‘st ia . os
Pl
Boge yh

‘2
Le)

0)
zd:

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET :

CONSEQUENCES WITHIN INDOCHINA OF Trig FALL

BIEN PHU:

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the probable consequences within Indochina during the next two or
three months of the fall of Dien Bien Phu within the near future.

SCOPE

The consequences of the fall of Dien Bien Phu on the political situation in France,,
and the repercussions of major decisions in France or Geneva on the situation in In-

dochina, are excluded from the scope of this estimate. ee.

CONCLUSIONS

j. The fall of Dien Bien Phu would have
far-reaching and adverse repercussions,
but it would not signal the immediate
collapse of the French Union political

“and military situation in Indochina. As

a consequence of the fall of Dien Bien
Phu, the morale of French Union forces

would receive a severe blow. A crucial’
- factor in the military situation there-

after would be the reliability of native
units, particularly the Vietnamese. There
would almost certainly be increased de-
sertions, and the possibility cannot be ex-
cluded that the native components of
French Union forces might disintegrate.
However, we believe that such disinte¢gra-
tion would be unlikely during the ensu-

_Ing two or three months, and that for at

least this period the major part of the

“native troops would probably remain:

loyal.

. 2. Assuming no such disintegration, the
fall of Dien Bien Phu would not in itself
substantially alter the relative military
capabilities of French Union and Viet
Minh forces in Indochina during the next

“two or three months. The French stand
at; Dien Bien Phu has produced certain
compensatory military results. It has
prevented an overrunning of Laos and
has resulted in the inflicting of casualties
upon the Viet Minh comparable in num-
ber to the total French force committed
at Dien Bien Phu. The bulk of Viet Minh
forces released by the fall of Dien Bien
Phu would probably not be able to move,
regroup, and re-equip in time to be em-
ployed in new major operations during
the next two or three months, although
some lightly equipped infantry battalions
might be made available more rapidly for
operations in the Delta region. -
