Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Discussion: The French government is under strong and
increasing domestic pressure to reduce the French military
commitment in Indochina. French national sensitivity con-
tinues--particularly upon points of prestige. Although
General Navarre has adopted many of the recommendations of
Lieutenant General John W. O'Daniel, USA, other recommenda-
tions pertaining to training, tactics, strategy, and logis-
tics have not yet been fully imp lemented. In some cases the
reasons for this lack of cooperation may be political in
nature, and. therefore beyond General Navarre's control. In
summary, a renewed effort to obtain full support of the
Navarre Plan and U.S. measures to support it, including
those hereafter recommended, is essential.

b. Approach the French with a proposal to organize a volun-
teer air group composed of personne! from various anti-communist
nations or groups to serve with the French Union forces in
Indochina as outlined in Appendix "A."

Discussion: This examination was directed by the Presi-
dent at the NSC meeting of 8 January 1954. While the Presi-
dent emphasized participation by U.S. volunteer personne!
he also mentioned the inclusion of other nationals. Since
this is a definitive means by which the French can increase
the Indochinese air effort as desired by them and thereby
increase their over-all air capability this step is militar-
ily desirable. Its feasibility is limited only by the pro-
vision of sufficient U.S. funds.

c. Assign additional technical specialists to MAAG, Indo-
china, in accordance with the recommendations of the November
O'Daniel report, so as to maximize technical assistance to
the French Union forces.

Discussion: Additional technical advisory personnel are
needed for MAAG, Indochina, to provide guidance and training
to the French.

d. Convince the French military authorities that it is im-
perative to increase unconventional warfare activities as sug-
gested in Appendix "B," the substance of which is a broad gen-
eral concept, for the use of guerrillas and can be used as the
basis for discussions between General O'Daniel and authorities |
in Indochina in order to appropriately influence the French.

Discussion: .The present French unconventional warfare
effort in Indochina is considered to be relatively ineffec-
tive.

213

» oot

L ‘ie SEGRE F]
