eo ome HSE WL 12 AM 7 19

mn

PERMANENT

0G TELE Deer vittee Hb Of State

NO: 133, July ll, 9 p.m. . ee ae &

-contents”*of DEPTEL 84 "and of our feeling that Vietnam Govern-

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

AR soy /

ae nr |

aa a} ee ise

. Control: 4452 1

Rogid: July 11, 1954
ye 7:14 p.m.

. aie ‘

10: Secretary o? BtAbO vps) PPT AEE

FROM! Paris ; oolic

7
AE et
fees Yee

\
e
\

4,
Q

”
ow

¢
THTII94

( a)
PRIORI TL re. nl \

SENT DEPARTMENT 135 REPEATED TNFORMATION CRNEVA 20, SAIGON le,
LONDON 34

4

ci

69D ISL

FOR SECRETARY FROM AMEASS 3ADOR DILLON, esyls)
Hola, Goplnt? &™
During conversation with Mende$ at Geneva, I informed him of

sey ty!

ment should be kept more fully informed by French. med ar ee
that we felt. time had now come for’ Vietnam to be informed Of a
generar tines—of-sever-potns propre: —Meme es said he would = —
cousideS inrorming Vietnamese after discussing matter wath fe na
advisows during aft ernoon: He -said he had originally felt it ist
weferable nov vo inform them until he could assure them that
US)pwas prepared to guarantee them against further aggression

or subversion.

He then spoke at length of_necessity for a clear-cut US_ > Susran—
tee that would protect Associated States in the event that the

Communists did not honor the spirit of any agreement that wight G
be reached at Geneva. Without such a eusrantee he said that a “te
settlement would not be worth the paper it was written on. ce
Mendes asked me to inquire as to whether if a settlement with-
in seven point framework was obtained, Secretary would then be
willing to come to Geneva to close cénference and to work out a
necessary guarantees to protect Associated States. Pas

He then discussed in some deteil the sttuation which would arise
if no settlement was reached at Geneva He said the sending -

of conscripts to Indochina would then be debated on July 22 and
23. If the National Assembly approved, the first division woulq ~-
leave om July 25 and the second division about 10 days later. 1a
Tt wouid take a month to reach Indochina and three more weels >to =
get troops ready for action Therefore the first division of! =,°.
conscripts would not be ready ic Tndoshina until about September’ a

a

This schedule for reinforcements would be known to Viet Minb sna
ar ret the result

£4230 TOP SRORRT Ge Dus eee FR,

ae MF, inf’

PELTED CLEY © This copy must be returned to ack central files with notation of action taken © -SOPY, 15 CLase: Fity, 1
