Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SUMMARY OF PLANNING BOARD ANNEX TO ITS REPORT ENTITLED, "NSC ACTION NO. 1074-a"

1. Problem: To assess risks, requirements, and consequences of alternate
forms of US military intervention in Indochina. The objective of intervention
is, in the absence of overt Chinese Communist intervention, destruction of or-
ganized Viet Minh forces by military action.

2. Nuclear weapons: Nuclear weapons will be available for use as required
by the tactical situation and as approved by the President. Estimated force re-
quirements contained in this paper are based on assumption of such availability.

3. Alternative A: Commitment of US forces in concert with the French.

a. Military requirements: Assuming military situation is approxi-
mately as at present, US military requirements would be:

(1) Ground Forces: None, provided that French Union forces afford
adequate security for the forces in Indochina.

(2) . Naval Forces: 1 Carrier Task Group, plus additional support-
ing units. :

(3) Air Forces: 1 fighter wing, 1 light bomber-wing, 1 troop
carrier, 1 tactical control squadron, 1 tactical reconnaissance squadron.

b. Logistic requirements: Case I can be logistically supported without
particular difficulty. As the training of Indigenous forces is crucial to the
success of this operation, the US must be prepared to support a training program
for 330,000 Indigenous troops, an increase of 100,000 over present forces.

c. Political aspects: The French would prefer a solution which did
not involve US military participation, but would not seriously oppose samé. The
Associated States would welcome US intervention if given appropriate security
guarantees. The Free World would generally support this action.

d. Free World reaction to US tactical use of nuclear weapons: Our
Allies would probably disapprove if nuclear weapons were used without their be-
ing consulted, but if consulted would generally approve their use tactically.

e. Soviet bloc reaction: Generally Soviet reaction would be the same
as though the US were assuming unilateral responsibility. The chances < e about
even that in this situation Communist China would decide upon overt intervention
rather than accept the defeat of Viet Minh. If US use of nuclear weapons should
lead to impending Viet Minh defeat, chances are better than even that ths Chi-
nese Communist would not openly intervene.

£. Foreign aid considerations: Military assistance would continue at
approximately current rates: i.e., FY-54, $800 million; FY-55, $1130 million.
Economic assistance would be substantially increased over present rate of $25
million per year.

4. Alternative B: In concert with the French and others.

a. Military requirements: Same as in Case 1, although allied air or
naval forces might substitute for US forces.

Vi VLU

ele.
