Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

167. France indicates the "necessity for a clear-cut U.S.
guarantee that would protect the Associated States"
if the commmists did not honor a Geneva settlement.
Mendes-France will resign if no cease-fire is reached.
Paris 133 to Dulles, 11 July 1954....+seseceesecseeeeescerees 633

168. Views of the U.K. on collective security of Southeast
Asia are summarized: (1) the British prefer a generalized
collective arrangement with as many states involved as
possible; (2) the preferred organization would have a
general Council, a political/economic council, and a
military organization; (3) in the event of no Indochina
agreement, the British would move ahead with a military
arrangement te meet the threat. Admiral Davis Memoran-
dum for Secretary of Defense, 13 July 1954.....-sssececsecces 35

169. Secretary Dulles reports on the Paris meeting: (1) an
agreed French-United States position paper on Indochina
which has the United States respecting terms conforming
to a 7-point agreement; (2) the 7 points along the lines
which were agreed during the Churchill-Eisenhower con-
versations; (3) a Mendes-France to Dulles letter which
tellsDulles that his absence from Geneva would produce
an effect opposite to his intention; (4) a Dulles to
Mendes-France letter which informs him of General Smith's
return to Geneva; (5) and a letter from Eden to Mendes-
France reassuring him of Britain's support. Paris 179
to Dulce yy Wediilee EOSiGs wu.cn ode acces ebuwdinsaebancuw esses. POO

170. Secretary Dulles reports on his trip to Paris at the
NSC meeting. Dulles had told Mendes that France's
troubles stemmed from lack of a decision on EDC and
the Soviets were successful in splitting France and
Germany. If the U.S. cannot guarantee the Geneva
Confer nee results or influence France to reject any
settlement, the U.S. will be blamed and put a major
strain on Franco-United States relations, NSC Minutes,

Lor Re kil) 577/206 SNe nL Le OO Oe a oF ce OS

171. Mendes-France is firm in a cocktail conversation with
Molotov on Vietnam election dates. The French, how-
ever, conceive the military demarcation line and
regroupment of forces to be the major outstanding i
issues. SECTO 626, 16 July 1954......... Sa piate e auhe ica taveuetet se eee

172. At a meeting of Mendes, Fden, and Molotov, the outstand-~

ing issues are swanarized: (1) demarcation line for
Vietnam; (2) elections; (3) control arrangements; (4)

xvii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
