Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

=257

fs #0? ROP SECRET

pa

“9! 3710; April 5, 1 a.m., fron Paris.

Second.
oper: at

Third. Forty 37 am. anti-aircraft eg

Dien Bien Phu. These guns operated py Chinese and evidently
are fron Koreas. These AA guns are now shooting through clouds,
‘to bring down French aircraft. c

‘ ial telephone lines installed maintal ned and
ed by Chinese personnel.

guns radar-controlled at

Fourth. One thousand supply trucks of which 500 have arrived
since 1 March, ell driven by Chiness army personnel. ~

Fifth. Substantial material help in guns, shells, etc.,-as is
well known.

Bidavlt said that French Chief of Air Staff wished US be in-
formed that US air ese at Dien Bien Phu coulc lead

to Chinese Communist sir attack on delta airfields. Never-
theless, governtient was making request for aid. .

Bidauvlt closed by saying that for good or evil the fate of
Southeast Asia now rested on Dien Bien Phu. He said that Gen-
eva would be won or lost depending on outcome at Dien Bien Phu.
this was reason for French re quest for this Nery serious action

on our part.

He then emphasized necessity for speed in view of renewed attack
which is expected before end of week. He thanked US for promot
action on airlift for French paratroops. He then said that he
had received Dulles! provosal for Southeast Asian coalition,

and that he would answer as soon as possible later in week as
restricted Cabinet sessicn not competent to make this decision.

New Subject. I passed on Norstad's concern that news of air-
lift (DEPTEL 3470, April 3) might leak as planes asseiibled,
. .Pleven was called into room. He expressed extreme concern. as
any leak would lead to earlier Viet Minh attack. He said at all
costs operation must be camouflaged as training exercise antil
troops have arrived. He is preparing them as rapidly aS pos-
sible and they will be ready to leave in a week. Bidault and
Ianiel presssd him to hurry up departure date of troops é d he
said he would de his utmost.
3 , DILLON

AB:MRS/12

NOTH: This message was read by Mr. Mec Arthur (Cc) at 10:15 p.m.
oa - inforuwed the Secretary, Under Ssoretary Smith,
Merchant (EUR) and Admiral Radford at:10:30 p. ae
iyi Js CW0/FED

TOP SECRAT
20 is
