Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a , =<) je “Se 2=s"4

COPY PELE ee tee

ARMY POSITION ON NSC' ACTION NO. 1074-A
1. There are important military disadvantages to intervention
in Indochina under the assumptions set forth in NSC Action No,
1074-2.

i 2a ee military victory in Indochina cannot be assured by U.S.
intervention with air * and navel Forces alone.

3. The use o f atomic weapons in Indochina*would not reduce
the number of ground forces required to achieve a military victory
in Indochina.

hk. It is estimated that seven U.S. divisions or their equiva-
lent, with appropriate naval and air support, would be required to
win a victory in Indochina if the French withdraw and the Chinese
Communists do not intervene. However, U.S. military intervention
must take into consideration the capability of the Chinese
Communists to intervene.

5. It is estimated that the equival ent of 12 U.S. divisions
would be required to win a victory in Indochina, if Ane French with-
draw and the Chinese Communist tHteTVene:

6. The equivalent of 7 U.S. divisions would be required to
win a victory in Indochina if the French remain and the Chinese
Communists intervene.

Le Requirements for air and naval support for ground force
operations are:

a. Five hundred fighter-bomber sorties per day exelusive
of interdiction and counter-air operations.

b. An airlift capability of a one division drop.
ec. A division amphibious lift.

8. One U.S. airborne regimental combat team can be placed in!
Indochina in 5 days, on e additional division in 24 days, and the re-
maining divisions in the following 120 days. This could be accon-
plished partially be reducing U.S. ground strenght in the Far Hast
with the remaining units coming from the general reserve in the
United States. Consequently, the U.S. ability to meet its NATO
commitment would be seriously effected for a considerable period.

The time required to place a total of 12 divisions in Indochina would
depend wpon the industrial and personne] mobilization measures taken
by the government. j

