Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

sts of csrtein reat on : B Unit issoci L$ tes military
eiaeete ‘of which ‘inst ae } million and

(5) the edditional = tea by operation
Wattente"! estine ae 1 ay 3 . i ok Those
developments plus adjus ses in ferce goals and con-
sumption and initial pro isnts where known should be
incorporated’ in. the cost i% should bs made clear that in
revising the cost study base factors these areas more or

less, tend to increase the astiuate. It is estimated that there are many
vnlnowa areas that would, if known, in ell probability reducs the estimate
coe With these revisions, the report of DC/B should be accepted
as the bsst possible estimate of cost of the Indochina military operations
vatil such time ag the — end MAAG Saigon can provide improved experience
factors snd costs. From en overall standpoint, it should bs noted that MAAG
Seigon has no basis for datermining the costs of the FY 1954 and FY 1955

HOA Program at this time. The HAAG feels that until su¢h time as the French
inform them of future plans it is impossible to davelop @ costing of the

PY 1954 and FY 1955 Indochina overations. Thus, any estimates contained

in the FY 1955 Budget and Congressional presentations are illustrative only
end in no way re eflect what the costs for FY 1955 will be.

GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS AMD CoLntants: The MAAG must be given euthority

to veview requisitions along the line indicated in this report in order .

that they may no longer merely act as a transmission agency for French
requisitions.

When and if the French provide the required logistical Gabe, the MAA
must meko sons fundemental changes internally, designed to extablish a Bien
ox supply control which will be geared toward the screening of requirements.
This will necessitate a proper integration of the present record system with
the needs of the screening and review process.

There is no question thet requirements of the French and poe ated
States must be met, be the problem is one of providing sufficient eauipment
of the right typs needed to support the military mission. Otherivise, both
funds and effort wi 21 be dissipated and the militery mission weakened by
providing cavipnent in exeess of reavixements or not of a type that can be

utilized. For exenple, 2094 rocket launchers 3.5" have been delivered
along with 66,000 rounds of ammunition, end an addi ional 190,000 rounds
programmed, sisiots the French do not went or use. Without close liaison

with the French in the planning end logistical phases, which will enable
the MAAG to have an understanding oF future opsrations, assets, and require.-
ments, there will be continuous problems of an unbalanced supply situation
and inedeauate date for US logistical and funding plenning.

fn improved. system ef inspection of end use of MDAP eauivment tnust
be dsevelopsad. 4% present the MAAG is permitted 30 inspections of units
& month, The MAAG mist give 60 days notice of proposed units to be inspocted
which necassitetes assuming thet spseifie units will be non—orerational anda
at a given location 60 days in advance. Even when the schedule is approved
by: the French, units to be: inspected are made operational without notificae-
tions to the MaiG, who, upon arriving at the sits find thet inspections
cannot be accomplished because the unit was made operational. More freedon-
of choice of units to be inspected :

OFAN 4"

a
