Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

c

eS, . SEGRE!

“

30)

er

of ‘asnets, the NLAG may approve end item reques
aseot Gate when in roality they may bo in long

m1

A further complicsati item imventory eee ae
oonteined in the Nenoranz ecween the US a
Fronch with relation to % 2 if pfogxain to the
STATes, Tho Is Lenin eget expenditures fos ex
eanipey ony communica? : sh
ok sosia ted. States Gut the 9385 1 mgiscn. I4
well bo for weterisl, Which will not bo control
the HAAG negeate @ Lreauast For HDAP end ito ai
prevent the ASSOCIATSd States from procuring +
mMillics progres, FURTHexmore, the MAAG voule. hays, if tho p

gerine

Lito

a

of logistical contusion vee biaideacter no information 28 to the mate
order from the $365 willion or that vhich is stocked as a result ef tho

$385 willion.

ATIONS: Tho MAAG immediately bring theix records up to dats in
ree to what equipzent and supplies have actually baon shipped to
Inédochina under all programs and what is plenned to be shipped by data.

VHB WIL necessitate couplets cooparetion oF all Dapartmsnt of Defense

agencios in the US and Frenca with IASG Soigon. =
A request ba made to tha Prench to furnish to the HAAG ell Know

assets, including materiol Son France, off-shore procurcnent and nat

etated assots, in turn, must be reconciled with the MAAG records in 0:
to provide a firm basis for computing future reaqui ivencnte.

ben
to bo pEsouret from the $365 million Associated ee aid progyvam.
2

210
OS

it
de

CONSUMPTION: The latest information evailable to the MANAG on actu].

Avny Gonstusption is conmtainod in e French report dated April 1993 fox

the calendar year 1952 which doss not toke account of the najor inersasod
eifort since that psried. When consvmption inforuetion is-furnished to
the HAAG it is usvally on 2 crash basis for the purpose of justifying
air lift of additional sunvlies. Experience has show thet the French
Bre roquasting materiel on a crash basis whan they actually have
suryficiens aquaentitics

im their om copots but say Jt is much oasier to
have the US aix lift additional quantities than to redistribute the
-neteriol within Indochine. Ppis is particulerly true in the case of
enuunition, Sometime G@uring tho month of April, the French will cr mit
enothor list of consumption Lectors, but aes will ba based on CY 1953
and will not refloct tha full impact of the Navarro Plan or the prasent
fighting at Dien Bien Phu.

26 the Fronch bs requestsd to provide experisnesda
on all tyoos of equivuent end subvlics on a month]
vnetevor basis is reasonable within their canabi

¥
lity.
i
STOCK DEVELS - OPEPATIOSAL EUSERYS: inasmuch es the assets, consunotion
pad Pr recaipis aro nore ex less unt ACN it is not possible for tha NAAG
to dotoreine whet stesk levols or oporati Nal rasoryves ara being main-
tained in depots, nor the amount of 5s a 5 and reparable cauionent
in despots, o> the anount of equipment in the hends of %¥ooDS. PRo3 *@ Era
