Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

PGES =D DISTRIBUTION

‘COMMUNIST REACTIONS TO CERTAIN US COURSES

OF ACTION WITH RESPEC

CT TO INDOCHINA.

: a THE PROBLEM
To estimate Chinese Communist and Soviet reactions to the courses of action and

consequent situations indicated below.*

: hess SIRE ESTIMATE

PART |

ASSUMPTIONS

A. The treaties of independence between France and the Associated States will

have been signed.

B. A regional security erouping including at least the Associated States, Thai-
“ Jand, the Philippines, Australia, France, and the United States, and possibly including

= also New Zealand and the United Kingdom, will have been formed.

C. The Associated States will have publicly requested the direct military partici-
pee of members of the regional grouping in the war in Indochina.

 D. The French will have undertaken to continue at least the present level of

their ey zommitment in Indochina.

REQUIREMENT 1

_* fo estimate the initial Chinese Communist

and Soviet reactions to the participation of
US air and neval forces with French Union

” forces and token Thai and Philippine forces

in coordinated ground, naval, and air opera-
tions designed to destroy the Communist mili-

*The assumptions and estimative requirements
stated herein were furnished to the intelligence
community for the purposes of this estimate.
We interpret the hypothetical action as occur-
ting within the next twelve to eighteen months.

tary forces in Indochina. Air operations
would be limited to targets in Indochina.
Nuclear weapons would be employed if their
use were deemed militarily advantageous but

nuclear attacks on the Indochinese civil pop-
ulation as a target system would be avoided.

hitace Communist Reaction

1. The intervention of US and’ allied forces
in Indochina probably would cause the Chi-
nese Communists to believe that sooner or
later they would have to decide whethe: to

TOP SECRET 3

o6h
