Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ts have Seen conpubted by the cost soudy team.
e ave T/OS%s for a limited mumbar.of units, but
i c them as Tira enough to be a basis for requixvenents
comp Du eatsor as. Tha T/O%s available represent a sanll segment of the total
materiel requirements. Therefore, the Army, Navy, and Air Force have been
accepting roquirenents es steted by the French except in those cases
sw{ficient information is available to modify the requests.

Tule Ss

ii)

fable (1) attached is a comparison of requiren vents én
ing the incomplete nature of the requirenents data available
For some items such as rifles, heavy mechine gun, Sfma recoilles
60xun morte, all tcucks, armored cers M8, personnel carriers hal

me a ee equipment, the requirements are less then es! as mach
a

50% some cases. No data is aveilabl
e difference between the 7/023
a t
TS

b

ee for th aa
sible to determine wiether ther

4

is]

ym 4

@) 2)
d the state
a

q
é ee OM

3% is impos q
those end itmes where Pequa Vemenus exces ets. . Yould all the » req. a
ments be met if the eppavent deficiency were funded? The MA i
position to answer that qa estion or to provide en eswer as to the definitiv
requirements hich must still be met. ;

to
urd
a
m9
[ar
par (i

]
oe

RECOMMENDATIONS: United States wtbeny experienced logistic and pleuning
ofiicers be assigned to General Nevavrre's staff in an advisory capacity
in order to determine logistic requirements for projected prog geared.
operations. If it ig not possible to assign US personnel to the French
Staff then it is imperative that the US logistic officers be kept inforuad
of the planned operetions in order to effectively ard efficiently support
those operations. Furthsrmore, the French and the M44G should meet anc
agree on approved T/0&Es for 211 units including tactical, sector and static
units, ord. the MAAG must be advised ian nediabely of changes or revisions
to the approved T/0%2s-
INVENTORIES: No firm information is available on o inventory positions
‘as Of any given date and actual deliveries from MDAP are not known in many
areas. The Air Force, Fer example, does not have eotuell delivery inforina--
tion on MDAP ammunition. This is due to suca things as: (1) No manifest
being forwarded with shipments; (2) shipments arriving end unloading with.
out knowledge of MAAG, etc. No information is. avails able as to French
contributions of end items or deliveries from off-shore procurement. The
inventories as swomitted by the French for the-cost study vary as much as
50% plus or minus from the inventories contained in the MAAG records, |

As illustrated in Tebdle a the ste ‘tus of inventories is not firm.
The table cormmarey asset data as of 31 Dacember 1953 aveilable at th
MAAG with that presented by the French in their Paris report to DCE. ‘There

is no consistent pattern or explanation as to the idee existing  stween
the tuo sets of stated as SSeS) ‘since for some items such as the carbine end
Slim morter the MAAG assets are double those stated by tho French, while

for the rifle and light machine gun, for exemple, the French indicate assets
Gouble those stated by th: 12 MSAG. Jt shovld be recognized that the MAAG doos
now provi de for combat loss

2s or for OSP and indigenous financed shiprents
of end itcas to Indochina. This tadle indicates that withovt the comp ete
knowledges :
