Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

! the necessary support - artillery, engineers, armor, communications - taking
into account the very special character of the war in Indochina, the terrain--
‘the enemy. To bring about a maximum of cooperation with the Air Force and the

Navy.

e. To maintain a reserve of special type units -- armor, commando, light
battalion, etc., for attachment to groups and divisions in accordance with terrain
and mission. .

f. To contime the effort of instructing and organizing the army of the
Associated States so as to give them more and more participation as well as more
and more autonomy in the conduct of operations.

Note: The above was given to General O'Daniel in writing by General
Navarre on 29 June 1953 and was thereafter referred to as the Navarre concept
for the successful conclusion of war in Indochina.

Few of these aims are progressing satisfactorily. The training of the
National armies is woefully inefficient and the series of tactical offensive
operations engaged in during 1953-54 fighting season, instead of retaking the
initiative has lost it to the Viet Minh. After a rather encouraging beginning
with the Lang Son operation, Navarre's later operations reveal that he is fol-

' lowing the same conservative defensive tactics as his predecessor, General Salan.
Although Movette was highly publicized as a successful offensive, it in fact was
nothing but a reconnaissance in force with the objective of occupying a strong
position and awaiting attack by the enemy ih the hope of dealing him a crippling
blow. The enemy refused to be taken in. The current campaign season has been
dominated by the Viet Minh, and the present position of the French Union Forces

is no improvement over that of last year. Dien Bien Phu is not only another

Na San but. a grave tactical and strategic error. The only hope for gain from

the battle now raging is that the French can survive. The French have consistently
postponed seizure of the initiative through failure to select and pursue vital
military objectives such as the obvious enemy troop concentration depot and
communications area in the foothills north of the Tonkin delta. Viet Minh leader-
ship, on the other hand, has capitalized on this vacated opportunity by seizing
and holding the initiative. The French battle corps, which was built up hope-
fully by energetic withdrawal of implanted units, has now been dissipated into
four sizeable components: (1) Dien Bien Phu -- 12 battalions -- an expensive-
supplied airhead, is encircled and under heavy attack. (2) Seno-Savannakhet-
Thakhek-Pakse area -- 15 battalions -- partially supported by air with its
overland communications threatened. (3) Operation Atlanta -- 25 battalions --

a coastline sweep north from Nha Trang, which has uncovered no appreciable enemy,
and (4) the Tonkin delta -- 18 battalions -- where the enemy is increasing his
attacks on rear installations and Lines of communications. The lack of initiative
which the French have is emphasized by the day-to-day reaction of the French to
enemy moves and activity as expressed in recent requests for emergency assistance
in the way of U.S. equipment and maintenance personnel.

French tactics are based primarily on defense, even though French Union
Forces outnumber Viet Minh forces by almost 2 to 1, have overwhelming fire
power, and upopposed air force, a balanced naval force and strategic transport
capability. The barbed wire concept is exemplified by the fact that the French
have established a requirement of 4000 tons of this item per month over and above
that furnished by France. The bulk of the C-119 airlift for Dien Bien Phu
supply was utilized in dropping barbed wire.

416 TOP SECRET
