Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

OLUP ti.

2. The action set forth in paragraph l-a above has been referred
to the Secretary of Defense and the Director, Office of Defense Mobili-
zation for appropriate implementation and was discussed at the Armed
Forces Policy Council on 15 April 1954. The action in paragraph 1-b
was referred to the Secretary of State.

3. It is requested that the Joint Chiefs of Staff promptly prepare
the military plans involved under paragraph l-a above. It is further
requested that the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in close collaboration, under
existing arrangements, with the Sacketar ex of the Military Departments
and the Assistant Secretaries of Defense (Supply and Logistics), (Man-
power and Personnel) and (Cpmptroller), promptly develop the supply, man-
power and other requirements arising from these military plans which
might affect production, manpower and budgetary planning by the Depart-—
ment of Defense and the Office of Defense Mobilization. This military
planning and the development of requirements should cover not only spe-
cific intervention in Indochina, but also any augmentations in forces
or supplies required to permit the United States to maintain at present
levels its present defense commitments and to be prudently prepared to
face possible increased risks of (1) Chinese Communist intervention and
(2) general war.

4. It is further requested that the Joint Chiefs of Staff report
to my office on the above by 10 May 1954. If it has not been possible
to complete the planning by that date, a progress report on 10 May 1954
is requested.

5. The Assistant Secretaries of Defense (Supply and Logistics) and
(Manpower and Personnel) will collaborate with the Office of Defense
Mobilization, as appropriate, in the preparation of production and man-
power plans based upon and required to implement the military plans.

5. ° Because of the security sensitivity of this planning, appropri-
ate security precautions will be taken by all concerned.

/s/
C. E. WILSON

cc: ASD (Comptroller)
ASD (Manpower & Personnel).
ASD (Supply & Logistics)
ASD (ISA)
Office of Special Operations

.

OP OLU!

383
