Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

I¢/43/Rev.
page 3

The Conferénce expresses its conviction that the execution of the provisions
‘set out in the present declaration and in the agreement on-the cessation of
hostilities creates the necessary basis for the achievement in the near future
. of a pore bce), Eerelenent in Viet- Nam. ae

7. The Cantecence Geelaves that, so far as Viet-Nam is concerned, the iM
settlement of political problems, effected on the basis of respect for the
principles of independence, unity and territorial integrity, shall permit the
Viet-Namese people to enjoy the fundamental freedoms, guaranteed by democratic

' institutions established as a result of free general elections by secret ballot.
In order to ensure that sufficient progress in the restoration of peace has been
made, and that all the necessary conditions obtain for free expression of the
national will, general elections shall be held in July 1956, under the supervision
of an international commission composed of representatives of the Member States
of the International Supervisory Commission, referred to in the agreement on the
cessation of hostilities. Consultations will be held on this subject between the
competent representative authorities of the two zones from 20 July 1955 onwards. -

8. The provisions of the agreements on the cessation of hostilities intended
.-to ensure the protection of individuals and of property must be most strictly
- applied and must, in particular, allow Even VONG in Viet-Nam to decide freely in

-. .which” zone he wishes to live.

a o.. The competent representative authorities of the Northern and Southern
zones of Viet-Nam, as well as the authorities of Laos and Cambodia, must not

_ permit any individual or collective reprisals against persons who have collabor-

“ ated in any way with one of the BaP EPS during. the war, or eeeinse members of
such PErSens? Tamekres. a A

ee - 10. The Gouterence takes note of the declaration of the Government of the
' . French Republic to the effect that it is ready to withdraw its troops from the
territory of Cambodia, Laos, and Viet-Nam, at the requests of the Governments
concérned and within periods which shall be fixed by agreement between the
parties except in the cases where, by agreement between the two parties, a
certain number of French troops shall remain at syccieted points and for a
—— rane

lle ’ The Gantevence takes note of the declaration of the French Government
to the effect that for the settlement of all the problems connected with the
re-establishment and consolidation of peace in Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam, the
French Government will proceed from the principle of respect for the independence
and sovereignty, unity, and térritorial integrity of Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam,

12. In their relations with Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam, each member of the
Geneva Conference undertakes to respect the sovereignty, the independence, the-
unity and the territorial intesrlty of the above-mentioned states, and to refrain
from any. SEECERESENES in cae ces affairs. BAS :
