Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ee a ee

‘ 7? 5 | ion | 2
| : Fi
Bw

3
2a es a j

e. Self-determination through free elections. Such
factors as the prevalence of illiteracy, the lack of
suitable educational media, and the absence of adequate
communications in the outlying areas would render the
holding of a truly representative plebiscite of doubt-—
ful feasibility. The Communists, by virtue of their
superior capability in the field of propaganda, could
readily pervert the issue as being a choice between
national independence and French Colonial rule. Further-
more, it would be militarily infeasible to prevent wide-
spread intimidation of voters by Communist partisans.
While it is obviously impossible to make a dependable
forecast as to the outcome of a free election, current
intelligence leads the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the
belief that a settlement based upon free elections would
be attended by almost certain loss of the Associated
States to Communist control.

4, The Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that
any negotiated settlement which would involve substantial
concessions to the Communists on the part of the Governments
of France and the Associated States, such as in c and d
above, would be generally regarded by Asian peoples as a
Communist victory, and would cast widespread doubt on the
ability of anti-Communist forces ultimately to stem the
tide of Communist control in the Far East. Any such settle-
ment would, in all probability, lead to the loss of Indo-
china to the Communists and deal a damaging blow to the
national will of other countries of the Far East to oppose
Communism. j

5. Should Indochina be lost to the Communists, and in
the absence of immediate and effective counteraction on
the part of the Western Powers which would of necessity
be on a much-greater scale than that which could be deci-
sive in Indochina, the conquest of the remainder of South-
east Asia would inevitably follow. Thereafter, longer
term results involving the gravest threats to fundamental
United States security interests in the Far East and even
to the stability and security of Europe could be expected
to ensue. (See paragraph 1 of NSC 5405.)

6. Orientation of Japan toward the West is the keystone
of United States policy in the Far East. In the judgment
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the loss of Southeast Asia
to Communism would, through economic and political pres-
sures, drive Japan into an accommodation with the Communist
Bloc. The communization of Japan would be the probable
ultimate result.
