Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TRESS
nee flats

pe
art
eetheacl

oe Tyla an

‘ ; 4 a
ge Cont rot: 1248

Action . ;

EUR j os f i) r
FROH: Paris 204 JUL 3 M720 11:12 p.m. OE]
Info a fe it

ge To: Secretary of SbAbe nS OTMENT ar STATE s

G : ae 0 ‘

spo. NOY «632, July 2, 8 p-m-

Cc = * kL’ ¢

FE ; * <p!

UNA SENT DEPARTMENT 32, REPEATED INFORMATION GENEVA 2, SAIGON 4.

a ;

P Re DEPTELs 5 and 8. ~
I took up reference telegrams with Mendes this afternoon. bi
Regarding present withdrawals in the delta Mendes said that ~
these had been planned in May by the Laniel government and =
he had made no change in the original plan. The withdrawals ~
represent a definite shortening of the French lines to protect > Pa
Hanoi, Haiphong and the connecting road. —

a = r . o .
He said he had been much surprised to read in the papers that My
a State Depsrtment spokesman had said that the US had not had ms:
prior information regarding these withdrawals. He had assuned , tog

e said, that Ely had fully informed O'Daniel of his plans. sy
fe then accordingly asked Ely this morning if that was not ‘Gs
the case and Ely had told him that he had “not informed 0'Da niel.
Mendes accordingly offered his apologies and said that he ha qd
instructed Ely in the future to keep O'Daniel fully informed
on the spot. lee 7:
Regarding withdrawals themselves he said they were necessary
to ensure the safety of the French Expeditionary Corps. He
said that the French had offered to take with them those members 7
of the local population who desired protection and that the aay
French forces had provided transportation for such peovle. cA

He said he hed not seen the latest figures but a fairly sub-
sténtial number of people had availed themselves of this oppor
tunity. On the other hand, there had been many who preferred
to stay where they were.

In this connection he said that since Dien Bien Phu the Viet Migh:

had not conducted reprisals when they occupied nev erritory
but had behaved very well toward the local population. He Saiq

that he resifzed that this. wigat “only be a temporary policy

to facilitate negotiations at Geneva, but that for wiisteverii: |
was worth, it vas the fact. He then said that the Withdrawals ¢
were not yet completed end shoved me on a rough map where ;
further withdrewsls were scheduled. These include the Ehouihe > a

~

24S 3area aod a wortiocn of the area to the west of Hanoi.

PERIMUENT < a an apr es ae
RECORD COPY = » This copy mutst be returned! "9 BGI céntr al" ales with notation of action taken © af Se
