Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
DELEGATION OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
28 May 1954

Dear Admiral Davis:

Developments over the past few days very clearly indicate that we
are approaching a stage in the conference where it is evident that the
French are going to settle on terms which the U.S. could not, under present
NSC directives, associate itself with. The British have long favored an
Indochina settlement on the basis of partition. The Viet Minh in their
proposals submitted at the restricted session on May 25 (TOSEC 302) made
a proposal which would in effect be partition. The Russians and Chinese
have, of course, supported the Viet Minh proposal. In the face of this,
the French have no firm position, nor has there been an indication that
they have a minimum position. As a result, I feel that we are moving toward
the probability that there will be a settlement which will, directly or
indirectly, result in the partition of Indochina.

I have discussed the foregoing points at considerable length with
Herman Phleger and Alex Johnson. They both recognize the dangers of parti-
tion and the impossibility of supervising an armistice in Indochina. There
appears to be a feeling of hopelessness inasmuch as the U.S. is not ina
position to control the situation. The U.S. position is not at all clear.
Someone indicated before the conference we should be flexible - I would say
we are now fluid. At the morning staff conferences, during the past two
days, there have been discussions of U.S. tactics, and General Smith has
indicated that the U.S. should remain firm. He has indicated, however,
that we should be realistic, and face the probability that there will be
some sort of a negotiated settlement which will result in a loss of at
least part of Indochina, and will result in some type of partition. There
has been no mention of the point at which the U.S. will disassociate itself
from the negotiations. On-the contrary, there have been indications that
the U.S. will probably have to go along with a settlement even though it
is unsatisfactory to the U.S,

Yesterday I attended a meeting with General Smith, Alex Johnson and
Ambassador Heath in which we met with Eden and Bidault. The subject of
discussion was Eden's proposal which he put forth at the sixth restricted
session. Bidault had thoughts of his own on the subject taking a slightly
different approach as you will note from the enclosed copy of his proposal,
The thing I noted most in the discussion was the all-out effort that the
various conferees are making to develop a position to which they feel the
Communists will agree. Both Eden and Bidault referred to international
supervision of the cessation of hostilities. However, it was quite clear
from the discussion that neither are aware of the many difficult problems
which will be involved in enforcing an armistice in Indochina. The question

498

TOP SECRET
