Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Deparisscse at of Stette HOHE Guat ot

iy 0. + peteietelichtciaisiehigiasigee ae eee ee
=e ieee . rt i Ue
ca mei an SHORTT negteene wof OEM i
Action <--~ Control: 7473 = fed
ae : “Roel ds arf 2 ae 1951
_ FROM: Geneva aia eB) el
3. £ Stet eee ee
e To: Secretary of State > site person Fy - Ss hoe
‘pP no; SECTO 632, July 17, 7 p.m. Seale spoil ial Ee SE
OR | yee a iS. "fg
= al Satta ease et . S
rs SENT DEPARTMENT SECTO 632; REPEATED INFORMATION PARIS ee iz
UNA SAIGON 50. | _ pochtion to Dore B= A
Following account of Mendes-France-Eden-Molotov. meeting last ©) Es
night is based on report of this meeting to Foreign Office ee:
made availebdle to Johnson by Caccia. This telegram expands ‘a
upon end supersedes preliminary account transmitted in rirst- tos
three peragraphs SECTO 630 (repeated information Paris 76,  &) Fs
Saigon 4 oe 5
At Eden's. eo teeest io French enumerated ‘documents, before Tae. Z
(A) Armistice agreements to be signed by local conmanders-in- | ~~
chief. French have prepared drafts for Vietnam and Laos and Gl
Cambodians draft for Cambodia. Viet Minh delegation prepar- =
ing counter draft for Vietnam.
(B) Control arrangements. French have circulated papers for
Vietnam, Leos, and Cambodia.
(C) Political arrangements. After having seen militery docu-
ments, certain delegations might make unilateral statements.
For example, Laos and Cambodia are preparing statements on
their willineness to limit their armed forces. Conference
as whole would then egree upon common statement taking note
of military agreements and unileteral declarations. French
have circulated draft of such statement. Soviets have pre-
pared counter draft and French second redreft.
‘French explained that if conference did not (repeat not) have
time to egree on all details of armistice, it might approve
only parts providing for cessation of hostilities and first
stage of regroupment. Remaining aspects, of agreements could: ee
‘be covered by statement of general principles for guidance = =<?
of experts who would work ou ae details after conference had. 790
dispersed. 2 : ae
It was agreed that British, French, and Soviet experts would i
meet July 17 to consider various drafts. —
648 At Edea's =
BIRNENT 4258 SECRET REPRODUCTION FaGPaus
Kevdnd CoPY =o This copy must be returned to DC/R central files with notation of action taken 9 COPY, IF CLASS FLED 45

ey Cites
