Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

Be 5035, June 24, 10 p.m., from Paris.

territory of Vietnam, the Viet Minh Government and the Viet-
‘nemese Government. According to Chauvel, this was the first
time that Chou had recognized the valid existence of the
‘Vietnamese Government.

1

Chou then said that the settlement in Vietnam should be
reached in two stages. First, an armistice which should be
reached as soon as possible, and second, peace, which would
obviously take louger to achieve. Chauvel said that Chou
clearly accepted, and for the first time, the French thesis
fac cnere se me wo pisses; first military and second
olitical to the eventual settlement of Vietnam. Regarding
military settlement, Chou said that there should be regroup-
ment of troops in large zones in order to stop the fighting.
Chou said that he was ready to discuss the division of zones
if Mendes so desired. Mendes answered that he was not yet
prepared for such a detailed discussion and Said he preferred
that it be handled by the delegations at Geneva. Therefore,
there was no discussion in detail regarding the make-up of
the eventual zones.

Regarding the final political settlement, Chou said this should
be reached by direct negotiations between the two governments
in Vietnam, i.e., the Vistnamese Government and the Viet Minn
Government. Chou further said that France might be able to
help in these negotiations. He added that he saw no reason

‘why thé eventually united state of Vietnam should not remain
“within the French Union.

Mendes at this point said that since the war had been going

on for 8 years and passions were high, it would take a long

time before elections could be held as the people must be

given eae full opnertunity to cool off and calm down. Chou made
yno chiectignets ots staterent by Mendes and did not press
for early(elections.

Mendes then told Chou that negotiations with the Viet Minh
for reasons not very clear to the French had been at a prac-
tical standstill for the past week or ten days and he sug-
gested that a word from Chou to the leader of the Viet Minh.
delegation might be helpful in speeding things up which.
seemed to be Chou's desire as well as Mendes'. Chou agreed
| to intervene with the Viet Minn and ask them to speed up
\ negotiations.

The conversation never touched on any subject other than Indo-_

china. According to Chauvel, no other item of Far.Eastern

policy was touched upon, nor was Europe nor the UN or possible”
590 recognition

— LLVGD TOP. SECRET
