Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

SUMMARY OF SECTION IV

STUDY BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

This study is based on the assumption that there will be no concurrent
U.S. involvement in Korea. It points out that from the point of view of the
U.S., Indochina is devoid of decisive military objectives and that,
consequently, the committing to the Indochina conflict of naval forces in
excess Of a Fast Carrier Task Force and supporting forces, as necessary
in accordance with the developments in the situation, or basing substantial
air forces in Indochina, will involve mal-deployment of forces and reduced
readiness to meet probable Chinese Communist reaction elsewhere in the Far
East.

Assuming the Chinese Communists intervene, we should, inter alia,
employ atomic weapons, whenever advantageous, conduct air operations
against military targets in Indochina, China, and Comminist-held offshore
islands, blockade the China coast, seize or neutralize Hainan, and have
Chinese Nationalist forces undertake operations against the mainland. In
accordance with the Unified Command Plan, CINCPAC would exercise unified
command of assigned forces. To train Associated States Forces,
approximately 2,250 U.S. personnel would be required to augment the
existing MAAG. Meanwhile, action should be taken to insure an
appropriate degree of U.S. mobilization to provide for the greater risk
of a general war, and we should undertake to strengthen those allies who
could directly support the U.S. strategic concept for a general war.

In the event the Chinese Communists do not intervene, we should,
inter alia, conduct air operations in support of allied forces in
Indochina, employing atomic weapons if such a course appears militarily
advantageous. Although the Allied Commander-in-Chief should be French,
there should be a U.S. Deputy and a U.S. Air Adviser. CINCPAC would
exercise command over all U.S. forces based in Indochina and other
forces assigned to him for operations in Indochina. The plan for
training native troops would be the same as under the assumption of |
Chinese Commnist intervention. |

Whether or not the U.S, intervenes in Indochina, the UCS consider
that it is vital that the war in Indochina be financed by a method
separate and distinct from the world-wide MDAP,.

522

TOP SECRET
