Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET

ORGANIZATION AND TACTICS OF THE REBEL ARMY

The Viet Minh is a well-led, veteran guerrilla army of approximately
300,000 troops organized into 6 insanity divisions, a heavy division of artillery
and engineers and numerous regiments, battalions and companies. It has 4 regional
militia component as well as its regular troops. Its equipment and tactics are
those of light infantry with a tremendous capability of cross country mobility
and endurance. A high command is reputed to contain Red Chinese advisors.
Until the pitched battle at Dien Bion Phu, the rebels followed the strategy of
hit and run with much of its maneuver dictated by political objectives. The
manner in which this force deployed its battle corps into assault infantry,
and, with effective artillery support, captured several highly organized and
well-defended strong points, indicates a versatility not fully appreciated prior
to this campaign season. Additionally, the Viet Minh are skilled in psychological
and political indoctrination and have been able to establish bases of operations
behind French fortified lines, particularly in the delta. The recent capability
of the Viet Minh to seize territory throughout Indochina, albeit temporarily,
will have a-profound effect upon the conferences at Geneva.

CONDUCT OF THE WAR -- MILITARY ASPECTS

In June 1953, General Navarre formulated a set of principles for the con-
duct of the war in Indochina. This was described in the O'Daniel report as the
Navarre concept for successful conclusion of the war in Indochina, but it is
less a formula for successfully concluding the war than a statement of short
term aims, to wit:

a. To retake the initiative immediately through the carrying out, beg ginning
this summer, of local offensives and by pushing to the utmost commando. and
guerrilla actions.

b. To take the offensive in the north beginning September 15, in order to
forestall the enemy attack. To conduct the battle which will take place during
the fall and winter of 1953-54 in an offensive manner by attacking the flanks
and rear of the enemy

3 ec. To recover from areas not directly involved in the battle a maximum
number of units. To pacify these regions progressively.

d. To build up progressively a battle corps by grouping battalions into

regiments and regiments into divisions and by giving to the units thus created

This document must not be
reporduced without permission
of the originating office. 15

TOP SECRET
