Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

or? ep pee
t 7a ‘ A Bal ei
/ | Let ew a ie I

compromise settlement based upon one or more of the pos-
sible other courses of action upon which the views of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff have been specifically requested in
your memorandum.

b. Imposition of a cease-fire. The acceptance of a
cease-fire in advance of a satisfactory settlement would,
in all probability, lead to a political stalemate attended
by a concurrent and irretrievable deterioration of the
Franco-Vietnamese military position. (See paragraph 27 of
NSC 5405.)

ec. Establishment of a coalition government. The ac-

ceptance of a settlement based upon the establishment of
a coalition government in one or more of the Associated
States would open the way for the ultimate seizure of
control by the Communists under conditions which might
preclude timely and effective external assistance in the
prevention of such seizure. (See subparagraph 26b of
NSC 5405.)

ad. Partition of the country. The acceptance of a
partitioning of one or more of the Associated States

would represent at least a partial victory for the Viet
Minh, and would constitute recognition of a Communist
territorial expansion achieved through force of arms.
Any partition acceptable to the Communists would in all
likelihood include the Tonkin Delta area which is acknowl-
edged to be the keystone of the defense of mainland
Southeast Asia, since in friendly hands it cuts off the
most favorable routes for any massive southward advance
towards central and southern Indochina and Thailand.
(See paragraph 4 of NSC 5405.) A partitioning involving
Vietnam and Laos in the vicinity of the 16th Parallel,
as has been suggested (See State cable from London, No.
3802, dated 4 March 1954), would cede to Communist con-
trol approximately half of Indochina, its people and
its resources, for exploitation in the interests of
further Communist aggression; specifically, it would
extend the Communist dominated area to the borders of
Thailand, thereby enhancing the opportunities for Com-—
munist infiltration and eventual subversion of that
country. Any cession of Indochinese territory to the
Communists would constitute a retrogressive step in the
Containment Policy, and would invite similar Communist
tactics against other countries of Southeast Asia.

2h7

TAD CE ADrT
ay te St ig ea
WE WEA
