161.

162,

163.

16h.

165.

166.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -

Dillon discovers that the U.S. complaints of not being
informed are proved unjustified on the French withdrawal
in Tonkin. Both State and Defense were notified via
Trapnell's hand-carried plans and diplomatic cables.
Public statements thus "can only serve to make our

- position here vis-a-vis Mendes and his goverrmment in-

creasingly difficult and undermine the confidence of
both the French Government and people in our candor..."
Paris 81 to Dulles, 7 July LOSE os wrecdie were iele erm orere womiverela eo ncelaveronn 618

"I have never harbored any thought of wilful conceal-
ment...there is a certain lack of intimacy..." in re-
lations with the present government. The U.S. intends
to leave representation at Geneva but notBedell Smith

nor Dulles will return. The U.S. should avoid a

"position at Geneva..." Dulles 85 to Paris, 8 July
TOSI ara ce wa are coe weeeweeee eoewvrveeseeoeweeaeeeeve_eeeeeveenwreeweee *eseeweeeeeewenenrteeeee# 619

The Chinese inform Ambassador Johnson that Chou En-lai

had a "very good meeting" with Ho Chi Minh end that

"results would be helpful to the French." The French

believe that the Sino-Soviet positions have been

coordinated with the Chinese views on Asian problems

being given major weight. SECTO 578, 9 July 1954............ 622

The Defense Department queries the State Department

regarding equipping three French light infantry

divisions for Indochina in view of (1) the Premier's

promise to end the war by 20 July and (2) the con-

Siderable impact of equipment removal on NATO.

Defense Letter to State, 9 July 1954..........-6.. foment steven ROSS

President Fisenhower and Secretary Dulles indicate

firmly to President Mendes-Franece the rationale
behind not sending Dulles or General Smith beck to :
Geneva. Essentially, the rationale is based on fail-
ure of the U.S., U.K. and Frence to agree on a joint

position at Geneva and lack of agreement on a

"wmited action" proposal if the position is not

accepted by the communists. Dulles sees France and

U.K. enhancing a communist “whittling-away" process

by reedily accepting less than the seven points. :
Dulies 127 to Paria, 16 duly 195). occ e:ncsines olesciie cies one e css DEO

France views the Dulles decision as (1) meking the
French bargaining position weaker and (2) that Europe
would interpret U.S, absence from Geneva as a step
in the "return to a policy of isolationism." .
Paris 334 to Dulles, Al July 1OS2. ..c0nceceos cecvacetecs acues 0 Son

SxViL TOP SECRET - Sensitive

