Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

-2~ 2656, June 4, 5 p.m., from Saigon.

for signature. Likewise Vietnamese experts, feeding at the
flesh pots, have shown no alacrity in pressing for final
action. It is not enought to broadcast a fine-sounding treaty
of independence without knowing exactly where Vietnamese will
find themselves in respect of control of their finances, their
courts, and their right to request technical assistance from
any quarter, and not exclusively from France.

As for question of elections to which Department quite rightly
attaches importance, it is now of less significance in Vietnam
than before owing to general feeling of panic and anxiety lest
entire country be lost through unfortunate armistice terms.
Press has announced that decrees will presently be signed by
Bao Dai providing for municipal elections and, with exception
of Saigon-Cholon, for direct election of mayors. This should
to some extent meet Department's requirement in this regard
although it is far less than national elections or Prepenevsene
for National Constituent Assembly.

Upon DeJean's return from north today, I plan to discuss with
him measures which should be taken locally as suggested numbered
paragraph 6. I intend to suggest to DeJean necessity of pro-
viding Vietnamese administrators and technical experts with
know-how derived from actual participation in the affairs of
government. Likewise, Department heads and Ministers should

be given greater opportunity to participate in forward planning
as this will result in sense of responsibility to the nation
which has heretofore been lacking. Another suggestion which
has frequently been advanced is that French, by turning over
Norodom Palace to Vietnamese, would give graphic evidence of
their intention to retire from this country and to confirm
Vietnamese independence. Main question, however, would be
whether’ Chief of State would return to occupy Palace.

* MCCLINTOCK

MAM/14

holy
932

TOP SECRET
