Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

aes Pe

" zt

7 :
{ | a LN he

b. Political aspects: While it might be possible to secure UN ac-
tion for armed assistance to the Associated States, It would be difficult to
stave off pressure for a negotiated settlement or UN mediation. It would be
possible to develop a regional grouping with maximum Asian participation if
it were clear that the US had decided to commit forces to the area. France
would prefer a regional grouping to UN sponsored assistance. The Associated
States would prefer UN sponsored assistance. The Free World reaction would
be somewhat more favorable te action as a part of a regional grouping than
to US unilateral action.

ec. Reaction to US use of nuclear weapons: Same as Case J.

d. Soviet bloc reaction: Even though the US was participating as
one of a regional group, the chances of overt Chines« Communist aggression
would remain substantial.

e. Foreign aid considerations: Expenditures would probably be
greater than in Case I’ because the US would be called upon to support the
forees of the additional participating states.

5, Alternative C: US acting in concert with others or alone.

a. Military requirements: Assuming no serlous deterioration in the
military situation prior to US take-over from the French of responsibility
for military operations:

(1) Ground Forces: Indigenous forces of 330,000; 6 Infantry
and 1 Airborne Division of US or Allied troops, plus 275,000 support personnel.

(2) Air Forces: 1 Fighter Wing, 1 Light Bomber Wing, 1 Troop
Carrier (Wing), 2 Tactical Reconnaissance Squadrons, 1 Fighter Bomber Wing
and 1 Tactical Control Squadron.

(3) Naval Forces: 1 Carrier Task Group, plus additional mining
and support units.

ibe Logistic implications: Case ITT can be supported without major
logistical implications provided production schedules are maintained at ‘ap-
proximately Korean War levels.

c. Impact on US military programs: As this course would involve

accepting an increased calculated risk of war with Communist China or o*
general war, it would require a reversal of present policy planning to _e-
duce the size of the US armed forces.

d. Political aspects: French disassociation would enhance support
for UN action or for a regional grouping. It would also end France's role
as a major power. Most of the Free World would support US intervention.

e. Soviet bloc reaction: Same as in Case IT.

£. Foreign aid considerations: Same as in Case II, although savings
in the US contribution for the support of French forces in Indochina would
partially offset the greatly increased cost of US forces taking their place.
