Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

belief that committing to the Indochina conflict naval forces
in excess of a Fast Carrier Task Force and supporting forces,
as necessary in accordance with the developments in the situ-
ation, of basing substantial air forces in Indochina, will
involve maldeployment of forees and reduce readiness to

meet probable Chinese Communist reaction elsewhere in the

Far Hast. Simultaneously, it is necessary to keep in mind
the considerable Allied military potential available in the
Korea-Japan-Okinawa area,

ec. In light of the above, it is clear that the denial of
these forces to Indochina could result in a schism between
the United States and France unless they were employed else-
where. However, it should be noted that the Joint Chiefs of
Staff have plans, both approved and under consideration,
which provide for the employment of these forces in combat
operations outside Indochina. Nevertheless, it is desired
to repeat that this particular report is responsive to the
question of U.S. intervention in Indochina only.

3 ASSUMING THE CHINESE COMMUNISTS INTERVENE
3. Strategic Concept and Plan of Operation

Seek to create conditions through the destruction of
effective Communist forces and their means for support in the
Indochina action and by reducing Chinese Communist capability
for further aggression, under which Associated States forces
could assume responsibility for the defense of Indochina, In
the light of this concept the major courses of action would be
as follows:

a. Employing atomic weapons, whenever advantageous, as
. well as other weapons, conduct offensive air operations
against selected military targets in Indochina and against
those military targets in China, Hainan, and other Communist-
held-offshore islands which are being used by the Communists,
in direct support of their operations, or which threaten the
security of U.S. and allied forces in the area.

b. Simultaneously, French Union Forces, augmented by
U.S. naval and air forces, would exploit by coordinated
ground, naval, and air action such successes as may be
gained as a result of the aforementioned air operations
in order to destroy enemy forces in Indochina,

488

TOP. SECRET
