C

Y .
PTA r

Cuee iste:

4

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRETARY DULINS! SEFORT O11}

pe a ea ee ae

t the NS
recent trip to Par

os hoe

m

cetinge of 15 ne Seorebary Dulles reported on his
s as follows:

m= C3

1. He had been in vractically continuous meetings with Mendes-
France and Mr. Z4en from the time of his arrival to his departure,
sometimes with one or the other individually and sometines with the
tvo together. He had told Nendes that, in his orinion, most of -
France's troubles stem from é Jack of © h decision on EDC. Be-
.cause of this, the Soviets were being successful in splitting France
and Gernary. Therefore, he put the greatest urgency on French
acbion’on EDC. Mendes said that it micht not be possible now to
get a constitutional majority of 31) votes in the Assemslé without

some face-savins formula. He honed this could be dene through

minor amendjsnts which would not require renegotiation, but in any
event, Hendes had prortised Secretary Dulles action by the Assembly

by early August. Mr. Dulles hed pointed out that the U.S. pudlic

was getting a trifle short-tempered on the NDC topic and that if

Mendes was not careful, the U.S. Congress might tertinate aid to
NATO which would be deuramenta? to the military effort of all

Europe, especially france.

bye
ae
ca)
fa
Q
=

ates
ht

2. a. Regarding the dilemua of U.S. varticipation in the
Geneva Conference, Secretary Dulles had pointed out that
the U.S. participates in the Conference and then finds 1%
unable to guarantee the restlts, a violent French public r
tion against the U.S. would ensue. Similarly, if the U.S
ticipates and so stiffens French will that France does no
accept the Comrmmist best offer, then again, the U.S. would be
blamed and a major strain placed uvon U.S.-Frencn relations,
- Therefore, the U.S. was seeking to play an inconspicuous role.
itio on line
12 16th
on

b. The original YM provosal had been for a part
along the lth varellel; their second proposal, al on
“parallel. Both had been rejected and the French pos Vas
to hold ovt for the 15th varallel, along with the gvaranteed
independence of Isaos and Carbodia. .

3 ck

£
“

joe jee 2d es

tu
it
ara

c.° The Secretary had worked wo with the French a joint
U.S.-Fr ae paper along the lines of the seven points of the
-U.K ner which had resulted from the Churchill-Rden
talks. tes Colles had said there would be no U.E. guarantee
of the settlenent, out rather a unilateral declaration that
‘tthe U.S. would not attempt to chanze it ty force. iendes had
provided iz. Bulle and

ct
Be
eat
os

a letter of reply and accemtance of
paper. Accordingly, Gen. Smith was

his instrvetions eonbained in these

