Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

eo?

b Lov exceptions g where monthly report
exo submitted by + AS. 2h KH Stock ‘Leyol La ésid, capeusintien. How Eee
tho stools levels For tha bull: of the a aes ona savipnont can bo
dotormined or xeconcilea to any specific level. he iIAAG +3 th

Gomasnt on the cost siuidy stated that tha Pronsh must heve.at

OB slitesic ptock: Level of supplies in tho theater. However, AAG
was via bie | to stato in spscifie teras wheat actually ccnotitute
sicienonth Levol of what constituice any militarily satisraston, S71

Lox, Tntocni:

Jn the arny exavnition ares, as noted in Table II, if tho cusront hi gn
consumption rates continue, e shortegs of 60 ma mortar sholls and 105 rm
howitzer shells will occur, uae present HDAP programsing will result in
en oversupply of 30 celibes carbine cartridges, 57 wa rifle shells, end 155m
howitsor gholls. With ovediablo Gonstaption data, yourzh requireacnts enn
bs coevelopsd ts Sree 28 2 besis for ee icsl pleaning to prsvens tha
Grech serene that he, 38n nocesseaxry rocently. While sone considoration
must be givon to tho mm j PoOcLition that feaktae cata on the opsrations1

plens of the French, it is impossible to state what constituica a
Sane che 7o ovpereticnsl ley oe. ostinates for planning purposes are still
SBN ) nyetie sbla consumption dats

PRCOE HL

quantity and location of stock levels and SE resorvea onerontly
haintained by typo of cquipnsat and supply and what is projected.

TONS: Tho Fronch should bo regusstod to fuenish the HAAG the

Sree? ay

Tne levels of suovly roquired in Indochina are de
of logistical backw ovtsids aie theater, the canal
tical orseniastion in Tndechina end such other factors ag Bee POs ea 2 On
ead cormunication facilitios within tho thoatew., It i 2
quslifiod losistica). porsen: sisned te nakes a ee ee! Se Dowie:
eupport situation in Indochina in orior to detormine wast levels ere
requicod jn the theater to svoport tha operation.

o
te
ts
°
o
ae

VETRARY of PERSOTIEG COSTS? Thoxve is insufficient inform
Anorican gources in Saigon to validato either tha ren

of pay end ellowances, nor is tices a, POvisod peroonn eS available to
thoy tae efXsct of xracent changes in foreo goala on the psreoansl build.
wo. Embassy’ and SHEI sourscss considor « bey ineroass for Associated St
military porsonnel o ie ee propability most likely taking tho fora o
non-ropaynent of tho aunvnl Now Year's (in2) eiivanse of one nonthta pay.
PvS22 59 ey Gate maaeesd to De/s in Paris indicstes Froncn exosctation
of a 203 pay inoraano for those Associated Statos porsonnel es woll aa
indigcnous porconnol with Feoneh Forces by cnt ce calonier 1955, altnouch |
this v23a net included in the budget. Such inforaction oe is ave. ilablo

on foot ani clothing pointa to poms vowar rovision of tho DG Stinate.

Cee aveailabla fr
te

12 on
ich or DC/B estimates

EUCOUTUMARI ONS:
onoh ba pwaqusstod to fusnish roviaeod porsonnel plans

dre Fr
sod taild-ww ad il Paletos to Jetest forea objootivos,

fi
ohoving t

2. “nat in omiae to validato catimatss of foot aosts, tha Irench bo .
‘ "CT . . ‘

poouspecd Yo provides
