Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

—_ = rere AG a (i eae =
A. waty ute we 5 3] me) Mi POD eo, 7 27, "i f Hh Ae 4j
ethare Jf iit. Son! ap al YG of LLY ¢ Lee fe Ai Of ay: ie C fH J i etc ae ,
Es Shih ae | e. iv
baa eteat iS: 1) Far samy ihe Central: 68 54 it pee
S340" Moa” esr Mei pote: due 14, 1954 =~ 1

FROM: Paris : 7:26 P- tm nay eG ee
TO: poor eunre a State

No: 4841, wine uh, 5 p.m.

DEPARTMENT EYES ONLY SECRETARY
GENEVA EYES ONLY UNDER SE ee

1.. In all probability one of first acts of any new French

s)
Li

Government will be request precise statement Immediate and fA
future US intentions regarding military intervention Indo- ro
china. nA oe Roe

as During past week, I have ete nea the very definite im- °° % G:
pression that because of (A) our reluctance to send ground 1
‘forces to Indochina; (B) deterioration of military and po- o
litical situation in Indochina during last month; (C) extreme Sg
‘peluctance, if not refusal, of ANZUS partners-to consider CO)
joining US in any military intervention in Delta ALCa , the oO
chances of US responding favorably to French request for mil- Se
itary assistance even after they have met all conditions are GC.
approximately nil. i

3. Hardening of Communist position in Geneva as indicated by ri
Molotov and Chou En-lai last week would seem to indicate that zo
Communists no longer fear possibility of US military inter- “
vention in Indochina provided there is no overt Chinese attack. Bi

Tt would seem, therefore, that Viet Minh and Chinese will not Bas.
accept any a emistice which does not clearly pave the way for Macs
Communist takeover in Indochina. =}

4, Lacking the possibility of US military support, it would =e

seem to be “only a a stion of time, weeks or a few months at 1 en
: very most, before French are forced to accept Viet_Minh_ terms. Sete
“ty the weanvime, there is the constant risk of an all-out ~~ ae
I fiX ssault on the Delta which could lead to a serious French re- a
v) erse, if not total annihilation of eared here corps in ey
ee cne er | OU ITN: 1 aa ; y £
ee have continually pointed out that such a reverse wight haves! may
é&\ disastrous effect on French public opinion. Today I am more. Ne

ee omner es than ever that such would be the case. Rightly or> an) = Sale
oe THD Armee ee Ng
ExEMANEHT j ae * REPROIUETION Fr) THs
0010 C077 © This copy must be returned to DG/R)centrat-flesiwith notation of action taken © ¢:> "08 C1253 FIED, FS

Got? promo TED

cng

ri L. ‘ an f
