Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

cmon res r
2 ? i pos % cS i zois i
€, The lack of ek facilities for superimposinz
U.S. Air Force forces on existing facilities in Indochina,

f. The inpol: eactlon by the Chinese Comnu-
» nists in the. nie of US. pa Bic toatlen.

a
se
k=
@)
oe
—_
)
o

Cry
,*

g. Atomic weapons will be used whenever it is to our
military edvantage.

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the basic prin-
ciple underlying any command structure for operations in Indo-
china which is ecceptable to the United States must enable the
U.S. to influence future strategy in Indochina, In eddition,
they believe that some new means to furnish the military guid-
ance which heretofore has come from Paris must be found. A
possible solution for over-all strategic guidance is a [i
Representatives Gommittee with memberehip from those nati

contributing the principal forces of the coalition with a
gBteering or standing group along the lines of NATO. eal

Group would be served by as -atT organized along the lin of
the U.S. Joint Staff composed primarily of U.S. and rene h
officers.

4. Although the Allied Gormander in Chief in Indochina
should be French, there must be a U.S. Deputy with sufficient
staff assistance to provide liaicon with the French and coordi-
nate U.S. activities with the over-all operations. CINCPAC
would exercise command over all U.S. forces based in Indochina
and other forces assigned to him for operations in Inochina,
In addition, a U.S. Air Advisor would be provided the French
Commander in Chief for the purpose of advising him concerning
the ale effort.

5 ENE Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the beat military
course for eventual victory in Indochina is the development of
effective native arued forces, ‘Thus far the French have beg
unsuccessfu_ in their efforts “to develop such forces. A firm
commitment by tne French and firm requests from the respective
governments of the Associated States for the training and de-
velopment of native forces by the United States should be a
-prerequisite of U.S. participation. It is estimated tnat an
augmentation of MAAG Indochina on the order of 2250, with an
appropriate logistic support force, would be required to
initiate this program. The size of this force and security
arrangements therefor will be determined in light of recom-
mendations reques eee. from CINCPACG and Chief, MAAG Indochina

a “Epiea Sth fy Sim
