Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
-2- 4287, May 10, 1 p.m., from Paris.

is facing is not (repeat not) the Viet Minh rebels, but Communist

China. Laniel observed that Communist China had fought the

whole UN to a standstill in Korea. Obviously France alone was

no (repeat no) match for China. The strength with which the

French could oppose Chinese propositions at Geneva would have

a direct connection with the amount of support they received —

from the other Western powers, particularly the US. In the

final analysis, the only such support, which he felt would have

any real effect on the Chinese, would be the direct threat of

US military intervention. He very much feared that the Communist

side would attempt so drag out the negotiations by interminable

procedural debates on such subjects as the admission to the
conference of non-existent Communist Governments of Laos and
Cambodia until such time as they could a a military Bes abe ou
in the ficid.

Laniel then turned to the immediate military orevien. He said
that the Viet Minh had_announced that they would not (repeat
not) cease operations this year during the monsoon. Their >
next objective, after Dien-Bien-Phu, would in all probability
be Hanoi. Under ordinary circunstances it should take the
-Viet Minh approximately a month to move their troops from Dien-
Bien-Phu to the Hanoi area. However, it might be possible to
reduce this period to two or three weeks if the Viet Minh made
an all-out effort. He also feared that in view of the success
which ‘the Chinese have had with their military intervention

at Dien-Bien-Phu, they would not (repeat not) now hesitate to
intervene further with Supplies and even with additional: person-
nel, to the extent necessary to gain a knockout victory at
Hanol.

It therefore was vitally aed ae as a first order of ‘business,
for the French to decid® how to regroup their forces in Indoching
80 as best to protect the expeditionary corps. laniel said

that he would much prefer to take these military decisions with
the aid of competent US military advice, rather than tc’ take

them by himself. He also said that he would have to ki 5w, in
connection with making his decisions, what, if any, military
action the US might be prepared to take in "Indochina and under
what, if any, circumstances. If there was no (repeat r>) possi-
bility of US military help at any point, the regroupmer.c of
forces would have to be much more’drastic, and the first thing
to be done would be the complete evacuation:and abandonment to
the Viet Minh of the entire territories of Laos and Cambodia.

He stated that there were eA French Union battalions presently
in Laos which would have to be redeployed to the Delta or to
some area near the sea. In addition, the French-held lines in
the Delta would have to be eee shortened.

Lu7 As a specific

pet TOP SECRET
, 7, ARTI
