Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive |

C7. The Defense member of the NSC Planning Beard indicates
the options ayaileble to the U.S. with regard to the
Geneva results. General Bonesteel suggests that the in-
ereased risks associated with pressuring France to con-
tinue the war end possible U.S. intervention to stop the
communist advance can "more surely and safely be accepted
now than ever again." On the other hand, a compromise at
Geneva would lead to communist subversion at a late date
and U.S. involvement then might be inhibited by an in-
creased Soviet nuclear capability. “Asia could thus be
lost." General Bonesteel Memorandum for Secretary of
Deverise, O May BOSH. sascie cols ow aisie.o's vila stewie oles wteares os aa cles we! hye

98. The draft instructions for the Geneva Delegation, which

have been approved by the President are sent to the

Defense Department for comment. According to the in-

structions, the U.S. is “an interested nation which,

however, is neither a belligerent nor a principal in

the negotiation." State Department Letter to R. B.

Anderson, Deputy Secretary of Defense, 10 May 1954........... 4h

99. France is convinced it is facing Commmist China at
Dien Bien Phu not Viet Minh rebels. The French request
the aid of competent U.S. military advice, i.e., a U.S.
General to confer with General Ely on regrouping forces
in Indochina. Paris 4287 to Dulles, 10 May 195%...seseseeeeee. 46

100. The United States "posture" at Geneva is interpreted as
"to cheer the players” rather than "to pitch." ‘The
draft instructions to the Geneva delegation imply a
"profound point" -- will the U.S. admit diplomatic
defeat and cease to use the conference toward its ends
if the conference appears to go against the U.S.?
General Bonesteel Memorandum for Deputy Secretary of
Deterers 10 Mey) 195i. es couse cules coves <Geieszecneseeeesessess nD

101. The President approves informing the French of his con-
ditions for U.S. intervention in Indochina. Even thoush
‘premature, the decision to internationalize the war must
be made. President Hisenhower would ask Congressional
euthority to commit U.S. forces provided: (1) there was
a French request, (2) thet other nations would be re-
quested and would accept, (3) that the UN would be noti-
fied, (4) that France guarantees independence in the
French Union to the Associated States, including the
option to withdraw at any time, (5) that France would
not withdraw its forces after the intervention, and
(6) that an agreed on structure for united action is
reached. Dulles 4023 to Paris, 11 May 1954.......ceceeeeeees 45D

xvii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
