Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ANGHCENG TELEEAM Deparment of (State

Action "tig eam a Control: 7O44
rE — Roct di July 16, ce al
“FROM: Geneva wa ; 4312 p.m.

SS To: Secretary of State
SP no: SEGTC 626, July 16, 7 p.m.

INA PRIORITY

R =
4 SENT DEPARTMENT SECTO 626, REPEATED INFORMATION PARIS 72, ae
SAZGON 44, : CH!

‘ t.,

Saw Chauvel this afternoon. He told me that Mendes~—France and 7)

Molotov had dinner last night, and Soviets had launched into “
substantive discussion even before cockteils were served end. “S

a continued throughout dinner, and Mendes-France znd Molotov had ~*~ &
discussicn following dinner with only interpreters present which G
\ lasted more than 5 ~ours until almost 1:00 a.m. -Discussion cov- jis:
: ered wnole range of outstanding questions: vat least once; accord-=
ing to Chauvel some of them "twenty times" Chauvel said Mendes ~si

had stuck firmly to French positions and with very minor excep- 1

tions of oe mentioned below, Molotov “hedjcuhtte being =:

very piessant, not” i (Pevean Hou). ‘budged an inch. On elections Gi

ae MoTatov Pneliy made sugsestion “that Coprerente agree. on date
bys “Dy y which — two governments of Viétnaéti would have decided date for ts.

Comminis=s—expected to find Mendes "sort", are somewhat confused * Plies
ihe at his firna E35 , atd _are still testing bim.

Se AV A oe.

We) elections. Mendes re jected “this. Chauvel's. assessment was that

There have been no (repeat no) other major deeeioonents. I called
Cesuvel's particular sttention toa paragra.1 5 Of position paper on
Indechina agreed at Paris and noted that. “rench were still using

tern "guaranteeing powes3" in draft armistice, and asked how he
perceived the situation in this regard. He said that he conceived
lara to be more than thst embodied in French draft of confer-
ce declaration (SECTO 597). I pointed out that position paper
ase it cisar that US will express its position unilaterally or in
|, ASSOS tation oaly with non-Communist state 2S, and was not quite surs
‘how French concept of conference declaration fitted therewith. T
said I had particularly instructed Bonsal reserve our position on
last paragraph of French draft _providing for consultation among
conference powers on reports of violations by supervisory commis-

sion, Although I had no (repeat no) instructions on subject, Bt.
did not (repeat not) believe US would be willing assume continuing’
obligation consult witn all conference po including Communist’
China and Viet Minh. Chauvel said that light of paragraph 5 3
of position paper, French drart provided onige for conference eae
armistice agreemnsnt. -
Wee ok 6 ‘Chauvel
4 MANENT : See aa Gee REPROCUCTION FRO THIS

4c820 C427 © This copy must be returned to OG /R central, Heaiwith notation of action taken o COPY, IF CLASSIFIED, 15

Wa Wi,
