Cony

of « “pages series "A"

/

r

~

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

iwi
THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

WLUW &,

WASHINGTON 25, D. D.

1 March 1954

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Subject: Consideration of the ROK Offer to
Send a Division to Indochina

1. In two messages, C-66980 dated 2 February 1954 (DA IN
36799) and KCG 2-4 dated 5 February 1954 (DA IN 37583),
CINCFE has reported President Rhee's proposal, subject to
United States concurrence, to offer a Republic of Korea
Army (ROKA) division to assist the Government of Laos in
resisting the Viet Minh invasion of that country. In dis-
cussing this matter with General Hull on 5 February 1954,
President Rhee stated that he did not wish to make any move
which would be embarrassing to the United States Government
and that he would do whatever the United States Government
desired him to do in this case. He felt that early action
should be taken if any reinforcements are to be sent to
Indochina, as the situation there appeared to him to be
quite critical. He stated that, in his opinion, whatever
decision is taken should be taken quickly.

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered the impli-
cations of this problem, and submit herewith their views in
the premises.

3. Provided the withdrawal of a ROKA division from the
United Nations forces in Korea for transfer to Indochina did
not bring about a general movement on the part of our United
Nations Allies to reduce their contingents in Korea, such a
withdrawal would be acceptable from the standpoint of the
military situation in Korea.

4. The augmentation of the French Union forces in Indo-
china by one ROKA division-would not, of itself, increase
their military capability vis-a-vis the Viet Minh to a
degree likely to be decisive.

5. In addition to the purely military considerations,
there are involved a number of important political and
psychological factors having military implications which
should be carefully weighed in evaluating the over-all

7___ tastes 259

SecDef Cont. No. 2572
