90.

91.

93.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Sensitive

Page

tactieal snd strategic error.” On the political aspects

of the war, Trapnell feels that "a strictly military
solution to the war in Indochina is not possible...iIt is
doubtful if the ordinary people understand the issues eat
stake between the rebel and Associated States objectives."
The solution in Indochina requires a strong French assault
on the Viet Minh, training of National armies, a defensive
alliance of Asian nations, and a guarantee of the Associated
States borders. Trannell recommends a U.S. training mission
for Indochina, and concludes that victory in Indochina is
international rather than locel and essentially political as
well as militsry. Major General Trapnell Debriefing,

3 May PGSM saints wisie wieis ais o/alalalsisiuissis/s orev elelele stursle oiniuje s! @'mus ysis eaueisleere

106

Indochina is the only nation that has the hignest MDAP

priority end thus has precedence over every other

nation for allocation of critical military equipment.

The JCS have completed a plan for military intervention

in Indochina and, as well, planned for resumption of

hostilities in Korea. CINCPAC has dirécted thet other

plans be prepared, i.e., blockade of China coast, evacu~

ation of French forces from Tonkin, etc. Joint Subsidiary

Plans. Memorendum for OCB, 5 May 1954. ...cccnccecscovesereseus 4O7
General Smith reviews the French proposal which has been
sent to the Cabinet for avproyal. France proposes a
cease-fire take place when “international” control
machinery, based on Laniel's 5 March conditions, is in
place. Regular troops would be regrouned into delimited
areas and all other forces disarmed. France assumes that
the Russians would propose a, follow-on political settle-
ment (coalition) end immediate elections. SECTO 106,

5 May OSU, -eccua Get hina a See ae ie mere a a ice ae eRe. | LER

The NSC-195th Meeting considers Secretary Dulles pessi- {
mistic report on Geneva to the President: (1) there is

no responsible French Goverment to deal with, (2) the

British reject the “regional grouping," (3) the British

want secret talks on Southeast Asia, (4) the exoected

comaunist proposal is for foreign troop withdrawal and

elections, (5) and the U.K. wants a settlement based on

partition. ESC 195th Meeting, 6 May 195k. ......cecveccvesces | HOS

Dulles briefs Congressional leaders on the Geneva Con-
ference and reviews the weaknesses of Britain's position.
Congress members coments are adverse. Dulles states
three conclusions: (1) U.S. should not intervene mili-
tarily, (2) U.S. must push rapidly for a Southeast Asia
community, (3) and the U.S. should not "write off" the
British and French in spite of their weakness in Asia.

TeDUL BYs 6 May LO, caieleve Se aclergis ol Basis w'mialeiS wie olete ns ellatal-a wal ere wies 42s

.

KV - TOP SECRET - Sensitive
