Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

5. The force requirements and inherent logistic implica-
tions for a "static" defense of the remaining countries of
Southeast Asia-Burma, Thailand, and Malaya are of the order
of magnitude as shown in Appendices "A" and "B" hereto. So
long as Burma and Thailand are not under Communist control,
the geography of the area and the lack of a Chinese Communist
capability for a major overseas attack renders Malaya secure
from external attack. Therefore, the force requirements are
limited to those necessary to defend Burma and Thailand and
to provide internal security against infiltration and sub-
version in Malaya. Should Burma and Thailand be lost, to
the Communists prior to an Allied decision to hold a line
in Southeast Asia, the defensive position would have to be
established in Malaya.

6. A study of the above requirements and implications re-
veals the following extensive and damaging weaknesses inher-
ent in this concept:
a. It is estimated that it would take a minimum of 12
months to build up the necessary base complex and facilities
required to support the forces indicated.

b. These forces would have to remain for an extended
period.

c. The commitment in manpower and material incident
to maintaining these forces in Southeast Asia for such
a period would be unacceptable from the overall viewpoint.

d. The presence of large numbers of United States
Commonwealth, and French troops in this area would provide
a basis for Communist propaganda to develop and intensify
anti-Western sentiment.

e. The dissipation of allied strength through the com-
mitment of forces of this magnitude to a "static" defense
of Southeast Asia would contribute to the realization of
the politico-military objectives of the USSR vis-a-vis
the free world.

f&. Execution of static defense plan would result in
maldeployment and seriously reduce the flexibility of
employment of United States forces. This could seriously
jeopardize the United States capability of supporting
logistically our present war plans.

7. In view of the foregoing, the Joint Chiefs of Staff

eoueider that from the military viewpoint the concept of a
static-type defense is unsound.

481 .

TOP SECRET
