Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
-2- DULEE 21, April 29, 10 a.m. from Geneva.
from pouibical standpoint this type of program eppears to
offer best hepe of France staying in war. If France and US
agree on such a plan, there would ve fair chance of Australia
and New Zealand coming aleng. However, this estimate can be
Liproved In next day or two after I have conferred further
with Foreign Minister Casey and Prime Minister Webb. It is
unlikely that the UK would initially participate and would
prebably use its influence to prevent participation by
Australia and New Zealand. The UK situation would be dif-
ficult internally and externally, and there would protably
be undesirable repercussions upon other NATO partners.
Thailand could be expected to cooperate if we act promptly.
Foreign Minister Wan gave further assurance today and urges
quick military conversations.

The attitude here of Molotov and Chou En-lai's statement
yesterday lead me to rate more highly than heretofore the
probability that any open US intervention _would_be answered
by open Chinese intervention” with consequence | of, general’ war

in Asia... :

(2) UK attitude is one of increasing weakness. British seem
to feel that we are disposed to accept present risks of a
Chinese war and this, coupled also with their fear that we
would start using atomic weapons, has badly frightened them.

I have just rec eived s note frdm "Eden referring to my paper
read before NATO restricted councfi- Where Hden again Urges
necessity of consultation before\any use. He says, "You

know our stron gly-neld views on the need for consultation

before any decision is taken.

(5) General: The decline of Frenca, the great weakness of
italy, end the considerable weakness \in England create a
Situation where I think that if we our\selves are clear as
to what should be done, we must be pretared to take the
leadership in what we think is the rigni course, having
regard to long-range US interest which includes importance
of Allies. I believe that our Allies wil} be inclined to
follow, if not immediately, then ultimately, strong and
sound leadership. In saying this, i do not underestimate
the immese difficulty of our finding the right course in
this troubled situation. Nor do I mean to imply that I
think thst this is the moment for a bold or war-like course.
I lack here the US political and NSC judgments needed for
overall evaluation. :

‘DULLES

* HTM/8

se
oo
cs
ED
Crt

TOP ECRET

398 *
