Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

ASSU?

PART Il

\PTIONS

A. The treaties of independence between France and the Associated States will

have been signed.

B. A regional security grouping including at least the Associated States, Thai-
land, the Philippines, Australia, France, and the United States, and possibly includ-
ing also New Zealand and the United Kingdom, will have been formed.

C. The Associated States will have publicly requested the direct military partici-
pation of members of the regional grouping in the war in Indochina.

D, The French will have undertaken to continue at least the present level of their

military commitment in Indochina.

E. The Chinese Communists will have openly intervened with military forces in
Indochina in order to counter US direct participation as defined in Requirement 1,

"REQUIREMENT 3

To estimate Chinese Communist and Soviet
reactions to an extension of allied offensive
air operations to include military targets in
Communist China directly supporting Com-
munist military operations in Indochina or
directly threatening the security of Allied
forces in the area.* Nuclear weapons would
be employed in these operations if it were
deemed militarily advantageous to do so, but
nuclear attacks on the Chinese civil popula-
_ tion as « target system would be avoided.

- Chinese Communist Reaction

10. We consider it probable that before inter-
vening in Indochina the Chinese Communists
would have accepted the likelihood of US air
attacks against military targets in China.
Consequently, they would not feel compelled
‘to withdraw their forces from Indochina solely
as a result of the initiation of the air opera-
ticns assumed above. At the same time, we

"In this requirement we interpret targets “direct-
ly supporting” Communist military operations to
be generally south of the Yangtze River and to
consist primarily of transport lines, troop con-
centrations, and air fields in the area.

TOP

believe that the Chinese Communists, in order

to prevent further destruction to this area of
China and particularly to avoid the spread of
unlimited US attacks to the whole of China,
would intensify efforts to induce the US to
enter negotiations for a settlement which
would preserve the Communist position and
prospects in Indochina,

11. Meanwhile the Chinese Communists, to
the full extent of their capabilities, would
prosecute the war on the ground in Indochina.
and attack allied air bases, aircraft carriers,
and other installations directly supporting
allied operations in the area. They would,
however, probably try to keep the war cen-
tered in Indochina and, as a consequence,
probably would confine their attacks to such
directly supporting bases and installations.

12. The use of nuclear weapons under the

‘ restrictions given above would greatly in-

crease Chinese Communist concern about US
intentions but probably would not by itself
cause them to adopt new courses of military
action at this time. However, they would
threaten nuclear retaliation. They would °
also exploit to the fullest resultant psycho-
logical opportunities and in particular would

SECRET
