Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -' Sensitive

Page

negotiation or military force as necessary, (4) if Tonkin .

is lost, France will not fight in the South, (5) nor would

Vietnamese Tight against other Vietnamese and sooner or

later the whole of Vietnam will become communist. TEDUL

EP CAN: TOO aioe vearorecereor aM bie well eetincal sib oie Ribena eaieonegeiewie. . Oe
127. Dulles feels that it is of “overriding importance" to

push on with action on Thailand's appeal to the United

Nations Security Council, TOSHC 368, 7 June 1954......... ave 55)

128. The U.S. will seek firm views of others once the "French
authoritively tell us they want to internationalize the
Indochina war." Further, when France decides to request
U.S, intervention, the U.S. must have the opportunity to
make its own decision based on prevailing circumstances.
"We cannot grant the French an indefinite option on us
without regard to intervening deterioration." TEDUL 175,

129. Because of Thailand's strong feeling the scope of appeal.
should not be limited to Thailand. The Thai government
has a negative attitude on limiting the scope and they
object to Czechoslovekia or other Soviet satellite men-
bership on the Peace Observation Commission (POC).

United Nations 810 to Dulles, 8 Jume 195)}.....csscceseerecwe phe

130. Bidault replies to a conversation reported in DULTE 156
(not printed here) in which "agreement in principle" with
the U.S. had been reached. No major differences are
noted, however, French military believe any JCS war plan
would show the necessity of at least one Marine division
for the Delta. General Valluy"s conversationsat the .
Pentagon are seen as most crucial. "Thus if we want
French military essistance...in, Southeast Asia...it is
vital, <JCS..-.approve a joint war plan justifying the
use of Marines." Paris 4766 to Dulles, 9 Jume 1954.......... D5ueht

131. Eden cites three major issues emerging on which "we cannot
compromise": (1) separate treatment of Laos and Cambodia
~ problem, (2) status and powers of international super-
visory authority and (3) composition of the international
Supervisory authority. Britain -feels negotiations have
failed and little can be salveged in Vietnem. DULTE 16},
Cis N tem AS OL PENNA yroeh eno RO ee les ccs cnt aecerele Sen EE bo 8 deel aie oa: mae

132. The French are upset because Admiral Radford had said
there was "no question of utilization of Marines in
Indochina.” The U.S. position, according to Dulles,

xh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Sue SRL = mensit
