Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
-2- SECTO 626, July 16, 7 p.m., from Geneva

Chauvel said French were concerned over reports continued con-
tacts between Fran Van Do and Dong. They did not know exactly
what was happening, they know very little about Do, but they

had impression he was unsophisticated and might be "taken into
camp" by Dong. ‘They felt after zones bétween defined and two
govermuents each clearly responsible for own territories, such
contacts would probably be desirable and necessary, but in pre-
sent situation might be dangerous and could even result in sur-
prise more bringing about something in nature of coalition govern-
ment. Chauvel said De Jean was going to see Bao Dai to determine
what Bao Dai knew about the matter and whether he had approved.

In reply to my question on what French conceived to be major
outstanding issue, Chauvel listed: (1) military demarcation

line in Vietnam, (2) regrouping in Vietnam, particularly in delta
area, where Chauvel said Viet Minh would be required to move out
two divisions from areas that they now occupied so as permit
separation from French-Vietnamese forces. In Laos he said major
question retention small number French troops there (consideration
was being given to "changing their flag" from French to Laos),
and also political questions in Laos. He said there were no major
issues on Cambodia.

Chauvel also mentioned international control and asked whether I had
any new instructions on subject. I said I had not and subject had
not been discussed at Paris in any detail.

UK informed me today that meeting was proposed this afternoon
between Mendes, Eden and Molotov to go over present stage of work
of conference and make catalogue of work to be done. They asked
whether I wished to be present, pointing out if US were present
Soviets would probably insist on presence of Chinese, thus turning
meeting into "five power affair". I replied that I had no objection
to their goind ahead on three-power basis.

JOHNS ON
TT: AW :

TOP SECRET

647
