Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

tt

OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSS&
WASHINGTON re & oe

INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS

LORS SIDUA FOR Ts SECRETARY OF DEFITSE

SUBJECT: | Future U. S. Action Reg arding Indo-Chira ; ‘
1. In light of the French Dera tabied an armistice proposal at
Geneve, the United States must now decide whether:

a. To intervene actively in the Indo-China war to redeem the situation,

». To exercise ali feasible pressure to require the French Gover
to avoid all compromise at Geneva and to take increased effective nmi
and political action against the Viet Minh in Indo-China. This ax

realistically possible only if the decision to implement a above i
made. >

3 ee ¥

fo us
abe
gf
ae |

OBS
S

c. To adopt a passive policy tovard the negotiations at Gereva while
endeavoring to organize hastily a regional grouping, with U.S. particivation,
to hold what remains of Southeast Asia.

2. Decisions 2 plus b offer the only sure Way gO stop the Communist advance.
They involve substantial risk of war with Red China ané increased risk of general
war. However, recognizing the ptecaiiy increasing Soviet capabilities in
nuclear warfare and the consequent steady diminution of the present military
advantage.cf the U.S. over the USSR, these incre esed risks can more surely and
safely be accepted now than ever again.

3. Decision ¢ would be a cox soromise involving clear possibilities for
piecemeal advancement of Commmist control over the balance of free Asia cespite
the best efforts of the U.S. to the contrary. The likelihood of further s
advancenient would be. somewhat diminished if the U.S. made publicly clear
the further supcort by Moscow and Peiping of Communist aggression or subvers
as. juiged oy the U.S., would entail direct military action by the U-S azsainst
the source or sources of this suoport. “ However, it might be months o. years
before further subversion vould erable su By then the

o
a

tha
vo
=

increased Soviet nuclear capability mizht well inhibit the U.S. Government
= Lv)
from opie enting its enpodueet invet tien. Asia could thus be lost.

he BOS it would appear that the U.S. Government must decide whether
to take the steps necessary to contain Communism in Asia within Red China by

intervention in Indo-Cnhin2 or accent ee prob2ole loss of Asia to Communism,

i. g

' e ee

Anetnent eemtains —— Pests 0 Seis
i eae ee oe . A "
3 5ies Series: se fm
SG. ee Gt as COO Seas bas
za not bs
ence? miarieston ;
vis ffica.

