a ere ars pec Ee eee pe ee

i te te eee
4

TOC
30 tial as to require our Ps dissociation with such a solution,

PERMANENT : hs
REeOnD COPY © This copy must be returned to DOG

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

at ee

vee 7 = ana pra wy ge ee fE NOE: a =
8 TELE nen Deparinesi eG) Late ki foe (oe
Ap
ee Le ee sees enn nee ONY A Se Ae
ys a. SECRET
. “. Contrott 9200 ates
r Roeid: June ; 1954
FROM: Geneva | LEMIAD: OZ
To: Secretary oF State ot tel tae ee ON A im : ~
NO: DULITH) 195, June 18, 5 pe wm. Se Z g7" voit es
LS) ee $i Ege 4 ORS
PRIORETE == at ee VG {} oe
SENT DEPARTMENT DULTE 195, REPEATED INFORMATION PARIS 195: O!
SATGON 177. 6)
PARIS EYES ONLY AMBASSADOR; SATGON EYES ONLY AMBASSADOR Oo
Johnsen saw Chauvel this morning and discussed with him oO
conference situation in light TEDUL 211. Johnson stated 5 oe
seemed -to us that such fundamental questions as composition, , =

vcting procedures and authority or international control com-
mission should be dealt with in conference rather than by
committee. If conference reachsd decision on fundamental » OO
principles, working out of details could be done by committee’ ~ VU!
of experts of principally interested parties in same pattern
as present Franco-Viet Minh military conversations.

Chauvel said this--would be “agreeable except that ane eetod of
authority, which he termed "relationship between international
commissicn and joint committees" could be dealt with by techni-
cal committee, thus implying France not (repeat not) prepared
to maintain principle ‘of subordination joint committees to
international commission. .As French have already circulated
proposal contained SECTO 460 through secretariat, it was agreed
. we would mae suggestion along foregoing lines at today's re-
stricted westing. Chauvel said they did not (repeat not) yet
have any further indication as to what attitude hinese would
takes on French propnosal entirely clear from conversation with
Chauvel that his main interest is in keeping some conference
activity of: nine going and that if regardless of level repre-
sentation we prepared continue some conference meetings would
probably meet French point of view. Appears French proposal =
made on assumption that there would be complete recess of cons
ference with departure of Smith and Eden.

7
au
1

Gia a tt)

ey
“Ja
Chauvel. made reference to his conversation with Smith x yesterday -*
(DULTE 193--last paragraph), making inquiry as to exactly wos!
we had in mind. Johnson in reply read to him paragraphs 5, 6

and 7 basic instructions (TOSEC 158) stating that French willing-
nees surrender even minimum enclave in north of Haiphong would SO
clearly contravene the principlés which the US considered essen-

aig

=

In reply
ply RE cons re

os |
seathah files with notation of action taken Gory. tf CLASSI Fy 1E,

ROA Ree
