‘nes

Fo ee ee ene a mame WAM le 6d nate iad pe eiara  allher ane

ea pe aa ac ra) OS ap Ie ee ee

ments by in

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

DEPART “ENT OF THE aris
WASHINGTON, D. Cc,

19 May 1954
MEMORANDUM FOR: THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

SUBJECT: Indo-China

1, Iam becoming increasingly concerned over the frequency of state-
dividuals of influence within and without the government that
United States air and sea forces alone could solve our problems in Indo-
China, and equally so over the very evident leck of appreciation of the
logistics factors affecting operations in that area.

2. Indo-China is almost totally devcid of local resources which would
be of use to our Armed Forces. It has 2 tropical, monsoon climate with
ee wet and dry seasons and the disease and morzle hazards are ©
high for Caucasian troops, The population, when net hostile, is wntrust-
worthy. However, the principal deficiency of Indo-China as a base for
the support of large mi itary operations lies in the inadequacy of its
facilities for the movement of supplies.

3. Yhe two principal ports are Szizon and Haiphong, with a combined
daily capacity of 15,100 short tons. Both are inland river ports requiring ©
considerable dredging before maximum potential can be obtained. TReEre
are nine secondary ports whose tonnage capacities vary from 100 to l,+
tons,

4, Because of the inadequacies of the road, railro cad, and waterway
systems north from Saigon, this port would be of very little use for the sup-
port of operations in the Tonkin Delta, Haiphong could not be used without
augmentation of its capacity including full use of secondary ports and all
beaches. The tonnage capacity of the road and railroad system from
Haiphong to Hanoi is even now less than the port capacity of Haiphong

5, It would be necessary to make full use of the air for supply and
evacuation 2s well 2s for tactical support. Much construction, to include

lengthening and reinforcing of runways, of extreme difficulty during the

rainy season, would be necessary, Only three  aieeialas in Indo-China,
Haiphong/Cat Bi, Tourane and Tan Sou Nhut (near Saigon), have runways

. over.7,500 feet long and have reported pavement strengths which could sup-

port B-45 bomber operations. - Eight fields can handle transport planes as
large as a C-119; an additional seven fields can accommodate C-46's, Sus-
tained operations could not be undertaken on most of these fields in the

rainy season, Within the Delta itself, there are ten airfields of all types of .

which only one, Cat Bi, is erent ys being used by C-H19's or C-54's,

Tha7? =
Dest Cent. He ei es

aed
4]
ates
jet
~

SL
