Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Gensitive

62. Admiral Radford shares doubts of other JCS members on the
adequacy of measures taken by General Navarre at Dien Bien
Phu. General Ely predicts the outcome at Dien Bien Phu as
"590-50" and emphasizes the great political importance of
the battle. Radford is "gravely fearful" that French
measures will be inadequate, the consequences could lead
to loss of Southeast Asia, and to avoid this, the U. §.
must be "prepared to act promptly and in force" to a be-
lated French request for intervention. See Annex B to
Document 63, page 277. JCS Memorandwa for the President,
Ot March! LOS. caja st cece cine aes EZ genial SOE SEC ee eee esicae — ee

63. General Ely, Chairman of the French Chiefs of Staff, is

' "“unsympathetic™ to the JCS view to expand MAAG, Indochina
to assist in training Vietnamese. Ely feels it would
encroach on French responsibilities, would affect "prestige"
and shows lack of confidence in French leadership.
(Annex A, Ely Memorandum for Radford; Annex B, JCS Memo-
randua for the President) JCS Memorandum for President's
Committee, 29 ttarch TOS. wins a suid sean an ese ve eaewebie cassie S)- Mene

64, The U. S. reiterates to the U. K. the following assumed-
position; (1) that Britain supports our agreement to
discuss Indochina at Geneva provided France would not
turn over the area to the Comamists; and (2) "we shall
not, however, be disposed to give Communist China what
it wants from us merely to buy its promises of future '
good behavior.” Dulles 5090 to London, 1 April 1954......... 292

65. The U. S. proposes a coalition of U. S., France, Associ-
ated States, U. K., Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, and
the Philippines, which would fight in Indochina as an
alternative to French Union surrender and as a position
of strength going to Geneva. Dulles 3476 to Paris,
Bl ATT ha pai ecttenata Re eae even ON mere Se Reade a ew ieeid eacatieteeaee ene a Deas

66. The British consider partition the "least undesirable
settlement" for Indochina and had not developed thoughts
on a confrontation with a French sell-out. Dulles 5177

to London, h April LS GO dy aera UN Sot Aer bra sald it once a aera peter Ne act hey ae atl 295

67. The French request "immediate armed intervention of U. S.

- carrier aircraft at Dien Bien Phu" to save the situation.

Admiral Radford hed previously assured Ely that he would

“do his best" to obtain the U. S,. support. Paris 3710 to
Dultes, Te Weil PORE. wuercleve ane actos vines aeeee coees scaeeeere oe

x TOP. SECRET = Sensitive
