Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
Section i

SUMMARY OF STUDIES BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE

rt 1. There are three parts to the State study:

a. Economic warfare against Communist China.

b. U.N. action in the event of U.S, armed intervention in
Indochina,

ce. Juridical relations to the French Union: Giving effect to
the independence of the Associated States.

2. Economic warfare against Communist China.- The paper seeks to
determine whether, in the event of U.S, intervention in Indochina,
intensified and broadened economic warfare measures would deter
Communist China from openly intervening or hinder its military effort if
it did intervene. The study concludes that the divisive risks of seeking
an international program of broadened and intensified economic warfare
measures against Communist China would be too great to be undertaken if
the full support of the United Kingdom were absent. Even such a program
as could be obtained with United Kingdom support would nevertheless not
constitute a serious deterrent or countermeasure to open Communist
Chinese intervention in Indochina in terms of economic impact. It
might be possible, however, to achieve some deterrent psychological
impact through the device of an advance multilateral declaration of the
economic consequences of massive Chinese Communist intervention.

The paper does not deal with the question of a naval blockade, which
State considers to be a military measure.

3. U.N. action in the event of U.S. armed intervention in Indochina -

With the exception of action under Article 51 (individual or collective

defense against "armed attack") the U.S. as a U.N, member is obligated
not to use armed force except in response to orders or recommendations of
the U.N.. Therefore, "united action" without prior U.N. authorization
would have to be taken under Article 51.

There are three possible types of U.N. action related to “united
action":

a. U.N. action prior to U.S. intervention, designed to lay
the foundation for "united action."

b. U.N. action following and supplementing the "united action."
ec. Possible U.N. action in the event the Chinese Communists
resumed hostilities in Korea as a result of “united action" in Indochina,
514

TOP SECRET
