Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TAD CTORET

Wi wiliwilicd

Dr. Quat described in detail the present psychological warfare activ-
ities undertaken in "Operation Atlanta" in the three provinces extending
between Nhatrang -and Hue. He said that not only were GAMO teams close be-
hind the expeditionary force, but that a new technique was being tried for
the first time in Vietnam. Hitherto fics Beenth Union and Vietnamese forces
had been content to overwhelm an area and then leave it relatively empty,
with the result that the Viet Minh returned to territories officially
listed as "pacified." Now, however, two new systems were being tried.
The first was in the treatment of villages in the line of allied advance.
Instead of following the old system of obliteration, three categories of
villages were recognized. The first was the village which offered all-
out resistance. This was subject to all-out attack and was wiped out,
either by aerial bombardment or land assault. The second class of village
was one which showed sporadic resistance, and this was encircled by Viet-
namese troops and called upon to surrender. Following capitulation, the
inhabitants were divided into three sub-categories: those who were clearly
Viet Minh and who were used for battle intelligence before being made pris-—
oners; those who were merely suspect and who were placed in concentration
camps where, by means of psychological warfare, they might be induced to
come over to the Vietnamese side; and those who were clearly the mass of
the people -— peasants who were promptly given work, paid in good Vietnamese
piasters, and set free, although still kept under surveillance. The third
type of village was that which offered no resistance whatever, but on the
contrary, welcomed liberation from the advancing French and Vietnamese
forces. These people were given immediate assistance and an opportunity

to work with prompt payment. The Minister felt that the outcome of this

257
