Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ral eee EAS.

e. The matter of local defense of the fields, when opera-
tional, adds to the continuing logistic supply effort.

£. The project, even reduced to consideration of the one
field at Seno, unquestionably involves continuing participa-
tion of U.S. military forces in active operations. The pros-—
pects of disengaging them appear remote if the fields are to
remain in active operation, as the capabilities of the French
to take on the continuing supply effort are questionable. In
fact, the probability of continuing and expanded participa-—
tion by U.S. military personnel is high. Increased risk of
U.S. personnel casualties is also involved,

g- The question resolves itself really to whether or not
we are, under the guise of a last minute effort to relieve
Dien Bien Phu to commence active participation by U.S. forces
in the Indochina war.

h. With regard to the furnishing of privateer aircraft
this request can be handled through regular MDAP channels, but
expedited. The first ten airplanes. are now being assembled
and prepared, and air delivery to Saigon will be expedited.
The additional ten can be provided at a later date.

3. In summary:

a. Employment of U.S. planes and crews, and GOA and
supervisory construction personnel, on missions stated,
would have the following major military consequences:

(1) Involve U.S. Armed Forces in direct participation
in military operations in Indochina.

(2) Mounting scale of U.S. Armed Forces participation ©
due to requirements for local security, and increasing de-
mands for combat and service support for both U.S. and
French forces.

(3) Greatly increased risk of U.S. personnel casualties
due to enemy action, including capture.

(4) Some increased risk of armed intervention by Com-
munist Chinese forces.

b. Within the approximate time limits suggested, the re~
habilitation and extension of the field at Seno appears to be
feasible. :

393

———

TOP SEGRE

ry
