Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET

SUMMARY OF THES NAVAL SITUATION

The French Union naval forces in Indochina are reasonably effective on
rivers and inshore areas. They have had much experience in river landings,
combating , river ambushes and intercepting junk and small boat traffic on both
the ocean and inland waterways. Also, logistic support by water to all services
is a constant and heavy undertaking. For guerrilla warfare along the waterways
in the Red River and Mekong River deltas, they are uniquely qualified and
equipped. In other more orthodox forms of naval warfare such as large amphibious
operations, anti-submarine and anti-aircraft warfare, they are neither trained
nor equipped. With the establishment of the Joint Amphibious Staff and the
formation of an Amphibious Corps, part of this deficiency should be eliminated.
Although enemy submarines and aircraft have not been a factor in this war, the
possibility does exist. There is little in Indochina to combat the potential
menance. Limitations and restrictions for the conduct of the war at present are
basically caused by a shortage of personnel rather than a lack of equipment.

In addition, concrete and positive steps have been taken in the establishing of
a Vietnamese National Navy. This will perform a two-fold purpose - that of

’ easing the serious shortage of personnel and engendering a spirit of pride in
the Vietnamese people through increased responsibility and pene ered in the
conduct of the war in their homeland.

ORGANIZATION OF THE FRENCH ATR FORCE

As of 10 April 1954, the French Air Force consisted of 98 Bearcats,
organized into 4 squadrons, 16 Bearcat Photo Recon Aircraft organized as a
flight, 84 B-26 light bombers, expanding to 3 squadrons, a light tactical
reconnaissance flight of modified B-26 bombers, 4 transport squadrons of
114 C-h7s -- 65 MDAP -- and liaison aircraft squadrons consisting of 8 C-45s,

12 L-20 Beavers and 8 H-19 helicopters. Additionally, 85 Army liaison aircraft -
L-19s - will be delivered by 31 August. 22 C-119 packets with supporting (200)
mechanics are on loan during the present emergency.

SUMMARY OF THE ATR FORCE SITUATION

The general MAAG opinion is that the individual flight and ground crews
are very well qualified in operating and maintaining their equipment. However,
there is not enough of them. Shortages of MDAP supplied equipment of he major
categories has not restricted or hampered the operational ability of the FAF
combat squadrons and support agencies. Some of the changes in methods and pro-
eedures which MAAG believed should be placed in effect are actually beyond the
capability of the FAF due primarily to the shortage of personnel and o. ral]
restrictions imposed on the FAF by the political and economic situation both
in Indochina and in Metropolitan France.

The French are highly operationally minded, however, they do not put proper
emphasis on their logistics support wogutranents to support their operations.

In spite of the MDAP equipment and machinery received, the development of this
country’s self-sufficiency has been abnormally slow. 5

wih

TOP SECRET
