Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SEGALL
Purine

(a) Host weocnt date on avorags coat ef food pox nan
for both Freush end Aasocietedt States Forcsas, by
er Borvice. , yy
(b) Lists of thevquentitios ond ocd in the
evihovined vation Lox (1) Froneh Frocoa 2 4.8.
Foxses ani (3) eny madjor fo: 8 geovps (such as
fel esa vaich ano Turnishod eee ration.

5
fhe lists should indicate thoso items procured
Locally end i o notre Be: Frangs, and the

(c) Latest evallable inventory position end explanation
“of basis for stock levels Mainteinsd «

(a) Date on vnit Cost, Co tetera ve es and inyontory
status of eny special or operations] rations used.

36 Fox estimates of clothing costs, the French shovld bo requested
to provider - :

(a) A. general oxplens

by esch sézyica i:

' Forces and (2) Kaxces

the significance, if
ryaquirenents

VGL0% n of the systcon or systems veed
viding olething to (1) Fraach

o be
moe

.2ted States Forces, including
eny, of doployaent on clothing

t

(b) A list of the items and quantities of clothing ;
furnished indiv s woon entry into the sorvico,
and the value ‘of this initial outfit (by servies).

(c) Latest available data as to epee closing replaco-
mont costs
(a) Current inventory posit

mn and explanation of basis
for stock levels maint 3

am *

ae Inasmuch es the US combined Group Saigon will heave definite

n the administration of the $385 million aid progran
ae the support of military porsonnel of the Associated States, proced-
wren should be set uo to koop currently advised of (a) changes in

personnel plans as chanses ars mede in force plans, (>) progress made

tovard meeting goals (or slippages) in force plens end personnel plans,
(c) oxperience dats on food end clothing consumption, prices, end stock
levols es well es (a) sxporisnesed expenditure rates for pay and allow.

“EnoSS.

HOSS2S SEROUS. PRANSHR :
of oxchanss is 35 3 piasters to the d
power patty in Indochine is about ers to the dollar, I+

fe)
7 S%

apoerent thet for thosa items purcha lee there is an everee
t na
i

O PIASTERS: The official rate
lar, whi jlo the praesent purchesin

Pa
5072 less of dollars as a resvlt of differences betyveen the exc
vate end the dollar plaste> purchesing power parity.
