Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

2 e 7a po Lee pee 4

Gt balhedi3 a Ia a ay VJEDES af th ayy) Be 5 p isis ieiaia* ;
. 44 Lei eyes LE asae-tindse oy Gee oli io Fe PZ Gy; Ae EGS Ai Fr / ise Bit AN Jitiiee }

oe A Sor

a | TOP SEORET i 4 ‘i
5 2 Cr

Controls 20179 ‘¢

‘ROMs Geneva ? = 7 SEHETS at a CS |

Wile j sa p. MH. a. ie Se al z

Eth we. tle J

+ es Daas

— _—
Crbee te Ake the

TO: Secretary oF Stato
ho: DULTE 5, April 25, midnight

NIACT t ¥ ce
EYES ONLY ACTING SECRETARY FROM THE SECRETARY ; - e

?
I met with Eden this evening at 10:15 p.m., rolléuing nis arrival
from London. He had consulted Churchill, the Cabinet and Brit bish
chiefs. He said that the United Kingdom is strongly opposed to m~]
any intervention at Dien Bien Phu because it doses not think it 6):
will have decisive effect and will not be understood by Units d ms *
Kingdom or free world opinion. He indicated that the views of | °
the British chiefs differ with ours and that British chiefs looke
forward to a discussion and estimate with Radford in London. Ing
summary the British position is as follows: (1) The United as
Kingdom is prepared now to join with the United States in a se- AN
cret study of measures which might be taken to defend Thailand 1.
and the rest of Southeast Asia if the Fre ench capitulate. Nh
Eden saw Bidault at Orly tonight on his way through Paris (whe ore Gi
he stopped to pick up Mrs. Eden) and outlined, to him the British? as
position as follows: (1) The United Kingdom will give the
French all possible diplomatic support in “Geneva to reach 4 satis-
factory settlement on Indochina. (2) If such a settlement is
reached the United Kingdom will be willing to Join with United
States and others in guaranteeing that settlement. (3) if
Geneva fails the United Kingdom will be prepared to join the
others to examine the situation urgently to see what shoiild be
done.

“a
; PA

I said to Eden that while I ha¢ BL Reservations uyself about: ee NX

intervention at Dien Bien Phu at this moment without an adequate

political basis -for such action, his mpl y was most discouraging

in that it seemed to leave the Frenoh nothing to fall back on. =o

If French are Es stand loss of Dien Bien Phu they must be strength-

— —-——tened and a declaration of common intent would do this. In essence

: i

srz--- --- Eden that I doubted that there would be French will to stand , SUD <3"

Fen aM HE NT
Qof7 8° en returned th OG/ RAILS iles with notation of action taken © C

pren7a

the United ee was asking ene French to negotiate and abt the
same time telling them that if the negotiation failed that they <=
-would te giad to exanine what could be done. Given the present
French situation with which Eden is fully familiar, I said to —.

to their adversaries at Geneve. | io 4 es

aa made quite clear that the United Kingdom is opposed ek

A Vif ¢ 388 intervention  - FBEPRMEUCTION fom i
aRAP yn CY, IF CLADST EYE

il
SH B}TEe0
