Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ee rain
i

wi ne

However, Dr. Quat added in strictest confidence that when last in
Paris he had discussed this problem with Marshal Juin. The Marshal asked
why the Vietnamese had not found it possible to find officers "elsewhere."
Quat at that time had made a request of Defense Minister Pleven for French
reserve officers, promising the pay and accoutrement of active officers
in the line plus an insurance policy. However, the French replied that
their reserves were very scarce in number and that most of the ex-officer
personnel were now in civil life.

I inquired whether, if it met with general agreement, it would be
possible to pay American reserve officers, should they seek employment in
the Vietnamese National forces, at the rate of salary they had received
when serving in American uniform. I likewise inquired if retired American
colonels who were qualified to serve as Generals of Division could be given
division command, rank and pay. The Defense Minister thought that, if the
principle were accepted, means of payment and rank could be worked out.

Dr. Quat said, again in terms of strictest confidence, that he had
received permission from Bao Dai to elaborate plans for development of a
national militia. -He said the matter was a delicate one, as it had not
met with conplere French acquiescence, and he requested that the matter
be discussed with the French. However, his studies of how to improve the
militia were almost completed, and he thought that soon His Majesty would
authorize him to approach the Chief of MAAG, the American Ambassador, or
the reporting officer with the request for American aid to arm, train,
and equip a Vietnamese National Militia.

I queried the Minister as to what progress had been made in psycho-
logical warfare, stressing his belief that competence in this field was

"half the battle" in such a war as that which prevails in Indochina.

vs SE ape
