Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3 3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

3. Although the Viet Minh haye a sub-
stantial capability to organize demon-
strations and carry out sabotage and

_ terrorist activities in the major cities of
Indochina, we believe that French Union
forces could maintain control in those
cities. :

4. The political consequences in Indo-
china of the fall of Dien Bien Phu would
be considerably more adverse than the
strictly military consequences and would
increase the tempo of deterioration in the
over-all French Union position in Indo-
,china, particularly in Vietnam. There
--would probably be a serious decline in
the Vietnamese will to continue the war
}and to:support the Vietnamese military
_|programs. However, we believe that gen-
-eral collapse of French and native goy-
~ ernmental authority during the next two

|

SECRET bike te

or three months would be prevented by
the continued existence of organized
French Union forces and the hope among
Indochinese that the US might intervene

in Indochina.

5. We believe that although the fall of

_ Dien Bien Phu would’ not immediately

lead to collapse of the French Union posi-
tion in Indochina, it would accelerate the
deterioration already evident in the
French Union military and political posi-
tion there. If this trend were not check-
ed, it could bring about a collapse of the
French Union position during the latter
half of 1954. It should be emphasized
that this estimate does not consider the
repercussion of major decisions in France
or Geneva and elsewhere, which could
have a decisive effect on the situation in
Indochina.

DISCUSSION

6. We believe that the fall of Dien Bien Phu,
if it occurred as assumed in the problem,
would result from: (a) French capitulation;
or (b) an overwhelming of the French either
by assault or by gracual constriction of the
French position.

1. If the French were to capitulate without
further heavy fighting, the adverse military

- and political consequences would be essen-
tially similar in kind, tnough possibly of
greater intensity, to those accompanying the
fall of the fortress through heavy fighting.
‘Viet Minh losses in the event of capitulation
would be less than those which would be in-
curred during further heavy fighting.

&. In any event, the Viet Minh would have
suffered heavy losses in the prolonged fighting
at Dien Bien Phu. Estimated Viet Minh cas-
ualties fi the fighting there to date are ap-
proximately 13,000; roughly 50 percent of this
number have been killed or rendered perma-

nently ineffective. Although a few experi-
enced units have been sent as reinforcements,
individual replacements for the most part
have consisted of partially trained personnel.
As a result of the Dien Bien Phu operation
the effectiveness of the Viet Minh ‘eliensive
striking force will be greatly reduced during
the next two or three months. |

9. French Union casualties at D n Bien Phu
to date have been approximately 5,500. The
defeat of the foree now at Dien Bien Phu
would add another 11,000, thus ‘ringing the
total French Union losses to rcughly 17,000,
At least two-thirds of these troops are exneri-
enced, professional units from Algerian, colo-
nial and foreign legion forces. Moreoyer, six
of the thirteen parachute battalions in the
French Union forces in Indochina are at Dien
Bien Phu. The loss of these elite French
Union troops would reduce the French Union
oftensive striking force by approximately one-

SECRET.

402
