15h,

155.

156.

157.

158.

159.

160.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

The U.S. does not want to be associated with a settlement

which fells short of the seven-point memorandum on which~

Britain agreed and now appear to be less than firm. “If

either or both the French and Communists are operating

on the assumption we will adhere to any settlement they

agree to, then we may be headed for serious trouble."

Diitles $2 to Paris, 3 duly 105%. csc: csesc sevrevecotvecwesecs 003

Dillon recommends that if the U.S, attempts to get the

best possible settlement, we should (1) maintain a

Geneva delegation, (2) have Dulles return to head the

delegation, (3) offer French support to sell a settlement

to Vietnam if it is satisfactory, and (4) pressure Britain

to stick to the seven points of US-UK agreement. Paris 41 4
cocDaties, i july 1OSls tes cos ausaee eu nae eensisasw een COS

The French welcome the US-UK 7-point agreement except

that clarification was suggested on the conflict be-~

tween provisions for elections and the position that

no political provisions should risk loss of the area

to communism. The French felt that the elections could

"go wrong.” Parise 50 to Dulles, G duly LOS... ences ocevene 608

The French indicate they attach no great military in-~
portance to retention of Haiphong and that they were
"avoiding contact" with the Vietnamese in order not

to have to answer their questions. SECTO 560, 6 July

sb ea eee rs. EI oe Bd Re hal hr, Pe oe AM
Mendes-France will announce to the National Assembly

that if a cease-fire is not agreed to prior to 21 July,

it will be necessary for the Asseinbly to approve the

sending of conscripts to Indochina. Paris 66 to Dulles,

SSE tg reap BoSivape cai. wacr neddasstecueean nae Sone: 612

Dulles informs Eden that it is "better if neither Bedell

nor I went back" to Geneva since the French will probably

settle for worse than the 7-point agreement, hence it

would be embarrrassing to all concerned. Dulles NJACT

101 to London, 7 July 195!..... edn ee aes PERE on Ee windion iaee

The U.S. feels that elections mean eventual unification
of Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh and therefore should be
held "as long after a cease-fire agreement as possible
and in conditions free from intimidation...." Further,
the U.S. believes ‘no date should be set now and that no
conditions be accepted which would effect international

Supervision of electicns. The U.S. would not oppose a

settlement based on the Y-points nor would we seek to
upset a settlement by force. Dulles 77 to Paris,
7 July 195): eee eee eee siete ls wiallaioia cihlsiles<) oles laid stetaleva iste} Rol eipya aTelacasue alsvels 616

“
ise)

soy TOP SECRET? - Sensitis
