Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

>. The U.S. is prepared to join actively in two regional groupings.
The first vee groupivg will include nations ready imicdiately to intervene
in Indochiia provided certain conditions are.met. The second such grouping
should be decid, with wider participrvion, to puarantee against Communist
-napression or subversion, all of Southeast Asia with the exception of Indo-
China so long as active Lighting continucs.
, *

. e. The smaller regional grouping, for active intervention, should .
‘consist of at least the U.S., France, the Associated States, Thailand and
the Philippines. A precondition of its formation is the absolute declaration
by France of the independence of the Associated States.

d. ‘The second regional grouping should be open to all countries who
wish to join, including the Colombo countries, Korea and, perhaps, the
Chinese Nationalists. The Asian members, definitely including the Colombo
countries, would be invited to maintain the peace and security of the area
of Indochina progressively liberated according to the procedures set forth
below. .

e. Intervention in the Indochina conflict by the first regional grouping
would be on invitation by the Associated States. Operations would be
conducted from as many Vietnam held areas as possible to destroy organized
Vietminh resistance therein ard to develop a "front" which would delimit

. the areas of independent Vietnam. These areas would be expanded as rapidly
as was consistent with the destruction of organized Vietminh forces therein.
As soon as a substantial area was "liberated", the "active" regional grouping,
i.e., the U.S. and France, would turn over the maintenance of order,
anti-guerrilla operations and anti-subversion to the Vietnam Government
assisted by the Asian members of the second and “peaceful” regional grouping.
Military installatiors necessary to support active combat could be kept
as “enclaves" within the liberated area.

8. The above concept, complicated though it may be, would seem to resolve
to a considerable degree the problem of U.S. intervention being construcd
as "colonialism." It would further be an offer to the Colombo nations to
guarantee the BEC Stee settlement of Ivdochina by force of arms in which
they are not aske! to participate. It would clarify to the world that the U.S,
means what is has frequently said, that the U.S. is determined that Communist
_expansion by aggressive force of arms shall not be permittcd.

9. The concept, to be effective in halting the deterioration of the free
world position in Indochina and et Geneva, would need to be publicly vresented
- to the world, after the decision to do so was reached by the Executive Branch
and Congress. It would have to be presented in its entirety to obtain the
psychological as well as factual resolution of the "colonial" problem.

RECOMMENDATION

10. It is recommended that this corecept be given appropriate study and <
further definition by the interested Departments and Agencies.

hod

=
La 24
ry

fa 5 :
a RL re, =e
