Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

pean —

2 TOP SECRET”

|= hE66, May 27, 6 p.m., from Paris

7. Ely's plan for the defense of the Delta centers around the
defense of what ne termed the Hanoi-Hsiphong axis. No specific
detail was given as to the number of units, where they were to
be retained, or the exact ares to be defended. He was particularly
and, no doubt, designedly pessimistic on the aspects for the
efensze of this axis, stating that if Hanoi had to be surrendered
French Union Forces would move to Haiphong, and if Haiphong wee
lost they would at lesst be able to move out from there to
"nossioly another stand in the south". ‘This, too, deponded
entirely, according to Ely, on what was decided sbout Us inter-
vention and other pending high-level political decisions.

8. Trapnell pointed out that French superiority in avistion and
ermor could be extremely effective against a Viet Minh coordinated
attack in tas Delta because of the terrain. Ely not only sdinitted
this fact but stated that it "is our trump card”.

9. Wnea Trapnell pressed Ely for an opinion ss to what was >
required cecween the period of the immediate threat and the

period woen, it was hoped, the Vietnamese army would be on sn
errective footing, Ely replied thst the General was obviously
thinxing of how msny US Marines would be required to assure the
derense of tne Delta. He went on to say that-in bis opinion, if
one or two US Merine divisions intervened "there would be no
problem”.

¢

reese GuneeteY ee i. , r ae
Comment: Tne conversation was lersely unsati
a eee NAS 2 fee * s
standpoine oecause our ertorts to obptsin speci
an atement regarding Fr

from diy, including any stste no intentions
concerning desoaten of reinforcements from metropolitsn France

and tierun Atrics co Indecninsa, were unsuccessful. Nor didif#ly
evoesr particulerly interested in Trapnell's recommendations
concerning tne redeplosment of forces. We atcribute tnis to

une face wast Bly-is still. busily engeged in consultations with
tne Prime Minister, Pleven, end tne Hign Council of National
Defense, end wos proossiy ceine very careful not to maxe +: ry
ecrmitments woien nasd not yet been clesred oy the government.

He was avare cost Trspneit is seeing Leniel tomorrow morning

wita the Amossssdor, St waien tine more specific metters ray be
discusssd. in tne meanwnilie, Bly requested that Trapnell sontinue
nis conversations with Colonel Beonean for the time being end thas,
of courss, Bly would se asealng Trepnell egain efter tne Intervie,
WES0 LARS.

| St

ate
