Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

was raised by one of Eden's staff regarding the number of troops required
to enforce the cessation of hostilities in Indochina. Various estimates
were discussed. However, it was generally agreed that the number of
troops required would be in excess of two divisions.

Since it is’obvious that the conference is headed toward partition,
I feel it significant to bring the foregoing information to your attention.
There is very little that the Defense Department can do to influence the
negotiations, since a political decision has been made that the U.S. will
continue to participate even though we know that partition of Indochina,
whatever form it may take, will ultimately result in its loss to the
Communists. The view seems to prevail in the U.S. Delegation that there
is very little the U.S. can do to influence the French and no useful
purpose would be served in disassociating ourselves from the negotiations,
I have little to offer in the way of recommendations. I have continued
to point out the views of the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs
of staff that from a military viewpoint a settlement in Indochina which
results in leaving the Communist military forces intact will ultimately
result in the loss of the area to Communist control. Also, there should
be little doubt that there is no form of international supervision that
will effectively stop further Communist infiltration and their eventual
control of Indochina. Although there seems to be general agreement with
the U.S. Delegation on these points there is a feeling that we cannot dis-
associate ourselves from the negotiations.

In outlining this gloomy situation I would like to mention one bright
spot. As a result of your recommendations to General Smith I have been
given every consideration and there has been complete cooperation. Due
to the small number of U.S. representatives who can attend the restricted
sessions on Indochina, I have not been to all of them. However, I have
been included in all important discussions. Though there is obviously
a difference in view between the Defense and State Department representa-
tives here on Indochina, it is a frank, honest and friendly difference,

I fully appreciate the State Department's difficulties, and though they
share our view on what will ultimately result from partition, they feel
compelled not to break with our Allies.

I shall keep you informed of further developments.
Respectfully,
(Signed)

CHARLES A SULLIVAN

hog
TOP SECRET
