Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Lrventry SALTONSTALL, MASS., CHAITISTARL a
SELL, GAs

STrYLrs oecr 4, No. ieee pt
RALPH OC. Planet weovr.

MAHGARE TCHATH S'4!TH, Malt Ay
HOtrHT Cyr agra, rt, J. > :
FRANCIS G25 Nt n +% 2%) c.f f ae Te PEN Pm

JAMES SURTTILCEYV aes (PES arse ee Cte

PON She rstar 4 Scorn nT. STUART S7MirsTot, MO.

COMMITTEE OF ARMED SERVICES
PIL KR, ALLO, CHIGF CLERA

‘ Jamuary 23, 1954

Honorable Charses BE. Wilson
Secretary of ge nse
Washington, D. Co

Dear Mr. Secretary:

I have been imoressed for some time that we have beon
steadily moving closer and closer to mieieo eenien in the var in
Imlo-China, JI am not. objecting to are announced policy thus fax,
but a decision must soon be meade as to how far we shall go, I feal
that you will be highly influential in formulating this important

policy.
It seens to me that we should certainly stop short _
: of sending our troops or airmen to this erea, either for participation
in the conflict or as instructors. As altrays, when we sem onegroup,

es

=
shall have to send another to protect the first and we shall thus
fully involved in a short tima, :

om
oO

With consideration of our confirmed promises ard assumed
obligations in Europe, in the Pacifie area, in Korea and elsewhere, ard
with conSideration of ovr home defenses, I do not think we can at ald

‘ afford to take chances on becoming participants in Indo-China,

* Forther, I have understood that the Air Force has a

special request to send twenty-five to fifty civilien airplane mechanics

. to Indo-China, It seems to me that almost the same reasons apply in
this instance, France has a great abundance of such mechanics, J on

sure, as I suv Le French mechanics last September at our miditer -¥y
instellation at Chateauroux engaged in overhauling jet engines,

I appreciate the
national welfare as
Council, I shall a
reaching question.

& fine contribution your are making .o our
Secretary of Defense and as a menber of the Security
ppreciate your consideration of this important, fares

|
With best wishes, I am

Covdially See!
§ SS ate,
Pf N\A i~ Md beeceetiay
Jota Stennis
United Sie abe 3 Senator
