Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

: va eid Sah ae es : a Lo” O%s. “
AMIE PSEC OALT - VAR MEE IL? MY gue ceh
Tie aoe unflagie) Pie pas teaal afl 5 Cp is elses tse 2 Of ~ Aveised
Te i RR A
TOP SECRET t a >
p> i 2a
= - ‘af
tctron Cofitrol: 1715 K
a. 7 Root d! April 4, 1954
FE Feo; Paris rey: , 9:45 pim.
Info :
SS Yo: \Secretary of State
G i
\ = ’
SP ro: 3710, April 5, 1 a.m.
C ae ie
EUR F 2
NUAC?T :
LIMIT DISTRIBUTION
URGENT. I was called at 11 o'clock Sunday night and asked to
cous immediately to Matignon where a restricted Cabinet meet-
ing was in progress.
On arrival Bidsult received te in Laniel's office and was
joined in a few minutes by Laniel. They said that Immediate
armed intervention of US carrier aircrart at Dien Bien Phu
is now necessary to save the situation,
'- en cats reports situation there now in state of precarious

equilibriue and that both sides are doing best to reinforce--
Viet Minh are bringing up last available reinforcements which

= or art way outnumber any reinforcing French can do by parachute
Grops. Renewal of assualt by reinforced Viet Minh probable
by middle or end of week. Without help by then fate of Dien
Bien Pao will vrobsbly be sealed.

Ely brougr + back report from Washington that Radford gave hin

Le BS personal (repeat personal) assurance that if situation ‘at
SE | Dien Bien Phu required US naval air support he would do his

+ — <4 best to obtain such tealp from US Government. Because. of this
] ra information from Radford as re ported by Ely, French Government

S now sskine for US carrier aircraft a. at Dien Bien Pru. [

Naverre feels that a relatively minor US effort could tur,

dort tes beg Et bef oe ye

al = tne tide but naturally hopes for as much help as possible.’
[ > Penta (eat ee Chinese intervention in Indochina already f lly
: establisbed as follows:

ve eS Si
‘First. Fourteen technical advisors at Giep headquarters plus

at

1 nua Srous nets at Gia tates jevel, .All under command of ~
= ,6hinese Communist General: Ly Chen- ho Suleho is. stationed at! Giap
 beadavarters. 2 ri aaalian a
second.

296

tei SPORET a
REPRORICTIGN FREI
Cory, 1F CLASSIF
Pi} 54720

my

