Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

E : eat = = er Ra Sores xe
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE ,

WASHINGTON 25, D. Cc.
7 > JUL 13 1954

MEMEORANDUM TO THis SECRSTARS OF DEPUNSE

SUBJECT: U.S. /U.K. Discussions on Southeast Asia

Three meotings of the Joint U.s./U.K. Study Group on Southenst
Asia, established as a follow-up to the Bisenhower/Churchil] discus-
sions, hive been held. In addition, there have been several meetings
of the U.S. side. [Under Secretary of State Walter Bedell Smith is the
Senior U.S. Representative. The U.K. is represented by Sir Robert I.
Scott.

J cS
The views of the U.K. with respect to collective security in the ~ 4
Southeast Asia area may be summarized as follows: ia
: : ia
a. %Itis the British view that a collective security arrangement
for Southeast Asia should be considered in two contexts, (1) on the b
basis of a settlement in Indochina, and (2) on the basis of no settle- P<
ment. In the event of a settlement which does not pose en immodiate a
military problen, the British would prefer a generelized collective z
securit; arrangement designed to bring in as many states as possible, ee
This approach would include such states as India, Indonesia, and Sd
Burma. On the other hand, if there is no Indochina settlement at x
Geneve. the British would agree to immediately establish an organiza- BL
tion to mest the military threat, Such an organization would pre- i.
sumably be limited to those countries who would make military commit- Cc
ments to halt tie dommunist aggression. A)
. i
b. Under the arrangement which the British prefer be establishod ~
in the event of a settlonent, there would be three principal elements <
to tne organization: a council which would include all participants
in the organization, an economic and political council which would
include as meny of the statas as possible and would deal with the
economic and social rroblems of the area, and a military organization
whieh would have fewer mombcrs, since states such es India would un-
questionatly not vish to participate in the military aspects of the
orpenizetion. 3 x
c. In tne event that tnere is no ayreament in Indochina, the . i
British would immediately move ahead with an effective military arrence- Ne
ment dosigned to obtain as much support as possible ror on organization ~
to resist further Communist acgression in Southeast Asia. i>

.

635 hate ay ‘

es L ae pee re eas * = i *
CHS Cuttin Baet Boe be Ay Gt Copy eee = Of =. Conicgs
Tr fy ‘ Bie
Savececss Witlieiws. population awd ah !
of the criginating offices Se) Axe? tie sae OF eee aes | wl
