Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

b. the Communists would evade covertly cease-fire controls.

3. The US should (as a last act to save IndoChina) propose to
France that if the following 5 conditions are met, the US will go to
. Congress for authority to intervene with combat forces:

a. grant of genuine freedom for Associated States
b. US take major responsibility for training indigenous forces
e. US share responsibility for military planning

d.- French forces to stay in the fight and no requirement of
replacement by US forces,

(e. Action under UN auspices?)

This offer to be made known simultaneously to the other members of the
proposed ‘regional grouping (UK, Australia, NZ, Thailand, Associated
States, Philippines) in order to enlist their participation.

I then summarized possible objections to making the above proposal to
* the French:

a&. No French Government is now competent to act in a lasting way.

b. There is no indication France wants to “internationalize” the
conflict.

c. The US proposal would be made without the prior assurance of a
regional grouping of SHA States, a precondition of Congress; although
this point might be added as another condition to the proposal.

. d. US would be "baling out colonial France" in the eyes of the
world.

e. US cannot undertake alone to save every situation of trouble.

I concluded that some PB members felt that it had never been made
clear to the French that the US was willing to ask for Congressional
authority, if certain fundamental preconditions were met; that these
matters had only been hinted at, and that the record of history should
be clear as to the US position. Dulles was interested to know the Presi-
dent's views, because he is talking with Ambassador Bonnet this afternoon.
He indicated that he would mention these matters to Bonnet, perhaps making
amore broad hint than heretofore. He would not circulate any formal
paper to Bonnet, or to anyone else.

The President referred to the proposition advanced by Governor Stassen
at the April 29 Council Meeting as not having been thoroughly thought out.

437

TOP SECRET
