Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

€. Opportunities for employment of large tactical air forces and seagoing
naval and amphibious forces are limited.

d. Stratesic targets are limited. Terrain and enemy skill in camouflage
reduce number of tactical targets.

e. A shortage of trained air personnel exists, with limited prospects for
augmentation from metropolitan France resources,

f. Commercial resources satisfy a considerable portion of naval and air
logistical requirements.

g Airfield construction limits composition of air traffic to light and
medium transports and propeller-driven fighters and bombers. The balance of
forces is considered adequate, although recently the French Air Force, motivated
by unanticipated operational requirements in Laos and Dien Bien Phu, has requested
additional B-26 light bombers, an additional c-7 transport squadron, and the loan
of U.S. C-119 heavy transports and maintenance personnel. Civilian CAT pilots are
presently on contract to the French Air Force for logistical missions. The Army
likewise has requested increased air strength in the form of helicopter companies
and liaison aircraft.

OBJECTIVES
The missions of the opposing forces may be considered as follows:

VIET MINH - To achieve, by attritive military and political action, a
negotiated settlement of the war in Indochina upon such terms as will permit either,

a. Absolute control of a portion of Viet Nam and Laos - generally yee aes
to be north of the 18th Parallel, or

b. Eventual control of the majority portion, or the complete entity, of
Indochina as a result of a favorable political position achieved at the peace table.

FRENCH UNION - To achieve, by overwhelming military pressure and political
action, a cessation of hostilities upon terms favorable to the French Urion which wil

ae Restrict the influence or tne League of Independent Viet Nam Party- -Viet
Minh, to that of a controllable minority.

b. Permit the establishment of sound, stable, solvent and harmoni .us
governments within the Associated States.

c. Enable France to maintain its position as the dominant member of the
French Union - of the Far East - with extra eetetourte privileges and commercial
benefits.

Naturally, the results of the Geneva Conference may be expected to have a
strong influence on future political and military peas in Indochina for
both sides

hid

TOP SECRET
