Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

oe)
=e

2 Gees of u
Ror |

(ed

Point United States-United Kingdom position and he did not (repeat not)
make any commitment to hold to these points during coming week, except
for statement regarding United States veto power if Secretary present.

On the overall effect of our decision, Mendes pointed out that this will
be first time since the war that United States not.(repeat not) represented
at equal level with other powers in an important conference. He said he
felt certain that Europe would interpret United States absence as first ‘
step in return to a policy of isolationism. This he felt, would have :
catastrophic effects not (repeat not) only in Far Fast, but also in Europe
and would be great cold war victory for Communism. According to Mendes,

we would in effect be saying “do your best, you have our sympathy, but
result is no (repeat no) real concern to us."

I tried hard to dissuade Mendes from this ices but without much
success. His statement regarding United States veto power if Secretary
present, led me to point out that there must also be an agreed alternative
if Conference failed. Mendes promptly replied that only alternative to
cease-fire at Geneva would be internationalization of war with United
States military forces coming promptly to assistance of French. This
aspect of our talk being covered more fully in separate telegram, being
repeated to Saigon.

Finally, Mendes asked if there was anything he could do specifically to
create a situation that would make it possible for Secretary to come to

Geneva. He asked me to pass this question on to Washington. In this
-eomnection, he specifically questioned sixth paragraph of Secretary's
letter, and said he knew of no (repeat no) French thinking along such
lines, except possibly on subject of international supervision. He
wondered where United States had got the ideas expressed in this paragraph.

While I was talking with Mendes, Johnson talked with Chauvel and showed
him a copy of Secretary's letter. Chauvel showed Johnson a cable from
Bonnet which indicated that Bonnet may have given Secretary the impression
that French were considering retrating from Seven Point program.

Chauvel and Johnson joined us at end of our talk, and Johnson and I
suggested that if Mendes develoned any concrete ideas which would help
meet United States fears, it would be helpful if he put them into a reply
to Secretary's letter. While Mendes was non-commital as to a formal reply,
“I rather expect he will make one. In closing, Mendes said he would keep
in close touch with Johnson. During talk, Mendes made it clear that while
presence of Under Secretary at Geneva would be most helpful, he very much
hoped that Secretary himself could come.

DILLON

Gor . 632

