Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

The key to this problem is a strong and effective Nationalist army with
the support of the Populist behind it. When the people have confidence in
their government and in its ability, through the Nationalist army, to give
them the protection from Communist terrorism which is necessary for business
and commerce, then complete victory will be in sight.

THE U.S. CONTRIBUTION TO TH# WAR IN INDOCHINA

The U.S. has greatly contributed to the success of the French in holding
Indochina from the beginning. In January 1951, material was rushed from the
docks of Haiphong to the battlefield of Vinh Yen, then being fought under the
personal direction of Marshall De Lattre himself. Since then, delivery of aid
has kept pace with changing French needs, often on a crash basis, down to the
present heroic defense of Dien Bien Phu. U.S. aid has consisted of budgetary
support, furnishing of end items, military hardware, and of technical training
teams. The magnitude and range of this contribution is shown by the following
very few examples. All of these figures are as of 31 March this year.

a. 785 million dollars has been allocated for the budgetary support of
the French Expeditionary Force and the Vietnamese Army. This will assist in
meeting budgetary requirements for pay, food, and allowances for these troops.

b. Under MDA Programs, a total of more than 784 millions of dollars has
been programmed for the years 1950-54. Of this, more than 440 million dollars
worth of military end items have been received.

¢. To date, 31 March 1954, 441 ships have delivered a total of 478 thousands
of long tons of MDA equipment to Indochina.

5.0 TU Tt ON

As in Korea, Iran, Malaya, and Burma, the war in Indochina is not a separate
entity. It is another tentacle of the octopus, another brush fire on the
periphery of the iron and bamboo curtains. The problem can only be solved com-
pletely if the masters of the Kremlin decide that Indochina should be abandoned
in favor of more profitable enterprises elsewhere. However, ways and means
exist to achieve a degree of success with respect to Indochina, beginning at
the political level -- specifically at the level of Chiefs of State. What is
then necessary “3 as follows:

a. An agreement must be reached with the French to deliver their strongest
possible assault upon the Viet Minh as soon as possible to reduce the efficiency
of that force to its lowest potential,

b. Concurrently, the Associated States armies must be put through a train-
ing cycle designed to produce leaders and units and to develop confidence through
skill and achievement. Such forces must be developed to the level of the ROK
or Greek armies under American tutelage and material support for these forces
must be in being and capable of replacing the French when they retire.

e. A defensive alliance of democratic nations of the Orient must be de-
veloped to provide future stability for the Associated States. The U.S. must
establish leadership in this area by relieving the French in a similar manner
as was followed in relieving the British for the responsibility of Greece,

d. The sovereignty and territorial borders of the Associated States must
be guaranteed - under no circumstances should the country be allowed to divide

on an arbitrary parallel such as in Korea.
hig TOP SECRET
