Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
2. 179, July 14, 9 p.m. (SECTION.ONE OF TWO), from Paris.

ich apply to the situation the principles of non-use of

finbes 2S are embodied in Article 2 (4) and (6) of the

Charter of the United Nations.~ °

4. he United States is prepared to seek, with other in- :
terested nations, a collective defense association designed
to preserve, against direct and indirect aggression, the
integrity of the non-Communist areas of Southeast Asia fol-
lowing any settlement. i

5. If there is no (repeat no) settlement, the United States
and French Governments will consult together on the measures
' to be taken. This will not (repeat not) preclude the United
States, if it so desires, bringing the matter before the
United Nations as involving a threat to peace as dealt with
by Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, 7

6. France reaffirms the principle of independence for the
Associated States in equal and voluntary associdtion as mem-
- bers of the French Union. .

UNQUOTE

B. Annex to above document consisting of the 7 points regard-

ing a settlement which could be respected as agreed Uuring
Churchill-Kisenhowér conversations. (Please note following

phrase which has been added with the full consent of Eden and
Mendes-France at the beginning of paragraph 2 of the 7 points.)

- "In connection with the line of military demarcation, preserves--"

"Memorandum of points referred to in paragraph 2 of the France-
United States position paper.

An agreement which:

"]. Preserves the ‘integrity and independence of Laos and Cam-
bodia and assures the withdrawal of Viet Minh forces therefrom;

"2, In connection with the line of military demarcation pre-
serves at least the southern half of Vietnam and if possible
an enclave in the deltas; in this connection, we would be un-
willing to see the line of division of responsibility drawn
further south than 4 line running generally west from Dong Hoi;

"53. Does not (repeat not) impose on Laos, Cambodia or retained
Vietnem any restrictions materially impairing their capacity
z to maintain stable non-Communist regimes; and especially re-
..strictions impairing their right to maintain adequate forces
639 for internal
