Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

NCOMING TELE «= Deparincent of State [ iexwicet /

é MeMCRi ee A Se
SECRET

. AD Se. ,

Action i Conprol?, 5952 Sot

oR” - aggigne Poets — “daly Whe 19e ae

"| FROM: Paris pene Pe a i 4

Info fone CE So a f

= ! TOs Secretary of State peyion i a

ee ee mee ee) ee | eee “e i wee ®

Sp Hee (9, July 14, 9 p.m. (SECTION TWO OF sa) ie

aR on pe iat ee!

ral SENT DEPARTMENT 179 REPEATED, INFORMATION LONDON ‘4S, GENEVA 27

It being your belief that the conbinuetd oe of te war would
involve a serious risk of an extension of the eonflict, both \
as concerns the combat areas and the belligerent countries,
the .qbvestion of the participation of the United States would —
be guided by the terms defined in the fourth paragraph-6f the og

- letter addressed on Juhx 16, 1954, by President Eisenhower to
Presidens Coty. 2

You have indicated to me that. you would fear, in the present

State of negotiations, that the sending by the United States
. to Geneva of representatives chosen at a high levél. and bear-

ing instructions from President Eisenhower to adhere to the ares
principles noted above, could cause a situation capable of

giving rise in France, “under the most regrettable circumstances ,

to a feeling that our two countries are divided and that it

might risk affecting seriously théir good relations which are
so important to the whole free world.

I have noted your hesitation to come to Geneva in the fear
of having eventually to disassociate yourself from an agrée-
ment, cr certain of its terms, which you might not (repeat: not )
be able to respect. This appears to me to be understandable,
but in my opinion it oe not (repeat not) respond to the '
situation. in effect, have every reason to think that your
absence would be preci eee interpreted as demonstrating, be-
fore the fect, that you disapproved of the conference and of
everything which might be accomplished. Not (repeat not) ionly
would those who are against us find therein the confirmation :of
the ill will which they attribute to your governmentjconcernirgs. *
the re-establishment of peace in Indochina; but many athers *:
would reéi in it a sure sign of a division of the western pavers.
Finally, the negotiations would thus be deprived of the element,
of balance indispensable to the seeking of 4 solution!as recom-
mended in the menoran dum cf June 30. t . eettk
:

I consider thus that such an absence would produce an: effect
—_— 2 . G4I liar tr cal
ALY 6 diame ly :
~ TRENT apap foe ot ae
-FECi2) [epy © This coy must be returned to DC/R’cénitral files with notation of action taken @ «SOFT, IF CLASSIFIED, Is

eae
