Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive . =

121, There is no misunderstending between U.S. and France if
U.S, policy on a Chinese intervention would be "judge
under the circumstances of the moment." Dillon cites
three courses of action cpen to the U,S. in such an
event: (1) President will request Congress to act, (2)
President would request authority to use forees, or (3)
U.S, would act only as part of a collective action.
Paris 625 to Dulies, 1 dune 105i, «.csasesaccsversccssecewe 200

122. NSC Action 5421 incloses summaries of studies prepared
by various departments and agencies with respect to
"possible U.S. action regarding Indochina." Summaries
included here are of studies prepared by Departments of
State, Justice, Defense and CIA, Office of Defense
Mobilization, Bureau of the Budget, Foreign Operetvtions
Administration and Operations Coordinating Board.
NS¢ 5421, 1 June Re aitee espera Wa opetec dears ate ats ee) Wisiealetoiarsieres Sis
123. Disagreement exists that the U.S. and France heave "now
reached accord in principal on the political side" on
conditions for U.S, participation in Indochina. The
U.S. needs a precise statement of France's commitments
to meet the preconditions for intervention. Dulles huey
to Paris, 4 June 1954........ Sauaecayp nearest Ee cewitegeek | aOO

510

12h. Saigon suggests that in order to make a French declara-
tion more palatable, the U.S, announce its intention to
withdraw technical and military assistance as soon as
practicable. In “neutralist Asian eyes, the U.S. is the
principal threat to Fastern Asia....and not decadent
France." A review of terms of reference which limit MAAG to
a. logistical function is now essential. Saigon 2656 to
Diikies, Bidune 1954. weww eeaes Cate een Geer asiaeesakeeecwes | DST

125. The U.S. seeks to avoid formal identification with open
partition or the creation of two states. While U.S. {
military authorities teke a "gloomy view" of the mili-
tary situation, France has failed to decide to "inter-
nationalize" the wer on the conditions laid down in
Paris. The French are not treating the U.S. proposal
seriously but "toying with it just enough to-use it as
a talking point at Geneva."  TEDUL 169, 7 Jume 1954.....+-.. 533

126. General Valluy evaluates the Tonkin Delta military
situation: (1) If Tonkin is lost, a military line will
not be re-established, (2) in this connection, there
are no South Vietnamese who could oppose North Viet-
namese, (3) Ho Chi Minh's objective is Tonkin and the
political capital Hanoi, to be gained either by

204 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

