Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

10 May 1954

In reply refer to I=11999

MEMORANDUM FOR DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE S
SUBJECT: United States "Posture" at Geneva Conference f

Captain Grant and I went over with Mr. Hensel the State Department
"Draft Instructions to the U.S. Delegation at Geneva." We all agreed that
as presently drafted they imply that the U.S, is at Geneva to "cheer the
players" rather than to "pitch." The following specific comments are to
raise the basic question with State, which is: are we in Geneva to try to
the limit of our capacities to influence the outcome along the lines we
want - or are we content to take a passive role? We think that to accept
the latter is to accept defeat in advance.

1. Regarding para. 3, the United States, while not a "belligerent,"
is certainly vitally interested in the successful handling of the Indochina ~
phase at Geneva. Again, while not technically a "principal" in the negoti-
ation it would seem the U.S. should act from its position as the strongest
nation in the free world and endeavor consistently to influence the progress
of negotiations towards our objectives. Consequently it is recommended that
this paragraph be amended by the insertion of the word "vitally" before the
words "interested nations" end the insertion of the word "technically"
before the words "a belligerent or a principal."

2. Regarding para. 4, this could be strengthened somewhat to give
proper guidance as to "posture," by changing the words "to assist in arriv-
ing at decisions" to "to promote decisions." It is further suggested that,
in the last sentence, the word "implies" be changed to "means."

3. With regard to para. 6, the U.S. Delegation should manifest
more positive efforts than merely those of "cooperation" with other Allied
Delegations. “fo this end, this paragraph should be changed to read: :

"You should, insofar as is compatible with these instructions,
cooperate with and endeavor to influence the Delegation of France and
with the Delegations of other friendly participants in this phase of
the Conference in order to further the attainment of U.S. objectives."

h, With regard to para. 7, there appears to be a profoundly
important point involved. This point is, in effect, will the United States
admit diplomatic defeat and cease to use all means to influence the Conference
towards its ends, if the Conference appears to be going against us. It has
been argued that this should be done so as to relieve the U.S. of responsi-
bility and permit the U.S, to pursue, with complete freedom of action, such

.

u
