Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Ic/43/Rev.
page 2 ; : ; : :

.

1, The Conference takes note of the agreements ending hostilities in

. Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam and organizing international control and the super-

vision of the execution of the provisions of ee agreements.

2. The Conference expresses satisfactfon at the ending of hostilities in

. Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam; the Conference expresses its conviction that the:

execution of the provisions set out in the present declaration and in the agrec-
ments on the cessation of hostilities will permit Cambodia, Laos, and Viet-Nam
henceforth to play their part, in full independence and sovereignty, in the
peaceful Romani = of nations.

3. The Conference takes note of the declarations made’ by the Governments

' of Cambodia and of Laos of their intention to adopt measures permitting all
‘citizens to take their place in the national community, in particular. by par-

ticipating in the next general elections, which, in conformity with the consti-

. ‘tution’of each of ‘these countries, shall take place in the course of the year
1955, eee secret ballot and in conditions of respect for fundamental freedoms.

pS Z “The Conference ‘takes note of the clauses in the agreement on the

ee of hostilities in Viet-Nam prohibiting the introduction into Viet-Nam
“of foreign troops and military personnel as well as of all kinds of arms and
. munitions.’ The Conference also takes note of the declarations made by the
'.Governments of Cambodia and Laos of their resolution not to request foreign aid,
‘ whether in war material, in personnel or in instructors except for the purpose of
the effective defence of their territory and, in the case of Laos, to the extent

defined by the agreements on the cessation of hostilities in Laos.

5. The Conference takes note of the clauses in the agreement on the cessation
of hostilities in Viet-Nam to the effect that no military base under the control of
a foreign State may be established in the regrouping zones of the two parties, tha
latter having the obligation to see that the zones allotted to them shall not
constitute part of any military alliance and shall not be utilized for the res-
umption of hostilities or in the service of an aggressive policy. The Conference
also takes note of the declarations of the Governments of Cambodia and Laos to

_the effect that they will not join in any agreement with other States if this

.) Sagreement includes the obligation to participate in a military alliance not in

“conformity with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations or, in the

case of Laos, with the principles of the agreement on the cessation of Bostilitics |
in Laos or, so long as their security is not threatened, the obligation to
establish bases on Cambodian or ' -teotian territory for the military forces of

foreign PowerSe . : ; ti x ;

6. “the Conference recognizes that the essential purpose of the agreement
relating to Viet-Nam is to settle military questions with a view to ending hos-

' tilities and that the military demarcation line is provisional and should not

in any way be interpreted as constituting a political or territorial boundary, ~

0)
—!
oa
