Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

-2- SECTO 578, July 9, 9 p.m., from Geneva

line about 40 kilometers north of Tuyhoa line and (2) "neutre-
tization" cf deita in order to permit total evacuation of
French Expeditionary Corps in three months period. French rep-
resentative stated soth these proposals wholly unacceptable ~
and not even worthy of discussion. He refused to set date for
next meeting. ;

——

Chauve? saw Molotov this morning. Molctov expressed interest

in being informed cf progress of conference. Chauvel gave him
general review touching particuiaz?y on question of demarcation
line, attitude of extreme intransigénce being adopted by Vist
Minh in militery taiks and probiem sf internaticnat controls.
Molotcv expressed interest but c_aimed unfamiliarity with deteils.
Chauvel suggested desirabiiity of contact between French military
representatives and members cf Soviet delegation in order that
Soviet delegation might be fully infcrmed of difficulties being
encountered and of attitudes adcpted by Viet Minh. Later in
day Soviet delegation got in tcuch with French delegation and
these contacts wiil be set up. Molotcev stated that he had seen
Chauvel’s working paper (SECTC 575) and that while there were
points requiring clarification ard further study he thought

it was a vUsefut contribution.

Chauvei has ees sion both Russians and Chinese give Viet Minh
fairly tree hand to see how far they ean zo but that when they _
find Viet Mintdemands have sore beycrd limit which French can
be expected to So ee Chauvel made point to —
Moletev that any agreement reached must be acceptable not only
to Francc-yietnamese side and to Viet Mink but also to other
conference members. He is hopeful that, as he says occurred
previcusly, Chinese-Russian mcderating influence will now te
brought to bear or Viet Minn. Chauve! expressed confidence

that if he were negotiating only with Russians and Chinese,

he cculd almcst ceStdinly achieve a settlement in line with
provisions of US-UX aide-memoive.

Chauvel told me that he is havir ng his staff prepare drafts of-
an armistice agreement and reiated documents so as to be ready
in case ministers reach agreements on major matters. He stated’
that information we had furnished regarding Korean armistice
was most useful to them and was much appreciated.

JOHNSON
AW/6
