Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

CONFIDENTIAL
-2- SECTO 654, July 18, 11 p.m. (SECTION TWO OF TWO), from Geneva.

Do noted further that there was no mention of State of Vietnam in
either French or Soviet drafts. Vietnamese delegation cannot
accept declaration or agreement where Vietnam, which invited to
conference as existing state, not even mentioned.

After pause following Molotov's request for other speakers, General
made following statement:

"If no one else desires to speak, I think it would be helpful if

I made clear position of US in these last critical days of con-
ference. I do this because I have recently seen the advance drafts
submitted to the conference and have had a chance to review them.

"One position of the United States with respect to this conference
has consistently been that it is willing to assist, where desired,
in arriving at a just and honorable settlement which will contri-
bute to the establishment and maintenance of peace in the area.

The United States is not a belligerent in this conflict and it has
not and will not seek to impose its views in any way upon the belli-
gerents, who are the parties primarily interested.

"If the agreements arrived at here are of a character which my
government is able to respect, the United States is prepared to de-
clare unilaterally that, in accordance with its obligations under
the United Nations Charter, and particularly Article II(4), it will
refrain from the threat or the use of force to disturb them, and
would view any renewal of the aggression in violation of the agree-
ments with grave concern.

Since no other representatives requested floor following General
Smith's statement, Molotov suggested intermission. After intermission
had lasted for 45 minutes, it was informally agreed that meeting
should be adjourned without returning to conference room. No com-
munique issued.

Comment: Today's restricted session strangest performance to date.
Apparent Molotov had not set stage even with Communist colleagues
for any particularly important announcement despite his insistence
that meeting be called. Molotov had said to Mendes-France just be-
fore meeting that he thought would be well underline progress made
and to show how close conference was to reaching agreement,

During recess, Chou En-lai said he had no desire make any statement.
He seemed as much in dark as everyone else as to why Soviets had
called meeting.

SMITH
SMD: JG/11 661
Note: Passed Army, Navy, Air, OSD 7/18/54, 11 p.m. JEF

CONFIDENTTAT
