Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

-2- SECTO 560, July 6, 7 p.m., from Geneva.

‘then be- submitted to the cenference. Perhaps conference might

then make a general statement of political principles which
would be included in a finel declaraticn by conference. Dong
agreed with this general approach. He referred to his own
Statement of May 12 in which he had advocated that agreements
regarding cessation cf hostilities should be bilateral.

Chauvel stated that in his talk with Dong he referred to fact °
military conversations not (repeat aor) moving well. He won- ~

- dered whether it might not (repeat not) be possible to supplement

them with some conversations between civilians on certain subjects
not (repeat not) purely militsry. Dong agreed and Chauvel
designated Offrey while Dong Indicated that Tran Cong Zuong

(Vice Minister of Justice in Viet Minn Cabinet and member Viet
Minh delegation here -- he was alsc in Fountaineblesu Confer-

ence in 1946) would be his representetive. :

Chauvel tcld me French delegation is werking on draft of paper

on control system which will be submitted to British and Russian .
delegations and of watch he will give us a copy as soon as
completed. Althcugh his positicn remains that parties should

agree accept decisions or recommendations of internetional

commission, he is somewhat skeptical on how system will work in
practice on major questicns. He stated that decisions could be
by majority or unanimous vote, but thst in case of majority
decisions on major questions implementation would obvicusly be
difficult. He pointed cut that eventual recourse to guaran-
teeing powers, l.e., conference powers will obviously not (repeat
not) work in event serious disagreement. He stated that it will
be necessary in this case "for us to work out something among
ourselves".

Chauvel tcld us that he is leaving for Paris tomorrow to see
Mendes-France in order to get his instructions. He indicated
thst Mendes-France .has been in teuch with London regarding
future plans for conference. He has impression from Massigli
thet Reading or Caccla will be returning here shortly and that
Fden is expected about 12th, (Lamb subsequently told me he has
no (repeat no) information on Eden's plans and knows nothing
sbout Reading or Caccia returning in advance of Eden).

'Mendes-France silmself may come here between 1lOth and léth,

probably not (repeat not} before Eden. The Chinese Communist
representative appsrently indicated to Chauvel that Chou En-
lai's return is expected, but gave no (repeat no) details.
Molotov is apparently still due ebout Cth, although Soviets have
not (repeat not) directly said anything on this.

I again raised matter Haiphong enclave by asking Chauvel if eae
. 616 any recent
ro TOP SECRET .
