Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Weak @ eat = al |
; GLUE
must be vorked out with the French. Beemce the $335 million dollar
progrenm includes pey end subsistence of forces of the Associated States,
this problen of inspection heconzs an even more acuie area, since 1%

eds § ca
is proposed that those units will ke visited by the HAAG at least once
a year to follow w on its implementation.
‘ The major reasons for the lack of program information and Logisti cal
beck up material wit thi in the MAAG are more or less a direct result of the
following: ; ‘ as
The H&AG members have, in the past, been expected to be exnexts in
relation to requirements for supplies end equipment to logistically
support a war for which they have no part in the plenning or execution.
Not only do they have no part in the pes ng but the plens, if any, vhich
ere prepared by the French ere not made known to the MAAG for the most
part until after execution or on « crash basis. It is believed that the
HAAG hes made a valiant attempt based on the limited information provided
them to screen end evaluate the requests for supplies and materiel in
order to provide the necessary requirements to support the Ware Due to
the very limited justification presented with requisitions, it has in the
past been intusident wocen the MAAG to ask the French for edditional
information prior to racormending approval to Washington. An exemole of
a reply from the French is ‘ans in (faos A and Al). The Commander-in-
Chief of the French Forces, General. Navarre, forwarded a letter (Tab B HB)
to General Trapnell, Chief of the MAAG, which resulted in a cable bsiz
forwarded from OSD) Nesh to the MAAG (Gab G). As a result of the shove
correspondence end General Navarre's discussion of the situation here
with visiting US officials who have given him the impression that all
his requests “will be grented, this attitude has filtere ed dow through
eee Nayarre's staff to the boint that they feel that en official
request for equinment or assis nia from the French Hign Command is
sufficient justification, and that their needs should not be put to
question. The MAAG, as a net result, has become to a great exten a
transmission agency for requisitions for supplies end equipment except
in those limited areas vhore MAAG persennel ave able to extract reasonable
justification from the French. In many cases the MAAG has recommended
disapproval of requests and the French have gone to higher authority end
gained epproval. A recent dispatch from the “MAAG to Headquarters USAF
G connection with French requests for aircraft support is atbeched
(Tab D) es an illustration of the difficulties under which MA&G action
is taken.

The following is a bri os analysis of the preblenm areas and recon-
mendations. It is believed that the following recommendations are
essentials if the US is to fu: eta logistically support for the var
in Indochina in a reasonably e ee cient and economical manner.

ce
-
5

FORCE BASIS: Since the completion the 6 February 195) DCE cost
Study theze have heen a nunbor of vee in Force Plen objectives of
the frmy, Navy md fir Force. Some of the chznges were under edvisonen

b
at the time of the 6 February report end in those cases wh ere considered
