Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
May 7, 1954

At a meeting in the President's office this morning with Dulles, three
topics were discussed:

1. Whether the President should approve paragraph lb of the tentative
Record of Action of the 5/6/54 NSC Meeting, which covers the proposed
answer to the Eden proposal. The Secretary of State thought the text was
correct. Wilson and Radford preferred the draft message to Smith for
Eden prepared yesterday by MacArthur and Captain Anderson, and cleared by
the JCS, which included in the Five Power Staff Agency Thailand and the
Philippines. Radford thinks that the Agency (which has hitherto been
not disclosed in SEA) has really completed its military planning; that if
it is enlarged by top level personnel, its actions will be necessarily
open to the world; that therefore some Southeast Asian countries should be
included in it, and he fears Eden's proposal as an intended delaying action.

The Presient approved the text of paragraph lb, but suggested
that Smith's reply to Eden's proposal should make clear the following:

1. Five Power Staff Agency, alone or with other nations, is not
to the United States a satisfactory substitute for a broad political
coalition which will inelude the Southeast Asian countries which are
to be defended.

2. Five Power Staff Acency examination is acceptable to see how
these nations can give military aid to the Southeast Asian countries
in their cooperative defense effort.

3. The United States will not agree to a "white man's party" to
determine the problems of the Southeast Asian nations.

I was instructed to advise Wilson and Radford of the above, and have done so,

2. The President went over the draft of the speech which Dulles is
going to make tonight, making quite a few suggestions and changes in text.
He though additionally the speech should inelude some easy to understand

_Slogans, such as "The US will never start a war," "The US will not go to
war without Congressional authority," “The US, as always, is trying t-
organize cooperative efforts to sustain the peace."

3. With reference to the cease-fire proposal transmitted by Bidault
to the French Cabinet, I read the following, as views principally of - ilitary
members of the Planning Board, expressed in their yeaterday afternoon meeting:

1. US should mot support the Bidault proposal,
2. Reasons for this position:

a. The mere proposal of the cease-fire at the Geneva Conference
would destroy the will to fight of French forces dnd make fence~
sitters jump to Vietminh side.

. 436
COPY FOR GENERAL BONESTEEL
TOP SECRET
