PEENANEIT
cae

ery
id pe Sy

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Septal Gap fo Ra
2) E, Dt E wii ge 26; é “ag ‘a A) é LE Fee EM oy

OS

af Aa tN me

TC SECRET. :
on Control: 4201 : lutheran ae
: . Pogtg: dune,9, 1954, ane
FROM: Paris . z 9 a.m. os
: b-oK
7 oy a tnt ai ——¢ - ie eile _——
To: Secretary of State pAb Pi paves efter
yo: 4766, June 9, noon me apse
SENT DEPARTMENT ee REPEATED INFORMATION GENEVA 370. =a
DEPARTMENT LIMIT DISTRIBUTION a ‘ oS]
GENEVA EYES ONLY UNDER SECRETARY , a
Reference: DEPTEL 4421 and DULTR 156.
I saw Schumann yesterday afternoon and endeavored to explain to
him our need for a French statement as to how they proposed to >
handle their actions as described in second paragraph of refer-
ence Departrent telegram. Schumann had difficulty understanding
just what 1t was we wanted at this time as he considers that the
basis for an agreement in principle has been reached and that it
was impossible to go further until the Geneva conference haa
definitely failed. He pointed out that ete the basic US re-
quirement was that any French request for military assistance
must be aporoved by the French Parliament, such a request could ~

not (repeat not) be made while there was any hope for progress
at Geneva because of the strong feeling in the Parliament that

everything possible should be done to reach an ~agreeiient at
Geneva. :

He then told me that Under secreaty apparently agreed that agree-
ment net teen reached in principle and he read me a telegran from
Bidault reporting same conversation as that reported in DULTE 156.,
Bidauit reported that Under Secretary had expressed pleasure that c
H Re garding numbered 7

—- SS ee;
ae Bae
n idault's report had following items of

pee iple aa now been reached.

Joins 156.38
Paragrapn 1, Bidault reported thet Under Secretary agreed with a
him that this problem wes over- BOWE EC ae e and should be simpli- £

Y

(aia

\
Oe)

1 : r
Pavezrapn 2. Bidault stated that he felt that the Thai resoly—. «+
tion took care of this probien ona he stated that the Under . >
Secretary agreed with him that this problem had now been solve@. >
Persgerapn 5. No difference. ana? : jh ee

Ph aa As ) a8
AALS ee Paragraph 4,
ShecayriaS .
© This copy must be returned to DOM cnt Panis vith ‘notation of acticn taken © aoe Foe
hh LAS31 FLED
oH PRON BITEL

aN
