Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

fhe JCS forward their views on negotiations with respect

to Indochina to the Secretary of Defense for transmittal

to the Department of State in regard to SECTO 106. The

JCS feel thet, based on the Korean experience, and as a

minimum, the U.S. should not "associate itself with any

-French proposal directed toward a cease-fire‘*in advance

of 4 satisfactory political settlement." JCS Memorandum

to Secretary of Defense, 7 May 195k.0..c..c<ecascegvessasescs 430

1
=

President Eisenhower makes it clear that the precondi-

tions for U.S. intervention in Indochina are that the

"U.S, would never intervene alone, that the indigenous

people must invite intervention, and that there must be

regional or collective action. The NSC action of the

meeting on 5 April as pertains to paragraph 1.b. of the

record (orgsnizing a regional grouping) is approved by

the President. Memorandwna by R. Cutler, Special Assis-

tant, for Secretary of Defense and CJCS and Meeting

Minuhee, 7, Hey 106d wtb ee taceins anla lite doule tb Ndewnvasensareg” ao

Mey 8 - July 21: Geneva Conference on Indochina. The lst
Plenary Session convenes on 8 May and hears proposals by
France and the Viet Minh for cessation of hostilities and
participation in the conference. (Excerpts) The delegates
to the conference ere from Great Britain and the USSR
(joint chairmen), France, the United States, Communist
China, Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, and the Viet Minh
regime. (Final egreements are signed on July 20 and 21,
and the main provisions concerning Vietnam are that (1)
Vietnem is to be partitioned along the 17th parallel into
North and South Vietnam, (2) regulations are imposed on
foreign military bases and personnel end on increased
armaments, (3) countrywide elections, leading to the
reunificetion of North and South Vietnam, are to be held
by July,20, 1956, and (4) an International Control Com-
mission (ICC) is to be established to supervise the im-
plementation of the agreements. The United States and
Vietnam ere not signetories to the esreements. The
United States issues a unilateral declaration stating
that it (1) “will refrain from the threat or the use of
force to disturb" the Geneva agreements, (2) "would view
any renewal of the aggression in violation of the afore-
s@id agreements with grave concern and as seriously
threstening international veace and security," end (3)
"shall continue to seek to achieve unity through free
elections, supervised by the UN to insure that they are
conducted fairly.™) Excerpts from lst Plenery Session

of the Geneva Conference, 8 May L95%..0. caves cece ccsescewces 139
