Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

It is noted by the NSC Planning Bodrd that France has had

the loan of U. S. carrier "Belleau Wood" for nearly a

year without use in the Indochina war. Further, the French

“urgent requests" for U, S. aircraft appear contradictory

in light of the sale of "Quragon" jets to India and use of

the "Belleau Wood" as a "delivery wagon." Geheral Bonesteel
Memorandum for Robert Cutler, Presidential Assistant,

WS SEAT OG, os a weit se eiwsslh wile cie fete bavarate eig¥.6 eUlaais a NESS, Fae 380

In view of the NSC actions on 6 April (1924 Meeting) and

subsequent Presidential avproval, the Secretary of Defense

directs the JCS to "promptly prepare the military plans"

for the contingency of intervention at Dien Bien Phu. He

also notes that the Presidential directed the State Depart-

ment to concentrate its efforts prior to Geneva on organiz-

ing a regional grouping for the defense of Southeast Asia.
Secretary of Defense Memorandum to the Secretaries and JCS,

US Apo MOS eo ckveweea aresnts Bie ete Bie Pe Ue aracaer oor

The Department of Defense indicates concern over the lack

of U. S. policy and pressures the State Department to

come up with a U. S. position for the Indochina phase of

the Geneva Conference. The Defense version of a draft

position recommends a positive and definite stance that

U. &. objectives in Southeast Asia not be compromised and

that if France does not accept this position the U. §.

should not participate at Geneva. Defense Foreign Mili-

tary Affairs Letter to U. Alexis Johnson, Coordinator of .
U. S. Delegation to Geneva, 15 April 1954.......cccceveeevees 304

Eden informs Dulles that Britain is strongly opposed to
intervention at Dien Bien Phu and, intends to lend only

diplomatic support to France at Geneva in search of a

settlement. DULTE 5 (Geneva) to Washington, 25 April

LOSE atecicitics Re auis ealelns eles S FEN Coens CRG Pease eee a Ore: cam 1 OOO

Dulles expresses “dismay that the British are apparently
encouraging the French in a direction of surrender which

is. in conflict not only with our interest but what I

[Dulles] conceive theirs to be." DULTE 9, 26 April 1954..... 390

The Joint Chiefs of Staff reject a French proposal for

additional aid because of the major military consequences

of involving U. S. planes and crews in the Indochina

action as well es the little value of the project to

relief of Dien Bien Phu. JCS Memorandum for Secretary

OF Derende, 27 Aprile UOGU.ocases0s «ecu vse ces ceees ecsageekens Sue

Sensitive

a)

xiii TOP SECRET
