Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

—A rayses>

lUPr OCU

effects which the introduction of a ROKA division into
Indochina might have. Since the substance of President
Rhee's offer has now been publicized, certain psychological
benefits have probably already been realized. The political
factors involved cannot be finally evaluated unless and
until the reactions of our Allies in Korea are determined.

6. President Rhee does not have at his command the resources
required to initiate and subsequently to support his proposed
project. The French Government has repeatedly indicated that
it is unable’ to increase above the present level its contribu-
tion to the Indochina conflict. Therefore, the material sup-
port of the project would inevitably devolve upon the United
States. It follows that no matter how President Rhee's offer
is presented, and no matter what the proclaimed attitude of
the United States Government might be, the sponsorship of the
project would be generally ascribed to the United States in
the eyes of the world.

7. It is not possible to predict with any degree of depend-
ability what the reaction of Communist China would be to the
introduction of a ROKA division into Indochina. While a deci-
sion on the part of Communist China to intervene overtly in
Indochina is more likely to be governed by other considerations,
the entry of ROK forces into the Indochinese conflict might pre-
cipitate overt intervention by the Chinese Communists. In view
of publicly announced United States policy, i.e., that open Red
Chinese aggression in Indochina would have ". . . grave conse-
quences which might not be confined to Indochina." (See para-
graph 4, Annex "A" to NSC 5405), implementation of President
Rhee's offer could have grave military implications involving
United States armed forces.

8. A direct and exclusive offer of a ROKA division to Laos
would probably be regarded by the governments of the other
Associ ited States and of France as an affront, and could
cause serious embarrassment in the matter of command relation-
ships. Furthermore, should the forces invading Laos be with-
drawn by the Communists as was done in the previous instance,
the employment of a ROKA division solely in Laos could develop
into unprofitable garrison duty even though it freed other
forces for active operations elsewhere in Indochina. Therefore,
if President Rhee's offer is to be formally made, it should be
addressed individually and simultaneously to the governments
of France, Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam with the stipulation
that the ROKA division would be made available to the Commander
of the French Union forces in Indochina for employment subject
only to the condition that the integrity of the division be
maintained.

260
TOP Crop ET

Yi VLUhAL
