58.

a9.

60.

61.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

Korean President Syngmean Rhee proposes sending a ROKA

Division to Indochina, but the Joint Chiefs of Staff

recommend that the transfer would not be in the best

interests of the Free World. JCS Memorandum for

Secretary of Defense, 1 March 195. ..c.ssesececscceeccecceees 259

The JCS express concern over developments in the status
of the MAAG Chief to Indochina relative to a considerable
increase in personnel and scope of training responsibili-
ties. The French feel that "it should be clearly under-
stood that neither O'Daniel nor MAAG-was to have any
powers, advisory or otherwise" in planning operations or
training the national armies. The JCS feels a demotion
of O'Daniel in deference to Navarre is detrimental to

‘U. S. prestige. JCS Memorandum for Secretary of Defense,

Gi Mat EE FON a 2 hace Gace OU era aly We eer IEE sl nclarg ee ar OR

In the preparation of Defense Department views regarding
negotiations on Indochina for the Geneva Conference, the

JCS reaffirm their position concerning the strategic

importance of Indochina to the security interests of the

United Stetes as reflected in WSc 5405. JCS Memorandim
for Secretary of Defense, 12 March’ 19O5!..-cscscessseccccseece 266

General Erskine submits the President's Special Committee

- recommendations on the military implications of the U. 8.

position on Indochina at Geneva. The analysis concludes

that “no solution to the Indochina problem short of

victory is acceptable." The conclusions expressed are

felt to merit consideration by the NSC and the President.

Erskine Memorandwm for the Special Committee, NSC,

EP Moreh 1OSE) eeau ais) cas acute cen se emocaeeeeemmeeceesees et

Secretary of Defense, Charles BH. Wilson, is fully in

accord with the JCS views (Document No. 43) and General

Erskine's recommendations (Document No. 4), and recom-

mends to Secretary Dulles that they be carefully con-

Sidered in preparation for the Geneva Conference.

Wilson letter to Dulles, 23 March 195t....csecesscccscesecees 276
General Ely feels that any air intervention at Dien Bien ~~

Phu would have to come from Chinese territory and would

earry grave consequences. "Can direct intervention by

U. S. aircraft be envisaged and, if such is the case,

how would it take place?" See Annex A of Doctment 63,

page 277. General’ Ely Menorandum to: Admiral Radford,

Pee aR ee aca sig hal sts aw Sete preionny she acniscat et tegen meee cote nae gles

