Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

Political decisions affecting military operations are reached in sessions
of the high committee by representatives of the States, France, and the Comnander
in Chief. Essentially military problems are resolved in a permanent military
committee in which the military chiefs of the Associated States together with
the Commanding General of Headquarters, Joint and Ground Forces, Far East, par-

ticipate.

Although a quadruplication of facilities exist in the form of several
national general staffs and territorial organizations, actually a reasonably
efficient channel of command is maintained by the French. Diplomatic liaison
with the States counterpart organizations is exercised wherever coordination is
required. This highly complex arrangement of joint and combined staffs and
pooling of national forces may be likened to a miniature NATO at war, except
that by necessity, the senior and more professionally qualified partner, France,
exercises the dominant role. The governmental structure of each state is more
or less oriented toward support of the war against Communism and the principal
portion of each State's budget is devoted to defense expenditures. Viet Nam is
the most vigorous state in this regard. Laos is cooperative to the French, but
without sizeable.resources of men or money. Cambodia views the entire struggle
as secondary to what it considers more important, the determination of future
relationships among the States themselves. In consideration of the fact that
hostilities are more or less normal in the life of the Indochinese, the States
may be considered as mobilized for war, although with less dislocation to
private enterprise and fewer restrictions and austerity measures than would be
expected by Western nations in a counterpart situation.

Both Laos and Cambodia are constitutional monarchies, while the Vietnamese
respond with less solidarity to the government indirectly controlled by the
Chief of State, Bao Dai, nominal descendant of the Emperors of Annam, He is
potentially a capable leader but unfortunately out of favor with many extreme
Nationalists and non-Communist dissidents.

The overall attitude of the population borders on indifference. The
failure of friendly propaganda toward both development of a National attitude
and the fostering of patriotism is an important deficiency. The uneducated
native is inclined toward himself, his family and his tribe, or stock, in that
order. The Japanese-inoculated spirity of Asia for the Asiatics has been adopted
by Nationalisti. leaders and the intelligentsia. The peasant, whose way of
life has not been changed for centuries, is mostly apathetic.

The principal targets for Communism are among the educated classes, whose
immediate resentment is the domination of the French through force of arms and
political and economic controls. These people, when converted to Communism,
muster more effective support from the peasantry and city workers than do the
French and the educated Loyalists. Communist influence is strong and its
organization very complete, particularly within the large cities. The contending
leaders compete with each other for recruits -- the Communists holding forth
idealistic rewards reinforced by threats, and the Loyalists stressing fear of
the enemy as well as other inducements, some of which approach impressment.

408.

TOP SECRET
