Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

_ ORGANIZATION OF THE FRENCH UNION GROUND FORCES

By the end of 1954, French Union ground forces will consist of four French
and one Vietnamese infantry division and one French airborne division. The ground
divisions will be formed from 13 French RCTs and 9 Vietnamese RCTs. The airborne
division will be formed from 2 French ARCTs and one Vietnamese ARCT. This force,
known as the Battle Corps, will be supported by 5 armored battalions, 5 recon-
naissance battalions, 5 amphibious battalions and 3 medium and 1 heavy artillery
battalion. This represents the striking force of the French Union Forces, not much
larger than a single U.S. type Army Corps. To free this force for independent
action against the Rebel strongholds, the French consider that a force of twice
that size is necessary for static defense and pacification purposes. By the end
of 1955, this surface defense force will reach a total of 86 standard infantry
battalions, 132 light infantry battalions, 1100 suppletive companies, the equivalent
of 70 artillery batteries and 36 armored car eompanies. All units of the French
Union Army are equipped with a percentage of MDAP material. Amounts vary according
to date of activation, depot stocks, mission and replacement factors. A certain
percentage of hard items, estimated at 30 percent of gross requirements, is provided
by French procurement agencies and may consist of identical items to those of MDAP,
having been acquired during World War II, or through other channels by which U.S,
surplus stocks were distributed after 1946. Indigenous production is practically
‘ negligible, since local industry is not developed and barely sufficient to provide
maintenance for civilian requirements. A certain number of paramilitary agencies
exist in this theater of operations which are not MDAP supported. These include
militia, national police, plantation guards and others. Obviously, MDAP items,
mostly small arms and ammunition will find their way by devious channels into
unauthorized hands,

Due to the stress of constant warfare, circumstances are such that strict
control is impossible. For example, an MDAP rifle, abandoned in battle may be
acquired by a Viet Minh soldier, who will forfeit the same weapon upon his death
or capture by paramilitary forces.

LOGISTICS OF THE GROUND FORCES

In general terms the organization and operation of the technical services
which furnish logistical support to the combat arms is similar to that in the
United States Army. The French Forces are handicapped by a insufficient number
of units and trained specialists and consequently are unable to furnish the amount
and quality of support given by comparable US units. For all technical services
MDA Programs have furnished the spare parts and small items necessary to carry
out adequate maintenance and repair programs.

This document must not be

reproduced without permission
of the originating office.

42

TOP SECRET
