Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ..
: -2—- 4607, May 30, 5 p.m. from Paris

could remain over Haiphong for 20 minutes on each mission.

A massive Chinese air attack (Schumann mentioned figure of

100 planes) could completely knock out French air capabilities
in.the delta and cculd so seriously damage the port of Haiphong
that it would be impossible to conduct a successful withdrawal
of French forces through the port. The loss of French air
potential would drastically tip the scales in favor of the
Viet Minh and make total defeat of French forces in the delta
inevitable. It is against this eventuality that the French
wish to have protection. Paragraph 9 of, Embassy telegram 4605
indicates Ely's belief that he already has commitment from
Admiral Radford on this type of attack. What French feel they
are asking for now is not, in fact, a new commitment from US
but assurances that US reaction will come within a matter of
hours and even, if possible, in time to meet attacking Chinese
planes. Schumann said he felt that only circumstances in which
Cninese would make such an attack would be if they felt that
US, for one reason or another, was not in a position to re-
spond promptly and effectively. Therefore, Schumann suggested
that if it should be impracticable to obtain preliminary ap-
proval of such military action from US Congress, it might be
equally useful to have a clear warning from either the Secre-
.tary or the President that a massive Chinese air attack would
meet with US opposition. Schumann said he felt certain that
if Chinese realized that an air attack would cause US inter-
vention they would never take the risk of mounting such an
‘attack.

I have ‘previously stated to Department that if we allowed delta
to fall to the Viet Minh without a successful evacuation of the
French expeditionary Corps, the effect here would be disastrous.
If such a disaster should come about because of open Chinese
Communist air attack to which we had not responded by US
military action, the result here would be nothing short of
catastrophic. We would have to count ona strong movement

in France that could well be successful in favor of making
peace at any price with the Soviets rather than continuing to
count on US support through NATO. The effect of such action
by France on the North Atdantic Alliance is obvious. In
addition, I do not feel that we could exclude possibility, if
the Soviets play their cards right, of a popular front govern-
ment.arising to carry out such a new policy. This naturally
would incur the danger of an eventual Communist take-over in
France. I do not have any means of evaluating effect in Asia
of a unilateral US response to a Chinese attack, but Depart-
ment should be constantly aware that lack of US response to a
full-scale Chinese Communist air attack on the delta would
Place in jeopardy the North Atlantic Alliance and our whole
position in Western Europe. ah ol id

Schumann has

ieee)

ELDQE ,
oe » ‘OP SECRET

*
