Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~ oy tol
“Di
die

ia)
a aa

5 é 7
OP OLAV
e. Re-examine current national strategy with respect to

Indochina, taking advantage of any unifying forces existing in
Southeast Asia as a whole in opposition to the spread of Soviet
Communism, and treating Southeast Asia as a unit with due re-
gard to the long term objectives of the U.S. and France in the
area. For further discussion, see Appendix "C."

Discussion: The Soviet Communist campaign in Southeast
Asia is waged on a regional and coordinated scale, rather
than separate attacks on individual countries. By forming
new coalitions of Western oriented countries, certain oppor-
tunities can be expected to open up which will directly
support operations in Indochina.

£. Increase the pace and scope of the U.S. information
program, and the U.S. advisory activities in furtherance of
the French and Associated States military psychological war-
fare effort in accordance with the recommendations of the
senior U.S. officers on the ground. (See Appendix "D").
Consideration should be given to both unilateral action and
action in conjunction with colonial French military and civil
authorities, as well as indigenous leaders of Southeast Asia.
The objectives should be to increase:

(1) The willingness of the people of France and the
U.S. to support the prosecution of the war.

(2) The anti-Communist attitudes and active partici-
pation of the native populations.

(3) The morale of the French forces in Indochina.

Discussion: To secure the maximum benefits of our pro-
gram of assistance to Indochina and, simultaneously, South-
east Asia by the cumulative and cooperative efforts of all
propaganda media at the disposal of the Allies.

g- To render maximum and expeditious assistance in providing
materiel and training to the French and Associated States Forces’
engaged in the Indochina war, the Services should be directed
to accomplish (1) and (4) below and authorized to accomplish
(2) and (3) below:

(1) Expedite shipment of undelivered items on FY 50-54
Programs in accordance with priority of the ae Chiefs of
Staff for deliveries of MDAP.

(2) Make changes in current programs as requestéd by
Chief, MAAG, Indochina, and make deliveries against such
changes and, if deemed necessary, without prior reference
to or approval of the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
