Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ae’ or SECRET ‘
ae ade ,
don at /  Csatrets LING5
oe : ) aris Rosta? April 27, 195%
tele FROM: Geneva 9:25 p.m.
In fo
To: Secretary of State 4a
no: DULTE 135, April 27, midnight =
jis =
ee:
NIACT i} Ee
NJ
SEN! DEPARTMEN? DULTE 13 REPEATED ENFORMATION LONDON 77 PARIS Ce
127. a
G)
EYES ONLY ACTING SECRETARY, - :
EYES ONLY AMBASSADORS. =
eS

unc heen April aT. a ee by saying tha t I S aotea to ee
frankly concerning our own immediate affairs. I said I con- ee

idered it great mistake to push French in direction cease- ‘fire -
which I believed would be a disaster. I said I considered it oF
of utmost importance that we both keep French in mood to fignt ~~
on in Indochina. If that masa is lost surely disaster would
follow with little chance of limiting its scope and indeed

little chance of French extricating themselves.

Eden replied with some heat that he was not advocating a cease-
fire though he admitted that he had told Bidault that he was
jess sure today than a,month ago that a cease-fire was out of
the question. He insisted that all he had been eae had
peen a cease-fire with adequate saree canes and controls tis
purpose he said-had been to concentrate French thinking on latter
points. $

Ny
I interjected that I did not think three of us were presenting

a very impressive or cohesive position. I reminded him that I ¥
e diate ad hoc plans covering Southeast Asia including <

wanted LE
Indochina if Geneva failed but that British were against this,
Frencn 1 aa had in effect no government and were ata loss as ;

to-whnat to do. They were drifting toward disaster. I was con- « J
j cerned thet we were not doing all “possible between us to shore K

s7/2 . 4 up French resolution. I said there was a basic difference be. .
? twesn us in that British seemed to think that plans for a ees ae
i. f--| defense were more apt to spread conflict they absence of ay: ay
by plans, 7 oes a
» 3 : a = “as
= t 7 I hal rt
oe said that what worried them in Tones apart pron polit Siecal ;
scots was that they felt military intervention would be "terpt.-
s business", a bigger affair then Korea, which could get us no -

where. Boe deerotosnt ate

¢ ry - . el Se 33} Pie

43819 355 poosiayieD
