Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

a : Ae - “ot
saan PEE CRO AP H\ Ay partora pe pnd Ci yf
: i :

le ee See an

= ee a CEN >, ; .

ripe: ie CONPIDENTIESE Nar, 3 une 1
action; fit ee coal is, . Usrxrois + 3877 eg
UNA i tr 5 Fy -~ Rootes June 8, 195%
as FROM: New York gone A 9:33 p.m.
Info ae : d 9 ~ ft Ce fe
SS TO: Secretary of Stato ES |: en dia SLA : Le:
SP Ho: 810, June 8, 7 p.m. CENT. oa il

EUR .

FE Re Indochina

P Dixon {UK) asked me this morning our understanding of the

voc | present status of Thai appeal in SC. I told him I understood
OLI Smith had been instructed to urge on Eden and Bidault importance
~) we attach to very early meeting. I also indicated our under-

TOP standing Thais strong feeling scope should not be too strictly
OCB limited. Dixon said his instructions remained 4) timing should
CIA oe dépendent entirely on developments at Geneva; (B) scope should
OSD ve limited to Thailand. He said if Russians veto resolution in
ARMY SC limiting the scope to Thailand, consideration could then be G
AIR given to broadening scope in GA resolution. We pointed out NY
NAVY broadening the scope in GA after Russian veto of limited scope ©
,resolution in SC would be likely to alienate votes; it was our °.
{impression there is more give in UK position on scope than nN
indicated by Dixon but that there is probably very little give
son the question of timing. on PSS ea
; ae fe ry]

Lucet (France), who was present, indicated to us in an aside “ss
that he personally thought a reference to "the general area of ©
Thailand" was too broad and that perhaps language could be t
worked out which permitted POC group to go into "neighboring" ©
states at the request of those states. caescos 4
Hoppenot is in-hospital and will be out of circulation for at
least week or two. We agreed to get in touch this evening or
tomorrow morning if any of us have any word from Geneva.

-¥homan (Thailand) came in this afternoon for general discussion.
a 1 oe ae * a e449 o

fe knévy about Sarasin's talk with Key. He very strongly em-
phasizead Thai Government's negative attitude towards limiting
scope to Thailand. He also recorded strongest opposition—to
\ have Czechoslovakia or any other satellite as member of POC

2 rs a. os pee e

group. He asked if we thought it would be useful for Hi to.
talk with other delezations in order to build up support for]

GA action in event of Soviet veto in St. We advised him it = 3
would be desirable to begin laying strong foundations now (Ay. ia
in favor of convening GA promptly, and (B) in support of de-.. “4
sirable objective when GA convenes. He would like to know u@ ~
thinking at present on resumed GA or special session. He woing

sa

dy)

also like :

are ry : bsprouehiey pe)
PER NANENT IP TDENTTAT ; . Sen ine ee
Pina2g E027 © This copy must be returned to oC earl moet notation of action taken o © GLPY, IF CLASH Eys
