Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
3-179, July 14, 9 p.m. (SECTION ONE OF TWO), from Paris.

for internal security, to import arms and to employ foreign
advisers ; i

"h > Does not (repeat not) contain political provisions which
would risk loss of the retained area to Communist control; ic

"5. Does not (repeat not) exclude the possibility of the
ultimate unification of the Vietnam by peaceful means;

"6, Provides for the peaceful and humane transfer, under
international supervision, of those people desiring to be
moved. from one zone to another of Vietnam; and

"7, Provides effective machinery for international supervision
of the agreement.

C. Letter from Mendes-France to Secretary (unofficial trans-
lation of French text).

> °

QUOTE
Dear Mr. Secretary:

Following our frank and friendly conversation of last evening,
I believe I understand fully the position of the United States
with regard to the negotiations at Geneva concerning Indochina.

If I interpret your views correctly, you recognize fully the
primary right of France, the Associated States of Vietnam,
Laos, and Cambodia, to decide the conditions for the settle-
ment of a war in which they are the only belligerents on the
non-Communist side. You wish to aid us through you good
offices in obtaining a just and honorable settlement which,
will take into account the needs of the interested peoples.
However, you are not (repeat not ) prepared to participate vith
the Communist countries in any settlement which might appear
to retain for them the benefits of aggression or the domina-
tion of non-willing peoples. In any case, if a settlemen**
should be arrived at between the parties holding the prim.cry

responsibility, you would agree to indicate that you would ti

comply with the principles which are contained in Articles 2

(4) and (6) of the United Nations Charter and you would con- >

sider any violation of the settlement by the Communist regimes -

as being of grave concern. ae
DULLES ~ ee
MRS/1 i: _
NOTE: Mr. Drumright (FE) notified 10 p.m., 7/14, MPL (cWo) ie
: atte
Dawes ‘i

_

E
LE049 SECRET
