Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET

The effect of the Ho Chi Minh bid for a negotiated peace and the French
inclination to seek a settlement has had strong repercussions among the people,
particularly those who pay double taxes, and whose villages are invaded, fought
over and destroyed periodically by the opposing forces.

Tt is natural that the Communists will support the line of negotiation
since implementation of any such peace will set the stage for Communist absorption
of the entire area, without fail and immediately. The Ho Demarche, and the proven
ability of his field forces to threaten seriously the French Union Forces, has
had a profound affect on metropolitan France as well, where a considerable portion
of the population is in favor of terminating an expensive and seemingly futile war,

PERFORMANCE OF MDAP -- SUPPORTED FORCES

French and Associated States Forces have received MDAP equipment in in-
ereasing amounts since 1950. French Union Forces conduct modern joint military
operations according to professionally accepted tactics and techniques, and in
accordance with doctrines approved by the U.S. Armed Services. Applications
vary in consonance with difficulties imposed by terrain and the climatic environ-
ment. It has been noted that this is a war which pits a modern mechanized army
against a large and well-led guerrilla force. However, the character of the
Viet Minh forces has been changing during the past year. Therefore, may in-
efficiencies must be charged against the mechanized army since it lacks complete
opportunity to utilize its capabilities fully. Since it is neither practicable
nor completely desirable to meet the enemy on the basis of guerrilla versus
guerrilla, the ultimate solution will require the isolation of the Viet Minh from
his base of supply in Red China and then overwhelming him by materiel superiority.
In any instance, a requirement for provision of quantities of MDAP equipment
exists and will contimie to exist for an indeterminate period. Generally,
maintenance standards of MDAP equipment are below those of the U.S. Armed Services,
although within well-trained units employing equipment in the intended manner,
favorable comparisons may be reached... Since many of the personnel of the French
Union Army begin their careers as illiterate peasants, completely unskilled, the
training and indoctrination task toward better maintenance is evident. MAAG
visiting teams proffer such guidance as is feasible. Specific notification of
superior, as well as unsatisfactory units, are made officielly to the French
military authorities. Under the existing terms of reference, MAAG has no
authorized direct contact with armed forces of the Associated States. Mi signifi-
cant weakness on the part of the French is their failure to project the r system
of field operations and staff planning beyond their experience in Indochina.
Imagination is frequently lacking. Also evident is the fact that their limited
experience in World War IT has stunted their overall development in mod-rn warfare,
This is basically the reason underlying their poor staff work, logistic and —
operational plans. Im addition, the French are sensitive and touchy and loath
to accept advice. We frequently encounter outdated techniques dating back to
Colonial campaigns and World War I.

|
Another weakness of the French Union Force is the diversity of troops em-
ployed. The French Expeditionary Corps is composed of Foreign Legion, Moroccans,
Algerians, Tunisians, Songaless and a small percentage of metropolitan French

This document must not be tog
reproduced without permission
of the originating office.

TOP SECRET
