Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_ -2- 4566, May 27, 6 p.m., from Paris

prepared to enter combat. -This-would be unsatisfactory because
training and advising methods of French and Americans were dis-

similar.

2. Ely stated that O'Daniel had presented, an operational plan for
continuing the war but that he found it unrealistic on basis that
it gave priority to operations in the south while the principal
and immediate threat is in the north. ’ ‘

3. Ely referred to increasing frequency of American criticism
of French conduct of war. He “explained that it was easy to
criticize post facto and when things went wrong. As Trapnell
knew, the war in Indochina was of a very special nature and it
was unfair for people who perhaps didn't understand this fact
as well as he and Trapnell to criticize. It was useless to
compare the wars in Korea and Indochina; they were entirely
different. He hoped that Trapnell could use his influence to
reduce the degree of present US criticism of past and present
French performance in Indochina in the interests of good Franco-"
American working relations in the important joint tasks at hand.

4. At about this stage of the conversation, Ely remarked that
it was virtually impossible to discuss spe cific military questions
. in Indochina without getting into the major political questions
including the possibility of US intervention, the prospects for
a Pacific pact and the wnole question of where the defense of
Southeast Asis was to take place and by whom. Trapnell referred
to his terms of reference which prevented him from discussing
other than specific military questions, particularly that of the
‘regrouping of existing forces in Indochina for the ere of

the Delta. ’

5, When Trapnell sked Ely what the immediate military prospects
were in the Delta, he replied that the five Viet Minh divisions
released from Dien Bien Phu were moving rapidly forward and should
be at the Delta perimeter between the 10th and 15th of Jrne.
Normally at that season they would return to their regrouping
areas for rest, "self-criticism" and general revision. Whether
they will do s0 this year or not is still uncertain, although
there are indications at the moment thet some Viet Minh : rces
are moving to regrouping areas. . : ces

6. When Trapnell asked what Ely was doing to regroup his forces
for the defense of the Delta a replied two basic things: First,
removing units from pecificats ion: and otner Stetic missions to the
Delta to become part or mobile defense groups; secondly, he was
recovering units from inactive posts in Laos, “Central Annam and
other ereas for transfer to the Delta to become part of these

same mobile forces.
hSG {. Bily's plen
- 35860. TOP SECRET
