Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

== — os
TAD CLeRTy

i 2} 743 €
Tat i es

SOUTHEAST ASTA — ALTERNATE POLICTES

1. General. The basic decision confronting the United States in
‘Southeast Asia is whether to cut our losses in that area and to grad-—
ually withdraw our commitments with the least possible loss of prestige
or to implement fully the provisions of a policy calculated to guaran-
tee the retention of the area in the free world provided the U.S. is
willing to take the full range of measures which are necessary to make
its stated policy effective. If the U.S. is not willing to do the lat-
ter it may consider two possible alternatives to Communist control.

2. Japanese Alternative. Recognizing the lack of decisive U.S.
military objectives in Southeast Asia, the apathy of the indigenous
people toward Communist encroachment, the improbability of any realis-—
tic Indian reaction to responsibility for Southeast Asia, to this end:

a. assure the Japanese Government of U.S. willingness to ac-
quiesce in a Japanese sphere of influence in Southeast Asia provided
they will cooperate in preventing Communist control of the remainder
of Southeast Asia by accelerating their rearmament program sufficiently
to assume responsibilities there;

b. divert a considerable proportion of MDAP funds programmed
for Indochina to an offshore procurement program for Japan for the pro-
duction of ground force weapons for Japanese and other free Asian forces;

c. encourage maximum Japanese participation in organizations
and programs designed to stimulate the economic growth of Southeast
Asia.

3. Indian Alternative. Recognizing the proximity of the Colombo
powers in this region, stimulate, with U.S. support, Indian interest
in and responsibility toward Southeast Asia, to this end:

a. pssure the Indian Government of U.S. willingness to sup-
port an Indiun area of moral influence in Southeast Asia, provided
they will act to prevent Communist control of the remainder of Indo-
china;

b. utilize the Colombo economic development organization to
stimulate the economic growth of Southeast Asia;

ce. utilize to the maximum Indian officials in assisting and
advising the indigenous governments. .
