Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ypu 184 Pelee) Department of Stale
eet TOP SECRET ‘
‘ Control: 1719 1 ;
Act
me) PRON: Paris 2:55 em Be ed
info aR a . RS a ae ee
TO: Secretary ve State ee cc eeceenetae Wm (Hae Ber vee :

Ko: 4D, Say X, 3 p.m. aN

Ne Nt As at

Qw ue ae NO
OX: 7

EYES ONLY SECRETARY
Rererence DEPTEL 52. \s

=

I can well understand difficulties we face as described in CG;
reference telegran. I feel that French position is fairly oa
clear as of now but difficulty may well arise in, last days G3
for hours of conference after Ministers have returned to pews
iGenevea. , le.
; Cz
In that cgnnection we face following problem. If.we ee “~
delegation from Geneva we lose all possibility of influencing ol
train- i

French to stand firm, and we also throw eway whatever res
ing influence we may s Still have on Communist delegations.
French would feel abandoned and, with only Eden to advise, Gi
would undouhtedly accept a result more favorable to tne J
Communists than if we stayed at Geneva. The same SS
but to ea lesser extent would result if neither Under Secretary

nor you return to Geneva for closing negotiations.

Oa_the other hand even if we do maintain a full delegation et
Geneva headed by you or Under Secretary there is always the.
possibility and maybe even eee | that French will acceot
a settlement that does not Fully accord with f points in

a

US-UK agreemerit. This will be particularly ane to happen if (i>
Eden does not stand firm in final negotiations. NERS
I do not feel that public statement of our position would be <
helpful as it would create the antagonism mentioned in next =
to last paragraph of reference telegran.
EK Sued
Even if we do not consider final settlement satisfactory COGS), at ol
_ uiewt, feel that unless we egree not to use force to upset it we aS,
vaya petit be in an untenable position here vis-a-vis Soviet and| yeas
‘yy neutralist propagands that will picture US as.the ‘nation 2
4 a FS by its acts clearly shows thet it wants war. ! oe
y ee Zice= = oclaal . . ' = a
page
ae: x Mendes is fully conscious thet we may feel -that we cannot be 6 tines
; woes Party to the settlenent. However, I do not reel tnat cae oe ae
would nécesserily weign very heavily with him in final settis- ree
ee Sesmeit., particularly ir he can obtain Eden's support. Natureliy : eras
spelieg ais thave. no idea whet iS in mind of Communists on this score. =
idl: 22004 B65 - REPRICUCTION FROM THis |
. AECTANENT = We have COPY, IF CLASSIFIED 15

REGGAO COPY © This copy must be returned torPStR centralifles with en of action hken © orauinrten
