Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

’ quarter, thus markedly reducing over-all
French Union capabilities for offensive opera-
tions in Indochina. :

10.. As a consequence of the fall of Dien Bien

Phu, the morale of the French Union forces
, would receive a severe blow. ' Their will to win

~ would be diminished, largely because of a

“sywridespread belief thet military victory was no
longer possible. The loss of morale would
probably not be sufficient to reduce the eficc-
tiveness of the professional soldiers of the
French Expeditionary force. However, a cru-
cial factor in the military situation thereafter
would be the reliability of native units, par-
ticularly the Vietnamese. There would al-
most certainly be an increase in Vietnam
desertions, and the possibility cannot be ex-
cluded that the native components of French
Union forces might disintegrate. However, we
believe that such disintegration would be un-
likely during the ensuing two or three months,
and that for at least this period the major

'. part of the native troops would probably re-
main loyal. Therefore, we estimate that the

‘-jmpact upon the morale of the French Union
forces would be severe, but not of such severity
as to preclude their employment as an effec-
tive military force during the next two or
three months.

11. The fall of Dien Bien Phu would not in
itself substantially alter the relative military
capabilities of French Union and Viet Minh
forces in Indochina during the next two or
three months unless there were large-scale
desertions from the French Union forces. The
victorious Viet Minh troops at Dien Bien Phu
would have suffered heavy casualties and their
efiiciency would be reduced. In order to bring
these forces up to full strength, the Viet Minh
would probably move them from Dien Bien
Phu to their main supply and training areas
adjacent to the Red River delta. Prior to the
rainy season, this redeployment would require
at least three to four weeks. After the full
onset of the rainy season, which is unlikely
‘before mid-May, the movement would take be-
tween two and three months tocomplete. We
therefore estimate that the bulk of the Viet
Minh troops at Dien Bien Phu would not be
available for major operations elsewhere in

tae 163

‘against French forces

os. See spony | 3

Indochina during the next two or three
months, although some liehtly-equipped in-
fantry battalions might be made available

more rapidly for operations in the Delta re-

gion.

12. Although the over-all capabilities of tne
Viet Minh would be reduced as a consequence
of the losses inflicted upon their main striking
force, Viet Minh forces elsewhere in Indo-
china would have the capability during the
rainy season to maintain and in some in-
stances increase military pressure against
French Union forces. In the Red River delta,
they could intensify efiorts to sever land com-
munications between Hanoi and Haiphong,
ambush French detachments, attack villages,
air bases, and other installations, and lay
siege to isolated French delta strong points.
The scale of Viet Minh operations in the
Delta, however, would be restricted by the
adverse effects of heavy rains on maneuver-
ability. Tie Viet Minh could use their force
concentrated in the Pleiku region in southern
Annam to launch fairly large-scale attacks
engaged in the-
“Atlante” operation. They could also use
units from this force for raiding operations
in the Mekong River area or to reinforce the
Viet Minh battalions now in Cambodia. Com-
bat operations in southern Annam, the Me-
kong valley, and in Cambodia would be re-
stricted by the tenuous nature of resupply
of ammunition and other military equipment
for these units. The Viet Minh could at the
same time organize demonstrations and carry
out sabotage and terrorist activities in the
major cities of Indochina. The Viet Minh
capability in this regard is probably sub-
stantial. :

13. French Union forces, assuming no major
Vietnamese defections, would have the capa-
bility to maintain their present major forti-
fied positions in the Delta, and elsewhere,
maintain control in the major cities, prevent -
the permanent severing of land communica-
tions between Hanoi and Haiphong, repulse
Viet Minh attacks in southern Annam and
the Mekong River area, and retain the area
liberated in the “Atlante” operation. If, the

Viet Minh were to undertake a major military

SECRET
