72.

73.

7h,

(ex

76.

(7

78.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

Page

"U. S. is doing everything possible....to prepare public,
Congressional, and constitutional basis for united action

in Indochina.” However, such action is considered

"impossible" except on a coalition basis with British

Commonwealth participation. Dulles 3482 to Paris,

BRE tee TRL Saray ten iene se ate De ekiailw DperhS Sen gee aoe e oS

France feels that the time for formulating coalitions has
passed as the fate of Indochina will be decided,in the next
ten deys at Dien Bien Phu. Dillon (Paris) 3729 to Dulles,

5 AGEN AI a in Seiein wise acnie eietaais 5/9 3%s bony Ws-oeiviae boa a siem aVeled ae Ens 360

The National Security Council receives recommendations of

the Planning Board on NSC Action 107/:-A. The Board recon-

mends that the U. 8. intervene if necessary but continue

to pressure the French and to support a regicnal defense

grouping in Southeast Asia with maximm Asian participa-

tion. The NSC also receives an assessment of risks in

intervention and alternative policies. NSC 192d Meeting ;
(Stee TNs ORT TOS awa dvdeiencntslara cued aban See leuteseonn ce oak

Eden feels the seriousness of the French military situa-

tion is exaggerated -- "French camnot lose the war between
now and the coming of the rainy season however badly they
may conduct it." London 4382 to Dulles, 6 April 1954........ 30°

Dulles emphasizes that unless-a new element is interjected
into Indochina situation, such as an ad hoe coalition of
nations prepared to fight, the French will "sell-out" at
Geneva. The U. K., Australia, and New Zealand attitude is
the key to "umited action" and it is believed that Red
China would not intervene. Dulles 163 to Canberra,

6 April LEST? Ae tte ae, ee pe, RA Sea a

(ad
oN
=

the Maloney mission, which reviewed the Indochina cost
study with the U. S. Country Team in Saigon, concludes
that "it is not possible...to arrive at any reasonable
estimate of cost" to the U. S. of materials for the Indo-~-
china war. The "crash requirements" and the French in-
pression (from visiting U, 8. officials) that all requests
will be granted has kept the MDAP program in a "constant
state of flux." Maloney Memorandum to Deputy Defense

Complrolien, TAPPUE LOS os dew as ales odbeewwnes vew'esssvasae DMO

Should Communist China intervene in Indochina with com-
bat aircraft, the.Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that

talks should be initiated to provide for implementation

of military actions as outlined in NSC 5405. JCS Memo-
randua for Secretary of Defense, 8 April 1954.....c.csseceee 378

xii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
