et ae

’
of
T
ie
A
.
be
‘
*
i)
iS
*
.

Ot ee ee a ee ee

*.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(Zhis ‘unilateral declaration by the United States Government sets

not sign.)

STATEMENT BY TIE UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE?
AT TITHE CONCLUDING PLENARY SESSION GY THE
GENEVA CONFERENCE, JULY 21, 1954?

AsI stated on July 18, my Government is not prepared to join ina
declaration by the Conference such as is submitted. However, the
United States makes this unilateral declaration of its position in these
matters: ' ‘

Declaration
The Government of the United States being resolved to devote its

-efforts to the strengthening ox peace in accordance with the principles

and purpeses of the United Nations takes noto of the agreements con-
cluded at Geneva on July 20 and 21, 1954. between (a) the Franco-
Laotian Command and the Command of the Peoples Army of Viet-

. + Nam; (b). the Royal Khmer Army Command and the Command of
=the Peoples
' . and the Command of the Peoples Army of Viet-Nam and of para-

Army of Viet-Nam; (c) Franco-Victnameso Command

taphs 1 to 12 inclusive of the declaration presented to the Geneva

. Conference on July 21, 1954 declares with regard to the aforesaid
- . agreements and paragraphs that (i) it will refrain from the threat or
-- thouse of force to disturb them, in accordance with Article 2(4) of the ©
- Charter of the United Nations dealing with the obligation of members
. to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of

force; and (ii) it would view any renewal of the aggression in violation

.of the aforesaid agreements with grave concern and as seriously

threatening international peace and security.

In connection with the statement in the declaration concerning fres_

elections in Viet-Nam my Government wishes to make clear its posi-
tion which it has expressed in a declaration mads in Washington on
June 29, 1954, as follows:

In the ease of nations now divided against their will, we shall continue to seek

to achieve wmity through free elections supervised by the United Nations to insure
that they are conducted fairly.

With respect to the statement made by the representative of tho

State of Viet-Nam, the United States reiterates its traditional position

. that peoples are entitled to determine their own future and that it

will not join in an arrangement which would hinder this. Nothing

in its declaration just made is intended to or does indicate any de- '

parture from this traditional position.

- We share the hope that the agreements will permit Cambodia, Lacs |

and Viet-Nam to play their part, in full independence and sovereignt

in the peaceful community of nations, and will enable the peoples of
that area to determine their own future, © 0 es 3 .

1 Walter Bedell Smith. cee ies Stier, ne
1 Department of State Bulletin, Aug. 2,1954, pp. 162-168, © ° '°

- bye

‘forth its position with regard to the Geneva Accords, which it did

Cer a

ep sey
+. . Oa
cs ‘

