Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

6 April 1954

Lui AE:

ITEM 1 (For Consideration)

POSSIBLE U. S. INTERVENTION IN INDO-CHINA
(NSC Action 1074-a)

PROBLEM

1.- To consider and make recommendations -to the President on appropriate
action regarding Indo-China and on the need for U.S. military intervention,

SUMMARY

2. The paper consists of a brief report from the Planning Board and an
annex which analyzes alternative forms of U.S. intervention. The annex is
summarized in TAB At

v

3. The report states there are four issues to be decided by the Council.
These are:

a. Will Indo-China be lost unless the U.S. commits combat forces?

This involves several specific questions:

(1) Is the military situation critical? (The report says not
yet but that it is deteriorating.)

(2) Are the French likely to negotiate an unsatisfactory settle-
ment at Geneva unless the U.S. is prepared to intervene? (The report
says this is uncertain.)

(3) Have we exhausted all practicable political and diplomatic
measures to encourage the French to live up to their commitments?
(The report says the U.S. should make a maximum diplomatic effort
to cause the French and Associated States to continue to fight to a
successful conclusion.)

b. What are the risks, requirements, and consequences of alternative
forms of U.S. military intervention? -

(See the annex or TAB A - The alternatives, to be valid, involve
assumptions: either the French and Associated States both will invite
U.S. military intervention or the Associated States will issue the invi-
tation alone if the French intend to withdraw. The annex also discusses
the question of use of nuclear weapons.)

c. Should the U.S. intervene | rather than lose Indo-China and if so.
on which alternative?

(The risks of intervention are high, but the loss of Indo-China
would result probably in, at least, the loss of South East Asia. A re-
gional grouping (Altern. B) would bring Asian allies to help fight and
thus be good, although it would require time and a need to give defense
commitments and assurances that intervention is not intended to overthrow

361 GP SEGRET
