Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 1

é whee :
* OSA CN” 9 CSAF-1 (MC-3 >

i a:
Cc eee cesarean ee one tn ge is 0 aie
a Legh S : oh ag : Contests 7615
lee eae: wastds. , JULY fEro49 192
i ‘FROM: Ceneva . ‘ LOS Dim. e ate ;
ip wits Re kee G rae a / ~,
ts 0: Secretary oF Sta oe Si? Bk ier gen Ge
3D No: SECTO 654, July 18, 11 p.m. (SECTION TWO OF TWO), a.
fur Ae het
[ PRLOREU

a

7 SENT DEPARTM
iroc 19, SALGON
| *  moKxO PASS i
rs DEPARTMENE PASS DEFENSE. 3

supervised by, in ternational commission. _BLections\ wooed ke plete

when in opinien of competent reoresentative eutnor! Les SEcn

Zone restoration of peace in country has made sufficient prozress ,

et cetera. eecie { speaks of a settlement which would give

Vietnauese people right decide freely as, to zone where residence

desired. i 2 .

Vietname se representative next veferred to Soviet 4: er
og Do

i (SECTO 615, vepegued Paris 65, Saigon 45). Article
draft speaks of “consultation between competent repr
thorities of northern and southern zones of Vietnam

states that representative authorities in norther

: + ua
zones of Vie etna, as well as eucthorities of Laos and ‘Car oodis, will.-
‘ nos permit: persscution of persons who have collaborated with othe=
side. ‘ .
, In view Vietnameze delegation, this indicates that Vietnam will te
a. divided into norte and south zones. Everyone. is talking of the 4:.
‘ ‘ yision of Yletnam and mention is. even = of parallels ai which  -
division wili be accomplisned. Delegation of Vietnam, gan Only Hrs.
i :' test the idea of partition. Besed on ‘point number oie cited Saelies
| ' ; in stetenent of Vietnamese representative, Vietnamese Gelegation
\ 4 | flatly rejects ‘both drafts submitted to conferenc as
{ Vietnamese representative then stated t
has not had covorturnity, on benair of i
exoress own views. It reserves its
2 — ration and to elaborate on it at a ple
5 Vietnsmese celegetion tnererfore request
7] : 2 j .

wt
ose
