Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Soviet Reaction

17. In this assumed situation, the USSR
would continue to provide military assistance
to: Communist China as indicated above, but
would probably refuse Chinese Communist
demand for full Soviet participation in the
war. The Kremlin would strongly urge the
Chinese Communists to negotiate for a cessa-
tion of hostilities on the basis of withdrawing
from Indochina.’ If the Chinese Commu-
nists could not obtain a cease-fire agreement,
the USSR would provide Communist China
with military assistance in every way short of
openly committing combat units of the Soviet
armed forces in operations against US and
allied forces outside Communist-held terri-
tory. The USSR would provide military re-
sources and equipment for Chinese Commu-
nist attacks on US bases or US forces any-
where in the Far East. At this stage of the
conflict, the USSR might provide Communist
China with nuclear weapons and the tech-
nical personnel required for their use.'1 1°

18. The USSR would continue its diplomatic
and propaganda campaigns against the US,
insisting that the Soviet aim was purely the
defense of China against outright ageression.
The USSR would also begin at least partial
mobilization of its own military forces on a
war basis.. It would issue thinly veiled
threats of general war, suggesting attacks on

“The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Department
of the Army, recommends the deletion of “on
the basis of withdrawing from Indochina,” be-
lieving that at this state of the conflict the
Kremlin would not willingly acquiesce in the
surrender of any Communist-Reld territory in

. Indochina or elsewhere.

"The Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint
Staff, and Director of Intellizence, USAF, be-
lieve that this sentence should read:

“We do not believe that the USSR would re-
lease nuclear weapons for Chinese Communist
T1ISse:"’ i 7 .

TOP SECRET

569

.

; - TOP SECRET 7 oe | gm

Western Europe and on the continental US,
but would probably confine its operations to
the defense of China so long as the US did not
attack Soviet territory.

REQUIREMENT 5

To estimate Chinese Communist and Soviet
reactions to the success of the foregoing oper-
ations (i.e., fo the impending effective destruc-
tion of the Chinese Communist capability to
conduct military operations outside the bor-
ders of Communist China) ™

Chinese Communist Reaction

19. Unless the USSR was willing to make an
unlimited commitment of Soviet forces to
prevent the success of the assumed US and
allied operations, we believe that the Commu-
nist Chinese, under the assumed circum;
stances, would accept any US terms for a set-
tlement which preserved. the integrity of
China under the Chinese Communist regime.

Soviet Reaction

20. In this assumed situation, we believe the
USSR would urge the Chinese Communists to
accept any US terms for a settlement which
preserved the integrity of China under the
Chinese Communist regime.“ So long as the
fighting continued, however, the USSR would
continue its aid to China.

“The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2; Department of

the Army, substitute for the last. itence:

“It,is also believed that the USoR would give
serious consideration to making a substantially
greater military contribution including nuclear
Weapons and the technical personnel required
for their use.”

“The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Department
of the Army,*believes that the results assumed
in this requirement could not be achieved by the
unbala anced and insufficient force envisaged.

“The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Department of
the Arnty, would add “and retained a Commiu-
nist foothold in Indochina.”
