Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Excerpts from the First Plenary Session
The Geneva Conference
Indochina Phase
May 8, 1954

ee ee

The French Proposals

"....The French Government is thus confident that it has done every-
thing in its power to put an end to the conflict. Wot only has it re-
moved all reason for this conflict to exist by recognizing fully and
unreservedly the independence of Viet-Nem, Laos and Cambodia but, further-
_ more, the French Government has menifested for a long time its readiness
and its desire of obtaining a reasonable settlement which would allow for
the hostilities to be brought to an end. This is the main and primary
task assigned to this Conference...,

"We propose that the Conference should, first of all, declare that
it adopt the principle of a general cessation of hostilities in Indochina
based upon the necessary guarantees of security....-

"s...in agreeing upon the withdrawal of the invading forces and the
restoration of the territorial integrity of those states....

"..-.For France there is a Viet-Nem state of which the unity, terri-
torial integrity and independence must be respected....

".,...the most just solution of the political problem can be found
and finally assured only when the population is in a position to express
in complete freedom its sovereign will by means of free elections. For
the present moment I repeat the problem is that of bringing about a’
cessation of hostilities and the guaranteeing of that cessation. These
guarantees, in our opinion, must be of two kinds. i

-
",..-the regular forces of the two parties would be brought tc zether
in clearly demarcated regrouping zones....the implementation of th
agreement should be placed under the supervision of international con-
missions....
"....the agreement....should be guaranteed in eppropriate conui-
tions by the states participating in the present Conference....

"..+-eThe French proposal is as follows:

"I. Vietnam ;

1. All regular units to be assembled in assembly areas to
be defined by the Conference on the basis of proposals
by the Conmmanders-in-Chief. ;

CQ
