National Security Council, a

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

settlement and should pursusc, directly with the governuents
of the Associated States and with other Allies (notably the
U. K.), ways and means of continuing the struggle against
the Viet Minh in. Indcchina without participation of the
French, :

: | C. The Special Coa mmittee has reviewed the findings
andirecommendetions of the Departuent of Defense and con- .
siders that the implications of this position are such as to
warrant their review at the h st levels and by the

thich they should become
the basis of the U, S. positi with respect. to Indochina
at Geneva. The Special pone eee recognizes moreover tnat
certain supplementary end alternative courses of action
designed to ensure a poms ie solution of the situation

l-
on

he
if

ete de IS"
Pal

©
1 a
ie

in Indochina merit consideration by the NSC. these, and
the Special Const ie? pereenendat ions with respect thereto,
are:

Te) he 5 28a), SOn8. to be. Ealken_ bo. Cee
at Geneva. That— the NSC eG ‘the’ “propo ee “poli oar “action
designed to achieve this objective with particular attention
to possible pressure against the French position in Korth
Africa, and in NATO, and to the fact that discussions con

cerning implementation of course 2 and 3 hereunder will be
contingent upon the success or failure of this course of
action,

2. Overt U.S. involvement in Indcchina, That
the HSC determine the extent of U. S, willingness, over and
above the contingencies listed in NSC 5405, to commit U. S.
air, naval and ultimately ground forces to the direct re-,
solution of the var in Indochina with or without French
Support and in the event of failure in course 1 above. That
in this connection the NSC take cognizance of present-

domestic and international climate of opinion with respect

to U. S, involvement and consider the initiation of such
steps as may be necessary to ensure world-wide recognition
of the significance of such steps in Indochina as a part

of the struggle against communist aggression,

3. The develonment of a substitute base of
onerations. That the ESC consider whether this course of
action is errr aare as a substitute for 1 and 2 above and
recog pnizin g that the hope of implementation thereof would
be one major expenditure and long-term petential only.

i

RO
oe
fixe |
