Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET

-2- SECTO 659, July 18, 1 p.m., from Geneva

The Communist informant said the 'crucial issue' now in the
Geneva peace negotiations revolves around whether the Western
powers will agree effectively to neutralize Indochina.

Refusal to join in such a guarantee,' the informant said, ,
‘could seriously deter a final settlement. On other important
points in the negotiations we are in agreement or close to it.
We are hopeful and we believe that there is time to reach a
settlement by July 20.!

| French Premier Pierre Mendes-France has promised to resign with
‘his Cabinet if he fails to end the bloody eight-year-old war

by next Tuesday. Fall of the French Government probably would
doom the Geneva negotiations. The informant declared that
American efforts to organize a. Southeast Asia Treaty organiza-
tion (SHATO) is 'a threat to any possible Indochina agreement.'

‘Success or failure of the Geneva Conference may depend on. the
attitude of the American delegation in this regard,' he added.

°

- END QUOTE

The above seems to me extremely significant, particularly in
view of the fact that in my discussion with Eden last night

he expressed pessimism, which he said was now shared for the
first time by Krishna Menon. Latter had begun to.feel, as I
do, that Molotov wishes to force Mendes-France's resignation.
Eden remarked that Molotov had now become the most_difficnult
and intransigent member of Communist delegation. You will note
obvious intention to place on shoulders of US responsibility
for failure of Geneva Conference and fall of French Government
if this occurs.

Molotov is -insisting on a meeting this afternoon which French
and British are trying to make highly restricted as they are
apprehensive of what may occur. If such a meeting is held and
if-demands are made for US association in any agreement, I will
Simply say that in the event a reasonable settlement is arrived
at which US could respect", US will probably issue a unilateral
statement of its own position. If question of participation
Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam in security pact is raised, I will
reply that this depends on outcome of conference.

Eden has already told Molotov that Security pact is inevitable
that he himself favored it some time ago and that he would not
(repeat not) withdraw from that position, but he made the mis-
_take of saying that no consideration had’ been given .to inclusion
of Laos and Cambodia. ~~~” Sieh: Va alae ets

« ee epee ee eS hee ah mr hs men a es ee

ee

BS i This Tinal
lee cee =
b213 soos +, |, ROP SECRET’
