Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

-2- #4508, May 28, 8 p.m., from Paris

undertake these Franco-US military negotiations in Washington at
the same time or parallel with 5-power military talks. If so,

he said he felt it was most important that Ely attend and he

would so inform Pleven, who, he was sure, would agree. He
requested a prompt answer so French could take necessary decision
as to wnether or not to send Ely. He said French had been anxious
for some time to initiate these military discussions and he hoped
that US was now ready and willing for them to begin. ‘

During course of my visit he had a telephone conversation with
Massigli in London regarding a telegram which Massigli had

sent reporting en British attitude regarding Southeast Asia Pact.
Schumann showed me the telegram, key portion of which indicated
British reluctance, as expressed by Sir Ivone Kirkpatrick to =
undertake any sort of military operations in any portion of
Indochina, as they thought that all Indochina, including Cambodia,
wes infested with Communists and so it was not practical for military
operations. Schumann was quite upset by this telegram which he made
clear to Massigli on the telephone, saying it was now clear that
British were only interested in defending Southeast Asia when
question became an immediate problem of the Defense of Malaya.
Schumann then brought up another question which he said was giving
great concern to Pleven. ‘This was possibility of Chinese air

attack on the delta. He said that French Air Force hes informed
‘Pleven that Chinese Communist planes operating from present bases
hed capability of remaining over Hanoi for 15 minutes, This would
be enough time to cause great destruction and Pleven felt that it
such an attack were not opposed immediately by US jets, Communists
in 3 to 5 days could cause enough damage to make the delta
effectively indefensible. Schumann wondéred whether something
along following lines might be possible. Provided French decided

to strongly reinforce the:delta and use conscripts in Indochina,
couid the President go to-Congress and ask for discretionary
authority to use US air power to defend the delta if it should be
attacked by Chinese Communist planes. A request to Congress coming
after the event would necessarily cause a few days delay which,

in Pleven's view, would be fatal. Schiumann thought present

United Action Program might not be ready in time as he did not

know what If any progress US was making with otner powers in

“EQ*

order to satisfy point 2B of conditions posed in DEPTEL 4023.

2 03.0

IT told Schumann naturally I could venture no opinion as to whether
the President would be able to make such a limited request for
discretionary authority but that from my personal knowledge of
Washington thinking I felt that it would be absolutely necessary
in any event that French teks action along lines of paragraph 3

of DEPTEHL 4272 regarding clerification of indepsAdence of
Associated States,

As I left
SG eo SOs

ibs
&O
(ae
co
ay

ate ’ — +
. . TOP SECRET
