.i/ Thus Professor Opperhsin s

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fhe intersst of the Dspart-asnt of Defense in the legal conclu-

siotis summarized above would appear te far less than thet of the
Stete end Ju mae as tne action tsken is bread
“enotzh in v or Defense to carry ouy tha
respousit ie it, there would appear to

s no gro lusions offered, This study
concludes Fraesident may bs exercised in
a state o ad Resolution provides ea
political guesticn which is broad
enough to hostilities, These ere the
principal concern te sé Department end sines I
agrees with these conclusions ond alse with the practical cenclusion

ect

régarding th
seams to me th
the conclusions of tha eeacrenaan

g
od ¢ ross, Prisoner-of-
oe

wu
s
he K
ha

Jar, end related conventions, it
r this Department to chellengs

cht

Notwithstanding the foregoing, I venture to offar tio cormsents on
ths gancral protlem presented. First, it sesxns to me that ths term
"Sntervention" might just es well be aveided altogether. It now appears
prominently througnout the Department of Justics study, but not in the
sre Ne resolution. Ths political connotations of thse word are as you

bject of much anvi-Amsrican, comment 2 ouch
ton: Moreover, apart fr S$, as a mabyer of technical inter-
Rebianat law ths word implies e dictatorial 2/ interference in the
affairs of snother stete. I understand there is no thousht of going
into Indochine except on tha basis cf an invitation on the part of the
is aula recopnized government. Our section would mot, therefore, bes
CARESE Ve ntion" in tha strict senss of the tearm as used in internsticns)

I. recognise that the word "intervention" doss not now appear in
the text of the ee Joint Resolution and it sesms to me, for the
reasons set forth goove, that it should not appssr, sither there or in
the public decla a ee of Administration spokaemen,.

es; "But it must be emphesised that
intervention proper is alve, dictetorial interference, not inter-
re

ferences pura and simple

4 fore intervention must neither be
confused with good offices, - nor with mediation, nor with intercss-
Sion, nor with co-opsration, becausa none of these imply a dicta-

torial interference, Thus, oe exempls, in 1826, at the request of

ra it cr

the Fortucuese Government, Great Britain sent troops to Portugal in
ordsr to essist that Cone seek eseinst a threatening revolution on

iy fr

the part of tha followers of Don i mie al; and in 1849, at tho reousst

of Austria, Russis sent troops sean mungery to assist Austria in

vr

suppressing the Hungarian revolt." I. Oppsnhein, Internationa
Lew (1948) 275. ; :

