Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

accept the defeat of the Viet Minh or to in-
tervene in force in order to try to prevent such
defeat. Their decision would probably rest
mainly, though not exclusively, upon their
weighing of the risks and disadvantages aris-
ing from the Viet Minh defeat against the
likelihood of involvement in major war with
the US and the probable consequences of such
a war for Communist China. Available evi-
dence gives no unmistakeable indication of
what the Chinese Communist decision would
be. On balance, however, we believe that the
chances are somewhat better than even that
| the Chinese Communist would decide to take
! whatever military action they thought re-
quired to prevent destruction of the Viet Minh,
| including when and if necessary, open use of
‘{ Chinese Communist forces in Indochina.?*

2. The nature of the assumed US action is
:such that ample warning would almost cer-
tainly be given in advance of actual opera-
‘tions. The Chinese Communists have the
capability now to intervene quickly and in
- such force as to drive French Union forces
out of the Delta.
might choose to exercise this capability before
US intervention could be effected. -

3. We believe it somewhat more likely, how-
ever, that even if the Chinese Communists
had determined not to accept the defeat of
the Viet Minh they would not intervene open-
ly immediately following the assumed US in-
tervention. They might estimate that US air

*The Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint
Staff, recommends deletion of the last sentence
of this paragraph and would substitute the fol-
lowing:

“However, their decision would be largely de-
termined by the Chinese estimate of the probable
extent and effect of US initial action.”

*Thne Director of Intelligence, USAF, believes that
the last senfence of this paragraph should read
as follows: 5

“Communist China will probably not choose
knowingly any course of action likely to expcse
its fundamental national strengths in war with
a major power. However, we believe that Com-
munist China's strength for conducting various
kinds of warfare is such, and the motives and
judgment of its leaders are such as to make
Communist China’s courses of action dangerously
unpredictable under outside pressure of any ap-
preciable magnitude.”

The Chinese Communists °

....., TOP SECRET

2

‘and naval forces could not, in the absence of

US ground forces, decisively alter the course
of the war. They might therefore consider
their intervention unnecessary at this point
and might postpone final decision as to their
course of action until they had observed the
initial scale and success of the allied military
operations and had estimated the probable
nature and extent of US aims in the conflict,

4. In this connection, US use of nuclear
weapons in Indochina would tend to hasten
the ultimate Chinese Communist decision
whether or not to intervene. It would prob-
ably convince the Chinese Communists of US
determination to obtain a decisive military
victory in Indochina at whatever risk and by
whatever means, and of the consequent dan-
ger.of nuclear attack on Communist China.
Whether this conviction would precipitate or

_ deter Chinese Communist intervention woula
depend on the military situation in Indochina
‘ at the time, the observed military effect of the

.

use of nuclear weapons, and the observed
political and psychological effect of such use,
particularly its effect on the coherence of the
regional security grouping and the Atlantic
alliance.

5. In any case, the Chinese Communists
would almost certainly greatly increase their
logistic support, delivery of arms and equip-—
ment, and technical assistance to the Viet
Minh. The Chinese Communists would prob-
ably increase their deliveries of AA weapons
and might send in Chinese AA gun crews.
Moreover, the Chinese Communists would
probably deploy ground and air units near
the Indochina border in order: (a) to warn
the US and its allies, and (b) to have forces
ready either to intervene on behalf of the
Viet Minh or to defend the southern border
of China.

6. While maintaining a posture of military
readiness, the Chinese Communists would in-
tensify political and propaganda activities de-
signed to exploit anti-Western and anticolo-
nial feelings of the indigenous population of
Indochina and the war-fears of neutralist
Asian nations and of certain US allies, They
would also seek to label the US as an acdres-
‘sor. In the meantime and throughout: the

Vd
