Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
WASHINGTON 25, D. C.

5 March 1954

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

SUBJECT: Reappraisal of General O'Daniel's
Status with Respect to Indochina

1. Subsequent to decisions made at levels above the —
Department of Defense concerning enlargement of Military
Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG), Indochina, and appoint-
ment of a new chief thereof, information has been received
which points to the need for a reappraisal of the matters
involved.

2. A recent message from the United States Ambassador
to Indochina, states that General Navarre informed the
Ambassador that Navarre's "very willing acceptance of
General O'Daniel [USA] was predicated on the understand- -
ing that the latter's functions were limited to military
assistance,” that "any good ideas the General or any [U.S.]
officers might produce would be put into effect wherever
practicable [but that] it should be clearly understood
that neither O'Daniel nor MAAG was to have any powers,
advisory or otherwise, in the conduct and planning of
operations, or in the training of national armies and
cadres."

3. Information available to the Joint Chiefs of Staff
relative to plans of the United States Government indicates
that a wery considerable increase in MAAG, Indochina, per-
sonnel and in the scope of its training responsibilities
is contemplated. Recent messages from the U.S. Ambassador
to Indochina and the U.S. Embassy, Paris, make it apparent
that General Navarre would be strongly opposed to granting
increased training responsibility and authority. From this
it appears that the Chief, MAAG, Indochina, will not have
authority, primarily the authority of command supervision,
to accompany the proposed greatly increased responsibility
of the MAAG. Without this capabiity to exercise command
supervision, no training program can be assured of success.
In the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, this places a
completely different complexion on the entire matter of
General O'Daniel's appointment as Chief, MAAG, Indochina.

264
SecDef Contro , No. 2654

me
ft
