Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Sep ee: DRAFT

- CONFIDENTIAL @ Soc Be lan deat on ty ot.

Vas aah at et JED St us rat, 1

‘ 2%

Gne following basic instructions, which have been approved
py the President, will guide you, as heed of the United States
Delegation, in your participation in the Indochina phase of the
Geneva Conference.

*

:1. The presence ofea United States representative during ;
the discussion at the Geneva Conference of "the problem of restoring
peace in Indochina” rests on the Berlin Agreement of February 18,

1954. Under that agreement the US, UK, France and USSR egreed that
the four of them plus other interested states should be invited to
a conference at Geneva on April 26 "for the purpose of reaching a
peaceful settlement of the Korean question" and agreed further,
that "the OSS of restoring peace in Indochina" would also be
discussed at Geneva by the four powers represented at Berlin, and
Communist China and other interested states.

| 2. ‘You will not deal with the delesates ‘of the Chinese Com-

| munist regime, or any other regime not now diplomatically recognized
‘by the United States, on any terms which imply political recognition
or which concedé to that regime any status other than thet of a
regime with which it is necessary to deal on a vse facto basis in
order to end aggression, or the threat of agg ession, and to ootain
peace. 7 . ane. Li

+

the Indochina
sted nation which,
ipal in the negotiation.

\
== 1 re
3. The position of the United States in phase
of the Geneva Conference is that of an, inter eh

a 1
' however, is Yneither a belliger:-nt nor a prine

titensl,

‘ aes ole patel hk, The United States is participating ; in the Indochina phas
of the Conference in order thereby to REO? th-arriving-as decisions
+P. a = |
rey ( which will help the nations of that area peacefully to enjoy terri-

anger torial integrity ard political independence under stable and free
v governments with the opportunity to expand their economies, to realize
an yn: f\. ther legitimate national asvirations, and to develop security throush
ole individual and collect: ve Bete against agzression, from withir or
without. This iBore sEs that these people should not be analsanated
into the Communist Biss or Sanerialiatse dictatorship.

.. 5. The United States is not prepared to give its exoress 01
implied approval to any cease fire, armistice or other settlement

which would have the effect of suwoverting the existing lawful govera- -
ments of the three aforementioned states or of permanently impairing
their territorial integrity or of placing in jeopardy the forces of

©
the French Union in Indochina, or which otherwise contravened the
principles stated in (4) above.

