Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

= NSC 195th Meeting
6 May 195)
Tt 2 (For Discus sion)
~ REPORT BY MR. DULESS Oi! ¢
i
1. Secretary Dulles, who vas rather pessimistic,in reporting to the
President yesterday mornins on the Geneve Conference, made the Sollovirg

ef.

nt with which to deal;

points: (a) there is no respoi
164 Te ea a Neato regarding a Soutseast Asia:
er

7
(b) the British have decli
regional grouping until after the Geneva Conference; te the British however
are Willing to proceed with secret talks with us regarding the political and
military scope of our plans for SHA; (a) the expected Communist proposal re

Indo-China will call for evacuation of all foreign troops and elections to
be supervised by a joint Vietminh-Viectran Commission; (2) French have no
particular form of settlement in mind; UX is still thinking in terms of
partition.

2. jt is not clear how the HSC discussion will develop, but it seens
desireable that certain questions be clarified at the meeting. They are alone
1 Lan v S

this line: i =
a. Should the U.S. resign itself to being unable to influence any
;further the French and U.K. positions at Geneva

aya? (iss, F6 26 Stil not
‘ possible to stiffen their spines by any conceivable means - Presidential
talks , threats, sending Mr. Dulles back with a new mandate, etc. = s0 as to
assure they will not accept a danserous compromise.)

a

_ b. Is or is not the U,S. prepered to comnit its combat forces dn the
near future, in some form of regional effort if possible, to save the
partition or loss of Indo- ohinar “(A decision in principle seens necessary
now. As the situation is at present we are saying we will consider this i?
the parliaments of Australia, New Zealand, ete. agree, but it is not clear
whether we mean before or after Indo-China is lost.)

ageression in and taking over of Indo-China ~ with Red Chinese support - ever
though we evaluate this loss as very serious to the free world and even
though we have the military means to redeem the situation? ° (The A- bomb )

c. is the U.S. prepared to acquiesce in the clearly eng gineered Cormu ise

Os

3. The Joint Chiefs of Steff sent you a memorandum several days ago
(see TAB A) recommending that you "secure governmental acceptance” of the

following position:

“In the event of a cease fire in Indochina, the shipment of military
end items under U.S. DAP .. . . will immediately be susperded, except
for such spares ard associated maintenance items necessary vo the main-
tenance oF equipment in operations. The entire question of U.S. aid to
Indochina will be re-exemined in the light of circumstances then existing."

The Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) has sugsested you

forward the mano to the KSC saying yo concur, buy you have not yet acted on
the matter. You may wish:to raise it Gurirg the discussion.

