Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

French Union forces do not as a general rule attempt to gain and maintain
contact with the enemy, but rather, they wait for the Viet Minh to attack.
Patrolling is the exception rather than the rule. Viet Minh regular battle
corps troops have been avoided unless the French troops are well dug in behind
barbed wire or have astronomical odds in their favor.

Night operations are never employed by French Union forces although the
Viet Minh use such operations most successfully. French forces retire to their
fortified and secured areas at nightfall, and control only the areas of their
fields of fire. Night operations training should be instituted and emphasized
in their training programs, and French Union forces should be as adopt and suc-
cessful in such operations as the enemy.

At present there is no evidence that the French staff is working off-
detailed plans for the final offensive which General Navarre has indicated
to me as Chief MAAG will occur during the next dry season, 1954-55.

Although Navarre demands that his requirement for U.S. equipment should
not be challenged by this MAAG, the fact is that the small inadequate French.
- Staff handling this function is not capable of accurately presenting requirements
for Indochina. Were it not for the screening which these requests undergo by
MAAG, material would be wastefully supplied, and many critical and sudden
shortages would occur. Many examples of this lack of planning foresight can
be found in the files of this MAAG, such as requests for specialized equipment
requiring specially trained operators with no companion plan to provide such
operators -- request for a specific amount of ammunition in January is consti-
tute a year, supply only to double the request in April - not because of an
oversight or error but because of poor planning for the operations to occur
during the intervening months.

This lack of French staff capability and to a great extent the conservative
and defensive attitude of the entire theater of operations, is due in large
measure to the fact that many of the officers on duty in this theater are over
age in grade according to U.S. standards, and are lacking in drive and imagi-
nation. Lack of command supervision is obvious in all echelons, the best evidence
of which is the absence of command inspections and maintenance inspections of
equipment of conmanders. End-use inspections by members of this MAAG frequently
reveal that higher commanders have never made an inspection of equipment in
their subordinate units. Shortage of personnel is another contributing factor
which-cannot be overcome except through more extensive support from metropolitan
France.

hi7

TOP SECRET
