Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
-2- hho, May 19, 4 p.m., from Paris

Indeed, if we fail to reach agreement with French for joint,
effective and hopeful action in Indochina, the Laniel govern-
ment which is living on borrowed time granted by National
Assembly in the hope that, thanks to United States support,

an honorable solution can be reached at Geneva, will probably
fall. A government pledged to peace in Indochina at any price
is then likely and such’ a government is also likely to bury
EDC for good, As regards Geneva, I am sure that Soviets must
be well aware of the reaction of Indochina crisis on EDC situa-
tion here. Therefore, I would assume that they would, while
endeavoring to appear reasonable in public and before world
opinion, take action to prevent any agreement in Geneva other
than ignominious surrender at least until July when there
would no longer be time to debate EDC here prior to summer
recess, Therefore, the only way that I can see to push EDC

to a vote here with a reasonable chance of success is to bring
present United States-French negotiations on Indochina to a
successful conclusion in next two or three weeks. Such a re-
sult would enable us to give solid support to French at Geneva
and would recreate the spirit of alliance between our two
countries which has been lacking since Dien Bien Phu.

Meanwhile, technical progress on EDC has continued. I do not
consider that French have failed to live up to agreement re-
garding setting date for debate as Saar precondition has not

yet been met. Delay on this is clearly a joint Franco-German
responsibility and connot by any stretch of the imagination be
imputed solely to French. There has been real progress in these
nesotiations which es reported are now concerned almost entirely
with the two words “corresponding relations" in Article 12 of
Naters' report. Schumann told me that if Teitgen and Adenauer
could not reach complete agreement at Strasbourg he expected
another meeting with Hallstein. He also told me that if no new
points were brought up by Hallstein, it should be possible to
reach complete agreement at this next meeting. There has also
been real progress on protocol signature problem as has recently
been reported by Bruce mission. If Socialist Party Congress
should live up to Mollet's expectations, Laniel's position re-
garding EDC will be greatly strengthened, not only in Parliament,
but also in committees and, in particular, in Steering Committee
where first test of strength will take place. MRP Congress due
May 27 and 28 also expected take strong pro-EDC position.

In view of above, I feel that present is not quite the time for
letter such as described in reference telegram. I feel we
should concentrate our immediate efforts on conclusion of
Indochina negotiations with France and on bringing about a Saar
settlement and agreement on signature of the protocols, all
prior to June l.

Delivery
473

TOP SECRET
