Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

¢. Conduct coordinated ground, naval, and air action to
destroy enemy forces in Indochina.

d. In the light of circumstances prevailing at the time,
and subject to an evaluation of the results of operations
conducted under subparagraphs a and b above, be prepared
to take further action against Communist China to reduce
its war-making capability, such as:

(1) Destruction of additional selected military targets.
In connection with these additional targets, such action
requires an enlarged but highly selective atomic offensive
in addition to attacks employing other weapons systems.

(2) Blockade of the China coast. This might be insti-
tuted progressively from the outset.

i (3) Seizure or neutralization of Hainan Island.

(4) Operations against the Chinese mainland by
Chinese Nationalist forces.

hk, Forces Required of Fach Nation Participating

The forces which would be eniployed under current plans
during the initial phases of the above operations are those
indicated in the Appendix hereto. The duration of the commit-
ment of these forces would depend on the succes of French
Union forces operations supported by U.S. naval and air opera-
tions in defeating communist forces in Indochina,

5. Normal Service logistic arrangement for United States
Forces would prevail. CINCPAC would be responsible for pro-
viding logistic support. CINCFE would assist by providing
material and logistic support as mutually agreed with CINCPAC,
or as directed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The facilities
of MATS and MSTS would be made available to CINCPAC as directed,
Existing U.S. bases in Western Pacific are available. Bases
with limited facilities in Indochina and the Philippines (other
than U.S.) would be available. Effort would be made to obtain
or utilize bases on Formosa, if required. The French would pro-
‘ vide their own logistic support within capabilities. United
States logistical support of French Union Forces and Associated
States would be provided as required. The Military Assistance
Advisory Group, Indochina, would coordinate and arrange for
utilization of facilities and services and would provide
logistic support to the United States Liaison Groups and Train-
ing Missions. In the event operations should involve the use

489

TOP SECRET
