Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

'-¢harge that the US was using weapons of
mass destruction on the civilian population.§

13. The Chinese Communists would attempt

by all means possible to convince other Asian
nations that the US had undertaken to de-
stroy the Chinese Communist regime in order
to thwart its efforts on behalf of an indi-
genous independence movement. If the Chi-
nese had not previously done so, they would
probably appeal to the UN to brand US action
as a threat to the peace.

Soviet Reaction ~-—

14. In this assumed situation, the USSR
would greatly increase its military assistance
to Communist China, especially supplying
modern aircraft and smal! naval vessels, pos-
sibly including submarines, with Soviet per-
sonnel to train and advise the Chinese and
probably to participate in air defense opera-
tions. The USSR would probably not openly
commit combat units of the Soviet armed
forces and probably would not release nuclear
weapons for Chinese Comrnunist use.

15. The Kremlin would also continue its diplo-
matic and propaganda campaigns against the

*The Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint
Staff, believes this paragraph should read:
“Nuclear weapon atiacks on Communist China
would undoubtedly result in a much greater Chi-
nese Communist reaction than nuclear attacks on
the Indochinese battleground. In addition, such
attacks would probably indicate to the Chinese
Communists a US willingness to exploit its supe-.
riority in nuclear weapons and delivery capa-
bility to force them out of Indochina. Since the
nuclear attack coutemplated in this requirement
» ds of a limited nature, the Chinese Communist
: + Tulers would retain control of the government
‘and country and, with the initial attacks, they
would probably make urgent appeals to the USSR
for nuclear weapons and additional military
assistance. They might also increase the tempo
of their military operations and would undoubt-
edly endeavor to induce the United States to
enter negotiations in the hope of forestalling
further attacks. A Chinese Communist decision
to withdraw or not would be dependent primarily
" upon continued or increased US nuclear attacks
and other US action as well as upon Soviet reac-
tion. It is believed, however, that the Chinese
Communists would be willing to withdraw from
Indochina rather than be sudjected to further
destruction of their homeland.”

TOP SECRET : 5

US, undertaking in the UN to brand the US
as an aggressor if this had not previously
been attempted. The USSR would support
Chinese charges concerning the use of nuclear
weapons against civilian populations. At the
same time, the USSR would probably advise
the Chinese Communists to negotiate for a

cessation of hostilities on the basis of the
Status quo at the time and would try, to
establish a position as peacemaker.

REQUIREMENT 4

To estimate Chinese Communist and Soviet
reactions ta the following additional allied
courses of action, undertaken subsequently to
those above:

a. Extension of allied offensive air opera-
tions to additional selected military targets in
Communist China, including the use of atomic
weapons under the same conditions as above.

b. Naval blockade of the China coast.
ce. Seizive or neutralization of Hainan.

d. Chinese Nationalist operations against
the Chinese mainland.

Chinese Communist Reaction

16. As a consequence of this allied broaden-
ing of the war, the Chinese Communists
wouid probably conclude that the US was
prepared to wage unlimited war against them.
They would continue to defend themselves to
the limit of their capabilities and would prob-

_ ably make vigorous efforts to secure the full

participation of the USSR. At the same time,
they would intensify their efforts to end the
war by negotiations, and might eventually
indicate in some way their willineness to
withdraw from Indochina in order to obtain
a cease-fire® If unable to obtain a cease-fire
agreement, the Chinese Commut nists would
accept the fact of unlimited war with the
US and would wage such war to the full ex-
tent of their remaining capabilities.

"The Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint
Staff, and the Director of Intelligence, USAP,
Suggest that the words “might eventually” in
this sentence should be replaced with “woulda
probably.” -

TOP SECRET :

068
