Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

.

TOP SECRET

_ POLITICAL ASPECTS

A strictly military solution to the war in Indochina is not possible,
Military operations are too closely bound to concurrent political problems, and
most of the military decisions concerning tactics and strategy have their origin
in the politics of the situation here. The governments of the three Associated
States are comparatively weak, and are almost as insistent upon complete autonomy
from France as they are on liberation from the Communists. It is doubtful if the
ordinary people understand the issues at stake between the rebel and Associated
States objectives. It probably appears to them that they are being ground be-
tween the two political groups, one of which seeks to achieve autonomy by
Communist methods. The other by political evolution. They are not aware of the
dangers of domination by Communism nor of the difference between democracy and
the Communist People's Government as we understand it.

The French have a tremendous investment in Indochina and have made great
strides in bringing the advantages of Western civilization to the people. yet
the French are not wanted. Colonialism is still the chief argument against the
French and with some substance. The natives are still considered as second-rate
people and the French have only made concessions reluctantly and when forced to
do so. There is a lack of comaraderis between the native soldier and officer
and the French. Separate messes are maintained, due in some measure to the
difference in dietary preference, but also due to this lack of friendly association
in a common cause.

The Viet Minh, on the other hand, are fighting a clever war of attrition,
without chance of a major military victory, but apparently feeling that time is
working in their favor and that French and U.S. public opinion will force
eventual favorable negotiation.

PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS

In 1949 the French, in a search for Nationalist support against Ho Chi Minh
recognized Bao Dai, playboy scion of the ancient Annamite emperors as Chief of
State of Viet Nam which was given its independence within the framework of the
French Union. Bao Dai is popularly believed to be very pro-French, and most of
the people have a luke-warm feeling toward the Government which they feel is
not earnestly working for their complete independence from France. The French
promise independence, but only semunctanely give concessions.

?

The key to this problem is a ee and effective Nationalist army with
the support of of the Populist behind it. When the people have confidence in
their government and in its ability, through the Nationalist army, to give
them the protection from Communist terrorism which is necessary for eee
and commerce, then complete victory will be in sight.

418

TOP SECRET
