Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

9. In addition to the foregoing, it is considered that
the transfer of a ROKA division to Indochina would be at-
tended by the following advantages and disadvantages having
military implications:

Advantages

a. It would augment the present "foreign forces" of
192,000 French metropolitan and colonial troops by about
15,000 men. This would enhance the capability of the
French to implement the Navarre Plan for offensive opera-
tions designed eventually to achieve a military victory,
and could furnish to the French Union forces the new
impetus required to accomplish this objective;

b. It could create a situation that would make it more
difficult for the French to withdraw from Indochina or to
negotiate a settlement with the Viet Minh of a nature prej-
udicial to the future freedom of the Associated States. A
rejection of the offer by the French would tend to place
increased onus on them to bring the Indochinese conflict
to a successful military conclusion with the forces now
available or planned;

¢. It would represent a concrete step in fostering
unity of action by anti-Communist Asiatic forces in
countering Communist aggression in Asia, with immense
psychological gain to the Free World;

d. It would open the way for a well-trained, battle-
experienced ROKA division, by exhibiting a high standard
of performance in combat, to inspire and stimulate the

’ Vietnamese forces to greater efforts;

e.. If a ROKA division performed well in Indochina, it
would serve as a demonstration of the effectiveness of
United States training methods in Korea, and might speed
the adoption of comparable training methods in Indochina;

Disadvantages

f. It would provide President Rhee with an opportunity
to exploit the situation to his own ulterior purposes. It
might be his hope that the transfer of a ROKA division to
Indochina would lead to a renewal of hostilities in Korea;

g- The burden of moving and providing logistic support
for the ROKA division would most certainly devolve, directly
or indirectly, on the United States. This would impose
additional responsibilities, commitments, and costs on the
United States Government and on the United States military

261

— =. — oe a eee
SPATS ag bbs

AW) Whi
