Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Pe Se TOP SECRET

Military epic eation cof U, S. Nesotiations on Indochine at

Se te ee arene ote ee eee ee es es ae eS ees ee eee ee aS

Gene Wek

ie pron ey

To dévelop a U. 8. position with reference to the
Geneva Conference as it relates to Indochina, encompassing
the military implications of certain alternatives which
might arise in connection with that conference.

II. HAJOR CORSEIDORATIONS

A. The Department f Defense and the CS have reviewed
NSC 5405 in the Light ae hevelo opinents since that policy
was.approved from a military point of view and in the light
of certain possible courses of action as they affect the
Geneva Conference. These are:

1. Maintenance of the status quo in Indochina.
! 2. Imposition of a cease-fire in Indochine.
p° Fstablishnent of.a coalition government.
. Partition of the country.
5. Seki-determination through free elections.

B.: The Department of Defense and the JCS have also
considered the impact of the possible future status of
Indochina. on the remainder of Southeast Asia and Japan
and have considered the effect which any substantial con-
cessions to the Communists on the part of France and the
Associated States would have with respect to Asian peoples
as a whole and U. S. objectives in Furope.

C. Indochina is the area in which the Communist and
non-Communist worlds confront one another actively on the
field of battle. -The loss of this battle by whatever means
would have the most serious repercussions on U. S. and fre-
world interests, mot only in Asia but in euroee and else-
where, os :

D. French withdrawal or defeat in Indochina would
have most serious consequences on the French position in
the world; the free world position in Asia; and in the U, S,
on the donestic atititude vis~a-vis the Frencn. It would, |
fui thermore , constitute a de facto failure on the part of ,
France to abide by its commitment in U. H. to repel agsres-
sion, “

EB. Unless the free world maintains its position in
Infochine, the Communists will be in a position to exploit

an TOP SECRET
