Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

: OP SECRET

-2-#DULTE 164, June 9, 10 p.m., from Geneva
before General Assembly. He said he would send instructions to
Dixon to try to work out with Lodge some language that would
meet his point, while not necessarily precluding POC operations
outside Thaila and. I am sending separate telegram repeated to

. USUN replying be your TOSHC 3/o giving only latter part this

paragraph.

Eden said he had not ee put to cabinet his ideas with regar
to UN appeal by Caribodia and Laos, and therefore aszed that the
matter be treated with strictest secrecy. ;

Eden also said he was considering recommendation reduce strength
of Connonwealth division in Korea by about half or one brigade
in order to reinforce Malaya. If things eased up in Egypt, he
was aiso hopeful that forces could be spared from there for
Malaya. I told him that in view of more critical situation in

southeast Asia and our ability within the armistice to train and
equip ROX forces as replacements, I thought we would have no
= -Objeeciors, ,
reais that Eden now considers negotiations here have failed.

Delieve fe is BPSpared to move ahead quickly in southeast Asia
coalition which would guarantee Ca anbodia and most of Laos under
mbrella of some UN action with respect to those two countri CS.
@ expects active cooperation from Burma, and hopes for benevole
nevirality from India. He apparer mently doesnot feel tm much can a
saivaged in Vietnam.

As you kmow, Bidault is not here and we will not know where

French stand until Assembly debate completed, if then If French
continue negotiations, point will probably arrive shortly when
deteriorating military Aner Will force them accept simple
cease-Fire in atteupt temporarily, salvage something. Therefore
one question we nay shortiy f face is what we and UK do if France
insists Cn cOutinuinge nepotiations somewhat Tonger. It is one
thing to withdraw if France negotia tes an agreement with which we
cannot publicly associate ourselves, and another to 1 withdraw
prior to that tine.

reconnend-themselves very strongly to nie.

it e] Oo me after the above was dictated. In Bidault's
a a others have been considering recommending to
Bidawl ‘ance and three Associated States together make
appeal He had reports from Valluy, part of woich he
read to mé@. He is obviously convinced that things will go badly
in Delta. JI made no couwient except to suggest that Laos and
a Cambodia commanded a certain syapathy in Asia and Middle East
(de which France plus Vietnam did not. I asked him categorically
A/ , if France wanted to internationalize on conditions we had tabled
yy Some cine af0, Saying neither you nor q knew where France Stood.

He replied

548

et tet all, Se, * aie : 1 TOP SHORE
