+

2 the crisinating office.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Jn addition to ithe foresoing, there are several points whieh hove
cone out in discussions with tho British which are worthy of mention:

a. The British have no intention of "pressing forward" with a
Southesst Asia Collective Security Organization until the Indochine
phase of the Geneva Conference has been ‘terininated.

*

b. Tho British representative has referred on a number of occa-
sions to use of military lorce to repel overt Communist aggression. ‘
However, the British attitude with respect to infiltration and subversion
is vague.

¢. The British consider that the principal problem in dealing with
Southeast Asia after nn Indochins settlement would be a large-scale
economic assistance program. “Although there has been no discussion as
to support of the economic assistance program for Southeast Asia, there.
is little doubt which state would be the principal contributor.

During the course of the meetings, General Smith has maintained
that regardless of whether there is a settlement in Indochina it is
necessary that an effective collective security organization be estab-
lished. Further, it is necessary that the orsanization be established
immediately in order that we will be in @ position to deal with the
probable adverse political and military repercussions in the Associated
States that will result from an unsatisfactory settlement of the Indo-
china conflict. It has also beon pointed out to the British that inas-
much as the principal danser of further Communist amgression in
Southeast Asia will prebably-take the form of infiltration and subver-
sion, ths organization must be in a position to deal effectively with this
situation. ;

Sinco approval of a collective security organization would probably
require considerable time for action by the various governments concerned,
the United States representutives have proposed that consideration be
given to the establishment of an interim organization to deal with tha
Situation. The British have indicated tenta tive arreement with this
iden. <A furtier point has been made by the U. 8. representatives that
no geographical limitation should be put on the treaty covering the col-
lective security aren. I recommended,and Secretary Dulles agreed, that
the ares covered by the treaty should. not be restricted to Southeast Asia,
but rather should be open to permit inclusion of nen-Communist states of
the entire Far East area. Altheugh Sir Robert Scott did not object to
this view, it is possible that when the formal British position becomes
clear they might not agree to leave open the area to be covered by the -
Treaty.

An additional point which has been discussed with the British has
been the question of a decluration to be made in the event of a settle.
ment nxt Geneva on Indochina. Secretary Smith informed the British that
the U.S. is planning to make a unilateral declaration and hopes that

.

ite TA ns be

