Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

had been clear from the start that "we were not willing

to make a commitment ahead of time which the French could

use for internal political maneuvering or negotiating at
Geneva...." TEDUL 178, 9 June 1954......000. ee ee Ae oe aU

133. "General Ely has twice in my presence stated that his
keenest desire is for the United States to enter this
war." The purpose of General Valluy's statement (war
assessment) is either to bring the U.S. and five other
powers into the conflict or to prepare an “excuse before
history" for an armistice. Saigon 2714 to Dulles,
20: Tune WS Seis oe, slais weitere oie Wa tiesiv spate crepe wale aeieessieewae

134. The French military feel that a Tonkin decision will rest
‘on U.S. intentions. The French are reluctant to request
“internationalization" which would result in new talks
and provoke new "hopes." The U.S., on the other hand,
does not want to consider a U.S. training mission separate
from the "overall operational plan" on the assumption the
conditions are fulfilled for U.S. participation in Indo-
china. Murphy (Acting SecState) 4508 to Paris, 10 June

195! eee eee wwe oe eevee eee ren eee ene eee eee eee eee ee nee eee

135. The French impression is that even after all. conditions
are met, the chances of U.S. participation are "nil."
With this attitude it is only a matter of time until the
French ccme to terms with the Viet Minh. The result
would be disastrous to French public opinion and the
"U.S, would be blamed" for having failed in the crisis.
Therefore, it is recommended that the French be informed
that "the President is no longer prepared to request
military intervention" even if France fulfills all con-
ditions. France should strive for an armistice and thus
avoid a.military disaster. A few months deley in commu-
nist takeover in Indochina is not commensurate with
"possible collapse of the defense of Western Europe."
Paris NS; Col Dulkess D4 GUbe OS. cates wove wieseveewsun eee EOI

136, The French want, and "in effect have, an option on our
‘intervention, but they do not want to exercise it aT
the date of expiry of our option is fast running out.
ee ee es ee 558

-137. Secretary Dulles emphasizes that events have shown that
predictions he has made all along on the lack of any
real French desire for U.S, intervention but "as a card
to play at Geneva.” The U.S. does not see that Frarice's
bitterness is justified considering "prolonged French
and U.K. indecision.” Dulles 4579 to Paris, 14 June 1954.... 2999

xxiii TOP SECRET - Sensitive

