Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

en 2EO} r re a = yf Ly; j

FoR og ET EN RE I A EEL Cs TES OAT ea FEF ete

uu rae.

( TOP SHORE? | i

25-N :

ction Csntrois 1 9

FE oor fostd: June 24, 1954
FROM: Paris ; aa | (05 p.m.

a Yo: Secretary of Stato ag! ee,

SP io: 5035, June 24, 10 p.m. ‘

C. : ss
priority = (Xnc poe (ee:
SENT DEPARTMENT 5035; REPEATED INFORMATION GENEVA 443. ae
LIMIT DISTRIBUTION. , Smee es ="

4
Since (iendes was tied up in National Assembly today, he. ‘asked —
me to seé Parodi and Chauvel regarding his talk with Chou. mee
Chauvel did all the talking and deséribed the the pe 8&8 Tol-° yg
lows: Oh

: He said that Mendes opetcd. the meeting telling Chou that he Gt
. had been glad to agree to Chou's idea of a meeting and that
Hy he was interested to hear anything Chou had to say. Chou then
spoke very fully and most of the time at the meeting, which
lasted a little over two hours, was taken up by Chou's state-
ments and the necessary translations, G:
t

fag?

Chou in general followed the same line as he previously had "5
taken with Eden and Bidault, with certain important excep- he
tions, which Chauvel considered to represent a sousidensbts I GE
advance over Chou's previous position. by

Chou started by talking about Laos and Cambodia. He said that |
the immediate problem was to obtain the withdrawal of all for-
‘eign forces“including Viet Minh from the entire territory! of
both countries. He said that then the governments of tn two
‘countries should arrange political settlements within their
own countries based on the will of the majority of the people.
Chou said that while there should be no persecution of minor-
ities, he had no objection to the two countries retainin; 3
thelr monarchical form of governnent if they so desired. The
one thing upon which he insisted was that there should be no
repeat no) US bases in either Laos and Cambodia. He stated
that he saw no objection to Laos and eanbee ee remaining within
the French Union, provided they so desired.

WO

‘The talk then turned to Vietnam where Chauvel considered in-
portant advances in Chou's position were revealed. _Chou =
that he recognized that there were ow_tvo_gaovernments In the

‘ak territory .

fh & re) ¥ =

oi 86109 983 Se Le teh
pEcaaD ci2y © This copy must be returned toNUER Ceniraetiles with notation of action taken © ee CHOITED
