Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

.

TOP SECRET

French Forces: French Forces are, for the most part, trained prior to
shipment to Indochina, Training of individual replacements is done in the
units to which they are assigned. French Far East ground forces operate
schools for artillery, armor, engineer and transportation for their own forces
and additionally provide generous quotas for Associated States personnel.
Recently, four tactical training centers have been activated for use as maneuver
areas for large tactical formations and battalions rotated out of static positions.

Vietnamese Forces: There are eight training centers for recruits of the
Vietnamese Army. Four are for recruits for the Regular Army and four are for
personnel to be activated into Kinh Quan (light infantry) battalions and companies.
On-the-job training is conducted in technical fields for selected individuals
upon assignment to a unit. In addition to this training, a limited number of
specialists, technical, non-commissioned and officer schools exist. A con-
siderable number of indigenous officers and men attend French schools both in
France and Indochina. Training is not up to American standards.

The Associated States training plan has an annual capacity of about 65,000.
It is considered adequate to meet phased build-up requirements. By American
criteria, certain training deficiencies are conspicuous, particularly in such
areas as standardization of training aids, programs of instruction, troop
training programs and training literature. Utilization of plant facilities
with greater efficiency is a further requirement. It is apparent that the
Associated States forces are developing with more stress on quantity than quality.
It is hoped that American guidance will prove acceptable and valuable to the
French. The use of MDAP equipment has not generated any critical training
problems, however a need exists for management training to encompass stock
control; organization of depots and other procedural-~type activities.

ORGANIZATION OF THE FRENCH NAVAL FORCES, FAR EAST

French naval strength is approximately 10,000. The only Associated States
navy is a 1,000 man Vietnamese force. Naval forces are light units composed
of approximately 250 light vessels and 100 small craft. These are supported
by an aircraft carrier on loan from NATO and a squadron of privateer aircraft.
Command of river operations as well as overall logistic support is the responsi-
bility of the Cumander, French Naval Forces ashore. Direct coordination of
naval river forces with the respective Army area commands is executed at the
Naval area level. Commander, French Naval Forces, afloat, controls coastal
operations including surveillance, blockade, and amphibious operations. Naval
Aviation, Indochina, supports the Naval mission as directed. The aircraft
carrier force is under Naval administrative command although embarked aircraft
operate as directed by the French Air Force area tactical commands ,

413

TOP SECRET
