i &
'- expected to ensue,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

¢ v,- ‘ ’ TOP SECRET

- whet will be widely regarded in Asia as a Communist victory.

should Indochina be lost to the Communists, and in the
ee = 5
absence of immediate and effective counteraction by the
free world (which vould of necessity be on a much greater
seale than that required ta be decisive an Indochine ) the
conquest of the remainder of Southeast Asia would inevitably
follow. Thereafter, longer term resvits, probably forcing
Japan into an accommodation with the Comaunist bloc, and
threatening the stability and security of Furope, could be
w a a.

F, As a measure of U. S. participation in the Indo
chinese war it is noted that the U. S. has
grammed in excess of $2.4 billion dollar
French “Associated States operations in Indochiz

ated to rave expended during the period
valent of some $5.4 billion, This ee peetnen a

to the heavy casualties sustained by the Frenc
an. Ns iietnanese, to say nothing of the great moral and
a involvement of the U. S, and French, will have

itless for the anti-Communist cause if control of
all. or a portion of Indochina should now be ceded to the

Communists

A. NSC hater: approved Janu ene 16, 1954, states U. S.
policy with respect to Indochine

B, The French desire for peace in Indochina almost
at any cost represents our greatest vulnerability in the
Geneva talks.

IV. DISCUSSION
For the views of the JCS sée Tab A.

Mes CONC Ci USIONS 3

A,’ Loss of Irgoehina to the Communists would consti-
tute a political and military setback of the most serious
consequences and would alnost Dg ine lead to the ar banere
Communist domination of ary Southeast Asia.

B. The U. S, policy and objectives with respect to
Southeast Asia as refiectedin NSC 5405 remain entirely valid
in ‘the light or developments since that policy was aporoved,

respect to possible alternative courses of
ated in parasraynh- If4 above, the Bepartnent of
eecnad the following .conclusicns:

TOP SEGRE

RO
=~.
co
