if

V.B.3- (Book II) TABLE OF CONTENTS

0.

5k.

5a

D3

54.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The Joint Chiefs of Steff recommend steps which the U. 5.
might teke to assist in achieving success of the Navarre

fate
A)
e

a =

Plan. Among these steps are: a reneved emohasis by France

on support of the Navarre Plan; an assignment of addi-

tional specialists to MAAG, Indochina; an increase in un-
conventional warfare activities; a re-examination of

current national strategy; and an interim revision of

French NATO commitments. JCS Memorandum for Secretary

of Defense, 15 danuery 1054... caveveucrucoservewsseeeecesweds Ste

The President approves the statement of policy in NSC 177,

"United States Objectives and Courses of Action with Re-

spect to Southeast Asia," which views the loss of Indo-

china as having "most serious repercussions on U.S. and

free world interests...." (NSC 177 was renumbered as :

NSC 505): 3S SHOS, 16 Jenuery FOGW a aesescuwenarreves sees SLY

Senator. Stennis informs Secretary Wilson that the U. 58.
should stop short ef sending troons or airmen to Indo-

china. "I do not think we can at all afford to take

chances on becoming participants in Indochina." Stennis
letter to Secretary of Defense, 29 January 19T4......ceeeeeee

The President's Special Committee decides to recommend 23
action on certain urgent French requests for twnety-two

B-26 aircraft and two hundred Air Force mechanics for

Indochina, and to await-General O'Daniel's return before

deciding on other requests. It is generally agreed that a

the importance to the U.S. of winning in Indochina could

lead to intervention by U.S, air and naval forces ~-- but

"not ground forces." ISA Memorandwn for the Record,

AN eraser NGS HS sys iPad ol h.s pn aoe EU ate iene Meee ae aieeniemase. CHO

The President approves, and the CJCS notifies France of

U, S. transfer to Indochina of ten B-26 type aircraft

and two-hundred USAF mechanics. This brings to twenty-

two the total of B-26 aircraft slated for delivery to

Indochina. Admiral Radford (Anderson) Memorandum to

General Valluy. 30 danuery LO se nes sauuevaeeveaseecesss 285

General O'Daniel reports on General Navarre's lack of

enthusiasm on having a U. S. "liaison officer" and his

disinterest in U, 8S, participnaticn in psychological

warfare. O'Daniel recommends that a small Joint Staff

be approved, additionel funds to STM be epproved, and

the employment of liaison officers be aporoved. He

coments that Dien Bien Phu can withstand any kind of

Viet Minh attack, but would be untenable to a force tha

had several battalions of artillery with air observation.

O'Paniel Report to JCS, 5 February 1954.....cccccneseneeveees PHO

viii TOP SECRET + Sensitive
