Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET

22.625, June 1, 1 p.m. from-Paris

1. Maintain position outlined in paragraph 3 of DEPTEL 409.
In this event French will continue to believe in their hearts
that President will in fact request Congress to act if there
should be an all-out Chinese air attack.

-2, Tell French that if there should be such unprovoked attack,

President would expect to request Congress for authority to
use U.S. forces. © ‘

3. Tell French that U.S. would not come to French assistance
even in the event of a Chinese air attack ence! as @ part’

of 2a collective action.

If in fact ‘ntention is to give assistance to French in event
of a Chinese air attack, it would seem immaterial whether we
follow courses No. 1 or No. 2 and I can see many reasons in
favor of sticking to course No. 1. However, if we stick to
course No. l, and then do not come to assistance of Frencn in

the event of a Chinese air attack, I feel that the results here

in France will be as outlined in EMBTE 1, 4607.

Therefore, if we do not intend to react to Chinese air attack
except in tne framework of collective action, I feel that it
would be better to adopt course No. 3\so as to avoid the risks
described in EMATEL “607. If we adopt course No. 3, however,
we must realize that it will come as a shock to the Fench
and would prooably have a prompt and serious effect on French
attitude in Geneva and on present French plans for reinforcing
Indochina. If 1t became public knowledge that course No. 3
was our policy, it would probably hasten fall of Laniel and
generelly militate egelast: our Huropean policy, though nowhere
nearly to the extent indicated in EMBTEL 1607.
When Ely arrives Washington next week, he will be under specific
instructions to attempt to clarify U.S. poliey on this point
if answer hes not previously been given. Therefore, if our de-.
cision is,to stick to policy outlined in par agraph S OF DRPVRT
HOG with no further explanations, all personnel who will be
telking with Ely snould be carefully briefed regarding the
subject. ;

DILLON :
