Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

of NORC Forces, United States logistic support above the
current NORC MDA Program would be provided. ‘

6. Plan for Command Structure

In accordance with the Unified Command Plan, CINCPAC
would exercise unified command of assigned forces. He would
insure the coordination of all operations in Southeast Asia and
provide for the necessary ground-air coordination between French
Union Forces and U.S. Navy and Air Force forces which operate
in support of the land battle. In addition, CINCPAC would
select targets and conduct air operations with assigned forces
against military targets in Indochina and those in China which
directly support Chinese Communist aggression. COMSAC would
support CINCPAC in these operations, and in addition would con-
duct air operations to further reduce the Chinese Communists
war-making capability, as directed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
CINCFE will continue to provide for the security of Japan and
the Ryukyus in accordance with his priority mission dnd in
addition would support CINCPAC and COMSAC in their operations
as agreed mutually.

{. Plan for Training Native Troops

For the United States to initiate training of Associated
States Forces, it is estimated that approximately 2,270 U.S.
personnel would be required, as an augmentation of the existing
Military Assistance Advisory Group, to carry out this program.
In additio, U.S. personnel would be required to provide appro-
priate logistic support. The exact size and composition of the
training mission, the logistic support requirements, and the
security requirements and arrangements till be determined in
light of recommendations which have been requested from CINCPAC
and the Chief, MAAG, Indochina. The training of Associated
States Forces would be patterned after the training program
conducted for RCK forces in Korea.’

8. Plan for World-Wide Military Aid

The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that action should be
taken to insure appropriate degree of mobilization to provide for the
greater risk of a general war and be prudently prepared under
this alternate assumption.. In view of the increased risk of
general war involving the Soviet Bloc, immediate action would

490

TOP SECRET
