Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

-2-DULTE 195, dune 18, 3 p. m. from Geneva

In reoly to Chauvel'’s questions, Johnson made it clear we were
.soeaking only of public disassociation from such a settlement.

The US had in the past and of course would continue working with
and supporting France in every possible way and wherever we could.
Chauvel indicated full understanding our position. He said they
had come to conclusion that what he termed any "leopard spot" so-
lution was entirely impracticable and unenforceable. From stand-
point of future it would be much better to retain a reasonably de-
fensible line in Vietnam behind which there would be no (repeat no)
enclaves of Viet Minh and do all possible behind that line to.
build up effective Vietnamese Government and defense. They had no
(repeat no) intention of "any immediate surrender of Haiphong"
which in any event must remain under thelr control for a consider-
able period for purely military reasons to effect evacuation of
French Union Forces from the north. However, if, as appeared
likely, choice was giving Viet Minh an enclave in south in ex-
change for French enclave in Haiphong, they thought it preferable
to give up Haiphong. He said no (repeat no) French parliament
would approve conditions which the US had laid down for its inter-
vention, and French had no (repeat no) choice but made the best
deal they could, obtaining as strong position as possible in sovth.
Chauvel understood fully we would probably not (repeat not) be >
able to publicly associate ourselves with such a solution, but he
hoped that when 1&6 came time to put 1t to the Vietnamese the US
would consider it possible very discreetly to let the Vietnamese
‘know that we considered it best that could be obtained under the
circumstances and our public disassociation would not (repeat not)
operate so as to encourage Vietnamese opposition. Johnson revlied
he did not (repeat not) see how it would be possible for us to do
this, and in any event he would of course have to see what the so-
lution was. Crauvel said that such a solution as partition should
come as no (repeat no) surprise to thé Vietnamese as Bul Loc nadq—

sonctine apo Indicated to DeJeanthsre had been conversations between

Vietnazese and Viet Minh in which Viet Minh had made 1t clear that
only two alternatives were coalition government or partition. ~~~

ee ad Beret eirs

ery unrealistic, unreasonable,

= - = = a a ee oe
Chauvel said Ngo Dinh and Diem ars “7
and would orchably prove to be "difficults".

+

Chauvel said the Line French had in mind had been made avilable
to US defenss representatives at some five-power talks, tit was
vague abcut time and place. He referred to it as "line of the
chalk cliffs", which he said was defensible position running from

oss Vietnam and Laos. to the Mekong. Undersatr’ this is
gnoly 19 parallel running from vicinity of Dong soi to
Thakbek. Replying to query, Chauvel said French Union Forces re-
moved from the north would be deployed along that line.

Chauvel said all indications were Mendes-France would succeed in
forming goveranenE next day or two and would probably himself as-
sume Foreign Minister post. Ssid he had been in .touch with Mendes-
France and had sent emissary to Paris this morning to brief him on
situution in Geneva. Chauvel said was anxious to show complete con-
4 Ah binulty of French effort here in Geneva and hoped there could be

_~*"" “another vestricted meeting tomorrow. Chauvel said, "“Under-ground
military talks" lazt night had been completely unproductive, Viet
lirh covlously taking strong line in view of French Government situa-

f eLOn. Sn eie
: GR: Lor /12 fg SMITH

Se a gd
* . *
- be . *
