Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

11. Plan for Logistic Support

The plan for logistic support would be the same under this
assumption as under the assumption that Chinese Communists inter-
vene (see paragraph 5 above) -- except for the last sentence of
paragraph 5.

12. Plan for Command Structure

Although the Allied Commander in Chief in Indochina should
be French, there must be a United States Deputy with sufficient
staff assistance to provide liaison with the French and coordi-
nate U.S. activities with the over-all operation. CINCPAC would
exercise command over all U.S. forces based in Indochina and
other forces assigned to him for operations in Indochina. In
addition, a U.S. Air Advisor would be provided the French Com-
mander in Chief for the purpose of advising him concerning the
air effort. This officer would have no command responsibilities
but would.be under the direction of the U.S. Deputy.

13. Plan for Training Native Troops

The plan for training native troops would be the same under
this assumption as under the assumption that Chinese Communists
intervene (see paragraph 7 above).

14, Plan for World-Wide Military Aid

a. Initially, there would be no requirement for additional
material and equipment over and above current IDAP for the
French and other allied forces in Indochina. MDA programs,
however, would require augmentation within approximately
6 months to provide equipment and support necessary to

_ equip initially and maintain a total of 3 new ROK-equivalent
Associated States' divisions. Thereafter, increased MDA pro-
grams would be required to support additional Associated States'
divisions as developed, The maximum number of such divisions
probably would not exceed 20.

b. All other military assistance should proceed as
currently programmed.

c. Current programs for equipping and modernizing
U.S. forces must not be curtailed as a result of any of
the foregoing.

hoe

TOP SECRET
