————
ah he)

bina

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
-2- #SECTO 557, July 3, 8 -p.m., from Geneva.

French forces withdrawing from Ankhe which’ is in this general
area). Kuznetsov suggested French and Viet Minh might examine
area between fourteenth and eighteenth parallel and exchange
views aS to specific areas of particular interest to each party.
Chauvel stated this could not (repeat not).be considered and
repeated position regarding line French have already offered.

Chauvel's talk with Dong took place this morning at residence
of Chinese Communist delegation. There was an exchange of
views about control and particularly regarding prior agreement
to accept decisions or recommendations of international com-
mission. Dong stated that he would consider this further. He
is aware that French, British and Soviet delegations are work-
ing on specific proposals (SECTO 553). pe

Chauvel reports that he spoke most firmly to Dong regarding
military discussions. He said French have accepted Viet Minh
proposal that Viet Minh receive Tonkin area, including Capital, >
but that further Viet Minh proposal for demarcation line is
unacceptable. Chauvel reiterated in strongest terms fact that
French proposal for demarcatica line just north”’of Dong Hoi

. would be acceptable to conference and would thus eliminate danger

of extension of war. (Chauvel stated to Bonsal that of course
French would have to hold Haiphong and adjacent zones for con-
siderable period.)

Dong raised question of Viet Minh troops and sympathizers in
area south of Faifo. Chauvel stated he assumed regular troops
would be evacuated and others would return to their villages.
He said that presumably thére would be no (repeat no) objec-
tion to any persons desiring to do so removing to Viet Minh
controlled territory. (Bonsal expressed interest and empha-
Sized United States view this subject as set forth paragraphs
of aide memoire contained Department telegram 4853. )

Dong endeavored to raise question of eventual political © -ttlement,

but Chauvel stated that in present discussions must be limited
to military matters and reaching of armistice. He stressed
purpose of present conversation is to make arrangements for
removal from Tonkin of 300,000 Franco-Vietnamese troops. He
said that French have no (repeat no) aggressive military: in-
tentions, although obviously it is essential for French to re-
inforce their position both by regrouping their forces in delta
and by measures agreed on in Paris in order to insure so far as
possible, security of their troops. (He told Bonsal he did not
(repeat not) believe either French or Viet Minh would take ag-
gressive military action under present circumstances. )

Alluding to political matters, Chauvel took occasion to pofnt
out to Dong thst elections have not (repeat not) yet been held
in Communist China and that Dong would probably agree on need for
considerable period of pac and reconstruction before
G1 elections
: TOP SECRET
