Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

2-175, July 14, 9 p.m. (SECTION TWO OF TWO) from Paris

diametrically opposed to the intentions which you have ex-
pressed and which I have cited above. In a situation as
difficult as this only the unity of the western democratic
front, supported by the immense potential which we have in
common, can bring about the very military and strategic unity
“which we should seek eventually to establish in that part of the
world. ;

It is in this spirit that the French Government envisages, aside
from the assurances which the conference itself could furnish,
the establishment of a_collective guarantee by virtue of

which the signatories would declare themselves prepared to
intervene if, in Indochina, one of ‘the three states was a
srotlacot ageression.

I am fully conscious of the position of ‘the government of the
United States and It have noted with care the consequences

which it might imply; but for the reasons which TI have just
enumerated, I have the profound conviction that the common -
. interests of our two countries and of the three. Associated
states would be effectively defended only if you, yourself,

or the Undersecretary should represent in person your govern-
ent at Geneva.

If the situation should nevertheless evolve in a manner which
would confirm your fears, I engage myself, on behalf of France,
to make known publicly the conditions under which you have
acceded to my request.

UNQUOTE

D. Letter from Secretary to Nondoachronee. :
QuoTE | ;

- My Dear Mr.’ President:

I have received your letter of July 14 with reference to par-

ticipation by the United States in the final stages of the
. Indochina phase of the Geneva conference. ;

In the light of what you say and after consultation with
President Kisenhower, Tam glad to dé able to informyou—

that the President and I are asking the Undersecretary of State
General Walter Bedell Smith, to prepsre to return at nis-—— 7”
‘earliest convenience to Geneva to share in the work of the
conference on the basis of the understanding which we have
‘arrived at. :

I greatly appreciate the opportunity which we have had to’
Bu? ' confer together

AAI. SECRET

.
