85.

87.

89.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive -
Page

Dulles and Eden exchange frank end heated words over the
British pressuring France for a cease-fire. The U, 5S,
pode ace thet the tripartite position is poor, 2.¢.,
not "very impressive or cohesive” and that "the other
side" was worried -- but not sbout Britain, The U. S.
is also concerned over the affects on HATO, EDC and the
entire defense structure in Eurape. DULTE 13, 27 April

PGB pre Eaaies oes a thecal hex tae atin s od Breer ene ac eevee

Dulles mekes an estimate of rapidly moving developments:
(1) when Dien Bien Phu falls, the French Government will
change, probably to the left, committed to liquidate

“Chine. <A withdrawal of forces to defensible encleves

under U.S, protection with subsequent U.S, treining of

native armies is considered. Open intervention at this

point would be answered by Chinese intervention, (2) U.K.
attitude is one of increasing weakness, (3) "the decline
of France, the great weakness of Italy, and the consider-
able weakness of England create a situation where...we
must be prepared to take the leadership...." DULTE 21,
29 April Dsl Ai oaeig an row ee Ne Bet ete a cc ies Sot

In the event of a cease-fire in Indochina, the JCS é
recommend that shipment of U. S, military aid under

MDAP be immediately suspended and the entire progrom

of aid to Indochina be re-examined. JCS Memorandum

for the Secretary of Defense, .30 April 19 GMa vececnereeeeeens 399

The Intelligence Advisory Committee concludes that the
fall of Dien Bien Phu would have far-reaching and ad-
verse repercussions, but would not sisnal the collepse
of the French Union political and-:military situetion in
Indochina, nor would it substantially alter relative
military capapilities of French end Viet Minh forces.
The French Union could retain control of the cities
though shere would be a serious decline in the Viet-
namese will to continue the war. NIE 63-54, 30 April

EE TE AER. irl nL Ula Sp ert 8) SRR, ON Te
Major General Thomas J, H. Trapnell, former Chief of
MAAG, Indochina comments in his debriefing on the French
Situation in Indochina. His comments cover in detail
the strategic position of Indochina, the government and
its prosecution of the war, the performance of MDAP sup-
ported forces, the objectives of the opposing forces,
the organization and tactics of both the French and
Viet Minh forces. In Trepnell's view, few of the eims
of the Navarre concept are progressing satisfactorily.
"Dien Bien Pau is not only enother Ne Sen, but ae grave

xiv : TOP SECRET - Sensitive

