Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ne Pe ee

departments. The arrangements for furnishing logistic
support to the ROKA division would undoubtedly involve
numerous difficulties;

h. It would add to the complications and difficulties
of French command relations in Indochina.

i. It would be difficult to’explain and justify to the
American public the transfer of a ROKA division to Indo-
china while still requiring the retention of United States
ground forces in Korea. In all probability, serious crit-
icism by the American public would ensue;

j- The governments allied with us in Korea would experi-
ence similar difficulties, and this would impose additional
strains upon our relations with our Allies in Korea;

k. The situation would, in all likelihood, be widely
exploited by Soviet bloc propaganda as a case of United
States employment of hapless oriental puppets for the
benefit of the white imperialists;

i. <A ROKA division committed in Indochina would be
fighting a type of warfare entirely new to it, under con-
ditions of climate and terrain completely foreign to its
previous experience, and without the accustomed United
States advisors at hand. It would lack the incentive of
fighting in the defense of its homeland. If under these
conditions the performance of the division were poor or
indifferent, the reputation of United States training
methods would suffer accordingly;

m. The language barrier would be a considerable obstacle.

10. In the light of all of the foregoing, the Joint Chiefs
of Staci conclude that, from a military point of view and hav-
ing due regard for the principal political and psychological
factors having military implications, the transfer of a ROKA
division to Indochina at this time would not be in the best
interests of the United States. Therefore the Joint Chiefs of
Staff consider that while President Rhee should be commended
by our Government for his determination to combat communist
aggression in Asia even outside the borders of Korea, he should
be told that we do not consider that the transfer of a ROKA
division to Indochina at this time would be in the best in-
terests of the Free World and therefore that we request he not
make a formal offer to the Laotian Government.

262

eS
wd atts j

5
