Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

 ~2- 4841 June 14, 5 p.m., from Paris.

wrongly, US would be blamed by French public opinion for hav-
ing built up French hopes of intervention and then for having
failed in the crisis. The result could well be a neutralist—
government in France that would reduce French military commitments
to NATO and would, at the same time, be completely intransi-
geant on question of German rearmament. Such a government ,
would also, in‘all probability, make a strong effort to streng-
then relations with the Soviet Union and to recreate the war-
time Franco-USSR alliance in order to prevent German rearmna-

ment.

From this distance, I cannot judge what the effect of such
French actions would be on American public opinion and particu-
larly on our Congress, but I suspect that it might lead to an
irresistible demand for the recall of some, if not all, of

our troops from Europe, which, in effect, would mean the end

of the North Atlantic Alliance followed eventually by the iso-
lation of the Western hemisphere. ! =
5. %In view of these very serious and grave dangers which we
will run if we allow the French to be defeated militarily “in

the Delta, and if my assumption in paragraph 2 above is correct,
I recommend that you give serious consideration to promptly
inforting the French that because of elther (A) the deteriora-
tion of the wilitary situation in Indochina or (B) the reluc-
-€ance of the ANZUS powers_to take action, or both, the Presi-
“dent is no longer prepsred to request military intervention
from the Congress even if the French should now fully meet our
conditions. White sucht action on our part would hasten what
now appears to be the inevitable loss of Vietnam and might
cause a certain additional temporary loss of face for the US,

it would put the French on notice that they should promptly
accept the Viet Minh armistice terms and thus would save the

French Expeditionary Corps from possible military disastér.
-In the event of a withdrawal from Indochina under such ¢ reum-
stances, I would not foresee any serious or long term rever-—
cussions on France's position in the North Atlantic Alliance.
If we allow the French to continue to fight in the false hope
that in the event of a crisis in the Delta, they may get JS
military assistance, the best we can hope for is to delay the
Communist conquest of Vietnam by a few months, while we risk
the very existence of the North Atlantic Alliance. ~~

Fron my viewpoint here in Paris, the possibility of a few
months delay in the Communist takeover of Indochina does not
seem at all commensurate with the risk of the possible collapse
of the defense of Western Europe. oe ‘

6. While
. % 5 5 is
