Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

volunteers. These units are diluted nearly 59 percent by native Indochinese.
The Associated States Forces are composed of varieties of native Vietnamese,
Laotians and Cambodians. The whole effect is that of a heterogeneous force
among whom even basic communication is difficult. Troops require a variety
of clothe sizes and diets. They have different religious customs, folkways
and mores. They vary in their capacity for different tasks and terrain.
Logistically, a great problem exists in the support of such troops.

On the other hand, the Rebels are mostly Vietnamese recruited largely from
the hardy stocks of Tonkin and Annam. They are a truly homogenous army whose
capabilities and requirements remain more or less consistent.

The MDAP equipment furnished the French Air Force of Indochina has converted
it into a modern air arm capable of performing its combat mission in a highly
satisfactory manner. It is an effective offensive or defensive combat weapon,

the full potential of which has not been realized.

NATIONAL MILITARY SERVICE

a. French Forces: All French Army personnel in Indochina are serving in
the Regular Army. The draftee in France is not required by law to serve in
Indochina, However, he may volunteer for such duty. The period of service in
Indochina was formerly 24 months, but due to a shortage of replacements, the
period currently is extended to 27 months. French personnel receive substantial
increases in pay for service in Indochina.

be Vietnamese Forces: The original law which drafted man for military
service required all physically fit males to undergo a period of service for
60 days. Until April 1953, this law was not strictly enforced. In April, it
became, with minor changes, the basis for the ordinance drafting 40,000 men for
duty with Kinh Quan battalions. Personnel are inducted into the army for the
duration. They are selected on the basis of their family situation. Single
men are taken first. A man enlisting for the Resular Army is taken on a. trial
basis for one year. A t the end of one year, and if his service has proven
satisfactory, he can reenlist for a period of one, two, three or four yerrs.
Recently, the draft laws have been more vigorously enforced to eliminate draft
dodging. ;

INTER-SERVICE BALANCE OF FORCES IN INDOCHINA

While the majority of resources are devoted to ground operations, the
following factors must be considered:

a. The enemy has no air forces or naval forces other than junks and sampans.
b. Friendly ground forces maintain a large proportion of river squadrons and lig
aviation units ;
410

TOP SECRET
