Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

culture, religion, ethnic origins, philosophy or political goals. Therefore, a
compromise position has been reached in which the principal state of Viet Nam,
combining the former protectorates of Annam and Tonkin with the ex-colony of
Cochin China, has entered into a loose state of alliance with the lesser states
of Laos and Cambodia, and with France. This federation is called the French
Union. The exact relationship of each autonomous state to France has as yet
not been completely determined. This indecision is, moreover, complicated by
natural rivalries existing among the states, even extending to political tribal
sroups within the states.

The topography of Indochina is varied and consists of extensive mountains,
jungles, rivers, canals amd major deltas. A remarkable compartmentation results.
Military operations in a given area may be conducted with almost complete disre-
gard of the situation in Ghe adjacent compartment. While essentially the ground
war presently is the dominant military activity, great potentials in amphibious,
naval and air warfare by French Union Forces exist which should be exploited
increasingly. Poor internal communications and 1,599 miles of coastline are
factors dictating the advisability of utilizing more effectively the combat power
of the combined arms.

The political situation in France and Indochina requires a complicated
system of military administration. Four national armies comprise the French
Union Ground Forces. The French Far East Territorial Force, numbering roughly
i million troops, equals the combined totals of the three indigenous armies,
of which only that of Viet Nam may be considered as significant. Military
responsibility is being delegated to the Associated States to the degree that
their state of military development and capabilities so warrant. The pentalateral
agreement of 23 December 1950 is the authority for existing relationships, The
United States is a signatory to this document which extends MDAP into Indochina.
Significantly, the conflict in Indochina has not been “internationalized" such
as in Korea. Of the Fremch Union partners, only France is a member of the United
Nations.. France has specifically opposed UN intervention on the presumption that
its control of the Union would eventually be weakened by UN participation. On
the enemy-side, the rebel army of 300,000 troops could not be supported ines iaks
the substantial aid presently provided by Red China.

GOVERNMENT OF INDOCHINA }

The prosecution of the war against the Viet Minh in Indochina is a joint
responsibility of the sowereign governments of Viet Nam, Cambodia, Laos and
France, under the leadership and direction of the latter, The local representative
of the French Government is the Commissioner General, M. De Jean. He represents
M. Mare Jacquet, French Minister of State, in charge of relations with *he
Associated States. The Ministers of the Associated States, the French .ommissioner
General and the military Commander in Chief, Lt General Henri Navarre, prescribe
the conduct of the war. Existing protocols define the degree of military control
enjoyed by the Commander in Chief over the armed forces of the individual
Associated States. Essentially, the French exercise operational control over
all forces in strategy amd tactics. Each of the Associated States maintains a
Chief of Staff and a General Staff who are primarily concerned with recruiting,
training, personnel actions and limited logistical activities. The long range
program envisages a progressive turnover of responsibilities to the Associated
States, although a requirement exists that adequate coordinating powers be vested
in the hands of the French for many years to come.

Lov

TOP SECRET
