Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

z 7 . =
Paige f° TOP SHCRSP

DULTE 9, April 26, 9 p.m.; fro a Geneva.

general cease- Peles lacking any--control or satoguards would -
make it impossible for Fre Sach Union forces to resuns Plenving
once cease-fire established, Bidault said that the “Beanch
Governwent had queried French High Command in Indochina and

had received a reply that there would either have to be a Pinal
cease-fire or further reenforcetents would have to be sent %o
Indochina during the conference. ,

As indicative of Bidault's continuing courage, he said that .
when he saw Molotov tomorroy he Intended to stand on Lenielts
statement of March 5 and atbempy to dray Molotoy out without

“ceding ground himself and without getting involved in detaile
dis cussions of substance on an Indochina settlement.

rived with instructiona actively to
ate ca ee tg Z i,
tb any settlement which tlt POSULt

jin my judgment, Eden has ar
encoureges French into almos'
[in cessation hostilities in Indochina. My guess-is that behind
this lies British fear that if Pignting continues, ‘Wwe Will in
one way or another becomes inv ived, shoreby enhancing risk
Chinese intervention and. possibllicy furtha? expansion of yar.
This estimat te of mine is confirmed by fact ‘that Chauvel told
‘Vactive thur that French believe Eden's instructions are to press

nN
2
u

i,

actively for a cease-fire.

‘I made clear to Bidault privately that we would have no (repeat
no) part in settlement at Geneva of indocnina war whieh con-
‘stituted surrender of Indochina to Communlsts , and that Francs
has better chance by cae on rather than by attenoted with-
drawal which would be under ost dirficult conditions. I in-
tend to ses Eden alons tor Hen Horning to talk with extrame
bluntness to him expressing my dismay that British are apparently
encouraging French tn diréction surrender “ynich LS: an ees
not (repeat not) only with our interest bus what I conceiv
theirs to be.

“

AVL + ‘TOP SECRET
