Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TAD CEPRIT
er a att ee

. a os

i ee | Wi Pie

Communist China. A UN action is not deeimabie. Unilateral intervention
(Alterns. A or C) might be politically difficult at home and abroad.)

_ qd. When and under what circumstances should the decision to inter—
vene be taken and | earried ini into effect?

(The report says - par. 7-c, page 7 ~- “on balance, it appears that
the U.S. should now reach a decision whether or not to intervene with com-
bat forces, if that is necessary to save Indo-China from Communist control
and, tentatively, the form and condition of such intervention." The real
issue, however, in light of the French request for urgent help at Dien
Bien Phu, is that the Council must decide whether it is essential to in-
tervene now with little or no time to (1) work out arrangements with the
French (including acceptance of conditions, command arrangements, etc.),
(2) condition public and Congressional opinion - intervention may involve
our drafting men for Indo-China where the French have never yet sent a
conscript — and (3) try to prepare a regional type arrangement. Decision
to act later may take care of these difficulties but might come too late
to save Dien Bien Phu.)

COMMENTS

4, In reaching any decision the Council should affirmatively decide that
regardless of the numbers or types of U.S. military forces initially involved
once the U.S. physically intervenes we must be prepared to expend whatever. re-
sources are necessary to secure victory. Involved are increased risks of Chi-
nese Communist intervention or general war, steps to prepare the U.S. to meet
these increased risks, and reversal of plans to reduce the size of U.S. armed
forces.

5. The views of the Service Secretaries and the Joint Chiefs of Staff
should be available at the Armed Forces Policy Council meeting at 11:30 a.m.,
6 April.

6. [An associated problem is that the U.S. has accepted an invitation
to meet with the French on 12 April 1954 to exchange views on Indo-China,. pre-
paratory t6 the Geneva Conference. It is important that the U.S. representa-—
tion at this meeting be at a high level (at least Mr. Robertson), with Depart=
ment of Defense pes SG shee J

RECOMMENDATIONS
7. It is recommended that you:

a. Agree that the U.S. must intervene if necessary to avoid the loss
of Indo-China, but advocate that no steps be left untaken to get tl
French to achieve a successful conclusion of the war on their own.

b. Support Alternative B (regional grouping with maximum Asian par-—
ticipation) as the best of the alternatives for intervention, pebicce to
discussion in the AFPC.

c. Base your decision as to whether immediate intervention at Dien
Bien Phu should be approved on the results of discussion’in the AFPC.

.

362

ee |
‘

)

tJ
cs
Pry
ai)

Pry

