Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

T Np CeOpRrye -

Uir VWELUPLL i

United States objectives in Southeast Asia, a continuation of fighting
with the objective of seeking a military victory appears as the only
alternative in Indochina. (JCS memorandum, TAB A).

Conclusions

If the Communists follow the same tactics they employed at Panmunjom,
they will be prepared for a long and difficult negotiation. The French
will find it almost impossible to withstand presures for a weakening of
their position (the Laniel proposal) and will most likely give way under
these pressures. Further, the French, once engaged in a negotiation, will
of necessity be required to seek every possible means of settlement.

The United States should not join with the French in any Indochina
negotiations at Geneva unless there is prior French commitment not to ac-
cept terms leading directly or indirectly to the loss of Indochina. This
commitment should be positive and definite, for it would be difficult, if
not impossible, for the United States to disassociate itself from the nego-
tiations once they had begun. Thus, if the negotiations result in a set-
tlement leading to the ultimate loss of Indochina, the United States would
have participated im this loss.

Recommendations
It is recommended that:

a. The United States adopt the position that it is highly improbable
that the Communist agreement could be obtained to a negotiated settlement
at Geneva which would be consistent with basic United States objectives in
Southeast Asia;

b. The United States position for Geneva be positive and definite
that we will agree to no settlement which would in any way compromise our
objectives with respect to Southeast Asia;

c. The French Government be informed of the United States position
(a and b above) at the earliest possible date;

d. Concurrently with informing the French of the United States posi-
tion, consideration should also be given to the following pressures to be
brought on the Freneh if circumstances dictate:

(1) If France through one means or another countenances a Com-
munist takeover in Indochina, it will mean far more than the end of
France's position in the Far East. Rather it will be a public ex-
hibition of France's inability to carry on any longer as an equal
member with the United States and the United Kingdom of the Big Three;

(2) The effect of abandonment would be so severe in North Africa
as to have serious repercussions not only on the French position
there, but also on the nature of the relationship between France and
the United States in that area;

TND-CEERIT Copy 2 of .2 ;
TOP fe a 6 ci PY Copies

386 Pagé..° of 3 > Papes
