Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

cae TOP SECRET 5

e~Son : Controf: 12206

od Rootd: April 29, 1954
FROM:Geneva 6:10 a.m.

Into ,
‘To: Secretary of State
NO: DULTE 21, April 29, 10 a.m. ;

EYES ONLY ACTING SECRETARY FOR PRESIDENT FROM SECRETARY.

Developments. have been so rapid and almost every hour so @
filled with high-level talks that evaluation has been dif- ee
ficult. My present estimates follov: pas
(1) Indochina: Delay in fall of Dien Bien Phu has resulted Die

in some French discounting of this development. Nevertheless, ~*~
it must be -assumed the French will not continue in any long-
range operation unless it will defeinitely relieve the strain
on French manpower in Indochina. Present French Government
holding on because their Parliament in recess and probably
no one eager to take over at this juncture. Bidault given
considerable discretion because present Cabinet cannot make
up its mind on any course. Therefore, we do not have anyone
on French side with whom we can make any dependable agree-
ments. After deputies return and Dien Bien Phu falls, there
may well be a change of government, probably to the left,
comnitted to liquidate Indochina. However, this is more
easily said than done and it is possible that as this fact
develops a French Government might be prepared to sit down
with us seriously and consider some joint program which is
something that so far they have evaded.

I do not know whether from military standpoint it would be
deemed feasible’ to end the scattering and exposure of mil-
itary forc’s for local political reasons and withdraw present
forces to defensible enclaves in deltas where they would have
US sea and air protection meanwhile retain enough territory
and enough prestige to develop really effective indigenous
army along lines suggested by O'Daniel. This might, I suppose,
teke .two yesrs and would require in large part taking over
training responsibility by US. Also full independence and
increased economic aid would probably be required to help
maintein friendly governments in ereas chosen for i ae ty

\

I.do not have any idea as to whether this is militarily feasinie 7

and Admiral Bavis inclines to view that it is not. However sie a
from politicals <r
ZLARDG ak
: et pnop Ofyg .
hes _ TOP SECRET REPRODUCTION FLO Tis
Cory, fF CLaAsgt Fit), "
PRO] SITED =
