Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
-2- 4766, June 9, noon from Paris

Paragraph 4. Wo difference. Schumann however pointed out the
great importance of this change of wording as "the end of hos-
tilities" could well be interpreted to mean a state of armistice,
whereas what was really meant was that troops should only be
withdrawn after peace had been established. The whole Viet Minh
effort has been to reach some sort of armistice that would force
the withdrawal of the French troops and leave the country to
them.

Paragraph 5. No difference. However, Schumann stated that he
had told Bidault prior to his interview with Under Secretary
that he felt that new language suggested by French was too broad
and that US would require more specific pledge. Bidault reported
that Schumann had guessed wrong as Under Secretary had seen no
(repeat no) difficulties in proposed language pointing out that
conditions named in new draft were inherent in sovereignty of
any great power, Bidault also reported Under Secretary had said
he would refer this language to Department for final decision.

Paragraph 6. No difference.

Schumann then stated that in view of meeting of minds between
Bidault and Under Secretary he was sure that with the possible
exception of new wording suggested in paragraph 5 of DULTE 156,
there were no (repeat no) political differences between us. He
then said that he had just received a very disturbing cable from
Bonnet. Before he could read it to me a call came through on
the telephone from Bonnet in which they talked further about the
same subject.

Subject is Valluy's negotiations regarding use of US Marines.
Valluy has reported to Pieven and Bonnet that it is very doubt-
ful if US would agree in any circumstances to sending a Marine
division to Indochina. I pointed out to Schumann that US re-
sponse on this subject had never been blanket pledge to use
Marines but had only stated that their use would not (repeat
not) be excluded provided an agreed upon war plan required their
presence. I further said that it would depend upon the war plan
which Valluy submitted as to whether or not our JCS would be con-
vineed that Marines should be committed. Schumann said he fully
understood this and would explain it further to Pleven, but no
emphasized crucial importance this matter.

Comment: As I pointed out in EMBTEL 4503 French military have
assumed that any war plan which was satisfactory to our JCS
would show necessity for the use of at least one Marine division.
While from our point of view this problem quite properly should
be judged on its military merits, we must realize that it also
has strong political aspects here and that French Parliament in
my Opinion will not (repeat not) in any circumstances vote to ask

for US

44068 545
TOP SECRET
