_ areas.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘operation against Cambodia, the defense of

Cambodia would require troops from other
French Union forces would retain the
capability to launch limited offensive opera-
tions before the full onset of the rainy season,
either in the Red River delta region or on the
coast of Annam.

14. The political consequences in Indochina
of the fall of Dien Bien Phu would be con-
siderably more adverse than the strictly mili-
tary consequences, although the two are in-
terrelated. The defeat would increase the
tempo of deterioration in the over-all French

Union position in Indochina, particularly in

Vietnam. The principal political consequences
would be: (a) a major blow to French prestige

-among the Indochinese, and an increased

.

‘grams;
‘chinese relations, partly as a result of in-

‘conviction on their part that the French were

unable to protect them against the Viet Minh;
(b) a serious’ decline in French and Indo-

‘chinese will to continue the war, and in par-

ticular a further decline in popular support
in Vietnam for Vietnamese military pro-
(c) exacerbation of French-Indo-

ereased Indochinese suspicions that the
French will “sell out” to the Viet Minh; (d)
@ sharp increase of “fense sitting’? among
politically conscious groups previously dis-
posed to support the Vietnam Government;

“and (e) a sharp increase, particularly among
. Vietnamese, of covert support of the Viet

Minh. However, we believe that a gencral
collapse of French and native governmental
authority during the next two or three months

would be prevented by the continued exist-

ence of organized French Union forces and

SECRET . miko

the hope that the US might intervene in In-

dochina. z

15. The political effect in Laos would probably
be similar to that of Vietnam. However, the
Laotians would probably display a greater dis-
position than the Vietnamese to stand by the
French and to continue the war effort.

16. The political effect on Cambcdia would be
extremely uncertain. The internal sectirity
of Cambodia and a certain minimum stability
might be maintained, but Cambodia's vulnera-
bility to future Viet Minh pressure would in-
crease.

17. The Viet Minh would make every effort to
make political capital of their victory at Dien
Bien Phu. They would concentrate on in-
creasing the sense of hopelessness in the Asso-
ciated States, and would seck to convince the
Indochinese that the triumph at Dien Bien
Phu signalled their imminent “deliverance’’
from colonial rule by fellow countrymen.
They would intensify current efforts to en-
hance the status of the so-called “People’s
Governments” of Laos and Cambodia.

18. We believe that although the fall of Dien
Bien Phu would not immediately lead to col-
lapse of the French Union position in Indo-
china, it would accelerate the deterioration
already evident in the French Union military
and political position there. If this trend
were not checked, it could bring about a
collapse of the French Union position during
the latter half of 1954. It snould be empha-
sized that this estimate does not consider the
repercussion of major decisions in France or

‘Geneva and elsewhere which are likely to have

a decisive effect on the situation ir Indochina.
