Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

period of military operations, the Commu-
nists would almost certainly agitate and prop-
agandize for a “cease-fire” and political settle-
ment, which would preserve the Communist
position and prospects.

Soviet Reaction

7. In the assumed situation, the USSR prob-
ably would estimate that the US action,
though limited to air and naval forces, would
considerably increase the risks of unlimited
war between the US-and Communist China.
The USSR would probably prefer that such
a war not develop out of the Indochina situa-
tion. Nevertheless, the USSR would assure
Communist China of continuing military
‘assistance. The USSR would also give com-
plete diplomatic and propaganda support to
~ Communist China and the Viet Minh regime.

“ REQUIREMENT 2
To estimate Chinese Communist and Soviet
‘reactions to the success of the operations en-
visaged in the assumptions above (i.e., to the
‘impending effective destruction of the Com-
munist forces in Indochina) .4

_*The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Department of
the Army, believes that the results in this re-
quirement could not be achieved by the unbal-
anced-and insufficient forces envisaged.

*The Director of Intelligence, USAF, believes that
this paragraph should read as follows:
“Communist China will probably not choose

_ knowingly any course of action likely to expose
its fundamental national strengths in war with
a major power. However, we believe that Com-
munist China's strength for conducting various
kinds of warfare is such, and the motives and
judement of its leaders are such as to make
Communist China’s courses of action danger-

.

TOP SECRET 3”

Chinese Communist Reaction

&. As stated-in Paragraph 1, we believe that
the chances are somewhat better than even
that the Chinese Communist, in the assumed
situation, would intervene militarily to pre-
vent the destruction of the Viet Minh. If
they decided to do so, we believe that the
exact timing and nature of their action would
depend on various factors, but principally on
the scope and character of the US/allied oper-
ations they were seeking to counter.’ ®

Soviet Reaction
9. In this assumed situation, the USSR would

probably continue to support the Chinese

Communists. If the Chinese Communists
intervened openly in support of the Viet Minh,
the USSR would rapidly increase military
assistance to Communist China. The Soviet
diplomatic and propaganda campaigns against?
the US would continue full-scale, and the
USSR might ask the UN to condemn the us
as an aggressor. Thinly veiled threats of So-
viet involvement in the fighting and refer-
ences to the Sino-Soviet Treaty of 1950 would
multiply.

ously unpredictable under outside pressure of
any appreciable magnitude.”

*The Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint
Stafl, believes that paragraph 8 should :
follows: aes

“Communist China would conclude from th
assumed impending destruction of Communist
forces in Indochina, by limited forces employing
nuclear and conventional weapons, that jts open
military intervention would invite an extensi 1
of similar action to Communist China ane
would, therefore, probably not intervene ae
tavily.” a mili-

TOP SECRET

v66
