Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Ul SECRI 'f

NS low a ee

7. The rice, tin, rubber, and oil of Southeast Asia
and the industrial capacity of Japan are the essential
elements which Red China needs to build a monolithic
military structure far more formidable than that of
Japan prior to World War II. If this complex of military
power is permitted to develop to its full potential, it
would ultimately control the entire Western and South--
western Pacific region and would threaten South Asia and
the Middle East.

8. Both the United States and France have invested
heavily of their resources toward the winning of the
struggle in Indochina. Since 1950 the United States has
contributed in excess of 1.6 billion dollars in providing
logistic support. France is reported to have expanded,
during the period 1946-1953, the equivalent of some 4.2
billion dollars. This investment, in addition to the
heavy casualties sustained by the French and Vietnamese,
will have been fruitless for the anti-Communist cause,
and indeed may redound in part to the immediate benefit
of the enemy, if control of a portion of Indochina should
now be ceded to the Communists. While the additional
commitment of resources required to achieve decisive
results in Indochina might be considerable, nevertheless
this additional effort would be far less than that which
would be required to stem the tide of Communist advance
once it had gained momentum in its progress into South~- —
east. Asia.

9. If, despite all United States efforts to the con-
trary, the French Government elects to accept a negotiated
settlement which, in the opinion of the United States,
would fail to provide reasonably adequate assurance of the
future political and territorial integrity of Indochina,
it is considered that the United States should decline to
associate itself with such a settlement, thereby preserving
freedom of action to pursue directly with the governments
of the Associated States and with other allies (motably the
United Kingdom) ways and means of continuing the struggle
against the Viet Minh in Indochina without participation
of the French. The advantages of so doing would, from the
military point of view, outweigh the advantage of maintain-—
ing political unity of action with the French in regard to
Indochina.

10. It is recommended that the foregoing views be conveyed
to the Department of State for consideration in connection
with the formulation of a United States position on the Indo-
chine problem for the forthcoming Conference and for any

269

Sm Te Rr
