Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET Page 2 of
Despatch No. 276
From SAIGON

Certain recommendations have already been diseussed with
the Government of Viet-Nam (GVN). Some of these actions have
already been agreed to by the GVN (e.g., transfer of the Civil
Guard to the GVN Department of Defense and creation of a na-
tional Internal Security Council), and others are under study
by the GVN (e.g., establishment of a military operational com-
mand for counter-insurgency operations, reorganization of military
regions, and implementation of a firm military chain of command).
In addition there are other actions which will shortly be taken up
with the GVN such as establishment of internal security councils
at every governmental level, implementation of proposals for the
establishment of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency
(previously discussed several times with the GVN, but-to be pushed
again) and creation of a village level communications system.

There are, however, certain actions which involve major
expenditures and will not be discussed with the GVN prior to
Washington approval. The most important of these latter actions
is the proposed 20,000 man increase in the size of the RVNAF
which was presented for Washington consideration in Embassy tele-
gram 1151, December 4, I maintain reservations concerning the
proposal to increase the force level up to 20,000 additional
RVNAF troops, purely to meet the threat in Viet-Nam and still
believe more calculated risks should be taken by using more of
the forces in being to meet the immediate and serious guerrilla
terrorist threat. I recognize, however, that additional well-
trained forces in being in this area are probably now justified
from purely US interest point of view in order to meet growing
bloc threat SEA represented by the Soviet airlift in Laos. (See
Embassy Telegram 1231, December 29.)*

*MAAG Comments:

The MAAG position on the need for a 20,000 force increase
continues as reported in MAAG telegrams to CINCPAC (CHMAAG 1579,
27 Dec 60 and CHMAAG 1620, 29 Dec 60) which were also forwarded -
to Washington.

a. The military requirement for this force increase
to accomplish the current mission had been demonstrated in MAAG

. considered opinion as early as August 1960, This force increase

was badly needed before the beginning of the Soviet airlift in
Laos. The recent Viet Minh overt aggression against Laos merely
reinforces this requirement.

b. The four divisions in the North in I and II Corps
areas are committed in anti-guerrilla and static guard duty to
an extent which not only cuts down their capability to resist
overt attack and thus magnifies the risk to a militarily unaccep-
table degree, but also prohibits required training to adequately

SECRET
1358
