Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

; SECRET
discipline, Furthermore, French assessment of the nature and magni~
tude of the communist threat posed against U.S, ebjectives through the
“ Neo "Lao Hak Xat.(ex-Pathet Lao) make it questionable whether or not ~-
Trench military advice and training of the Lao National Army will serve \
‘our best interests. We are now studying the practicability of a new ap-
proach to the French Government to bring French policy in Laos into
ageecment with our own and British views on the nature of the communist
threat and to indute amore cooperative attitude on the part of the French
representatives in Vientiane, At the samé time a U.S. MAAG cannot
be established because of the present desire of the U.S. to respect the
Geneva Agreement prohibition against the introduction of foreign military
personnel, This means that U.S, financial and maicrial assistance to the
Lao Army ae not used to maximum advantage fox Laos and the U.S. As
_an interim solution, consideration is being given to furnishing Filipino
civilian trainers to the Lao Army with PEO (Civilian MAAG) assistance.
Repre esentations to the French concerning their training EE
appear to be an a ee pont necessity. .

ad
'

“Vi FEDERATION OF MALAYA -

A sU sald EVALUATION

.

, : 28. The Pivetamant has shown continued detex mination to fight
‘communist terrorism and subversion, and has succeeded in maintaining’
<a str ong, Stable administration and 2 considerable degree of inter-racial
harmony. However, recent local election returns indicate some “weaken=
ing of support for this basically pro-Western government as under lying
oe racial tensions manifest themselves in a drift toward socialist and ulira~ .
nationalist opposition parties, This ¢ leteri joxation of the government's
pols tical strength, particularly among Chinese and Indian voters supporte °
ing neutr alis*~oriented parties favoring recognition of Communist China
‘and the Malay Communist Party, could neutralize the progress made in ,
achieving U.S. objectives in Matava - —- i

“3, MAJOR OPERATING PROBLEMS FACING THE UNITED STATES

29, Requests for Economic Assistance, As of April 30 a total of |
$19, million in jn applications had been received by the DLF from the Federa-~
-fion Government, Of the two projects submitted, one is under serious —
consideration, the deep-w ater port facilities project for $10.9 million;
‘the other, a teaching ues spital, has been rejected. ~

ees ee “
