Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

pF. ' theiv combat cavabilities since the Geneva Conference
| of 1954.

b. -Subdversion, In most countrics of Southeast Asia
a tarcat also arises fron the existence of extensive
local Coimwnist capabilitics for all typcs of subversive
activitics, ranging up to arucd insurrection. Addition-
ally, tne large overseas Chinese communities in South-
cast Asia offer a fertile field for subversion. Tne
weak internal. security systems of the Southcast Asian

ete Ft states make them bighly vulnerable to such activitics.

¢,. Communist Political and Economic Offensive.
At present overt agsrcssion and militant sudversion are
-Jess likely than an intensificd campaign of Coninunist
political, economic and cultural penetration in the
area. Tne political instability, economic backwardncss,
export problems, and extrene nationalisa of these coun- —
; - tries provide many opportunities for Communist exvloita-
tion by trade ana economic assistanes, conventional
. political and Giplomatic activity, and oxtensive
infiltration. Tais offensive now constitutes a threat
to U. S. interests more subtle and more difficult to
cope With tonan other tiuruats.

-

€

° ; 4, ‘United Statcs Role. Thu United States is likely to

i - ponain the only major outside source of power to counteract

-the Russian-Ciiinese Communist tarust inta Southcast Asia.

Tous, the retention of this areca in the free world will

--eontinue to aepend on the extent ana effectiveness of U. S.
support as well as on the local «fforts of the countries

: themselves. :

a. Political.: The underlying purposu of U. 8.
assistance in tac area is to hel» the non-Comnunist
countries. Gevelop more effective political orzanizations,
strengthen their intérnal administration and enlist
reater allegiance in bota urban and rural districts. In
part this purpose will De served by progranus for military
and ecconowic aid dealt with peiow. In part it will
require an intensification of present programs for

Vee peer

(

ee ea es eee

: training competent Asian aanagerial and technical

H personnel. And in part new approaches, both governmental

: ang private, will be needed. These should not con-

: centrate exclusively at the national level, but should

i incluce activities designed to stren then and vitalize

; jndigenous traditions and institutions and to nave an ™

nae inact on village life, rural society, and educational
systens.

a NSC 5512/1 TOP SECRET

te a = - ae cele ee ee ee ee ee
eo ” an ee pes «ee ea Beers eee ser ;
ee eee ~oee oy r
