in

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
OPERATIONS COORDINATING BOARD

February 10, 1960

mas GC SPECIAL REPORT ON SOUTHEAST ASIA (NSC 5809)
mit oe oF (Approved by the President, April 2, 1958)
(Period Covere od From August 12, 1959, through Februasy 16, 1950}

oe

} ADEQUACY OF U.S, POLICY IN MAINLAND SOUTHEAST ASIA (NSC s809),

a6 The validity and implementation of U. S. Policy on Southeast Asia
has been appraised and evaluated in the light of operating experience, -
is recommended that the National Security Council review those parts

‘the policy which pertain to Cambodia and Laos, The basis for this ci

mendation is as follows:

Cambos dia (Paragraphs 39 through 42)

2. The major difficulty is encountered in the present wording and con«
text of paragraph 39. Owing to the evolution of political conditions in

.Carmbodia over the past 18 months, this paragraph appears misleading in

that it does not provide guidance for dealing with Prince Sihanouk and the
political strength he represents, but rather implies that we should encourage
non-communist elements whether or not they are opposed to Sihanouk. The
latter has emerged with added power and prestige from the abortive coup
plots and subsequent subversive activities mounted against hiro jn 1959 by
ostensibly nntiecommunist elements, In the process many of these elexm.e: rf

“svere climinated and the revelation of € thelx real or fancied association cea

the United States and other free world countries underraincd Cambodian
confidence in U, S, motives and became an obstacle to the pursuit of our
objectives. Moreover, Sihanouk has given further evidexce of political
astutencss in the domestic arena, has displayed increased aleviness to
communist subversion, and has shown no inclination to tolerate any challenge
to.his pre-eminence, Policy guidance, therefore, should be directed coa~
spicuously and specifically at the problem of dealing with Sihanouk, by ail

‘-odde the major single = .ctor in Cambodia and the principal target of U. S&.

poli iCYe

3. The other courses of action for Cambodia (paragraphs 40 through 42
remain valid, but fail to teke into account the particulay forrns in which
certain general pr oblems are encountered in Cambodia, In re vising the
NSC paper, considex ‘ation should be given to the following additional p poinuc

. f . nc

SECRET:

I . fe 10
