Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET Page 2
LIMIT DISTRIBUTION Enclosure 1

Despatch: 264
From Saigon

which the Department of State believes would have beneficial affects if
adopted now in connection with the other measures you are planning. Apart
from the organizational changes proposed in the governmental and military
structure and those liberalizing schemes you have told me about -- such as
elections of youths to village councils and other progressive matters of this
nature -- we believe it would be helpful if you could also adopt the measures
outlined below. We, of course, recognize that security considerations impose
certain limitations on liberalization, but we believe that the political
situation requires certain calculated risks in order that the public and
world opinion will become convinced of the sincerity of the steps you are
takeing to evoke broad participation in your efforts to improve security and
develop the economy and institutions of Viet-Nam. It is our belief that the
liberalization schemes should be clear-out, effective, and of a broad nature
so that the impact of their announcement will have the desired beneficial effect
‘on the public here and abroad and will enhance the public support for your
regime. With this thought in mind, it is suggested that:

1. In connection with the excellent new method of having Ministers
defend their budgets before Assembly Committees, it would be advantageous
from a political and press point of view either to publicize these hearings
in full or at least to give fairly full minutes of these meetings to the
press.

2. As has already been suggested, it would be politically worthwhile
to authorize the Assembly to conduct investigations of any Department or
Agency, of the Government. While public hearings would be politically more
useful, closed hearings could be held providing the results of the investiga-
tions are made public in considerable detail.

3. While it is realized that it is not a simple matter to work out an
effective domestic press code, we believe it would be most beneficial to a
better understanding of the fruitful efforts being made by your Government
- on behalf of the people and a better appreciation of the many problems you
and your colleagues have to face, if the Assembly could adopt in the “ear
future a fairly liberal press code. If this cannot be accomplished : iortly,
the press should be encouraged to set up machinery to police itself. ‘Under
such a system the Government should only intervene if articles are flagrantly
dishonest, inaccurate, or favorable to the Communists. In case of a ‘reach
of the press code it might be better to require the paper to publish a full
retraction rather than confiscate the particular edition or suspend the
newspaper.

hk. I have already discussed with you our suggestions on ways and means
to have more favorable foreign press coverage. In this connection, the Depart-
ment of State believes that it is almost as important for your Government to
have favorable foreign press relations as it is to have diplomatic recognition
from friendly countries. The Department suggests that you continue to have
periodic press conferences such as those recently conducted by Mr. Thuan, that

SECRET
LIMIT DISTRIBUTION

1354
