Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

country’s decision to participate in such arrangements is
based on its own calculation of its best interests and does
not of itself constitute a claim for increased financial aid.
Where countries participate, measures to assure adherence
are desirable, normally including preferential treatment in
the fields of economic and military assistance as justified
by U. S. strategic objectives. Where new opportunities for
affiliation develop they should be encouraged. The United
States should, however, accept the right of each nation to
chooseits own path to the future, and should not exert
pressure to make active allies of countries not so inclined,
The genuine independence of such countries from Communism
serves U. S. interests even though they are not formally
aligned with the United States. The United States should
accordingly support and assist them so long as they remain
determined to preserve their own independence and are ac-
tively pursuing policies to this end,

III. OBJECTIVE

12. To prevent the countries of Southeast Asia from passing
into or becoming economically dependent upon the Communist bloc;
to persuade them that their best interests lie in greater coop-
erabion and stronger affiliations with the rest of the Free
World; and to assist them to develop toward stable, free,
representative governments with the will and ability to resist
Communism from within and without, and thereby to contribute
to the strengthening of the Free World.

IV. REGIONAL COURSES OF ACTION*

13. Support and assist the countries of the area on the
basis of their will and ability to defend and strengthen their
independence.

14, Respect each country's choice of national policy for
preserving its independence, but make every effort to demon-
strate the advantages of greater cooperation and closer
alignment with the Free World, as well as the dangers of
alignment with the Communist bloc.

15. Encourage the countries of Southeast Asia to cooperate
closely with each other on a basis of mutual aid and support,
and support indigenous efforts to develop regional associations
so long as they do not weaken SEATO or the spirit of resistance
to Communism. |

* The regional courses of action are not applicable to
Malaya and Singapore,

1087
NSC 5613/1
