Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

iy Sala a , Bo Sle a ts eer

Ir, BURMA = ae . ;

A sUMM AR x = LUATION

whee eet tee ne eee ee tee

12, There has been a significant, if modest improvement in the
position of the U.S. in Burma’ and in the attitudes and actions of the
Burmese Government as they bear on U,S, objectives. However, the
Soviet Union and Communist China have been able to continue thei
economic activities in Burma, even though, domestically, both com-
munism and Marxist ideology have received a sharp setback, On

+, January 29 Prime Minister Nu, with unanimous approval of the Anti-+
Fascist Peoples Freedom League (AF PFL) Executive Committee,

announced the Government Party's con aicrs disavowal of Marxism as its
puting poli. tidal philogephy. :

B. MAJOR OP! OP BERATING PROB LEN MS FACING THE UNITED S STATES

ESS Generals We necessarily aiterout to sottneagaare our as~
sistance programs to the political sensitivities and the technical deficien~.-
cies of the Burmese Government. However, difficulties in coping With

_ Burmese attitudes, which often fail to take account of MSP legislation
and ICA procedures, result in protracted and continual delays. While
.these disagreements thus far have been reconciled amicably, the consee

quent delays inevitably tend to ‘vitiate the favorable resulis we hope to
deri ive fromm assistance programs. .

, As a result there may be unfortunate contrast between our
seeming rigidity and the apparent flexibility of the communist bloc in
its economic and technical aid DRcerauze.

28 14, PL 480 Sales, The signing of a new PL 480 Sales Agreement:
with Burma has been delz ayed by Burmese Government requests fox
special treatment which though not inconsistent with the law requi: sd
repeated exceptions to established policies, The fact that the Burmese
Governracnt is aware that substantial concessions have been made in the

' PL 480 agreements With other countries, particularly Poland, har com- ~

licated these negotiations, Final agreement appears to be at hand,
Pp acer PE

15% Developraent Assis stance. An approach by the Burmese for a
new Development Assistance Loan in the amount of $75 million is antici«+
pated. Difficulties in developing projects on an acceptable basis under

the present $25 million loan portend inevitable difficulties in the use of the

DL fox financing future Burmese projects,

aS ae .,  (S8iGRIeT

nh

*
