Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

res ML SECRET

DISCUSSION. FP

“1. COMMUNIST INTENTIONS IN LAOS  °

7. We believe that the initiation of Communist
guerrilla warfare in Laos in mid-July was pri-
marily a reaction to a series of actions by the
Royal Lao Government which threatened

-. ‘drastically to weaken the Communist position ~

in Laos. For a period of about‘one year after
the November 1957 political agreements be-
tween the Laotian Government and the Pathet

Lao, the Communist controlicd party in:

*’ Laos—the Neo Lao Hak Zat—attempted to
“move by legal political competition toward
its objective of gaining control of Laos. The
Laotian Governm.... had taken counteraction
which checked this effort. Moreover, the US
had stepped up its activities to strengthen the
Laotian Government, notably through the de-
| cision to send military training teams, and
clearly was increasing its presence in Laos.
The Communist advance in Laos was losing
impetus. To the Communist world, the fu-
' ture probably appeared to be one-of increasing
political repression, declining assets, and a
strengthened anti-Communist position in the

, country. .

- 8. Hence we believe that the current crisis was
initiated mainly in order to protect the Com-
munist apparatus in Laos, to stop the trend
towards Laotian alignment with the US, and
to improve Communist prospects for gaining
contro! of the country. Judging by Commu-
nist propaganda and diplomatic representa-
tions, and by the scale of guerrilla activities
to date, it does not appear that the Commu-

’* nists expected by military action to overthrow

“the Laotian Government and seize control of
the country. They may have believed that
the government would be intimidated into
immediate concessions, restoring at least a
major part of the legal and political position
Which the Communists had enjoyed after the
1957 agreements between the Pathet Lao and
“the government. We think it more likely,
however, that the Communists expected a re-
newal of strife in Laos to alarm the world at
large and to produce a widespread demand for

tystoration of quiet, and that they hoped thus

‘to bring about through international action

a return of the International Control Com-
mission (ICC) to Laos. Under the 1CG the
Communists had enjoyed substantial advan-
tages, and they probably expected to enjoy
them again if the Commission returned.

‘9. Whatever their initial aims, the Commu-
nists undoubtedly were prepared to adapt
their tactics and their objectives to the devel-
oping situation, and even to press on towards
an overthrow of the government and control
of the country if the prospects for such ac-
tions developed favorably. They may also
have in mind, as a feasible intermediate aim,
the re-establishment of Communist control
over the provinces of Sam Neua and Phong
Saly, and possibly the formation of a rival
government in those areas as a springboard
for future subversive efforts,

10. The Chinese Communists probably have
certain interests in the present crisis in addi-
tion to these of North Vietnam.
Chinese Communist policy to oppose vigor-
ously the strengthening of anti-Communist
regimes in the area of their interest in Asia
and to resist the strengthening of the US posi-
tion anywhere on’ China’s periphery. The
Chinese Communists probably also wish to
demonstrate to Southeast Asian governments,
particularly the neutralist ones, that they can-
not turn toward the West without serious
risks. Although Peiping may well wish to
emphasize its importance on the world scene
and may regard the Laos crisis as useful for
tks purpose, this is probably no more than a
bonus effect.

11. Soviet interests in the current crisis in
Laos are more remote than those of Peiping
and Hanoi. The USSR probably views’ the
current actions of Hanoi and of the Commu-
nist guerrillas in Laos as!a reasonable applica-
tion of basic Communist revolutionary doc-
trine and in line with worldwide Communist
interests. It is probably willing to let Pei-
ping and Hanoi work out the details so long as
the situation does not appear to risk major
hostilities with the West. Moscow's propa-

SECRET

Ti. is basic to:

ee ge a ee ne EE ES EE Ee RE EA es Ne oe ene

5 paige arr ge pp ee ce fri fm Sed

fee ee re tee

ce ae ae ee et
