on

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
* - “ah

ES. Encourage the countries of Sout east Asia to cOOper=
ace closely with each other on a basis of mutual aid ana
support, aad support indigenous efforts to develop regional
associabion 18 so long as chey ado not weaken SEATO or the spirit
of resistance to Communism,

16. Participate actively in SEATO, and seek to develop
poth its military and non-rilitary aspects in a manner that
will convincingly demonstrate the value of SEATO as a regional
association, the usefulness of wnich extends beyond deterrence
of Commu expansion. Encourage limited participation of

2
cH a8
ist, non-SEATO Asian nations in certain SEATO

Par Recs
ActulVLULEsS, :

cae Encourage and supvort the spirit of resistance among

the peoples of Southeast Asia to Chinese Communist eggression
as well es to indigenous Commun 1ist insurrection, subversion,
ihe. = 6 i

‘
i

18. Maintain, in the general area of the Far East, U. S.
forces adequate to exert a deterrent influence against
Communist aggsression, in conformity with current basic national
security policy.

19. Shovld overt Communist aggression occur in the
Southeast Asian eaty area, invoke the UN Gharter or tne
SEATO Treaty, of both as epplicaple ; and subject to local
request ror eG Serene] cake necessary military and. any other
ection vo assist any Mainland’ Southeast Asian state or
; b. territory in the SEATO area willing to resist

=G to force: Provided, that. the taking of

ion shall.be subject to prior submission to. and
one Congress unless the emergency is deemed by

nt to be so grea & that immediate action is :

‘necessary to save a vital interest of the United States,

an imminent or actual Communist attempt

roi From witain, and assuming some manifest

Lor VW. Se assistance, taxe all feasible measures
aUtenot 6, “inelucing even military action after

Vy
+
pi

21. AS avoronriate, essist the police forces in Southeast
Asien countries to obtain training-.and equipment to detect and
contein Communist activities.

e2,. in order to strengthen the non-Communist covernn rents

ne area and to nelp forestall. their: economic dependence

mm oc:

ry

Rapaes) isa te
