Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

mentation of present euerrilla forces, and
then using this situation for political
bargaining purposes. The Comnz: te

a4.

would probably be prepared to accept a

prolonged and unresolved struggle, par--

ticularly if the country were geograph-
ically divided. Jf non-Asian forces were
committed in Laos, the likehhood of ar
overt Communist’ invasion would in-
crease. (Purd..21)

6. If the Communists should come to be-
lieve that a .Western intervention ap-
peared capable of resolving the conflict
and establishing firm anti-Communist
contro! over Laos, they would then face
the diificult decision of whether to raise
the. ante further, possibly to the point of
openly committing North Vietnamese or
Chinese Communist forces to the fighting.

We estimate that both Communist China

and the USSR wish to avoid serious risk
_of expanding the hostilities more broadly
into the Far East or beyond. We believe,
therefore, that the Communists would
seek through various uses of diplomacy,
propaganda, covert action and guerrilla
>The Director of Intelligence and Research,
pariment of State; the Assistant Chief of Staff
for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the
Assistant Cief of Naval Operations for Intelli-
gence, Department of the Navy; and the Director
for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, would delcte
this sentence, believing that it oversimplifies
the factors which might lead to an overt Com-
munist invasion:

De-",

SECRET sa eS

warfare to cause the West to back down.
If, however, the Communists became con-
vinced during the course of a series of ac-
tions and counteractions that the US in-
tended to commit major US combat forces
into Laos, we believe that the odds would
be better than even-‘that the Communists
would directly intervene in strength with
North Vietnamese and possibly Chinese
Communist military forces.** (Para. 22)

*The Assistant Chicf dt Staff, Intelligence, USAF
believes that the likelihood of overt interven-
tion by Chinese Communist or North Vietnamese
forces would be significantly reduced if the Com-
munists were convineed that the US would not
limit its counteroperations in an expanding con-
flict to the territory of Laos.

*The Director of Intelligence and Research, De-
partment of State; the Assistant Chief of Staff
for Intelligence, Department of the Army; and
the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for In-
telligence, Department of the Navy, believe that
the last sentence of this paragraph overstates
somewhat the willingness of North Victnam and
Communist China to use major military force
against the US in the Laos situation, and therc-
fore would detete the sentence and substitute the
following: “If these measures failed, North Vict-

nam, and possibly Conmimunist China, mieht re- ,

sort to at least a show of military force in a last
effort to make these pressures on the West effec-
tive, and the risks of overt Communist military
intervention would thus increase. In the end,

. however, the Communists would be untikely to
press such use of fotce téa point which in their
estimation w ould approach serious risk of large-
scale hostilities.” The Assistant Chief of Staff
for Intelligence, Department of the Army, would

. add the following clause: “particularly if they
were convinced that the US would not limit its
counteroperations in an expanding canflict to
the territory of Laos.”

SH CHE .

wor

iZke : ,

*

hindi nied alae tie a olielanad ee ne

1 RES Sar nme TEE geen TE REE SER TR SUERTE SR 8 ET em RE RT re

8 ED ne He reo

*
