Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
FOREIGN SERVICE DESPATCH
American Embassy Saigon 276
Desp No.
The Department of State, Washington January 4, 1961

Department Telegram 658, October 20, 1960

Subject: Counter Insurgency Plan for South Viet-Nam

Reference is made to joint State DOD message, Department's
658 of October 20, 1960, and Defense message DEF 982994 of
September 16, 1960, both of which set forth the requirements
for the development of an over-all United States plan for en-
couraging and supporting the Government of Viet-Nam in the pre-
sent National emergency. Such a plan has been developed by the
Country Team and is attached as an enclosure to this despatch
for review by interested Washington agencies.

The plan was drafted by a Country Team staff committee com-
posed of the following members: MAAG - Col. F. W. Boye, Jr.,
Major Kurtz J. Miller, Jr., and Captain Boyd Bashore; Embassy -
Joseph A. Mendenhall (Chairman) and Andrew J. Fink; USOM - James
W. Howe and William R. Trigg; USIS - John M. Anspacher; and DSA -
William E. Colby and Clarence E. Barbier. Because of the impor-
tance of military factors in the development of the plan, MAAG
assumed the major burden in its preparation, and is to be con-
gratulated on the excellent job it has done.

The plan,based on tasks and concepts outlined in the CINCPAC :
and OASD/ISA plan for counter-insurgency operations, not only sets
forth recommended action in the military field, but also establishes
requirements for coordinated and supporting action in the political,
economic and psychological fields. In developing the tasks to be!
undertaken the plan also presents recommendations and justificati n
concerning requirements for United States personnel, materiel, funds
and organizational and operational concepts. The Country Team
Plan consists of a summary and three Annexes, which discuss Task
Organization, Concept of Operations and Logistics. Hach Annex al 9
has appropriate appendices which spell out in detail the tasks,
the present situation with regard thereto and recommended action.
The plan is complete except for appendices relating to a study of
the non-military communications system and to economics and finance.
These will be forwarded upon completion as supplements to the plan
enclosed herewith.

SECRET

1357
