oes

|
|
|

a ol
in te ee gee ene ne ap renin ae

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

appet SECRET | 2

- pervasive influence of the Can Lao,? the semi-
clandestine apparatus of the regime; Diem’s
virtual one-man rule; and the growing evi-
dence of corruption in high places. In. late
_ April, 18 prominent Vietnamese publicly peti-
| tioned Diem to “liberalize the regime, expand
| democr acy, grant minimum Civil rights, (and) .
| recognize the opposition in order to let the
t people speak without fear.” This unprece-
dented public attack on Diem by a non-Com-

- munist group may embolden other urban ele-

ments to become more vocal.

5. A new and even more important element

in the political situation is the growing criti-.
. cism of Diem’s leadership within government

circles, including the official bureaucracy and
military; this criticism has become more in-
' tense than at any time since 1956. Since the
early paz"t of this year, Vice President Tho,
other members of the cabinet, and middle
“echelon officials have made known their
serious concern over Diem’s handling of the
internal security problem and have privately
criticized the power and influence exerted by
‘Nhu and his entourage. In addition, there
' is considerable uneasiness concerning the op-
‘ erations and activities of the Can Lao organi-
. zation.
6. Although most of the Vietmamese peasants
are politically apathetic, they also have their
grievances against the government. These
{include the ineptitude and arrogance of many
local and provincial officials, the lack of effec-
_ tive protection from Viet Cong demands in
‘many parts of the country, the harshness with
. Which many peasants have been forced to con-
tribute their labor to government programs,
and the unsettling economic and social effects
of the agroville (government-sponsored settle-

*The Can Lao organization is based on the cell
“and cadre system, similar to that of the Kuomin-
tang or a Communist party. Ii is controlled by

.Diem’s brothers, Nhu and Can. Can Lao mem-
bers are active at virtually every level of Viet-
namese political life. One-third of the cabinet
members and over half of the National Assembly

, deputics probably belong to the Can Lao. The
organization also controls the regime’s mass
political party, the National Revolutionary Move-
ment. It is deeply involved in Vietnamese busi-
ness affairs and has a program to recruit key
> Officers i in the Vietnamese military establishment,

Pn eet

aeeote spe aay a a

- sion as well as paramilitary action.

SHORE

ments) program. As a consequence, Diern’s
government is lacking in positive support
among the people in the countryside.

7. The members of Diem’s immediate entour-

‘age have attempted, with_some_ success, -.to

keep him insulated from unpleasant develop-
ments and trends. However, he has become
concerned over the deteriorating internal se-
curity situation, although he still tends to dis-
count the amount of discontent both in the
countryside and among urban elements.
Although he has taken some steps to meet the
internal security problem, he tends to view
it almost entirely in military terms. He be-
lieves that increased military activity against
the Viet Cong, along with an expansion of
the agroville program, will greatly improye
internal security. He has been openly con-
temptuous of the views of oppositionists in

Saigon and regards thern as uninformed and ©

dupes of the Communists. Diem also has
failed to take any major steps against corrup-
tion and arbitrary conduct on the part of the
Can Lao organization.

The Security Situcition
8. Aggravating many of the government’s

_problems is the active campaign of the Viet

Cong to discredit Diem and weaken the goy-
ernment’s authority through political subver-
The Viet
Cong has had some success in exploiting dis-
contented intellectuals, sowing disaffection
among the populace, and disrupting the effec-
tive administration of government. This
campaign has been well organized and skill-

fully executed, with the result that Diem has.
been confronted not merely with the armed °

threat of guerrilla operations but with a com-
prehensive subversive program.

$. Between mid-1957 and the end of 1959, the
Viet Cong conducted a steady but low key
campaign of propaganda, subversion, and
terrorism in the South Vietnamese country-
side. Since January, there has been a sig-

nificant increase in the number and size of

Viet Cong attacks in several areas, particu-
larly in the southwest. Civilian travel on

public roads more than 15 miles outside Sai-°

gon has become hazardous. Attacking units,

c 4

el

’

i293.
St

e

2 a

4

|
|
|

Oe et dee ee te ed

%

© a TPES Ree
