—

ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET ie aes 6

taining intact its opposition to closer contact
with the DRV. Although the GVN may agree
to limited discussions with DRV represpnta+
tives, such as the proposed negotiation re-
garding administrative problems of the De-
militarized Zone, it is not likely to enter into
any broader discussions (whether or not held
under the auspices of the International Con-
~ trol Commission (ICC)); and even less likely
to agree to the establishment of regular official
contacts with the north.

25. Cambodia: Relations between the GVN
and Cambodia have become acutely strained.
“Diem is convinced that Cambodia’s Prince
Sihanouk is untrustworthy and is tolerating,
if not supporting, anti-GVN operations on the
’ Cambodian border area by both Communists
and non-Communists. The GVN leaders have
little confidence in the ability of Cambodia
to resist Communist pressures and they pre
convinced that Cambodia’s recent recognition
of Communist China shows that there is little
will to resist. The GVN is fearful of a Com-
-munist takeover in Cambodia which would
provide a base for subversive operations or at-
tack. GVN leaders were closely involved in
_ recent anti-Sihanouk plots, and probably will
continue activities designed to stir up anti-
Sihanouk feeling both inside and outside of
Cambodia and to lead to Sihanouk’s downfall.

96. Laos: South Victnam’s relations with Laos
are on a generally friendly basis, especially
since the Lao Government has indicated
greater awareness of the Communist threat
and has become more outspokenly pro-West
in its foreign policy statements. The GVN
has undertaken to advise the Lao Government
on an anti-Communist program, has offered
to train some Lao troops, and in other ways
is seeking to stiffen the anti-Communist posi-
tion of the Lao Government. However, GVN
worries have been only partially relieved by
recent Lao Government measures to check
Lao Communist political activity; the GVN
continues to feel considerable disquiet because
of North Vietnamese pressures along the DRV-
Laos border.

27. France: The GVN leaders continue to sus-

pect the French of intriguing to overthrow the

Diem government and to increase their influ-
1

ence in South Vietnam. French businessmen
and officials in South eee are carefully
watched and the scope of French commercial,
cultural, and educational activities is re-
Stricled. The GVN leaders also believe that
the I’rench are at least partially to blame for
Cambodia’s apparent drift towards Commu-
nist China and for the failure of recent anti-
Sihanouk plots. Althoygh many South Viet-
namese leaders have | cultural aMinity for
France, GVN-French relations are likely to
remain cool. |

28. US: Although we do not expect the pres-
ent close GVN-US relationship to be under-
mined, the GVN’s sensitivity to its dependence

our dealings with it. |Nhu and some other
leaders have expressed resentment at what
they consider US attempts to dictate to them
and to restrict their freedom of action at home
and abroad. Diem has indicated that South
Vietnam expects the maintenance of large

- on the US is likely to po and to complicate

. US aid ana special consideration from the US

as a reward for its kteadfast support. Failure
to receive such special consideration could
lead Diem to assume a stance of greater in-
dependence vis-a-vis the US. However, in
light of Diem’s strong aversion to the French

and in the absence of any acceptable ailerna-

tive source of support, spe will’almost certainly
avoid jeopardizing basic US-South Vietnamese
ties during the period of this estimate.

E: Outlook for South Vietnam

29. The prospects for continued political sta-
bility in South Vic!iam.depend heavily upon
President Diem 224 his ability to maintsin
firm control of thi army < and police. The re-
gime’s efforts to assuri' internal security and
its belief that an authoritarian government |
is necessary to hancic the country’s problems |
will result in a continued repression of poten- ,;
tial oppositior elernents. This policy of \re- ;
pression will inhibit the growth of popularity,
of the regime, and we believe that dissatisfac- },
tion will grow, particularly among those who |)
are politically conscious. The power and un-
scrupulousness of the Can Lao, if unchecked,
will probably prejudice the prestige of the gov-_

SECRET

Lo Cae
x
1 +

He Sal Taal

an

-

ici —_
.
~— _ Ee ie koa .
ee ee EI a Fe Re Re TN ed Se es ae Ye re Veet al Rue Su aS a eg. pee A eC el Oe EY ee en as ee Tl ee Ey A ro ee ag Pe
