Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 6 of 18
SECRET-NOFORN Enel No, 1

Desp No. 278

From Saigon

These incidents, plus a relatively minor incident involving a VC
attack on ARVN patrol on September 14 some 35 kilometers south of the
town of Quang Neai are significant in that they represent the first such
reports received from Central Viet-Nam of this type of violence in many
months, VC activity among the Montagnards, particularly propaganda
activity, intended to set the Montagnards against the GVN and its programs
for economic and social development in Central Viet-Nam has been the subject
of reports by CAS and our consulate at Hue. There have also been a number
of reports of VC efforts to establish bases and to recruit Montagnards
for guerrilla activity.

During a visit to Kontum in late January our Consul in Hue found
officials rather worried about the security situation. The Chief of Kontum's
northermost district of Dak Sut said that during a three week period in
January, Communists had forced or persuaded three Montagnard villages to
withdraw into the mountains, out of reach of GVN administrators. This Dis-
trict Chief said that he and the Kontum Civil Guard Chief both think that
the Commnists have a major base in the Quang Nam mountains northeast of
Dak Gle (the northermost point en route 14), and predicted that communist
activities inmrthern Kontum and southwest Quang Nam provinces would be
stepped up in 1960. Our Consul was not permitted to go all the way to Dak
Gle because on January 18 a Civil Guard force patrolling route 14 was fired
on by a machine gun on a hilltop between Dak Gle and Dak Rotah.

A large scale sweep intended to flush out Viet Cong in the mountains
of Quang Ngai Province has been underway since the end of October 1958.
According to information obtained by USOM Public Safety Division, eleven
companies of the Civil Guard and one battalion of ARVN and two intelligence
companies were employed in the initial pacification phase. The operation
was reported by mid-January to have entered a second phase, that of securing
the support of the local population. The new chief of Quang Ngai Province,
Nguyen van TAT, told our Consul in January that additional Civil Guard Posts
are being set up in the Montagnard districts of his province and that the
Self Defense Corps will be greatly expanded in the Vietnamese sections.
Asked about the progress of the sweep, he was non-committal, but he admitted
that the security drive “will not be over for a Long time".

E. DRV Intentions
; In May 1959, the Central Committee of the Lao Dong Party passed a
resolution or statement stating that the struggle for reunification would

have to be carried out by all "appropriate measures", British observers .
have taken this to mean measures other than peaceful.

SECRET-NOFORN

1263
