Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET=NFORM '
2137261
FOREIGN SERVICE DISPATCH
March 7, 1960
American Embassy SAIGON 278
Despatch

This document consists of 22 pages. Copy 14 of 25 copies. Series Cc
Department's Telegram No. 1339, January 29, 1960
D/ARMY
Special Report on Current Internal Security Situation

Enclosed is a special report prepared by a Country Team study group
on the current internal security situation in Viet-Nam, A summary of
this report and an analysis of the main factors in Viet-Nam's current
serious internal security problem are given below:

Situation. Internal security, which improved greatly since the nip
and tuck period from 1954-56 but which nevertheless has been a steady con-
cern of the GVN over the past few years, has again become its No. 1 problem
as a result of intensification of Viet Cong guerrilla and terrorist activi-
ties, weaknesses apparent in the GVN security forces and the growth of
apathy and considerable dissatisfaction among the rural populace. The
situation has grown progressively more disturbing since shortly after
the National Assembly elections at the end of August 1959, despite the
fact that President DIEM was claiming, up to the end of December, that
internal security was continuing to improve. The monthly rate of assassi-
nations rose substantially starting in September, and other signs of
inereasingly aggressive VC tactics such as ambushes of GVN security forces
began to appear about the same time. The full impact of the seriousness
of the present situation was brought home by a series of VC incidents in
late January and February, particularly an attack on an ARVN regimental
post near Tay Ninh, other smaller and less dramatic attacks on security
posts elsewhere in the southwest and serious VC depredations in Kien Hoa
Province.

President Diem and other GVN officials are now showing a reassuting
awareness of the gravity of the situation. They have not permitted shem-

selves to become panic-stricken, and there is no reason to become alarmist
if prompt steps are taken to correct the situation.

1254

SECRET-NOFORN
