Rs

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

of invasion along the border areca has no natural defenses
after the enemy passes through the Annam Chain. This is a
soft area for defensive purposes, Either one, or a combina~
tion of both, of the above routes is possible and feasible.
Above the 17th parallel the Viet Minh have 200,000 regular
troops and 250,000 regional troops. Secretary Quarles raised
the question as to restriction on those forces by the Geneva
Accords, ‘It was -stated that.there is no restriction on the
numbers, The troops, however, have been given modernized
equipment and training by the Chinese Communists and their
re-equipment is a violation of the Geneva Accords, President.
Ngo also stated the Bussians are particularly concerned with
the training cf these forces and in accordance with Russian
practice have emphasized artillery to the point that they
have three times as much as Viet-Nam, He stated that the
Viet-Minh air force has been training in Communist China
since 1951. : : =

The Vietnamese do not have sufficient forces to guard
the entire border. Laos has a weak army, very poor roads and is
Jightly populated, Infiltration through Laos is both easy and
dangerous to Viet-Nam, It is helieved possible.that the Viet
Ninh could infiltrate this interior route with as many as a

- 300,000 troops disguised as coolies which could be very

dangerous, President Ngo views a strictly defensive plan as
unsatisfactory if only because of the demoralizing factor.
He feels the plan must be both offensive and defensive. He
covered this concept as follows: ()) Vietnamese do not know
the SEATO Plan, (2) The General Staff first conccived a defen-
sive plan which was considered demoralizing. (3). They have
now conceived an offensive-defensive plan which has been
referred to General Williams, (4) Population of the North
is against Communism. If free to move it would -move out to
the South, In the North soldiers are the principals in the
-priviledged class. (5) It is believed necessary in the
‘event of aggression to .bring airborne troops into the high
plateau area of Laos--Viet-Nam, and also conduct airborne
operations to pin down the Viet Minh and make possible an
offensive to the North, In addition the line of the 17th

- parallel must be. held as this is the route of.refugees, . Any

eirborne landings must be Vietnamese trocps not foreign troops,
Forcign troops should be limited to use below the 17th parallel
as support forces,

Big question for Vietnamese is when do they get the
foreign troons, Thai forces will be otherwise occupied,
The civil guard is poorly equipped and would not he effecti
There are no other ground forces available in the Southeast
