Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

., 9.54. Bloc propaganda activities have been es specially marked in Cam-+--
bodia, where Communist China, the USSR, and North Vict-Nam have ell made
rapid progress in the film field, During the first nine months of 1958 over .

Sovict films appeared as compared with a total of 15 to 20 during all of:
1957, A number of Chinese technicians have arrived in Phnom Penh to

install the 20 kw radio transmitter presented to Sihanouk last year. The blec's

propaganda efforts within Cambodia have been zirned primarily at youth
through the educational system, and Sovict diplomatic personnel have cone
tinued to make aggressive efforts along this lines

55, Subvers ive : Peta Bloc officials'in the area have usually con»
centrated c on developing correct cordial relations with constituted authorities.
Covert contacts, however, are maintained through embassies and through

_ Chinese. Coramunist Sconbrolled banks in places such as Burrna and Singapore.
'-.The banks provide legitimate financial support to pro-Peiping adherents and
are also a means of ychologic cal and economic pressure on the population,

56. Sena: Chine. exploits extensively pro-Peiping clements within .
Ovexseas Chinese communities throughout the area. These groups 5 axe
cultu rally toa large extent sesident aliens regardless of foxmal ciazenEhep
and they are drawa toward =e "homeland" vegardless of politics.

.
A

: 5%~ _ in. Thailand; South Viet-Nam, Malaya, and Singapore the Communist
parties are outlawed and fox the most part fragmented, Although aid may
Lave been given from time to time to insurrectionary forces, both the bloc *

ad local Communists generally would prefer legality to continued illegal

and guerrilla activity. Bloc subversive efforts have been aimed primarily
at stimulating e> cisting discontent among non-Gommunists.

58, The developing political situatio on-in Laos, where the Communist

Jominated Neo Lao Hak Zat (NLHZ) won 13 of the 21 assembly seats up for
election last May, has shown the Communists to be successful in using legal

md semi-legal tactics. The victory was made possible by superior NLEZ

grass roots organization and by lack of unity among non»scommunist elements
who won @ ma jority of the popular vote but dissipa ated this advantage by

cunning teo many candidates... The NLHZ appears to be making strong gains
in almest every sector of Laotian society including a swell of pro»NLHZ
sentiment among Laos! 13,000 Buddhist monks who have some influence: cr er
- village opinion.’ The NLHZ alco appears to be making sorne headway in
- penetrating the army and eroding government authority in the provinces,
{Some locally elected officials in ru ral areas are reported to be resigning

a

index NLHZ PRESSUTOs .

59, Rea action to Bloc Activities: Generally speaking, the governments

—

xf the area are prece Gear’ with and somewhat fearful about resurgent

eee yews

vs

————---

SS a ee ee ere

a a a gee nie Ge te ee eae renee ery pee aie meee el ee ey ees gs ene eee

CTT er mr tater epee eet tee enn oe

st le eee

*
