Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

Trends in South Vieinam

169, Barring a major Comrmaunist effort to dis-
rupt the Diem regime by renewal.of large

jlla operations, the over-all pros- _

iscale gucr ; ;
pects for improved security of South Vietnam

are good, The VNA, as its training progresses
and 2s more units are released from static
security duties, probably, will be able to pacify
and extend government authority into many
areas of present Commu nist influence. !} Diem’s

s [success in by-passing the July 1956 election
D date without evoking large scale Communist
: | military reaction will reassure many Victne-
-lmese and encourage thena to cooperate with

. . ea

| GVN programs to expose and root out Com-
-} munists. Continued improvement in internal
«security will depend in some measure on the
government’s ability to deal with economic
‘and social. problems and on the efiectiveness

shee the administrative apparatus.

70, If the Communists were to undertake
large scale guerrilla action in South Vietnam,
they probably would not be able to develop
widespread popular suppert, especially if the
VNA were to register some early military suc-
cess. The GVN is being imcreasingly accepted
tas a nationalist alternative to Communist
\Jeadership. Public confidence in the GVN,
combined with general war-weariness, may
have already reached the point where any
effort to.upset the government by force would
lead to a strong popular reaction against the
i guerriljas. §
71. The trend toward inereased political sta-
bility in South Vietnam will probably continue
during the period of this estimate and Presi-
dent Diem will probably continue to exercise
efiective political control} The trend toward
: authoritarian rule through the political par-
ties led by Diern’s relatives and small circle of
: trusted associates will probably continue. Iso-
* lation and neutralization of governinent crit-"

oO
at

(

“support.

14.

ics and men disliked or distrusted by Diem |
will also continue. Diem and his BSSBEI tee |
are likely to exert strong pressures against;
any opposition in the Assembly. Thus it is;
not likely that Diem or his government will;
meet any serious opposition in the National
Assembly during the period of this estimate;
however, over a longer period the accumula-
tion of grievances among various groups and
individuals may lead to development of a
national opposition movement.{ The major
economic problems will undoubtedly continue
and over the longer run may handicap South
Vietnam in competition with the Communist
north, but economic conditions are unlikely to
affect political stability during the period of
this estimate.

72. Despite the moderately favorable outlook
projected for South Vicinam, the situation
contains many elements of instability, and
progress will continue to depend on firm US
A number of contingent develop-
ments could create new tensions*among the
foreign powers concerned as well as between
the GVN and the DRV. For example, the
steps which Diem is willing to take toward
facilitating the operations of the ICC may not
be adequate to satisfy India whose representa-
tive serves as chairman of the Commission.
Should the Commission withdraw, DRV agi-
tation might well be intensified and interna-
tional Communist pressures on the diplomatic
level would probably increase. The UK might
become less firm in its support of Diem’s posi-
tion. Weakening of internaticnal support for
Diem, a marked increase In Bloc support for

the DRV, or a substantial increase in Commu-

nist activity within South V tnam would
probably weaken the government’s confidence
in its position, cause some less of public sup-
port, and lead to renewed efforts by opponents
of the regime in the direction o: .econciliation
with the north. .
