Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a Tel Z ee. erepoy

2

troops are very mobile, le irreguiar forces advance ahead
‘of regular troops to sabetage and cut conmunications. They
also follow the regular trooss to subdue the population. Use
of atamic weapons against the aggression through the sparce
settled territory of Lacs would not be effective. Therefore,
‘the President believes that the Victnamese must reorganize
their Army to be prepared for such a struggle.

Despite the efforts of Genera] O*Daniel the present Army
structure is now not satisfacory., This is due to the French
policy which insisted on kecping Victnamese forces in small
wnits no larger than a battalion, preventing the development
of a proper Viet-Ham Arny. This is why Diem could not cone
to power seoner. French said Vietnamese couldn't be trained
and were too weak physically. They limited then to light '
forces. After the Armistice the French continued to control
the forces, Following the French phase out, and the elinination =
of French forces, training was conducted under a mixed French-
US training group. The French concept of light battalion,
light division, heavy division, made no sense at all not even
for use against the sects, J therefore felt the Army should
be conpletely reorganized and consolidation of training into
a strictly US mission made this possible, The U.S, military
_know that the Vietnamese make good soldiers, I have talked
over my idea with General Williams, and it is to reorganize
ny 6 light and 4 heavy divisions of 5,600 and 8,300 men respec-
tively, into the same number of field divisions with 10,000
each, with 3 regiments per division, Yo achieve this the Army
must increase to 170,006, This would avoid a complete shift
of the present division, If we stay at the present 150,000
nen it would be necessary to shift or change the basic struc-~
ture, If ovr total forces are raised to 170 thousand we
could increase each division te 10,000, To reduce the impact
of the budget I have decreed a draft as a stop gap plen.
Draftces will be inducted for ] year terms in the age group
20 to 21, Beginning 1] August 150 per day will be inducted,
This will amount to 46,000 per year. In 3 years this will
make it possible to replace 2/3 of the Army at the end of
3.years, The budget will be stabilized, At the present tinie

. Viet-Nam arny is organized along French colonial lines with.
the families traveling with the troons, The average pay is a
thousand piasters a month, The military budget is 170 million
dollars a year, the use of draftees would reduce the cost by
half. Draftecs would be young people with no families, The
US, militery recommend that I not replace all my troops with
draitecs but retain 30,000 minimum as a hard core, I believe
the above is necessary because in my view to meet aggression in
my country requires eiuphasis on the Ground forcés, As the

