Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fe ic cis gle SECRET ZS 6

strugele, particularly if the country were ¢geo-
graphically divided. If non-Asian forces were
conunitted in Laos, the likclihood of an overt
Communist invasion would increase.* i

22, If the Communists should come to belicve
that a Western intervention appeared capable
of resolving the conflict and establishing firm
-anti-Communist control over Laos, they would

then face the dificult decision of whether to’

raise the ante further, possibly to the point
of openly committing North Vietnamese or
Chinese Communist forces to the fiehting.
We estimate that both Communist China and
the USSR wish to avoid serious risk of ex-
panding the hostilities more broadly in the
Far East -or beyond. We believe, therefore,
“that the Communists would seek through
various uses of diplomacy, propaganda, covert
action and guerrilla warfare to cause the West
to back down. If, however, the Communists
became convinced during the course of a series
of actions and counteractions that the US in-
tended to commit major US combat forces into
Laos, we believe that the odds would be better
than -even that the Communists would di-
rectly intervene in strength with North Viet-
“namese and possibly Chinese Communist mili-
tary forces.®

23. The Communists would probably counter
the unilateral introduction of “volunteers” or
regular military units from South Vietnam
and Thailand wicn the introduction of North
Vietnamese “volunteers.”

*See footnote to Conc’usion 5.

*See footnotes to Conclusion 6. -

24. The uncommitted and anti-Communist
countries of the world would view with alarm
a Communist takeover of Laos, but are fear-
ful that a Western intervention in Laos mieht
lead to the outbreak of a major war, Nover-
theless, most of these ‘countries, including
most members of SEATO, would probably sup-
port such intervention if they were convineed

of the gravily of the Laotian Government's po-:

sition and of direct Communist Bloc support
of the rebels in Laos. The findings of the UN
Security Council subcommittee will almost
certainly have an impojtant influence in this
respect,

25. If the uncommitted and anti-Communist

- countries accepted the need for intervention

in Laos, they would prefer that such action be
taken under UN auspices. If dispatch of a
UN-led force were blocked by Communist dip-
lomatic opposition, intervention by SEATO
would probably be supported by most Free
World countries despite the strong dislike of
some neutralist nations for the SEAT'O con-
cept.
move effectively in response to a Lao appeal
for help would not only endanger the existence
of SEATO itseli but would seriously weaken
the confidence of the non-SEATO states of
Asia in the West’s determination and ability
to defend them from Communist attack.

26. US military intervention, such as the dis-
patch of tragys to Laos, in the absence of broad

acceptance of the need to intervene would

probably have little support even arnong the
anti-Communist nations. Our SEATO allies,
however, would probably support us although
most might do so with considerable reluctance.

SECRET

On the other hand, SEATO failure to

4 ONT
ot. 2! : &

——. ae

Son ee re a aap aa pr ar ee aes ES OTTERS aS Re ce

Se ee SY ne On Speers a ee

re
