Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

34. Encourage and support those elements in Burma which do main-
tain a stable free government that identifies its interest with those of
the free world and resists Communist inducements, threats, and programs
+o subvert Burma's independence.

35. Encourage Burmese assumption of regional and international
responsibilities compatible with our own objectives.

36. For political purposes, upon Burmese request make available
military equipment and supplies on a loan or reimbursable basis, as
consistent with U. S. interests. ;

37. Encourage the Burmese Government to establish internal
security throughout the country, and discourage further foreign
assistance to Chinese Nationalist irregulars and ethnic rebel groups

_in Burma.

38. Should overt Communist aggression occur against Burma, invoke
+he UN Charter and, subject to Burmese request for assistance, take
necessary military and any other action to assist Burma if Burma is
willing to resist Communist resort to force and U. S. vital interests are
involved: provided that the taking of military action shall be subject
to prior submission to and approval by the Congress.

CAMBODIA

39. In order to maintain Cambodia's independence and to reverse
the drift toward pro-Communist neutrality, encourage individuals and
groups in Cambodia who oppose dealing with the Communist bloe and who
would serve to broaden the political power base in Cambodia.

ho, Provide modest military aid for indigenous armed forces
capable of assuring internal security.

li. Terminate economic and military aid if the Cambodian Govern-
ment ceases to demonstrate a will to resist internal Communist subversion
and to carry out a policy of maintaining its independence.

2, Assist where possible in solution of Cambodian-Thai border
problems and in fostering good relations between Cambodia and Viet Nam.

LAOS

43. Seek to strengthen the determination of the Royal Government
+o resist subversion and to maintain its independence.

wsc 5612/1 (Revised 11/29/56) ~ TOP SECRET
1091
