Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

January 22, 1959

MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHATRMAN, JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

SUBJECT: Aircraft for Vietnam (U)

By memorandum dated 30 December 1958, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
recommended that thirty (30) AD-4 type aircraft be substituted for T-28s
in the Vietriam Military Assistance Program to replace F-8F aircraft now
used by the Vietnamese Air Force. We are advised by the Air Force that
the F-8F aircraft are supportable through Fiscal Year 1960 and probably
through Fiscal Year 1962 and, although obsolescent by U.S. standards,
remain capable of performing their mission. While a more advanced
capability for the Vietnam Air Force is both militarily and politically
desirable, we question the advisability of introducing AD-4 aircraft at
this time. ,

Although the ASCP rate for the F-8F aircraft is extremely low
(average less than 2% for the last 18 months) the utilization rate
(monthly average 7 hours per assigned aircraft during Fiscal Year 1958)
is very unsatisfactory. This unsatisfactory utilization rate, which is
50% of the programmed flying hour requirement, is because of high
unscheduled maintenance rate and substandard logistic practices, aggra-
vated by a lack of trained supply and maintenance personnel. The result
has been an in-commission rate of less than 35% during the past few
months. This poor maintenance and an inability to operate the logistics
and supply facilities necessary to support these aircraft are partially
due to the fact that the Vietnamese are changing over from -a French
operated system to a U.S. recommended system which must be operated
by the Vietnamese themselves. :

Because of the above and the tightness of the 1959 prosram and
in light >of the coming Congressional presentation, we believe it
advisable, until there is improvement in Vietnamese training and mainte-
nance, and at least until Fiscal Year 19€0, to withhold the proposed
substitution of AD-4 aircraft for the F-8F aircraft.

SIGNED

John N. Irwin, IT
Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)

1183
