Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

, _ TOP SECRET

wo, fe 1 Problem of Alignment. To preserve their indepen-~
dence, _wengenen 1 their internal stability, and protect them-
selves against agesression, some countries “in Southeast Asia
prefer to join regional security arrangements; Some, however,
prefer to dvoid alignment with other nations The basic
objective of both groups is to maintain the independence of
their countries free of outside interference or dictation, and
ndense and vitealivy of both are important to the
nd to each other,

.

“
a

Pat
a
.

f .
‘ '

‘ Ii, POLLCY ‘CONCLUSIONS

t-
b

7. Tne national independence of the mainland Southeast
Asian states is important to the secuzity interests of the
Yniteé.States. If such independence is to be preserved, U.'S.
policies must seek to build sufficient strength in the area at
least tojicentify aggression, suppress subversion, prevent
Gommunis> political and economic domination, and assist the
non-Communist governments to consolidate their domestic posi-
tions. U. S. policy should not depend primarily on the degree
and nature of Communist activity at any particular tine, but
piobia seek to promote these goals within the limits of the
econonic capacities of the countries concerned and U. 8S.
resources available for the area.

8. Where a national determination to maintain independ-
ence and oppose external egsgression is sufficiently manifest,
the United Svates should be prepared to provide military
assistance based es n tt j
in the "Country Cor

C)

Dees m ee 1s of the forces as indicated
es of Action" (Part V, below). |
: cao |

~ Oe in che eeeee ae aggression against a Southeast Asian
state willing to resist, the provisions of the UN Charter or
tno SB°DO Treaty should be invoked, but tne United States
snou_c not forgo necessary action in behalf of such a si tate,
oe suates because of the possibility that other allies migh

be loatn to participate or to. furnish more than token ee
Forces. i

10. In the long run; the ability of the non-Communist
govermacnes cto attain political, economic and social objectives
Will be the dominant factor in defeating the Communist attempts
to Gominate Southeast Asia. Tne United States should assist
the non-Communist states of the area to formulate and exetute
progranis designed to promote conditions of sound development,
to Gemonstrate that they can achieve growth without: reliance
or Cc enue SY methods or Cependence on the Communist bioc, and

€S @ greater stake in the continued
eir countries,

ow
