Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 11 of 18
SECRET-NOFORN Encl No. 1

Desp No. 278

From Saigon

at the cost of the population under their control. Press
editorials have attacked local officials for extorting money from
peasants, using torture to wring false confessions from innocent
people and conducting themselves in such a manner as to reflect
adversely on the prestige of the national government. In addition
rumors continue to circulate among the population concerning the
alleged nefarious activities of and favoritism shown to members

of the Can Lac party. While officials have been largely unable

to identify and put out of commission Viet Cong undercover cadres
among the population, they have often arrested people on the basis
of rumors or of denunciations by people who harbor only personal
grudges. Police powers justified on the basis of the needs of
internal security have reportedly been misused to extort money

not only from the peasants but from land owners, merchants and
professional people in the towns. This misuse of police powers
and the kind of broad scale arrests on suspicion are weakening

the support of the population for the regime. On the other hand,
the application of swift, summary justice (such as the Special
Military Tribunals were created to hand out) designed to protect
the population against the Viet Cong threat, if carefully
administered and "advertised" as such, can do much to restore a
feeling of security;* (c) While the GVN has made an effort to
meet the economic and social needs of the rural populations
through community development, the construction of schools,
hospitals, roads, etc., these projects appear to have enjoyed only
a measure of success in creating support.for the government and,
in fact, in many instances have resulted in resentment. Basically,
the problem appears to be that such projects have been imposed on
the people without adequate psychological preparation in terms of
the benefits to be gained. Since most of these projects call for
sacrifice on the part of the population (in the form of allegedly
"yolunteer" labor in the case of construction, time away from jobs
or school in the case of rural youth groups, leaving homes and
lands in the case of regrouping isolated peasants), they are bound
to be opposed unless they represent a partnership effort for
mutual be efit on the part of the population and the government.
(See subsequent section on "GVN Reactions" for indications of
Diem's current awareness of this problem).

The situation may be summed up in the fact that the government

has tended to treat the population with suspicion or to coerce it
and has. been rewarded with an attitude of apathy or resentment.

'* Ensuing section on "GV Reactions" shows Diem now aware of
incompetence and abuse of power by many officials.

SECRET-NOFORN
1268
