Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 1 of 18 pages
SECRET-NOFORN Enel No, 1

Desp No. 278

From Saigon

Special Report On Internal Security Situation In Viet-Nam

The Viet Cong attack on the Vietnamese Army installation near Tay Ninh
on January 26 is -a dramatic illustration of the increasingly aggressive
tactics of the Viet Cong and of the difficulty the GVN is having in con-
trolling the internal security situation. The audacity of the Viet Cong
in conducting the attack, the likelihood of VC infiltration into ARVN, the
indications of secret support of the VC by some of the local populace, the
successful planning and coordination in carrying out the attack as opposed
to apparent failure of ARVN which had been told there might be an attack
+o be sufficieritly alert for such an attack and effectively counter once
the attack had been launched, are indications of many of the problems
faced by the GVN and discussed in this report.

Recent Viet Cong Activit
A. General Situation

The increase in Viet Cong activity in recent months can be traced
back as far as the middle of September when the assassination and kidnapping
rate began to rise. It will be recalled that the Government of Viet-Nam
intensified its anti-VC measures during the spring of 1959 when it in-
ereased its forces engeged in internal security operations. These operations
appear to have forced the VC to curtail their activities for a period of
several months, regroup, strengthen and reorganize their cadres and estab-~
lish new bases, The added precautions taken by the GVN during the period
prior to and immediately following the August 30 National Assembly elec-
tions further suppressed VC activity. The two important exceptions to this
relatively static period of VC operations are the acts of sabotage of farm
machinery in May and June (which backfired because of peasant resentment)
and the July attack on U.S. Army personnel at the MAAG detachment in Bien
Hoa, :

By September 1959 the VC position was somewhat as follows: The VC had
failed to carry out their plans to disrupt the National Assembly elections.
This failure placed the VC in a position of reasserting themselves in the
countryside or facing a gradual decrease of their influence as the GVN im-
proved security and pushed forward its social and economic reforms.

Reports reaching CAS indicated that the VC by September had become
quite concerned over the possible effects of various GVN programs which
were getting underway at that time. The GVN program for regrouping
isolated peasants into communities was just beginning, the various youth
organizations were becoming active in the villages and the new identity
ecard program promised to create difficulties for many VC cadres who had
béen provided with false identity papers, The VC propaganda offensive
against these programs, which was already underway during August, was
intensified in September and VC harassment and violence

SECRET-NOFORN

1258
