SO cee tel taht

dey ee eee pene ts ere eae ene ee tet oe me me mk gene pct Ai ee neha ee ee eam NT Te

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET :

to join regional security arrangements. Some, however,
to avoid alignnent with other nations, me basic
ective of botn groups’ is to maintain the independence of
gr countries free of outside interference or dictation, and
e independence and vitaiity of both are important to the
ited States and to each other, a

Lil Lin’

co)
Sy ny
ov 0
Ss La}

oF
Ee — (1)

toe

=
ts
tk

5

mr en en 6) 5 4

Fa oi . -« if. POLICY CONCLUSIONS

7. Tne national independence of the mainland Southeast
ts sian states is important to the security interests of the
United States. If such independence is to be preserved, U, S..
policies must seek to build sufficient strencth in the area at
jeast to identify aggression, suppress subversion, prevent
Communist political and economic domination, and assist the -
non-Comnunist Governments to consolidate their domestic posi-
tions. U. S. policy should not depend primarily on the degree
and nature of Communist activity at any particular time, out
should ‘seek to promote tnuese goals within the limits of the
economic capacities of the countries concerned and U. S. re-
sources available for the area,

&.: Where a national determination to maintain- independ-
ence and oppose external aggression is sufficiently manifest,
the United States should be prepared to provide military as-
sistance based upon the missions of the forces as indicated
in the "Country Courses of Action" (Part V, below).

9. In the event of aggression against a Soutveast Asian
state willing to resist, the provisions of the UN Charter or
the SEATO Treaty should be invoked, but. the United States
snovid not forgo necessary action in behalf of sucu a state
or states because of the vossibility that other allies might

“pe loath to participate or to furnish more than token wilitary

forces,

10. - In. the longs run, the ability of tne non-Commnunist
governnents, to attain political, economic and social objectives
will be the dominant factor in defeating tne Communist attempts
to dominate Southeast Asia. Tne United States should assist
the non-Comnunist states of the area to formulate and-excute
programs designed to promote conditions of sound development,
to demonstrate that they can achieve growta without reliance.
on. Communist methods or dependence on the Communist bloc, and
to give tneir. peoples a greater stake in tne continued inde-
pendence of their countrics,

21. Tne United States should continuc to make clear
own devotion to tie orinciple of collective security
lief tnet regional security arrangements provide ma:
tection at miniinum cost for all, and its expectation

: i088 |
NSC 5512/1 : 1 TOP SECRET

-~

Fat tes

oO
