enjoys ¢

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

health would almost certainly rule him out
as a leading contender for leadership. Tran
Van Lam, leader of the CR, is ambitious and
; onsiderable popularity in the -south-
ern provinces, but his political position is
weak. Although the army high command
has been trying to keep the army out of poli-
tics, the prestige and strength of the army
would almost certainly play a mea jor and possi-
bly decisive role in the redistribution of politi-
cal power, The numerous anti-Diem national-
ists in South Vietnam and France would prob-
ably attempt to re-enter the picture and their
-maneuvers would add to the confusion, How-
ever, many of these men are discredited be-
cause of their past relations with Bao Dai,
the French, or the Communists, and it is
doubtful that any of them could muster suf-
ficient backing to gain control.

Fconomic

40. South Victmam is normally an agricul-
tural surplus area, exporting rice and rubber.

‘During World War Il and the civil war

periods large portions of cultivated land were
abandoned and the transportation and irri-
‘gation systems deteriorated. Current rice
production is Jess than two-thirds the pre-
World War II levels, and exports in 1955 were
only about 100,000 tons as compared with the
prewar annual fotal of more than one million
tons. Current rubber output of 54,000 tons
excecds the prewar level by about 10,000 tons
and rubber has replaced rice as South Viet-
nami’s leading foreign exchange earner. In
1955, high market prices raised the value of
South Vietnam’s rubber exports almost 80 per-
cent above 1954 and to more than. half the

value of all exports.

44. Because of the decline in rice exports and
the large imports of consumer goods and, to a
lesser extent, capital goods for rehabilitation,
South Vietnam is running a large deficit in
its balance of payments. In 1954 exports
covercd 17 percent of imports while in 1955,
even with unusually high rubber prices, ex-
ports covered only 25 percent of imports. At
present, US aid is filling the eap and is an
important factor in the relatively high stand-

SECRET a at 8

Vietnam. For the fiscal years 1955 and 1956
the planned level of US economic and military

_ aid for South Vietnam totaled approximately

$520 million (not including the value of US
equipment already in Vietnam and trans- |
ferred*to the GVN). ‘At present the US is
financing about 90 percent of the GVN mili-
tary budget, 65 percent of the combined mili-
tary-civilian budget, and 75 percent of all
South Vietnam’s imports.

42. The withdrawal of French military forces,
the termination of France’s preferential trade
status, and the loosening of French-Vietna-
mese political ties have combined to curtail
the scale of French industrial and commercial
activity in South Vietnam. French business
interests are withdrawing about as rapidly
as Vietnamese restrictions on currency trans-
fers permit. South Vietnam’s import trade is
moving away from France toward Japan and
the US. In 1933 and 1954, France supplied
about 80 percent of South Vietnam’s imports.
In 1955 the figure dropped to 50 percent and
the downward trend is continuing. In the
same two-year period, Japan’s share of South
Vietnam’s irhports has increased from three
to 12 percent.

43. The GVN has not yet effectively come to-
grips with its economic problems. President

Diem has stated that 1956 will be a year of

economic consolidation, but through the first

six months of the year, GVN attention con-

tinued to be focused on security and political

issues. Only the most pressing economic

problems have received serious government at-

tention and those have generally been dealt

with by ed hoe methods or authoritarian de-

erees. For example, the government has at- —
tempted to cope with a serious threat of infla-
tion by a series of decrees controlling prices
and inventories for many items and establish-
ing high fines and even the death penalty for
attempts to corner the market. These meas-
ures have contributed little to preventing in-
flation and have aroused the resentment of
the important Chinese community. Inflation-
ary pressures have been held in check pri-
marily because the government has been able,
with US aid, to maintain a fairly high level
of imports of consumer goods.

ards of living prevalent in much of South

SECRET
Fd sib cle if

BAT 2:
