Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

“SECRET > ,. 3

‘|

it is aware of the existing dangers and can cope with them. A dangex ;
. existe that by expanding its contacts with Communist China and Communist

' North Viet-Nam it will permit subversion especially of the Vietname se and
Chinese communities to a point beyond its control,

Status of U. S. Actions: Advantage is taken of whatever

skepticism Sihanouk may have regarding the assurances he. received from

Chinese Communist leaders, Efforts ave being continued to try to bring

about an improvement in the pr xeponderantly pro-communist press and to
implement the police progratne

18 Redtiction of Informational Outlets. During the five-month
‘period preceding Prince Sihanouk's recent visit to the United States, place-
ment of USIS peeee material and other non-USIS originated material which
supported U. S, interests dropped rharply while press usage of pro-commues :
nist material increased corr © SPURL: The decline in the usage of U. S,
material was caused by the Ministry of Information's pxejudicial treatment
of the U. S. in its official press service, by governmental closure of
several newspapers which had formerly been receptive to USIS approaches

,and by the refusal of others to accept USIS output. In view of the apparent corn«
munist influence in the Ministry of Information, USIS activities in other me ca

. could be seriously affected by one»sided administration of the government 1g
recently promulgated communique on propaganda activities,

Status’ of U. S, Actions: Special efforts. have. been made, with
gorne success, to persua de the Cambodian Goveny racnt, particularly the

Ministry of Information, to apply restvictions upon ideological propaganda

equally to pro-communis st and free world information activities, Since

Prince Sihanouk's visit to the United States, the Ministry of Information has
taken steps te decrease pro “communis t pr ‘opagandas Whether or not this

represents a a-permanent chaage in emphas sis xe mains to be ee }

i. “4 : . : IF

peye) e
i. .
(a

se)

bee

“SECRET a

~
