Ce ee
ie ea

At eee

ry

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

21. In case of an imminent or actual Communist attempt

to seize control from within, and assuming some manifest
jocal desire for U. S. assistance, take all feasible mea—
sures to thwart the attempt, including even military action

after appropriate Congressional action.

22. -As appropriate, ‘assist the police forces in South-
t Asian countries to obtain training and equipment to

ea5 ; Sue
“@etect and contain Communist activities.

23. In order to strengthen the non-Communist govern-
ments of the area and to help forestall their economic

dependence on the Communist Bloc:
assist-

a. Provide flexible economic and technical
ance as necessary to attain U. S. objectives. In the
- framing of U. S. aid programs to Southeast Asian countri
“take into account the economic and technical assistance
being provided by other Free World nations and by inter-
national institutions, coordinating with such nations
and institutions where SUB ROP esate:

b. Encourage measures to improve the climate for
private investment, both domestic and foreign, and to
mobilize the maximum investment of U. S. private capital
in the area consistent with the prevailing climate.

Cc. Encourage United Nations agencies, other Colombo
Plan countries, and other friendly -countries to contri-
bute available resources to promote the economic growth
of Southeast Asia.

G.. Encourage the Southeast Asian countries to.

orient their economies in the direction of the Free

. World and to rely primarily on non-Communist markets
and sources of supply for trade, technicians, capital

development, and atomic development. |

e. In carrying out progrems involving disposal of
U. S. agricultural surpluses abroad:
(1) Give perticular attention to the eco’ omic
vulnerabilities of the Southeast Asian countries _

and avoid, to the maximum extent practicable,
detracting from the ability of these countries to

market their own exportable produce. |

(2) Give particular emphasis to the use of the

resources to pene re multilateral trdde and économic

development.

.

NSG 6012 Tsu: je he OB tere SECRE
(Revised 8/2/60)

iy

ri
