byte

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

v

SECRET . Perey eit Age nh

both the domestic and international spheres.
On 17 November, his governmgnt and. the
Communist Neo Lao Hak Xat announced an
agreement to establish a national coalition
government including representatives of the
NLHX. The agreement also provided that
the government would soon accept aid from
Communist China and North Vietnam and

-would send a delegation to. those countrics

to negotiate for exchange of economic and
cultural relations, for the re-establishment of
telecommunications with North Vietnam, and
for the immediate opening of the Laos-China
border. On 29 November, Souvanna’s cabinet
named a 10-man friendship mission, headed
by the Prime Minister, for a visit to Peiping
and Hanoi beginning 10 December. Deliveries
of Soviet food and POL to Vientiane have be-
gun and a 3-man Soviet Embassy staff has
taken up residence in Vientiane.

11. Thus, Souvanna now relies very heavily
upon the support of pro-Communist and Kong
Le elements, It appears that this will con-
tinue, and that as opposition to him mounts

he will keep on seeking broader and more

specific support from the Communist Bloc.
Souvanna probably still hopes to keep Com-
munist influence in check, but some of his
measures to protect his position by moving
closer to the Communists are irrevocable, and
most, if not all, of them have been highly

-favorable to future Communist domination of*

the Vientiane Government.

12. Phouwm?. ‘The position of Phoumi, and
of the Revolutionary Committee he has set
up with Boun Oum, has a number of serious
weaknesses. In southern Laos, there are
about 7,500 combat troops, most of whom are
under commanders probably loyal to Phoumi.
Most of these troops are scattered widely

' through the area, and have their hands full

attempting to cope with local Pathet Lao
activities. In the Thakhet-Savannakhet area,
Phoumi has about 1,500 troops. He is in
the process of recruiting and organizing an
additional battalion. It is unlikely that
Phoumi’s troops without continued US assist-
ance could or would offer very strong or effec-
tive resistance to a determined attack on their
positions by Vientiane and Pathet Lao forces.

13. Phoumi’s military capabilities have mark-
edly increased since he received additional
US aid and maral support. Moreover, the pro-
Savannakhet coup of 10 November in Luang
Prabang greatly improved: Phoumi’s military
and political positions. Nearly all the com-
manders in the Luang Prabang revion have
pledged their support to him. Several small
units operating against the Pathct Lao in
Sam Neua are being supplicd by Phoumi and
are probably respofhisive to his guidance.
Phoumi is handicapped, however, by poor
communications with these units. In Xieng

Khouang, the militant Meco tribesmen are -

being supplied with arms by Phoumi and are
currently conducting effective anti-Pathcet Lao
operations. mt

14. The Revolutionary Committee probably

has some political appeal in southern Laos.
Boun Oum is a member of the Royal Family

- Of Champassak which ruled southern Laos

until Laos was united by the French follow-
ing the Second World War. However, we
believe that Boun Gum and Phoumi lack
broad political appeal outside the south.
Phoumi’s loss of prestige among both political
and military leaders in Laos as a result of the
Kong Le coup has been only partially made
up by the Luang Prabang coup and General
Ouan’s defection. Moreover, Phoumi has in
the past proved to be an undependable and,
at times, careless military leader, highly am-
bitious and opinionated,

15. Phoumi’s. motivations in the present sit-

uation are probably a combination of per-

sonal pride and anti-Communist convictions.
He is frustrated by what he believes to be
inadequate US support and an ambiguous
US policy. However, he probably has never
intended to come to terms with Souvanna,
and probably has felt that the US would,
in the final analysis, support him. He would
like to retake Vientiane by force and almost
certainly has plans for such an operation.

16. King Savang. The King appears to,have

no personal courage. |He has been extremely
careful to stay within constitutional limits
and he has never asserted; openly and clearly,
his potential authority and infiuence. Al-
though it is quite clear that he distrusts

7 Jick. SecrEy

io ae

aes
