Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

\ .

a. It would seem desirable to acknowledge the acute sensitivity

of Cambodians to the U. S. attitude tqward Sihanouk's brand of neutrality
and to reinforce the general guidance nn this question given as ‘a regional
course of action in\paragraph 14 by more specific treatment in the country

section. xe

b. “Another problem which probably merits specific attention is i.

. the presence francaise in Cambodia. Guidance on U. S, policy toward

the attempt to maintain French influence in Cambodia, and on the use of this
influence in the furtherance of U. S. objectives, would appear desirable.

S ey Paragraphs 40 and 41, dealing with U. S. aid, probably eouta ee

be marised to reflect the fact tha at our military and economic assistance

“programs in sensitive fields are essentially preclusive in nature and to ey
- provide clearer guidance on the use of U, S,. aid to prevent communist

: pesetiation.

de Finally, the guidance on Cambodia's relations with its neigh-
bore might be strengthened to reflect the greater significance this problem
has assumed in recent months and consequently the more urgent need fox

‘the U. S. to exert a earenating influence, ~-: ,

‘and the guidance contained in paragraphs 43 through 49 is not entirely ade~ |

‘Lace. (Paragra aphs 42 43 ths ough 49)

-*4, Both the internal political saa tion. and the cox untry" & external. rela~
tions have evolved considerably since NSC 5809 was approved (April 2, 1958);

quate in the light of operational experience, ; i,
5, Mere specifically, our problem in the last few months has not been
"to strengthen the determination of the RLG to resist subversion" (P, 43)
or "to prevent L1o neutrality from veering toward pro~comraunism' (P, 44).
Without minimizing the importance of these objectives,. our immediate’
operational problem has been to persuade the Lao leadership from taking
too drastic actions which might provoke a reaction on the part of the North
Vietnamese and which might alienate free world sympathy for Laos--as for

: instance, outlawing and eliminating by force the NLHX, or taking a hard anti-

ae 2

a position in international atfair Be

6." Again, the events of the past summer have streng ened the. belief

of the. Lao in-the UN and have satisfied them that SEATO and, more impor~

tantly, the U, S. would come to their assistance in the event of armed
conflict with the communist ieee PURI eLOTSs the question now is not to

ey t

“*See Attachment: Laos: Political acl roneds

[Sear ea rahe nea ae meee PS UH

ae cae Pe : SECRET

bs
N>
CF}
ie
é

S
