Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

EE a et hE aye ees Tae 8 ee SBE CREE en neces
"Their concentration of activities in rural areas where comznunications and oy
’. terrain make it difficult for the government to cope with them recalls the a

.

tactics used against the French during the Indochina Waz. . Assassinations,
particularly of officials in rural arcas, continue at an alarrning rate of* .
about fifteen to thirty-five a month. Attacks on rubber plantations and _

reported communist plans to break up the land development, land reform and >

- agricultural credit programs indicate deliberate efforts to interfere with
Viet-Nam's economic programs,

Status of U.S. Actions: After a long period of negotiation,

——

President Ngo Dinh Diem has now agreed to place the Civil Guard under the _ ‘

‘Minister of Interior. The Embassy and the Government of Viet-Nam have
reached an understanding on a program to be presented to Washington for
training and cquipping the Givil Guard to enable it to cope with the situation
described above. The program, if approved, would be for the training and
equipping of only about 32,000 of the Civil Guard and not the total current
force of 48,000. A major question is whether this situation requires an im-=
‘provement in the Civil Guard, or whethex other existing Vietnamese security
forces, including the Army, can adequately deal with the situation, This
question is being discussed by the agencies concerned but agreement Has not
yet been reached,

35, —Economic Development, Economic development, though pro
gressing, is still at a rate below that which is politically necess sary to enatite
Free Viet-Nam to compete successfully with the communist regime in North

-Viet-Nam. The rate of development is also below what is politically desir-
“able in ordex to enable Viet-Nam ultimately to veduce.its heavy dependence
upon external assistance. This problem is further exacerbated at the present
time because demands on available resources to mect the communist mili- -
tary and subver> ‘ve threat are rising. It appears doubtful, therefore,

%
.

whether our political objectives can be achieved to the degree desixed..

Status of U.S. Actions: Means of mmebiticing additional Viet
narnese resources for development are undex study by the Vietnamese
Government. Defense support aid available fox economic development Was
‘reduced by $40 million in FY 1958 and further reduced by $35+20 million in
FY 1959, Vietnamese access to the Development Loan Fund (which is

. expected as secon as project engineering studies are complete) may offset
the FY, 1959 veduction but will probably not bring tote “1 aid available fox
: COUT OR EES nt back to.the FY eo 57 level,

“SECRET
