Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

pa SECRET ean eee

40. The Catholic population of approximately
950,000 appears to be the main center of
assive resistance to Communist indectrina-

tion and DRV control. The Communists ap-

pear to have recognized the special nature of
the Catholic problem and, probably with an
eye both fo reducing opposition and impress-
ing the evacuees in the south, have moved

’ slowly to restrict ehurch ‘activities. At the

-Jectivization of agriculture.

same time, they are attempting to weaken
the hold of the clergy over the communicants
py various means including visits of “puppet”
priests fram Eastern Europe. To date the
Vietnamese Catholic hierarchy appears‘ to
have been fairly successful in maintaining its
position among the Catholic population,

i. ‘The substantial ethnic minorities, who live
outside the river deltas, have an ingrained
dislike for all Vietnamese and there have been
some instances of armed opposition by the
tribal groups of north and northwest Tonkin,
To integrate these minorities politically and
to lessen their opposition to Communist lead-
ership, the DRV has established “autonomous
administrative areas” nominally controlled by
{tribal dignitaries loyal to the Communists.

In any event, Communist military and secu- -

rity forces are capable of eliminating any
active resistance in the north.

Economic Policies and Courses of Acticn
42, The regime is moving gradually to extend

jis contrs! over all aspects of the economy,’

but it hes not yet attempted detailed over-all
planning, the nationalization of ‘small pro-
ductive umits 2nd domestic trade, or the col-

regime is attempting to deal with immediate
problems on the following priority: (a) in-
creasing agricultural production; (b) restor-
ing the transportation network; and (c) re-

habilitating export industries, e. g., coal, ce-

ment, phosphates, and textile and other light
industries. Thus far the regime has not be-
gun to stress heavy industrial development
and is concentrating a major portion of its
industrial preduction on consumer goods.

_ J3, The regime’s major economic problem is

to meet the minimum consumption needs of
the population while developing a self-sup-

At present, the -

porting economy. Prior to 1954 the annual

. rice deficit of North Vietnam averaged about

200,000 metric tons. As a result of wartime
damage to irrigation facilities and an un-
precedented series of floods, droughts, and_
insect scourges, the rice deficit in each of the
past two years has amounted to at least
500,000 metric tons. With shipments from
South Vietnam cut to a trickle since 1954,
the DRV appealed to the Bloc for relief.
However, imports through April 1956, consist-
ing of token shipments from Communist
China and some 200,000 tons of Burmese rice
purchased by the USSN, have fallen far short
of minimum requirements. In December 1955
the DRV announced that the per capita food
consumption in that year had dropped at
times to as low as 500 calories per day.

14, There will probably be some improvement
in the food situation in 1956-1957. The USSR
has agreed to accept up to 460,000 tons of Bur-
mese rice each year through 1958. It is likely
that the Burmese will actually.ship a high
percentage of this figure and that the DRV
will receive a major share of this rice. Al-
though the spring crop in 1956 will probably
again fall below normal because of continued
adverse weather, the extensive efforts of the
regime to mobilize all segments of the popu-
lation for- irrigation repair, reclamation of
abandoned land, cultivation of new Jand, and
planting of subsidiary crops should lead to
a gradual increase in domestic output.

15. However, North Vietnam will not achieve
self-sufficiency in rice in the next few years
even with optimum weather conditions.
‘Planned investment to increase the supply
of fertilizers, pumps, improved seeds, and ag-
ricultural implements appears insufficient to
achieve a substantial increase in output in
the near future. Moreover, the current pro-
gram for redistribution of land will probably
depress production.

16. Rehabilitation of modern industries has
gone slowly due to « lack of raw materials,
technicians, and equipment. Coal production
in 1955 is estimated to have bécn about 700,-
000 tons compared to 900,000 tons under the
French in 1953 and the pre-World War II
peak of 2,600,000 tons.. The rate may reach

SECRET

LOGS
