ae

—~—-,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

, rage: Ss’ 2
; ‘Enclosure 1
TOP SECRET - Sensitive Dispatch
i . From Saigon

effective use be made of the weekly press conferences.of the Directorate
General of Information by channelling items of substantive information
through that agency for release, that foreign correspondents be permitted
to make trips in the country to learn for themselves the nature of the
Viet Cong threat, and that Ministers of, the Government be available to
have open and frank talks with correspondents about the accomplishments
and problems of the various Ministries. It is believed that this might
be helpful in improving the tone of foreign press articles.

5. We are pleased to learn that steps are being taken to increase
and stabilize the price of paddy to the peasants. We also suggest that
further efforts be made to grant brosder credit facilities to the

_ peasants.

It is the belief? of the Department of State that if measures such
as those suggested above, in addition to the ovher liberalizing steps
regarding elections of youth representatives to village councils,
sending tetter administrators into the countryside, periodic

“fireside chats", etc., are adopted in the near future, it would be
‘worthwhile to withhold the announcement of individual measures, so

that a meaningful official annovncement could be made, preferably by you,

of all of the liberalizing measures you are putting into immediate

effect. If the individval measures were not disclosed in advance, such
an across-the-board anmorncement of genvine liberalizing measures would,
we believe, have a most beneficial effect on the people of Viet-Nam and
on world opinion. It is certain that such an announcement would do

@ great deal to correct any erroneous impressions that have been given to
world opinion in recent months and encourage the world press and govern-
ment spokesmen to support you in your tireless efforts to eliminate the
Viet Cong threat and continue the fine progress attained in Viet-Nam

in such a short period of time.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ara 5
Se
oe
