5

~,

~@

.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3. 3}
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

“SECRET

anti-communist < and, in February, declared that I Laos had satisfied all :

urbe provisions of the Geneva Agreement, While the government has Eee
ene back on this bold stand and resumed an announced foreign policy of

—eueeall ty (with our encoura gem ent), in fact it has continued to oppose the

- exchange of diplomatic missions with any communist country and at home

has taken firm measures to counter and control the Neo Lao Hak Xat. The

_ progress which the government was slowly making, its firmness toward this’

partys and the party's consequent lessening prospects ofa peaceful tak erove's

have been considered causes: fox the eventa of the past summer. By reverting

£0" arraed subversion, the communists presumably sought to protect their

. apparatus and recover their influence which had been g gradual) y evoded over

several months, |.

"* 44, The events of this summer brought world: attention to focus on the
situation in Laos, Domestically, they resulted in strengthening the anti-+
communis t, 2 anti-Viet Minh convictions of the Lao leadership. Internationally,
they brought about the decision to establish an enlarged UN presence in the
country which would permit world opinion to focus rapidly on the situation
if new fighting were to break out. At the same time, the Lao gained a sense
of reassurance that SEATO and, more me aningfully, the U, S, were pre-
pared to stand by their country if it came to a showdown,

15. While it is.not inconceivable that a Cabinet with neutralist ten~
dencies might be created, such an eventuality is far less likcly than in
April 1958. Major elements of the Lao leadership are firmly committed to

anti-cormraunist stand, Therefore, the major problem is no lonyer one of
jnsuring an anti- communist government but rather one of giving the proee os
western anti-communist elernents cause for maintaining their position
encouraging greater cohesion among them and reassuring them that their
policies will permit their country to progress. This evaluation is stren ¢thenel
by the recent political crisis of December. o59aTanuary 1960 which brought
about the downfall of Phoui and the creation of a new Cabinet under Ko:
Abhay. While Kou has made public declarations of neutrality (in consozance
with our recommendations), all the Ministers on whom the Ambassador
called have made clear that they would continue to look to close cooper tion
with. the U. S. The Kov Government is charged with Propaxing Laos f.s
new elections in ee nee? futu Le.

v2]

ies wet oe (Pe ERC
