)

ans

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

uh, yer. NAM ues eb “Ee | eas 2

ode “SUMMARY. EVALUATION | we

*

a Bee P ectianeoonts related particularly toa U. S, course of action
‘to assist Free Viet-Nam to develop-a strong, stable and constitutional —
government which would: work toward the weakening of the communists
both North and South Vict-Nam. President Diem remained firmly in ere
despite some political dissatisfaction with his government, As a strongly
committed anti-communist country, iene aim displayed a serious concern
_about developments in Laos, Cambodia 's recognition of Cornmunist China,
“and the Use Se position in the Taiwan Straits, The cormmunists and dissie
Gents continued their campaign of as sasesaniions, especially of officials in

- pural areas and carried out attacks aimed at disrupting Viet-Nam's eco-

Romie DVOLVESSe Although the government gave increasing attention to
.Gevelopm ent of the economy, such development continued to be inhibited by
“almost pre-emptive military requirements which utilized a substantial
portion of Viet-Nam!'s total resources, including Uy S. aid, At the samne
‘time, communist North Vict-Nam continued to exploit for political and,
ee cal peepoees its own reportedly en? economic development,

: : -B, MATOR OPERATING | PROBLEMS FAGING THE UNITED STATES

eine

33, Diem's Internal Political F Position: Diern increased his travels
throughout the cc country fox the purpose of popularizing his regime. Increas-
ing accomplishments of the government in the economic and social fields
should also have beneficial political results. Nevertheless, the failure of
the government to fully rally certain elements of the middle class, the
intellectuals and fonmee officials to its support, the frustvation and rest~-
lessness of some of the present officials, and.some discontent ix the army ~
are sources of political weakness, This iseatistacts on is caused primarily
by the authoxitarian and pervasive political controls of the Ngo femily |

and its associates,

Status of U. S, Actions: The desizability of liberalizing po»
litical and. administrative controls is brought to the attention of the Vii =
namese Goverument, when considered appropriate by the U. S.. Ambassadox,

Posgisie nes of U. S. action are greatly limited due to the extreme sensi-*

eat

tivity of Vieinasacce feadone on this subject,

34, Internal Security. It has become increasingly clear that the
comraunista, no 1: nger expectant that Free Viet-Nam will fall. to their con-
trol through peasenal methods, are ex te6; uting a Gatet fully planned campaign
of violence aimed at undermining the stability of ¢ Diem Government.

. + S&CREr
