Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 14 of 18

SECRET-NOFORN Enel No. 1
Desp No. 278
From Saigon

of command by the Presidency; assignment of commanders to be

made on recommendations of the General Staff through the

Department of Defense to the President as contrasted with
recommendation to the President by civilian and political

advisers; clarification and definition of the responsibility and
authority between the province chiefs, military regional commanders
and local troop commanders; and centralization of control of the
various intelligence agencies.

Indications have been received that at least some of the
ideas which have been expressed by GVN officials are being
implemented. President Diem has told Ambassador Durbrow that
Colonel Nguyen KHANH, newly designated commander of the Fifth
Military Region (the southwestern area where insecurity is the
worst), has been given full military powers over the security
forces of the area regardless of the prerogatives of the province
chiefs. Diem also said that the GVN is extending an earlier plan
of appointing military officers as deputy province chiefs responsible
for security, and has placed them under the control of the military
regional commander.

According to a CAS report, the Assistant Secretary of State
for Defense issued a directive on February 1 ordering concentration
on anti-guerrilla training and tactics and enforcement of maximum
-security at all military posts.

Another CAS report states that President Diem, as a result
of recent urgings for improvement in relations between the
Government and the peasants, has ordered a slowdown in the program
of building regroupment centers ("agrovilles"). Secretary of State
for the Presidency TRUAN told Ambassador Durbrow on February 17,
however, that this program must be continued but perhaps at a
slower pace, as there is no way to provide protection to isolated
farm houses other than by regrouping such peasants into larger
communities. He admitted that the peasants have the normal human
reaction sf disliking being forced to work on the regroupment
centers, but he believes that after the centers have been completed
they will see the advantages offered. Diem told the Ambassador
on February 22 that, while he must continue to create "agrovilles,"
he is not planning to push too fast until one or two pilot towns
are in being so that the peasants can learn for themselves the
many advantages of this sort of rural organization.

CAS also reported that the NRM recently dispatched special
cadres to the provinces to obtain for the President information
on cases of dissatisfaction with high-handed or dictatorial
attitudes of local officials. Intelligence committees have also
been formed in each province which will report to the President
through the Minister of Interior. Diem told the Ambassador he had

SECRET-NOFORN

1271
