STIS A esa ip

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

11. The United States shovld continue to make clear its
own devotion to the principle of collective: security, its
belief thet regional Secueity arrangements provide maximum

rotection at minimum cost for all, and its expectation that
a\country's decision to participate in such arrangements is
based on its owm calculation of its best interests and does
not of itself constitute a claim for increased financial
aid. Where countries participate, measures to assure adher-
ence are desirable, normally including preferential treat-
ment-in-the fields of economic end military Ca eteaia as
justified by U. S. strategic objectives. Where new oppor-
tunities for affiliation develop they should be encom ea.
The United States should, however, eccept the right of each

“nation to choose its own path to the future, and should not

exert pressure to make active allies of countries not so
inclined, “The genuine independence of such countries from
Communism serves U. S, interests even though they are not
formally aligned with the United States. The United States
should accordingly support and assist them so long as they
remain determined to preserve their ow independence and.
are actively pursuing policies to this end.

12. To prevent the countries of Southeast Asia from ‘
passing into or becoming economically dependent upon the
Communist Bloc; to persuade them that fheir best interests
lie in greater cooperation and stronger affiliations with
the rest of the Free World; and to assist them to develop
toward stable, free repres sentative governments with the will
and ability to. resist Communism from within and without, and
thereby to contribute to the strengthening of the Free World.

) . IV. REGIONAL COURSES OF ACTION*

13. %Support end assist the countries of the area on the
basis of their will and ability to defend and. strengthen

their independence.

- .- 34, Respect each country's choice of national policy for
preserving its independence, but make every effort to demon-
strate the advantages of greater cooperation and closer
alignment with the Free World, as well as the dangers of
alignment with the Communist Bloc. .

courses of action are not apvlicable to the

* The f Folion
pore at this time: paregraphs 13, 14, 16,

State of es
22-a, end 32

_ 4,
&
ee)

-D

wn
ea
©
tere

- NSC 6012 .
