Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

eee ee oe 8 Taha an SECRET

Cheap cotton textiles and small manufactures from Commu-,
nist China appeared in greater quantities during the past year in many
’ Southeast Asian markets. This sharp competition has mainly affected
exports fz0om Japan and India, but also, in some instances, the production
of local textile mills. “

i Status, of U. S. Actions: With a vicw to offsetting the high
political impact of communist aid projects, the U. S. continued to pub-
licize the more dramatic accomplishments of U. S. aid programs, . In this
connection such a program as PL 480 assistance in the form of raw cotton
‘for pz ‘ocessing in third countries was one means of curbing further Chinese
Communist inroads into the textile market. A suppoxting factor in off-
setting communist aid projects is that remittances from overseas Chinese.
to relatives on the mainla: and have decreased markedly since the estab-
lishment of peopic's communes, From August to October, remitta inces’
through the Hong Kong branch of the Bank of China reportedly dropped
40 percent to the lowest volume since 1955, and a similar decrease is ©
' reported from Singapore. ‘art of this r eduction is attributed by sore to the
development of communes on the mainland, ;

7 Economic Aid Program Delays. Despite recent imnprovernents,

Petes ee

a ee

the impact of aid program delays | on U. Se relations in the area and on the
ability of the U. S. to meet the economic challenge of the communist bloc

‘requizes continued attention and emphasis at high levels within State and
‘ICA on eliminating these difficulties, Specifically, project apptoval pro-
: cedures, contracting and procurement still need faster handling. Person
nel selection, though greatly improved, requires Seen attention.

Status of U. S. Actions: Substantially fastex program approva als
have occurred this year under new programming procedures. Progress has
‘also been made in the initiation of corrective measures to reduce delays

in implementing @conoczic aid z activities. Several of these improvements
stem from action by the special committee recently established under the

ICA Director,

.

; The problem of delays has been made more acute in the past

by prernature commitments and assurances of aid, New legislation ¢ ‘ec«
‘tive this year prohibits obligation of any economic assistance funds for
projects costing over $100, 000 end requiring substantive technical ox

financial planning until necessary engineering, fina ancial or other plans are
completed and a reasonably firm cost estimate made, On the other hand, the
new legislation will also tend te increase the amount of time required be=
tween forsvlation and initiation of certain projects. 2

= A -
aie

€, Political Instability, Political instabi! ey is a potential problem

a
ets’ all the countries ¢ of the ¢ 1rca, Owing to the pene ively nar EEO base upen

SECRET .
