99. Policies Toward South Vietnam. Lack-
ing full Bloc support for its reunification
demands and recognizing that the July 1956
deadline for elections would not “be met,
the DRV is now adjusting its policies for the
longer pull. The regime’s public position that
the Geneva provisions must be fulfilled and
that nationwide elections must be held re-
mains unchanged. - However,.the DRV is now
playing down the demand for early reconven-
ing of the Geneva conference and increasing
its demands for direct north-south consulta-
Jhe DRV has accepted the position
taken by the Soviet Union at the London talks
that the ICC and Joint Armistice Commission
should continue their functions despite the
dissolution of the French High Command.
‘The DRV has also enlarged the scope of its
diplomatic activity to enhance its interna-
tional prestige and position and to secure the
broadest possible foreign support for eventual
implementation of the Geneva Agreements.

tions.

30. At the same time, the DRV has main-
: tained jis network of political and paramili-
tary cadres in the south. It has continued
ts efiorts to penetrate the government of
South Vicinam and probably is maintaining
contact with non-Communist but anti-Diem
Vietnamese, chiefly those now in exile, who
favor conciliation with the north. Through
use of nationalist themes and front organiza-
tions, it is attempting to retain popular fol-
lowing in the south.] Ninety-five thousand
men were evacuated frem the south in the
1 first few months following the Armistice. The
DRY probably views this group as a possible
instrument for subversive activity in South

+ Vietnam and some may have been retrained,
i reindoctrinated, and perhaps even reinfil-
trated}
ae |

$1. Policies Toward Laos and Cambodia. The
‘Communist rebel movement in Laos, the
Fathet Lao, is completely dependent on DRV
support and assistance to maintain its posi-
tion in the northern provinces, Although
‘ the DR¥ continues to support the Pathet Lao,
it has begun to soften its line toward the
Royal Lao government. In place of its earlier
criticisern of the Lao government, the DRV
now praises the Lao government's professed

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

differences.

France,

Political

SECRET

Il, SOUTH VIETNAM — CU
AND TRENDS

adherence to the “five principles of cocxist-
ence,” encourages Laos to adopt a neutral
foreign policy and to enter into direct consul-
tations with the Pathet Lao to resolve their

32. DRV policy toward Cambodia encourages’
neutralism and the establishment of wider
contacts between the Cambodian government
and the Communist world.
has virtually eliminated its previously bitter
condemnation of the Cambodian government
and is now extravagant in its praise of Cam-
bodian foreign policy and its “resistance” to
alleged US “plots” to undermine Cambodian
independence. Future DRV policies with re-
spect to Laos and Cambodia will probably
reflect the guidance of Moscow and Peiping.

33. Policies Toward Other Countries.
relations with other states in Asia, the DRV
has attempted to increase support for its
position on unification, to further the gen-
eral Bloc peace campaign, and to obtain dip-
lomatic contacts and recognition.
ent, North Vietnam is recognized by all Bloc
‘countries, but no non-Bloc country has ex-
tended full diplomatic recognition. India and
Indonesia have exchanged consular represent-
atives with both North and South Vietnam
and Burma has permitted the DRV to main-
tain an Information Office in Rangoon.
DRV has taken special pains to woo the In-
dian delegates to the ICC.

34. The DRV has severely curtailed remain-
ing French cultural activities in North Viet-
nam and the much publicized commercial
arrangements have been too restrictive to
hold or attract any significant economic ac-
tivity by the French. However, the DRV has
won French agreement to the establishment
of a commercial and cultural mission in Paris,
Its presence will complicate French reJations
with Diem and facilitate the maintenance of
DRV influence among Vietnamese resident in

The Hanoi radio

In its

At prés-

NT SITUATION

35. During the past year President Neo Dinh
Diem’s government has greatly strenethened

ce
