.

Leases ot eee =a
.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3 3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ae SECRET

Cong contro! in the countryside, particularly
in the southwestern provinces.

15. Dissatisfaction and discontent with the
government will probably continue to rise un-
less the security situation improves and uuless
Diem can be brought to reduce the corruption
and excesses of his regime. Although there
have been no popular demonstrations so far,

we believe that the possibilities for antiregime .

disturbances are increasing. The Viet Cong
will attempt to capture and control major
demonstrations that occur. Existing police

‘and civil guard strength is capable of con;

trolling small-scale disorders in major popu-
lation centers, but army support would be re-
quired if rioting became widespread.

16. Tht position of the army in the Viet-

‘namese political scene is not entirely clear.

The regime has taken pains to insure that
no one army figure could acquire such per-
sonal standing or prestige that he could range
himself and the army against the government.
However, there is some discontent among offi-

.

cers over Can Lao influence in promotions and
assignments, and concern over corruption and
nepotism in the army has increased. If un-
rest in official circles and urban elements
became extreme and attempts were made to
organize an antiregime opposition, the atti-
tude of the army would become a vital political
factor. But it is not clear what the army’s
action would be in these circumstances.

17. Although Diem’s personal position and
that of his government are probably not now
in danger, the marked deterioration since
January of this year is disturbing. These ad-
verse trends are not irreversible, but if they
remain unchecked, they will almost certainly
in time cause the collapse of Diem’s regime.
We do not anticipate that this will occur
within the period of this estimate. However,
if Diem is not able to alter present trends and_
the situation deteriorates substantially, it is
possible during the period of this estimate
that the government will lose control over
much of the countryside and political crisis
will ensue.

