; ‘normal suppliers,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a En . ' SECRET

_efusing any formal relations with the bloc until the ten year Communist
' rebellion in Malaya is ended,
‘45, Burma has the broadest bloc representation, having relations with
the USSR, Ceornmunist China, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Rumania, and
4ongolia, In Thailand only the USSR maintains a mission which, with some
20 officials, is considerably overstaficd in terms of the work at hand, Except
fox some 25 Polish officials on the International Control Gommission, there
weno-bloc officials in South Viet-Nam. : . :
= Economic Activity: pialaves with its large Chinese population, has
reen a focal p point of Communist China's commercial drive in Southeast Asia, .
Peiping is competing with Japan and Hong Kong and has intensified its trade
vromotion activities in Singapore since April. A wide variety of new Chinese:
sornm oddities axe appearing at prices slashed 10-20 percent below those of
: ‘The effectiveness of this campaign is reflected in a 40
“ wercent rise fi the value of Chinese Comméanist goods. imported during the -
_irst seven ‘months of 1958 over the comparable period in 1957, Malaya's total
“exports to the bloc from December 1957 through May 1958 were about
$43 million, Compared with the first half of 1957, exports to the bloc as a
vhole increased duving the December-May period by 42 percent and imports
declined 5 percent,- Cormmunist China was once again the principal bloc =
surchaser. >The marked increase in exports was caused by a doubling of
subbez exports to 75, 800 long tonse-15 percent of Malaya's total rubber
zports in the first half of 1958. -

47, China's drive for economic influence in Malaya, may;~-howevers be:
jeopardized by recent Peiping threats of trade sanctions against Malaya aor
Singapore in retaliation fox anti-Peiping rnoves by the Federation governe~
~ ment, Even if trade is only temporarily affected, Peiping's actions have -

‘caused sharply critical comment in the Federation and have bolstcved the -
alliance governme nts determination to curtail Chinese Communist economic

activitie a.

48, Cambodia made its first import alioes atinine in April vndex trade
agreements with the USSR, Czechoslovakia and Communist China. The value
of export licenses issued was much lower than the level set far imports.

ye However, the allocations totaled about $2,606,000 and, if actually used,
would raise imports from the bloc in 1958 to at least 10 percent of Cambodia's
planned imports, exclusive of those under aid programs,

49. The level of bloc trade with Thailand continucs to be less than ¢ one
vercent of total trade because of the relatively satisfactory economic con»
ditions in Thailand, its pro-west alignment, and extensive American aid.
Thailand refused Soviet forrnal trade evertuxes in March, but did oe its

“SECRET

Seems sy

a ea eg er ee pe

pe eee
