Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

SEC? A. Dah

b. Military. Because these countries do not have
the capability “of creating armed forces which could
effectively resist large- scale external ageression, the
United States willbe required to provide a basic shield
against Communist aggression. For the foreseeable
future, local will to resist aggression will depend on a
conviction in Southeast Asia that the United States will
contirme its support end will maintain striking forces
adequate to counter aggression in Southeast Asia with .
the capabilities described in current basic national
security policy. The combination of such U. S. force
and local will to resist would constitute the best
deterrent against aggression. Should the deterrent fail,
this combination would also provide the most effective

insurance that, in conjunction with eS and allied

forces, the United States could suppress aggression in
the area quickly and in a manner and on a scale best
calculated to avoid the hostilities broadening into
general war,

ce.’ Economic and Technica The insistence, through-

out most of the area, on economic development provides
the strongest lever for the exertion of influence by the
Free World or by the Communist Bloc. Without increased
external help from some source, most of the governments

of the area will be unable, even with adequate indigenous

effort, to manage the political demand for rapid better.
ment in the conditions of life and provide for sound
economic development. Failure to obtain such assistance
from the Free World will tend to drive these countries
toward economic dependence ‘on the Communist Bloc. The
general preference in Southeast Asia for Western tech-
nical and economic assistance gives the United States
and the Free World an opportunity to obtain primacy over
Communist efforts in key economic sectors The outcome
may, however, be strongly influenced by the success with
which the Free World can’ cope with Communist efforts to
exploit the existence of Southeast Asien export problems,
particularly those involving rice, In the period ahead,
'flexibility of U. S. procedure and rapidity of U. S. .
action will be increasingly important, if effective
advantage is to be taken of unexpected and trensient
opportunities,

run, the small, “yulnerable, and essentially dependent nations

5. The Problem of Rezional Association. Over the long

‘of Southeast Asia cannot exist satisfactorily as free nations

without closer associations than now exist,

1
ca
“one

ot
tne
CS
—

—

.

NSC 6012 SECRE"
