Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 13 of 18
SECRET-NOFORN Encl No. 1

Desp No. 278

From Saigon

other foreign officials Diem has become very frank in admitting
that many of the civilian administrators have been incompetent
and have abused their power. He has added he is removing these
and placing competent men in their jobs whose principal duty
will be to pay attention to the needs of the population and make
every effort to win their confidence. The President has become
quite aware of the adverse reaction of the people to indiscriminate
use of methods of coercion in carrying out the government's
programs in rural areas. He explained to the Ambassador at some
length on February 22 the urgent need for civilian officials to
explain in detail the reasons for the government's actions in
these matters in order that the population will fully understand
how they will benefit in the long run.

Ngo Dinh NHU, the President's brother and political advisor,
also told CAS on February 5 that the security forces need more
anti-guerrilla training. He added, however, that political
measures are the real key to defense against the VC attacks, and
mentioned specifically that GVN officials should consider political
aspects of a situation and not just concentrate on rapid physical
results to please the President.

In late January Vice President Neuyen Ngoc THO, according to
a CAS report, had a discussion with President Diem in which he
‘pointed out his belief that the reports which the President had
been receiving on internal security were incorrect as they
underestimated the size of the VC network in South Vietnam.
He reportedly reminded the President that he had told him a year
and a half ago that the GVN did not have a correct estimate of VC
strength and, unless this were obtained, the time would come when
the country would be unable to cope with VC subversion. Privately
Tho was said to have placed the blame for GVN loss of support among
the peasantry on province chiefs whose only activity was to apply
police powers strictly. He also was said to have indicated that
both Ngo Dinh Nhu and the NRM leaders, through the province chiefs,
were resp nsible for providing completely erroneous and optimistic
reports about the security situation. In a conversation with
Ambassador Durbrow shortly after the Tay Ninh attack Tho expressed
concern over the seriousness of the internal security situation, and
he also urged more anti-guerrilla training of the GVN security
forees,

Lieutenant General Le van TY, Chief of Staff of the Vietnamese
Army, has also expressed the view that further anti-guerrilla
training is required. In addition, according to MAAG, soon after
_ the Tay Ninh attack a meeting was held by the Assistant Secretary
of Defense with the Chief of Staff and Corps and Field Commanders
at which it was decided to make certain recommendations to the
President. These recommendations included adherence to the chain

SECRET-NOFORN

1270
