Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

does not indicate a choice of communism by the Lao electoxate but simply
a protest vote against war and couruption and in favor of peace, nevirality -

and new faces, itis clear that the Neo Lao Hak Xat has emerged as a

well-organized and disciplined legal pclitical par ty whose aim is to estab
lish communist control of Laos, probably by parliamentary means,

- The conservative leaders have been badly shaken by the com-
“munists show-of strength which resulted largely from conservative failure
to agree on a minimum consolidated list of candidates. Available figures
indicate that conservative candidates received a clear majoxity of the

‘popular vote but that conservatives got only a minority of the seats at
‘stake, Jt is possible fox the conservatives; if given a little organization

and discipline, and reasonably effective leadership, to form an all-
conservative government, They have a majority of the enlarged Assem=
* bly and they possess the psychological advantage of having received a.
popular majority in the elections, We are now considering various pos»

sibilities zeteene to a ere rina of our effort in Laos.

—
a

265 “Monetary Ref form. Nevetiadon to achieve a single re ealistic

: Pate of exchange, without: trade and exchange restrictions were pursued .

“ first in Vientiane and latex in Washington during and after the Lao Prime
Minister's visit, Because the U.S. could not guarantee that imrnediate
devaluation would net jeopardize conservative chances in the elections,

“as unanimously contended by Lao leaders, the U.S. agreed that monctary

xeform should not take place until some time after the recent supplemen~
tary elections. The U.S. insisted, however, that new releases of aid .
dollars be placed in a segregated escrow account pending devaluation and
assurances that the ultimate XP value would eventually be deposited into
the counterpart fund. The U.S. declined to effect further dollar transfer
(project aid was not shinee owing to the Lao Government's reluctance
to accept lenient escrow arrangements offered, Scandalous import

di licensing was stopped when negotiations led to acceptance by the Lao
Government of new procedures proposed by the U.S. There have been.

no abuses since. The Lao Government proposed that U.S, aid dollars

“<-henceforth be placed in a segregated account in the Lao National nie

and not be used until ager eement is reached between the U.S. and Lao
on sich matters. The U.S. agreed that this device would be epee a

until negotiations are reopened in June in the hope that this would accom=

plish U.S. objectives and also permit the Lao to save face.
Zt. ao National Army 7 Traini ing, Because the French Military
Mission is so reduced in streng th and quality that itis unable to fulfill -
its responsibilities, the Lao National Army is not recciving proper train«
ing, result ting in deteri oration of its capabilities and increasing lack of.
