Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

-adverse political effects in the south and
‘could lead to increased internal and inter-
' national pressure for reunification of . Viet-
- nam under a coalition government with the
- Communists.

59. His refusal to permit nationwide elections
and to assume responsibilities under the Ge-
neva Accords raised the possibility of a with-
‘agrawal of the ICC fdllowing the deactivation
of the French High Command in April. To
deal with this situation, representatives of
the Geneva co-chairmen (the UK and the
USSR) met in London during April and May
1956. The USSR failed to press DRV de-
mands that the co-chairmen reopen the Ge-
neva conference. Instead, the co-chairmen
finatly agreed upon identical letters to the
—pRV end GVN requesting them to prevent

eny violation of military clauses of the Ge-
neva Accords, to insure implementation of the
political terms, to submit at the earliest pos-
sible time a convenient deadline for direct
‘consultations and for holding ‘all-Vietnam
elections, and to give every assistance to the
icc. The co-chairmen requested the ICC to
continue supervising the Armistice. They re-
quested the French government to continue
its good offices in support of the ICC, to reach
agreement with the GVN to facilitate the task
oi the ICC and the Joint Armistice Commis-
sion (French-DRV), an d to preserve the status
quo until such new arrangements could be put
into effect.

60, Despite his past refusals to assume respon-
sibiiiies under the Geneva Accords, in his
“response to the co-chairmen’s message Diem

.

acreed to respect the Armistice and to pro-.
o

vide security for ICC members. He recognizes
the deterrent value inherent in the presence
of the ICC, and appears willing to take action
necessary to continue its function but con-
-{inues to-avoid the acceptance of any legal
obligation under the Geneva Accords.

61. Franco-Victnamese relations continue to
reflect considerable ill-will and distrust on
poth sides. Recent causes of friction include
disagreements concerning the. future status
and role of French military training missions,
residual military base rights in South Vict-
nam, and the equivocal French attitude to-

~

SECRET wor eae

ward the Communist regime in the north.
The French now exercise little Influence in
Vietnamese afiairs and there is little prospect
for any improvement in relations in the near
future. |

62. South Vietnam-US relations have re-
mained close and friendly during the past
year. There have been few evidences of Viet-
namese resentment of increasing US influence
and activity in South Vietnam despite con-
tinual efforts by the Communists and some
local French to stir up dissatisfaction on that
score, The GVN would like the US to raise:
the mutually agreed ceiling on VNA force.
levels and desires greater autonomy in ad-
ministering the foreign aid program. Diem‘
would also like the US to exercise maximum
political pressure, especially on the UK, India,
and France, to enable the GVN to avoid any
responsibility for the Geneva Accords.

63, Relations between South Vietnam and
Cambodia have been strained by activities of
resistance groups in border areas; by treat-
ment of rninority groups, by boundary dis-
putes, and most seriously by disagreements
relating to trade arrangements. A trade stop-
page early in 1956 was removed through in-
formal mediation by the US, and by the terms
of settlement official representatives have
been exchanged for the first time. The basic
causes of friction remain, however. Vietnam

" does not desire full diplomatic relations with

Cambodia because it fears such action would
lead to Cambodian recognition of the DRV as
well. There are no pressing problems in Lao-
Vietnamese relations and South Vietnam’s re-

lations with the Philippines and Thailand are

generally good.

WV. THE OUTLOOK IN VIETNAM
Probable Communist Courses uf Action
Toward South Vieinar

64. The DRV probably estimates that its
chances for securing control of South Viet-
nam by means short of open attack or large
scale guerrilla action supported from the a
north will gradually diminish with the pas-—
sage of time.| As indicated by Soviet and
Chinese Communist performance in the pasi

eee SECRET

1078
