“3” to Peiping. ‘

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

OMS
ANNEX
Decembex 18, 1958

ory

SINO-SOVIST BLOG ACTIVITIES IN MAINLAND SOUTHEAST ASIA‘

Sino+Sovict Bloc Activities in Ma ainland Southeast Asia, (Prepared by
ss CIA without inter-agency coordination as an informal document for use
by the OCB Working Group and as background for the information of
~ the-OCB and the NSC) =: 5 gneeee),

-? 40. General Bloc Policy: The Sino-Sovict bloc is actively working to
encourage nevtralisrn in Southeast Asia; to destroy the Southeast Asia Treaty
Organization, and to encourage the creation of a group of independent,
nationalist anti-Western entities which might t ultimately come under close

 Sino-Sovict influence. te 3 ,

41. Bloc policy has been flexible and epportunistic, adjusting itself to

the degree of anti-communism evident in each state. Peiping and Moscow
" have avoided pressing too urgently and have sought to influence by example

. the states in which conditions have been most favorable to them. Thus in
-Cambodia and in. Burrna-»at least up te the change in governm Gri e where

bloc activity has been most pronounced, Moscow and Peiping have attempted
to be circumspect and have tried to folfill ec onomic aid agreements pee)
and satisfactorily. , ; af

42, Communist China and the USSR for the most part appear to have
resexved a judgment for the present on developments potentially adverse to
them in Burma, Laos, and Malaya. The bloc continues to stand on-a prow

fessed plank of noninterference in the internal affairs of other states embodicd

in the "Five Principles" enunciated by Chou En-lei and Nchru in 1954, . Chou
repeated his'advice" to Cambodia's Chinese to "refrain from taking part in,
"political. activi ties" Be vi a the August visit of Cambodia's Pringe Sihanouk

.

*

43, -The immediate aim of local Communist parties is two-fold--to ©
achieve legality and eventually to turn their governments! policies into neue
tralist channels, The USSR and Communist China complement that aim by
discreet and frequent oifers of "disinterested" economic aid and wider
culiuxal relations. ane ae

‘44, Dip! omatie Activity. Repeated iiee initiatives to expand diplomatic
represe Re Gae he eee met with success in Cambodia but not in Laos. Cambodia,
which alruady has resident missions from the USSR and Czechoslovakia, ~
recognized Gommunist China in July and ambassadors heve been excha anged,
This is a significant diplomatic victory for Peiping in Southeast Asia and w °°
‘eonsidezably aise Communist China! 6 prestige among the Overseas Chinese
in the area, Malayan Prime M inister Abdul Rahman continues his Boeey of

_

Fee's

Roxy =
eP

Be at

ee et ee

—

He 0 peg ee
