pe

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

SECRET

asia, bearing in mind his extreme Senatbinity to any sugges-
tion of Preesive or slight, -

yh, Since real or fancied threats from neighboring
free World countries have been a: major factor contributing
to Cambodia's sense of insecurity and its consequent readi-
ness to accept Sino-Soviet Bloc support, endeavor persis-

. tently. and firmly. to improve Cambodia's relations with

these countries, particularly Thailand and Viet Nam, Take
every eu eR occasion to impress on the governments of
neighboring countries the importance of repairing Des

relations witan Cambodia.

45. Seek means effectively to peonote a sense of
responsibility on the part of Sihanouk and other Cambodian
leaders for exerting sustained effort to create conditions
conducive to better relations with neighboring countries
and for avoiding contentious and Re statements.
When feasible and consistent with over-all U. S. interests,
take steps to prevent provocative actions by any of the
countries concerned,

46, Encourage positive cooperation. between Cambodia
and neighboring countries such as joint participation in
the development of the Lower Mekong River Basin as a nucleus
for regional cooperation and mutual aid, |

h7, Continue to provide modest military aid to enable
the Cambodian armed forces to maintain internal security
against Communist subversion or other elements hostile to
U, S. interests and to discourage Cambodia. from accepting
substantial military aid from the Sino-Soviet Bioc,

45, Concentrate U. S, economic and technical assist-
ance primarily in those areas in which increased Corrunist
influence would entail the greatest threat to Cambodiats
neutrality and independence,

49g, In view of the relatively strong position still
maintained by France in Cambodia, seek opportunities for
greater mutual understanding and cooperation with the

French in the furtherance of common Free World objectives,

LAOS

50. Provide military assistance for the development
and support of Lao armed forces capable of maintaining
internal security against Comraunist sudversion or other
elemonts hostile to U. S. interests and providing limited

NSc 6012 ha | SECK«:
' (Revised 8/2 1/60) a
