. WAY

“TI, CAMBODIA

bodians sey be prepared and able to take.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

“ Jt 25 ae ao SEGRE

16. “Military Assi stance Progra am. A delay which must appear to A

“the Burmese as > as inordinate has taken place in the Washington formulation

‘ofa specific, offer. with regard to the magnitude and terms of the military

assistance which we are commit tted in principle to make available to the

Burmese. Legal difficulties encountered here have now been resolved
and Embassy Rangoon has ee Supp. plicd wa negot tiating instructions,
1%, ‘Police. Assistance Program. Although negotiations on the oS)
million police program mam Joan are still foi going on, the program has begun,
A way was found for initiating the program promptly by providing tempor~

ary drawdown against the existing line of credit for the period required

to negotiate and conclude an effective agreement, The Burmese appear
satisfied that the U. S. is demonstrating a timely interest, A survey of
requirements has been completed and procurement of equipment is under

o 38; U. Kyaw Nyecin Visit ‘Plans aye being. drawn up for a visit

= +6 the. United States by Deputy Prin ime Minister U. Kyaw Nyein in the late
‘summer or fall of 1958, Our inability to provide official "red carpet"

tueatment to U. Kyaw Nyein,; who has been lavishly entertained in the -

“USSR ‘and Communist China, is being at least partially overcome by sup
BS assistance from the Asia. Foundation, aT,

“A. SUMMARY EVALUATION

F 19. As avresult of sustained efforts of the coxmmunist bloc to con-

!
= = - . o = * i
solidate adventages it gained in Carnbodia in 1956, the internal security {

.. Situation has clearly deteriorated. However, there has been evidence re~

cently that Prince Sihanouk and other Cambodian leaders are increasingly
aware of the potential dangers of cormmunist activities, and some steps
have been taken to control subversion, In the short run, the situation in
Cambodia is not alarming, since the population as a whole remains

strongly Buddhist, loyal to the monarchy and united under the leadership

of Prince Sihanovk,. and it has not yet been heavily subjected to communist

-jnfluence. In the long run, there is greater danger that the extension of

communist influence may overcome euch countermeasures as the Cam-

Thexe has been a reduction in pro-communist sentiment with~
in the Chinese community in Cambadia, largely because of the Carnbodian

- Government's action in the internal security field.

Pre
