.

i

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET 6

leaving tie country open to carly domination
»y the Communists. :

27. If no political settlement is reached be-
tween Phoumi and Souvanna, the US may
soon be taced with the followimg situations:

; (a) ASouvanna solution, which would gravely

| risk ultimate Communist supremacy. This

would involve serious adverse consequences
for the US position in Southeast Asia, and
over the longer run, would greatly facilitate
Communist subversion, infiltration, and ex-
pansion in Southeast Asia. (b) A widespread

- civil war in which the Phoumi forces almost

certainly could not prevail or even survive
without extensive outside assistance. Such
assistance to Phoumi in a civil war situation
would probably prompt a Souvanna appeal
to the UN and_ would risk the introduction of
North Vietnamese or even Chinese Commu-
hist “volunteers.” While ‘at least initially,
extensive assistance to Phoumi in a civil war
would not have the support of the Western
members of SEATO or possibly of most
Free World opinion, if successful it would
strenethen the SEATO area against further
Communist aggression.

28. Even if the various non-Communist fac-
tions surmount the immediate crisis by a
political settlement, the fundamental politi-

+ SECRET

*

a ee ete

cal and social problems of Laos will remain
and, as a result of recent events, will prob-
ably be more acute than before. Patnet Lao
armed strength will be greater and more
Communist footholds established in villages
throughout the country. Solutions to the
fundamental problems,: if indeed there are
solutions, can be worked out only over a
long period of time. Meanwhile, the urgent
threats of the Pathect Lao on one hand and
the centrifugal force of non-Communist dis-
unity on the other, will operate against the
solution of long-term problems.
29. Consequently, we believe that any non-
Communist government assuming power in
the wake of the present crisis would, in time,
face very heavy pressure to move toward a
neutralist position and Pathct Lao integra-
tion into the political life of the country, or
face the likclihood of the situation gravitating
again toward civil war. It will be extremely
difficult for the non-Communist leaders of
Laos to resist this pressure and to contain
the Pathet Lao unless they devclop a much
greater degree of unity, determination, and
nationalism than they have in the past, take
effective measures to win the loyalty of the
peoples of Laos, and nk extensive outside
assistance to this end.

Lot os

a en re ste re ee ee ee ec ee el a A TS A a en ge
