Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

b. Answer: A major proportion of U.S. resources available
for assistance to Southeast Asia should be allocated to economic and
technical assistance. Greater emphasis should be placed on creating
an expanding number of technically competent, pro-Western leaders and
on "political warfare" activities, at the expense of economic assistance,
if necessary. ‘Grant military assistance should, in general, be limited
to those nations which either are threatened by Communist aggression or
are willing to provide forces for collective defense measures in support
of common: commitments. Reimburseable military assistance should be
extended to allied nations capable of bearing the cost and to other
nations which are inelisible for grant assistance but are willing to
develop their own capabilities to resist Communism.

3. Absolute Level of Assistance

a. Question: Should the absolute level of U.S. economic,
technical and military assistance to Southeast Asia be increased,
decreased, or maintained at present levels in the light of the current
Soviet campaign of political and economic penetration?

b. Answer: The absolute level of U.S. economic, technical
and military assistance should be maintained at present levels in the
light of the current Soviet campaign of political and economic penetration.
However, in neutralist countries, military assistance should be decreased
where it is in excess of the needs for maintaining internal security.

h. Functions of Indigenous Military Forces

a. Question: Should indigenous military forces in Southeast
Asia be designed (a) solely to maintain internal security, (b) to main-
tain internal security and assist local. external Communist aggression,
or (c) in addition to (a) and (b), to contribute to collective defense
efforts in the area?

b. Answer: Indigenous military forces in Taiwan, Thailand
and the Philippines should be designed to maintain internal security, to
resist local external Communist agsression and to contribute to collective
defense efforts in the area. Indigenous military forces in South Vietnam
should be designed to maintain internal security and resist Viet Ninh
overt Communist aggression. Military forces of other Southeast Asian
nations should be designed solely to maintain internal security.

5. U.S. Response to Aggression

a. Question: Wheat political and military action should the
U.S. be prepared to undertake alone or in cooperation with allies in
the event of Communist seizure of control within, or overt aggression
“against, a Southeast Asian country? What would be the role of SEATO
in these eventualities?

-2- Page 2 of 3 pages
