Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

26. Hold or reduce the number of U. S. officials in each country
+o a strict minimum consistent with sound implementation of essential
programs, in order to head off an adverse political reaction to the
presence of a large number of Americans in relatively privileged positions.

27. Promote increasing Asian Buddhist contact with and knowledge
of the free world. Explore with friendly religious organizations ways
of developing Buddhist fraternal associations and identification with
free world religious leaders and movements.

28. Continue activities designed to encourage the overseas Chinese
communities in Southeast Asia (a) to organize and activate anti-Communist
groups and activities within their own communities; (b) to resist the effects
of parallel pro-Communist groups and activities; (c) generally, to increase
their orientation toward their local governments and toward the free world;
and (ad) consistent with their obligations and primary allegiance to their

- local governments, to extend sympathy and support to the Chinese National
Government.

29. Discreetly encourage local governments to work toward assimi-
Jation of racial minorities.

30. Implement as appropriate covert operations designed to assist
in the achievement of U. S. objectives in Southeast Asia.

31. Promote economic cooperation between the countries of the area
and Japan and with the Government of the Republic of China, to the extent
feasible without jeopardizing the achievement of U. S. objectives toward
the individual Southeast Asian countries.

32. In order to promote increased cooperation in the area and to
deny the general area of the Mekong River Basin to Communist influence’
or domination, assist as feasible in the development of the Mekong River
Basin as a nucleus for regional cooperation and mutual aid.

Vv. COUNTRY COURSES OF ACTION IN ADDITION TO THE "REGIONAL
Pen ee ek a a eel eel a aa
COURSES OF ACTION” ABOVE

BURMA

33. In view of the emerging opportunities in Burma and the
repercussions that developments there will have on the uncommitted
areas of Asia and Africa, make a special effort to influence an
increasingly favorable orientation in Burma's policies.

.

wse 5612/1 ; TOP SECRET
1090
