Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

LJ

LAOS: POLITICAL BACKGROUND

9, Jn April 1958 an electoral campaign was caer way in which the oe
Tao Hak Xat, the communist-front party, was permitted to eae caee & 5: The
campaign was being fought for 21 seats to the National Assembly me a “
ment of a provision of the Political Agreement which had been signed be~
tween the Royal Lao Government and the cornmunist dominated Pathet Lao

“thé previous November. This agreement had also provided for the entry fe :
; ‘two Pathet Lao leaders into the Cabinet, The Military Agreement, signed a
‘the same time, provided fox the integration of two Pathet Lao Renercns Sao 2
the Lao Army and the demobilization of the balance of the Pathet Lao fox ces Be
‘Jn sum, with communist and fellow-traverlers permitted to enter phe Cabinet,
He the administration, the army and the National Assembly, the fave oe ae
“appeared in the spring of 1958 to be cloudy indeed, The xesults of the elec

tions, which were held in May, confirmed our fears, The Neo Lao Hak Xat

and a sate ‘Mite party won 13 of the 21 seats at stake, gene pices: pT

of ns par iy" s strength and organi aetaCes

/-10, Since then, poe commuaites elements have taken a firmer stand
toward the NLHX and a take-ovex by peaceful means, which we may pre=
sume the PL anticipated and we ourselves feared, does not appear to be an
atediots possibilitye

ll, The election results gave anti-cormmunist patriotic Shnents a
pevere shock and in reaction the two major political parties merged into one
(Rally of the Lao People}, while a group of young. selatively bettex educz ated
ren in the government, military and business circles organized Oe eevee
Snto a so-called Committee for the Defense of the National Interests fepty 3
The CDNi's stated purpose was to support any Cabinet, political party and
individual who aeet in the national, intere sts, The CDNI was strongly ante

comm uni St.

j 12. In July 1958, the vacillating Souvanna Phouma, who negotiated with

.. the Pathet Lao, resigned as Prime Minister and, in August, Phoui Saneni-~

kone formed a new Cabinet from which the Pathet Lao were excluded az |

which comprised representatives from both the Rally and the CDNI pre-.

senting a solid anti-cornmunist front. This Cabinet, which was further
o

strengthened in January 1959 by the inclusion of three senior army offi -rs,
tackled one by one some of the major problems which had been left pending

ate

by previous governments, It carried out monetary reform, a partial adrnin«
. eo A = * 1 . a ; stares

istrative shakcup, undertook various village aid and Peyenereeslat yar

programs, and cons sented to haye France aad the United, States implement

a joint training pt gram for its army.

13, In Jenvary 19 59, the Prime ae inister declared unequivocally before
== = + 2, + + a
the Assembly that the government's forcign ee W30 pro-western and

Tamed
page)
ert
PD
