Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
‘OPERAT IONS COORDINATING BOARD
Waghington 25, Dy ©. ‘

January 7, 1959
“-- * REPORT ON SOUTHEAST ASIA (NSC 5809)
(Appz: ved by the President, April 2, 1958).
(Period Covered: From May 28, 1958 through Janna ary 7, 1959}

.*

* a

=~

oe

ie REG IONAL

A.) SUMMARY EVALUATION

1, General

: : Qo Progress was irregular in assisting the countries in
Southeast Asia to Gevelop toward stable, free representative governments .
with the will and ability to resist communism. The danger that any of them

may pass into the communist orbit varies from country to country.

Thailand, Vict-Nam and the Federation of Mal aya maintained an antic
communist position. A.drift toward political confusion in Burma wes .

inferrupted by General Ne Viin's accession to the premicrship and Ae

-immediate stand against communism. The Lao Governmi>at withstood

neutralist-and communist efforts to overthrow it, eliminated communists
from cabinet positions and took jnitial steps toward countering comraunist
political and subyersive progress in the countrys ide. Its prospects Of
successfully warding off communist subversion and achieving stability have

“Improved considerably since the low point reached in the May elections,

. the organization, The Military Planning Office in Bangkek developed a
comprehensive plan fox combined SEATO military exercises in FY 1959,

but genuine non-cemmunist unity has not yet been a achieved, -Cambodia,
while maintaining its neutral position, made a awing to the leit in recogs
nizing Conimunist China end then Prince Sihanouk tried to balance this
move to some extent with @ visit to the United States, In Singe pore the
moderate governing Labor Front failed to improve its position, In the |
future it may be seriously threatened by the extreme leftist People’ § A tio
Party which has shown increased evidence of pop ate LY BUppOTt. -

b, Slight progress was rade in a second objective of per
daaing the countries that. their best interests Ne in greater. cooperation

oe stronger a affiliations with the rest of the free world, Under SEATO

‘pati sfactory. progvess continued on both the military and civilian sides. of

Informal political consultation improved and-was characterized by the
active participation of all of the members, Particularly noteworthy was
the improvement in the material preeuced by the Publi t¢ Relations Office

>. \ as Ge. 2 SECRET

*
f

Pema,
cm
Bp)

ince

oe lh ae ale a eet ae

Pe eee mms ee re
