Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_ SECRET

9, Utilize Thailand's central location in Southeast
-tg as 2 point from which to create discontent and internal
NS epiculties within nearby Communist-dominated areas and
waerart Communist subversive efforts in neighboring free
countries; to a degree consistent with U. S. policies ane
erograns in neighboring free countries.

| 60. Provide military assistance to Th ailand for support
-f forces sufficient:

a. "To maintain internal security.

b. To present limited initial resistance to
external aggression,

* fo make a modest.contribution to collective
" aefens @ of contiguous SEATO areas.

continue to urge the Tnai Government to improve the organi-
gation of the Thai Armed Forces so as to make a maximun
contribution to the above objectives, ;

61. Encourage and support an improvement in relations.
between Mhadtane and Cambodia.

VIET NAM , | , oe |

62. Assist Free Viet Nam to develop a strong, stable)
and constitutional government to enable Free Viet Nam to
assert an increasingly attractive-contrast, to conditions
in the present Communist zone, In this regard encc: age | we
and assist public relations and public information prograens | ©
of the Government of Viet Nam directed both internally to
‘the Free Vietnamese and externally to North Viet Nam, ie

63. Work toward the. weakening of the Communists in
“North and South Viet Nam in order to bring about the 4:
eventual peaceful reunification of a free and independent
. Viet Nam under anti-Communist leadership,

. - 64, Support the position of the Government of Free’ .

Viet Nam that all-Viet Nam elections may take place only 3%
after it is satisfied that genuinely free elections can

be held throughout both zones of Viet Nam,

. 65. Assist Free Viet Nam to build up indigenous armed
forces, including independent logistical and administra- 2,3,¥%
tive services, which will be capable of assuring internal —
security and of providing limited initial resistance to
attack by tne Viet Minn, ’

NSC 6012 Aeon =e SECRET
(Revised 8/21/60) 7 -
