} 7 19. Basie economic development is also in-
hibited by the GVN’s preoccupation with
South Vietnam’s problems of internal segurity

|

. . -
ae 2 14 ee eee ‘

20. Another aspect of the economic situation
has political as well as economic ramifications.
1 A considerable amount of US aid is in the form
; of grants of dollars which are used to import
commodities. This practice has tended to in-
| industries, although steps are now being taken

ported a standard of living higher than the
try could maintain on its own resources.

é A significant cutback in the standard of living:
“would” probably create scrious political prob-
ie lems for the _government. The present slow

i
—

} coun

delay, considerable progress is being made in
a modest agrarian reform program. In addi-
‘tion, almost 100,000 persons from crowded
urban and coastal areas have been relocated
on land development projects in the Mekong bids to “regularize”’
delta area and in the sparsely populated cen-
tral highlands.
these last mentioned projects has not yet been

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

% SECRET

far below prewar levels.
passed 1939 levels and has replaced rice as

a

proved. The eb siiement of refugecs from
the north is about completed.
tion is approaching 1939 levels, but increased
and military preparedness. It continues to domestic consumption has kept rice exports
regard programs for long-range economic
growth as of lower priority than the building
of defense strength. Moreover, for political the nation’s major export.
/ reasons, it is reluctant to take any measures
which might reduce the country’s relatively
high standard of living. Consequently, the
GVN devotes only a small part of available
resources to long-range economic development../.
Diem is hopeful, however, that resources for |
‘development will be provided from external
sources, principally the US and the Japanese
reparations settlement. There is little pros-
pect for private foreign investment, primarily
because “of the unsettled security situation,
uncertainty regarding GVN economic policy,.
and other factors creating an unattractive
economic climate.

Rice produc-

Rubber has sur-

22. Some constructive long-range measures

are being taken. The GVN is attempting to

increase internal revenues by strengthening
) its tax system and is trying to restrict domes-
4°" tic consumption and total imports to about
present amounts. If the main part of the
defense burden is carried by the US, it is prob-
able that over the next few years the steps
taken and planned by the GVN will enable
domestic production to expand and thus re-
duce the balance of payments deficit on goods
and services, which was about $190 million
in 1958. The planned development of man-

.. ufacturing would make possible over the

| enero 2

sponsor. The GVN1

21. Nevertheless, South Vietnam is making and to assert their
some economic progress. The heavily dam- Which they believe tc
aged transportation network is being repaired.

SECRET
TAGE

ene

D. South Vietnam's Folcign Relations

next five years the lowering of import require-
ments by about $25 million a year.
same period the trade gap should narrow by
another $30 to $40 million if land development
and rice productivity programs produce the
hibit the development of local consumer goods - planned results. Even if these results are
achieved, however, South Vietnarn will still”
to encourage domestic industries. Ithassup- have large foreign trade and internal budget
deficits and continue to depend upon US aid.

In the

23. South Vicinam’s foreign policy is based

upon fear of and rigid opposition to commu-
‘pace -+of ‘economic development holds little : rarer Bit. SEpOs

‘promise that the gap between the present
‘ living standard and the capacity of the econ-
“omy will be closed in the foreseeable future.

nism, anil upon a conscious dependence_on.
the US as ils major source of assistance and
protection and as its principal in -rnational °
aders desire to maintain
nation’s independence,
be endangered most di-
rectly by the activities and milita’ , strength
After an initial period of frustration. and of North Vietnam. They are also concerned
over what they consider the weakness and
pro-Chinese Communist orientation of Cam-

bodia, and the machinations of the French,

24. DRV: In responding to persistent DitV
relations, GVN policy is
to impose conditions it is sure will be un-
The economic viability of° acceptable. . By this means the GVN secks to
im}ove is propaganda pos sition, while main-
