Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

.

SECRET
' continues in most Southeast Asia countrics regarding the presence of* ee
large numbers of U.S., British and French citizens. :
8, SEATO, SEATO has a continuing probiem in popularizing the /
organization within Asian momber countries as well as in the general
treaty area. It is essential that this problem be solved if the leaders of
| Asian meraber countries are to succeed in countering domestic criticism ...
‘ of SEATO membership; and if SEATO is to attract new members (notably
Malaya). From the position taken by representatives of the Asian members
in various SEATO forums, itis clear that they consider membership in
SEATO should enable them to obtain preferential treatment in the alloca~
tion of economic assistance, - To TSS i ss my . F
9, Sino~Soviet Bloc Economic and Psychological Inroads. A come ,~
bination of fairiy widespread acceptance of communist coexisience propa~
ganda; 2 desire to profit from communist "largess" and conviction that
communist infiltration is controllable, facilitates communist efforts to
‘promote acceptance of their economic aid programs. In addition,
although bloc aid has ‘boomeranged psychologically in certain instances,
“notably in Burma and less so in Cambodia, the resistance to bloc aid is
reduced by its reputation for "speed", “easy terms" and the apparent —
absence of "strings", In some instances, U.S, assistance, because of
premature commitments oy assurances of aid on the one hand and subse~
quent delays, appaxent inflexibility and conspicuous checks and control
procecures on the other, suffers by comparison in these respects, The
high political imp .ct of communist aid projects emphasizes the import-
ance of continuing efforts to maximize the effectiveness of U.S, aid
programs. te Ele pentec Sn a ee

« While Burma and Cambodia continue to be the chief bene~ v

ficiavies of bloc aid, a general offer of assistance to the underdeveloped

Asian countries was made by the Soviet delegate at recent ECAFE. meet»

ings in Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur. Also, in addition to credits of up to

five years fox the purchase of machinery and equipment, the USSR c::2e" 25:
announced it would consider longwterm agreements for the purchase of
basic exports. ‘The USSR has offered a trade agreement to Thailand.

_. Burma has indicated its intention to use Soviet assistance in
the priority construction of.a technological institute, a hotel and a
hospithl, The number of Soviet technicians in Burma is soon expected to
increase greatly. Communist China's assistance to Burma was extended
in the form of an agreement with Burma for a $4.2 million loan, Burma
continues to be receptive to bloc assistance but is revising its barter |v
‘agreements with bloc countries to trade on a permissive and cash basis,
