fighters operational im 1957.

-94. Relations with the Eloc.

"96. Over the pase year,
Giplornatic support may not have met DRV

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ee a: SECRET  , 5

ear and the largest concentration remains
in the Delta region, approximately 300 miles

from the 17th parallel. However, clandestine

guerrilla operations, including infiltration of
small units, could be comducted against South
Vietnam and Laos without major troop move-

ments.

combat, air capabilities at the present time,
put some air training probably is underway
jn Communist China. It is possible that the
DRV will have one or two regiments of piston
There are 26
former French air fiekis in North Vietnam,
five of which could be used with little or no
development to support sustained operations
by Cce mmunist jet fighters, and one of which
could probably suppor® sustained Jet light
Homber operations. Tie DRV has no sepa-
rate naval organizatiom and coastal defense
depends on small armed craft and ground
patrols. —

DRV External Relations and Policies __

We believe that
the DRV is firmly committed to the policies of
the Sino-Soviet Bloc, even to the extent of
subordinating or postponing the pursuit of
jts local or regional objectives in the interest
of over-all Bloc tactics and strategy. The
attitude of DRV leadership follows from its
Communist world outiook and from the fact

that DRV objectives cam only be realized with

Sino-Sov ie? Bloc support.

95. Despite its close ties with and dependence
on Peiping and Moscow, the DRV on occasion

acts in less conformity with the. Bloc than

the Buropean Satellites. A number of consid-
erations account for tiais special status. The
viet naracse Communists fought their own

fight against French wolonialism. The DRV

possesses an army and security organization
which was developed prior to 1950 independ-
ently of Sino-Soviet material assistance. The
appearance of relative independence created
by some DRV actions may, nevertheless, serve
to further Bloc interests elsewhere in South-

east Asia.
Bloe economic and

——

93. The Vietnamese, Communists have’ no’

expectations. Bloc deliveries of rice have
been far below levels necessary to prevent
widespread debility in North Vietnam. Mi-
koyan’s visit to Hanoi in April 1956, the first
by a major Soviet official, was made a great
public occasion and DRV propaganda sug-

gested some expectation that new aid or

-economic agreements might result. No new
Soviet-DRV arrangements were announced,
however, and in fact Mikoyan departed with-
out issuance of the usual joint communigue.
The USSR also failed to press DRV demands
either for the “strict implementation” of the

Geneva Agreements with respect to north-.

south consultations and elections, or for re-
convening the Geneva conference. The So-
viet position, as it developed at the April-May
Geneva co-chairmen talks, accepts mainte-
nance of the status quo for the time being.
Although the Chinese Communists have been
more forthright in supporting the stated DRV
position, the Soviet Union has shown no dis-
position to support the DRV’s basic objective
of securing control of all Vietnam at the risk
of jeopardizing Soviet policy objectives in
other areas or the Bloc’s campaign of em-
phasizing “friendship” and reducing tensions.

27. The rather aloof position of the USSR,
which increases the dependence of the Viet-
namese Communists on Communist China,
may be disappointing to the DRV. Some ele-
ment of the traditional Vietnamese distrust of
the Chinese probably survives among Vict-
namese Communist leaders, despite the bond
of Marxism, and the DRV may well wish that
“it could counter Chinese influen 2 with closer
Soviet ties.

28. Substantial differences over policy toward
South Vietnam, and possibly 1 os, may de-
velop between the DRV and tne USSR and
Communist China if prospects for an early
xtension of Communist control to South Viet-
nam continue to declinc. Even/in this event,
however, antl despite the DRV’s potential
capacity for independent action, we believe
that other considerations would prevail to
cause the DRV to continue its loyal adherence
to the Bloc.

SECRET

LO73

~~

-
