Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

or Peiping and Hanoi—are likely to let this
opportunity pass. The longer the present cri;
sis’ continues, the better the Pathet Lao will

_be able to consolidate their political and mili-

tary positions.

22. They would prefer to-gain their objectives
through negotiations and political action be-
cause this would reduce: the chances of out-
side intervention. Events since the Kong Le
coup have moved along lines favorable to such
tactics. They have profited greatly from dis-
unity among the non-Communist political and
military leaders. Moreover, they hold Vien-
tiane virtually a hostage and have been able
to exert considerable. leverage on Souvanna
and Kong Le, and Quinim, the most influen-
tid) member of the government after Sou-
vanna himself, has apparently become their
tool. — : ,

23. Although Pathet Lao tactics have empha-
sized negotiations, psychological pressures,
and political action, they have maintained a

fairly high level of military pressure on the

Laotian armed forces and have built up their
guerrilla strength in key areas. This puts
them in a favorable position to seize by force

‘large parts of the country, including such key

points as Luang Prabang, Savannakxhet, the
Phong Saly. If the Pathet Lao were to exert
their full euerrilla warfare capabilities, the
Laotian armed forces, in their present disor-
ganized condition, probably could not prevent
the loss of large parts of the countryside and
a ee of key towns.

Hl. POSSIBLE FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
24. If present trends continue, the situation

“in Laos will remain one of confusion, drift,

and: disintegration. Ultimately this would
probably resuli in the fragmentation of the
country, with the Communists, supported by
the Bloc, essuming control over most of the
north and the Revolutionary Committee at-

. tempting to set up a separate state in the

south. Without large amounts of outside as-
sistance, a separate southern Laos probably
would not survive for long.

25. We believe it more likely, however, that
the pace of events will quicken over the next

.point in their conflict.

SECRET

‘SECRET ms 5

few weeks and, barring a quick victory by the
Phoumi forces, that the situation cither will
move toward some [orm of political settlement
or will degencrate into widespread civil war.
Although-a political settlement based on a
compromise agreement between the Vientiane
and Savannakhetl groups may still be possible,
we believe that odds are against it. Souvanna
and Phoumi are not likely to find mutually
acceptable terms for cooperation at this late
Any negotiations held
between them are not likely to be con-
ducted in good faith. Although it is con-
ceivable that the Kine might be induced to
exert more influence than he has in the past,
we do not believe he can be induced to take
personal charge of the situation. Moreover,
we do not believe that Souvanna is likely to
resign voluntarily. If an effort is made to
upset his government by calling a special
meeting of the National Assembly in Luang
Prabang to pass a no-confidence motion, Sou-
vanna could maintain that the deputies and
the King, as prisoners of rebel forces, were
acting under duress. He could declare their
act illegal and invalid, aid maintain that he
wis the legal head of the government. If, cn
the other hand, Souvanna were forced out by
political pressures, the Pathet Lao would prob-
aly step up sharply their military activity.
Consequently, it is probable that any politi-
cal measures to oust Souvanna will be inef-
fectual unless enforced by military means.

26. Thus, we believe that Laos is heading to-
ward civil war, with supporters of the Sou-
vanna government—primarily the Pathet Lao
and the followers of Kong Le—on one side
and anti-Pathet Lao elements and supporters
of the Savannakhet group on the other. The
conflict could be triggered by a Phoumi at-
tack on Vientiane or by a Souvanna or a
Kong Le-Pathet Lao attack on Luang Prabang.
Both sides have major problems of logistics,
communications, and transport. The strus-
gle would probably be one of widely-scattered

at |

small-unit operations in which tne staying -

power, the training, and the relatively shorter
supply lines from North Vietnam would give

the Pathet Lao guerrillas an advantage.

Without extensive outside assistance, the
Phoumi forces would probably soon collapse,
