‘of action to strengthen the determination of the Royal Government to resist

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

sore : oe SECRET

We PACE is. oS

As SUMMARY EVA EVALUATION ee

a rte nh mane Rae rere

19. Recent developments related particularly to the U, S. course
subversion and to maintain its independence. The Phovi Sananikone
Government, by announcing on October 10 its decision to undertake mone
tary reform, faced the first test of its ability to survive with unaccustomed
firmness and sel f.confidence, Subs sequently, it foiled an attempt by com-~

-munists, neutralists and certain disgruntled elements of the Rally of the

Leo People to bring it down by a no confidence vote in the National Assembly.
_ The government emerged from this first test with increased authority and

jn a sti vonger position to pz roceed with the establishment of genuine non=.
communist political unity and the development of a grass roots organization,

‘Its prospects of successfully warding off communist subversion and achieve

ing stability have improved considerably since the low point reached in
the May elections, but genuine non-communist unity has not yet been
achieved. ee : aS .
an ; Sh. .
_B. MAJOR OPERATING PROBLEMS FACING THE UNITED STATES

Aen Et es Te ames yee ee ee eee

20, Haplementation of Monetary Reform Decision. Maintenance
of monetary stability in Laos. will continue to be a problem of major U,
concern, The exchange of notes and protocol of September 30, 1958, con
_ gtituting agreement on monetary reform,provided for periodic discussions
between U..S. and Lao representatives to review economic developments

‘ and to consides measures which appear to be necessary to maintain a realis-
‘tic rate of exchange for the Lao currency, This will involve constant tie toe

vigilance and re ésistance to inflationary policies and proposals,
Status of U. S, Actions: U, S. officials continue to exercise
vigilance in order to resist any Lao Oey policies. -:

oe USPantns fob Ceuseal Elections: The Lac Government is
‘expecting to hold generat elections for the National AES IE Os probably in
December 1959. The sutcome of the elections Tey be of crucial importance
in deterraining the future international alignment of Laos 8, particularly in

its relations with ie. EES: tate CS. 2 a a

Status of U, S. Actions: We are discussing with the Creo

Tearn at Vientiane a + Country.Team plan fox major U:. S.

* effort to bring about a favorable ovtacme in the forthcoming general elec

tions, The planning and execution of this effort will involve at least State,

ICA, Defense, USIA and prebably other agencies. “The Enbassy has

LAK aS. SECRET tO

Sa) ia eS omen miner abe,
