Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Gt EP ei, SECRET - ans Mo il

10,000 with appr oximately 5,000 organized in
skeletal company and battalion sized units
‘which could be expanded through , recruit-
, ment. These armed forees are generally scat-
tered through the mountains paralleling the
Annam coast and the remote swampy regions
fCochin-China. They are capable of harass-
ing actions against VNA outposts and of wide-

ah ‘spread intimidation, ‘assassination, sabotage,

end terrorism, especially 1 in rural areas. They
could disrupt north-south traffic throughout
Central Vietnam and interfere seriously with
_ provincial and local administration. How-
\ ever, any sustamed guerrilla operations w ould
require a flow of reinforcements and supply
‘from the north.
54. The Communisis have an unknown num-
ber. of political eadres in the south eng ag ed in
“subversive and propaganda activities. Al-
though Communist cadres probabiy exercise
efiective control over some remote communi-
tics where the GVN has not yet attempted to
. establish its authority, and have some influ-
ence in villages through much of South Vict-
nam, over-all Vielnamese Communist political
“gnfluence in the south appears to have dimin-
ished during the past year. However, ‘if the
“Communists ¢ Gecide to exercise their capability
for armed intimidation and terror they could
4 quickly reassert political control or influence,
‘| at least in some rural areas wher re GVN

authority is tenuous. Sas

55. During the past year the Communists in
South Vietnam have remained generally qui-
esctut. _They have passed by a number_of
opportunities to. embarrass the Diem regime.
ta Although some cadres and supplies ere being
, infiltrated across the 17th parallel, the DRV
probably has not sent any large scale rein-
“forcement or upply to the south. Commu-
nist activity in. the south appears to concen-
‘trate on protecting vital bases and supply
caches, developing clandestine paramilitary
erganizations, and implementing a broad pro-
gram of infiltration and subversion. While
“seeking to maintain intact as much of their
armed strength as possible, their main activity

seers to be an effort to weaken the Diem goy-;

ernment by subversive and political tactics,+
Communist directives indicate that penetre-
tion and subversion of the GVN military and

SECRE

a

security forees is a major objective. Although
there is little specific evidence, they probably
have penetrated lower echeloris of the VNA,
especially the integrated sect forces, and prob-
ably hold positions of. influence in some pro-
vincial governments and village councils.
Local Communist groups probably gave some
assistance to the Cao Dai and Hoa Hao forces
opposing the government. Since the collapse
of sect armed resistance it is possible that
the Communists are seeking to take over the
remnants of the sect forces.

56: The GVN has organized a Civil Guard. to
relieve the VNA of many static internal secu-
rity duties. Current strength of the Civil
Guard is approximately 48,000 men organized
in lightly-armed mobile companies. Its mis-
sion is to maintain law and order, collect in-
telligence, and conduct countersubversion
cperations at the provincial level in areas
pacified by the army. Although considerable
progress and refinement in its training and
organization will be necessary before the Civil

Guard can fully discharge its responsibilities,

it has shown considerable potential as an in-
strument for maintaining internal security.
A 60,000-man village Self-Defense Corps (Dan
Ve Doan): is being organized to provide sccu-
rity at the local level.

Foreign Relations

57. GVN foreign policy objectives are to win
recognition as the legitimate government of
all Vietnam, to obtain maximum foreign mili-
tary and economic aid and guarantees of for- .
eign assistance in the event of Communist
aggression, and to develop foreign support for

“tts } position with respect to the Geneva Agree-

ments. Forty-one nations have recognized
the GVN. In addition, India and Indonesia
maintain consular relations with the GVN.
58. President Diem consistently has main-
tained that South Vietnam is not bound by
the 1954 Geneva Accords and has no legal
responsibility for their implementation. He
has refused to deal directly with the ‘DRV
on any.issue and has been steadfast in his
rejection of all-Vietnam elections until “‘demo-
cratic processes can be assured in North Viet-
nam.” He believes that any consultations
or implied recognition of the DEW would have
