“17. We believe that if, under existing

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET © 5 : -

relatively small—probably 1,500 to 2,000 at
most. Although this may represent the ma-
jor portion of guerrillas rceently indocirinated
and trained for operations in Laos, the Com-
munists probably have considerable additional
potential strength. Although we have no
conclusive evidence of participation by North
‘Vietnamese, we believe it is almost certain
some are inyolved in the guerrilla activity,
particularly in coordination, communication,
and advisory roles. Lao rebel capabilities are
directly proportional to the amount of assist-
ance provided them by North Vietnam.

condi-
tions, the Communists made a vigorous effort
through guerrilla warfare to seize Sam Neua
and: Phong Saly provinces, they could succeed
in doing so with an augmentation of present
guerrilla forces by additional guerrilla forces
and logistic support from outside Laos, and
without involving the use of regular North
Vietnamese units, Sam Neua town itself,
which has special political and psychological
importance for the Laotian Government,
might be able to hole out for a considerable
length of time, particularly if loyal troops
elsewhere in the province conducted effective
guerrilla action against the Communist guer-
rillas. However, problems of logistic support

and morale, if not corrected, could lead to the ©

fall or surrender of Sam Neua town.
though the loss of the two provinces and par-
ticularly of Sam Neua town would be a serious
blow to the Laotian Government, we do not
believe that it would lead to the collapse of the
government's will to continue the strugele,
particularly if it appeared that effective help
vould be forthcoming.

18. The considerations discussed in the para-
graphs above probably caused the Communists

- to belicve: (a) that guerrilla warfare offered

some prospects—at low risk—of promoting
Communis! objectives in Laos even if the Lao
Government received substantial moral and
material support from the outside, and (b)
that. military forces which the West would be
likely to commit inside Laos would be inde-
cisive against the flexible Communist guer-
rilla tactics,

Ill. REACTIONS TO CERTAIN CONTINGENT
DEVELOPMENTS

19. We do not believe that the Communists
will resort in the near future to large-scale
guerrilla activity, Such as an attempt to take
Sam Neua, at least so long as the UN fact-find-
ing mission is present in Laos. The Cornamu-
nists will make special cforts to conceal evi-
dences of outside participation and will prob-
ably reaffirm offers to negotiate political
differences with the Laotian Government.
Moreover, the US has already set in motion
certain military preparedness measures in the
Far Hast. It is possible that these or similar
moves might. cause the (Commnutusts to keep
guerrilla activity in Laos at a low level for a
considerable period. —

20. If, however, Communist armed action in-
‘creased in scale and efiectiveness, cither in
the near future or at some later time, and if

aotian appeals for outside assistance did not
result in quick and favorable response, it is
probable that Laotian morale would rapidly
decline and the will to resist would wither
away. Such develapments would have wide-
spread adverse repcrcussions throughout neu-
tral and non-Communist elements in. South-
east Asia.

|
21. Hanoi and Peiping have warned that any
foreign military intervention in Laos. would

“be considered as a direct threat to their na-

tional security. However, depending partly
on the scale and nature.of the military move,
the Communist military reaction to the West-
ern intervention, whether under UN, SHAT

or US auspices, initially woulé probably take
the form of further covert North Vietnamese
intervention rather than overt invasion.
There probably would be less efort than at
present to camouflage this intervention. This
Communist action might, in the first instance,
be limited to seizing substantial territory in
Laos—such as Sam Neua and Phong Saly
provinces—which we believe they could do
under existing conditions with an augmenta-
tion of present guerrilla forces, and then using
this situation for political bargaining pur-
poses. The Cornmunists would probably be
prepared to accépt a prolonged and unresolved
- : '

SECRET

“

Pa oe

i

KG

a>

= ae ad SR ES Ae ae Se SS Se ee eT a er et a
se re Sap as Ne ie ene at ee ee es r
