Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

eee ee LD SECRET a Ge |
- “, : oe _-—- 347th NSC Meeting’
Cl: er ee A ates _| BS December 1957...
“ITEM 5 (For Discussion) a |
" PROGRESS REPORT ON U.S, POLICY IN MAINLA AND .
SOUTHEAST z= EMBERS boiz] 1) Ps
BACKGROUND a

“3, U.S. Policy in Mainland Southeast Asia was approved on 5 September
1956, This progress report covers the period 13 March through 6 November 1957.

SUMMARY  —\

Ze. - Political::

aS RRA a thailand: ‘The coup in Thailand overshadowed all other developments
TE ‘in the area, The dependability of assurances that Thai foreign policy
: - will not change remains to be seen, Owing to the changed pituation,
“2. various U. S, programs are being reviewed.
a: Decree cas may deveioped noes relations with the Free World |
€ = ‘ : pet _ while maintaining publicly its neutral Br anELen and continuing to x en ae
ace Se ceive Communist aid,

oh aes, yepresentatives became more active, The threat posed by Pathet Lao
iw control of two northern provinces continues, and security conditions
in a the areas under government control. deteriorated, »

Cambodia: A sharper awareness ‘ of the Communist danger anaes ed

. fo ex reate 21 more friendly climate foward the U. S. Nevertheless, the
overall internal security situation deter iorated as a result of ee é

- yigorous Communist activity, ; : :

In

\ e, Vietnam maintained its close relationship with the U. S, Progress
was made in developing a representative government, and ¢ .ecutive
. leaders ship remained str ong. .

ue i Malaya became an independent member of the British Commonwealth
j in August, and good will continues to exist toward the U,. Kh The
_ mew cabinet is conservative and pr o-Western, but present indications
are that Malaya will not join SEATO,. Communist terrorists continue
oe a oe : - -to threaten internal security, at
C “. gp. Singapore: The government weakened Communist strength by
’ “additional arrests. it aoe

erpacy . ait.

ge Laos: Negotiations for a cabinet including Pathet Lao (Communist-led)

ae ee ee

Se ee tee ne ee ee meee

ee

ame na eg eee:

i

Se SE er arerereey serene SF heey

Se ee
