a = ee ES re ee ee ee oo ee

Lt aaa

coup with Souvanna.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Souvanna and desires Souvanna’s resignation,
thus far he has been unwilling to take any
overt. steps to this end. - The Revolutionary
Committee at Savannakhet received the
King’s private approval, and the 10 November
coup in Luang Prabang probably had his
blessing, although thus far he has been care-

ful to avoid associating himself with either..
' It is possible that the King has played a sig-

nificant behind-the-scenes role in the anti-
Souvanna plotting and maneuvering. It is
unlikely, however, that he will openly take
a strong personal stand,-or one which he
believes Would endanger the position of the
monarchy.

17. Kong Le. There is some circumstantial
evidence that Kong Le may have plotted his
However, Kong Le’s
August revolt apparently was conceived and

- executed on very short notice, and it may

have been a decision made primarily by Kong
Le himself. He probably was motivated
largely by personal grievances arising from
the way in which his 2nd Paratroop Battal-
ion—the best combat unit in the Laotian
armed forces—had been treated. However,
the revolt has assumed proportions and
opened up ramifications which Kong Le prob-
ably did not anticipate and which have been
beyond his ability to cope with. He has now
become so implicated with Souvanna and the
Pathet Lao that he probably cannot turn back.

Although there have been some indications

that his control over his troops has been weak-
ened, Kone’ Le is still an important element
in the situation and coi.d still rally a consid-
erable number of troops to his personal com-
mand. .

_ 18. The role of Kong Le with respect to the
. activities of the Souvanna government is not

clear. Until recently, it appeared that he ex-
ercised a veto power ‘over those political and
military decisions of the Souvanna govern-
ment which he considered important to him.
Now, howe
ence on the government is being usurped by
the Pathet Lao. Although Kong Le has lim-
ited Souvanna’s freedom of action, it is also
clear that Souvanna has used Kong Le.

ver, it appears that his direct influ-.

! '. SECRET |

SSh3 | oh

SECRET ova i Svorediz 4

19. Shortly after the coup, Kong Le' critically

, compromised his position with respect to the

Pathet Lao when he distributed! the arms
stored in Vientiane to yillagers, including
many Pathet Lao, in the surrounding area.
Although he probably did this to build
strength against a possible attack from Luang
Prabang and Savannakhet, once the arms
were distributed his favorable balance of mili-
tary power in the Vientiane area vis-a-vis the
Pathet Lao was lost. Whatever his own wishes
may have been, Kong Le has become increas-
ingly a captive of the Pathet Lao. If Sou-
vanna were to lose out and an anti-Pathet
Lao government take over, Kong Le would
probably join the Pathet Lao.

20. The Pathet'Lao. The hand of the Pathct
Lao has been strengthened greatly by events
since the Kong Le coup. lany figures concern-
ing the strength of their armed guerrillas are
highly speculative. It is almost certain that
their number is higher than at any time in
the past. We estimate their present strength
to be wetween 4,000 and 8,000. They have
obtained considerable arms and ammunition
from Kong Le and as a result of capturing
equipment during the rout of Phoumi’s. forces
at Paksane and their defeat and disarming
of the Sam Neua garrison. They probably
have been reinforced by cadres recently
trained in North Vietnam, and they probably
have concentrated increasing numbers of

troops in the areas around Vientiane, Thakhet- |

Savannakhet, Phong Saly, and Luang Pra-
bang. The Pathet Lao and Vientiane forces
in the Vientiane area are deployed in such
a manner as to either defend or attack the
city, and the forces facing Phoumi along the
Nam Ca Dinh line are of both Pathet Lao
and Vientiane units. At present, anti-Pathet

Lao operations are going on eae in Phong

Saly and Xieng Khouang.

21. The Pathet Lao probably view the devel-
oping situation as a golden opportunity cither
to force acceptance of their particiation in
the government and their foreign policy de-
mands, or to seize control of Laos by armed
action if they conclude that they can do so
quickly and without risking outside inisrven-
tion. We do not believe that the Pathet Lao—
