ox
EM,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

55 , arent: MOP SECRET

b. Military. Because these countries do not have
ity or creating armed forces which could

resist large -seale external aggression, the
United States will be required to provide a basic shield
against Communist aggression. For the foreseeable future, ~
local will to resist aggression will depend on a con-
viction in Seutheast Asia that the United States will con-
tinue dts support and will: maintain striking forces
agequate to counter agsression in Southeast Asia with the
.cgnabilities described in current basic national security
policy. The combination of such U, S. forces and local

. Will to resist would constitute the best deterrent
against aggression, Should the deterrent fail, this
combination would also provide the most effective in-
surance that, in conjunction with indigenous and allied
rozces, tne United States could suppress aggression in
the area quickly and in a manner and on a scale best
calculateg to avoid the hostilities broadening into
gener war,

c, Economic and Technical, ‘Tne insistence, through~
ous most of the area, on economic development provides
the strongest lever for the exertion of influence by the
Free World or by the Communist bloc. without increased
external help from sowe source, most oi the governments
or tne area Will be unable, even with adequate indigenous
effort, to manage the political demand for rapid better-
ment in tne conditions of life and provide for sound
economic cevelooment., Failure to obtain such assistance
-from the Free World will tend to Crive these countries
toward economic dependence on the .Communist bloc. The
general preference in Southeast Asia for Western technical
ang economic assistance gives the United States ded the
free World an opportunity to obtain primacy over Comaunist
efforts in key economic sectors, The outcome may,
however, be strongly influenced by the success with which
he Free World can cope with Communist efforts +)

h) 0

q

exploit the existence of :Soutneast Asian export problems,
particularly those involving rice, In the period ahead,
flexibility of U. S. procedure and repidity of U. S.
action will be increasingly © important, if effect .ve

advantage is to be taken of unexpect sed and transient

5. Mae Problem of Remional Association, Over the long
yun, the Ssinali, vulneraole, and essentially « dependent nations
of Southeast Asia cannot exist ‘satisfactorily as free nations
witnous closer associations than now exist. -

a.
joan
ey
are)

AN
o>
O

5
‘
|
is
mg
mA
a
aah

NSC
