a fe

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

GOP SECRET

@a cesse-fire in Viet Nam and sporadic hostilities con-
tinue in Laos. Thne'Viet Minh have continued to. improve
their combat capabiliti es since the Geneva Conference

of 1954

- ° b, Subversion. In most countries of Southeast Asia

‘'e th¥eat also atises fron the existence ef extensive
local Communist capabilities for all types of subversive
activities, ranging uv to armed: insurrection, Addition~
ally, the large overseas Chinese communities in-South-
east Asia offer a fertile field for subversion. The
_weak internal security systems of the Southeast Asian
’ states make them highly vulnerable to such, activities.

¢. Communist st Political and Teonomic Offensive.

At present overt, aggression and militant subversion are

: jess likely.tvhan.an itensified campaign of Communist
political , economic and cultural penetration in the area.
Tne political instability, economie backwardness, export
provliens, and cxtreme nationalism of these countries
provide many opportunities for Communist exploitation by
trade and economic assistance, conventional political and
Givlomatic activity, end extensive infiltration. This
orfensive now constitutes a threat to U. S. interests more
subtle and more difficult to cope with than other threats.

_4, WU. S. Role, The United States is likely to remain. the
2a major outside source of power to counteract tne Russian-
"yinese Communist thrust into Southeast Asia. Tous, the
etention of this area in the Free vee will continue to
pena on the extent end effectiveness of U. S. support as
Li as on the local errors ts of the Souniies themselves,

“4

ieve lop more effective ee orga ere
neir internat administration and enlist

: u

Bresves ilegiance in both urban and rural districts.
in parc, this purpose will be served by programs for
military ane

ae requir

economic aid dealt with below. In part it
an intensification of present programs for
stent Asian managerial and technical

“hoe in part, new approaches, both govern-
‘ @, Will be needed, These shovld not

s designed to strengthen and vitalize
ions and institutions and to have an
Fe, rural society, and educational

