Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 12 of 18
SECRET-NQFORN Encl No. 1

Desp No. 278

From Saigon

The basic factor which has been lacking is a felling of rapport
between the government and the population. The people have not
identified themselves with the government. There has been a
general lack of "a sense of mission" in the building of the
country among both the local population and local authorities.

In the past at least Diem has contributed to this attitude by his
constant admonition to the villagers he talks to on his trips
throughout the country that they must work harder, do more for
themselves, and not complain. He has made little effort to praise
them for what they have accomplished or explain the reasons for
the demands he places on the population. He has none of the
demagogue in him, but is rather still the mandarin. Now that he
realizes the feelings of the people, it is to be hoped that he
will show more solicitude for their needs and feelings, but

this will not be easy for him to do.

Possibly another factor adversely affecting the current
attitude of the peasants toward the Government is the decline over
recent months in the price of paddy. Since the population in the
Southwestern delta is particularly dependent on paddy for its
income, it would be a normal political reaction for this development
to increase dissatisfaction with the government.

GVN Reactions to Current Internal Security Situation

President Diem, who had earlier taken the position in
conversations with Ambassador Durbrow that the GVN's security
operations had broken up many VC camps and forced them to regroup :
into larger forces, has modified his assessment considerably after
the Tay Ninh attack and other recent manifestations of expanded
VC activities. Previously indicating that VC reinforcements had
come from Cambodia, Diem in his latest conversation with the
Ambassador on February 12 stated the VC had been reenforced by
well-trained forces from North Vietnam. In his view the recent —
step-up in VC activities is basically a somewhat desperate attempt
to disrupt the progress of South Vietnam. He does not appear
to be deeply alarmed, but, on the contrary, feels that with
measures he has in mind the situation should greatly improve in a
few months. He believes the security forces need more anti-
guerrilla training, but also thinks more security forces are needed
in order to provide better protection for the entire population.

He has called for volunteers from military reservists who had long
guerrilla experience during the Indochina War as well as from
ARVN and the Civil Guard, and has indicated that over 1000 have
already volunteered. i

Diem also now shows awareness of many of the political factors
which have contributed to the deterioration in internal security.
By the end of February in conversations with the Ambassador and

SECRET-NOFORN

1269
