i

addressed to the following major requirements: for economic growth:

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
themselves have not been sufficient to effect a rate of growth satisfactory

to these underdeveloped countries’which tend increasingly to compare their
national economic progress with that claimed by communist controlled Asian
countries, The urgency of the problem is onyppenings by.the developing

communist economic offensive. From the U. S. standpoint, dissatisfaction .
mie is particula Lly imp ortant in these countries, which have corne to expect
ed! “that their a alignment with, the free world will bring them the external

assis tance needed fox more rapid ¢ economic devclopment, Cea:

Stanis ‘of U. S. Actions: Considerable progress has been made.

= during this period in def fining policies and the broad approaches which the
‘-United States will employ in increasing our effectiveness in assisting these

countries to achieve a satisfactory vate of development, These policies
anid approaches were summarized in the President's recent gpeech to the
Colombo Plan Conference in Seattle and are applicable to all underdeveloped
areas, including Southeast Asia, The President presented a program

ie att) enon gsr oe expended international trade
"ow 6Be «technical skills

a re . ©. private inveatment

ule d,. normal bankable loans ae
“.  @, 6financing to cover other sound projects whi ch will afford
_ the borrower flexibility regarding terms of Sesapmest 0

Action to mect some of the requirements under each of these .

points is receiving considexable emphasis in present programs.’ Consideras

ion is being given to increasing the eraphasis on other elements not yet
& P y

: adeguately Hay oloosd, The President has created the Draper Committee ta
‘consider, among other things, the impact of our military assistance pro-

gvatms on those related portions and objectives of the rnutual security effort
which are directed primarily at the economic betterment and growth of the.
free world and to appraise the relative emphasis which should be given to
military and economic programs, particularly in the less developed axeas,

Certain other majer problerns involved in carrying out current programs
are also under study by such groups as the Straus Study Group and the World

Economic Practices Committce,.

The problem of economic development as i t rela tes te Southe

.

east Asia veflects the need for clarification of U, S, basic policy in order

to. Borer ane the objectives, cenditions, and time period which should

govern U, S. economic assistance for this area, The attention of the
NSC is aa: to this pressing problern in t he context of NSC 5810/1.

SECRET

jes
haN
CH
cS
'

Seivomsithe” Wimmmeeeanietens
