Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 4 of 18
SECRET-NOFORN Enel No. 1

Desp No. 278
Fron Saigon

group of 80 to 100 VC attacked the Kien An District Office, Kien Giang
Province, killing the district chief, a policeman, six CG members and

four civilians. Seven civilians were wounded and the VC after releasing
about 70 prisoners from the local prison compound carried away 23 weapons
and other equipment plus the district payroll, which was apparently the
target of the,raid. Exact VC casualties are not known, but were estimated
to be considerable.

According to a senior GVN intelligence officer whose comments were
reported by CAS in December, the VC in An Xuyen, Ba Xuyen, Kien Giang,
Phong Dinh, An Giang, Kien Phong, Kien Tuong, and Long An Province numbered
2900 about twice the September 1959 figure, divided into groups of LO to
50 men. This officer expressed the opinion that VC attacks in November on
isolated Civil Guard posts and ARVN patrol units in Kien Phong Province
present an important change in VC strategy in the southwest and that the VC
plan to become increasingly active in early 1960 in an effort to prove to
the people that the GVN is unable to cope with the internal security situa-
tion. An example of this type of activity is the November 14 VC storming
of Phong My Market in Kien Phong Province during which they reportedly set
fire to a defense militia post, the information hall, three bridges and a
motor-boat of the Kien Phong Security Service. Minister of Information
THANH told British Ambassador PARKES on February 22 that the VC's are
burning a large number of information halls, and he is very worried by the
lack of protection and retaliation.

By November and December it had become apparent that the VC were
operating in larger groups than those used earlier in the year and that
their attacks were well planned and vigorously executed. It seems apparent,
moreover, from such large scale operations as took place in late January in
the provinces of Kien Hoa, Tay Ninh and Phuoe Long (Dong Xoai incident) that
the VC have further increased their activities.* Serious incidents are con-
tinuing: ARVN intelligence reports indicate that approximately twenty VC
attacked a boat in Kien Giang Province on February 2 killing 12 Civil Guard
and 13 eivilians and wounding 11 Civil Guard, 2 other security personnel
and 5 civilians and that as of February 7 VC terrorism was continuing in
Kien Hoa Province.

* See Embassy telegrams 2288 (February 1) 2301 (February 2); FVS honk,

hope, 4229 and 4227; ARMA CX-9.

SECRET~NOFORN

1261
