Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

|

‘t on economic development.

SECRET

PROSPECTS FOR NORTH AND SOUTH VIETNAM

4

THE PROBLEM

~

‘To analyze the current situations in North and South Vietnam and to estimate
probable developments over the next two or three years.

CONCLUSIONS | |

1.. The prospect of reunification of Com-
munist North Vietnam (DRV) and west-
ern-oriented South Vietnam (GVN) re-
mainsremote. In the DRV the full range
of Communist techniques is used to con-
trol the population, socialize the economy,
impose austerity and direct investment
to economic rehabilitation and develop-
ment.
forces. In South Vietnam, despite the
authoritaricn nature of the regime, there
isfar more freedom. Local resources and
US aid are devoted to developing the
armed forces, maintaining internal se-
curity, and supporting a relatively high
standard of living, with lesser emphasis
(Para. 9)

2..In South Vietnam political stability

depends heavily upon President Diem and
his continued contro! of the instruments
of power, including the army and police.
Diem will almost certainly be President
for many years. The regime will con-
tinue to repress potential opposition ele-
ments and depend increasingly upon the

effectiveness of the Can Lao, the regime’s

SECRET a

The DRV maintains large armed’.

political apparatus, which is run by
Diem’s brothers Nhu and Can. (Paras.
11-14, 29-31)

3. The capabilities| of the GVN bliated
forces will improve given continued US
materiel support and training.‘ Con-
tinuance of the present level of train-
ing is threatened by a recent finding of
the International Control Commission
(ICC) that the US Temporary Equipment
Recovery Mission (TERM) should end its
activities by mid-1959. In any event,
GVN forces will remain incapable of with-
Standing more than temporarily the

larger DRV forces." The internal security |
forces will not be hble to eradicate DEY 1. 9

supported guerrilla or subversive activity —
in the foreseeable future. Army units,

will probably have to be diverted to
special internal security assignments.
(Paras. 15-17, ra |

4. The GVN is ‘preoccupied with the
threat to national security and the main-
tenance of large military and security

“|
