tae]

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

= “MAJOR. OPERATING PROP LEMS FACING THE UNITED STATES.

te RE eR nT ieee A Gate ee ee tee einen ame

20. Cambodian Nevitra lity.

ay ee Ey ee

Bes | AAS - Cambodia's neutrality inhibits it from taking a strong

stand j in ee of the Free World, and together with the long-standing
animosity between Cambodia and its neighbors, prevents close associa»
= ‘fion with: them in regional organizations.

— - wl ital 4

ie Bs Cambodian neutrality also limits the opportunities for the \;

cv ‘United States fo work closely with the Cambodian Government. - It is Bees
difficult to take measures to encourage Cambodia to meet the dangers

of internal communist subversion without at the same time seeming to

contravene Cambodian neutzality. We should encourage the Cambodians
_to orient their policy in a direction more favozxable to the West but any

evidei:ce of undue pressure on our part to change the basic policy of

' neutvality could easily cause Cambodia to abandon its new firmer posture

to ward communism,

21, %Internal Security. In spite of inexeasing awareness of the |

‘ magnitude of the communist effort in Cambodia, Cambodian leaders have

taken fax too few steps to counteract such influence, Implementation of
the police training program has progressed satisfactorily, but unification

of all Cambodian police services has yet to take place and implementation

of an agreed action program is hampered by administrative ineffectiveness,

22. Developments Relatin g to Operating Problems, Itis possible

that the Cambodian developments of the past few weeks, which indicate a

new awareness of the communist threat and a determination to oppose it,

may require that consideration be given to revision of certain paragrajy 1s
in NSC 5809 relating to Cambodia. In particular, paragraph 39, implying
a continuing drift toward pro-communist neutrality, and pavagraph 41,

implying that Cambodia might cease to demonstrate a will to resist inter-

nal communist subversion, may need to be replaced by paragraphs calling
for U.S. action to promote increased awareness of the danger of subver= -
sion and to provide means ta combat that danger, as wellas U.S. econome=

ic.aid in which continued stress should be put upon specific technical

BSsistance,

23% : Government Adminis nistration \ Weakne sses, One of Carnbodia's
most urgent needs is for effective civil administr ‘ation. The ICA prograra
is attempting to strengthen the most important public services: iene
agriculture, health and transportation. In 1957 the government requested
U.S. advisoxy assistance to improve its budget operations, tax adminis«
tration, and customs collections, One advisor has been recruited; two
advisors vemain to be recruited.

SECRET
