3

. ee

Bs
“Sen ee
Ge

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

LAOS § SITUATION

The Bon Outi Government ig in control in Vientiano but feces
‘eritical problems: . 8

Be

b.

-

ane

Militarily its forces are subject to Conus et-ouppanted
_ guerrille warfare throvghout the Kingdom and to the throat

~ of overt intervention by the DRVN (North Viot Nam).

Politically tho government does not control the entire
country and is considered by the Department of State to bo
too narrowly based to bs Popular.

Economically the government faces tho necessity for

(1) emergency relief for civiliens, (2) payment of mili-
teary forces and civilian officials throughout the Kingdon .
fo..a three-months period (less the amounts p2id Phount
forsee by CAS), and (3) roconstruction in Vientiane.

Internationally only the U.S. and the Thais are fully
supporting the government althovgh there are indications

- that the British, Philippines and others will give de facto
“recognition. Souvanna Phouma claims to be the legal Prime
“Minister and-is supported by Comiunist Bloc countries.

. The United States is faced with tho problem of giving the new
~ government immediate and substantial aid in each of the above-listod

problem areas.

Innediate matters of concern to the U.S. inelude:

_detion is being taken in each field.

Tho. necessity to bolster Phouind Porcas pete Communist

. supplied Pathet Lao attacks, and to be ready for military .
* and ees ia action in the event of overt intervention by
DRVN forces
‘that Phouni. "does not become over opts

(CINCPLC has cautioned ere PEO, to assure
stio - a *najor Seeeee
lies ache od). a

Tho desirability of Poreeteiidne efforts sy Nehru and others

.  to'reconstitute the ICC.

Tho. destrability of gaining wider genontescs for the Bon

Ouin eovesnaane: in the Free Hox.

Funding of U.S. eee activitios. len =)

Assumption by tho U. S. of: primary advisor status with re-

lation to the provision of So a and Epereesenee advice
to Lao forces.
