Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECHET

i eeia® yas etanes £0 Canduniet dggression, Encourage Laos
ro formulate and implement a broadly conceived security
o14n, including both internal and external security, wnich
ancompasses the services of all branches of the Royal

covermneeh civil and military.

51, In the provision of U.:S. assistence, direct our
oyograms to the promotion of social and economic progress
and “unification of Laos, thus helping maintain the confi-
gence of the Royal Government in its anti-Communist, pro-

sree World "neutrality".

52. Continue to promote conditions engendering confi-
gence by Lao leaders that the UN Charter, SEATO, and Free
World support provide a favorable basis for Lao resistance
to Communist pressure and inducements, and. at the same time
continue to impress upon the Lao tne need for a sense of
responsibility and recognition that too drastic actions
may have adverse international implications.

53. Encourage the Lao to observe constitutional and
legal processes as providing the soundest basis for the.
growth and vitality of democratic institutions; discourage
resort to force in political affairs,

54, Encourage the Lao Government to give emphasis to
programs tending to reorient disaffected elements of the |

population,
55. Encourage and support ccoperation betveen Laos .

and other Southeast Asian countries, particularly Thailend,
Viet Nam, the Philippines, Malaya; and Burma, including

such joint effort in the anti-subversion,: a cor-

munications, and military fields as is feasible

*56. Develop greater mutual understanding and coopera-
tion with the French in the Pupenerance of common Free’ World

objectives. : \

sy i Strongly support "the UN presence" and expanded UN
technical assistance in Laos, and make a special intensified
effort to encourage other friendly nations to assume a
larger share of fenbo nb es for the support of the

- country.

“THATTLAND

58. Promote the development of a Thai leadership which
is increasingly united, stable and constructive, is sunvorted
by tae Thai people, and willing to continue the alignment of
fnailand with the United States and the West.

19S
NSC 6012 SECRET
(Revised s/ot/o0) re

hh
