Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ne a ' SECRET

several months, the DRV probably cannot
expect strong support from the Bloc for the
“strict implementation” of the Geneva Agree-
ments. The lack of strong Bloc pressure
strengthens international acceptance of the
status quo in Vietnam and increases confi-
dence in the future in.South Vietnam. Al-

-. though the DRV may still believe that it

could obtain control of all Vietnam through
ICC supervised nationwide elections, Viet-
namese Communist leaders are probably in-
creasingly doubtful on this point because of

- . their own imternal difiiculties and the grow-

_ ==

ee

ing nationelist stature of Diem. !~ The DRV
‘ probably also believes that its covert_assets
jn South Vietnam will. gradually decline if
. the Diem government is permitted to concen-
* trate on infernal security and economic prob-
lems free of external haresenenh

65. Despite the declining prospects for the |

“peaceful” take-over of South Vietnam, we
believe that the USSR and Communist China
‘will almost-certainly continue unwilling to
support open DRV military action against
South Vietnam during the period of this esti-
mate. They are probably unwilling to risk
the chance of US or SEATO intervention
which would make it difficult to limit the con-
flict to Vietnam, and probably believe that
overt DRV military action would seriously un-
dercut the worldwide effort of the Bloc to, win
friends and supporters. Although the DRV

_retaing the capability to Jaunch an independ- -

ent military action against South Vietnam,
the chances of such action in the absence of
‘assured Bloc ;1pport appear to be extremely
small. :

.

{66. The only remaining course of
‘ing out same promise for the early achieve-
‘ment of Communist control in South Vietnam
‘appears to be the development of large scale
guerrilla warfare in the south. In recent
“weeks a mumber of reports from sources of
untested reliability have indicated that the
Communists may have started preparations
in both South Vietnam and in the north to
begin guerrilla action. DRV allegations of
Vietnamese violations of the demilitarized
zone along the 17th parallel and Communist
claims of US-Diermm plans to violate the Armis-,

SEC

action hold-

13

tice could be propaganda cover for the initia-
tion of guerrilla action against the south.

ag

67. However, the possible indications of armed
action appear inconsistent with the DRV’s in-
sistence on the continued functioning of the
ICC — which is in a position to make at least
limited observations of DRV activities. More-.
over, guerrilla action in South Vietnam, if it |
were to be sustained and not to result simply ;
in the identification and gradual elimination|
of Communist cadres, would. require large:
Scale support from the north. ~ This would in-
volve some risk of detection by the ICC and
of intervention by the US_and possibly SEATO.
It would also tend to prejudice current Com- |
munist maneuvers elsewhere in Asia. For
these reasons, we believe that the DRV will
refrain from instituting large scale guerrilla
action within South Vietnam during the
period of this estimate. Communist capabili-
ties for guerrilla warfare in South Vietnam
will exist for some time, however, and the
chances of their being employed would prob-
ably increase in the event of any substantia
deterioration in the domestic situation in
South Vietnam-— such as might conceivably
occur on the death of Diem. The chances of
Communist guerrilla warfare would also be
increased by deterioration of the international
aspects of the situation, such as a withdrawal
of the ICC under circumstances which would
permit the Corimunists to place the blame for
this event on the GYN.

68. The DRV will continue to seek maximum
Bloc support for its objectives and will seek,
within the limits of Bloc stratesy, to harass
and undermine the government in South Vict-
nam. It will continue to seek direct contacts
with South Vietnam, offering economic and
cultural exchanges while castigating Diem for
“blocking” unification. It will continue ef-
forts to penetrate the government of South
Vietnam and to improve its covert organiza-
tion throughout the area. It may attempt to
increase pressures for a reconvening of the
Geneve conference and to unseitie the Dien
government by fabricating or provoking inci-
dents along the demarcation line and by dem-
onstrations of armed strength within South
Vietnam.

RET
