Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

.¢ to cooperate with the United States and capable of
cen internal and external Communist threats,

Encourage and support British, Australien, Federa-
f Malaya and Singavore Government efforts to

anethen moderate political forces in order to counteract
i ch as possible the extreme left's pull on the Govern-

, Be prepared, however, after consultation with the
ish, to take .such independent action as necessary to

Jonplish this end,

SJ
=e |
3G Ov Gy

77. In case the Communists or extreme leftists move
+9 gain control of the Government by legal or violent
szans, consult with the United Kingdon, the Federation,
sna if appropriate other interested parties, and as nece
siry support counteraction, being prepared, as Neceatenee
‘ao take independent action along the lines of paragraph 21.

78. Should overt Conmunist ageression occur against
Singapore, place initial reliance on the resources possessed
ty Singapore, the British and the Federation of Malaya,
but be prepared to take action, if necessary, in accordance

with paragraph 20.

79. While recognizing the desire of Singapore to
merge with the Federation, do not encourage such a step
unless and until such action appears to be useful in
achieving both long-range and short-range U. S. aims as
set forth in paragraphs 75 and 76; in the meantime use
the Singapore Government's desire for closer ties and
eventual merger with the Federation in an effort to
counteract the extreme left's pull on the. Eo veemnen ss

80, Encourage efforts by the aevenaie nt of Singapore
to.solve its political and economic problems in ways con-
Sistent with U. S. objectives. To the extent feasible;
rely on the United Kingdom to provide external financial
Support. to Singapore and, to the extent desired by the -
United Kingdom, support the utilization of Free World
international financial institutions in the promoting of
€conomic development and economic reforms in Singapore.

Be prepared, however, to provide U. S. technical and
—€conomic develooment assistance when such assistance wovld
be of special significance in achieving U. S. objectives.
81, In all U. S. activities in Singapore, keep in mind
the continuing British responsibility for Singapore's

defense and foreign efrairs, and the Britisn role in internal
Security as well as British knowledge and experiences in
Soverning Singapore, and seek to avoid action likely to

cause a serious misunderstending. between the United States
and the United Kinedom. . :

NSC 6012 . : | SECRET
| (Revised 8/2"/60) os
