ae

ar

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

——————————

ae Sia, SR CRET : . 47 es

DISCUSSION

|. INTRODUCTION

5, Under the terms of the 1954 Geneva Ac-
cords on Indochina, the area of Vietnam north
of the 17th parallel was ‘placed under the ad-
ministration of the Vietnamese Communists.
The French assumed responsibility for imple-
mentation of the Armistice provisions in the
ea south of the 17th parallel, but neither
the French nor the Diem government has
acknowledged responsibility for implementing
the political settlement envisaged in the Final
Declaration of the conference.

6. The UK and the USSR, as co-chairmen of
the Geneva conference, met in London in
April and May 1956 and reafiirmed support
for the political settlement foreseen at Ge-
neva but implicitly approved postponement of
its implementation, including the nationwide
elections. The co-chairman called upon all
parties to preserve the status quo and re-
guested the International Supervisory and
Contre! Commission (ICC) to continue super-
yising the Armistice. Thus no steps have been

‘taken to bring about unification or a political

settlement: in Vietnam, and the partitioning
of Vietnam has been tacitly accepted by the
Genev2. conference -powers for an indefinite

period of time. In the meantime, the Commu-

nist regime in the north and the Diem govern-
ment in the south have been developing their
own institutions and preparing for an extend-
ed period of struggle for control of Vietnam.

I, NORTH VIETNAM = CURRENT SITUATION
AND TRENDS

"7. The Communist Party of Vietnam (com-
monly called the Viel Minh) and its govern-
mental apparatus, the “Democratic Republic
of Vietnam” (DRV) continue to exercise firm
and efiective control over the estimated 13
million inhabitants of North Vietnam. Al-
though critically lacking in technically
trained personnel, the Communist regime
possesses @ large number of experienced po-

‘low Ho are not clear, but party

litical workers and has made considerable
progress in developing an effective adminis-
trative machine. It has strengthened its con-.
trol despite severe food shortages, continued
passive resistance to its internal policies, and
the gradual reduction of its prospects for early
domination of all Vietnam.

8. Ho Chi Minh continues to occupy a pre-
eminent position among Vietnamese Commu-
nist leaders, despite some de-emphasis of his
public role. His prestige as a nationalist lead-
er is still a significant factor in the attitude
of many people in South Vietnam and South-
east Asia toward the Vietnamese Communist
regime. Power relationships at the level be-
ecretary
Truong Chinh, Premier and Foreign Minister
Pham Van Dong, and army corrimander Vo
Neuyen Giap appear to share top level re-
sponsibilities. We have no evidence of policy
or personal differences among these three men
or of the existence of “pro-Chinese” and “pro-
Soviet” factions in the party.

9. The regime’s primary concern in the past
year has been to develop more efiective con-
trols over the people and the economy and to
deal with such immediate problems as reha-
bilitation, malnutrition, widespread disease,
famine, tightening of the party apparatus,
and the development of the armed forces.
Although violence and intimide on have been
employed selectively, the Communists have
so far refrained from the publicized, wide-
spread terror employed in Corenunist China
during the consolidation perioc in 1951-1952.
Strenuous efforts are still beine made to rally
popular support behind front groups on the
basis of nationalist and unification slogans.
The most important of these is The Father-
Jand Front which is designed not only to
mobilize support in the north for immediate
reconstruction tasks but also to attract sup-
port in South Vietnam for Communist efforts
to unify the country.
