Howe en, basic o
can Eas showid be established on a regional basis.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

STATEMENT OF POLICY

on

U. §. POLICY IN MAINLAND SOUTHEAST ASTA®

oe ee me ee ee eee ee a

I. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
i. Genera Since mainland Southeast Asia does not
sent a ied area, courses of action must generally be
ined in the light of widely varying country situations.

*

bjectives and main directions of U. S. policy

fe
°

hal

wea d

2. Consequences of Communise Domination, The national

security O01 tne United States would ve endangered by Communist
Comination,of mainland Southeast Asia, whether achieved by
overt aggression, subversion, or a political and economic
orrensive,

_ & The loss to Communist control of any single free
country would encourage tendencies toward accommodation
py the rest,

b, The loss of tne entire area wots have a seriously
adverse impact on the U. S. position elsewhere in the Far
Bast, have severe economic consequences for many nations
of tne Free World, add significant resources to the
Communist bloc in rice, rubber, tin and other minerals,
and could result in ‘severe ‘economic and political pres=
sures on Jaoan and India for accomnodation to -che Communist
bloc. Tne loss of Southeast Asia mainland could thus
have farreaching. consequen ces pekeoueey. adverse to U. S.
security interests.

Ss. The _ Communist Threat

a. Overt Asaression, Although Communist policy now
empnasizes non-military methods, the danger of overt ag-
eressicn will remain inherent so long as Communist China
and North Viet Nam continue a basically hostile policy

supported by substantial military forces. There is only

Ils

rHor ourposes OL this pader, "Mainland Southeast Asia" con-
si Burna., Se Laos, Thailand, Viet Nam, Malaya
at soore. In addition, there is attached a supple-
re va, onene: of policy on the special situation in
N am.

Pat
i
i

1

Baek

oa

NSC 5509 ; : TOP SECRET
