Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Se Be Meats. abn oie SECRET

.

support are likely 'to result § in proposals g for 3 new aid pepieets. The IBRD
*- team and ICA advisors are assisting the Thai in plannis ing the best ufiliza-
tion of ses own resources. i. : c

a
a

vit “VIET NAM a
oe SUMMARY EVALUATION.

"40, In ae we are adie U. &. objectives in Viet-Nam. ~— «
Relations. between Viet-Nam and the Government of the Republic of China
‘are improving since the Chinese community in Viet-Nam has accommodated ©
itself to Vietnamese sep eietion concerning eense and certain key

Pe ereten es i. i.
B. MAS JOR OPE SRATING PROBL VG FACING THE UNITED STATES

a -41,. Viet-Nam! s Conknoed Dependence on Foreign Aid. In spite
_of some_evidence of greater economic stability, Viet- Nam continues to
depend on foreign aid, the largest part of which goes to support the mili-

tary establishment, U. S. aid still accounts for approximately 85 percent

’ of imports and two-thirds of the budgetary revenues, Some irnprovement

-in the investment climate occurred with the ex change of notes between

the United £ States and Viet- Nam effecting an Investment Guaranty Agree-

ment and with acceptance of the U. &. view that that portion of International

‘ Development Corporation capital financed by the U. &. would be available
: to aid private enterprise only. However, cconomic nationalism and ex-
cessive government intervention continue to discourage private foreign
-and domestic investment. Moreover, it is likely the Government of Vict-
Narn will continue to insist that certain larger industrial projects be
government-controlled, at least in their early years of operations,

42, Political and Security Problems of the D Diem Government

- President Ngo Dinh Diem's policy of strict contr ‘ol in the political and
economic fields has caused a certain amount of internal dissatisfaction,
Should the President's exercise of personal authority develop too fay t? 2re
“may be danger that the resultant frustration of government officials might
‘Weaken the united support for his regirne which the situation requires,
Likewise, the President's stern police measures and his emphasis on
internal security have led to some criticisrn of the government, This em-
phasis on internal security stems from the recent emeigence of the country,
the continuation of communist-inspired violence and subversion, and such
incidents as the assassination of local officials in rural areas of southern

Nee m, “

4 .

Sey che <a SECRET
