Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
LIMIT DISTRIBUTION

Page 1

Enclosure 1
Despatch 26).
From Saigon

Memorandum Handed to President Diem by Ambassador Durbrow on December 23, 1960

I have reported to the Department of State your serious concern and that
of other high-ranking Vietnamese officials about the critical articles about
Viet-Nam which have appeared in American as well as other foreign papers. [I
have also reported on the progress being made in working out new policies, and
organizational and liberalization changes in the governmental and military
structure which you and other officials have informed us you are pis e to
implement in the near future.

A As you know, my Government has taken certain steps to assist you in
strengthening the GVN against the Communist attacks being made against it.

The new AD-6 planes whose delivery was speeded up I understand are proving
effective and helpful, and you are aware of the large quantity of electronic
communications equipment MAAG and USOM secured on an expedited basis.

Lastly, I have instructed Mr. Gardiner to seek an appointment with the Vice
President and Secretary of State Thuan to re-examine carefully the entire
problem of your piastre shortage to see whether there may be some new technique
or action to meet your critical need in this area. Your comparatively satis-
factory foreign exchange and balance of payments position has of course created
special problems which we hope we can jointly solve.

On the basis of these reports I have received instructions to discuss
these matters with you, particularly certain liberalizing projects which would
have a favorable effect on world public opinion. As you no doubt know, Mr.
President, since the press conference held by Mr. Thuan on November 17 at
which he stated that the Government had for some time been working out details
for new organizational and liberalization schemes, many elements here in
Viet-Nam and in the world press have questioned whether these projected
schemes would be adequate and sufficiently profound to increase the public
support for your Government and make it clear to world opinion that ti - criti-
cisms of your Government in the world press were unfounded. ;

In an effort to be as helpful as we can to assist you in your efforts to

broaden the base of your Government, the Department of State has instr cted
me to discuss with you some of the suggestions which we have already made and

SECRET
LIMIT DISTRIBUTION

1353
