besa re

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

wa

SECRET

6. The Problem of Alignment. To preserve their inde-
pendence, strengthen their internal stability, and protect
themselves against aggression, some countries in Southeast
Asia prefer to join regional security arrangements. Some,
however, prefer to avoid alignment with other netions. The
basic objective of both groups is to maintain the inde-
pendence of their countries free of outside interference or
dictation, and the independence and vitality of both are
important to the United States and to each other,

7. The national independence of the mainland South-

east Asian states is important to the security interests
If such independence is to be pre-

of the United States.
served, U. S. policies must seek to build sufficient strength
in the area at least to identify aggression, suppress sub-
version, prevent Communist political and economic domination,
end assist the non-Communist governments to consolidate

U.. S. policy snould not depend

If. POLICY CONCLUSIONS

their domestic positions.

primarily on the degree and nature qf Communist activity at
any particular time, but should seek to promote these goals
within the limits of the economic capacities of the countries
concerned and U. S. resources available for the area.

' " 8.° Where a national determination to maintain inde-
pendence and oppose external aggression is sufficiently
manifest, the United States should be prepared to provide
military assistance based upon the missions of the forces
as indicated in the “Country Courses of Action" (Part V,
below). “gi LT é a
9. In the event of aggression against a Southeast

Asien state willing to resist, the provisions of the UN!
hould be invoked, but the

Charter or the SEATO Treaty st
United Strtes should not forgo necessary action in behalf
of such: a-state or states because of the possibility that

other allies might be loath to participate or to furnish
more than token military forces,

: 10.. In the long run, the ability of the non-Communist
governments to attain political, economic and social objec-
tives will be the dominant factor in defeating the Communist
attempts to dominate Southeast Asia. The United States
should assist. the non-Communist states of the area to
formulate and execute programs designed to promote condi-
tions of sound development, to demonstrate that they can
achieve growta without reliance on Communist methods or depen-
dence on the Communist Bloc, and to give their peoples a
greater stake in tne continued independence of their countricss,

LM Sige jy =
dae SECRET

NSC 6012
