‘who have governed Laos have never

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

THE SITUATION AND Si

SECRET

RT-TERM OUTLOOK

] }

| IN LAOS

THE ESTIMATE

l. THE SITUATION

* 1. Laos has never been a national entity gov-

erned by sure and united authority. Its
people lack a sense of national loyalty and
identity and they continue to be- divided by
“traditional ethnic, regional, and family an-
tagonisms. A gulf has always existed be-
‘tween the central government in Vientiane
and the people in the countryside, and those
estab-
lished efiective authority or won the respect

. of all of the various peoples who make up

the Laotian nation. ‘The non-Communist po-
litical factions have never achieved unity or
cohesion and have tended to view one another
with as much suspicion as they do the Com-
munist left. As a result, no strong, efiective

’ non-Communist leadership has emerged since

Laos achieved independence. These funda-

mental weaknesses in the political and social .

fabric of Laos have been brought again to the
surface and accentuated since Kong Le seized
control 6: Vientiane in early August. In-
deed, developments since the coup were made
possible, almost inevitable, by the incoherent
nature of the country, its leaders, and its
‘people. This chaos has been compounded
by contradictory and inconsistent Western
counsel and by the wide attraction of neu-
tralism, however vaguely understood, among

. Many Laotians.

2. The principal political elements in Laos,

aside,jrom the Communist-dominated Pathet

Lao—the Souvanna Phouma government in
Vientiane, the Revolutionary Committee set

up by Phoumi and Boun Oum at Savanna-

khet, and King Savang at the royal capital of

Luang Prabang—have been unwilling to work:

together. Alone none of them has the fol-

lowing, the national status, and the military
strength to contain the Pathet Lao. The
Laotian Army, spread thin in small often, iso-
lated units, has been uncertain in its loyal-
ties. A majority of the commanders lean to
Phoumi and the Revolutionary Committee
altnougn some still support Souvanna’s gov-
ernment, Others seck to maintain a neutral
position in the struggle among the non-Com-
munist factions. Hew of them, however, ap-
pear willing to fioht!one another. Some com-
manders are anti-Pathet Lao and ready to do
battle with that enemy,

3. Under cover of the confusion, and taking
advantage of both the stalemate among the
non-Communist elements and the desire of .
Souvanna and Kong Le for a negotiated end
to the civil conflict, the Pathet Lao have
steadily improved their political and military
positions. Thus, Kong Le’s act of mutiny
set in motion a chain of events in Laos which
could lead to the country’s departure from its
western orientation and its endry into the
Communist orbit. |

4. Kong Le’s Saite and its aftermath Lae
also had deep repercussions in Soi heast Asia,
particularly in Thailand and South Vietnam.
Thailand’s Prime Minister, Sarit, is con-
vinced that either a Communist ‘akeover or
the establishment of a neutral: ., coalition
government in Tavs would seriously threaten
Thai security. Either development, he feels,
would dangerously expose his country to Com-
munist infiltration, subversion, and attack,
and would generate strong pressures inside
Thailand for a more neutralist policy. More-
over, he believes it would undermine his own
personal position.. He almost certainly views
US policy in the Laotian crisis as providing a

SECRET | ‘a

1340
