“er,

NPs 4 ahaa bm
Agta cae

Wot skal

=
WE hee ce ten

i

ae

Me ORV omiae
Net a

whe ee,
. sate
een a

“te ee eat

”

Burm

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

,sommitted areas of Asia and Africa, make a special effort

ur nfluence an increasingly favorable-orientation in

‘ ts policies. d

37. Encourage,and support those elements i Burma
wnich can maintain a stable free government that identifies
its: interest with those of the Free World and resists Com-
-unist inducements, threats, and programs to subvert Burma's

independence...
38, Encourage Burmese assumption of regional and inter-
national responsibilities compatible witn our own objectives,
ih Soe For political purposes, upon Burmese request make
military training available on a grant basis and modest

‘amounts of military equipment and supplies on a sales or

token payment basis, as consistent with U. S. interests,

HO. Encourage the Burmese Government to establish
internal security throughout the country, and discovrage
further foreign assistance to Chinese Nationalist irregulars
and ethnic rebel groups in Burma.

' 81, Should overt Communist aggression occur against

Burma, invoke the UN Charter and, subject to Burmese re-

quest for assistance, take necessary military and any other
‘action to assist Burma if Burma is willing to resist Com- ‘
munist resort to force and U. S. vital interests are in-
volved: Provided, that the taking of mflitary action shall

be subject to prior submission to the approval by the Con-
gress, . .

cammopta ~ «BeEScinded SY MEM ea ahs
qe SATEL oamak.

» He, Seek to increase Cambodia's respect for and confi-
dence in the United States and the Free World in order to
assist in maintaining Cambodia's independence and in curbing
4ts tendency to increased orientation toward the Sino-Soviet’
Bioc. To this end demonstrate continued friendly U. S.
support for Cambodia's independence, understanding of its
policy of neutrality, and concern for its economic and

social progress.

43, In shaping particular courses of action in Cambodia,
take into account the fact that Prince Sihanouk enjoys wide-
spread popularity, particularly among the rural populetion,
and controls 211 major sources of political power. Devote
special efforts toward developing Sihanouk's understanding

and of the U. S, position in Southeast

IGG y=

io

of U. S. policies

ty ‘|

ee]

NSG 6012 i to
(Revised 8/24/60)

t

Et errr ere

