‘
caree ie Tha” pect eiato

PRE eet oe Sane

\
:

chins ee fee tpt

jeer e

a

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

eS SSeS SSS SS eS
- “4. eas : Ou * * * -“ .
E Sie. ae! He aa a Mnelosire & .
> Despuve: AS?
31) m Prom Cnigen
ENGLISH THRE OF NOES ON NGO DIMA NaU AND Dit, TRAN KEG VU‘
. . -
In addition to hose hae sitive MOVES, ancin aaa edend andl moot aoluelantlyy
i feel that IL should bran 5 to your abvention the increasing discontent amon:
various strata of Vietnam ase society with the role and allered vi
brother Neo dinh Why 1 Madame Mhu. i repeat, I bring this
reluctantly since et for Me. and Mrs, Nhn and i know
eount on his advice a usel, I know personally of the maby c¢
has mage to the success of your Governmens and I len oy that he is
with ob to maintain the indenendence and Antbe ged ty or
advatice the fine progress which has already heen made in your cou
discussed this type of rumor before and 1 know ‘that you have Tull
your brother, Nevertheless, the position aes o end Meg. ili
has bacome the basis for a lerge amount of criticism and a teccen
Government ,.Untor vinately, whether based en Sact cr nob, this oxiti
the point that question is no longer whether these allerations ave LOG.
fhe fact that more and more peopic ae belis vine them is serica oly ¢ ing the
prestise of the Governmens., Unfortunately theses rumors are also bes wsod
against your Goverament by Viet Cong ena t3 in tho enemys a, Theres
sirce it appears that these allegations ave assuming a lerger and lavger imnorinns:

inthe public.mim and ave causins considerable discontent in tha

Met a

1 Is Asse = eT as soe ates, OY eae oyien
perhaps be advisable to give serious coosideration to transfor:

fee ik to ate roger

bor Ques

duties, It has deen suggestes that he might be given an Amsasa assienmans
abroei, As you know, Mr, President, many Governnonts, ineluding rr own, havea fron
tims to tine found *it necessary to remove of transfer hisnly useful officials
because OF the adverse public image. they have ereated, .- ne
;
connection we have also hoard

= Okt
Cyne haat leds Geer n ts
wCLSh Cx une

iss

CULV of Dr. Tran Aim Tuyen, nao, oe to-a going n
has come to represent A
+

rn a7 Fs] SRI fates a CE apn ei
& Neescive force 8S Of Many, This too CONS SLOUSes
fate ean ee a EI ‘. oe a le i a = i, i i:
a basis for serious discontent and resen Gnas agains + the Governmants, “T
pn *

TbwoLOR Gi tha works

personally: know Dr. Tuyen and know of
of the Cover AEG but because of the nes

St ‘, ate ee. | Saas e4 ~- 4
faslve ateitude aborts hain male £aS
= sy eed 7 i; ca = Is + - l = iat —< ae!
Geveloved, it might be well to consider his appointment to a post SOL s

: i repeat, as unfourded as these eeports and-rumors may ve, dt has often
- mane La ~ ion eee, SO as 7 ot Seta _
nroven adv %o ovher Governmants to make tranafors of this kind,
Ee
‘
|
é
i int mihrira) bie EEL ory
; / BCRED - Ji? DISTRTE
i *
a .
hee ‘

Po
