Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

; : ; ; DINSvTns.

; is only a cease-fire in Viet Nam and sporadic hostilities
oe continue in Laos. The Viet ee have continued to
improve their combat capabilities since the Geneva
Conference of 1954. ;

-b. Subversion, In most countries of Southeast Asia
f a threat also arises from the existence of extensive

pel '  Jocal Communist canabilities for all types of subversive
at activities, ranging up to armed insurrection. Addition-

i i ally, the large overseas Chinese communities in South-

: east Asia offer a fertile field for subversion. ‘The
weak internal security systems of the Southeast Asian

states make them highly vulnerable to such activities.

c. Communist Political ‘and Economic Offensive. At
present overt aggression and, except in the cases of
; Viet Nam and Laos, militant subversion are less likely
foe than an intensified campaign of Communist political,
economic and cultural penet tration in the area. The
political instability, economic backwardness, export
provlems, and extreme nationalism of these countries
provide many opportunities for Communist exploitation
by trade and economic assistance, conventional political
: : and diplomatic activity, and extensive infiltration.
aaa This offensive now constitutes a threat to U. S. inter.
is ; ests more subtle and more eau to Ope with then

other threats.

j 4, U.S. Role. The United States is likely to remain
the only major outside source of power to counteract the
Russian-Chinese Communist thrust into Southeast Asia, Thus
the retention of this area in the Free World wild continue

to depend on the extent and effectiveness of U. S. support as
well as on the local efforts of the countries themselves,

‘ ae Political. The underlying purpose of U. S.
: assistance in the area is to help the non-Communist
ot '. eountries develop more effective political organizations,
strengthen their internal administration and enlist _

a greater allegiance in both urban and rural districts.

: ’ In part, this purpose will be served by programs for
military and economic aid dealt with below, In part it
will require an intensification of present prozrams for
training competent Asien manageriel and technical
personne And, in part, new approaches, both govern-
meatal. and private, will be needed. These should not
concentrate exclusively at the national level, but should
include activities designed to strengthen and vitelize
. indigenous traditions and institutions and to have an
bs Sane on village life, rural soclety, and educational

i ten a) .

pe.

t

has by
Cy
G3

| ala : a | SECRET
