Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

April 15, 1957
In reply refer to: 1-13475/7

Dear Mr. Robertson:

Recent developments have brought about a new urgency in re-
solving the problem of the ceiling on U. S. military personnel in
Viet-Nam. You will remember that by interdepartmental agreement
early in 1956 there was established a ceiling of 692, which in-
cludes -342 for the MAAG and 350 for TERM, the Temporary Equipment
Recovery Mission.

Two facets of the problem now point to the necessity of doing
away with the MAAG ceiling and permitting the Departments of the
Army, Navy, and Air Force to augment MAAG Viet-Nam with the
additional personnel necessary to accomplish the mission there.

The first aspect is that raised in the telegram from the
Embassy in Saigon to the Department of State, 2772, of 12 March
1957, which points out that the International Control Commission
is becoming increasingly more restive in respect to TERM and
recommends consideration of several courses of action. The Depart-
ment of Defense concurred in the April 9 Department of State tele-
gram to Saigon which stated that a solution of the problem along
the lines of incorporating TERM into an increased MAAG was under
study and that the Department of State would discuss the problem
with the Canadians, British, French, and Indians. This telegram
was the result of a conference on March 20 of staff representatives
of the two departments in which Ambassador Durbrow participated.

The second aspect of the problem is the necessity for taking
over the training of the Vietnamese Navy and Air Force. It will
be remembered that TERM was created for a dual purpose, to provide
a logistical organization to resolve the problems of excess pro-
perty in Indochina and logistical training in Viet-Nam, and to free
the MAAG from other duties so that its personnel could concentrate
on the training of the Vietnamese Army. The withdrawal of the

‘French Army training personnel required this increased emphasis
on training. In the telegram from Chief, MAAG Viet-Nam 5607 of
li April, we have been informed that President Ngo Dinh Diem told
the Chief, MAAG that agreement had been reached with the French
Ambassador for the withdrawal of the French Air Force and Navy
training missions upon the completion of the present courses of
instruction. The first completion is scheduled for this month,
and additional U.S. military personnel will be required to pick

1098
