Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
-2- 1151, December 4, 2 p.m., (SECTION 1 OF 2), from Saigon

cabinet Ministers, other loyal officials, deputies and some
military. Nhu and Thuan have indicated that Diem, who not
particularly interested fundamental political matters,

is resisting some suggested basic reforms.

Nhu and Diem still deeply rankled particularly by critical
American press stories about autocratic regime and entourage,
and Diem made the ridiculous statement to Ladejinsky November
30th that he believes some Americans may have backed coup
because one of coup leaders, Colonel Dong, “told him so during
negotiations." This may represent rationalization blame others
not selves. Diem probably drawing on his "miracle theory”
refuses admit rebels could have captured or killed him if they had
believed through initial advantage (General Khanh told me 3rd
after first rebel attack morning 115th there were only 30 defenders
in Palace which could have been easily taken) and both Nhu

and Diem now expressing deep displeasure because “Americans
equated Diem regime with rebels because both anti-Communists
and therefore we urged both sides negotiate. While under
circumstances their attitude understandable, we have made point
clear to them that we did all in our power to prevent

bloodshed and urge rebels when they had power to oust Diem

that he should be given active role in any government
established. While hothead can Lao party members who organized
committee against Communists colonialists have been calmed down
somewhat, this element could regain momentum and cause further
trouble if unleashed again by CVN.

Just below surface there is much talk about another coup

unless Diem relaxes some controls, puts in effective reforms,
takes more effective action to fight VC and give protection

to populs sion. There is still strong under-current of resentment
against entourage but because any action he took this score would
be under pressure and indicate weakness, and particularly his
resentment of press stories about entourage, coupled with fact
Diem feels he made Nhu as loyal adviser, prospects Diem will
transfer Nhu to other work or abroad not in sight, at least

for some time. Despite this malaise and feeling about entourage,

most

SECRET

1335
