Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 33
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

i | ~ GOP SECRET

Olt. Place increased enmiess on communi ty development
a

projects,. educational programs, and other activities aimed
&o influence the welfare and attitudes of the people at the
village level.

25. Strengthen informational, eae eee and educational
activities, as appropriate, to foster increased alignment of:
she peovle with the Free World and to sone to an under-
shaneing of Communist aims and techniques,

26, Hold or reduce the number of U. S. officials in each
country to a-Stvict minimun consistmt with sound implement~
uation of essential Progra ams, in order to head off an adverse

olitical. reaction to the presence of a large number of

ae aricans in relatively privileged positions, . _

27. Promote inereasing Asian Buddhist contact with and
knowledge of the Free World, Explore with friendly religious
ovganizations ways of developing Buddhist fraternal asso-
eiatbions and identification with Free World religious leaders
end movements.

28, -Gontinue activities designed to encourage the
oversees Chinese communities in Southeast. Asia (a) to organize
eng ecsivate anti-Communist groups and activities within their
cnn commuities; (b) to resist the effects of parallel pro-
Gomauniss groups and activities; (c) generally, to increase
their ovientavion toward their local governments and toward
ane Free Worlds and (ad) consistent with their obligations and
peimary allegiance to their local governments, to extend
symoathy ana support to the Chinese National Government.

base
29. Discreetly encourage local eves eis to work

«

oward assimilation of racial minorities,

30, implement as appropriate covert operations designed
to assiss in the achievement of U. S. objectives in Southeast
Asie.

31, Promote economic cooperation between the countries
of she area and Japan and with the Government of the Republic
or China, to the extent reasiole without jeopardizing the
achievement of U. S. odjectives toward the individual South-
east Asian COUNTLESS, é

32, In order vo promote increa sed cooperation in the
area, and to Geny tne general area of the Mekong River Basi

- FOP SECRET

ed
LO
©)
WN
(eo)
oO
2)
pe
2 et.
ie)
-
