Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

20 June 1956

MEMORANDUM FOR: THE DEFENSE MEMBER OF THE NSC PLANNING BOARD
= THE SPECTAL ASSISTANT TO THE JCS FOR NSC AFFAIRS

SUBJECT: Tentative Army Position on "Issues in Southeast Asia" (U)

1. Allied vs Neutral Countries.

a. Question: To what extent should the degree of alignment
with the Free World determine the U. S. attitude toward the countries
of Southeast Asia, particularly as regards economic, technical and
military assistance?

b. Answer:

(1) U. S. attitudes toward the countries of Southeast
Asia should be governed by U. S. national objectives. U. S. objectives
must be based upon what is obtainable and therefore will vary from
country to country. These objectives range from retention of positive
support for U. S. positions to the prevention of any additional Communist
* anfluence in neutral nations.

(2) The above notwithstanding, it is generally in U. S.

; interests to give preference to Allied nations who share in the belief
that regional alliances are the only effective way to deter further
Comiunist aggression. This should include special consideration for

U. S. allies in the granting of economic, militery and technical assistance.
However, this should not preclude the granting of a substantial amount of
aid to a neutral nation in preference to an allied nation, when it has
been determined to be in the national interest to do so. In granting aid
to neutral nations the US should declare its respect for the opinions of
those nations, bu the US should at the same time make clear that it does
not agree with the logic of their positions.

2, Relative Weight of Assistance Programs.

a. Question: What proportion of U. S.. resources available for
assistance to Southeast Asia should be allocated to economic and technical
assistance as against military assistance? Should greater emphasis be
placed on operating an expanding number of technically-competent, pro-
Western leaders and on "political warfare" activities, at the expense of
economic assistance, if necessary?

Reproduction of this document Regrading data cannot

in whole or in part is pro- be predetermined.
hibited except with permission

of the issuing office. Copy 1 of 10 copies.

Page 1 of 3 pages.
