Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
16. Participate actively in SEATO, and seek to develop with its
military and non-military aspects in a manner that will convincingly
* demonstrate the value of SEATO as a regional association, the usefulness
of which extends beyond deterrence of Communist expansion. Encourage
limited participation of non-Communist, non-SEATO Asian nations in certain
SEATO activities.

17. Encourage and support the spirit of resistance among the peoples
of Southeast Asia to Chinese Communist aggression as well as to indigenous
Communist insurrection, subversion, and propaganda.

18. Maintain, in the general area of the Far Rast, U. S. forces
adequate to exert a deterrent influence against Communist aggression, in
conformity with NSC 5602/1.

: 19. Should overt Communist aggression occur in the Southeast Asian
treaty area, invoke the UN Charter or the SEATO Treaty, or both as
applicable; and subject to local request for assistance take necessary
military and any other action to assist any Mainland Southeast Asian pee
or dependent territory in the SEATO area willing to resist Communist resort

+o force: Provided, that the taking of military action shall be subject

~ +o prior submission to and approval by the Congress unless the emergency

is deemed by the President to be so great that immediate action is nec-

essary to save a vital interest of the United States.

20. In case of an imminent or actual Communist attempt to seize
control from within, and assuming some manifest local desire for ite 5.
assistance, take all feasible measures to thwart the attempt, including
even military action after appropriate Congressional action.

21. As appropriate, assist the police forces in Southeast Asian
countries to obtain training and equipment to detect and contain Communist
activities.

22, In -rder to strengthen the non-Communist governments of the
area and to help forestall their economic dependents on the Communist bloc:

a. Provide flexible economic and technical assistance as
necessary to attain U. S. objectives.

b. Encourage measures to improve the climate for private
investment, both domestic and foreign, and to mobilize the maximum
investment of U. S. private capital in the area consistent with the
prevailing climate.

nsec 5612/1 TOP SECRET
qeue 1088
