Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~~ :
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE’ ; 17 ‘

2 ” WASHINGTON 25, D.'c. pai a

4 oe <= >

NOY 11 jgeo

MEMORANDUM FOR SECRETARY GATES :

From: Brig Gen Lansdale, oso/osD

Subject: Vietnam

- With the news that President Diem has put down the revolt in Saigon
and is rapidly re-establishing his authority, it would be useful to give.
some thought to what comes next. Here are some initial personal
thoughts which might be of help in considering the situation.

_ The revolt undoubtedly has taught a lesson to Diern. He might well
read this lesson as teaching him to mistrust large segments of the
armed forces and, possibly, the utility of the way MAAG advisors are
placed with Victnamese units. After all, officers and men in the revolt
were quite close to the American military, Thus, it is possible that he
will tend to take even closer personal command of the armed forces and
do some shaking up by his own personal direction. If so, then this will
rnake General McGarr's role with President Diem of vital importance to
the United States. It would be useful to get State's agreement to free
General McGarr to confer with President Diem as closely and as
continuously as necessary, under only broad guidance to attain U.S.
objectives, without the Ambassador insisting’upon McGarr checking with
him every five minutes. 7

Of course; the lesson we would like him to learn is that he should
change sorne of his ways, since some of his people felt strongly enough
about it to take up arms against him. This is normally a task for the
“Ambassador, when it comes to conveying U.S.views on such delicate
internal matters to a Chief of State, However, it is most doubtful that
Ambassador Durbrow has any personal stature remaining. Diem must

feel that Durbrow sided with the revolters emotionally. Perhaps he even |

‘feels that Durbrow's rernarks over the rnonths helped incite the revolt.
Thus, it would be useful to get Durbrow out of Saigon. A graceful way
would be to have him come home to report.

rif

fhO2

OD (1270 Sf
