Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Iii, CAMBODIA

.

A, SUMMARY EVALUATION.

14, Recent devolopments relate particularly toa U. S. course of
action to reverse the drift toward pro-communist neutrality and to assist
- where possible in a solution of the Cambodia-Thailand border problem
and in fostering goéd relations between Cambodia and Viet-Nam. Cambodia's
neutral position swung to the left with the recognition of Communist China,
Sihanouk's subsequent visit to the United States may have restored, some=
“what, better balance to Cambodia's neutrality but there has been a net los
‘to the free world's position in Cambodia. The deterioration of Coen dete &
relations with VieteNam and Thailand (the most important internation=:l
problems in Cambodian eyes) exacerbated the problern of inducing Cuine
‘bodia to take adequate counter measures against-the communist dangex,

"Be MAJOR eee PROBLEMS FACING THE UNITED STATES

tee te eter ene diet lenenaediemen nena eiiementel

es

Lo. Carnbodian Neutrality. in view of the Cambsdian definition
of neutrality as requiring oscillation to the right and the left in order to
_ bal ance international pressures and influences, we expect some Carbodian
“actions to be contrary to our interests, and some to be favorable to us.
Thus Sihanouk's reaction to his visit in the U. S. may presage at least a
brief period more favorable to the U, S, — ;

q
Status of U. §. Actions. The U. S, is continuing its assist
ance programs as long as Carnbodia. demonstrates a will to maintain jts

- independence. U,. S. influence continues to be disereetly applied in the
-hope that the Cambodian Government will be more receptive of Us S. viewse

16, Relations with Viet-Nam and Tha Jang. Cambodia's disputes
with its neighbors are a ‘Seyor obstacle to regional cooperation, deter the
focussing of Cambodian atvention on communist dangers, and inhibit the
‘favorable exercise of U. S. influence in Cambodia because of the identi-

fication of VieteNam and Thaila aS as U. S,. allies,

Bums "Status of U; S. heviona: We continue to urge settlement of
these disputes 6 thr ough De setul negotiations, but have avoided involvement
as mediator because of the isk of alienating one side or the other and our

. doubt that any of the parties genuinely desire a settlernent other than on

its own terms,

~ 1%. Subversion. The Carnbodian Government is handicapped in
dealing with the problem of subversion by its over+confident belicf that

SECRET

Rat
o
