Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

up the training from the French. CINCPAC has requested in his
0623522 of 6 April that additional personnel over and above the
present ceiling reach Viet-Nam in June of this year.

Other aspects of the problem of the ceiling include a
request from President Diem for additional Army instructors at
the Viet-lNam military academy, a proposal by CINCPAC to transfer
underway training of the Vietnamese Navy from Subic Bay to Viet-
Nam, and the current difficulty in operating MAAG and TERM
efficiently within their present ceilings.

An increase in MAAG strength to achieve a rapid improvement
in the effectiveness of Vietnamese forces to compensate for the
withdrawal of French forces is considered a matter of urgency.
While the French have withdrawn approximately 190,000 regular
troops from Viet-Nam since the Geneva Agreement was signed the
Viet Minh have continuously reorganized and re-equipped their
forces during the same period so as to increase their regular
combat strength from six to eighteen divisions. These forces
have a capability of conducting combat operations at Corps level.
The Vietnamese Army consists of ten divisions which are in the
early stages of training at regimental and division level. The
eurrent military situation requires that the Vietnamese armed forces
expeditiously attain a satisfactory level of combat effectiveness.

In view of the forthcoming visit of President Diem to
Washington on May 8th, 9th, and 10th and of the impending
training crises for the Vietnamese Navy and Air Force J recom-
mend that steps be taken as a matter of urgency to secure the
necessary international conecurrences in the abolition of the
ceiling on MAAG Viet-Nam. I feel it might be desirable to have
this problem resolved, if possible, prior to the arrival of
President Diem in Washington so that he could be informed at
that time of our plans to assist him in the training of his
Navy and Air Force.

Sincerely yours,
(Signed) Mansfield D. Sprague

Mansfield D. Sprague
Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)

Honorable Walter S. Robertson

Assistant Secretary of State
Department of State

LO99
