Pe as ete eee ety eee

MP iac5

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOYr SECRET

: Dd. To present limited initial. resistance to
external aggression.

- ¢, To make a modest contribution to collective
defense of contiguous SEATO areas, ,

53. Encourage and support close bonds between Thailand
ana Laos and between Taailand and Cambodia, including’ such
political associations, economic cooperation, and joint
military planning as feasible.

“

VIET NAM

54, Assist Free Viet Nam to develop a strong, stavdle
ane constitutional governuent to enable Free Viet Nam to
assert an increasingly attractive contrast to conditions in
the present Comnunist zone.

55. Work toward the weakening of the Communists in
North and South Viet Nam in order to bring about the eventual
peaceful reunification of a free and independent Viet Nam
under anti-Communist leadership. .

55, Support the position of the Government of Free Viet
Nan that all-Viet Nam elections may take place only after it
‘is satisfied that genuinely free elections can be held

throughout both zones of Viet ‘Nain. ,

57. Assist Free Viet Nam to build up indigenous arined
forces, including iadcpendent logistical ana administrative
services, Which will be capable of assuring internal security
and of providing limited initial resistance to attack by the
Viet Minh. oe

. 58, Encourage Vietnainese military planning for defense
against external aggression along lines consistent with

_U. S.. planning concepts based upon approved U. S. policy,

ana adiscrectly manifest in other ways U. S. interest in
assisting Free Viet Nam, in accordance with the SEATO Treaty,
to defend itself against ex sbernat aggression,

+

SINGAPORE AND THE Fs! ERATION OF MALAYA
vie following courses of action Only, and not the
regional courses of action, are applicable to the :

Federation of Malaya and Singapore.

59. Accept the vresent primary role of the ey se
Malaya in so far as they are wikling and able to mainta
it, and collaborate with the British so far as prattisa ie.

re 4093
NSC 5512/1 , = a TOP SECRET

€
