Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

" SECRET

Sey

THE PROSPECTS FOR: NORTH VIETNAM

- THE

PROBLEM

To analyze the current political, economic, and military situations and to esti-
_-mate the prospects for North Vietnam over the next year or so.

CONCLUSIONS

1, Although the Communist regime in
‘North Vietnam (DRV) has probably lost
a considerable measure of its original
popular support and has been faced with
" sporadic outbursts of violence, it remains
in firm control largely because of the loy-
alty and effectiveness of the army. More-
over, with substantial help from the Bloc,
it has apparently made significant prog-
- ress toward economic restoration, par-
ticularly in agriculture. (Paras. ae
20-21)

“2. The DRV has undertaken to roe)
rect its riistakes” which it admits caused
popular resentment, and it will probably
be able to regain some of the popular sup-
port which it lost. If the par ty ergan-
ivation is sufficiently strengthened and
if crop prospects are good, steps toward
further socialization of agriculture may
--come as soon as the fall or winter of 1957,
Local disturbances may recur but for the
foreseeable future the DRV will be ca-
pable of maintaining effective control.
(Paras. 17, 23-26)

3. The DRV is generally isolated from the
outside world except for close ties with
the Bloc, on which it depends for aid and

upport. However, the DRV has probably

been disappointed by the lack of effective
Bloc support for its objective of unifying
all Vietnam under DRV rule. The DRV,
with Bloc logistical support, could easily
overrun South Vietnam, Cambodia, and
Laos if opposed only by indigenous forces.
However, the Bloc would support such an,
attack only if Moscow and Peiping were
to estimate that such action carried little
risk of US military intervention. (Paras.
29-54)

4. The DRV will probably continue its
tactics of “peaceful competition” with
South Vietnam for the swpport of the Vi-
etnamese, although it will con tinue its ef-

forts to infiltrate and to suby-rt official

and nonofiicial organizations und to ex-
ploit dissident and dissatisfied groups in
South Vietnam. In Laos, we believe that
the DRV will continue to supr ort Pathet
Lao efforts to negotiate a political agree-
ment with the Royal Lao Government,
with the ultimate objective of Communist
control, and may encourage local Pathet
Lao military action in order to bring pres-
sure to this end. The DRV will probably
not, in the immediate future, play @ pri-
mary role in Cambodia. (Paras. 34-36)

SECRET = 1

1

-
Aes
