Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 9 of 18

. SECRET-NOFORN Encl No. 1
Desp No. 278
From Saigon

inability, or lack of desire, to recognize the following factors:
(1) It is actively engaged in an internal war and, therefore, |
must take the measures which this situation entails. (2) There
is a great need for a strong central military command with wide
powers for the conduct of internal security operations in the
unpacified areas. (3) There is a need for a capable, well-
equipped, well-trained, centrally-controlled Civil Guard to take
over from the Military in pacified areas.

It cannot be emphasized too strongly that the apparent lack
of success in the GYN attempts to reduce the internal threat of the
VC until now has stemmed from the lack of unity of command in a
single operational commander who has the means and the authority
to utilize all of the potential in the area of operations without
regard to province or regional boundaries and without regard to
the existing political subdivision of the area. Unity of command
is the most important basic principle of administration lacking
here. The Province Chief structure has caused a breakdown of
coordination and a fragmentation of command structure which has
blocked an effective attack on the internal security problem.

The fact that the GVN, though striving to bring its military
organization to a high state of training, is constantly plagued
by the diversion of an average of 25 battalions to an internal
security mission is indicative that a serious internal threat
exists. The resulting piecemeal commitment of the armed forces
has obviously been generally unsatisfactory because of the lack
of a strong central command which could effectively coordinate
and control all security functions in the area of operations.
(See subsequent "GYN Reactions” section re recent action taken
to centralize command in the Fifth Military Region).

Political Factors Affecting the Internal Security Situation

It is highly unlikely that any final solution can be found
to the internal security situation in South Vietnam if the GVN
does not enjoy the support and cooperation of the rural population.
At the present time indications are that the rural population is
generally apathetic towards the Diem Government and there are signs
of considerable dissatisfaction and silent opposition. In part
this attitude appears to result from widespread fear of the
Viet Cong and a belief that the GVN is relatively helpless to
protect the rural population from Viet Cong depredations.
Unfortunately the longer serious insecurity continues to exist
in the countryside despite GVN efforts to control: it, the more
serious is the effect on the GVN's prestige. Another effect is
a growing belief among the peasants that the Viet Cong-will always
be here as long as North Vietnam remains under Communist control
and that they mist adjust to live’with them. (A realization of the
long-range nature of the problem among officials responsible for

SECRET-NOFORN

1266
