Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 3 of 18

SECRET-~NOFORN Enel No. 1
Desp No. 278
From Saigon

for the period July-December 1959 are shown in ari attachment. The
accuracy and value of the casualty statistics is, however, open to serious
question. Comparison of ARVN data with that obtained from the NPSS and
the SDC shows frequent discrepancies in casualty figures.

The post-election intensification of VC attacks began with the
completely successful engagement of two ARVN companies on September 26.
The poor performance of ARVN during this operation exposed a number of
weaknesses which have been commented upon by many CAS and MAAG sources
in the Vietnamese Government. MAAG's evaluation of the factors contributing
to ARVN's failure include security leaks, inadequate planning, lack of
aggressive leadership, failure to communicate information to other par-
ticipating units and the failure of supporting units to press forward to
engage the VC (they were close enough to hear the sound of gunfire at the
time). Another factor of importance illustrated in this ambush was the
confidence of the VC in their ability to successfully conduct such opera-
tions. This self assurance and agesressiveness appear to be characteristic
of many actions taken by the VC since September and have probably contrib-
uted to the low state of morale reported in GVN security units by CAS

SOUrCeS >.

Earlier in 1959 ARVN units were ordered to conduct operations in
Phuoe Thanh Province (VC Resistance Zone "D"). From March 8-19 1959 elements
of the 7th Division and a paratroop group conducted an indecisive opera-
tion against the VC in this area, mainly because of difficulty in locating
the VC. Toward the end of March the elements of the 7th Division were
replaced by 3 battalions of the Airborne Group, 2 infantry regiments and
other miscellaneous units, to seal off and block in the area, The Viet-
namese Air Force employed 5 and later 6 F8F fighter planes to conduct air
strikes. These strikes employed rockets, bombs and strafing, but the only
known result was the destruction of a number of VC buildings and huts. As
the rainy season approached the emphasis was switched from operations to
providing security for road construction and other civil works teams. Some
patrolling in search of VC was continued throughout the rainy season, but
contacts with the VC were minor and infrequent. By September, Engineer
construction troops had reportedly been set to work doing road work, clearing
the forests, planting trees and building houses. The 5th Division was the
principal unit engaged in the operation and was still in Phuoe Thanh as of
late November, searching for VC. The bulk of the VC had apparently moved
on to continue their operations elsewhere.

Major incidents in October were the following: According to a CAS
report an ARVN section (which normally consists of about 45 men) immediately

surrendered when attacked by a VC group on October 10 in Kien Phong Province.
ARVN, however, denies the occurrence of this incident. On October 30 a

SECRET-NOFORN

1260
