Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

AG . 7 . i = = * .

De Public Attitudes Toward the U, SS. Eficrts to encovrage

Mare tenenne

Pi

(ere eet

Favorable public attitudes in the arga toward céllective seourity pacts and
toward the U. S. and the free world in eaeiat continue to face import tant.
obstacles, including: (1) demonstrated growth of SinosSoviet seientific, ~
military and economic ade (2) Asian fear of involvernent in nuclear —
warfare; (3) the appeal of communist cosxistence propaganda; (4) increase
ing public interest in domestic econornic, financial and social problems;
(5) doubt that participating in collective defense measures clfers more
benefits and less disadvantages than neutrality; and (6) national sensiti ivity
which continues in most Southeast Asian countries poeer awe | the presence
of lazge numbexs of foreign citizens. :

‘Statits of U, S. Actions: Some of the obstacles outlined
ea ect RE Sa ne eg
abave involve the U, S. world position in its entirety and require action
beyond the scope of the information program alone, We expect that the 6a

obstacles will continue to be a serious preblem in gur efforts te present

U. S. policies and programs to the leaders of Southeast Asia. Efforts.cone

tinue to be rnade, howevex,; to provide information and public relations
support for U. S. political, economic and military policies and progyvams in
order to achieve more EaVORS EAE public attitudes, Ac

6, Sina-Sovict Bice Economic and Psychological, Tnroads. A. come

eer Pantin pene teense Co en IR tg ee Matas at ena ay gee ree a Re a

. bination of fairly widespread acceptance of communist coexistence propae

ganda, a desire to profit from communist "largess" and conviction that

communist infiltration $s contrcllable, facilitates communist efforts to prae’

mote acceptance of. their economic aid programs, Resistance to blac aid
is reduced by its reputation for'speed,"."oasy terme" and the apparent
absence of "strings". In some instanges, Ue S. assiatanse euffers by come
parison in these respects,
Burma and Cambodia continved to be the chief 1 penefti cjnaries of
‘bloc aid, However, the general offer of assistance ta the under “developed

- Asian countries made by the Soviet delegate at ECAFE meet tings in Bangkek *:

and Kuala:Lumpur carly this yoar has not been followed yp. Impressive,
progress has been made in implementing Sovict assistance prejects in _
Burma, which include.a technological institute,a hotcl,a heapital, and.tech>
nical assistance in agviculiural projects. Under Geneval Ne Win, Buema is

' Ikely to be leas roceptive to blec assistance, Baxtar agrecments with blos

-» ‘eountries have Already been revised to provide fer trade on a pez aniacive

aud case basis. Tho USSR is making progress on the 500-bed hoapital it is

Nesying! Cambodia, In connection with Cambodia's ontension of diplomatic
recognition to Communist China in July 1958, the lattoz hae offered to ine
crenna ito program aimed. £ oid of Mees 4 waitin by tha oqzsvaleat at Se a
$5.6 million. Phx oe ee ae i:

. 2 j ey * i.
Eo . Me ais TL? .

mn eee
