Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

2 239) BACs ;

al SUMMARY EVALUATION - ie Fier eel

24, ’ Tho formation in November, 1957, of a coalition cabinet
‘ with Communist Pathe? Lao participation, additional communist gains of
_ places in army and civil service, and permission fox the Pathst Lazo to
"operate as a legal ‘political party throughout the country were generally
“> considered a setback fox U.S. objectives, On the positive side the Royal
* Lao Government has gained substantial control of Sam Neua and Phong
Saly and the Royal Lao Army now occupies the frontier posts bordering
“+ on China and north VietNam. U.S. policy was reevaluated, following the
Lao Government-Pathet Lao settlement, taking into account the Prime
Minister's declaration in January that the Lao Government was determined
*-- _ to tolerate no subyer'sion and his request for U.S, assistance, particular~
acl _ ly for the purpose of winning the crucial May elections. It was decided to
‘continue U.S. aid as before, but with the clear understanding that pES-
"vision of such aid depended pon future Lao performance. Our effort
“has therefore shified from the negative one of attempting to prevent dis-.--
astrous concessions to the Pathet Lao to the positive one of helping the
“Lao Government carry out the settlement already reached, with a mini-
mum of damage to the Free World position, In this connection, the U.S. |
carried out an impact program of material and administrative assistance.
Solution of the exchange rate problem through monetary reform has been
deferred until after the recent supplementary elections, new cash trans~
fers of aid dollaxs meanwhile being placed in an accountublocked by action
of the Lao Government uniil agreement on monetary seform to seached
with the U.S. Government, . a i

.

T

B MA oboe OPER/ ATING PROB sain ha FACING THE ae ee STATES

ee ee rt ee eet

. 255 Pathet Lao. tae Inasmuch as the Pathet Lao have sponcont
a ; ‘chosen to concentrate on political means -to achieve their ends, the ‘ ite«
j gration and demobilization of Pathet Lao forces have taken place relative~
ly smoothly and the Lao National Army has moved into the two formér
Pathet Lao provinces, The Pathst Lao made an all-out effoxt in the May 4
nationwide election carmpaign for 2] National Assembly seats, utiliz.ng
well-organized grass-roots cells and demobilized PathetLao soldiers ©
2s propaganda agents. Firm final results have not yet been announced but
a (| ae may safely be assumed that the communists De o Jiao Hak Xat) have won
i? seats and the Neu tralists (Santiphab) have won 4 out of 21 seats atissue ~
in the elections. Since there axe 8 loftists in the National Assembly al-’
rea dy, a leftist coalition could possibly control about onevthivd of the tha
seats in the new enlarged Assernbly (as many 25 21 out of 59 seats), Al«

though J Lao officials claim that the strong sh 10 Wi ng of cornmunist candidates

me
c

a site * “SPCRET

Teed
you
“fF
ah
iN!
’
