meeepen sit Sete aj sty Sates
ah rT |

eee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Se ae oy - TOP SECRET

Ds Military. Because these countries ao not have
the capability of creating armed forces which could
effectively rcsist large-scale extemal agsression,
the United States will be ee to provides a basic
‘shield ajainst Connunist agsression, For the foresceabic
future local will to resist ager pees ca Will depend on a
‘conviction in Southeast Asia that the United States will
‘eontinue its supvort and will mai nya strilans forces
acequate *to‘counter ageression in Southeast Asia witn
tnc capabilitics described in NSC 5502/1 (paragraons 11,
15 and 1S). The combination of such U. S. forces and
jJocal will oe resist woule constitute the best deterrent
against aggression. Snould the deterrent fail, this
cowbination ous @aiso provide the most crffective in-
suvance that, in conjunction with indigenous and aliicd
forces, the United States could suppress Aue eee in
the area quickly and in a manner and on a scale dest
calculated to avoid the hostilities broadening into

general war. ‘

ce. Econonic and Tachnical. The insistence, through-

out most of the aroa, on economic development vrovides
.the strongest lever for the exertion of influence: by ne
ae world or by the Communist bloc. Without inercasec

xtcernal help froa some source, most of the covemnnedes
oe the arca will be unable, even with accquate indigenous
effort, to nanage tho political dsmand for venid better-
ment in the conditions of life and “provice for sound
economic developuent, Feilure to obtain such assistance

from tne free world will tend‘to drive .these countric
toward ccononic eepencence. on tae Communist ploc,. Wee}

4

general preference in’ Soutneast Asia for Western technical
and econowie assistanen Gives the United States and tne
fFroe world an opvortunit, to obtain primacy over Coiaunist
efforts in kcy ecconowic sectors, ne outcome may,
nowever, be stronzsly influenced by the success with mich
the Proe world can cope with Comuunist efforts to :
exploit the existence of Southncast See export provloms,
narticularly those involving rice, tire rioc anoad,
fiexibility of U. S. procedure end 3 a ty’ or U. S.
action will tbe increasingly important, if effeetive
advantage is to be taken or unoxpectos and transiciit
opportunities. oe

+ 5. Tne Prodleia f Regional Associa ition. Over the long

pun, the setts aes ore and essentially .cenendent nations
of Soutneast Asia cannot exist satisfactorily as free nations

.Witnout closer associations than now exist. 3

6. The Problea of Alicnment. . To preserve tneir indenen-

Gence, strengthen their internal — stability, ana protect thea-
selves against aggression, soue countries in Southeast Asia

108s

NSC 5612/1 mo TAP SrARRN

