.

". past year.

-. prior to the Armistice.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

forces. The primary US-directed effort has
peen the training of a Vietnamese instructor
corps and the development of training ‘pro-
grams throughout the Vietnamese army. US
_ personnel ere detailed to VNA training cen-
ters, to units at division level, and to major
territorial commands to supervise progress
and implementation of the training program.
he US military group in South Vietnam has
been held to its pre-Geneva size despite. the
near complete withdrawal of the French mis-
sion, Which totaled about 2,500 personnel
However, a $350-man
US Temporary Equipment Recovery Mission
(TERM) is being established in South Vict-
> nam.

“49. South Vietnam's embryonic air force

(VNAF) has grown only slightly during the

and 100 pilot trainees. VNAY¥ aircraft inven-

. tory is 143 planes, mostly trainer/liaison and
. transport types. Although the air force is

receiving F&F piston fighter-type planes, it
is unable fo maintain even limited flight oper-
gations because of a lack of qualified mainte-
nance personnel, The VNAF has 2 limited
capability to provide air support to ground
troops, artillery observation, alr evacuation,
liaison, and air lift for paratroop operations.
No significant incresse in VNA f
appears likely during the next two to three
. years.

50, South Vietnam's navy is under operational

control of the Chief of Staff of the VNA and=

under the 2dmir..strative commend of a senior
naval ofiicer.. Personnel strength jis 142 of -
cers and 1,755 men, with a Marine Coros of
44 officers and 1,775 men. The forces afioat,
which have been augmented over the past year

by additions from the withdrawing French

forces, include 3 submarine chasers (PC),
3 coastal. minesweepers (RASC (O)), 14 arn-

phibisus vessels (2 LSM, 2 LSSL, 5 LSiL,

5 LCU), and 170 smaller amphibious and .

patrol craft. The Vietnamese navy has lim-
_jted effectiveness, but it is capable of under-
taking river patrol and minor coastal and
amphibious operations. Capabilities should
improve substantially in the near future be-

SECRET

Its current strength of 3,386 in- —
cludes 103 trained officer and enlisted pilots ©

” capabilities .

10

cause of continued US aid and intensive train-
ing programs which include technical train-
ing in the US and France.

51. We believe South Vietnam’s military and

"security forces are capable of maintaining

the government in power against any poten-
tiel armed opposition now _located south of

concerted guerrilla° warfare supported by in-
filtration of men and supplies from the north, |
relatively large areas of rural Vietnam prob-
ably would be lost to government control. Inj
the event of full scale invasion, the Vietna-
mese forces at present probably could not de-
lay for more than 60 days 2a Vietnamese Com-
munist advance to the Ban Me Thout-Nha
Trang line. If the trend toward improved
internal security and increased effectiveness
of the Civil Guard continues, it will be possi-
ble to step up training and reorganization of
the VNA, thereby improving its capabilities
during the period of this estimate. However,
by mid-1957 Victnemese forces will still be
incapable of delaying for rnore then 90 days

the 17th parallel.1In the event of large scale, |
|

an advance by DRV forces beyond the Ban Me

Thout-Nha Trang line.

Internal Security

52. The internal security situation in South
Vietnam has improved substantialiy curing
the past year. The sects are no longer.a ma-
jor security problem for the GVN. Most of
‘the important non-Communist sect leaders of
a year ago have either fied the country, been
killed or captured, lost control of their forces,
or ralliea to the government. Remaining sect
armed bands are scattered and disorganized
and probably total no more than 2,060. Al-
though various bandit groups will probably
continue to cause local disturbances, it is like-
ly that organized non-Communist resistance.
will virtually disappear during the period of
this estimate.

53. With the sect problem basically under con-
trol, the Coinmunist underground represents
the only serious threat to internal security
in South Vietnam. Reports on Communist
armed strength in the south over the past
year have ranged from 6,000 to 10,000. Our
best. estimate of current strength is 6,000 to

LOQ7G

i

2

/

.

Dott)

4

=
