a a

= “obtaining the parti cipating countries! understanding of the project and in

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Be _., (SEGRET

- The Asian members continued to seek an expansion in economic activities
under. SEATO, and the U. S. accordingly committed $2, 3 rnillion for .

_ spilled labor training and $425, 000 to assist Thailand in establishing a
“SEATO Graduate School of Engincexing. A most successful Council meeting
_was held in Manila in Merch which authorized the Seczetary General to
-enter into limited contact with other regional defense organisations a and
agreed to a proposal that contact with nonemember states be continued
and expe anded,

Some progress was made in developing regional projects.
Agreements were signed in June with Thailand, Viet-Nam and Laos to
provide $27 million of U. S. funds toward the cost of a regional tele-
communications system, Funds were also tentatively earmarked for the
possible inclusion of Cambodia. A mild expression of interest by Burma
fox participation in the project has been explored, and Burmese participa»

“tion seems unlikely in the near future, ICA has appointed the prime engie
nécring contractor for the project. A second regional project relating to .

. English language teaching has fallen ohne schedule because of problems in

*

. drawing up the necessary eecummentat One moe

‘ There have been two main themes - in Southea et Asian
attitudes toward the Taiwan Strait crisis, The initi ial note of feax that the
‘whole area. might be involved in war was ‘eeplaced, to a alarge extent, by

atisfaction that Ete U. S,. did not back down on this issue,

Cs Progress in preventing Southeast Asian countries from |
becoming economically dependent upon the communist blec varies frorn ©
country to country, Seemingly generous trade and aid offers frora communist
bloc countries have proved tempting to some Southeast Asian nations.

. Burma and Cambodia have been most velnexable. In Singapore and the
Federation of Malaya the Chinese Comrnunists, for instance, operate through

banking and trading interests. The Federation is taking steps to reduce
the influence of the Communist Bank of China. In Thailand, the volum: of
imports from Communist China, which is small but increasing, has impor-
tant propaganda value to the communists, Laos has so far resisted Chinese
Communist trade and aid offers, Even assuming favorable political de-clope

. ments,.-many uncertainties exist for the economic development of Soutl.cast
Asia. Sore obvious weaknesses include limited understanding by govern»
ment and other leaders of the elements essential to economic pevelopiacn we!
and mobilization of capital, both domestic and forcign, lack of managerial
and technical experience, Jack of diversity in export commodities and.
vulnerability to price fluctuations for these commodities. Some appre-
hension exists regarding the possibility of obtaining reasonable prices for
the fa averable rice crops now expected in the are Ca, pa srticularly Burma.

2, No veview of policy is recommended,

SECRET

if

Sar ean
ey

oe
’

\

.

a

Ce Le ee ee

t

et Dt ee ed

me gt pee eT
"1 '
