Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

sa 2S ee 2 SEGRE

Mict-ham the Cambodians also harbored strong suspicions of United States
omplicity in the coup plots and anti-American sentiment reached alarming
proportions in February and March. -The Communists pyofited from the’
situation by actively identifying themselves with the Cambodian side in the
dispute and by the fact that preoccupation with opposition movements sup~
%i ported by Thailand and Viet~Nam further distracted Cambodian attention
{> from the threat of internal communist subversion. Communistinfluence |.
oF in public information média’ continued to grow, although there is recent evi-
”. dence of official alarm and attempts to right the balance in favor of a more
: strictly "neutral" news presentation. Repeated United States disclaimers
; of support for anti-Sihanouk activities, sympathetic United States kes es

to two messages from Prince.Sihanouk, visits to Phnom Penh by high ©
_Amevican officials and Cambodian fear of alienating the U.S., have recently
‘improved relations, .At the same time, continuation of our economic and
military aid programs turing the period of stress probably had a favorable
effect on the Cambodian Government. In this context, relations between
.-. French and U.S, officials in Cambodia have improved resulting in better
‘cooperation in oux mutual efforts to further free world objectives. No
further significant moves were made by Cambodia toward the Sin>-Soviet bloc, 44
aoe ‘Relations with Thailand became more cordial and the deterioration in Cam~
on bodian relations with Viet-Nam was halted, These developments followed
_& /.by elimination of anti-Western persons from the cabinet, ‘point to a pro-West
: oscillation in Cambodia's orientation,
. 5 Laos, Progress has been made in furthering United States objec- .
tives in Laos, particularly with reference to the strengthening of Lao political
. leadership, the improvernent of Lao relations with other Southeast Asian
ce: countries, and in providing for the training of the Lao National Army. Since
, the grant of special powers in January to a new cabinet, there ave indications.
“* “that the prestige and morale of the Communist Neo Lao Hak Kat have de-
teriorated, while those of the non-communists have improved, Stresses
and strains continue between the oldex conservative leaders in the Lao Hom
: Lao and the younger elements.in the Committee for the Defense of Nation: |
terests although both groups continued to participate in the government
“and vecently have evidenced greater willingness to cooperate in the face of
a the NLHX thzeat. For the first time since Laos became independent, the
"".. Lao Government has recently been in a position to consider the long term probe
lem of deycloping the rural areas. For instance, through the rural aid
program, means have been made available to provincial administrators to —
help villa cron g carry cut small but important devclopment projects, Re- |
sumption of cornniunist guerrilla activities in July may reveal communist
recognition of theiy inability to make progress by "soft" tactics in the face
_. of the improving Lao Government position, However, the military situation
{ x yermains unclear and there is no conclusive evidence as to the exact composition,

aU pe tee
