Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 2 of 18
SECRET=NOFORN Enel No. 1

Desp No, 278

From Saigon

directed against GVN youth groups, project personnel and village officials
began to rise.

B. Assassinations and Kidnappings

The figures presently available indicate that assassinations and
kidnappings perpetrated by the VC and other dissidents got off to a slow
start in September, '59. The date on which the GVN relaxed its post-election
security precautions is not available at the present time, but the VC which
committed only 7* assassinations and } kidnappings in the first 13 days of
September subsequently intensified their activities and by the end of Sep-
tember the total for the month amounted to 22 assassinations and 3 kid-
nappings, according to evaluated data from various sources, From this
point the figures have continued to rise to levels considerably above the
average for the past two years, A chart prepared by the Embassy and based
as nearly as possible on constant criteria, is included as Annex I to this’
report. Deaths or persons missing as a result of participation in armed
combat are not represented on this chart. Since reports are still incomplete
for November and December, the figures for these months are tentative.

Although a complete analysis of assassinations and kidnappings is not
available at the present time, it has become fairly apparent that since
last summer the VC have added the newly formed GVN youth groups to their
list of prime targets which continue to include village officials and NRM
eadres.. The vast majority of incidents has consistently occurred in the
Fifth Military Region with a small number reported in the First and Capital
Military Regions. During September and October, the months for which final
figures are available, An Xuyen Province topped the list for both assassi-
nations and kidnappings, followed by Kien Giang, Kien Phong and Phong Dinh.
Other Provinces in the Fifth Military Region, although far from peaceful,
vary considerably from month to month,

C. VC Military Type Operations

vc activities involving military type operations such as ambushes,
clashes and attacks on GVN military and civil posts have intensified in
size and vigor over the past few months although, according to available
information, the number of such actions increased only slightly through
December. Statistics from GVN sources on actions and casualties of both
friendly and enemy forces

* This figure includes four members of the security forces who may have
been killed in action since reports simply state that they were "killed"
by the VC.

SECRET-NOFORN

1259
