Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

hier. SIS Se pa i eta, ce | \ GSECRET:

asure that elements within these communities that continue
eo feel and act as Chinese rather than “as citizens of their
"x5st countries look to the’ GRC as the custodian of Chinese
social and cultural values and support it as the representa-
ard i 5 . = se 1 =
+sye Of the interests and aspirations of the Chinese people,

: 130. Discreetly encourage the governments of the countries
‘of the area to.promote and facilitate the integration of
yacial minorities,- bearing in mind that tne extent-and pace

of such integration will be affected by the willingness of

the host countries to permit the overseas Chinese and otner
rinorities to participate in the national life without

~ @iscrimination.

4 ; 31. Implement as appropriate covert operations designed
: to assist in the achievement of U. S. objectives in Southeast

Asia.

; 32. Promote economic cooperation between the countries
: of the area and Japan and with the Government of the Republic
i of China, to the extent feasible without jeopardizing the
{ achievement of U. S. objectives toward the individual South-
f + edst Asian countries.

"3 : 33. In order to promote increased cooperation in the

area and to deny the general area of the Mekong River Basin
to Communist influence or domination, assist as feasible in
the development of the Mekong River Basin as a nucleus for
regional cooperation and mutual aid.

34, Should-any country in the area cease to demon-

strate a will to resist internal Communist subversion and

<5, to carry out a policy of maintaining its intependence, +

‘T= terminate U. S, economic and military assistance progranis
: _ to such nations. es | : j

r

35. Exercise caution to ensure that the United States
does not become so identified, either in fact or in the
eyes of the world, with particular regimes, individuals or
political factions in the countries of the area as to hinder
U. &. accommodation to changes in the political scene,

V. COUNTRY COURSES OF ACTION IN ADDITION TO

THE “REGIONAL COURSES OF “ACTION” ABOVE

BURMA

35. In view of the emerging opportunities in Burma and
the repercussions that developments there will have on the

1290

Nsc 6012 Se oh =
(Revised 8/22/50)
