Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 8 of 18
SECRET-NOFORN Encl No. 1

Desp No. 278

From Saigon

A recent CAS report (FVS-42l9)* indicates that the VC are
presently planning to augment their forces, particularly in
An Xuyen, Kien Giang, Phong Dinh, Kien Phong and Kien Tuong Province
and that they will press general guerrilla warfare in South Vietnam
during 1960. This guerrilla warfare would be under the flag of
the People's Liberation Movement (reports of a mumber of recent
incidents mention the flying of a red flag with a blue star).
The VC reportedly estimate that 70% of the people in the rural
areas of South Vietnam are either embittered by or indifferent
toward the present government. According to this report the VC
are convinced they can bring about a coup d'etat in 1960, and are
presently considering three ways to do this: (1) to incite the GVN
military forces to revolt and to penetrate the new government to
steer it into a neutralist policy; (2) to force the GVN to use harsh
repressive measures against the people by organizing widespread
popular uprisings, thereby laying the foundation for open revolt;
(3) to set up popular front provisional governments in the Trans-
Bassac area as the general guerrilla warfare mentioned above pro-
gresses (the VC estimate that they have sufficient penetrations in
or control over village level administration to make this possible).
The alternative which is selected will, according to the source,
depend upon VC progress during the first four months of this year.

President Diem told the Ambassador and General WILLIAMS in
late February about the capture of a document by GVN security
forces outlining VC plans to further step up aggressive attacks
all over the country, including Saigon. These operations are
planned to begin in the second quarter of 1960. (CAS has seen
the document and believes it to be authentic - see FVS-292).

Military Factors Affecting the Internal Security Situation

GVN internal security operations in 1959 employed an average .
of 25 ARVN battalions, 44,000 Civil Guards, 43,000 SDC, 6,000 Surete,
as well as the Gendermerie, Self Guard Youth Corps and NRM members
for which figures are not presently available. This impressive
number of personnel has, however, failed to keep VC and dissident |
activities under control. Numerous high-ranking GVN officials
have very recently stressed the necessity of more anti-guerrilla
training for the security forces. From a military point of view
an outstanding deficiency in the GVN effort has been the government's

* Gee also FVS-4220 and FVS-4263.

SECRET-NOFORN

1265
