Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Goes ee a ee _. + 7 SECRET

- unobtrusively encouraged these developments and supported some regional
projects such as. malaria’ eradication, a telecommunications system and the
“construction or improvement of trans-border highways, taking care to leave
-the. initiative with me Asian leaders,

ae Burma, chene has been substantial progress toward the achicvae
ment of United States objectives in Burma. ‘The government of Prime
Minister.Ne Win has introduced stability and vigor into the conduct of Burma's
. domestic and international policy. The United States has encouraged the
new Burmese Government to cooperate with the West and has made available
_ substantial military assistance. The Burmese security forces have effec-~
-. tively used U. S. eqijipment against insurgent elements within the country,
At the same time, the insurgents' relations with communist political organi-
_ gations have been impaired by the arrest of communist political leaders
- engaged ‘in liaison, Communist influence in labor, among the students, and
in the press has been substantially reduced,’ The government's information
services have evidenced greater willingness to cooperate with the United
"28. States Information Agency and other United States services in psychological
pee: warfare against the insurgents and in general public indoctrination,
. _ In its international policy, the Ne Win Government has made it
> clear that, although it may maintain an overt posture of neutrality because
of its geographical position,. it considers itself, in fact, ideologically aligned
with the West and looks to the United States for support and leadership in
--.’many fields, The Prime Minister has privately stated that he believes SEATO
plays an important and useful role, and, while noting continuing Burmese
_ sensitivity to open identification with the western powers, he. hopes ‘a move

’ Burma gradually toward a public posture of closer identification witi: $ PHO
“ Relationships between the United States and Burma are ueeee cordial tian
. they have ever been, At Burmese request, the United States has agraed to.™

contribute substantially to the construction of a highway. end universily
facilitids as evidence of United States interest, By contrast, Burmese rela»
tions with the Sov.cts have deteriorated sharply. Burma is curtailing its
trade and aid relationships with the USSR and the press has been severely
‘eritical of Soviet Embassy conduct, In its relations with Communist China,
. -Burma has moved much more cautiousi, but is stiffening its attitude toward
the Peiping Government, particularly in the matter of a border settlement,
4, Cambodia, A resurgence of severe tension in relations between
’ Cambodia and its. neighbors, particularly Viet-Nam, resulting from Cam
“bodian conviction of Thai and Vietnarmese involvement in two abortive anti-
Sihanouk plots, threatened seriously to frustrate United States objectives
_ in Cambodia during the early months of 1959, Primarily because of our
‘close: association with the anti-~ -communist. governments of Thailand and

rs
w

SECRET

ce
