Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

ee ° ee Sh wae +25). SECRET

size and objectives of the attacking forces, Never theless, it is reasonable

‘to asstime that the attacks were at least supported by the North Victnamese
Communists and that theix minimum objective is the reactivation of the
International Control Commission, Visits by the Foreign Ministers of

the Republic of Viet-Nam, Cambodia and Thailand have served to improve
the good relations of Laos with those countries and may pave the way for
increased cooperation with Thailand and Viet-Nam, Strong British support
of the Lao Government's opposition to communist efforts to reactivate the
“International Control Commission was another encouraging development.

Although he Lao Government appears to have handled the insub-
' ordination of the former Pathet Lao baitalion at Xieng Khouang in a moderate
"Ss manner, this episode gives cause for concern on two grounds: first, the
Lao Army displayed a disappointing lack of capacity to control:a small
scale internal security problem when it permitted the battalion to escape;
“*  gecond, conzmunist bloc threats relating to this episode raised the possibility
“that the blo¢ may be planning either an accelerated subversive effort in
& nica of the Neo Lao Hak Xat or a more sexious move in’Southeast Asia,
. ‘Discussions in Paris at the end of May xesulted in a general reconciliation
of Fx ench and American views on means of improving the effectiveness of
: the Lao National Army through American participation in training in a man-
~ : ner, that the French Government can justify in the light of its responsibilities
sundex the 1954 Geneva Accords, The Lao Government has accepted French-
American BRGpOrs nls, a anda a. joint training program has been initiated,

“The genera us increased pro-Westexn posture of Laos has included : Ns
a greater appreciation of SEATO, However, neither the Lao Government
“nor the United States favors Laos joining srt at. this time.

+ “Monetary fefora, including the sdoption es é pealistic rate of
‘exchange and free convertibility of the Lao currency, was undertaken by.
the Royal Lao Government on October 10, 1958, The reform has been.
‘successful in virtually eliminating previously widespread financial and com-~
mercial abuses and in essentially holding the line on inflation. A number of
serious financial problems for the United States and for Laos, which existed
in varying degrees of irapoxtance prior to the institution of monstary reform,
“remain unresolved: (1) Jao Government revenues remain strikingly low
while expenditures have increased, thus aggravating the already sizeable
civil budget ceficit; (2) dollar reserves have substantially declined and have.
only been maintained above the "safe" level by periodic injections of cash
grant dollars; (3) with the exception of POL (petroleum and other lubricants) |
products the use ef Procurement ss pations ae imnpoxvts has alrmost
entirely ceased,

*

’

KO nuit aa nee - ae or : i : a , SECRETS

.
*
—
tr
rm
ait in)
Sate
(Su
me,
’
