ers

Do nand inate hah tiiek tebe ke ied

ihe ia dO hla beet heat pee nan ee re

dee kee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
STATEMENT OF POLICY
‘on

U. S. POLICY IN MAINLAND SOUTHEAST ASTA*

ue EES CONSIDERATIONS
1. Generali. Since mainland Southeast Asia does not
represent a a unified areca, courses of action must generally be
deterwineé 1n the light of widely varying country situations,
However, basic objectives and main Girections of U. S. policy
ean and should be esvabitshec on &@ regional basis.

2s ‘Conse quences ‘of Commnist Domination. The national
security or the United States would bo endangered by Communist
dowination of mainland Southeast Asia, whether achieved by
syert asgression, subversion, or a solitical and econoaic

orfensive.

a. Tac loss to Comaunist control of any sinile free
country would cnceures° tendencies toward acc omnodation oy
the rest, .

2

“>. Tue loss of the entire area would have a seriously
adverse inpact on the U. S. position elscwncre in tne Far
East, have severe economic consequétnees for szany nations
of the free world, add significant resources to the
Gomuunist Dioc in rice, rudder, tin anc other minerals,
and could result in severe cconowie anc’ Dolitical pres+
sures on Japan and India for accownodation to the Conmaunist
loc. Mic loss of Southeast Asia mainland coulda tuus
have farreaching conse quences seriously adverse to U. S.
security interests. .

3. ‘Tae Communist Torsat

@. Overt Aggression. Althoug) nD Cozumunist policy now
enonasizes non-inilitary methods, the danger of overt
ageression will remain inherent so long as Cosmunist
China and North Viet Nam continuc a basically hostile
policy suyported by substantial wilitary forces. There

- as.only a cease-fire in Viet Nam and svoradic nostilitics
continue in Laos Tac Viet Minh have continued to isaprove

*® For purposas of this paper "Mainland Southeast Asia" .consists
of Burma, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, Viet Nan, Malaya and
Singapors:. In acdition, there is attacuec a supplementary
statement of policy ON the special situation in Norti

NSC 5512/1 ; 10223 ; “TOP SECRT
