Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Si SCRET .

*

Communist Chinats rapid rise from "semicolonial" status to ee one and
military stature as a great power. There is also a great deal of respect for
Shina's economic achievement, Local opinion tends to separate the Russians
as cutlanders, end except for localized inci dents; the pattern of Soviet

' activity does not evoke a sense of threat comparabic os that of Communist,

: China,

60.

:

Some resentment againet Communist Ching kaw wane evidenced in ,

| Buxina over the protracted Chinese border dispute and in Burma and Malaya
“ever bloc efforts on behalf of opposition parties or dissidents. Singepore

and Malaya both have been irritated by Russian tin dumping on the world
market and by Chinese Communist textile dumping, On 1 Octobex Singapore
‘and Malaya restz ‘icted imports of Chinese text tiles. oo =

ie 61.

can bring.

‘

Outlook: _ The Sino»Soviet bloc's fluid and oppériunis stic approach

: “within the framework of a policy of developing widex contacts and relations

eon all levels with the nations of the area, will probably continue, The
development of sentiment that is initially neut ralist; independent, and
nationalist will semain the general bloc aim, Communist China and the USSR
will probably bend evexy effort to developing a smooth implementation. of the
economic relationship with Cambodia as a demonstration of what neutrality

Normalization of relations with Communis st China shor vld lead

to an jnerease jin Communist activity in Carmbodia, At no time in recent
Lao history has the government been more pro-Free World in its foreign
Nonetheless, Communist influence is still increasing domestically

policy.
although a

a somewhat

slower rate, The bloc is likely to make little progz 2088

in South Viet-Nam unless political unrest should develop, and disturb the
' tenure of President Diem, President Diem is now 2 nticipating a shayp ups
surge in Communist guerrilla activity and texrorism in South Viet-Nam.
. Thailand and Malaya will probably continue to pursue policies of minimal.
with the bloc, although in the former there ave a few indications ‘of
a softening toward the bloc. The trend toward the left in Burma has been
abruptly terminated by the accession of General Ne Win and for the dura véion
of his premiership, Communist influence shovld diminish, Communist
China's economic offensive in Malaya and its appeal to the Inzge Chinese
rninority theres-38 porcent of the popvlation-=will peepee result in an
inex ease of undfficial Chinese Gomraunist influence,

zelations

wt

xy,

SECRET |

i= LA
bas
ee)
,

oe eee

a eer

sp rlwreeree site riteneey = teorrtes

Bee ee et

ao hem

ee ee

ote eer ee

ad
