by

)

i

I>
|
|
|
1
]
\

ae a et at Ma

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_Srenrns 173 ; |

stage, and basic economic growth has been
slower than that of the north. The GVN still
depends upon US aid to finance about tvio-
thirds of its national budget, including ‘most
of the support for the armed forces.

I. MAJOR TRENDS IN SOUTH VIETNAM

A. Political Trends a
[ 2°. President Diem continues to be the undis-
puted ruler of South Vietnam; all important
and many minor decisions are referred to him.
Although he professes to believe in representa-
tive government and democracy, Diem is con-
yinced that the Vietnamese are not ready for
such a political system and that he must

. .-. rule with a firm hand, at least so long as na-

' tional security is threatencd. " He also believes
that the country cannot afford a political
' opposition which could obstruct or dilute the

government's efforts to establish 2 «!rong and
' secure state. Although respectid for his
courage, dedication, and integrity, Diem has

) -remained a somewhat austere and remote fig-

ure to most Vietnamese and has not generated
widespread popular enthusiasm.

1). Diem’s regime reflects his ideas. A facade
of representative government is maintained,
but the government is in fact essentially au-
thoritarian. The legislative powers of the
National Assembly are strictly circumscribed;

the judiciary is undeveloped and subordinate
i to the executive; and the members of the
‘| executive branch are little more than the per-
sonal agents of Diem. -No organized opposi-
tion, loyal or otherwise, is tolerated, and critics
of the regime are often repressed. This
highly centralized regime has provided reso-
lute and stable direction to national affairs,
but it has alienated many of the country’s
educated elite and has inhibited the growth of
governmental and political institutions which
could carry on in Diem’s absence. The exer-
cise of power and responsibility is limited to
\ Diem anda very small circle mainly composed
of his relatives, the most important being his
__ brothers Nhu and Can. | Nhu is particularly
influential in international affairs and in mat-
ters relative to the southern half of the coun-
try,
security and the northern half df the country.

\

Can is more concerned with internal .

12. An inereasingly important and effective
mechanism employed by the Diem regime to
maintain control over the affairs of South
Vietnam is the Can Lao, a semicovert polit-
ical apparatus. Its structure, like that of the
Kuomintang or a Communist party, is based
on the cell and cadre system. The Can Lao is
organized on a regional basis. The southern
region is run by Nhu, an a ‘ticulate, pragmatic
activist. It is loosely organized and admin-
istered. The northern region is ruled with
an iron hand by Can, a withdrawn eccentric
feared by most Vietnamese, who seldom yen-
tures from his’ headquarters in Hue. Al-
‘though there is considerable rivalry and ten-
sion between the two brothers, there is no
evidence that either is less than completely
loyal to Diem. Diem apparently finds it ad-
vantageous to continue the division of author-
ity as a means of controlling the ambitions
of Nhu and Can.

13, -Can Lao members are active at virtually
every level of Vietnamese political life. Mem-
bership is becoming increasingly important
for professional advancement. One-third of
the cabinet members and over one-half of the
National Assembly deputies are probably Can
Lao men; the acitc! figure may-be higher.
The Can Lao controls the regime’s mass polit-
ical party, the National Revolutionary Move-
ment. It apparently has its hand in most im-
portant business transactions in South Viet-
nam and is engaged in dubious business prac-
tices. Recently the Can Lao has stepped up
-its campaign to recruit key officers in the GVN
military establishment, probably to establish
a control mechanism within the only organi-
zation in South Vietnam strong nough to
challenge the Diem regime.

14. Although the popular enthusiasin attend-
ant on the achieving of independer *e and the
end of colonial rule has subsided and some
disillusion has arisen, iparticularly among the
+ educated elite, there appears to be little iden-—
tifiable public unrest. There is some dissat-
* isfaction among military officers largely be-
cause of increasing Can Lao meddling in mili-
tary affairs. The growth of dissatisfaction is
inhibited by South Vietnam’s continuing high
standard of living relhtive to that of ils neigh-

SECRET

eA
ro
Cf)
PO
