Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

. : : Ba SECRDYT

\ OPERATIONS COORDINAVING BOARD
2 Washington 25, Ds Gy fait =
\ ms August 12, 1959

REPORT ON SOUTHEAST ASIA. (NSC 5809)
. . (Approved by the President, April 2, 19.58)
(Period Govered: From May 28, 1958 through August 12, 1959)

=

AL reed wacy of U.S. 3 Policy in Mainland Goutheast Asia (NSC eeo2)

ee ce Review of Setiay with respect to Singapore is recommended on an
urgent basis, in order to provide guidance for the new situation which has
developed in Singapore with the granting of internal self-government and

. the victory of the leftist People's Action Party on May 30, a development

adverse to U. S. and free world interests, - If this revision of policy is made,
the review of U. S. Policy Toward the Far East (NSC 5429/5) should be
kept in mind,

B. Summary Evaluations of Progress rade. in 1 Accomplishing U. Se os

Sonaiistadebanmniazaand

Chjectives

2. There has Boon substantial progress toward meeting the objectives
of NSC 5809 in most of the mainland countries of Southeast Asia. In Singa-
pore, however, left-wing political elements won an overwhelming electoral
victory. Friction between Cambodia and its pro-U. S, neighbors adverse~
ly affected Cambodia's relations with the U. S&. for some months but sub-
sequently there was noticeable improvement, There has been an increased
awareness of the communist threat, This increase was given new impetus by
recent events in Tibet. The resolution of all governments in the area, ex-~
cept those in Singapore and Cambodia, to take a firm line in response to 2
this threat was reflected in the political developments described below,
United States political, economic, information and military as sistance pro
gremy have played a significant part in these developments,

-Regional Seonewaits on in Southeast Asia has improved as a result not

- only of our own efforts to promote political and economic cooperation ad to
reduce specific areas of discord, but also because of increased Asian aware~ °

ness of the Sino-Soviet threat and of the material benefits possible from

‘regional development. This favorable trend has been facilitated by the fac

that the Southeast Asian leaders feel able to work with,one another due to -

similarities in governmental practice and political philosophy. Aggres agrees

Chinese Communis t policies in Tibet and clsewhere in Asia have given them

- a sense of unpency to dra LW ares regionally. The United States has

SECRET

“tes aeamaree s
