Vesna ae eS iy

ae

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

15. Encourage the countries of Southeast Asia to cooper-
ate closely with each other on a basis of mutual aid and
support, and support indigenous efforts to develop regional
associations so long as they do not weaken SHATO or the
spirit of resistance to Communism. .

16, Participate actively in SEATO, and séek to develop

-poth its military and non-military aspects in a manner that

will convincingly demonstrate the value of SEATO as a regional
association, the usefulness of which extends beyond deter-
rence of Communist expansion. Encourage limited participa~
tion of non-Communist, non-SEATO Asian nations in certain

- SEATO activities.

17. Encourage and support the spirit of resistance
among the peoples of Southeast Asia to Chinese Communist
aggression as well as the indigenous Communist insurrection,
subversion, and propaganda, :

18. Encourage the Governments of Laos, Thailand, and
Viet Nam to maintain close relations with the GRC and to-
support its international position as the Government of
China. Having in mind the desirability, from the U. S,
point of view, of Malaya and Singapore developing closer
relations with the GRC, encourage these Governments, as
appropriate, to take steps that will lead ultimately to this
objective. Seek to ensure that Malaya does not recognize
the Chinese Communist regime or support”’its seating -in the
United Nations es the Government of China, and that Singapore
does not develop closer economic or cultural relations with
Communist China, Encourege the. countries of the area to
eschew relations with the Communist regimes in North Korea
and North Viet Nam and to support the international position

‘of the Governments of the Republics of Viet Nam and of Korea.

19. Maintain, in the general area of the Far East, U. S.
forces adequate to exert a deterrent influence against ~
Communist aggression, in conformity with current basic
national security policy.

20, Should overt Communist aggression occur in the
Southeast Asian treaty area, invoke ‘ne UN Charter or the
SEATO Treaty, or both as applicable; and subject to local
request for assistance take necessary military and any other
action to assist any Mainland Southeast Asian state or
dependent territory in the SEATO area willing to resist
Communist resort to forces: Provided, that the taking of
Military action shall be subject to prior submission to
end approval by the Congress unless the emergency is deemed
by the President to be so great that immediate action is
necessary to save a vital interest of the United States,

NSC 6012 i
{Revised 8/24/60)

SECRET
