“

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_ SECRET

Asia area, In answer to a,question as to whether the troops

‘to be used in the platcau-could be Thai, the President answered

no, Laos is afraid of the Thais; they are afraid of a Pan-
fhai movement te swallow Laos, Luos*hates Cambodia, distrusts
the Thais but likes the Vietnamese, They would like an outlet
to the sea at Tourane. They have promised to send officers to
be trained by the Vietnamese, President Ngo then connented
on his planned second counter move which is to fill up the
vacuum of the high plateau area, the forest border area and the
Plaine des Jones. This plan will be begun by placing trained
demobilized men from the Civil} Guard in these areas with their
families, = ,000 so far. He is now ‘appealing to the people of
the central ‘Viet-Ham area to se ttle on the high plateau and is
asking people ef South Viet-Nam, the southern areas, to move in~
to’ the Plaine des Jones, “a
SEATO has always recognized the need of the fight against
subversion. Planting men in these arcas will construct a
huwan wall effective against Communist infiltration and sub-
version, The above goes hand in hand with construction of
roads in the above areas, Stationing men and building roads
serve both a strategic and econonic purpose, The road build-
ing projects is really a stage of the French plan that goes

back to 1919 and continues to 1942,

Secretary Guarles asked the status of the road construc-
tion now. The President answered it had not yet begun but
Capital Engincering Firm was starting construction, studies
and he thought construction could begin next year. These
roads in the interior are important because the roads along.
the coast is easily disrupted, It has many bridges and that
is why French, thinking of the possibility of Japanese ai esete)
along the coast, thought roads in this area desirable. Thi
wa's part of the Preuch Empire Plan to tie together yioteban
Cambodia and Laos. It is still a good plan for the defense of
Southeast Asia. a includes a road across the interior to
Pakse on the Hekong which is near the Thai Railroad terminus at
Ubon. Route 9 fe Tourane. to Savannakhet is too close to the
17th parallel, but Laos is interested in an out]ct to the sea

for economic reasons, SEATO principals are (1) to pary aggres-

sion (2) struggle against subversion and (3) economic and
social aspects required to support the above, The French

aud British are interested mostly in nuniber 3, The military
strategic asrect of offensive-defensive plan a Lay ac by
the air force and nevy. In case of aggression ctical atonic

veapons, could be used. Vietnamese feel they must nant oe
Ground weapons because the Viet tt: mo war showed that it was

difficult to use air effectively in this country, Communist

-=
fs

C3
