Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

SNIE 63.1-60
23 August 1960

SHORT-TERM TRENDS IN SOUTH VIETNAM

The Problem

To assess political and security problems and probable trends in South Vietnam

over the next year or so.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Developments within South Vietnam

over the past six months indicate a trend
adverse to the stability and effectiveness

of President Diem's government. Criti-

cism of Diem's leadership within urban

groups and government circles has been

mounting. More immediately important,

the Communist Viet Cong, with support

and guidance from Hanoi, has markedly
increased subversive operations, terrorist

ee and guerrilla warfare. (Paras.
-13

2. Although Diem's personal position and
that of his government are probably not

now in danger, the marked deterioration
since Jamiary of this year is disturbing.
These adverse trends are not irreversible,
but if they remain unchecked, they will
almost certainly in time cause the collapse
of Diem's regime. We do not anticipate
that this will occur within the period of
this estimate. However, if Diem is not
able to alter presenttrends and the situa-
tion deteriorates substantilly, it is possi-
ble during the period of this estimate that
the government will lose control over much
of the countryside and a political crisis
will ensue. (Para. 17)

DISCUSSION

3. Since the beginning of 1960, there has
been a general decline in the political and
security situations in South Vietnam. The
Comminist Viet Cong has stepped up
terrorist activities and guerrilla warfare.

1/ The Viet Cong insurgents represent. the

paramilitary arm of the North Vietnam
Comminist Party. The Viet Cong esti-
mated to have in South Vietnam between
3,000 and 5,000 regular armed cadres
and about 3,000 irregulars organized as
underground troops. Main areas of Viet
Cong activity lie south and west of
Saigon and along the Cambodian border.
North Vietnam furnishes guidance, per-
sonnel reinforcements, and logistical
support to the insurgents.

At the same time, grievances against the
government, which have long be n accumu-
lating, have become increasingly urgent
and articulate.

The Political Situation

4, Discontent with the Diem government has
been prevalent for some time among intellec:
tuals and elite circles and, to a lesser
extent, in labor and urban business groups.
Criticism by these elements focusses on Ngo
family rule, especially the roles of the
President's brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, and

* Madame Nhu, the

SECRET

1298
