ina

a enemies oe tite

oer

ed vee oar me

et ae

eee ae

aueers

NSC 5612/1

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

; 60. Encourage the British and local authorities to take
vigorous actions to curb Cdmaunist subversion, and be pre-
pared to assist in such action as requested by British or
local authorities, : ;

61. Employ all feasible means to prevent Singapore and
the Federation of Malaya from falling uncer Communist control,
In the case of armed attack, place initial reliance on
Commonwealth, ANZUS, or SEATO resources as appropriate, but
be prepared to take such additional U. 5S. action as may be
required. “

62. Encourage the development of a strong, stable,
independent Malayan nation witnin the Commonwealth.

63. -Seek to assure free world strategic interests in
Singapore, favoring, only if consistent with this end
elective institutions in Singapore and Singapore's in-
corporation with an independent Malaya within the Coimaonwealtn.

64, After Malaya attains full self-government and in-
dependence, be prepared, as appropriate and consistent
with recognition of Commonwealth responsibility, to assist
Malaya to maintain stability and ‘independence and cncourage
it to join SEATO. ; all

VI. SUPPLEMENTARY STATEMENT OF POLICY
on © ‘f
THE SPECIAL SITUATION IN NORTH VIET NAM

65. Treat the Viet Minh*as not constituting a legitimate
government, and discourage other non-Coimunist states froin
developing or maintaining relations with the Viet Minh
reginc. :

f. eS = = ses *
; 6S, Prevent the Viet iftinh from expanding their political
influence and territorial control in Free Viet Nam and South-
east Asia. ;

67. Deter the Vict Minh from attacking or subverting
; - Fie | - o
Free Vict Nam or Laos.

cr = ; 1 = ps
68. Probe weaknesses of the Viet Minh and exploit them
internally and internationally whenever possible.

69. Exploit nationaiist sentiment within North Viet Nam
2s a means of weakening and disrupting Sino-Soviet domination

70. Assist the Government of Viet Nam to undertake

programs of political, economic

ol lc and psychological warfare
against Viet Minh Comaunists.

10S

9)

——

TOP SECRET

.
