EES)

mannan ee

cae

=i

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

on dae Es es TP Sieh mT] one NSO Meeting

TEM 16 (For Thtomnation)” ie

a) PRO ESS_ REPORT ON MAINLAND SOUTHRAST ASTA Lue. 60a)

=.
.

ee - The penant U.S. policy on SER Asia (NSC 5612/1) was approved” 5 Septenbor

1956. This 3s the first iuuesne Pere thereon and covers the period through

0 March 1957.
es No euiaew of NS policy is vecoumpanen by the OCB. ees ©

3. pte eopeurd to be moving closer to the Free World. Although her basic

‘policy of neutralism is unlikely to change, Burma has indicated interest in obtaining -

U.S. econenic and military assistance. The U.S. has been unable to influence

is Cambodia in the direction .of develoyment of a stable government and non-involvemen’

ig t=

“

“continued, and Vietnan seems clearly persuaded that its interests lie in Bleed

_ with the Cemmnist, Bloc. The situation in Iaos worsened, the government being
threatened with the possibility of downfall af “negotiations with the Pathet L20
should collapse. “The Federation of Malaya made further progress in its transition -
_ to independence. Thailand's ‘slow progress toward freo representative goverment

Seat eB the Free World. -

-

re te

ze A scuibincl SEATO nilitery exercise was held to Smprove militery coopera~
tion among the SEATO nations. Prospects that other nations might participate in 4
_SEATO did not improve, with the exception of Vietnam. On the whole, MAP has begun
_to make a contribution. In Vietnam the Army is now capable: of insuring internal
' security, and: in Cambodia the MAAG has made some progress toward achieving a working
Pelatioichin with the Cambedian general steff. In Taos MDAP has made an army pos-
sible. Jn Thailand the armed forces are considered capable of meeting any indigenous
threat to internal security, retarding external agEress ion, and making a token con-

tribution to collective defense

5. The economic aid eosrans in the erea have all continued to show slow

‘ progresa. No new U.S. commitments have been entered into during the reporting :

period. Efforts Fxve been made to lessen demands upon U.S. resources and upon lecal

-. economies (NSC Action No. 1599~e). In Canbedia end Lacs the ermed forces were re-_ .

_have been hold with regard to the purposes of NSO Action No. 1599-e.

@uced, and in Vietnam the U.S, has refused a request for an increase of forces. In
Burnie, for overriding political considerations, ‘it was found necessary to grant
Burinats request for needed loan assistance. In Thailand no formal consultations

Comegie o gfe en ay
Mh ig é. ” ks you know, the JCS recently recommended that U.S. policy re Cambodia

be modified to restore the mission for its arned forces of resisting external aygres-
pion, We have recomnuended that you non-concur in the JCS recommendation. * ;
