_oe eee
.

Viet-Nem Contd.

PAGE PARA,

197. 86.

_ Bradvate

Timing - Continuing) 5

14 61 :

a ‘ "COURSES OF ACTION

"Encourage U.S. training and orientation visite

of Vietnamese secondary schools.

Inerease training of Vietnamese technical,
* professions 11 and administrative pe sonnel. im 8 Net ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET. =

. ‘,

r hibedipseenstytantehaleedatd

Aarigned %o: OASD/IS!
for potentiel Vietnamese goverment and _.°, Buppors: vs
business leaders. Continue the granting of ~ ‘dc aN pays 7
level scholarships, with extensions to garet
permit attaimment of advanced degrees of me as
Belectcd-cases. Permit U.S. financing of
ful undergraduate scholarships at U.S. © ‘
vniversitics Zor selected outstanding graduates . ae eis
Fneourage fullest ag ON ee etears
assimilation into Victnamcse life (military, economic, Yee
pocial, political and cultural) of returned exchangeas, : i
participants end. trainecs. ' Maintain and strengthen be) <oae UTI:
contact with these beneficiaries of U.S. exchange Bg, lage ca
and training programs. Proyide them with pe <= ey eee
continuing access to American sources of techni Cay 0 Sei ae he
professional end cultural information, and. help © ~ 9.4 2 3:
them exercise & pro-Free World influence among eet a
fellow Victnamesé. (0GB Assignment: Defense, ICA, _ Stee Ry use
USIA, State; asin - Continuing) a are eS ee ye

> Apoigacd to: ofsn/ ts

Viet-lan , U.S. and third country schocis.
(OCB Assignment: ICA, USIA, State, Des ene

Continue training the Vietnamese armed forces Assigacd to: JCS

’ for their internal security role, including - ~ “ot mh

15

15

> perecned Self-Defense Corps, and to continue other

Defense}

.counterrintelligence within :
- support of police actions, pacification and. .° , -

Continue to translate textbooks on leadership,

‘ The Goverment of Vict-Nam should be encouraged

the armed forces,

operations, et cetera. (OCB

enti-guerri ta
Timing - Continuing) ©

Assignment: Defe ense;
to; dCs

Assignc |
OASD/ISA °

anti-subversion, counter-intelligence, Support:

administration of martiel. lev, riot control,

. ete., into French end Vietnamese for dis tribution ss
". to Vietnamese armed forccs. MO

(OCB As signrmcnt: mC
Defense, ICA; Timing - Cont inuing) PR ea we ag
Assigned to; JCS’
to maintain en effective, well-trained and carefully

self-help and probe ection
(0CcB Ageiem rent; - TCA,

activities which emphasize
against Viet Cong.terrorism,
eeaane - Continuing) -

atk

A, ate Ce

= SECRET. os 2 S40

1)
