Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

its internal political position in South Vict-
nam, a country with an estimated population
of 12 million. “The national referendum in
October 1955 established the legitimacy of the
Government of Vietnam (GVN), and com-
pleted the elimination of Bao Dai as Chief
of State and as a maior political factor in
South Vietnam. By the end of March 1956,
Diem reduced.the ‘Cao Dai and Hoa Hao
groups to political impotence by a series of

moves which culminated in the elimination’

of the Cao Dai army as an independent mili-
tary force and the capture, trial, and execu-
tion of Ba Cut, the last important active Hoa
Hao resistance leader.

36. On 4 March 1956, in South Vietnam’s first
naticnal elections, 80 percent of the eligible
 yaters participated in electing 123 deputies
from 405 candidates for the Constituent As-
sembly. The returns gave pro-Diem forces a
substantial majority. Although nearly one-
third of the government-favored candidates

were defeated, no openly anti-Diem deputy

was elected. This was due in part to govern-
-ment manipulation of the election campaign
and in part to a boycott of the elections by
most of the opposition parties. Despite efforts
t by the Vietnamese Communists and other
| resistance groups to disrupt and sabotage the
a voling, the elections generally were calm and
{ orderly. Tne Constituent Assembly will sit
* for a four-year term as the first National

Assembly.

37. The deputies in the Constituent Assembly,
which convened 15 March, are divided among
political parties as follows: National Revolu-
tionary Movement (NRM), 61; Revolutionary
Workers Partly (RWP), 15; Citizens Rally
(CR), 26; Movement of Struggle for Freedom
(MSF), 6; and Independents (including one
~ Dai Vict), 15.. The NRM is the Diem govern-
ment’s primary source of organized political
power. Although Information Minister Tran
Chanh Thanh is its titular head, a large part
of the party is controlled by Diem’s brother,
Ngo Dinh Can, who controls Central Vict-
nam, The RWP, also a government party, is
led by Dicm's brother, Neo Dinh Nhu. While
the CR, MSI, and most Independents now
support Diem, they contain some members

SECRET re "

who have reservations about some of Diem’s
methods and are potential centers of parlia-
mentary dpposition.

38. Diem will probably maintain his domi-
nant political position in South Vietnam dur-.
ing the period of this estimate. The consti-
tution, which has been drafted under Diem’s
supervision, gives the President wide powers
including the right to appoint the first Vice
President and to suspend civil rights during
the life of the first Assembly. Diem’s personal
prestige will probably be enhanced by im-
provement in internal security and by con-
tinued frustration of Vietnamese Communist
objectives. However, he will continue to face
serious problems in attracting additional ac-
tive support for his government, in part be-
cause of his reliance on a small circle of rela-
tives and trusted friends. While Diem’s con-
trol of the Assembly during the period of this
estimate will probably be adequate to insure
adoption of any important rneasure he wishes
enacted, his inclination to hold a tight rein
on the legislature may accelerate the develop-
ment of an active opposition.

- 39. The appointment of a Vice President by

Diem, now 55, will remove much uncertainty
over presidential successorship. Neverthe-
less, Diem’s death, whether by natural causes
or assassination, could result in serious fac-
tional disputes in the government and among
the major political parties which could strain
the new governmental institutions. Ngo Dinh
Nhu and Tran Chanh Thanh, Key figures jn
the RWP and NRM, have a great deal of
political power and would play important
roles In any redistribution of power, but nei-
ther of these men has a wide popular folow-
ing. To some government critics and govern-
ment supporters Thanh symbolizes the more
regressive features of the Diem regime. At
the moment, Secretary to the President and
Acting Minister of the Interior Neuyen Huu
Chau appears to enjoy Diem’s favor and has
grown rapidly in stature and power, but he
has no organized political backing apart from
his support by Diem and Nhu. Neo Dinh Can
would probably play an important behind-
the-scenes role in any redistribution of power,
but his lack of national stature and poor

SECRET

LOT2

ote e
