Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

—_—_ oe rt

‘ f SECRET

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN NORTH. AND SOUTH

iN

_ VIETNAM THR

4 -

OUGH MID-1957

fo analyze the current political, economic, and military situation in North and

4. We believe that the Communist “Dem-
oeratic Republic of Vietnam” (DRV) will
not attempt an open invasion of South
‘ Vietnam or a large scale guerrilla war-
fare effort during the period of this esti-
mate because of the danger of US or pos-
“ sibiy SEATO counteraction and because
-. such action would prejudice Bloc empha-
sis on peaceful coexistence elsewhere.
The Communist regime will almost cer-

throughout the period of this estimate,
despite ‘some passive resistance and seri-
oug economic difficulties. It will require
continued large scale Bloc aid to make
_ even limited progress toward developing
- 4 self-supporting economy. The DRV
“army will retain the capability of defeat-
ing the total forces of South Vietnam,
Iaos, and Cambodia. (Paras. 7-11, 13-

16, 18-21, 64-68)
. 9 In South Vietnarn, the trend toward
i political stability and popular confidence
in the government will probably continue,
parring 2 DRV invasion, large’scale guer-

villa action, or the death of Diem. Never-
theless, such contingent developments as
intensified Bloc support for DRV objec-

LUGT

tainly remain in firm political control

South Vietnam and to estimate probable developments through mid-1957.

CONCLUSIONS

tives or reduction in Diem’s internaticnal
support could stimulate greater Commu-
nist subversive pressure, weaken the
South Vietnam government’s confidence,
cause some loss of its public support, and
revive opposition efforts for reconcilia-
tion with the north. (Paras. 35-39, 69-72)

3. Progress toward resolving basic eco-
nomic problemas will probably continue
slow, but economic conditions in South
Vietnam are not likely to have serious
adverse political effects during the next
year, as rice production, ruber exports,
and Jarge scale US aid provide reasonable
living standards. (Paras. 40-46)

4. All significant sect resistance in South
Vietnam has been eliminated, but some

8,000-10,000 armed Communists and a |

Communist political network scattered
through the villages continue to pose 2 ,

serious internal security problem.
effectiveness of the South Vietnam army
will probably improve gradually as more
units are released from security missions
for training, but by mid-1957 it will still
be. unable to contain a DRV attack for a
prolonged period. (Paras. 47-56)

The |
