Uses

POE meer Ince ee AP UR ee speed
i iatasey secs

.

a anemeds se ar RRMA 9 Seite hee wa ately +g | :
Aa De Hy ein, eee ct
; ’ ir sp hetona . oe enews
: 1 gents. :
; A he te
.

et ten Tt
—_

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

66, Encourage Vietnamese military planning for defen
against external ager ession along lines consistent with
U, Oe planning concepts based upon approved U. S. policy,
and discreetly manifest in other ways U, S. interest in
assisting Free Viet Nam, in accordance with the SEATO

Treaty, to defend itself against external aggression.
af

and support an improvement in relations ne

Cc a a

67. Encourage
petween oa Nam and Cambodia,

DERATION OF MALAYA Resend by nine S
ee ee ea ae ReLg wer 19 ¢

68, Encourage the continued develiosncnt of a strong
‘stable Malaya within the Commonwealth,

69. Eneourage the Conmonwealth to exercise primary
responsibility in Malaya but be prepared to assist, as
necessary, in the maintenance of Malaya's stability and

independence.

7O. In the auotiesetion to Malaya of the course of
action in paragraph 23-a, be prepared to provide needed
technical assistance to Malaya, and consider the exten-
sion of loans for economic development if altexnate sources
of financing prove to be inadequate,

Zl. Discreetly encourage the present Malayan leader-
ship to improve. its position of strength and responsibility

unless more favorable alternatives develop,

2. Discreetly encourage Malaya's participation and
avoiding any actions which migat

membership in SEATO,
strengthen neutralist sentiment,

73. Encourage the Malayan Government to take vigorous
actions to curb Communist subversion and to rely primarily

on one Comnonwealth for any assistance PORES

Should overt Communist ageression occur against

Th.
Malaya, place initial reliance on Commonwealth, SEATO or UN
resources as appropriate, but be prepared, subject to

Malayan request for assistance, to take independent U.
action along the lines of. the proviso in paragraph 20,

+

oO,

STNGAPORE

75. Bearing in mind Singapore's strategic position
and its importance to the Free World, encourage develorment
toward a politically stable, economically viable Singavore,

NS¢ 6022 a ee SEGRE?
aa (Revised 8/24/60)
