Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

¢. Encourage United Nations agencies, other Colombo Plan
countries, and other friendly countries to contribute available
resources to promote the economic growth of Southeast Asia.

d. Encourage the Southeast Asian countries to orient their
economics in the direction of the free world and to rely primarily
on non-Communist markets and sources of supply for trade, technicians,
capital development, and atomic development.

e. In carrying out programs involving disposal of U. S.
agricultural surpluses abroad:

(1) Give particular attentioh to the economic vulner-
abilities of the Southeast Asian countries and avoid, to the
maximum extent practicable, detracting from the ability of
these countries to market their own exportable produce.

(2) Give particular emphasis to the use of the resources
to promote multilateral trade and economic development.

f£. Promote as appropriate the expansion of trade relation-
ships between the United States and the countries of Southeast

Asia.

g. Take advantage of adverse local reactions to Communist
parter agreements with countries in the area by demonstrating the
advantages to these countries of conducting trade on a multilateral
commercial basis.

23. Make a special, sustained effort to help educate an expanding
mumber of technically competent, pro-Western civilian and military
leaders, working bilaterally, through the United Nations, with the
other Colombo Plan countries and with other friendly countries. Stress
the development of potential and secondary leadership to support the thin
stratum of elite now administering the central governments and bring to
their support modern techniques and technology in public information and

organization.

eh, Place increased emphasis on community development projects,
educational programs, and other activities aimed to influence the
welfare and attitudes of the people at the village level.

25. Strengthen informational, cultural and educational activities,
as appropriate, to foster increased alignment of the people with the
free world and to contribute to an understanding of Communist aims and

techniques.

Nsc 5612/1 TOP SECRET
1089
