Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ae THE SITUATION IN LAOS ,

r
THE PROBLEM

.
. .

To estimate Communist capabilities and short-run intentions in Laos, and to esti-
mate the reactions of Communist and non-Communist countries to certain contin-

gent developments.

~

- CONCLUSIONS

'1. We believe that the Communist re-
sumption of guerrilla warfare in Laos was

- primarily a reaction to a stronger anti-
Communist posture by the Laotian Gov-
ernment and to recent US initiatives in
support of Laos.. We consider that it was
undertaken mainly to protect the Com-
munist apparatus in Laos and to improve
Communist prospects for gaining control
of the country. (Paras. 7-8)

9. The Communists probably believed:
(a) that guerrilla warfare offered some
prospects—at low risk—of promoting
Communist objectives in Laos even if the
Laotian Government received substantial
moral and material support from the out-
side, and (b) that nilitary forces which
the West -woild be likely to commit inside

“Laos would be indecisive against the
fiexible Communist guerrilla tactics.
(Para. 18)

3. We estimate that the Communists in-
tend to keep the risks and the costs of
their action on a low level and they are

“not likely in the near future to resort to
large-scale guerrilla activity, at least so
long as the UN fact-finding mission is in

Laos. (Para. 19) '

fl Aaa

4. Most uncommitted and anti-Commu- _

nist countries would provably support
Western intervention in Laos if they were
convinced that the Laotian Govern-
ment’s position was erave and that there
was direct Communist Bloc support of
the Laotian rebels. In that event, they
would prefer that such action be taken
under UN auspices. (Paras. 24-26)

5. Hanoi and Peiping have warned that
any foreign military intervention in Laos

- Would be considered as a direct threat to

their national security. However, de-
pending partly on the scale and nature
of the military move, the Communist mili-
tary reaction to the Western interven-
tion, whether under UN, SEATO, or US
auspices, initially would propably take
the form ,of further covert North Viet-
namese intervention rather than overt in-
vasion. There probably would be less

efiort than at present to camouflage this

intervention. This Communist action
might, in the first instance, be limited to

. « - . - Ld
seizing substantial territory in Laos—

such as Sam Neua and Phong Saly prov-
inces—which we believe they could do
under existing conditions with an aug-

SECRET ne J

a

y

re

7

eee eT eee ee eae y gma ¢ A ee eae te — eA EE Os eS SN Sy tee naan ere geen lenis es ere

eben aunt Suh pe eng se awh cma ewe ig a a re ene ma Fe

ee
