Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Peon A . SUOR IT

forces. It will probably remain unwill-
ing to devote a significantly greater share

of resources and attention to longer range
economic development. Assuming con-
tinued US’ aid at about present levels,
modest improvement in South Vietnam's
economic position is likely. However, de-
velopment will lag behind that in the
North, and the GVN will continue to rely
heavily upon US support to close the gap
between its own resources and its re-
quirements. (Paras. 19-22, 32)

5. There is little prospect of a significant

improvement in relations between South

Vietnam.and Cambodia so long as the
present leaders of the two countries re-
main in power. Relations with Laos will
probably remain “generally friendly.
Continued suspicion that the French are
intriguing in the area to recapture a posi-

tion of major influence will probably pre-

. nam (DRV) in the north.

INTRODUCTION

8. The 1954 “prov isional military demarcation
line” dividing Vietnam at the 17th par allel has
become a fixed boundary separating two en-
trenched and hostile governments, the Gov-
ernmei of Vietnam (GVN) in the south and
the Communist Democratic Republic of Viet-
The all-Vietnam
elections called for under the Geneva Agreec-
ments of 1954 have not been held, and the
divergent conditions demanded by both gov-
ernments preclude the holding of such elec-
tions.” To date the GVN has been preoccupied
with the threat to internal security posed by
DRV subversion and guerrilla warfare and
with the threat that the Communists’ numeri-
cally superior armed forces wil! one day invade
the south. However, there are no 5 thie
that the DRV js willing to assume the risks
of US intervention and attempt to conquer

vent an improvement of Franco-GVN re-
lations. (Paras. 25-27, 35)

6. Despite widespfead popular discontent,
the Government of the DRY is in full con-
trol of the country and no significant in-
ternal threat to the regime is likely.
With large-scale Bloc aid, considerable
progress has been made in rehabilitating
and developing the economy with major
emphasis on agriculture, raw materials

probably soon have laid the foundations
for considerable economic expansion.
(Paras. 37-38, 42, 44)

7. The DRV has no diplomatic polions
with any country outside the Bloc and
its foreign policy is subservient to the
Bloc. We believe that it hill continue its
narassment. of the GVN and of Leos,
though a military invasion of either is
unlikely. (Pares. 46, 48-49)

: I
decision would probably be made by Peiping
and Moscow rather than by Hanoi.

9. Meanwhile life on the two sides of the
bouncary is marked by an increasing dispar-
ity. ‘The north is organized alone strict Com-
munist lines. The standard of living is low;
life‘is grim and regimented; and the Rational
effort is concentrated on building for the fu-
ture. The DRV claims it has reduced its reli-
ance on Bloc aid to about one-third of its
national budget. Its large army is almost
entirely financed domestically, except for arms
delivered by the Bloc. Both its foreign aid
and its Spartanly acquired domestic capital
are devoted to restoring and increasing pro-
ductive capacity in agriculture and industry.
In the south the standard of living is much
higher and there is far jmore freedom and
paicty. However, South Victnam’s economic

1
; 2

South Vietnam by militi ary invasion. Sucha development is still at an early and uncertain
1s |. al
SECRET :

i,

and light industry. The regime will _
