ws REGIONAL oe

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

OPERATIONS ; COORDINA TING BOARD
Washington 25, De | 5

REPORT ON SOUTHEAST ASIA (se 5612/1)
‘(Approved by the President September 6, 1956) - = -~
. ar ‘iod ee From November 6, 1957 through May 28, A928)

NSC 5612/1 was revised on April 2 | ee
and issued a as NSC 5809. er

“A; SUMMARY EVALUATION Te ae

‘ i ’ General. Burma and Cambodia showed a more friendly atti-
tude toward the United States and the Free World, and Cambodian leaders

' made some attempt to control communist subversion. Thailand's new

“regime revinvigorated the pro-SEATO, antincommunist policies of its
Se and Nict=Nane maintained close relationship with the
United States ae , .

nae On the other hand, as the price for. regaining contro! of the
two provinces previously dominated by the Pathet Lao, the Lao Govern~

_ ment accepted two Pathect Lao leaders in the National Cabinet and assi- i
_.milated sore FPathet ‘Lao troops into the Royal Lad Army. Tne conservative
governing coalition in newly-independent. Malaya suffered some political

setbacks, The communist»supported leftist party did vexy well in Singa- /

pore municipal elections in contrast to the poor showing of moderate and

con seryative poli tical parties.

= The short-run economic outlook in Southeast ete is somewhat

clouded by declining foreign exchange reserves and prospects for lower

export earnings resulting from poorer rice crops and lower prices for
other export. commodities, Jn the long-run bettex prospects exist, as~ }

-puming favorable political developments, because of:: (a) the wealth of

human, agricultural and zaw materials resources of the area and (b)
the developing power, comm wunications, irrigation and other basic facili-
. ties su pported by external financial assistance,

however, the Asian members still

ee ‘SEATO., Satisfactox zy progress continued at the operational | :

“Jevel in militay LLY ‘and civil a Spc et

8;
seek'an eens sion of economic < acti vities, Atomic~capable weapons were

