Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 10 of 18
SECRET-NOFORN Encl No. 1

From Saigon

Desp No. 278

dealing with it could be an advantage. In Malaya it has taken
11 years to reduce the security situation to the minimum, and it
is even more difficult to deal with it in a divided country with
long exposed frontiers).

There appear to be other reasons contributing to the difficulty
experienced by the GVN in attempting to rally the rural population:*
(a) Until recently it was becoming more and more apparent that
Diem was not being given accurate information on the internal
security and political situation in rural areas. As late as the
end of December, 1959, he was telling all callers how much better
the internal security situation had become, despite many doubts
raised by his listeners. Information was apparently being
presented to him by local officials in such a manner as to reflect
well upon the officials giving it. The President's trips to the
provinces have appeared to be carefully "laid on" by local officials.
The President himself cannot be absolved entirely from the blame,
however, since his system of personal rule which permits direct
appeal from the individual provincial authorities to himself, in
a sort of intra-executive check and balance system, serves to
further weaken the administrative apparatus.

Recently, however, as indicated in the subsequent section on
"GVN Reactions," the Vice President and others who are not his
usual informers on security matters have spoken frankly with him
and he now seems well aware of the situation; (b) Provincial and
district authorities exercise almost autonomous control in the
areas under their jurisdiction. Too often the personnel holding
these positions have been incompetent, having been chosen for
reason of party loyalty. Moreover, some have tended to view their
jobs as a means to personal advancement or financial gain** often

* See also FVS-4220 and Fvs-4228.

** The local press from time to time reports incidents of extortion
and blackmail by local officials. On December 1 Le Song in an
editorial cited "numerous cases of abuse of power committed by village
police officials such as extortion of money and bribery." Examples
like the following are to be found in various reports in the press
-and from various CAS and USOM sources:

On February 13 Tu Do reported that a hamlet chief in Binh Tuong
Province had been arrested for posing as a security agent and
blackmailing four farmers. A USOM source in July reported that a
District Chief of Security in Blao had reportedly been removed
from his position for extorting sums of money from wealthy residents
who were arrested on charges of being Communist sympathizers and
had to pay for their release.

SECRET-NOFORN

1267
