Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Page 2 of 4
Encl No. 213 7261
SECRET-NOFORN Desp. No. 278

From Saigon

VC Intentions and Potential. Indications are growing that the VC
are mounting a special campaign aimed at undermining the Diem Government.
According to CAS sources, VC armed cadre strength has increased to about
3,000 in the southwest, double the number in September. VC groups now
operate in larger strength, and their tactics have changed from attacks on
individuals to rather frequent and daring attacks on GVN security forces.
A recent CAS report has indicated a VC intention to press general guer-
rilla warfare in South Viet-Nam in 1960, and indicates the VC are convinced
they can mount a coup d'etat this year, President Diem also told me in
late February about the capture of a VC document indicating their intention
to step up aggressive attacks all over the country, including Saigon, be-
ginning in the second quarter, t

These signs indicate that aggressively worded statements emanating
from the DRV in 1959 may accurately reflect DRV intentions. In May 1959
the central committee of the Lao Dong Party passed a resolution stating that
the struggle for reunification of Viet-Nam should be carried out by all
"appropriate means". Subsequently in conversations with Western officials,
Prime Minister Pham van DONG made statements to the effect that "We will
be in Saigon tomorrow" and "We will drive the Americans into the sea".

It is not completely clear why the DRV has chosen this particular time
to mount an intensified guerrilla campaign in South Viet-Nam. Several
hypotheses have been put forward. The campaign may be part of general
Chicom strategy to increase pressure on non-communist countries all along
the southern rim of the Asian communist bloc. Several GVN officials, in-
eluding President Diem, have said that the present DRV tactics may be re-
lated to the forthcoming East-West summit meeting, but they do not seem to
be clear as to just what this relationship might be. Diem and others have
also expressed the view that the DRV is aiming at disruption of the GVN's
economic, social and security programs, many of which have been making
steady progress while others, like the agroville program, threaten to
weaken the VC position if carried out successfully. The DRV may also
have been embittered by its failure to interfere successfully with the
GVN National Assembly elections last August and resolved, as a result of
this failure, to intensify activities in the South.

GVN Security and Political Weaknesses, At the same time that the DRV
guerrilla potential has increased in the South, weaknesses have become more
apparent in the GVN security forces. GVN leaders have in recent weeks
stressed the need for more anti-guerrilla training of ARVN. The desirability
of centralized command in insecure areas and a centralized intelligence
service has also :

SECRET-NOFORN

1259
