Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

e S$ should continue to make clear its
he principle of collective security, its.
18 Urit arrangements proviae maximum

b r all, and its expectation that a
i a te in such arrangements is
on of its best interests and does
net or itself consti i tute a claim for increased financial aid.
Where countries participate, measures to assure adherence
are desirable, normally including preferential treatment in
the fields of. economic and militar ry assistance as justified
by U, S. strategic objectives, Where new opportunities for
affiliation develop they should be encouraged. The United

Q Ky
eaebe:

tates should, however, accevt the rignt of each nation to
_¢noose its own meee to. the future, and should not exert
pressure to make active dllies of countries not so inclined.
The genuine independence of such countries from Communism,
serves U. S. interests even though they are not formally
ni States, ~The United States should

to
aligned ae tne Unit
a

ed
eccording ty pee nd assist them so long as they remain

at.

a ccaned E oreserve their own independence and are
actively ne per cies to this end. *.
: LIt, OBJECTIVES

12. To prevent the eountries of Southeast Asia from-
passing into or becoming economically dependent upon the
Communist bloc; to persuade them that their best interests lie
in greater cooperation and stronger affiliations with the rest
of the Free Worlé; and to assist them to develop toward
stable, free, representative governments with the will and
ability to resist Communist from within and without, and

reby to contribute to the strengthening of the-Free World,

oo

tnere

iV. “OTOMAT, COURSES OTF AcTTON*

San a re a be

|
the countries of the are’ on the

ils . GY to defend and stren: shen their
ee.

aad tal

14, Respect each country's choice of national rolicy for
preserving its independence, but make every effort ~o demon-
strate the edvantagses of eee cooperation and closer
alignment With the free World, as well as the dangers of
alignment with the Seer ee blon

= Me following courses of action are not applicable to .the
State of Singapore at this time: paragraph 13, 14, 16,

22-a, and 32.
NSC 5809 - . «E120 | a ‘TOP SECRET

A (Revised 11/10/59)
