Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

A f. Promote as appropriate the expansion of trade
‘ relationships between the United States and the countries
of Southeast Asia. Be

wee ee

i: z g. Take advantage of adverse local reactions to
: Communist barter agreements with countries in: the area
i lby demonstrating the advantages to these countries of
*. i. iconducting trade on a multilateral commercial basis.

et, Make a special, sustained effort to help educate
en expanding number of technically competent, pro-Western
eivilian and military leaders, working bilaterally, through
che United Nations, with the other Colombo Plan countries
and with other friendly countries. -Stress the development
of potential and secondary leadership to support the thin
stratum of elite now administering the central governments
and bring to their support modern techniques and technology

j jn public information and organization. 3

25. Place increased emohasis on community development
projects, educational programs, and other activities aimed
to influence the welfare and attitudes of the people at the
village level. =,

é 26. Strengthen informational, cultural and educational
“3 ‘activities, as appropriate, to foster increased alignment
of the people with the Free World and to contribui-: to an
understanding of Communist aims and techniaues, :

27. Hold or reduce the number of U. S. officials in
each country to a strict minimum consistent with sound
implementation of essential programs, in order to head off
an adverse political reaction to the presence of a large
number of Americans in relatively privileged positions.

" 8, Promote increasing Asian Buddhist contact with and
knowledge of the Free World, Explore with friendly religious
organizations ways of developing Buddhist fraternal associa-
tions and identification with Free World religious leaders
and movements, :

e9. When not .in conflict with other U. S, political
objectives, continve activities designed to encourage the
overseas Chinese in Southeast Asia (a) to integrate fully
and as rapidly as practicable into the national life of
their host countries, becoming loyal citizens and identifying
themselves with the interests of these countries; (b) to
Support and participate in anti-Communist activities in their
countries of domicile; (c) to resist Communist-efforts to

» ™~ dinfiltrate and gain control of their communities. Seek to

eer (Revised 8/21/60),
