rat

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

successfully introduced without adverse psychological reaction in the re~ \y
cent "Phiblink" exer cise, and a number of military exercises have been
scheduled and approved for the coming year. Standardization of equipment
is being accomplished between military forces of member nations which

: will lead- to a.reduction of the technical obstacles to fuller cooperation
4 ‘in mutual defense. There were significant administrative improvements;

‘political consultation in meetings of the Council Representatives improved

eo in quality and content;: ‘and. a successful counter~subversion seminar was held
; in ‘Baguio; and a cultural round table, attended by some non-member govern~'...__

“ments, was held in Bangkok, » In addition, the United States has committed |
$2 million for skilled labor training and agreed in principle to assist
* Thailand in the a context to develop Ree Teeoaty, engineering facilities,

What is Bekerally considered to have been the most successful

+ Council rnceting to date was held in Manila in-March. Am ong other things,

- the coming year.

the Council at that time authorized the Secretary General to enter into
limited contact with other regional defense organizations and agreed to a
Dae that contact with non-member states be continued and expanded in

: 3. Mekong River Development The four-power Coordinating Com-
“rnittee established by Thailand, Laos, Cambodia and Viet-Nam to plan

the development of the Mekong River basin agreed to set up a system for
the cooperative collection of basic data on the river basin, - In line with

our regional objectives the U. S, offered at the time of the recent ECAFE
meeting at Kuala Lumpur to contribute a total of 52 million to establishm ent
of this system, The offer, which was accepted by the four riparian coun- —
trices, produced a favorable impact in the ECAFE area. The U.S. con-

_ tributions together with funds offered by the UN and other friendly govern-_
ments, is sufficient to finance the costs for approx simately the first year of
the development plan-«$2, 5 million--recommended by the Wheeler survey

mis Sion.

4, No review of policy is recommended. |

.

B, MAJOR fe} BERATING PROBLEMS FACING THE UNITED sit PATES

oh

2S Obstacles to Regional Cooperation, -At present more factors

obstruct the development of regional cooperation in Asia than facilitate it.
The most important ones are nationalistic preoccupation with dornestic.

a SECRET
