Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

44, Progress has been slow in the resettlement gram to resettle 100,000 refugees on aban-

of refugees and in the implementation of other
measures to increase agricultural production,
The limited land reform program inatgurated
jn 1953 is unattractive to the peasant in com-
parison with extravagant Communist prom-
jses. Landlords are objecting to the low renis
provided for in the program and their opposi-
tion plus the generat Jack of oficial determi-
nation and administrative competence has led
to the stagnation of land reform.

45. Nevertheless, the GVN has made some
progress in building the organizational struc-
ture necessary to replace institutions of the
French colonial period. The GVN has created
an independent national bank, a foreign-ex-
change office, an investment fund, a govern-
ment-owned commercial bank, and an inde-
pendent currency. President Diem has pro-
posed establishment of a High Economic Coun-
cil to guide the country’s economic develop-
ment and he has made informal reference to
the possibility of a four or five year plan for
economic rehabilitation and development. In
addition, governrnent ofiicials now administer
‘a substantial import program and the appli-
‘cation of a substantial US foreign aid pro-
gram. Although these new institutions and
economic activities provide an essential be-
ginning for further economic progress, they
are not yet fully operative or effective.

46. Though South Vietnam cannot become
economically self-supporting so long as it
must maintain armed forces of the present
size, its economic position could be substan-
tially improved by economic and fiscal re-
forms. “ However, during the period of this
estimate there is littie prospect for marked
development of South Vietnam’s economy or
for a significant reduction in its balance of
trade and budget deficits. . Inflationary pres-
sures are almost certain to continue. How-
ever, the food supply, a critical political fac-
tor, is likely to be more than adequate for
domestic necds. Provided security conditions
continue to improve, the GVN will probably
give economic problems Increased attention
during the coming year and will probably be
able to make some progress toward solution
of several specific economic problems, A pro-

at

8

te

Cc

’ French-Vietnamese military agi 2

£

doned land has been developed and some
40,000 of these have already been relocated.
This project will probably be followed by fur-
ther resettlement projects which are likely to
reduce substantially the refugee problem dur-.
ing the estimate period. Additional land will
probably be brought under cultivation. Some
improvement is likely in tax collection and
in handling the problem of French disinvest-
ment. By mid-1957, economic development
planning will probably be well advanced, but
concrete results are unlikely within the period.

Military

47, Current strength of the Vietnamese Na-
tional Army (VNA) is approximately 145,000
troops. The VNA is organized into 4 field
infantry divisions (8,560), 6 light infentry
divisions (5,225), 1 airborne groupment
(4,000), 13 territorial regiments, 5 sepa-
rate sect regiments, and 15 assorted combat
battalions. Although some progress has been
made during the past year, the extensive
plens for training and reorganizing the VNA
have fellen behind schedule because most me-

jor units have been dispersed with many of
them engaged in security operations. Pyin-

cipal VNA weaknesses are an inadequate logis-
tical and technical support system, an inefiec-
tive chain of command, and inexperience at
the command and staff levels. At least six
months of uninterrupted training will be nec-
essary to bring the VNA to minimum opera-
tional effectiveness at division level. WNA
loyalty to President Diem and his policies
seems assured. The army’s s*li-confidence
and morale are generally good.

48. When the French High Ccrnmand was
inactivated on 23 April 1956, all previous
nents were
fil French combat units have
been withdrawn from Vietnam. Aiter 1 July,
only a few French army personnel remained
in South Vietnam, in addition to a 1,000-man
French military support group for the ICC.
The Vietnamese and the French are now ne-
goliating concerning French support for the
ICC and the French role in training the Viet-
nar forces, particularly air and naval
/

terminated.

ese

dy

5

>

v

-
t
