Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

spokesman. At the most critical moment of the coup attempt, the U.S.
Ambassador urged Diem to give in to rebel demands to avoid bloodshed.
Earlier, he had urged others to urge Diem to compromise with the

rebels. The most charitable view that Diem could take would be that
our Ambassador is a badly-informed man, but he would also then believe
that the Ambassador has been far too prone to listen to the wrong people
in Vietnam, people who are Diem's enemies.

Actually, Ambassador Durbrow is not entirely to biame for
these blunders. The invitation to engage in this badly-timed and
demoralizing meddling in Vietnam's affairs was given the Ambassador
by the Southeast Asia desk staff in State message 775. This action, on
top of many others which seem to have weakened both the U.S. position
and the cause of freedom in Southeast Asia in the immediate past, should
make us note that advice and actions of this staff carry definite hazards
to the security of the U.S. Their advice and instructions on the next
events in Vietnam deserve the most careful scrutiny and evaluation,
particularly by Defense whose resources are called upon so heavily to
earry out U.S. policy in this area. The long-known strategic value of
Southeast Asia places a premium upon our military participation.

Finally, it appears that General McGarr, the MAAG Chief,
eame through this test of U.S. influence very well. Both the rebel
forces and the loyal forces turned to him for counsel. He seems to
have handled them with complete honesty and objectivity which will
increase his potential for influencing the Vietnamese military in the
future. This is a factor which should carry its proper weight in future
considerations of our actions in Vietnam. Also, it should be borne in
mind that this will subject General McGarr to considerable vindictive
attack by the Vietminh and by those jealous of his increased prestige.

These observations are prompted by the fact that it is critical
that U.S, plicy makers have some deeper understanding of people
and events in Vietnam, if weare to keep Southeast Asia free. It is wr key piece
in the area and must be handled correctly.

Although this memo deals with a most sensitive subject, you may wish
to show it to General Lemnitzer and Assistant Secretary Irwin who also
_ are concerned with this problem.

SECRET

1331
