Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

So far Carnbodia has received approximately one-quarter of a
programmed $22,4 million grant from Communist China and seems satis»
fied- with the program, which has received favorable publicity. New
buildings fox the Cambodian National Parliament will be included in this
program. The Chinese Communists have also offered one million riels
($28,571, at official vate of 35 to 1) to conbtruct a modern building for a
20 kilowatt radio transmitter donated by the Chinese.

Thailand has not yet accepted a Soviet offer of a "cobalt
bomb" for hospital use,

7’ si 10, Economic Aid Progra am Delays, Much political and psychologi-

cal eredit as well as operational economy and efficiency continue to be lost
_. because of premature commitments and assurances of aid on the one hand
_ and thé inordinate’ime réquired for formulation and implementation of
-our economic and téchnical assistance programs on the other, Recipient |
countries continue to complain of delays, This raises serious problems
-with respect not only to the assistance programs, but to U.S. relations

in the area, In addition, particularly in uncommitted countries, it’

also materially reduced the attractivencss of U. S. aid as eae with |v
cies a | bloc aid. i

Commitments for physical construction are frequently made
Serer fe} ‘reconnaisa nee; engineering and coste stimates are available.

-In view of the impact of premature commitments and assur
‘ances of aid, and aid program delays on U.S, relations in the area and
on the ability of the U.S. to meet the econamic challenge of the communist
3 bloc, increased emphasis will be given to a concentrated, coordinated
atiack to eliminate these difficulties, State and ICA are giving urgent
consideration to these problems with a view to reconciling the limitations
imposed on ovx aid programs by statute, by Congressional relations
factors and by .ovmal administrative requirements on the one hand, with
the need for obtaining an optimura mixture of economic, poli . and
. psychological benefits on the other, : 8 '

ae ies Effort S re 0 Lesse en Demands Upon U.S U.S,  Resoiress and Upon

Ieccal Economies mies (NSC. Actio tion 1 No, No, 1599--e). Under this requirement the
Depar partment of State in consultation with the Department of Defense was to
os the possibility of arranging conferences with the nations in the
SEATO area to achieve agreements as to future U.S. aid prograres which
will be more moderate in their demands upon U.S, resources and the
local economies, Under present circumstances, this objective has not
been accompliched. | | ; ve Wiig mae

SECRET

Pag TS eB eS ee a de EY Evans a ab eden 1S pe
