0

Se, Saar - -
: —_

. and he is not trusted by the King.
of the National Assembly, chosen in highly ©

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

“SECRET | : ee:

, demonstration of what support he could ex-
pect from the US if a Communist coup
against his government were to occur. .Thus
far, he has been niost disillusioned by US policy
in the Laotian crisis, feeling it to be inde-
cisive and ambiguous. .

5. As a result of the developments in Laos
and the 11 November coup attempt in Saigon,
‘President Diem of South Vietaam probably has
lost some of his confidence in US willingness
to support fully his anti-Communist position.
He may believe that the Saigon coup effort
-was at least partly stimulated by Kong. Le’s
coup and the failure of the US to extend
General Pnoumi full and immediate support.
Moreover, these events, coming on. the heels
ol US efiorts to convince him to hold less
tightly the reigns of power in his own gov-
ernment, have probably further undermined
his confidence in US judgment. From Diem’s

point of view, an anti-Communist Laos pro- ©

vides some shield against a North Vietnamese
attack, and southern Laos, at least, must be
kept in anti-Communist hands to avoid criti-
‘eally exposing his own borders to infiltration
and attack.

6. The outcome of the immediate crisis, inso-
far as internal considerations apply, rests pri-
marily with the interplay of the intentions and
capabilities of the major Laotian elernenis:

_Souvanna, Phoumi, the King, Kong Le, .and:

the Pathet Lao.

7. Souvanie:. Compared with other Laotian
politicians, Souvanna has considerable per-

* sonal prestige and appeal among the peoples

of Laos. He is stil Prime Minister, but he
controls no organized political apparatus, he
lacks adminisirative control of! the country-
side and command of the Laotian military,
A quorum

corrupt elections in May of 1960, remains in
Vientiane, but almost certainly a number
of its members, if free of duress, would oppose
Souvanna or defect to the Phoumi group.

_ 8..Souvanna is neutralist and leftist, but we

do not believe that he is a Communist. Sou-
vanna’s leadership qualities are weakened by
his imipulsiveness, willful disregard of un-

pleasant facts, and over-weaning self-confi-
dence, particularly with regard to his ability
to deal with and control the Pathet Lao. He
believes most of the Pathet Lao to be patriots
who, once reintegrated into Laotian political
and social life, would lose their Communist
coloration. Those few hardcore types who
would remain Communists, he states, could
be kept in check. Accordingly, the only fea-
sible solution for Laos, in Souvanna’s mind,
is a negotiated settlement with the Pathet
Lao along the lines of the 1957 agreement,

and a neutral foreign policy. Souvanna is.

moving Laos in the direction that he has
maintained for several years it should move.
However, we believe that it is moving at a
faster pace than Souvanna would counte-
nance if he were master of his government
and free from the pressures Kong Le and the
Pathet Lao exert on him in Vientiane.

9. Early in the crisis, Souvanna apparently
had hoped to strengthen his negotiating posi-
tion vis-a-vis the Pathet Lao. He was unable
to use Kong Le to this end because Kong Le
tended’ to be more amenable to the Pathet
Lao than to Souvanna. At one time Souvanna
probably believed that a combination of Kong
Le and Pathet Lao military pressure on the
one hand, and US political pressure on Phoumi
on the other, would force the latter to capitu-

late, thus restoring his government’s au-

‘thority over the troops and areas controlled by

the Revolutionary Committee. Although he
has attempted to open negotiations with the
Boun Oum-Phoumi group, his conditions have
been unattractive to Phoumi, and, at times,
seemed to be calculated insults. Recently
Souvanna has attempted to strengthen his
position by recruiting several new battalions
of troops in Vientiane. However, these units
are probably infiltrated by the Pathet Lao.

10. Souvanna also hoped to win over the

troops in the Luang Prabang area which had
attempted to maintain a neutral position.

- However, this hope was dashed by the pro-

Savannakhet coup of 10 November and the
subsequent defection of General Ouan to Sa-
vannakhet. This was a serious blow to Sou-
vanna, and he attempted to compensate for
it by drawing closer to the Communists in

SECRET . a

te |

ee er

jigs
