Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SEP 13 1960

MEMORANDUM FOR ADMIRAL E. J. O'DONNELL, REGIONAL DIRECTOR, FAR EAST, ISA
FROM: Brigadier General Edward G. Lansdale, 0S0/OSD
SUBJECT: Possible Courses of Action in Vietnam

Reference: Memo for ASD/ISA from Secretary Douglas, dated 29 August 1960,
subject: "Deteriorating Situation in South Vietnam"

As noted by the Deputy Secretary of Defense, conditions in Vietnam
are deteriorating. The key element in the situation is the activity of
the Viet Cong. While criticism of Diem's government in metropolitan
areas adds to his problems and interacts with Viet Cong plans, the Viet
Cong remains the primary threat to security. To the end of meeting this
threat, several proposals are herewith submitted for consideration

A. Actions within the authority of DOD

(1) The emphasis of the MAAG function should be shifted from
purely training and organizational advice in preparation for
defense against external aggression to include on-the-spot ad-
vice and assistance in the conduct of tactical operations
against the Viet Cong.

(2) Concomitantly, the MAAG should be staffed to a greater in-
tent with officers skilled in the conduct of counter-guerilla
operations and who are capable of operating in the field. This
might include Marines for amphibious instruction on Mekong River
operations. If the immediate threat is recognized as being
Viet Cong, these proposals logically follow as a deemphasis from
conventional warfare against a wholesale DRV invasion. While
the latter possibility is not discounted, it is felt that Viet
Cong operations offer a more immediate and a very deadly threat
to Vietnam.

(3) Equipment required to support counter-guerrilla operations,
including turbo-jet boats for Mekong River patrols, should be
furnished on a priority basis. Items required by the Vietnamese
in the psychological warfare area (See Appendix A) shoul be given
a higher priority within MAP and expeditiously furnished. Advice
and training in this field specifically directed against the Viet
Cong should be stepped up.

SECRET

1307
