Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

. ~ . . x

(eee ee ee _.. SECRET

"affairs, political antagonisms and suspicions, and the genezal lack OF i

complementary economics Se . |

While dour riparian states are now agreed on the collection

“ ay pacie data regarding the Lower Mekong River Basin, difficulties will
P= obably arise if the time comes to determine means of developing and

| utilizing power, ixvigation, and navigation facilities, ,

. The Se Sotnedancecees Project has fallen far,
belied schedule chiefly because nf problems with the engineering con
tractor. A top-level advisor has completed an evaluation of the funda~

_mental plan of the contractor in an attempt to expedite the project.

6. Slow Economic Develspment. Economic development in the’ M
area is slow because of a shortage of both public and private capital, oo:
Anite d basic facilities such as power, communications, and transporta~
4 tion, as well as the limited number of trained, skilled personnel, The
: -xesistance of many Southeast Asia countries to measures which might
oe “encourage or assist overseas Chinese and other minority groups, oe
4 watards economic and business development. The fall of prices for eae
» basic export commodities of the area, with BE: _ Bovermiment reve: nue
AOR Eee, scat Siow economic it ae
It has beon difficult t to find appropriate means of encouraging
(free World industrial countries to contribute to the economic development. .
‘of Southeast Asia. In the case of Japan, at present Asia's. only impoxtant
industrial country; itis difficult to: determine the extent to which the U. S.
should encourage Japanese economic development activity. in Southeast 2
Asia. While Japanese proposais of June 1957 fox Asian cet financial
institutions, to be funded largely by the U. Bs and joined by other non~
regional participants, were not found practicable by the U.S. ; Ee U.S.
continues to recognize the desirability of close economic ee between
Japan and Southeast Asia, and has offered to cooperate with Japan and

ri interested Sout theast Asia countries ona casewby~case basis.

7; Public Attitudes, Efforts to encourage Sreeees public \
. attitudes jn the area toward collective security pacts ae toward the U,

a, ‘and the Free World in general continue to face important obstacles,
including: (1) demonstrated growth of Sino-Sovict scientific, mately
and economic power; (2) Asian fear of involvement in nuclear warfare; :

* (3) the appeal of communist coexistence pr opaganda; (4) increasing public.
domestic, economic, financial and social problems; (5) doubt
a coll iefense asures offers more benefits and
that participating in ce ective defense meas “ pees a
Jess disadvan tages than neutrality; and (6) national sensitivity which

2a SECRET

