oe Fhe pees ee eae es ‘i

+

;
4

Senn ramets meee oi

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

estimated to number at times in the hundreds,

have operated over wider areas than at any

time since 1954 and have assaulted Vietnamese

Army installations. Since the beginning of

the rainy season in April and the launching of
- Vietnamese Army counteroperations, Viet
Cong operations have abated somewhat but
terrorist activity, such as assassination and
kidnapping of provincial officials and govern-
ment sympathizers, has continued at high
, levels.* Support from North Vietnam appears
to have increased over the past several months.
In particular, senior cadres and military sup-
‘plies such as communications equipment are
’ believed to be moving south through Laos and
Cambodia and by junk along the eastern
coastline.

10. Tiss upsurge in Viet Cong activity, accom-
"panied by a stepped up propaganda campaign
from Hanoi, probably reflects a recent Com-
munist decision to increase pressures on the
South Vietnamese Government.
tions of inereasing dissatisfaction with the

- Diem government have probably encouraged

|

ang eee,
4
'

the Hanoi regime, supported and guided by
-the Chinese Communists, to take stronger
action at this time.
probably regard South Vietnam as a promis-
ing area for weakening the US position in
Southeast Asia at little cost or risk. From
the Chinese point of view, many favorable ele-
ments are present: a sizable and effective in-
digenous guerrilla apparatus responsive to

The indica- .

The Chinese Communists -

Communist control;.a government lacking in *

positive sxpport from its people; and the
widely recognized political commitment the
US has in Sou.a Vietnam.

11. In. countering the Viet Cone challenge, i

\ Diem faces many of the same problems which
i confronted the French during the Indo-China
;, War. Viet Cong guerrilla units have suc-
“ceeded in exploiting their natural advantages
of surprise, mobility, and initiative. In many
of their areas of operations, they have ex-

*In the first five months of 1960, 760 government
Officials and sympathizers were assassinated by
insurgents. The total number of assassinations
in 1958 was 193 and in 1959, 239. Kidnappings
this year through May total 282, as compared
swith Yin 19558 and 244 in 1959. +

t

Eaten cat Sos t wegen ofa PEE ia me aris lg diet Ge See

SECRET oA) 2 Ae ae

ploited the tendency of the largely passive

population to accommodate to their presence ©

and thereby avoid reprisals. In some areas
of operations, however, they have obtained the

“active cooperation of the local population.

12: In contrast to the French strategy in the
Indo-China War, however, the Vietnamese
Government is attempting not only to control
the populated areas and main lines of com-
munications but also to group the peasantry
into more defensible units through its agro-
ville program. Special measures in organi-
zation and training have been implemented
enabling the army to react more quickly and
effectively against guerrilla hit-and-run tac-
tics. The civil guard is forming “commando”
“units and new stress is being placed on the
building of a youth corps, 10,000 strong, for
patrol and reconnaissance purposes in sols
villages and towns.

13. The most effective government measure
against the Viet Cong, however, remains the
active participation of the army, with air
force support. Until recently, the army’s
commitment to internal security operations

has been limited by the deployment of major -

.- elements in defense against an overt attack
from North Vietnam and by training -ac-
tivities in support of this mission. Some im-
provement in the army’s effectiveness and

capabilities can be expected with the increased ~

* emphasis on antiguerrilla training, improved
organization, and better combat intelligence.
We believe it unlikely, however, that the army
will be able to do more than contain the Viet
Cong threat, at least over the short run.

‘The Outlook ES

14. The Viet Cong will probably maintain its
pressure on provincial officials and govern-
ment installations at the present high level,
and, with the end.of the wet season in October,
return to large-scale guerrilla actions aimed
at nullifying the government’s authority in
the rural areas. Hanoi. could step up the
weight and pace of the Viet Cong activities in
South Vietnam. “In the absence of mere effec-
tive government measures to protect the peas-
ants and to win their positive cooperation, the

.prospect is for expansion of the areas of Viet.
= 4 * 4

eee aa fe ETS ea a an
