Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ganda has concentrated on charging the Lao-
tian Government with violations of the 1954
Geneva Agreements, but on the whole, Moscow
nas continued to follow a more restrained line
than Hanoi or Peiping. Soviet restraint on
this question is likely to continue at Ieast as
long as the current high-level East-West dis-
cussions are underway. aH

I. PROSPECTS FOR GUERRILLA WARFARE

12. Many conditions in Laos, espeGially in the

northern provinces of Phong Saly and Sam,

Neua, are favorable for Communist gucrrilla
warfare. The country is mostly jungle coy-
ered motntains. It is sparsely populated.
Most of the people live in small isolated vil-
lages connected only by foot trails and water-
ways, The few rozds which do exist, except
those in the immediate vicinity of the major
towns, are little more than jeep trails. Fur-
thermore, the supply routes from Hanoi into
Sam Neua and Phong Saly provinces and into
central Laos are considerably better than
those from Vientiane. Air facilities in Laos
are limited. The two primary airfields (Seno
and Vientiane) have a year-round capability
to support medium transports with limited
loads. Three secondary airfields (Luang
Prabang, Pakse and Xieng Khouang) can
support light transport operations on a year-
round basis. The remaining airfields are of
marginal value, particularly during the rainy
season. Communications facilities are inade-
quate even for minimum administrative re-
quirements in peacetime. Vientiane has ra-
dio communication with the provincial capi-
tals and the regional military commands.
Most villages, army outposts, and self-defense
units must depend upon runners for commu-
nication with higher authorities.

13. Current monsoon rains hamper Laotian
Government military operations ard logistic
SuStGrt Snore than they do Communist ouer-

a.
= -

. T2iny season generally
Slntkers ebtut mid-Septernber to mid-October
iin $3 followed by a five-month dry season.

=

SF

li. The social and political situation also of-
ters favorable opportunities for Communist
guerrilla and psychological warfare. The au-

SECRET 4

thority of the Laotian Government has never
been thoroughly established throuehout the
nation, due in part to the physical character-
istics of the country and in part to a general
lack of interest by the ethnic Lao governing
elite, which is concentrated in Vientiane and
Luang Prabang. People of Lao stock make
up only half of the population. These con-
siderations have inhibite dithe development of
a Laotian national spiril, or identification with
the central government. The common peo-
ple of Laos, especially those in the villages, are
superstitious and simple folk highly suscepti-
ble to rumors, propaganda and intimidation.
Communist psychological warfare has been at
least as effective as armed ae MOF in the cur-
rent efiort.

15. Government authority has been especially
weak in the northern provinees of Sam Neua
and Phong Saly which were under Pathet Lao
control until late 1957. During the lull be-
tween the 1957 Laotian Government-Pathct
Lao agreements on unification and the re-
newal of Communist guerrilla activity in mid-
July of this year, the government had made
only a beginning in the process of re-educating
the population of these two provinces away
from Communist influences, or away from
their traditional trade ties with northern Viet-
nam, This is particularly true aniong the
Kha, Meo and Black Thai tribal groups, whose
mountainous domain straddles the Laotian-
North Vietnamese. border. These tribes,

which make - about 50 percent of the popu-’

lation of Sam Neua and Phong Saly provinces,
have traditionally been antagonistic toward
the Lao people and government. I

16. Most of the guerrillas!in the northern
provinces are ex-Pathet Lao soldiers, anc. Meo
and Black Thai tribal people. Elements of
the Pathet Lao battalion which refused in-
tegration and escaped to North Vietnar are
probably involved. It is almost certain that
many of the guerrillas nowiengaged have re-
ceived training In North Vietnam, tai same
supplies and equipment for the current epera-
tions have been provided by North Vietnam.
and that the cuerrillas move into and oui of
North Vietnam as necessary. The total num-
her of guerrillas involve ed up to the present is

SECRET

L285 ‘ore ip

€

2 a ey eee es

2 ee pny eT a tg ee EE St LS RR RIT TY a RR IRE ET I SaaS SS
