Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

IV.C Evolution of the War (26 Vols.)
Direct Action: The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968
(16 Vols.)
6. U.S. Ground Strategy and Force Deployments: 1965-1967
(3 Vols.)
c. Volume III: Program 6

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"co, Plan Three, which would deploy the 82nd Airborne
Division but would leave Marine Corps battalions in CONUS.
This plan would likewise envisage no Reserve callup and no
legislative action.”

Under Plan One, elements of one brigade of the 82nd Airborne
Division could commence movement within 2h hours and the division itself
36-48 hours later. 6/9ths of a Marine Corps Division/wing team could be
ready for deployment to Vietnam in one week without utilizing Vietnem
replacement drafts. Dependent upon the availability of aircraft and
the degree of drawdown on the current level of Southeast Asia airlift
support, the deployment could be completed within three to four weeks.

Under Plan Two, elements of two CONUS Marine Divisions, consisting
of 12 battalions could be air transported to Vietnam, although two weeks
preparation would be required. This deployment, however, would deplete
Marine Corps assets except for three battalions -- one afloat in the
Mediterranean, one afloat in the Caribbean, and one ashore at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba.

Under Plan Three, as under Plan One, elements of one brigade of the
82nd Airborne Division could commence movement in 24 hours, the division
itself 36-48 hours later.

All of these plans, however, would require drawdowns on previously
protected CONUS stocks during procurement lead-time for new production
and would further aggravate the shortage of long procurement lead time
items currently short, such as helicopters, tracked combat vehicles,
and ammunition.

An examination was also made of the feasibility of an increased
acceleration in the deployment of the four infantry battalions scheduled
to deploy in March-April under Program 5. It was concluded that these
units could not be deployed earlier "except under the most critical
circumstances.”

In examining the capacity to meet the possibility of widespread
civil disorder in the United States, the Joint Chiefs of Staff concluded
‘that, whether or not deployments under any of the plans were directed,
it appeared that sufficient forces would still be available for civil

disorder control.

However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff cautioned that the residual CONUS-
based active combat-ready ground forces that would result from the exten-
sion of each of the plans examined would be:

a. Pian One - 6/9 Marine Division/Wing Team.

>. Plan Two - One Airborne Division.

.

hy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
12.
13.
1h.
15.
16.
a7.

18.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

FOOTNOTES

COMUSMACV 61712, 260755 Jan 68, Subject: "Annual Assessment."

".S. Aides Predict All-Out Red Drive as Prelude to Talks," by
George R. Packard, Philadelphia Bulletin, 11 Jen 68, p. 1.

JCSM 91-68, 12 Feb 68, Subject: “Emergency Reinforcement of COMUSMACV."

JCS Msg 9926, 130218Z Feb 68, Subject: "Deployment of Brigade Task
Force of 82nd Airborne Division to SVN (S)."

Ibid.

JCS Msg 9929, 1303412 Feb 68, Subject: "Deployment of Marine Corps
Regiment (Reinforced) to SVN (S)."

GINCPAC Msg to JCS/CINCSTRIKE, 150125Z Feb 68, Subject: “Deployment
of Marine Regiment (U)" JCS in 12316.

DISM 259-68, Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, Subject:
"Marine Deployments to Vietnam (U)," dated 6 Mar 68.

JOSM 95-68, 13 Feb 68, Subject: "Emergency Reinforcement of COMUSMACV(¢c)."

Report of Chairman, JCS on Situation in Vietnam and MACV Force
Requirements, 27 Feb 1968 (TS).

Ibid., pp- 1-2,
Tbid., p. Ea
Ibid., pp. le-13.
ibid., p- 13.
ibid, Hs dt.

Handwritten notes by Morton Halperin from conversation with
Paul Warnke, 29 Feb 1968 (TS-EYES ONLY).

Memorandum from William Bundy to General Taylor and Mr. Warnke,
29 Feb 1968 (TS-NODIS).

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

9h
19.

20.

22.

23.
oh.
25.
26.

28.

29.
30.
Bis

32.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a TOP SECRET =- Sensitive

Halperin notes, op. cit.

Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency,
Memorandum for the Director, Subject: The Outlook in Vietnam,
dated 26 Feb 1968 (S).

Central Intelligence Agency, Memorandum, Subject: Communist

Alternatives in Vietnam, dated 29 Feb 1958 (S)

ibidse, pe 1

Central Intelligence Agency, Memorandum, Subject: Questions Concerning
the Situation in Vietnam, dated 1 March 1968 (S).

W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum for the Group, Subject: Alternative
Gourses-of Action, dated 29 Feb 1968 (7S).

Department of State, Memorandum for the Group, Subject: Checklist of
Factors Affecting Alternative Courses of Action, dated 29 Feb 1968,
initialed by Nicholas deB. Katzenbach (TS-NODIS).

W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum for the Group, op. cit., 29 Feb 68.

W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum for the Group, Subject: Introductory
Paper on Key Elements in the Situation, dated 29 Feb 1968 (TS).

Department of State, "Possible Soviet Responses to Various US Actions
in Indochina -- Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia;" "Probable Chinese
Responses to Certain US Courses of Action in Indochina-~Vietnam,

Laos and Cembodia;" "Probable Western European Reaction to Various
US Courses of Action in Indochina -- Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia,” un-
dated papers (TS).

Cable, MOSCOW 2983, 0115152 March 1968, TS-LITERALLY EYES ONLY for
Under Secretary from Ambassador.

W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum, Subject: European and Other Non-
Asian Reactions to a Major US Force Increase, dated 1 Mar 1958 (TS).

W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Asian Reaction to a Major
U.S. Force Increase, dated 1 Mar 68 (TS).

W. P. Bundy, First Draft, Subject: Options on Our Negotiating
Posture, dated 29 Feb 68 (1S).

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
33-

ho.
hi.

he.

43.

hs.
h6.

Te.

48.
49.

50.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Undated Memorandum, Subject: Viet-Nam Alternatives, signed M.D.T.,
General Taylor took, as the U.S. objective, the statement of Pres.
Johnson in his speech at Johns Hopkins University in April 1965:
"Our objective is the independence of South Viet-Nem and its freedom
from attack. We want nothing for ourselves, only that the people

of South Viet-Nam be allowed to guide their country in their own
way."

OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Deployments - A Discussion of
Alternatives, undated (S).

ibid.

OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Pacification Slowdowm, undated (C)
Ibid., p- 2 7

OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: The Status of RVNAF, undated (TS).

OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Alternative Strategies, dated
29 Feb 1968, pp. 1-2 (7S).

Ibid., pp. 2-4.

OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Data for Analysis of Strategies,
undated (TS).

Phil G. Goulding, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Possible Public Reaction
to Various Alternatives, undated (7S). :

Ibid., p. 5

Memorandum for the President, Subject: Alternative Strategies in
SVN, lst Draft, 29 Feb 1968 (TS-SENS)

Tbid., 3rd Draft, 1 Mar 1968 (TS-SENS)

Ibid., p. 3

Tbid., pn 5-6.

Tbid., pp. 6-7-

Tbid., pp. 8-10.

Ibid., Annex II, Alternative Courses of Military Action, pp. 8-10.

96 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
51.
52.
23°
oh.
22°
56.
5T-
58.

29

60.

61.

62.
63.
6h.
65
66.
67.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensiti

Ibid., Annex II, Population Security, p. 15.

Ibid., p- 16.

“Ibid., pp. 16-17.

TIbid., Appendix, Strategy by Corps Tactical Zone, pp. A-3 - A-8.
Tbid., Appendix, Effects of Strategy on Interior Provinces, pp. A-1 - A-3.
Thid.s, De 2e

Brig. Gen. Harris W. Hollis, Director of Operations, ODCSOPS, DA;
Memorandum for LIG Lemley, Subject: CINCPAC Force Requirements,

dated 27 Feb 1958 (S); Lt Col Spiller, ODCSOPS, DA, Supplemental
Information, Subject: MACY Requirements and Major Ground Forces
Deployment by Option, 1 Mar 1968 (8).

Assistant Secretary of Defense, ISA, Memorandum for the Secretary

of Defense, Subject: General Wheeler's View of the Two Fatal

Flaws in the Population Control Strategy, dated 2 Mar. 1968 (TS-SENS).

MAC 02951, 0209472, from General Westmoreland to General Wheeler,
(TS-LIMDIS,EYES ONLY).

Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Plans and Policy Directorate,
Short Range Branch, J-5, Subject: Analysis of COMUSMACYV Force
Requirements and Altermtives, dated 1 Mar 1968 (TS-SHENS).

Memorandum for the President, 3 Mar Draft (Goulding -Warnke) (TS-SENS).
Tbide, De O-

Tbid., pp- 8-10.

Ibid., pp. 5-6.

Draft Memorandum for the President, 4. Mar 1968 (TS-SENS), pp. 1-2.

Thid., Tab A, The Justification for Imediate Additional Forces
in South Vietnam, pp. 1-2.

o7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
68.

69.

70.

fi.
2.
73.

Th.

75
76.

TT-

78.

19+

80.

81.

83.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Tbid., Tab B, Increasing the Effectiveness of Vietnamese Efforts
in Conjunction with 4 U.S. Troop Increase, pp. 1-7.

Tbid., Tab C, Justification for Increasing the Strategic Reserve,

pp. 1-2.

Thid., Tab D, Necessity for In-Depth Study of Vietnam Policy and

Strategic Guidance, p. l.
Ibid., pp. 1-2.

Tbid., Tab E, Negotiating Posture Options, and Possible Diplomatic

Actions, p. 1.
Ibid., pp- 4-6.

Tbid., Tab F, Military Action Against North Vietnam.

Tbid., Tab G, Difficulties and Negative Factors in the Course of
Action; Tab H, Problems We Can Anticipate in U.S. Public Opinion, p. 4.

cM-3098-68, Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, Subject:
COMUSMACV Force Requirements, dated 8 Mar 68 (T'S-SEINS).

Neil Sheehan and Hedrick Smith, "Westmoreland Requests 206,000 More
Men, Stirring Debate in Administration, New York Times, 10 Mar 1968,

pp. 1,11.

Joseph R.L. Sterne, "War Critics Denounce Any Troop Rises,"
Baltimore Sun, March 8, 1968, p. 1; John W. Finney, "Criticism of

War Widens in Senate on Build-Up Issue," New York Times, 8 Mar 68, p. 1.

Joseph R.L. Sterne, "For Different Aims, Russell, Fulbright Ask
Viet Restudy,” Baltimore Sun, 13 March 1968, p. 1.

Ibid.

Handwritten notes by Alain Enthoven from meeting with Secretary
Clifford, Mr. Warnke, Mr. Resor, General Wheeler, 13 Mar. 1968. (S)

98

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

Ql.

92.

95

96.

oT.

98.

99.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Deputy Secretary of Defense, Memorandum for Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, Subject: Southeast Asia Deployments, dated .
14 Mar 1968. (TS) :

Secretary of the Army, Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense,

14 Mar 1968 (Ss).
Tbid.

Chief of Staff, USA, Memorandum for the Secretary of the Army,
Subject: Call-Up of Reserves and Program 6 Deployment, dated

1 Mar 1968.

Alain Enthoven, Memorandum for the Record, 16 Mar 1968.

Robert H. Phelps, "More U.S. Troops Going to Vietnam," New York Times,
17 Mar. 1968, p. 1. :

John W. Finney, "Third of House Wants Review of War Policy,"
New York Times, 19 Mar. 1968, p. 32.

Muriel Dubbin, "War Foes Censured by Johnson," Baltimore Sun,
19 Mar. 1968, p. 1. aie aes ant

Stuart H. Loory,

Charles W. Corddry, "Westmoreland Attains No. 1 Goal," Baltimore Sun,
23 Mar. 1968, pp. 1, 25. er ee
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Systems Analysis), Memorandum for
Secretary of Defense, Subject: Program #6 Summry Table (Tentative)
(U), dated 23 Mar. 1968, (TS).

Murray Mardes, "General Abrams, LBJ Confer on Vietnam," Washington
Post, 27 Mar. 1968, p. 1; Neil Sheehan, "Gen. Abrams in Capitol, Sees
President and Aides,” New York Times, March 27, 1968, p. 2.

Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Military Operations, Memorandum
for Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, Subject: MACV Requirements, undated, (S).

Joint Staff, Pacific Division, J-3, Subject: MACV Troop List, Program
6 Add-On, dated 28 March 1968. Corrected 5 April 1968.

Department of State Message 139431, 30 March 1968 (TS-NODIS LITERALLY
EYES ONLY, FOR AMBASSADOR. OR CHARGE).

Remarks of the President to the Netion, March 31, 1968.

gg TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

100. Deputy Secretary of Defense, Memorandum for Secretaries of the
Military Departments, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Assistant fecretaries of Defense, Subject: Southeast Asia
Deployment Program #6(U), dated 4 April 1968(s).

101. White House Press Release, 3 April 1968.

100 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ec. Plan Three - One and 3/9 Marine Division/Wing Team."

Moreover, these forces were at various levels of readiness and a high
percentage of their personnel were Vietnam returnees or close to the
end of the obligated active service. The capability of these uncom-
mitted general purpose forces was further constrained, the Joint Chiefs
pointed out, by shortages of critical skilled specialists and shortages
in mission essential items of equipment and materiel. Thus, the Joint
Chiefs emphasized, our posture of readily available combat forces was
seriously strained. Any decision to deploy emergency augmentation
forces should be accompanied by the recall of at least an equivalent
number, or more prudently, additional Reserve component forces and

an extension of terms of service for active duty personnel. Indeed,
the Chiefs, warned,

"Tt is not clear at this time whether the enemy will be able
to mount and sustain a second series of major attacks throughout
the country. It is equally unclear as to how well the Vietnamese
Armed Forces would be able to stand up against such a series of
attacks if they were to occur, In the face of these uncertainties,
a more precise assessment of USMACV's additional force requirements,
if any, must await further developments. The Joint Chiefs of
Staff do not exclude the possibility that additional develop-
ments could make further deployments necessary.”

Based on this assessment of the situation, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff concluded and recommended that:
"a. A decision to deploy reinforcements to Vietnam be
deferred at this time.

"b, Measures be taken now to prepare the 82nd Airborne
Division and 6/9 Marine Division/Wing team for possible deploy-
ment to Vietnam.

"oa. As a matter of prudence, call certain additional
Reserve units to active duty now. Deployment of emergency
reinforcements to Vietnam should not be made without concomitant
Callup of Reserves sufficient at least to replace those deployed
and provide for the increased sustaining base requirements of all
Services. In addition, bring selected Reserve force units to
full strength and an increased state of combat readiness,

"q, Legislation be sought now to (1) provide authority to
call individual Reservists to active duty; (2) extend past
30 June 1968 the existing authority to call Reserve units to
active duty; and (3) extend terms of service for active duty
personnel.

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive |
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"oe, Procurement and other supply actions be taken now to
overcome shortages existing in certain critical items of materiel
and equipment such as munitions, helicopters, and other combat
aircraft."

Thus, for perhaps the first time in the history of American involve-
ment in Vietnam, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended against deploying
the additional forces requested by the field commander, in the absence
of other steps to reconstitute the strategic reserve. At long last, the
resources were beginning to be drawn too thin, the assets became unavail-
able, the support base too small.

Notwithstanding the recommendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the
Secretary of Defense almost immediately approved the deployment of one
brigade of the 82nd Airborne Division and one Marine regimental landing
team to South Vietnam. <A total strength of almost 10,500 was assumed
and publicly announced. - These deployments were directed by the JCS on
13 February. Airlift of the brigade from the 82nd Airborne Division, at
a strength of approximately four thousand, was to begin on 14 February
and the brigade was to close in-country not later than 26 February 1968. 4/
After coordination with CINCSTRIKE and USCONARC, the strength of this
unit was fixed at 3,702. 5/

The Marine Corps Regiment was to close in SVN not later than 26
February also. The Regiment (reinforced) less one battalion, was to be
deployed by air from California at a strength of about 3,600. One bat-
talion (reinforced) which was then embarked, was to be deployed by surface
at a strength of about 1,600. 6/

In view of the wide variation of strength associated with a Marine
Corps Regiment (reinforced), CINCPAC was directed to advise all concerned
of the identity, composition and strength of the force selected for
deployment. 7/ CINCPAC nominated the 27th Marine Regiment, which included
5247 Marine and 327 Navy personnel. Additionally, he included the deploy-
ment of a logistic support element of 389 personnel from Okinawa to reduce
the impact on the already heavily committed logistic units in I CTZ. In
addition, CINCPAC took the precautionary step of identifying, for follow-
on deployment, a sea-tail of reinforcing units totalling 1,400 personnel.
This element, scheduled to follow in April 1968, would provide the regiment
the necessary self-sustaining combat power in the event early replacement
was not provided. 8/ Thus, the total number of troops deployed or alerted
for the follow-on sea-tail numbered 11,065. 9/

The Joint Chiefs of Staff reacted almost immediately to the national
decision to deploy these forces without a concomitant reserve callup.
On 13 February 1968 they forwarded to the Secretary of Defense their
recommendations for actions‘which should be taken relative to callup of
reserves, obtaining legislation and instituting procurement actions to
provide support for these forces and to sustain their deployment. 10/

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A minimum callup of Reserve units to replace deploying forces and
+o sustain and support them was justified, the Joint Chiefs stated, by
the following situation: :

"a, Army. The 82nd Airborne Division represents the only
readily deployable Army division in the CONUS-based active
strategic reserve. The impending reduction of this division by
one-third to meet approved deployments establishes an immediate
requirement for its prompt reconstitution which is possible only
by the callup of Reserve units. In order to replace the forces
deployed from the strategic reserve, to provide support units
+o meet anticipation requirements in I CTZ and to provide a
wider rotation base of requisite ranks and skills, it will be
necessary for the Army to call up two infantry brigade forces
of the Reserve components. This callup will total approximately
32,000 personnel, These two brigades should attain a combat-
ready and deployable status in 12 weeks following callup.

"5. Marine Corps.

"(1) The Marine Corps cannot sustain additional deployments
+o Southeast Asia under current personnel policies. Thus, the
force authorized for deployment must be replaced with a comparable
Reserve unit as soon as possible. The Reserve force required for
this purpose will consist of one Marine regiment, reinforcing
combat support and combat service support units, and one composite
Marine Air Group with one VYNA, one VMP, and two medium helicopter
squadrons (HMM).

"(2) The Reserve force will consist of approximately
12,000 personnel. It will provide the capability to deploy a
balanced, self-sustaining air/ground combat force in relief of
the lightly structured 27th Marines (Rein) and permit return
of the 27th Marine Regiment (Rein) to the training/rotation base
in CONUS/Hawaii. This exchange would commence as soon as the
Reserve unit becomes combat-ready (approximately 60 days after
callup) and must be completed not later than 120 days after
deployment of RLT-27.

"(3) It is envisioned that the Reserve forces will be.
redeployed to CONUS without replacement after 13 months in South
Vietnam. However, if this does not occur, it will be best to
deploy a relief brigade from the 4th Marine Division/wing team.
Alternately, an adequate rotation base in CONUS to sustain the
continued deployment’ can be created but to do so requires
extensions of terms of service and other personnel policy changes.

"(k) In addition, it must be recognized that the anticipated
proportionate increase in personnel losses will require an increase
in the end strength of the active forces to sustain these losses’.

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"ce, Navy. Support of the newly authorized deployments will
require the callup of two Navy mobile construction battalions
(NMCB) totalling 1,700 personnel and 600 individual medical/
dental /chaplain Reservists. These callups will provide for
bringing recalled Marine units up to strength, sustaining the
Navy personnel organic to the deployed RLT, and adding medical
staffing -required by the increased level of activity in South-
east Asia to forward hospital facilities including Guam.

"a. Air Force. The Air Force plans to support this approved
deployment operation without recall of individuals or units.
Reserve airlift augmentation needed to supplement the deployment
airlift can be accomplished by Reservists on a voluntary basis.”

In addition, the Joint Chiefs indicated that it would be both prudent
and advisable to reach a readiness level that could be responsive to
further COMUSMACV force requirements, if the remainder of the 82nd Airborne
Division and one more RLT were required. COMUSMACV had already indicated
the potential need for these units at an early date. To reach such a
readiness level, the Joint Chiefs indicated that the following Reserve
forces would have to be activated:

"a, Army. Should the additional deployments be made, it would
be necessary for the Army to recall (in addition to the two brigade
forces previously discussed) one infantry division force and one
infantry brigade force of the Army Reserve components, totalling
58,000 men. These forces will be needed to reconstitute the
strategic reserve and to broaden the source of critical ranks
and skills to be applied against the increased rotation base
requirements. The Reserve units should be recalled at this time
to bring them closer to a combat-ready status prior to the probable
deployment of the balance of the 82nd Airborne Division. The
Reserve division force should attain a combat-capable status in
15 weeks after recall and the brigade force should require 12 weeks.

"bd, Marine Corps.

(1) The most desirable Reserve callup consists of the
entire th Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF), plus other units
and selected individual Reserves. This totals about 51,000.
Mobilization and subsequent deployment of the Reserve forces
should be accomplished incrementally. This callup permits the
early and orderly replacement of the 5th Marine Division (-)
in South Vietnam and the subsequent redeployment of the 5th
Marine Division (-) to CONUS, or, alternatively, the 4th Division/
Wing Team can meet the additional requirements....

"eo, Navy. Support of these additional deployments. would
require the callup of an additional three NMCB (total of five)
totalling 4,150 personnel and an additional LOO (for a total
of 1,000) medical /dental/chaplain Reservists. These callups

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

would provide for 1k NMCB in RVN for direct construction support
and an adequate rotation base to maintain these deployments.

The additional medical /dental/chaplain personnel will provide
for bringing recalled Marine units up to strength, sustaining
the Navy personnel in the additional deploying RLT, and adding
some medical staffing to forward hospital facilities. Recall
of an additional 2,800 personnel would be required to augment
the logistic operations in Vietnam. The increased requirement
for naval gunfire support for the larger deployments would
necessitate the activation of two heavy cruisers to fill CINCPAC's
requirements for additional shore bombardment capability to
maintain two large calibre gun ships on station in the SEA
DRAGON area and off RVN. Additionally, 15 destroyers should

be activated from the mothball fleet to replace 15 Naval Reserve
Training destroyers to be called to active duty. This would
fill CINCPAC's requirement for an additional five destroyers

on station off Vietnam and provide the rotation base to support
them. The recall of 6,000 Naval Reserve personnel would provide
the additional manpower and skills base to man these reactivated
ships.

"a. Air Force. The deployment of the remainder of the 82nd
Airborne Division to Southeast Asia will require the support of
three tactical fighter squadrons, a tactical reconnaissance
squadron, necessary elements of the Tactical Air Control System,
one PRIME BEEF unit, and one security squadron. In order to
provide support of the deployment and the broadening of the
training and rotetion base and to retain a minimum acceptable
number of combat-ready deployable squadrons in the CONUS, these
Air Force organizations will have to be replaced by activation
of the following Air Reserve Forces: eisht tactical fighter
squadrons, five tactical reconnaissance squadrons, one Tactical
Control Group, two military airlift groups, and one tactical
airlift wing, totalling 22,497 spaces. Activation of these Air
National Guard/Reserve units include organizations not currently
manned under COMBAT BEEF standards (100 percent)."

The Joint Chiefs reiterated their recommendation that legislation
be sought to: "(1) provide authority to call selected individual
Reservists to active duty; (2) extend beyond 30 June 1968 the existing
authority to call Reserve units to active duty; and (3) extend terms
of service for active duty personnel." The provisions of such legisla-
tion would, the Joint Chiefs indicated, impact on the Services in the
following manner:

to, Army.

(1) Extension of terms of Service. Provides an immediate
impact on readiness worldwide in that critical skill specialists
in short supply are retained on active duty, It is estimated that

9 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_TOP SECRET - Sensitive

between 30,000 and 40,000 additional trained personnel will be
retained in the Army for each month of extension. For example,
during the first six-month period of extension of terms of
service, the Army would gain in excess of 500 helicopter pilots,
of which there is a critical shortease. OQther critical skill
shortages would be similarly affected.

"(2) Selective callup of individual Reservists. The
Army Immediate Ready Reserve contains 490,000 personnel, of
which more than 90 percent are in grades of E-4 and E-5. A
selective callup of individual Reservists, coupled with an
extension of terms of service, will alleviate virtually all of
the Army's current critical skill shortages.

"b. Marine Corps.

(1) Involuntary extension of enlistments of all
enlisted personnel would produce an average of 5,766 enlisted
men per month through June. Within this gain, an average of
1,728 experienced NCOs per month would be gained,

"(2) Selective recall of individual Reservists would
be necessary in order to bring mobilized units up, to provide
the essential rank and skills not contained in the organized
Reserve. Within the Marine Corps Reserve, but outside of the
organized units, there is an invaluable pool of key personnel:
noncommissioned officers, officers (particularly pilots), and
Marines possessing long lead time "hard skill" Military Occupa-
tional Specialties.

"o, Navy. In the deploying ships of the Navy, there is a
shortfall of 32,500 in officers and the top six enlisted pay
grades.

(1) Involuntary extension of Reserve Officers and
selected recall of Reserves would fulfill officer manning
requirements in one to three months.

"(2) Gancellation of early releases and selective
involuntary extensions, recall of Fleet Reserves, deferral of
transfers to Fleet Reserve, and recall of Ready Reserves would
achieve 100 percent enlisted requirements by rate/rating in
one to three months.

"q@, Air Force. If extension of terms of service were granted
the Air Force could, on a selective basis, hold approximately
20,000 skilled personnel out of a possible 70,000 that would
be discharged over a six-month period. Retaining these critical

skills would sustain the force at an acceptable level. Should

" 10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

that:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

additional forces be deployed to meet possible future MACV
requirements, legislation would be necessary in order that
active units can be replaced by activation of corresponding
Air National Guard units after 30 June 1968."

Based on all the foregoing, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended

"ea. The following Reserve component units be called to
active duty immediately:

(1) Two infantry brigade forces.

(2) One Marine regiment, plus the support forces —
indicated in paragraph 3b(1).

(3) Two NMCBs.

"5. The following Reserve component units be brought to a
high state of readiness for probable call to active duty on
short notice:

(1) One infantry division force and one infantry
brigade force, in addition to the two brigade forces indicated
above.

(2). The remainder of the ith Marine Expeditionary Force.

(3) Three NMCBs, in addition to the two indicated above.
Also, de-mothball work and long lead time procurement should begin
on two heavy cruisers and 15 destroyers. Fifteen Naval Reserve
Training destroyers should be placed on active duty and commence
immediate installation of modern communications/electronics
equipment.

"(4) Bight TPS, five TPS, one TACS, five ARS, one
PRIME BEEF unit, and one security squadron.

"6, Measures be taken immediately to obtain the legislation
to (1) provide authority to call selected individual Reservists
to active duty; (2) extend beyond 30 June 1968 the existing
authority ‘to call Reserve units to active duty; and (3) extend
terms of service for active duty personnel.

"a, A supplemental appropriation be requested to cover the

unprogrammed cost of the approved and probable future deployments."

si TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In addition, the Joint Chiefs of Staff indicated that an updated
assessment of U.S, military posture worldwide pertaining to additional
problems for U.S, military capabilities, to include specific recommenda-
tions for required improvement, would be reported in the near future.

This request was overtaken, as we shall see, by subsequent require-
ments submitted by COMUSMACY.

2. The Troop Request

Although the new Secretary of Defense, Clark Clifford, was formally
sworn into office by the President on 1 March, his work had begun many days
before.

In order to ascertain the situation in SVN and to determine subsequent
‘MACV force requirements, General Harle Wheeler, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, had been sent by the President to Saigon on 23 February. His report
was presented to the President on 27 February 1968. 11/ On the basis of this
report, and the recommendations it contained, the President ordered the initi-
ation of a complete and searching reassessment of the entire U.S. strategy
and commitment in South Vietnam. The Secretary of Defense-designate, Mr.
Clifford, was directed to conduct this review, aided by other members of the
Cabinet.

In his report, General Wheeler summarized the situation in Vietnam
as follows:

- The enemy failed to achieve his initial objective but
is continuing his effort. Although many of his units were
badly hurt, the judgment is that he has the will and the
capability to continue.

- Enemy losses have been heavy; he has failed to achieve
his prime objectives of mass uprisings and capture of a large
number of the capital cities and towns. Morale in enemy units
which were badly manled or where the men were oversold the idea
of a decisive victory at TET probably has suffered severely,
However, with replacements, his indoctrination system would
seem capable of maintaining morale at a generally adequate level.
His determination appears to be unshaken.

- The enemy is operating with relative freedom in the
countryside, probably recruiting heavily and no doubt infil-
trating NVA units and personnel. His recovery is likely to be
rapid; his supplies are adequate; and he is trying to maintain
the momentum of his winter-spring offensive.

- The structure of the GVN held up but its effectiveness
has suffered.

12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET + Sensitive

- The RVNAF held up against the initial assault with
gratifying, and in away, Surprising strength and fortitude.
However, ARVN is now in a defensive posture around towns
and cities and there is concern about how well they will
bear up under sustained pressure.

- The initial attack nearly succeeded in a dozen places,
and defeat in those places was only averted by the timely
reaction of US forces. In short, it was a very near thing.

- There is no doubt that the RD Program has suffered
a severe set back.

- RVNAF was not badly hurt physically -- they should
recover strength and equipment rather quickly (equipment
in 2 - 3 months -- strength in 3 - 6 months). Their prob-
lems are more psychological than physical.

- US forees have lost none of their pre-TET capability.

- MACV has three principal problems. First, logistic
support north of Danang is marginal owing to weather, enemy
interdiction and harassment and the massive deployment of
US forces into the DMZ/Hue area. Opening Route 1 will
alleviate this problem but takes a substantial troop com-
mitment. Second, the defensive posture of ARVN is permitting
the VG to make rapid inroads in the formerly pacified country-
side. ARVN, in its own words, is in a dilemma as it cannot
afford another enemy thrust into the cities and towns and yet
if it remains in a defensive posture against this eontingency,
the countryside goes by default. MACV is forced to devote
much of its-troop strength to this problem. Third, MACV
has been forced to deploy 50% of all US maneuver battalions
into I Corps, to meet the threat there, while enemy syn-
chronizes an attack against Khe Sanh/Hue-Quang Tri with an
offensive in the Highlands and around Saigon while keeping the
pressure on throughout the remainder of the country, MACV
will be hard pressed to meet adequately all threats. Under
these circumstances, we must be prepared to accept some
reverses. 12

As to the future, General Wheeler saw the enemy pursuing a strategy of
a reinforced offensive in order to enlarge his control throughout the
countryside and keep pressure on the government and the allies. The enemy
is likely, the Chairman indicated:

To maintain strong threats in the DMZ area, at Khe Sanh,
in the highlands, and at Saigon, and to attack in force when
conditions seem favorable. He is likely to try to gain

13 TOP SRCRET - Sensitive |
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

control of the country's northern provinces. He will con-
tinue efforts to encircle cities and province capitals to
isolate and disrupt normal activities, and infiltrate them
to create chaos. He will seek maximum attrition of RVNAF
elements. Against US forces, he will emphasize attacks by
fire on airfields and installations, using assaults and
ambushes selectively. His central objective continues to
be the destruction of the Government of SVN and its armed
forces. As a minimum he hopes to seize sufficient territory
and gain control of enough people to support establishment
of the groups and committees he proposes for participation
in an NLF dominated government. 13/

General Wheeler stated that MACV believed the central thrust of U.S.
strategy must be to defeat the enemy offensive. If this were done well,
the situation overall would be greatly improved over the pre-TET condition.

While accepting the fact that its first priority must be the security
of the GVN in Saigon and in provincial capitals, MACV described its objec-
tives as:

--First, to counter the enemy offensive and to destroy
or eject the NVA invasion force in the north.

-- Second, to restore security in the cities and towns.

-- Third, to restore security in the heavily popu-
lated areas of the countryside.

-- Fourth, to regain the initiative through offensive
operations. 1/

In discussing how General Westmoreland would accomplish these objec-
tives, General Wheeler indicated the following tasks:

(1) Security of Cities and Government. MACV recog-
nizes that US forces will be required to reinforce and
support RVNAF in the security of cities, towns and govern-
ment structure. At this time, 10 US battalions are operating
in the environs of Saigon. It is clear that this task will
absorb a substantial portion of US forces,

(2) Security in the Countryside. To a large extent
the VC now control the countryside. Most of the 54 bat-
talions formerly providing security for pacification are
now defending district Or province towns. MACV estimates
that US forces will be required in a number of places to
assist and encourage the Vietnamese Army to leave the cities
and towns and reenter the country. This is especially true

in the Delta.

nen TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(3) Defense of the borders, the DMZ and the northern
provinces. MACY considers that it must meet the enemy
threat in I Corps Tactical Zone and has already deployed
there slightly over 50% of all US maneuver battalions.

US forces have been thinned out in the highlands, notwith-
standing an expected enemy offensive in the early future.

(4) Offensive Operations. Coupling the increased
requirement for the defense of the cities and subsequent

reentry into the rural areas, and the heavy requirement

for defense of the I Corps Zone, MACV does not have adequate
forces at this time to resume the offensive in the remainder
of the country, nor does it have adequate reserves against
the contingency of simultaneous large-scale enemy offensive
action throughout the country. 15/

The conclusion was obvious:

Forces currently assigned to MACY, plus the residual
Program Five forces yet to be delivered, are inadequate
in numbers and balance to carry out the strategy and to
accomplish the tasks described above in the proper priority.

However, it was the extent and magnitude of General Wheeler's request
that stimulated the initiation of a thorough review of the direction of
U.S. policy in SVN. To contend with, and defeat, the new enemy threat,
MACV indicated a total requirement of 206,756 spaces over the 525,000
ceiling imposed by Program Five, or a new proposed ceiling of 731,756.

All of these forces, which included three Division equivalents, 15 tactical
fighter squadrons, and augmentation for current Navy programs, were to be
deployed into country by the end of CY 68. These additional forces were

+o be delivered in three packages as follows:

(1) Immediate Increment, Priority One: To be deployed
by 1 May 68. Major elements include one brigade of the 5th
Mechanized Division with a mix of one infantry, one armored
and one mechanized battalion; the Fifth Marine Division (less
RLT-26); one armored cavalry regiment; eight tactical fighter
squadrons; and a groupment of Navy units to augment on going
programs.

(2) Immediate Increment, Priority Two: To be deployed
as soon as possible but prior to 1 Sep 68. Major elements
include the remainder of the 5th Mechanized Division, and four
tactical fighter squadrons. It is desirable that the ROK
Light Division be deployed within this time frame.

(3) Follow-On Increment: To be deployed by the end of
cy 68. Major elements include one infantry division, three
tactical fighter sauadrons, and units to further .augment

Navy Programs. 16/

15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
A fo
out in st
troops wo
tion of t

To deny the request for troops, or to attempt to again cut it to a size which
could be sustained by the thinly stretched active forces, would just as surely

signify t
reached.

3.

his first

reassessment of U.S. strategy. Present, in addition to Clifford, were McNamara,

General T

Habib. 17/

President

pe addressed was not whether we should send 200,000 additional troops to Viet-

nam. The
could it

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

rk in the road had been reached. Now the alternatives stood

ark reality. To accept and meet General Wheeler's request for

uld mean a total U.S. military commitment to SVN -- an Americaniza-
he war, a callup of reserve forces, vastly increased expenditures.

hat an upper limit to the U.S. military commitment in SVN had been

"A to Z%" Reassessment

These thoughts were very much on Secretary Clifford's mind during
meeting on 29 February with the people who were to conduct the

aylor, Nitze, Fowler, Katzenbach, Rostow, Helms, Bundy, Warnke, and
Mr. Clifford outlined the task as he had received it from the
. He indicated to the group that he felt that the real problem to

real questions were: Should we follow the present course in SVN;
ever prove successful even if vastly more than 200,000 troops were

sent? The answers to these questions, the formulation of alternative courses

open to t
general a
were to b

he U.S., was to be the initial focus of the review. To that end,
ssignments were made concerning papers to be written. These papers
e prepared for discussion among the Group on Saturday, March 2.

The general division of labor and outline of subjects assigned was indicated
by Mr. Bundy in a memorandum the subsequent day, as follows:

1. What alternative courses of action are available to

the US?

addi

Assignment: Defense - General Taylor - State (Secretary)
2. What alternative courses are open to the enemy?
Assignment - Defense and CIA

3. Analysis of implications of Westmoreland's request for
tional troops.

series of papers on the following.

Military implications = JCS

Political implications - State
(Political implications in their broadest
domestic and international sense to include

internal Vietnamese problem).

Budgetary results - Defense

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Economic implications - Treasury
Congressional implications - Defense

Implications for public opinion - domestic and
international - State.

h, Negotiation Alternatives
Assignment - State 18/

In addition, Secretary Clifford indicated that certain military options
were to be examined in this review. These options were:

Option I: Add approximately 196,000 troops to the present
total authorized force level, i.e. Program 5
(525,000) plus the six additional battalions
already deployed (10,500). Restrictions cur-
rently imposed on air and ground operations in
Cambodia, Laos, and North Vietnam are relaxed
to permit destruction of the ports, mining of
the waterways, attack of complete target systems
in NVN and offensive operations against vc/NVA
Army forces in Laos and Cambodia.

Option IA: No change from Option I except that current
restrictions on ground and air operations in
Cambodia, Laos, and NVN are maintained.

Option II: No change to total authorized force level
(525,000 plus 10,500 augnentation) except to
deploy 3 fighter squadrons authorized within
the ceiling but not deployed.

Option III: Add 50,000 troops above those currently authorized.
Option IV: Add 100,000 troops above those currently authorized. 19/

The main work in preparing a paper for Secretary Clifford to present
to the President was to be done in the Defense Department by a group of
staff action officers working intensively under the direction of Mr. Leslie
Gelb. These staff officers worked as a drafting committee while a group
consisting of Mr. Warnke, Mr. Enthoven, Mr. Halperin and Mr. Steadman
acted as a policy review board. Of the work done outside the Pentagon,
only the papers on negotiations and SVN domestic policies prepared by
Mr. Bundy and Mr. Habib at State and General Taylor's paper on alternative
strategies went to the White House. The other materials contributed by
CIA,. State, Treasury, and the Joint Staff were fed into the deliberative
process at the Pentagon but were not included as such in the final product.
Thus, the dominant voice jn the consideration of alternatives as the reassess~
ment progressed was that of the OSD.

If TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

These agency views were, however, read and assessed by the working
group and, although they were not furnished to the President, they were
part of the background of the deliberative process. It would be mis-
leading, therefore, to say that they were not considered or had no influ-
ence on the decisions taken. In any case, they provided some sense of
the ideas and alternatives being considered and debated during these few
frantic days of late February - early March, 1968.

The CIA furnished three papers which were considered in the reassess-
ment. The first, dated 26 February 1968, was prepared for the Director of
Central Intelligence prior to the formation of the Task Group. Entitled
"the Outlook in Vietnam," this paper stated the following conclusion:

We believe that the Communists will sustain a high level
of military activity for at least the next two or three
months. It is difficult to forecast the situation which will
then obtain, given the number of unknowable factors which
will figure. Our best estimate is as follows:

a. The least likely outcome of the present phase
is that the Communist side will expend its resources to such
an extent as to be incapable thereafter of preventing steady
advances by the US/GVI.

b. Also unlikely, though considerably less so, is
that the GVN/ARVN will be so critically weakened that it can
play no further significant part in the military and political
prosecution of the struggle.

c. More likely than either of the above is that the
present push will be generally contained, but with severe
losses to both the GVN and Communist forces, and that a
period will set in during which neither will be capable of
registering decisive gains. 20/

The second CIA paper, dated 29 February, was entitled "Communist
Alternatives in Vietnam." Two main military alternatives were identified,
as follows:

@. maintain widespread military pressure in Vietnam
at least for the next several months;

b. increase the level of military pressures by one
or more of the following measures:

(1) committing all of their reserves from NVN,
tantamount to an all-out invasion, to gain decisive results
as quickly as possible;

(2) committing two or three additional divisions;

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(3) seeking one major battle which promised significant
political gains.

(4) expanding current efforts in Laos. 21/
Based on this analysis, Communist intentions were assessed as follows:

The Communists probably intend to maintain widespread mili-
tary pressures in Vietnam for at least the next several months.
A special effort will be made to harass urban areas and keep
them under threat. They will probably calculate that the
US/GVN will be forced to defend the towns and the countryside
will be left more vulnerable to Communist domination. At
some time, new Communist attacks will probably be launched
to seize and hold certain cities and towns. Where condi-
tions appear favorable they will engage US forces, seeking
some significant local success which would have a major
political return. The total result of their campaign, they
hope, will be to so strain the resources of the US and the
GVN/ARVN, that the Saigon government will lose control of
much of the country and the US will have little choice but
to settle the war on Communist terms. 22/

The third CIA paper, submitted on 1 March 1968, attempted to answer
specific questions posed by the Secretary of Defense in his initial meeting
with his senior working group on 29 February. Pertinent questions and the
CIA assessment are listed below:

Q@. What is the likely course of events in South Vietnam
over the next 10 months, assuming no change in U.S. policy
or force levels?

A. In the assumed circumstances a total military victory
by the Allies or the Communists is highly unlikely in the next
10 months. It is manifestly impossible for the Communists to
drive U.S. forces out of the country. It is equally out of
the question for US/GVN forces to clear South Vietnam of
Communist forces. It is possible, however, that the over-
all situation in this period will take a decisive turn.

We think it unlikely that this turn could be in the
us/GVN favor...-We see no evidence yet that the GVN/ARVN
will be inspired to seize the initiative, go over to the
attack, exploit the Communist vulnerabilities, and quickly
regain the rural areas. We doubt they have the will and
capability to make the effort.

Far more likely is an erosion of the ARVN's morale
and effectiveness. We do not believe that the GVN will
collapse, or that the ARVN will totally disintegrate. But

19 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

there is a fairly good chance that Communist presssures
will result in a serious weakening of the GVN/ARVIN apparatus
and an end to its effective functioning in parts of the
country. In these circumstances, virtually the entire
burden of the war would fall on US forces.

* + %*

In sum, there is a high risk that both the ARVN
and GVN will be seriously weakened in the next months,
and perhaps decisively so. Our best estimate is that
in the assumed circumstances the overall situation 10
months hence will be no better than a standoff.

Q. What is the likely Communist reaction to a change
in US strategy toward greater control over population
centers, with or without increased forces?

A. In general the Communists would view this move
as a success for their strategy. Their tactical response
in such circumstances would depend mainly on the nature
of US enclaves. If these were fairly large and embraced
much of the outlying countryside, the Communists would
pelieve them to be porous enough to infiltrate and harass,
much as they are doing now. If the defensive perimeters
were fairly solid, however, the Communists would not try
to overrun them in frontal assaults. Instead, they
would concentrate for a time on consolidating the country-
side and isolating the various defended enclaves, in
particular interdicting supply lines and forcing the US
to undertake expensive supply movements from out of
country. A Communist-controlled regime with a "coalition"
facade would be set up in "liberated" areas and attempts
at terrorist activity inside the enclaves would be under-
taken. Hanoi. would hope that a combination of military and
political pressure, together with the dim prospect for
achievement of the original US aims in the Vietnam struggle,
would eventually persuade the US to extricate itself through
negotiations.

Q@. Wheat is the likely NVA/VC strategy over the next
10 months if US forces are increased by 50,000, by 100,000,
or by 200,000? :

A. We would expect the Communists to continue the ware

They still have resources available in North Vietnam and
within South Vietnam to increase their troop strength. Their

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

strong logistical effort and their ability to organize and
exploit the people under their control in the South enable them
+o counter US increases by smaller increases of their own.

Over a ten-month period the Communists would probably be able
to introduce sufficient new units into the South to offset

the US maneuver battalion increments of the various force
levels given above. 23/

These CIA assessments, then, painted very bleak alternatives for
U.S. policymakers. If U.S. policy and force levels did not change, there
was a high risk that ARVN and the GVN would be seriously weakened, perhaps
decisively so. The US would assume the major burden of the war, and the
situation would be no better than a standoff. If U.S. forces were increased
by as much as 100,000, the Communists would probably be able to introduce
sufficient new units in the South to offset this increase. If the U.S.
changed its strategy toward greater control over population centers, with
or without increased forces, the Communists would adjust their strategy
so as to preclude the achievement of U.S. aims.

In his various papers for the Working Group, Assistant Secretary of
State William Bundy attempted a deliberate approach. He furnished one
paper which outlined alternative courses of action which he considered
deserved serious consideration. ah/ Another paper outlined a checklist
"to serve as a rough guide t the papers that need preparation under a
systematic code." 2

The alternative courses listed by Mr. Bundy were:

a. Accept the Wheeler/Westmoreland recommendation aimed
at sending roughly 100,000 men by 1 May and another 100,000
men by the end of 1968.

b. Change our military strategy, reducing the areas and
places we seek to control and concentrating far more heavily
on the protection of populated areas.

ec. Adopt option b above in the south, but extend our
bombing and other military actions against the North to try
to strangle the war there and put greater pressure on Hanoi
in this area.

d. Accept immediately those elements of the Wheeler/
Westmoreland proposals that could hope to affect the situ-
ation fayorably over the next four months or so, but do not
go beyond that in terms of force plans and related actions.

e. "Cut and shave" the Wheeler/Westmoreland proposals
and their action implications, but carry on basically in
accordance with present strategy.

f, "“Ali-out option.” “Announce that we were prepared
to hold in Vietnam no matter what developed." 26

(eal TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Department of State also prepared papers on the following
subjects:

a. Introductory Paper on Key Elements in the Situation 27/
b. Probable Soviet, Chinese, Western European Reactions 28/

ec. Ambassador Thompson's Cable on Soviet Reactions to
Possible U.S. Government Courses of Action 29/

d. European and Other Non-Asian Reactions to Major Force
Increases 30/

e. Asian Reaction to a Major U.S, Force Increase 31/
£. Options on our Negotiating Posture 32/

These papers were presented to the Clifford Group at the meeting on
3 March 1968. However, as will be seen, they were quickly overtaken by
the rapidly moving situation and, with the exception of the paper on nego-
tiating options, did not figure in the final memorandum which was forwarded
to the President on 4 March.

General Maxwell Taylor's paper on alternative courses of action is
of greater interest in that it was furnished both to the Clifford Working
Group and to the White House directly through General Taylor's capacity
as Military Advisor to the President. Although it is not known what weight
was given to this paper, it was received by the President even prior to the
Memorandum from the Clifford Group, and thereby could have gained some
special weight in the deliberations of the President.

After a brief listing of the U.S. objectives in SVN, General Taylor
concluded that, since there was no serious consideration being given at the
moment to adding to or subtracting from our present objective, the discussion
should be limited to considerations of alternative strategies and programs
to attain that objective. 33/

General Taylor concluded that, basically, our government had only two
choices:

a. We can tell General Westmoreland that he must make do
with his present forces in Viet-Nam and ask him to report to
us what he is capable of accomplishing therewith. This would
be an invitation to him to cut back sharply upon the military
objectives he has defined in his latest Combined Campaign
Plan (1968). Alternatively, while making this decision to
provide no further forces, we could give new strategic
guidance to General Westmoreland which would assist him in
establishing the priorities for his efforts necessary to
pring his mission within capabilities of the forces allotted
him. :

*

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. The other broad alternative is to increase his present
forces by some amount varying from less than his figure of
205,000 and ranging up to the full amount. Also in this case,
we might well consider giving him revised strategic guidance
in the light of what we have learned from the Tet offensive
and its sequel.

General Taylor thus indicated that in the reassessment of our strategy,
the government would be required to answer the following questions:

(1) Do we decide at this time to send any additional
reinforcements to General Westmoreland?

(2) If the answer is affirmative, should we agree to
send all or part of the 205,000 requested by General
Westmoreland?

(3) Whether the response is affirmative or negative, should
we send General Westmoreland new strategic guidance, hoping to
limit further demands on U.S. military manpower?

(4) What Strategie Reserve should be retained in the U.S.
in the foregoing situations?

General Taylor then listed some of the political considerations of the
military course of action decided upon. He listed the following political
actions as worth considering in connection with any decision on reinforce-

ment:

(1) A renewed offer of negotiation, possibly with a private
communication that we would suspend the bombing for a fixed period
without making the time limitation public if we were assured that
productive negotiations would start before the end of the period.

(2) A public announcement that we would adjust the bombing
of the North to the level of intensity of enemy ground action
in the South.

(3) As a prelude to sharply increased bombing levels, possibly
40 include the closing of Haiphong, a statement of our intentions
made necessary by the enemy offensive against the cities and
aeross the frontiers.

(4) Announcement of the withdrawal of the San Antonio
formula in view of the heightened level of aggression conducted

by North Viet-Nam.

(5) Keep silent.

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In choosing among these alternatives, General Taylor argued that the
present military situation in South Vietnam argued strongly against a new
negotiation effort or any thought of reducing the bombing of the North.
He further argued that, in any case, we would appear well-advised to
withdraw from the San Antonio formula.

Thus, he concluded, there seemed to be at least three program
packages worth serious consideration. They were:

Package A
a. No increase of General Westmoreland's forces in south Viet—Nam.
b. New strategic guidance.
c. Build-up of Strateeie Reserve.
dad. No negotiation initiative.
e. Withdrawal of San Antonio formula,
f£. Pressure on GVN to do better.

Package B

Be Partial acceptance of General Westmoreland's recommendation.

Io

New strategic guidance.

le
.

Build-up of Strategic Reserve.
d. No negotiation initiative.

Withdrawal of San Antonio formula.

lo

f. Pressure on GVN to do better.

Package C
a. Approval of General Westmoreland's full request.
b. New strategic guidance.
c. Build-up of Strategic Reserve.
d. No negotiation initiative.
e&. Withdrawal of San Antonio formula and announcement of

intention to close Haiphong.

f. Pressure on GVN to do better.

Major effort te rally the homefront.

itis

el TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The working group within ISA had access to all of these documents.
In addition, and at the request of the working group, other papers were
prepared within the Department of Defense by the Assistant Secretary
(Systems Analysis) and the Assistant Secretary (Public Affairs).

Initially, Systems Analysis undertook a capability study in order
to: determine if the MACV requirement could indeed be met. They concluded
that, with the exception of Army aviation units, the MACV manpower request
could be filled essentially as desired. This could even be done, the
analysis concluded, without changing the one-year tour policy, without
drawing down on Europe, and without widespread second tours with less than
2. months in CONUS. This assumed a reserve recall, added funds, and the
required strength increases.

Our maximum capability would be to provide 6 maneuver
battalions in May, 9 more in June, 9 in July and as many as
6 more in August -- faster than the MACV request. These
units would have the necessary artillery, transportation
and engineer support. Added tactical air units could deploy
on a matching schedule.

The only significant shortfall would be in Army Aviation.
Even with a reserve recall, present deployment schedules cannot
be significantly accelerated. Production limitations are such
that at least one year would be required to increase the out-
put of UH-1/AF-1 helicopters. Thus, it would be mid-1969
before any added aviation units could deploy and mid-1971
before the total MACV requirement could be met. 3h/

This SA paper also considered several other deployment options, as
follows: cut 50,000 from present authorization; no increase in current
authorization; increase by 50,000; increase by 100,000; increase by 200,000.
The units required under all these options, it was concluded, could deploy
+o Vietnam in a matter of months. The 50,000 man package could arrive in
May and June; the 100,000 man package by August; and the full 200,000 (with
minor exceptions ) by December. The principal exceptions under all options
would continue to be Army aviation units. A summary of the various options
considered is shown below:

Optional Deployments
A B C D EB

Cut Current Ada Ada Ada
50,000 Plsn 50,000 100,000 200,000

Total U.S. personnel 485,000 535,000 585,000 635,000 631,000

U.S. Maneuver Bns 103 112 118 12h, 133
Artillery Bns 68 72 Te 83 92

Tac Air Sads yy hs 51 56 60

Annual. Cost $23 Bil. $25 Bil. $28 Bil. $30 Bil. $35 Bil.
Reserve Recall -- Lo 65,000 200,000 250,000 35/

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Other papers prepared by Systems Analysis during this period were
furnished to the ISA working group upon their request. Indeed, the subject
matter and thrust of these papers indicated fairly early the bias of the
people preparing them as well as the direction in which the reassessment of
U.S. strategy was moving, at least within the working group in ISA.

Papers were also furnished concerning pacification, costs and probable
results of alternative U.S. strategies in South Vietnam, the status of
RVNAF, problems of inflation, and data for analysis of strategies. The
main thrust of most of these papers was that "more of the same" in South
Vietnam would not achieve decisive results and, indeed, would not be satis-
factory. The paper on pacification indicated that:

Hamlet Evaluation System (HES) reports for CY 1967 indicate
that pacification progressed slowly during the first half of
1967, and lost ground in the second half. Most (60%) of the
1967 gain results from accounting type changes to the HES
system, not from pacification progress; hamlet additions and
deletions, and revised population estimates accounted for
half of the January-June inerease and all of the June-December
increase. In the area that really counts--VC-D-E hamlets
rising to A-B-C ratings--we actually suffered a net loss of
10,100 people between June and December 19067. 36/

Based’ on General Wheeler's statement in his report to the President,
that "to a large extent the VC now control the countryside," the paper con-
eluded that "the enemy's current offensive appears to have killed the program
onee and for all." 37/

In analyzing the status of RVNAF, the Systems Analysis paper concluded:

Highest priority must be given to getting RVNAF moving. In
the short run re-equipping the Vietnamese and helping them
regain their combat power insures that we can prevent unnecessary
loss should the enemy attack the cities or put pressure there
while hitting Khe Sanh. Further, present US force commitments
mean that only a recuperated RVNAF will permit release of US
units for other missions and accomplish any objectives in
pacification. Finally, restoration of security in the cities
in conjunction with the National Police is a major new mission
for RVNAF which requires forces.

What can we do? There are many indications that the man-
power situation is worse than reported. Every effort must be
made to determine how many deserters there are and to approach
them. Rounding up trained manpower delinquent in returning
from Tet will help. US advisors can pressure the JGS to up-
grade selected RF/PF into ARVNin addition to measures already
initiated by RVNAF.

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

COMUSMACV must identify weak RVNAF units. III Corps
need special study and preparation of revised contingency
plans. Priority on remanning, re-equipping and retraining
must be given to the RVMAF elite units (VNMC) which con-
stitute the general reserve. COMUSMACV must plan for the
use of this reserve and earmarked US units to defect VC
attack of week RVNAF units during the interim period.

RVNAF modernization should take precedence over equip-
ping all US forces except those deploying to the combat
zone. The remaining 82,000 M16 rifles must be delivered
ASAP. It is also in the US interest to equip the RF/PF
with Ml6s before equipping the US training base, which is
already programmed.

lastly, COMUSMACV must make decisions about what
missions RVNAF need not accomplish now. RVNAF is stretched
too thin given its past and expected missions. It alone
cannot protect the cities and hold the countryside where
it is still deployed. Decision is needed to permit the
build-up of weak units and better integrated use of US
and RVNAF against whatever enemy scenario develops, 38/

The paper entitled "Alternate Strategies" painted a bleak picture of
American failure in Vietnam:

We lost our offensive stance because we never achieved
the momentum essential for military victory. Search and
Destroy operations can't build this kind of momentum and
the RVNAF was not pushed hard enough. We became mesmerized
by statistics of known doubtful validity, choosing to place
our faith only in the ones that showed progress. We judged
the enemy's intentions rather than his capabilities because
we trusted captured documents too much. We were not alert
to the perils of time lag and spoofing. In short, our set-
backs were due to wishful thinking compounded by a massive
intelligence collection and/or evaluation failure.

Tndeed,. in examining U.S. objectives in SVN, the picture of failure was
manifest:

Since the original commitment of large US forces in 1965,
our stated objectives have been to:

(1) Make it as difficult and costly as possible for
NVM to continue effective support of the VC and cause NVN to

cease its direction of the VC insurgency.

(While we have raised the price to NVN of aggression and

27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

support of the VC, it shows no lack of capability or will

to match each new US escalation. Our strategy of "attrition"
has not worked. Adding 206,000 more US men to a force of .
525,000, gaining only 27 additional maneuver battalions and
270 tactical fighters at an added cost te the US of $10 bil-
lion per year raises the question of who is making it costly
from whon. )

(2) Extend GVN dominion, direction and control over
SVN.

(This objective can only be achieved by the GVN through
its political and economic processes and with the indispensable
support of an effective RVNAF. The TET offensive demonstrated
not only that the US had not provided an effective shield, it
also demonstrated that the GVN and RVNAF had not made real
progress in pacification -- the essential first step along the
road of extending GVN dominion, direction and control.)

(3) Defeat the VC and NVA forces in SVN and force
their withdrawal. (The TET offensive proves we were further
from this goal than we thought. How much further remains
+o be seen.)

(4) Deter the Chinese Communists from direct inter-
vention in SHA. (This we have done successfully so far;
however, greatly increased U.S. forces may become counter-
praductive.)

We know that despite a massive influx of 500,000 US troops,
1.2 million tons of bombs a year, 400,000 attack sorties per year,
200,000 enemy KITA in three years, 20,000 US KTA, etc., our control
of the countryside and the defense of the urban areas is now
essentially at pre-August 1965 levels. We have achieved stale-
mate at a high commitment. A new strategy must be sought. 39/

Several alternative strategies were briefly discussed and all but one
were quickly dismissed as being unlikely to bring success:

(1) No change but increase the resources.
This strategy alternative is implicit in the recommenda-
sions of MACV and CJCS....In brief, the MACV and CJCS recommenda-
tions are for additional forces to regair this ground lost since
January, 1968. Nothing is said as to whether still more US
' forces will be required to finish the job. Another payment on
an open-ended commitment is requested.

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(2) Widen the War.

Adoption of this alternative would require more forces
than are now being considered and it runs further risks of
involving China and the USSR. The course of events already
set in motion could lead to adoption of this alternative;
increasing US forces in SVN would undoubtedly increase ‘the
possibilities of it. And the option is open fcr North
Korea. or other aggressive countries to test our will else-
where. .

(3) Opt Out of the War.

The price of quitting now would include the under-
mining of our other commitments world-wide, bitter dissension
at home, and a probable resurgence of active Chinese-USSR
territorial aggrandizements.

Before TET we could have done this with less risk than
now. * is

(4) Resuscitate GVN and RVNAF.
This option is to return to the concept of a GVN
war with US assistance instead of the present situation of
a US war with dubious GVN assistance. j

Adoption of this alternative requires:

(a) A solid commitment to a US force ceiling.
This commitment must be communicated to the highest levels

of GVN/RVNAF and our own military leaders.

(ob) A skillful conditioning of US and world
opinion to the limited US commitment to the South Vietnamese
war and to our right of withdrawal if GVN/RVNAF determina-
tion or performance wavers. :

(c) A statement that the US objective in SVN is
to develop the GVN capability to defeat the VC and NVA
forces in SVN and force their withdrawal. ho/_

The remaining Systems Analysis paper cited statistics to show that,
in the past, the North Vietnamese had been able to match the U.S. buildup
in SVN with their own buildup. Also statistics were used to project the
cost to the U.S. in casualties resulting from various deployment options
and-various strategies on the ground. These projections showed that a
shift to a population control strategy which was unchallenged by the enemy
would stabilize casualty rates, as some units would be underemployed. 41

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The paper prepared by the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public
Affairs) was entitled "Possible Public Reaction to Various Alternatives."
Five alternative options were examined:

1. Increased mobilization and deployment. This includes
sending General Westmoreland 50,000 to 200,000 more troops
and the additional moves this would require at home -- calling
reserves, extending enlistments, extra expenditures, bigger
tax bill, etc.

2. Increased mobilization/deployment plus expanded bombing
of North Vietnam.

3. Increased mobili zation/deployment plus a bombing pause.

h, Denial of the Westmoreland requests and continuation of
the war "as is" -- as it was being fought prior to the Tet
offensive and Khe Sanh.

5. Denial of the Westmoreland requests and a change in
war-fighting policy with greater concentration on defending
populated areas and less on search-and-destroy in unpopulated
areas. This would include an announced program to begin
troop withdrawal at a fixed date. he/

The Assistant Secretary, Mr. Goulding, emphasized that all options
were being examined from a public reaction standpoint only. He also
emphasized that no action would unite the country. The question to be
attacked was which option will most coalesce supporters and most isolate
the opposition.

In analyzing the various options ebove, Mr. Goulding divided the
public into hawks, doves, and middle~of-the-roaders. Under Option 1,
he argued, increased mobilization and deployment moves, without other
new actions:

.. Will make the doves unhappy because we become more
and more enmeshed in the war. They will make the hawks
unhappy because we still will be withholding our militery
strength, particularly in the North. And the middle-of-
the-roaders who basically support the President out of
conviction ‘or patriotism will be unhappy because they will
see the ante going up in so many ways and still will not
be given a victory date, a progress report they can believe
or an argument they can accept that all of this is in the
national interest. (Further, they will read in the dissent
columns and editorials that 18 months from now, when the
North Vietnamese have added 30,000 more troops, we will be
right back where we started.)

*

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Thus, public reaction to this option would be extremely negative, and
would become increasingly so as the deployment numbers, the financial
costs, and the life-disrupting actions increase.

The next two options, Mr. Goulding indicated, should be considered
together since, from a public affairs standpoint, the decision to deploy
additional troops of any significant number must be accompanied by some
"new" move. The two options discussed were deployment plus expanded
pombing of the North, and increased mobilization plus a bombing pause.

The first course, Goulding concluded,would elicit more support in
the country than does the present course.

This course would clearly bring aboard more hawks and
further isolate the doves. It would also make the war much
easier to accept by the middle-of~the-roaders. It would
help unite the country. Some fence sitters, however, would
be added to those who already view the war as an unforgiveable
sin. I think the campus and "liberal" reaction would sur-
pass anything we have seen.

The other option envisioned continuing to fight as we are in the
south, strengthening General Westmoreland with part or all of his request,
and coupling these moves with a visible "peace" campaign based upon a
cessation of the bombing in the North. This course, Goulding concluded:

--.would alienate those who take the hardest line.
We would be adding much to our cost, both by the extra
deployment and the military price paid for the pause,
without receiving any immediate or concrete results. If
the Communists took advantage of the bombing halt, the
hawks and many of the military would react strongly....
The doves, of course, would enthusiastically endorse the
pause and would immediately begin pleading and praying
that it be continued long enough to explore every possible
and conceivable corridor....Additionally, the doves would
deplore the extra deployments. ‘They would complein that
the pause was not unlimited or unconditional. They would
argue that the deployments plus the failure to be "uncon-
ditional" detracted from the effort. This two-pronged
approach -- strengthen but seck negotiation -- would give
new confidence to the middle-of-the-roaders. They would:
appleud thé government for doing "something" different,
for seeking a way out of the quagmire. They would be
more patient than the hawks to give the pause a chance,
and less disturbed than the doves at the mobilization.
For them, it could be a way out -- and even a "could be":
is better than the frustration they now feel....The deploy/
pause option would be more favorably received by the nation
than the deploy/escalate North, since it would, in the public
mind, offer more hope of ana eventual solution to the war.

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The fourth option, denial of the Westmoreland request and continue
the war "as is," would please no one, according to Mr. Goulding. The
hawks (and the military) would protest vehemently. They would be less
satisfied, and the doves would be no more satisfied by this failure to
take new initiatives toward peace. However, Mr. Goulding concluded,
since fewer people would be affected by this course than by Option One,
and therefore it would be preferable to that Option.

The advantages of Option Five - denial of General Westmoreland's
requests and a change in strategy in South Vietnam -- from a public affairs
standpoint were overwhelming, the paper concluded.

«+.-The pain of additional deployments, Reserve callups,
increased draft calls, increased casualties, extended tours
would be eliminated. The hazards of bombing escalation
would be eliminated. The dangers of a bombing pause would
be eliminated. The frustration of more-and-more-and-more
into the endless pit would be eliminated. What the people
want most of all is some sign that we are making progress,
that there is, somewhere, an end. While this does not
necessarily show progress, it does show change. It does
show the search for new approaches....It would prevent the
middle-of-the-readers from joining the doves. While the
doves want a pause, I would think they would prefer this
to deployment-mobilization plus pause. While the hawks
want to escalate in the North, most of them (not a11) also
want an end to increased ground strength in the South.

I believe that we would be successful in getting members
of Congress to make speeches in support of this.

In summary, then, and strictly from a public reaction standpoint,
Mr. Goulding noted the options as follows:

Acceptable: Only #5 -- Denial of requests and a
change in policy in the South.

Most acceptable of the others: #3 -- Deploy and
pause.

Next most acceptable: #2 -- Deploy and expand Air
War North. ;

Next most acceptable: # -- Deny Westmoreland and
continue as is.

Most objectionable: #1 -- Deploy and continue as is,
north and south. 43

32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

h. Drafting a Memorandum

There is, of course, no way of knowing how much consideration
and weight were given to each of these papers by the small group of action
officers in the Pentagon who were, in the last analysis, charged with
digesting all of these factors, considerations, and views and actually
drafting the reassessment of U.S, strategy required by the President of
his new Secretary of Defense. The predilections of these drafters, per-
haps were hinted at by the subject matter of the backup papers prepared at
their specific request and summarized above.

By 29 February, this group had produced an initial draft of a memoran-
dum for the President which examined the situation in SVN "in light of U.S.
political objectives and General Westmoreland's request for additional
troops, as stated in General Wheeler's report." hh/

This draft was slightly revised by senior officers in ISA and apparently
was Giscussed within the Defense Establishment on 1 March. 45/

This paper began with an assessment of the current situation in South
Viet Nam and a discussion of the prospects over the next 10 months. Quoting
Generel Wheeler's report, the draft memorandum indicated that the most impor-
tant VC goal in the winter-spring offensive was the takeover of the country-
side. In many parts of the country, it was stated, they may have already
succeeded in achieving this goal.

The 'main event’ thus is still to come, not in a one-night
offensive but in a week-by-week expulsion of GVN presence and
influence from the rural areas, showing up on the pacification
maps as a ‘red tide’ flowing up to the edges of the province
and district towns, and over some of them. 46/

Although ARVN held up well under initial assaults, the ISA memorandum
concluded that they would not soon move out of their defensive posture
around the cities and towns. They would, in the future, challenge the VC
offensively much less than before.

In the new, more dangerous environment to come about in
the countryside, and as currently led, motivated, and influ-
enced at the top, ARVN is even less likely than before to
buckle down to the crucial offensive job of chasing district
companies and (with U.S. help) provincial battalions. In that
environment, informers will clam up, or be killed; the VC will
get more information and cooperation, the GVN less; officials
and police will be much less willing to act on information or

, VC suspects and activities. 47/

The memorandum was even more pessimistic concerning the future direction
and abilities of the South Vietnamese Government, and read more into the TET
offensive than had been noted there by other observers.

33 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It is unlikely that the GVN will rise to the challenge.
Tt will not move toward a Government of National Union.
Current arrests of oppositionists further isolate and dis-
eredit it, and possibly foreshadow the emasculation of the
Assembly and the undoing of all promising political develop-
ments of the past year. Furthermore, it is possible that
the recent offensive was facilitated by a newly friendly
or apathetic urban environment, and a broad low-level
cooperative organization that had not existed on the same
seale before. If, in fact, the attacks reflect new VC
opportunities and capability in the cities, then the impact
of the attacks themselves, the overall military response,
and the ineffective GVN political response may still further
improve the VC cause in the cities, as well as in the country-
side. Even if the political makeup of the GVN should change
for the better, it may well be that VC penetration in the
cities has now gone or will soon go too far for real non-
communist political mobilization to develop. 48/

Based upon this bleak assessment of the future of the Government and
Army of South Vietnam, the ISA draft memorandum undertook to examine
alternative military strategies. Two such strategies were to be compared,
the current one and an alternative which emphasized population security.
(Actually, only one was analyzed in detail. ) The two strategies were to be
compared at current force levels and with added increments of 50,000,
150,000 and 200,000.

In analyzing our current strategy, the memorandum undertook a review
of how our strategy in Vietnam evolved. At the time U.S. forces were first
committed in South Vietnam in early 1965, the draft Presidential memorandum
indicated, the political situation was a desperate one. There was imminent
danger of a North Vietnamese-controlled seizure of power in SVN and the
imposition of a communist regime by force. Thus, the immediate objective
of the U.S. was a military one--to arrest this trend and to deny to the
nva/ve the seizure of political control by force.

Once U.S, forces were committed in increasingly large numbers, however,
the military and political situation began to improve significantly. By
the end of 1966, our initial military objective had been achieved--no longer
was it possible for NVN to impose its will upon SVN by force. By this time,
however, our military objectives had been expanded at the expense of our
political objectives.

In the absence of political directives limiting the goals to be
attained by U.S. military force, our objectives became:

a. To make it as difficult and costly as possible for
NVM to continue effective support of the VC and to cause NVN
to cease direction of the insurgency.

*

——

3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. To defeat the VC and NVA forces in SVN and force the
withdrawal of NVN forces....

ec. To extend GVN control over all of SVN.

Indeed, in asking for increased forces, General Wheeler and General
Westmoreland described their current tasks as follows:

a. Security of Cities and Government.
b. Security in the Countryside.

ec. Defense of the Borders, the DMZ, and the Northern
Province.

d. Offensive Operations. 4g/

The question to be answered, then, suggested the memorandum, was what
we could hope to accomplish with these increased force levels in pursuit of
our current strategy. The answer was not encouraging.

With current force levels we cannot continue to pursue all
of the objectives listed by General Wheeler. Can we de so with
increased forces? .

MACV does not clearly specify how he would use the addi-
tional forces he requests, except to indicate that they
would provide him with a theater reserve and an offensive
capability. Even with the 200,000 additional troops requested
by MACV, we will not be in a position to drive the enemy from
SVN or to destroy his forces. MACV's description of his key
problems makes clear that the additional forces would be used
to open Route 1, north of Danang; support ARVN units, particu-
larly in the Delta; and to maintain a reserve against enemy
offensives. With lesser increases of 50,000 or 100,000,
MACV would be in an even less favorable position to go on the
offensive. Moreover, even before the TET offensive the
enemy was initiating about two-thirds of the clashes and
could, in response to our buildup, adopt a casualty limiting
posture. r

The more likely enemy response, however, is that with
which he has responded to previous increases in our force
levels, viz., a matching increase on his part. Hanoi has
maintained 2 constant ratio of one maneuver battalion to
1.5 U.S, maneuver battalions from his reserve in NVN of
from 45-70 maneuver battalions (comprising 40,000-60,000
men in 5-8 divisions).

So: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Even if the enemy stands and fights as he did before
TET, the results can only be disappointing in terms of
attriting his capability.

Over the past year the United States has been killing
between 70 and 100 ve/iNVA per month per U.S. combat bat-
talion in theater. The return per combat battalion deployed
has been falling off, but even assuming that additional
deployments will double the number of combat battalions,
and assuming that the kill-ratios will remain constant, we
could expect enemy deaths, at best, on the order of magni-
tude of 20,000 per month, but the infiltration system from
North Viet Nam alone could supply 13,000-16,000 per month,
regardless of our bombing pattern, leaving the remainder --
4,000 -- to be recruited in South Viet Nam -- a demonstrably
manageable undertaking for the VC.

The current strategy thus can promise no early end to
the conflict, nor any success in attriting the enemy or
eroding Hanoi's will to fight. Moreover, it would entail
substantial costs in South Viet Nem, in the United States,
and in the rest of the world. 50/

These substantial costs, the paper indicated, would indeed preclude
the attainment of U.S. objectives. In South Vietnam,

«the presence of more than 700,000 U.S. military can
mean nothing but the total Americanization of the war.
There is no sign that ARVN effectiveness will increase,
and there will be no pressure from the U.S. or the GVN for
ARVN to shape up if the U.S. appears willing to increase
its force levels as necessary to maintain a stalemate in
the country.

The effect on the GVN would be even more unfortunate.
The Saigon leadership shows no signs of a willingness--let
alone an ability--to attract the necessary loyalty or sup-
port of the people. It is true that the GVN did not totally
collapse during TET, but there is not yet anything like an
urgent sense of national unity and purpose. A large influx
of additional U.S, forces will intensify the belief of the
ruling elite that the U.S. will continue to fight its war
while it engages in backroom polities and permits wide-
spread corruption. The proposed actions will also generate
inereased inflation, thereby reducing the effectiveness of
the GVN and making corruption harder to control. Reform
of the GVN will come only when and if they come to believe
that our continued presence in South Viet Nam depends on
what the GVN does. Certainly, a U.S. commitment to a sub-
stantial troop increase before the GVN conmits itself to
reform’ and action can only be counterproductive. Whatever

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

our success on the battlefield, our chances of leaving behind
an effective functioning national government when we at last
withdraw will be sharply diminished.

In the United States, the effects would be equally unfortunate.

We will have to mobilize reserves, increase our budget
by billions, and see U.S. casualties climb to 1,300-1,400
per month. Our balance of payments will be worsened con-
siderably, and we will need a larger tax increase--justified
as a war tax, or wage and price controls....

It will be difficult to convince critics that we are not
simply destroying South Viet Nam in order to "save" it and
that we genuinely want peace talks. This growing disaffection
accompanied, as it certainly will be, by increased defiance
of the draft and growing unrest in the cities because of the
belief that we are neglecting domestic problems, runs great
risks of provoking a domestic crisis of unprecedented pro-
portions. 51

Thus, if our current strategy, even with increased troops, could not
promise an early end to the conflict, what alternatives were available
to the United States? No U.S. ground strategy and no level of U.S. forces,
alone, could by themselves accomplish our objective in South Viet Nam,
the draft memorandum stated.

We can obtain our objective only if the GVN begins to
take the steps necessary to gain the confidence of the people
and to provide effective leadership for the diverse groups
in the population. ARVN must also be turned into an effective
fighting force. If we fail in these objectives, a military
victory over the NVN/VC main forces, followed by a U.S. with-
drawal, would only pave the way for an NLF takeover.

Our military presence in South Viet Nam should be designed
toby the time during which ARVN and the GVN can develop effec-
tive capability. In order to do this, we must deny the enemy
access to the populated areas of the country and prevent hin -
from achieving his objectives of controlling the population and
destroying the GVN.

The memorandum concluded that MACV should be told that his mission
was to provide security to populated areas and to deny the enemy access to
the population; that he should not attempt to attrite the enemy or to
drive him out of the country. MACV should be asked to recommend an appro-
priate strategy and to determine his force requirements to carry out this
objective with the minimum possible casualties.

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

However, in the next section of the Presidential draft memorandum,
the Working Group relieved MACV of this responsibility by sketching one
possible strategy (obviously the preferred one) which should be able to
be pursued "without substantially increasing our level of forces in South
Viet Nam, thus avoiding the adverse domestic and foreign consequences
sketched above." 52/

The strategy outlined in the memorandum was designed to attain the
initiative along the "demographic frontier." It consisted of the following:
Those forces currently in or near the heavily populated
areas along the coast should remain in place. Those forces
currently bordering on the demographic frontier*® should con-
tinue to operate from those positions, not on long search-and-
destroy missions, but in support of the frontier. Eight to
10 battalions from the DMZ areas would be redeployed and become
strategic research in I Corps; six battalions from the interior
of II Corps would be redeployed to Dien Binh province as a
strategic reserve for defense of provincial capitals in the
highlands. As security is restored in the previously neglected
populated areas of coastal Viet Nam, additional U.S, battalions
would move forward to the demographic frontier....

Based just beyond the populated areas, the forces on the
demographic frontiers would conduct spoiling raids, long-
range reconnaissance patrols and, when appropriate targets
are located, search-and-destroy operations into the enemy's
gone of movement in the unpopulated areas between the demo-
graphic and the political frontiers. They would be available
as a quick reaction force to support RVNAF when it was attacked
within the populated areas. Where RVNAF patrolling in the
populated areas is inadequate, U.S. forces would be in a posi-
tion to assist. 53/

The advantages of the "demographic strategy of population security"
were listed as follows:

1. It would become possible to keep the VC/NVA off
balance in their present zone of movement. This area is
now largely available to them for maneuver and massing, no
more than a day's march from any of the major cities north
of Saigon.

2, It would lengthen enemy LOC's from their sanctu-
aries in Laos and Cambodia. Base areas and LOC's within
SVN would be the subject of attack and disruption, without
extending the war to neighboring countries.

¥ this frontier runs along the eastern foothills of the Annamite chain,
fron Quang-Tri Province to Phan Thiet in Binh Thuen, cuts across SVN
along the northern edge of the Delta from Phuc Tuy to the Cambodian
Border in Tay Ninh. Garrisons would be established as at Bong Son

and An Khe. 38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
dum.

In I

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. RVNAF, knowing the availability of support from
U.S. reaction forces, would perform more aggressively.

h, This would permit the patrolling and securing of
populated areas to be accomplished primarily by Vietnamese
forces.

5. U.S. forces would keep active in what is now the
enemy's zone Of movement, no longer presenting static posi-
tions against which the enemy can mass and attack. This,
plus his increased logistical problems, would reduce U.S.
casualties while increasing his. In effect, we would force
him to come to us, fight on terrain of our choosing.

6. The increased patrolling of the populated areas by
RVNAF combined with U.S. actions in the zone of movement
would make it harder for the enemy to mass against and
attack targets within the populated areas. This would
reduce civilian casualties and refugee generation.

7. Garrisoning U.S, forces closer to RVNAF would facili-
tate joint operations at the maneuver level (battalion,
company), again increasing RVNAF aggressiveness.

8. With RVNAF thus supported by U.S. forces, it can be
expected to remain in uniform and engage in operations as
long’as it is paid and fed. 54/

No disadvantages of this strategy were noted. or listed in the memoran-

Details of this strategy, by Corps area, were examined in an appendix.
Corps, our present precarious position could be relieved.

Were MACV to be provided guidance to forego position
defense in areas remote from population centers and concen-
trate upon mobile offensive operations in and contiguous
to the coastal plain, one division equivalent - eight to
10 U.S. maneuver battalions - could eventually be relieved
from operations in, or related to defense of Khe Sanh.
Undoubtedly, however, these eight to 10 battalions would
be required to restore tactical flexibility to and insure
logistical sufficiency for the forces presently disposed in
the Quang-Tri-Hue-Danang area.  MACV presently is planning
operations in the Aeschau [sic] Valley after April 1968;
the new guidance would preclude these.

Guidanee to MACV in II Corps

"should counsel continued economy of force and should
specifically exclude determined defense of all but province

39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘capitals in the highlands. Permissionto withdraw from

Special Forces camps (e.g., Dak To), and other exposed
positions remote from the coastal plain should be included.
Under this guidance, six U.S. battalions could be with-

drawn from border defense operations in the highlands for

use as a mobile reserve or for Operations on the coastal plain.

- In ITT Corps, no redeployment from present positions, with U.S.
forces concentrated in the immediate environs of Saigon were envisaged.

The guidance to MACV should be to concentrate on offensive
operations in and around the densely populated portions of
Tit CTY. MACV should maintain a mobile strike force for
defense of remote province capitals, buthe should otherwise
forego long range or regional search-and-destroy operations.
Withdrawals from Special Forces camps should be authorized.

Fourth Corps - the Mekong Delta region - is the only region of SVN in
which the burden of the war was still borne, chiefly by RVNAF. U.S.
strategy should avoid Americanizing the conflict there. Instead, our
efforts should be aimed at catalyzing increased RVNAF efforts there.

Guidance provided to MACV should be geared to galvanizing
RVNAF by a strategy of:

1. Defending province capitals, major towns, principal
comminication centers, and commercially important routes.

2. Extending GVN control into the countryside, consis-
tent with RVNAF capability to defend RD teams and other
public administration there.

3. Stimulating RVNAF operations by providing U.S. forces
on an occasional basis for combined operations against
particularly promising targets, or in conjunction with key
defensive operations. U.S. forces in the Delta for this
effort should draw on the existing Dong Tam and Saigon bases.

h, Providing limited assistance to RVNAF with sophisti-
cated engineer equipment and reconnaissance apparatus where
such would improve their ability to perform the missions
sketched above.

5. Bringing serious pressure to bear on RVN leaders in
Saigon and within IV CTZ to mount active, sustained, offensive
operations consistent with the foregoing missions. Considera-
tion should be given to:

Providing additional RVNAF battalions to IV CTZ on
a temporary basis from TIT CTZ--conceptually, battalions or
regiments from the 5th or 18th ARVN Divisions would be deployed
to IV CTZ, minus dependents, for periods of one month or more

of active operations. 55
40 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In another eppendix, the memorandum enalyzed the effects of this
strategy on those interior provinces outside the "demographic frontier."
It would be desirable to maintain all interior Province capitals, the
appendix concluded, because "the political consequences of withdrawal from
whole Provinces would be to recreate the atmosphere of 1954 or 1965, and
while the situation may be that grim, we should at least strive to make
it appear otherwise."56/

The Province capitals would be garrisoned with ARVN units of the 22nd
and 23rd Divisions and, initially, some American units. These units would
have as their mission the holding of the Province town for a minimum of
four days, giving time for the arrival of a relief strike force.

Having secured the Province capitals, however, this strategy envisaged
evacuating other installations in the interior Provinces,

-«esuch as the frontier series running from Bu Dop to
Dak To and the interior but vulnerable points as Vo Dat
and Vinh Thanh, Although these points are not held by
allied main force units, they do tie down other assets,
such as Special Forces, CIDG, PF, and RF. Furthermore,
their combined existence represents a potential strain for
the limited reaction ability currently available since we
must respond, as we did at Dak To, when the enemy massed
for an attack. If a presence is required in some of these areas,
it should be in the form of a mobile striking unit, and not a
garrison.

Based upon this "analysis" of our current strategy and a strategy of
protecting the demographic frontier, the draft memorandum recommended the
following actions to the President:

1. Approve a NSAM, stating that our political objective
is a peace which will leave the people of South Viet Nam
free to fashion their own political institutions....The NSAM
should state that the primary role of U.S. military forces is
to provide security in the populated areas of South Viet Nem
rather than to destroy the VC/NVA or drive them out of the
country. We should plan on maintaining the posture necessary
to accomplish this objective for a considerable period.

2. Approve the immediate dispatch of an additional
10,500 military personnel to South Viet Nam.

3. Approve an accelerated and expanded program of
increased fire power and mobility for ARVIN and other ele-
ments of the GVN Armed Forces.

h. Send General. Taylor to Saigon to explain the NSAM
+o MACY and the GVN, and to request General Westmoreland to
develop a strategy and force requirements to implement the
military objectives stated in the NSAM.

a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. Dispatch one or two high-level civilians to Saigon
with General Taylor to warn the GVN that it must broaden
their base of political support, end its internal bickering,
purge corrupt officers and officials, and move to develop
efficient administration and effective forces. They should
also begin a discussion of negotiations while informing the
GVN of the increased support to be provided for ARVN.

6. Deliver a Presidential address to the American public,
explaining our new strategy in light of the enemy's new
tactics. 57/

In short, then, this initial reassessment of our strategy in SVN
indicated to the President that no ground strategy and no level of addi-
tional U.S. forces alone could achieve an early end to the war. That
could be done only if the GVN took the steps necessary to provide effec-
tive military and political leadership to its population. In order to
speed up this process, the U.S. should limit its objectives in SVN and
adopt a strategy of population security. This would give the GVN time to
organize and develop democratic institutions, and would give RVNAF time to
grow in effectiveness while our forces provided a protective screen for
the populated areas at minimum cost in resources and casualties.

This paper was discussed within the military community at a meeting
in the Secretary of Defense's office on 1 March. General Wheeler, the ©
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was appalled at the apparent repudi-
ation of American military policy in South Viet Nam contained in the ISA
Draft Memorandum. He detected two "fatal flaws" in the population security
stratesy.-

1. The proposed strategy would mean increased fighting in or close
to population centers and, hence, would result in increased civilian casualties.

2. By adopting a posture of static defense, we would allow the enemy
an increased capability of massing near population centers, especially north
of Saigon.

In addition, General Wheeler was equally appalled at the statement in
the ISA Draft Presidential Memorandum to the effect that "MACV does not
clearly specify how he would use the additional forces he requests, except
to indicate that they would provide him with a theater reserve and an
offensive capability." MACV had indeed clearly and specifically indicated
to CINCPAC on 27 February, concurrent with General Wheeler's original memoran-
dum to the President, the locations and missions of the requested add-on
units. These had been transmitted through the Joint Staff to each of the
Services, who indeed were engaged in studying and staffing these proposals. 58/
Apparently, this information had not specifically been furnished to the

Office of the Secretary of Defense.

he TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The debate within the Defense Establishment continued into the fol-
lowing day. In a memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, dated 2 March,
Assistant Secretary of Defense Warnke gave his answer to General Wheeler's
"two fatal flaws" of the population control strategy.

1. Increasing Fighting in the Cities. General Wheeler

is concerned that the proposed strategy will mean increased
fighting in or close to population centers and, hence, will
result in increased civilian casualties. This argument over-
looks, I believe, the fact that the enemy demonstrated during
the TET offensive his willingness and ability to attack
populated centers regardless of our strategy. He is demon-
strating that capability again right now in the Quang Tri-Hue
area and may soon do so in the Delta. If the enemy continues
to choose to fight in the cities, we will have no choice

but to engage him in those areas at the cost of civilian
casualties. The proposed strategy may actually reduce civilian
casualties if we can succeed in attacking enemy concentrations
before he can attack the cities. Moreover, in attacking the
cities, the enemy will face American as well as ARVN forces
engaged in offensive patrolling operations around the cities.
This should result in fewer casualties than have come from the
liberation of cities in the post-TET period. By freeing

forces now engaged along the DMZ and in lightly populated high-
lands for active offensive operations near population centers,
we should make the enemy effort against cities less effective.

2. Enemy Ability to Mass Near Population Centers. General

Wheeler's concern that under the proposed strategy the enemy
will be more capable of massing near population centers north
of Saigon is difficult to understand. In fact, prior to TET,
because we were operating primarily along the coast, along the
DMZ, and in the highlands, we were permitting the enemy to
mass along the demographic frontier as he did prior to the TET
offensive. In fact, one of the advantages of the new strategy
is that we will be able to keep the enemy off-balance in this
area. General Wheeler may believe we advocate a posture of
static defense. This is not true. In the strategy sketched in
the paper, one of the primary missions of U.S. forces would be
to operate in this area, remain highly mobile and carry out
attacks against suspected enemy base camps. 59/

h3 2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

VOLUME TIT 5
U.S. GROUND STRATEGY AND FORCE DEPLOYMENTS, 1965--1967

TABLE OF CONTENTS and OUTLINE

V. PROGRAM 6
Page

1. Emergency AUSMENtaLION. os vcccsccvccccescescscsceccescceveseen L
2. The Troop Request. .sccccsvevevcenereccvvaccevssvververcesssces LO
By. a (A RSS HER SHEL Es wore erere-siniersiece srenaie:d)wrealecdisiw wee eaiesr e wrerecereee LO
Ws) Drafting & MemOrandwieccsa0 navcces esse susieene qaisecescnorwews 35
5. Recommendation to the Presiden. cz sacs ewe saaes cee sis cid wale wares al
6s Whe Cismate Of OpMLOr. 6 oon cere sae swerecees A OS ee a
W. The President: POUGSiS alex wikis oicivieneas: eielee eee bie\wie eal elielie om eleia la oie ae) fall
Gs Merbrestgent Decides uriviews cess eels sciee vecivwiecices sac vesisiewe a 10
9. The Decision is Announced......e+- ielor awry pa Ee oleh lerede oie staota nie WO
10. "ZI Shall Not Seek, and I Will Not Accept”....... sake cutee e OO
LD. EPlLOguel.. c05 cvccncs cecea es Up cis veiee civeee svcee se ccewe vagcees ¢ GO

POOTNOTES . coc cee cece tr de eae ee eee tense eee re rere essen scenes eesese 94

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

General Wheeler fought back with arguments contained in two docu-
ments. The first was a backchannel message from COMUSMACYV, dated
2 March, which answered specific questions concerning the planned use
of additional forces. These questions had been asked by General Wheeler
in a backchannel message the previous day. The first question concerned
the military "and other" objectives additional forces were designed to
advance. General Westmoreland was ambitious, indeed, and stated that
these objectives were to:

(1) Defeat and evict from SVN the new NVA units now
present in Western Quang Tri and Central Thua Trien provinces,
to include the Ashau Valley and base areas 131 and 11h.

(2) Maintain positive governmental and military control
over Quang Tri and Thua Thien provinces, particularly the
populous areas of the coastal lowlands and the DMZ area. Be
prepared to block or interdict the infiltration/invasion routes
from NVN through Laos.

(3) Destroy VC/NVA main force units and base areas in the
remainder of I Corps and in the northeastern coastal and north-
western Laos border areas of II Corps.

(4) Reduce the "calculated risk" currently entailed in our
economy of force posture in II and ITI Corps by providing the
added flexibility and "punch" of an armored cavalry regiment.

(5) Conduct aggressive and continuing offensive campaigns
throughout the coastal areas of ITI Corps and into traditional
enemy base areas and sanctuaries in ITI Corps along the
Cambodian border; especially in war zones "C" and "D". Restore
the offensive combat and pacification momentum lost in III Corps
as a result of the enemy's TET offensive and the requirement
+o transfer the 101st Airborne Division (-) to I Corps to stem the
NVA incursion into Quang Tri.

(6) Be prepared for contingency operations if required.
The second question asked by General Wheeler was:

Question B: What specific dangers are their dispatch to
SVN designed to avoid, and what specific goals would the
inerement of force aim to achieve -

In the next 6 months?

Over the next year?

dd TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In his answer, General Westmoreland was equally optimistic

...additive forces would serve to forestall the danger
of local defeats due to the tactical degeneration or temporary
disorganization of some ARVN units in the event of another
general enemy offensive coupled with a massive invasion across
the DMZ. The need to be prepared to support or reinforce
ARVN units that are surprised by the nature and intensity of
ve/NVA attacks became manifest during the enemy's TET drive
and must be recognized in US troop requirement and deployment
plans for the foreseeable future. By providing a two division
mobile “swing force" which could be positioned and employed as
required, the need to draw down on forces directly engaged in
territorial security tasks probably would be reduced. ‘Thus
the danger of losing popular confidence in and support for
Gvn/usS capabilities, policies and aspirations as a result of
temporary military or psychological setbacks would also be
diminished.

(2) Provision of the immediately required additional
forces also would make it possible to apply continuous pressure
+o some degree in all corps areas and thus reduce the danger
of allowing the enemy the opportunity to solicit support from
the population and to reorganize, refit and recoup so that he
could soon field rejuvenated units, despite heavy losses suffered
during the TET offensive. This is particularly important in
view of the enemy capability to move additional divisions south
through the panhandle or DMZ without any clear intelligence
indicators of such action. (This matter is of particular concern
to me) these forces will also make it possible to retain that
degree of flexibility and rapid responsiveness necessary to
cope with an apparent new enemy tactic of searching for thin
spots in our force structure or deployment in order to launch
his concentrated mass attacks.

(3) In the next six months the presence of the armored
cavalry regiment in II or JII Corps would reduce the degree of
calculated risk inherent in the economy of force posture in
those areas, provide added territorial security and further the
goal of providing added combat flexibility. Addition of another
Marine regiment and its division headquarters in I Corps would
thicken troop density in critical I CTZ, add to combat flexi-
bility and improve command and eontrol capabilities in that critical

area.

(4) Over the next year the increment of force would make
it possible to:

his TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A. Move progressively from north to south with a continuing
series of hard hitting offensive campaigns to invade base Areas,
interdict and disrupt infiltration routes, and eliminate or
evict VC/NVA forces from SVN.

B. At the same time, the highly mobile exploitation force
(two divisions) would be available to counter enemy aggression
or to exploit opportunities for tactical success anywhere in
SVN without reducing the minimal essential force necessary to
guarantee maintenance of security in those areas where success-
ful military campaigns have already been waged.

C. Addition of the new division in III Corps during this
time frame would re-establish the capability for conducting
constant operations in and around war zones "C" and "D" and make
possible the constant use of a division size force in the
IV CTZ which capability was removed with transfer of the 10lst
Airborne Division (-) to I Corps. In addition, combat operations
conducted by this division would provide added security for
LOC and the vital seat of government and economic center of
Saigon.

D. With the total additive combat forces requested it will
be possible to deal with the invader from the north, and to face
with a greater degree of confidence the potential tank, rocket and
tactical air threat as well as the ever present possibility that
he may reinforce with additional elements of his home army. 60/

The second docwnent available to General Wheeler was an analysis of
the military implications in South Vietnam of the deployment of various
increments of U-S. forces. This analysis was done by the Short Range
Branch, Plans and Policy Directorate, Joint Staff. It was an informal
staff document which had not been addressed by the Joint Chiefs of
Starf or any of the military services separately. 61/ The five
options addressed were those indicated by the Secretary of Defense in
his meeting of 29 February (see pages 7-8). This paper documented the
large enemy buildup in South Vietnam:

1. The enemy, since November, has increased his forces
in South Viet Nam by at least 41 maneuver battalions, some armored
elements, a large number of rockets, and additional artillery.
There are indications he is preparing for the use of limited air
support, including logistical air drops and bombing missions.
The Joint Staff paper took exception to COMUSMACV's stated first
priority of insuring "the security of the GVN in Saigon and in the
provincial capitals."

46 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The basic strategy which must be followed by MACV in any
circumstances is to defeat the current enemy offensive both
in Northern I Corps Tactical Zone where it is the most formidable,
in the Highlands where it is highly dangerous, and throughout
South Vietnam in defense of the government and the cities and
towns..--Allied forces are not conducting offensive operations
of any great magnitude or frequency and therefore they are not
wresting control of the countryside from the enemy....

If the enemy offensive can be broken with sustained heavy
casualties, then, and only then, will the cities be secure and
the countryside reentered. Even with the largest force
contemplated (Option 1) it will not be possible to perform
adequately all of the tasks unless the current enemy offensive
is decisively defeated. This, therefore, is the first and most
important task upon which all else depends....

If the forces now in Vietnam or the forces under any of the
options prove to be inadequate to break the enemy offensive, or if,
conversely, the enemy sustained offensive breaks the Vietnamese
armed forces (even short of destroying the GVN), then our objectives
in South Vietnam and the tasks associated with them will be un-
obtainable. Specifically, we would be unable to regain the
initiative, that is, we would not be able to conduct offensive
operations at the scope and pace required either to prevent further
enemy buildup or to reenter the countryside. This would force US
and allied forces into a defensive posture around the major
population centers....

Therefore, immediate action to break the enemy's current
offensive is not only the first but the decisive requirement.

In specifically addressing each of the options, the Joint Staff reach-
ed the following conclusions;

Liz TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

OPTIONS
ip

Ada approximately 196,000
+o the present MACV Pro-
gram 5 authorized level
(525,000) plus 6 addi-
tional bus already de-
ployed (10,500). Relax-
ation of restrictions on
operations in Cambodia/
Laos/NVN.

TOTAL - 133 maneuver bns

I-A

Same additive forces as
Option I.

No relaxation of restric-
tions on operations.

II

No change to present

MACV Program 5 author-
ized level (525,000)

plus 6 additional bus
already deployed (10,500).
TOTAL - 112 maneuver bns

na

Add 50,000 US troops to the
approximately 535,000 in
Option Il.

TOTAL - 118 maneuver bns

IV

Add 100,000 to the ap-
proximately 535,000 in
Option Il.

TOTAL - 124 maneuver bns

kg

CONCLUSIONS
(To Defeat the VC/NVA in SVN)

This Option would:

a. Assuming no additional deployments
break enemy offensive and permit
early and sustained operations
against the enemy.

b. Permit simultaneous operations
against enemy main force, base
areas, and border sanctuaries.

c. Permit resumption of program to
develop effectiveness of RVNAF.

d. Permit greater employment of air as-
sets in conducting an expanded air
campaign against NVN, Laos, Cambodia.

Essentially the same as Option I except:

a. The rate of conducting operations
would be reduced by higher military risk.

b. The enemy would enjoy sanctuary
across the Cambodian/Laotian/NVN borders.

c. The rebuilding of the RVNAF would be
at a slower pace.

US objectives in SVN cannot be achieved
as allied forces must remain in defensive
posture.

At present levels, allied forces can
expect increasingly grave threats to
their security with high casualty rates.

This option could probably secure the
cities but would be insufficient to
counter the current enemy offensive or
to restore security in the countryside.

The results of this Option are essentially

the same as Option I, except:

a. The rate of progress would be slower.

b. The enemy would retain the initiative
in the border areas.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The paper, then, concluded that the larger forces of Option I and
TA would “greatly reduce risks to Free World forces in SVN and will ac-
complish U.S. ebjectives more rapidly than the forces of the other
options," and recommended that immediate action be taken to provide the

forces of Option I.

Read another way, however, the Joint Staff analysis could be taken
to indicate that the United States could successfully pursue a strategy
of “population security" by adopting Option ITI, adding 50,000 troops
to the current level in SVN,

At the 2 March meeting of the senior members of the Secretary of
Defense's Working Group conducting the reassessment, no consensus was
reached on & new U.S. strategy. Apparently, Mr. Warnke and Mr. Goulding
were given the task of drafting a new memorandum for the President which
would be less controversial than the initial ISA document.

The draft memorandum for the President, dated 3 March 1968, which
was prepared by these two individuals, differed markedly in tone from the
initial memorandum presented to the Clifford Group on 2 March. Gone was
any discussion of grand strategy. This memorandum recommended simply:

1. Meeting General Westmoreland's request by deploying as
close to May 1 as practical 20,000 additional troops (approximately
1/2 of which would be combat).

2. Approval of a Reserve call-up and an increased end
strength adequate to meet the balance of the request and to
restore a strategic reserve in the United States, adequate for
possible contingencies.

3. Reservation of the decision to deploy the balance of
General Westmoreland's new request. While we would be in a
position to make these additional deployments, the future
decision to do so would be contingent upon:

a. Continuous reexamination of the desirability of
further deployments on a week-by-week basis as the situation
develops;

b. Improved political performance by the GVN and
inereased contribution in effective military action by the

ARVN;

‘ c. The results of a study in depth, to be initiated in-
mediately, of a possible new strategic guidance for the conduct
of US military operations in South Vietnam.

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Two appendices to this paper addressed the basis for these recom-
mendations and the context in which additional troop commitments to Vietnam
should be examined.

In explaining the basis for the recommendation to deploy 20,000
troops, the memorandum indicated that the first increment of forces re-
quested by General Westmoreland should be provided as an emergency
measure to meet the prospect of continued abnormal levels of enemy
activity. "This would, by May 1st, furnish him with an additional 20,000
troops, 10,500 of whom would be for combat purposes. Because of the
possibility that the North Vietnamese leaders may decide to launch a
larger scale invasion by main force units, we should put ourselves ina
position to provide the other 1855 000 ground, sea, and air forces in-
volved in General Westmoreland's request." 63/ |

Additional forces, however, should not be dispatched until the
situation in Vietnam developed.

A continuing and intensive review should focus not only on
future enemy activity but also on the demonstrated ability of the
GVN and the ARVN to pull themselves together, to get back into
business, and to demonstrate significant improvements both in
their ability to win popular support and their willingness to
fight aggressively for their own security. Unless these qualities
are evidenced, there can be no real hope for the accomplishment
of our political aims.

Finally, we believe that the striking change in the enemy's
tactics, the willingness to commit at least two additional divisions
to the fighting in the South over the past few weeks, the obvious
and not wholly anticipated strength of the Viet Cong infrastructure,
there can be no prospect of a quick military solution to the
aggression in South Vietnam. Under these circumstances, we should
give intensive study to the development of a new strategic guidance
+o General Westmoreland. This guidance should make clear the
fact that he cannot be expected either to destroy the enemy forces
or to rout them completely from South Vietnam. The kind of
American commitment that would be required to achieve these
military objectives cannot even be estimated. There is no reason
to believe that it could be done by an additional 200,000 American
troops or double or triple that gquantity....

The exact nature of the strategic guidance which should be
adopted cannot now be predicted. It should be the subject of a
detailed inter-agency study over the next several weeks. During
the progress of the study, discussions of the appropriate strategic
guidance and its nature and implications for the extent of our
military commitment in South Vietnam should be undertaken with cee
General Westmoreland and Ambassador Bunker. 6h/

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In placing these additional troop commitments in a larger context,
an edditional appendix concluded:

No matter what the result in South Vietnam itself, we will
have failed in our purposes if:

a. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where it is
a major conflict leading to direct military confrontation
with the USSR and/or China;

b. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where we
are so committed in resources that our other world-wide
commitments -- especially NATO -- are no longer credible;

ec. The attitudes of the American people towards "more
Vietnams"” are such that our other commitments are brought
into question as a matter of US will;

d. Other countries no longer wish the US commitment
for fear of the consequences to themselves as a battlefield
between the East and the West.

Under these circumstances, we recommend that under the leader-
ship of the State Department, with the assistance of the Office of
the Secretary of Defense, the JCS, and the Treasury, a review of
our Vietnamese policy in the context of our global politico-military
strategy be undertaken with a due date of May 15. 65/

Thus, the net result of this period of frantic preperation, consul-
tation, writing, and reassessing was similar to all previous requests
for reinforcement in Vietnam. The litany was familiar: "We will furnish
what we can presently furnish without disrupting the normal political and
economic life of the nation, while we study the situation as it develops."
No startling reassessment of strategy was indicated, although for the
first time it was recognized that such a reassessment was needed, that a
limit to U.S. involvement in SVN had to be determined, and that any
number of U.S. troops could not achieve our objectives without-significant
improvement in the ability of the GVN to win popular support and to
fight aggressively for their own security.

5. Recommendation to the President

This draft memorandum was discussed again within the Defense
Department on 3 March, and several changes were made. The 4 March draft
memorandum for the President was apparently approved by the Secretary
of Defense and forwarded to the President. The paper which was forwarded
+o the President bore a great resemblance to the 3 March draft, although
the Systems Analysis influence on the 4 March paper was evidenced by its
greater detail, especially concerning actions to be required of the GVN.

gill TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The memorandum recapitulated General Westmoreland's request for

personnel and indicated that General Wheeler believed that we should
meet this request, and should act to increase and improve our strategic
reserve in the United States. To achieve both these goals, the paper
stated, staff examination indicated that the following actions would be

required:

a. A call-up of reserve units and individuals totaling
approximately 262,000 (194,000 in units, 68,000 as individuals).

bd. Increased draft calls.

ec. Extension of terms of service. These actions would preduce
a total increase in end strength in the Armed Forces of approxi-
mately 511,000 by June 30, 1969. (The staff examination referred
to above included spaces to add 31,500 troops in South Korea and
a US naval proposal to add two cruisers and fifteen destroyers to
the naval forces in Southeast Asia. If these proposals are
disapproved in their entirety, the figures above will be decreased
to approximately 242,000 and 454,000 respectively.

The Secretary of Defense then recommended:

1. An immediate decision to deploy to Vietnam an estimated
total of 22,000 additional personnel (approximately 60% of which
would be combat). An immediate decision to deploy the three
tactical fighter squadrons deferred from Program 5 (about 1,000
men). This would be over and above the four battalions (about 3700
men) already planned for deployment in April which in themselves
would bring us slightly above the 525,000 authorized level....

2. Wither through Ambassador Bunker or through an early
visit by Secretary Clifford, a highly forceful approach to the GVN
(Thieu and Ky) to get certain key commitments for improvement,
tied to our own increased effort and to increased US support for
the ARVN....

3. Early approval of a Reserve call-up and an increased end
strength adequate to meet the balence of the Westmoreland request
and to restore a strategic reserve in the United States, adequate
for possible contingencies world-wide....

lh. Reservation of the decision to meet the Westmoreland request
in full. While we would be putting ourselves in a position to make
these additionel deployments, the future decision to do so would
be contingent upon:

52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a. Reexamination on a week-by-week basis of the desir-
ability of further deployments as the situation develops;

b. Improved political performance by the GVN and
increased contribution in effective military action by the
ARVN;

ec. The results of a study in depth, to be initiated
immediately, of possible new political and strategic guidance
for the conduct of US operations in South Vietnam, and of our
Vietnamese policy in the context of our world-wide politico-
military strategy...

5. No new peace initiative on Vietnam. Re-statement of our terms
for peace and certain limited diplomatic actions to dramatize Laos
and to focus attention on the total threat to Southeast Asia....

6. A general decision on bombing policy, not excluding future
change, but adequate to form a basis for discussion with the Congress
on this key aspect. Here your advisers are divided:

@. General Wheeler and others would advocate a substantial -
extension of targets and authority in and near Hanoi and Haiphong,
mining of Haiphong, and naval gunfire up to a Chinese Buffer
Zone;

b. Others would advocate a seasonal step-up through the
spring, but without these added elements. 66/

In proposing this course of action, the Secretary of Defense indicated
that he recognized that there were many negative factors and certain
difficulties. Nevertheless, he indicated the belief that this course of
action, at least in its essential outline, was urgently required to meet
the immediate situation in Vietnam, as well as wider possible contingencies
there and elsewhere.

Eight tabs to the draft memorandum elaborated upon the reasoning
which led to the recommendations contained therein. TAB A reviewed the
justification for immediately sending additional forces to Vietnam.
‘The situation in SVN was analyzed as follows:

Hanoi has made a basic change in its strategy and scale of
operations. Perhaps because they thought they were losing as the
war and pacification were going, Hanoi is pressing hard for

i decisive results over the next few months. They are committing
a high proportion of their assets, although it appears likely that
they would retain poth the capability and will to keep up the
pressure next year if this effort does not succeed. There is hope
that, if this year's effort could be thwarted, Hanoi and Viet Cong
morale would be sufficiently affeoted to open up possibilities of
peace, ‘but this cannot be assessed as likely.

53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Within South Vietnam, there are key variables that could
move the situation sharply, one way or the other, in the
coming months. Specifically:

a. The degree to which Hanoi and the VC are
able to keep pressing, and how effectively they are
countered in the military sphere.

b. The degree to which the VC are able to extend
their control in the countryside and recoup their losses --
or whether conversely the South Vietnamese can take the
initiative and either neutralize such recoupment cr set in
motion a new favorable trend.

ec. The degree to which the GVN improves its per-
formance and galvanizes potentially greater popular support
than it can now have.

Thus, there was created an urgent need, both practical and psycho-
logical, to send such forces as could be effective within the next four
or five months.

The following additional forces of about 22,000 men could
be deployed by June 15 in accordance with the schedule set
forth below:

Six Tactical Pighter Squadrons - 3,000 men
: 2 Squadrons by - 1 April
3 Squadrons by - 1 May
1 Squadron by - 1 June

lth Marine Expeditionary Force (minus) - 18,100 men
by - 15 June

aval Mobile Construction Battalion - 700 men
by - 1 May

In addition, it was reiterated that an urgent effort was required to
improve and modernize the equipment of the SVN Armed Forces.

Tab B elaborated on what should be done to increase the effectiveness
of Vietnamese efforts in conjunction with the U.S. troop increase. Two
possible GVN reactions were foreseen to the ceployment of additionel U.S.
forces. The reaffirmation of the U.S, commitment would be welcomed, would
add to the feeling of confidence, and might stiffen the GVN's will at a
time "when the tasks it faces are rather monumental.” On the other hand,
there was always the danger that the Vietnamese would be tempted to relax
behind the refuge of American power, and the sense of anxiety and urgency
which had resulted from the TET offensive could suffer. The memorandum
indicated, however, that the GVN had the capacity to take those civil and

military actions which would materially improve the political and security

5h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

climate of South Vietnam, as well as the image of the GVN in the United
States. This involved, the memorandum indicated, a readiness for the

U.S. to make specific demands upon the GVN in order to get it to take a

wide range of decisions and actions. Among those things considered essential
and feasible, the following actions were listed:

1. Mobilization - The Vietnamese Armed Forces should be
increased to the maximum. As a first step, present plans to
increase Vietnamese forces by 65,000 men should be amended to
provide for an additional 30,000 men under arms by the end of
1968. The draft of 18 and 19 year olds should proceed as
presently scheduled. This should be consistent with the ability
to train and supply the forces, but avoid undercutting the
need for key civilians in other governmental functions by
diversion of skilled personnel.

2. The Thieu-Ky Relationship and Unity of Leadership -
The failure of Thieu and Ky to cooperate fully and apply
their individual talents to the needs of the situation has
continued to plague the effective management of the Vietnamese
effort. In turn this has had ramifications down the line in
poth the military and civilian chain of command. It has also
complicated the chances of rallying the various elements in
the society, as the rivalry translates itself into interference
with attempts at forming a national anti-communist front.

Thieu and Ky and their followers, as well as other
elements in the society not associated directly with them,
must be brought to realize that we are no longer prepared to
put up with anything but the maximum effort on their part.

A clear and precise role for Ky should be defined. Thieu

and Ky must bring their followers into line. The government
should be prepared to engage the services of people with
administrative and executive talent who are now not participating
in the common task. Our expectations in this regard have to

be made crystal clear to each and every Vietnamese leader in

and out of Government. Without this fundamental change in

the attitude and dedication of the leadership, the necessary
reforms and the necessary inspiration of the Vietnamese people
Will not be forthcoming quickly or sufficiently.

3. Getting the Govermnent Back into the Countryside -
We must win the race to the countryside, go on the offensive,
re-establish security in the rural areas, and restore the
government's presence in the villages. The ARVN and other
security forces must deploy aggressively, the RD cadre must
return to-their tasks, and governmental services reach out

from the province capitals.

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In the final analysis rural security, the sine qua non
of popular identification with the GVN, must be provided by
the Vietnamese themselves. The two keys here are (1) the
calibre and role of the 4h province chiefs (and their sup-
porting staffs) and (2) a properly offensive sense of mission
on the part of ARVN units - and their commanders - assigned
to rural security support missions. In every area (village,
district, province, DTZ and corps) the RVNAF unit commanders
responsible for security in that area must be graded (i.e.
promoted, commended or sacked) primarily on their ability
to find, fix and eradicate the VC Force indigenous to that
area. They must also be graded (with commensurate effect
on their careers) with respect to the behavior of their
troops vis-a-vis the populace in that area.

4, Drive on the Viet Cong Infrastructure - In our con-
cern over the behavior of our allies, we must not neglect our
enemies and the present opportunity to compound and exacerbate
communist problems. Operation Phoenix which is targetted
against the Viet Cong must be pursued more vigorously in closer
diaison with the US. Vietnamese armed forces should be devoted
to anti-infrastructure activities on a priority basis. The
Tet offensive surfaced a good deal of the infrastructure and
the opportunity to damage it has never been better. This
would force the VC on the defensive and head off the estab-
lishment of local VC administrative organizations and VC
attempts to set up provisional governmental committees.

5. US-ARVN Command Relationships - While we accept the

Mission's reluctance to create a joint command, we believe
that alternative arrangements which give the US a greater
role in ARVN employment are necessary. This can be done at
the Corps level and below. It would involve US participation
in the planning and control of ARVN operations. It might
even call for the prior approval by US advisors of ARVN
operational plans -- this now exists in certain cases
depending upon individual advisor relationships. We

should request MACV to study the matter and come up with

a specific plan to meet the requirement.

6. Government Reform and Anti-Corruption Campaign -

The beginning steps at administrative reform which President
Thieu has innounced must be accelerated. This should be
directly associated with a new deal on corruption, which must
be dealt with by relief of a specified list of corrupt offi-
cials now and the promise of severe action in the future.

A capable Inspectorate should be established. Incompetent
ARVN officers must be removed, beginning with a specific

list that should be made available by MACV. Incompetent
province chiefs who have plagued our efforts in the past
must be removed. The removal of incompetent commanders

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

«
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and officials is now more feasible in the light of per=
formance during the Tet offensive. We should not hesitate
to make our desires known and back them up by refusing to
provide support for the incompetent. For key commanders,
we should require the right of prior approval on a secret
and discreet basis. The precise tools of leverage to be
applied in this regard should be left to the US Mission,
but could include withholding advice and assistance at
jJocal levels in extreme cases.

7. The Prime Minister - We should solicit Ambassador
Bunker's views on the desirability of replacing the Prime
Minister. If he is to be replaced we should agree on his
successor beforehand, in consultation with Thieu and Ky.

8. The United Front - A nationalist spirit of coopera-
tion and unity came to the fore in the immediate wake of
the Tet offensive. It is being manifested incompletely in
attempts to organize groups in support of the national task.
Despite the personal misgivings of old antagonists there has
been some success. This is now threatened by personal rival-
ries, and most significantly by differences between Thieu and
Ky. We need to find a formula for joint efforts. Ambassador
Bunker suggests that the optimum result would be a "super front"
of the anti-communist groups. Although not directly tied to
the government, such a front could serve to rally the people
proadly and emotionally against the Viet Cong. To succeed it
must. be backed by the leadership of the government - both
Thieu and Ky - but not appear to compete with the National
Assembly. It should encompass all elements in the society,
but not be the vehicle for any one power group.

9. Economic Measures - There will be increased inflation
in Vietnam this year, and additional US troops will make it
more severe. Steps need to be taken now to counter the
threat of inflation, if we are not to be faced with a severe
erisis next fall and winter. The GVN needs to move on tax
increases, and U.S, and GVN expenditures for non-essential
programs in Vietnam should be restrained. On the other hand,
wage increases for civil and military personnel in the GVN
are needed if inflation is not to weaken their will and support.

Additionally, we must demand of the GVN some measure of
action on their part to compensate for the effect of addi-
tional US troops on the US balance of payments. This can
be done by having the GVN provide to the US at no cost the
additional piaster costs incurred by our troop increase. We
should also insist that GVN reserves be reduced to $250 mil-
lion from the present maximum reserve level of $300 million
and that a significant portion of the reserve be invested in
medium and long term US securities. The details of these

57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

economic measures cannot be discussed in this paper, but

a comprehensive economic package should be prepared and
presented to the GVN - to include what the US is prepared

to do in the way of increased financing of commercial imports.

10. Resource Allocation - Non-essential use of resources
should be eliminated. Present government programs to
eliminate new luxury construction. must be tightened and con-
tinued. Bars and night clubs should remain closed. Austerity
should be fostered. 68/

The Appendix recommended that a high-level mission, probably headed
by the Secretary of Defense, should go to Saigon to emphasize to the GVN
that we consider improved GVN performance essential; that any further U.S.
support must be matched by GVN actions; and that the above recommendations
would be used as a checklist for judging Vietnamese performance. In addi-
tion, this Appendix emphasized that we should do what was necessary to
improve the capability of RVNAF. Although no details were given, the state-
ment was made that: "On the basis of current planning estimates, this
would involve additional expenditure of about $475 million over a period
of 18 months."

Tab C of the Memorandum for the President consisted of a brief justif-
ication for increasing the strategic reserve. The basic argument was that
we would then be prepared to provide the additional ground, sea, and air
forces involved in General Westmoreland's request if the military situation
required. In addition, the paper indicated:

If these additional forces are not deployed to Vietnam,
our action in thus reconstituting the strategic reserve would
nevertheless be fully warranted. Our strategic reserve has
been appreciably depleted because of Vietnam demands. At
present, the active division forces in the Continental United
States, Hawaii and Okinawa, and including the Marine units
in the Caribbean and Mediterranean, consist of 4-2/3 Army
divisions and 1-1/3 Marine divisions. This compares with
the 9 Army divisions and 3 Marine divisions in our strategic
reserve on 30 June 1965. A call-up of 245,000, with no
deployments to South Vietnam in excess of the 20-30,000
now recommended, would yield a strategic reserve of 7 Army
divisions and 2 Marine divisions. The unsettled situations
in many parts of the world make this build-up a prudent
action entirely apart from possible Vietnam contingencies. 69/

Relegated to Tab D of the Memorandum for the President was what had
begun as the major task of the Working Group--the necessity for in-depth
study of Vietnam policy and strategic guidance.

General Westmoreland's request, this Appendix pointed out, does not
purport to provide any really Satisfactory answer to the problem in Vietnam.

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

There can be no assurance that this very substantial
additional deployment would leave us a year from today in
any more favorable military position. All that can be said
is that the additional troops would enable us to kill more
of the enemy and would provide more security if the enemy does
not offset them by lesser reinforcements of his own. There
is no indication that they would bring about a quick solution
in Vietnam and, in the absence of better performance by the
GVN and the ARVN, the increased destruction and increased
Americanization of the war could, in fact, be counter-
productive. 70/

There were many other reasons for conducting a study of our Vietnamese
policy in the context of the U.S. worldwide political/military strategy.
No matter what the result in Vietnam itself, we will have failed in our
purpose, the memorandum stated, if:

a. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where it is
a major conflict leading to direct military confrontation
with the USSR and/or China;

b. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where we
are so committed in resources that our other world-wide
commitments -~ especially NATO -- are no longer credible;

ec. The attitudes of the American people towards "more
Vietnams" are such that our other commitments are brought
into question as a matter of US will;

d. Other countries no longer wish the US commitment for
fear of the consequences to themselves as a battlefield between
the Hast and the West. 71/

In addition, any intensive review should focus on the ability of the
GVN and the ARVN to demonstrate significant improvement, both in their
ability to win popular support and their willingness to fight aggressively
for their own security.

Finally, the memorandum stated:

..-the striking change in the enemy's tactics, his
willingness to commit at least two additional divisions
to the fighting in the South over the pist few weeks
and the obvious and not wholly anticipated strength of
the Viet Cong infrastructure, shows that there can be
no prospect of a quick military solution to the aggression
in South Vietnam. Under these circumstances, we should give
antensive study to the development of new strategic guidance
+o General Westmoreland. This study may show that he should
not be expected either to destroy the enemy forces or to
rout them completely from South Vietnam. The kind of American
commitment that might be required to achieve these military

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

objectives cannot even be estimated. There is no reason
to believe that it could be done by an additional 200,000
American troops or double or triple that quantity....

The exact nature of the strategic guidance which should
be adopted cannot now be predicted. It should be the subject
of a detailed interagency study over the next several weeks.
During the progress of the study, discussions of the appro-
priate strategic guidance and its nature and implications
for the extent of our military commitment in South Vietnam
should be undertaken with both General Westmoreland and
Ambassador Bunker. 72/

Thus, the "A to Z reassessment" of U.S. strategy requested by the
President was relegated by the Working Group to a future date.

Tab E remained intact from the original 29 February draft memorandum.
Prepared by the State Department, it discussed negotiating options and
possible diplomatic actions in connection with a buildup of U.S. forces.
Concerning our negotiating posture, three broad options were listed:

1. Stand pat on the San Antonio formula and on our basic
position toward the terms of a negotiated settlement -- the

Geneva Accords plus free choice in the South, rejecting a

coalition or any special position for the NIF.

2. Take some new initiative, either privately or publicly,
that might involve a change in our position on the San Antonio
formula, and/or a change in our position on the elements of a
settlement. -

3. No change in our position for the present, but pitching
our course of action toward a strong move for negotiations when
and if we have countered Hanoi's offensive -- i.e., in a matter
of four months or so perhaps. 73/

The crucial question, the paper indicated, was really to examine
what we could conceivably do by way of a new initiative under Option 2.
After examining the situation, however, the conclusion was reached that:

..-any change in our position on the terms of a peaceful
settlement would be extremely unwise at the present time. We
may well wish to work on opening up channels to the NLF, but
this must be done in the utmost secrecy and in full consulta-
tion with the GVN. We do not know what the possibilities
may be in this direction, but any public stress on this avenue
would feed the fires of a VC propaganda line that has already
had significant disturbing effect in South Vietnam.

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As to our conditions for stopping the bombing and
entering into talks, we continue to believe that the San
Antonio formula is "rock bottom." The South Vietnamese
are in fact talking about much stiffer conditions, such
as stopping the infiltration entirely. Any move by us to
modify the San Antonio formula downward would be extremely
disturbing in South Vietnam, and would have no significant
offsetting gains in US public opinion or in key third countries....

This being said, we believe that it would strengthen our
over-all posture, and involve no significant risks in Vietnam,
if we were to reiterate our basic position on our terms of
settlement in South Vietnam. A systematic restatement of our
position on the Geneva Accords and free choice in the South
could be a vital part of selling our whole course of action
to the public, to Congress, and the world. Although we have
stated all the elements at different times, we have not pulled
them together for a long time and we could get a considerable
impression of freshness, even novelty, and certainly reasonable-
ness by identifying more precisely the elements of the Geneva
Accords; our position on free choice, and perhaps adding
something on external guarantees, which have always been a
generalized part of our position and that of the South Viet-
namese. 7

Further diplomatic actions, the Appendix indicated, would be designed
to dramatize the Communist threats to Laos, Thailand, and Cambodia. Among
the actions suggested were the following:

First, that the restatement of our position on South Viet-
nam include substantial emphasis on restoration of the Laos
Accords of 1962 and on the preservation of the neutrality and
territorial integrity of Cambodia under the 1954 Accords.

Indeed, we could go still further and take the occasion
to talk in terms of an over-all settlement for Southeast Asia
that would specifically provide that each nation was free to
assume whatever neutral or other international posture it
wished to take. We could explicitly state that we were pre-
pared to accept a Southeast Asia that was "neutral" in the
sense of not adhering to any power bloc or forming a part
of any alliance directed at others.

We could say a favorable word about regional arrange-
ments in Southeast Asia consistent with the concept, and
could indicate our willingness to join with other outside
nations to consider what kind of general assurances of sup-
port could be given to such a Southeast Asia....

Second, there are strong diplomatic steps that could be

61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

taken to dramatize the situation in Iaos. We could encourage
Souvanna to take the case to the UN where Lacs and Souvanna

have strong appeal. Concurrently, but we believe less effec-
tive in practice, Souvanna could press the British and Soviets

to take action or even to reconvene the Geneva Conference of 1962.

Third, we could attempt similar action for Cambodia. This
might be through the Australians, to get Sihanouk to take his
ease also to the UN. Even if he made some accusations against
us in the process, he would be likely at the present time to
highlight his internal Chinese-backed threat, and the net result
eould be useful.

A further possibility would be to seek to enlist India more
deeply in the Cambodian situation. This is worth trying, but
the Indians are a weak reed for action or for effective diplo-
matic dramatization.

Fourth, we could consider getting the Thai to dramatize
their situation more than they have done. This takes careful
thought, since they do not wish to alarm their own people. 75/

Other possibilities discussed were the enlisting and engaging of other
Asian nations in the search for peace in Vietnam and the Soviet Union in an
effort to find peace in Southeast Asia.

In Tab F appeared a discussion of military action against North Viet-
nam. This tab contained two contrary views concerning the bombing campaign
against NVN, and is discussed in detail in another Task Force paper. This
is the first place that any written discussion of the bombing campaign ;
against the North appears in any of the papers of the Working Group. it is
interesting to note, in the light of subsequent developments, that neither
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff nor the Secretary of Defense made
mention of @ partial or complete bombing suspension of the North at this
time. They differed only on the extent to which the bombing campaign
against North Viet Nam should be intensified. 76/

Tabs G and H, the final Tabs, considered the public affairs problems
in dealing with increased U.S. troop commitments to SVN and to the calling
up of reserve forces. In dealing with public opinion and with Congress,
these Appendices concluded that from a public affairs viewpoint:

Beyond the basic points of establishing that the war is in
the national interest, that there is a plan to end it satis-
factorily and that we can identify the resources needed to
carry out that plan, we must prove:

1. That General Westmoreland needs the additional troops
being sent him.

62 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. That he does not need further additional troops at
this time.

3. That the Strategic Reserve does need reconstitution
at this time.

h. That the possible need of General Westmoreland for
possible future reinforcement is sufficiently important
to merit the callup.

5. That there is not a bottomless pit.

6. That the nation still has the resources for the ghetto
fight. 77/

Thus, the memorandum forwarded to the President by the Secretary of
Defense in response to the Presidential request for an "A to Z% reassessment"
of our Vietnam policy again represented a compromise. In this case, it
was @ compromise brought about by differences between the Assistant Secre-
tary of Defense for International Security Affairs and his staff, and the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and his officers. Initially, ISA had
prepared a draft Presidential memorandum which had indeed reassessed U.S.
strategy in SVN, found it faulty, and recommended a new strategy of protecting
the "demographic frontier" with basically the U.S. forces presently in-
country. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff found "fatal flaws " in
this strategy, could not accept the implied criticism of past strategy in
the ISA proposal, did not think that the Defense Department civilians should
be involved in issuing specific guidance to the military field commander,
and supported this field commander in his request for the forces required
to allow him to “regain the initiative.” The compromise reached, of course,
was that a decision on new strategic guidance should be deferred pending a
complete political/military reassessment of the U.S, strategy and objectives >
in Vietnam in the context of our worldwide commitments.

The recommendation for additional forces was also a compromise and
was based, as had past decisions of this nature, on what could be done by
the forces in-being without disrupting the nation. However, there were addi-
tional reasons adduced for not meeting all of COMUSMACV's requirements for
forces. The situation in SVN was not clear. The ability of the Government
and of the Army of South Vietnam to survive and to improve were in serious
question. The ability of the U.S, to attain its objectives in SVN by mili-
tary force of whatever size was not clear. Weighing heavily upon the minds
of the senior officials who prepared and approved the 4 March memorandum to
the President was, indeed, what difference in the war, what progress toward
wictory such 2 puildup as requested by MACV would make. These leaders were,
finally, prepared to go a long way down the road in meeting COMUSMACV's
request. They recommended to the President that the first increment of
this request be met. They also recommended a partial mobilization so as
to be prepared to meet additional requirements if and when it was demon-
strated that these forces were necessary and would make a strategic difference.

63 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

V. PROGRAM 6

1, Emergency Augmentation

Thus, the year ended with the combat elements of Program 5 either
closing in Vietnam or on their way to Vietnam on an accelerated schedule.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff, however, could only promise that, even with
these deployments, the rate of progress in Vietnam would continue to be
slow in light of the continuing restrictions imposed on the conduct of
military operations. c

In his year-end assessment of the military situation, however,
COMUSMACV had a somewhat more optimistic outlook. He indicated that
the Program 5 deployments had "provided us with an increased force
structure and logistics base for offensive operations". The past year,
he indicated, had been marked by steady free world progress, a notice-
able deterioration of the enemy's combat effectiveness, and his loss of
control over large areas and population.

"During 1967, the enemy lost control of large sectors of
the population. He faces significant problems in the areas
of indigenous recruiting, morale, health and resources control.
Voids in VC ranks are being filled by regular NVA. Sea infiltra-
tion through the Market Time area has diminished to near-insignifica-
tion proportions. Interdiction of the enemy's logistics train
in Laos and NVN by our indispensable sir efforts has imposed
significant difficulties on him. In many areas the enemy has
been driven away from the population centers; in others he has
been compelled to disperse and evade contact, thus nullifying
much of his potential. The year ended with the enemy increasingly
resorting to desperation tactics in attempting to achieve military/
psychological victory; and he has experienced only failure in
these attempts. Enemy bases, with sparse exception, are no
longer safe havens and he has necessarily become increasingly
reliant on Cambodian and Laotian sanctuaries..."

"The friendly picture gives rise to optimism for increased
successes in 1968, In 1967, our logistics base and force
structure permitted us to assume a fully offensive posture...
A greatly improved intelligence system frequently enabled us
to concentrate our superior military assets in preempting enemy
military initiatives leading us to decisive accomplishments in
conventional engagements. Materiel and tactical innovations
have been further developed and employed: Long range recon-
naissance patrols, aerial reconnaissance sensors, new 0-2A
observation aircraft, Rome plows, 47 (Spooky) gunships, air-
mobile operations and the Mobile Riverine Force (MRF), to name

z TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

More importantly, however, these officials finally came to the realization
that no military strategy could be successful unless a South Vietnamese
political and military entity was capable of winning the support of its
people. Thus, for the first time, U.S. efforts were to be made contingent
upon specific reform measures undertaken by the GVN, and U.S. leverage was
to be used to elicit these reforms. South Vietnam was to be put on notice
that the limit of U.S. patience and commitment had been approached.

Concerning negotiations and the bombing of the North, the Memorandum
for the President was conventional. No changes in our negotiating position
were recommended and no really new diplomatic initiatives were suggested.
Concerning the bombing of the North, the only issue indicated concerned
the degree of intensification. There was no mention made of a partial reduc-
tion or cessation.

Thus, faced with a fork in the road of our Vietnam policy, the Working
Group failed to seize the opportunity to change directions. Indeed, they
seemed to recommend that we continue rather haltingly down the same road,
meanwhile consulting the map more frequently and in greater detail to insure
that we were still on the right road.

6. The Climate of Opinion

This memorandum was presented to the President on Monday evening,
hk March, and at his request, the recommendations were passed to General
Westmoreland for his comments. These comments were received by the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and passed to the Secretary of Defense on
8 March 1968. General Westmoreland welcomed the additional airpower which
"would greatly enhance the tactical air support available to ground units."
The chairman indicated, however, that there had been no change in General
Westmoreland's requirements as originally proposed and, indeed, additional
eombat service-support forces had been requested.

General Westmoreland states that although immediate
authorization for deployment of 22,000 additional personnel
would provide much needed combat and combat support forces,
the combat service support forces now in Vietnam are insuffi-
cient to support our present force structure. This is especi-
ally critical in view of the recent deployment of the 3rd
Brigade of the 82d Airborne Division and RLT 27 to the I Corps
tactical zone without the appropriate slice of combat support.
He emphasizes the absolute reduirement to provide the support
forces identified with the increased deployments prior to or
at the same time the tactical forces are deployed. In this
regard, General Westmoreland has this date forwarded his
specific strength recommendations for the immediate essential
combat service support forces to provide adequate support for
combat units in I CTZ, including the 3rd Brigade of the 82d
Airborne Division, RLT 27 and Army units which have been

redeployed to Northern I Corps tactical zone. This request

64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

has not yet been validated by CINCPAC, but is currently under
consideration here by the Joint Staff in anticipation of early
action by Admiral Sharp's headquarters.

Finally, General Westmoreland recognizes that the forces
which were contained in the Committee's recommendations were
apparently based upon the capabilities of the Services to
produce troops for deployment. He states that there has been
no change in his appraisal of the situation since my visit to
Vietnam and thus there has been no change in his reauirements
as originally proposed. 78/

From the 4th of March until the final Presidential decision was announced
to the country, the written record becomes sparse. The debate within the
Administration was argued and carried forward on a personal basis by the
officials involved, primarily, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary
of State.

The decision, however, had been placed squarely on the shoulders of
the President. The recommendations of the 4 March memorandum had left him
a profound political/military dilemma. The memorandum had recommended "a
little bit more of the same" to stabilize the military situation, plus a
level of mobilization in order to be prepared to meet any further deteriori-
ation in the ground situation. Any new strategic guidance, any new direction
in policy, however, were to be left to a subsequent study.

But many political events in the first few weeks of March 1968 gave
strong indications that the country was becoming increasingly divided over
and disenchanted with the current Vietnam strategy, and would no longer
settle for "more of the same" with no indication of an eventual end to the
conflict. That the President was aware of these external political pres-
sures and that they influenced his decision is evident.

Focus to this political debate and sense of dissatisfaction was given
by a startlingly accurate account, published in The New York Times on
10 March, of General Westmoreland's request and of the strategic reassess-
ment which was being conducted within the executive branch of the government.
Tt also indicated the growing doubt and unease in the nation concerning this
policy review.

Written by Neil Sheehan and Hedrick Smith, the article stated:

General William C. Westmoreland has asked for 206,000
more American troops for Vietnam, but the request has touched
off a divisive internal debate within high levels of the
Johnson Administration.

A number of sub-Cabinet civilian officials in the Defense

Department, supported by some senior officials in the State
Department, have argued against General Westmoreland's plea

65 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for a 40 per cent increase in his forces 'to regain the
initiative’ from the enemy.

-»--Many of the civilian officials are arguing that
there should be no increase beyond-the movement of troops
now under way.-.-.

The contention of these high ranking officials is that
an American increase will bring a matching increase by
North Vietnam, thereby raising the level of violence with-
out giving the allies the wpper hand.

Senior Pentagon civilians have put forward a written
counter-proposal to President Johnson, calling for 4
shift in American strategy to a concept of close-in
defense of populated areas with more limited offensive
thrusts then at present. Much of the military hierarchy
is reported to oppose this approach....

The President has not yet decided on the question of
substantial increases in American forces in Vietnam....

Nonetheless, the scope and depth of the internal debate
within the Government reflect the wrenching uncertainty
and doubt in this capitel about every facet of the war left
by the enemy's dramatic wave of attacks at Tet, the Asian
New Year holiday, six weeks ago. More than ever this has
left a sense of weariness and irritation over the war.

Officials themselves comment in private about wide-
spread and deep changes in attitudes, a sense that a water-
shed has been reached and that its meaning is just now
beginning to be understood....

But at every level of Government there is a sense that
the conflict, if expanded further, can no longer be called
's limited war.* Officials acknowledge that any further
American involvement carries serious implications for the
civilian life of the nation--not only the call-up of mili-
tary reserves and enactment of a tax increase but problems
with the budget, the economy and the balance of payments.

In Congress, uneasy and divided, as the Senate debate
on Thursday showed, there is a rising demand that Capitol Hill
be consulted. before any critical new step is taken. Even
supporters of Administration policy, such as Senator Richard
B. Russell, Democrat of Georgia, who is chaizman of the
Senate Armed Services Committee, are openly critical of
American combat strategy. Mr. Russell has suggested that the

66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a a ey ae.
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

United States has lost the battlefield initiative not only through
the enemy's bold tactics but by what he calls its own defensive,
gradualist psychology....

General Westmoreland's request for another 206,000 troops,
beyond the present authorized 525,000-man level to be reached by
next fall, was brought from Saigon last month by Gen. Earle G.
Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff....

General Wheeler presented the request to President Johnson at
the White House on Feb. 28, when he delivered a report on his three-
day survey of the war situation in South Vietnam. The request was
also forwarded to the President by the Joint Chiefs as a body
‘with our approval'....

Military leaders also contend that only a massive infusion of
troops will restore the allied initiative. They say it would also
permit the allied forces to resume the pacification of the country-
side and the war of attrition against the Vietcong that they contend
was being successfully waged before the Tet offensive.

The main lines of the case against General Westmoreland's
request are contained in a position paper prepared over the last
weekend by senior civilian officials in the Defense Department,
including assistant secretaries. Most of these officials were
brought into the Government by former Secretary of Defense Robert S.
McNamara.

The argument goes like this:

Since the United States military build-up began in 1965, Hanoi
has gradually increased its forces in South Vietnam and maintained
a reasonable ratio to the fighting strength of the American Forces.
There is every reason to believe, these officials contend, that
Hanoi is able and willing to continue to do so if more American
troops are sent to Vietnam within the next year.

_ The reinforcements that General Westmoreland wants would thus
not restore the initiative. They would simply raise the level of
violence. The United States would spend billions more on the war
effort and would suffer appreciably higher casualties.

North Vietnam would likewise endure substantially greater losses.
But the experience of the Tet offensive shows, according to this
line of reasoning, that American Military commanders have gravely
underestimated the capacity of the enemy to absorb such punishment
and to be still able to launch bold offensive operations.

‘So there would just be a lot more killing,’ one analyst said.

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The White House is also reported to have received an analysis
from the Central Intelligence Agency that support this view of
North Vietnam's manpower resources and its will to resist.

'essentially,' said one official, ‘we are fighting Vietnam's
birth rate.'

The Defense Department's paper was yerbally endorsed by Deputy
Secretary of Defense Paul T. Nitze and forwarded by him to Clark
M. Clifford, the new Defense Secretary, for transmittal to the
President on Monday. ;

Mr. Clifford was impressed with the caliber of the analysis,
informants said, but it is not known whether he endorsed the
document personally.

The thrust of the argument in the Pentagon paper is reported
to have gained the sympathetic support of a number of senior State
Department officials, including Under Secretary Nicholas deB.
Katzenbach, William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Fast Asian
and Pacific Affairs, and others close to Vietnam policy.

'I can tell you that all of us in this building are against a
troop increase,’ one State Department official said. However,
Secretary Rusk's position on the matter was unknown.

The defense position paper concludes by proposing a change in
American strategy in South Vietnam. This would entail withdrawing
from exposed positions like Khesanh in the sparsely populated
frontier regions and concentrating on a mobile defense of the
cities and populated areas nearer the sea.

But some military officials contend this is not a realistic
option.

'Rach town will become a Khesanh,' they assert, and civilian
casualties will soar.

Although most civilian officials declined to use the term
tenclave' to describe their proposed strategy, some conceded that
it does amount to a modification of the theory advanced by Lieut.
Gen. James M. Gavin, retired. He has for months urged that the
allies pull back to defensive positions around cities and other
important enclaves along the coast.

The Pentagon document suggests that on the political side the
United States encouraged the Saigon regime to broaden itself by
including non-Communist opposition elements such as the followers of
the militant Buddhist leader Tri Quang. A broader base would help
the regime establish a better relationship with its population and
make its army more effective, the paper asserts.

68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In their discussion of the American predicament in Vietnam,
some Civilian officials go significantly further and suggest
that the Administration should concede that ‘you cannot completely
defeat the enemy.’ The United States, they say, should instead
"buy time' with its present forces while the non-Commmist South
Vietnamese can strengthen themselves to the point where they
‘believe in their ability to survive against the Communists
after some sort of internal compromise. '

Officials are vague about the ingredients of this compromise,
put they acknowledge that it would probably involve negotiations
between the Vietcong and the non-Communists in the South.

Although it clearly entails abandonment of the military
solution that is implicit in current Administration policy, they
argue that such a compromise would not violate any public
American commitment to South Vietnam.

While avoiding any decision so far, President Johnson has
gained time by putting pressure on General Westmoreland to obtain
maximum use of the troops he now has. The President has instructed
the general to justify in detail his request for reinforcements.

Mr. Johnson has also set in motion extensive staff studies of
the full political, economic and military ramifications of giving
General Westmoreland more troops. Included among these may be an
examination of the possibility of acquiring additional forces
from Washington's allies in South Vietnam--Australia, South Korea,
Thailand and the Philippines.

The thrust of the President's concern, however, has been with
the consequences of troop increases. There is no indication at this
time that Mr. Johnson and his closest advisers, Mr. Rusk, Mr.
Clifford and Mr. Rostow are seriously interested in extending the
war to Cambodia and Laos or in changing to a strategy of close-in
defense of populated areas.

They reject @ political compromise with the Vietcong at this
point. Some senior civilian officials, in fact, believe Mr.
Johnson is ‘still intensely committed to a military solution.'

These officials consider General Westmoreland's request for

an additional 206,000 men ‘unrealistic,’ however, and do not believe
the President will grant it. 79/

69 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Even prior to this article, there had been a great deal of speculation
in the press concerning the need for additional troops in SVN, and the
general conclusion seemed to be that some additions would be required.
Members of Congress had already demanded that Congress be consulted
before any decision was made to increase troop strength in Vietnam
significantly. A number of prominent senators had interrupted debate
on civil rights on 7 March to make this demand because of "disturbing
information that a Presidential Decision was imminent." 80/

The Sheehan article appeared one day before Secretary of State Dean
Rusk appeared to testify before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
His 2-day grilling indicated a considerable growth in open dissent
within the Committee concerning U.S. policy in South Vietnam. Rusk even
came under criticism from one of the few Administration supporters on
the Committee, Senator Karl E. Mundt (R-SD), who warned him, "You are
as aware as we are that the shift of opinion in this country is in
the wrong direction" - meaning away from support of U.S. policy in Viet-
nem. "Something more convincing," said Mundt, "has to come from the
Administration as to what this is all about ‘to match' the sacrifices
.we are making." Rusk sidestepped all attempts by Senators Fulbright,
Gore, and other questioners to pin him down on a possible increase in
troops or Other element of future Vietnam strategy. It would "not be
right for me to speculate about numbers of possibilities," said Rusk,
"while the President is consulting his advisors." 81/

Later, on 12 March, both friends and foes of the President's policy
in Vietnam served notice that the present course must be reassessed
before more troops were sent to Vietnam.

"Senator Fulbright (D-Ark), Foreign Relations Committee chairman,
warned against an escalation that could lead to ‘all-out war,' and
insisted during a televised hearing with Dean Rusk, Secretary of State,
that Congress be consulted before crucial new decisions are made."

But Senator Russell (D-Ga), Armed Services Committee chairman, took
a different tack, contending that air and sea power should be used to
the fullest extent before ground-force levels are increased.

"Tf we are not willing to take this calculated risk," Russell told
a Veterans of Foreign Wars dinner, "we should not still be increasing
the half-million men in Vietnam who are exposed to danger daily from
weapons that might have been kept from the hands of our enemies." 82/

These comments from two powerful committee chairmen demonstrated
the cross-currents of opinion swirling around the President as he con-
templated General Westmoreland's request and the recommendations of his

advisors.

70 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Adding fuel to this controversy was the unexpected triumph in the
New Hampshire Presidential Primary on 12 March of the Democratic "peace"
candidate, Senator Eugene McCarthy. This triumph was widely heralded
as @ repudiation by the voters of the present Administration and its
Vietnam policies, and it encouraged another critic of these policies,
Senator Robert Kennedy, to announce on 16 March his intention to seek
the Democratic Presidential nomination.

7. The President Ponders

At a meeting at the White House on 13 March, the President
decided to deploy 30,000 troops to South Vietnam in addition to the 10,500
emergency augmentation already made. This would substantially meet
General Westmoreland's initial package request. Army forces would
replace those Marine Corps forces requested, as the Marine Corps could
not sustain the requested deployments. Also an additional Army brigade
(7,363 personnel) would be deployed to replace Marine RLT 27, and its
associated support. RLT 27 sould begin to return to CONUS on 15 July.
The forces to be deployed were as follows:

Deployment Date

A. US ARMY
Inf Bde (3 Inf Bns) © 4,500 15-30 June
Mech Bde (1 Inf Bn, 1 Inf

Bn (Mech), 1 Tk Bn) 5,041 12 July

Avn Co, Sep Bde 238 15 July
Armd Cav Sqdn 1,030 15-30 June
MP Bn 955 15-30 June
Cbt Sve Spt 3,316 15-30 June
Cbt and Cbt Sve Spt 9,120 15-30 June
SUB-TOTAL 2h ,200 15-30 June

B. 7th AF
h TFS 2,164 5 April
FAC/TACP 191 1 June
Airlift Th1 1 June
Support 929 i June
SUB-TOTAL 4,025

Cc. USN
NSA Da Nang Support 1,775 ~ i2.June
SUB-TOTAL 1470s —

D. TOTAL MACV 30,000

fal. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

There would be two reserve callups to meet and sustain these deploy-
ments, one in March and one in May. The callup in March would support
the 30,000 deployment. The one in May would reconstitute the strategic
reserve at seven active divisions. Other ground rules decided upon were:
(1) those Reservists to be called in May would not now be notified; (2)
there would be no extensions of terms of service for personnel presently
on active duty; (3) no individuals would be recalled, only units. 83/

This decision was formalized by the Deputy Secretary of Defense in a
memorandum to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on 14 March 1968.
Mr. Nitze asked the chairman to inform General Westmoreland of these pro-
posals, and to ask him whether he considered the substitutions satisfactory. 8h/

On 14 March, the Secretary of the Army forwarded to the Secretary of
Defense his recommendations concerning these Program Six deployments, and
the Reserve callup necessary to sustain them and to reconstitute the
strategic reserve. Secretary Resor pointed out, however, that an addi-
tional 13,500 men would have to be added to the figure of 30,000 to be
deployed. "If the 3d Brigade of the 82nd Airborne is to be left in-country
permanently and if the Army is to replace the RLT with an infantry brigade
on a permanent basis then units with TO&E strength of 13,500 must be
ineluded in the March 15 call-up and deployed....In addition, the MACV
ceiling will have to be increased from 565,000 to 578,500, unless MACV can
provide trade-off spaces for all or part of this add-on." 85/

The strength of units to be called up in March would be 45,000, as
follows:

a. Units to provide for the additional deployments - 31,563.

b. Units to provide the sustaining troops for 82d Airborne
and RLT 27 replacement - 13,437.

The May 15 callup would comprise the following:

1 division plus 1 IST 32,000
1 brigade 4,000

Post, camp and station comple-
ment to open 1 additional station 5,000
Total 71,000

This would reconstitute the STRAF at the following levels:

Division :
Isl
SSI 1-1/3 86/

72 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In addition, the Secretary indicated that the Chief of Staff of the
Army recomnended:

-.-tvhat one division, its ISI and the station comple-
ment, a total of 37,000 TOR strength, be alerted 15 March
and called up 15 April instead of 15 May in order to provide
an earlier capability to react to the unpredicted, a stronger
STRAF in light of growing uncertainties in Southeast and
Northeast Asia and to assure an earlier improvement of the
sustaining base to support the increased deployments and to
avoid drawdown on Europe. 87/

The approval of an additional 13,500 deployment to support the emer-
gency augmentation was apparently approved very quickly.

In a memorandum for the record on 16 March, the latest tentative plan

for Vietnam Deployments and reserve call-ups were listed as follows by the
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Systems Analysis):

Bit Deployment
Program #5 525,000

Emergency Augmentation 10,500
Support fox 10,500 13,500
Additional Deployment 30,000
Total 579,000
2, The March reserve call, to be announced around 20 March
will be:
Support deployment 36,621
Support personnel for the 10,500 13,437

Total 50,058

The March call will waive the 30 days notice, so troops
will report around March 27.

3. Around a week or 10 days later, "after a study" there will
be a second call of 48,393....These reservists will be given
30 days, therefore reporting around 1 May. 88/

Still, the ‘President was troubled. In public he continued to indicate
firmness and resoluteness, but press leaks and continued public criticism
continued to compound his problem. On March 17, the New York Times, again
amazingly accurate, forecast that the President would ap approve dispatch
of an additional 35,000 to 50,000 men to Vietnam over the next six months.. 89/
On March 18, nearly one-third of the House of Representatives, a total
of 139 members, - 98 Republicans and 41 Democrats - joined in sponsoring a
resolution calling for an immediate Congressional review of the United

States policy in Southeast Asié. 90

73 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a few. The MRF has been significantly successful in depriving
the enemy of freedom and initiative in the population and
resources rich Delta areas. The heliconter has established
itself as perhaps the single most important tool in our
arsenal -- and we will welcome more. To air support in both
RVN and NVN (Army, Navy, Marine and Air Force) goes much of
the credit for our accomplishments." 1/

The enemy's TET offensive, which began with the attack on the U.S.
Embassy in Saigon on 31 January 1968, although it had been predicted, 2/
took the U.S. command and the U.S. public by surprise, and its strength,
length, and intensity prolonged this shock. As the attacks continued,
the Secretary of Defense, on 9 February, requested the Joint Chiefs of
Staff to furnish plans which would provide for emergency reinforcement
of COMUSMACY.

After extensive backchannel communication with General Westmoreland,
the JCS forwarded these plans on 12 February. 3/ The Joint Chiefs’
assessment of the current Vietnam situation differed markedly from
COMUSMACV's year-end assessment submitted only 17 days earlier:

"a, The VC/NVA forces have launched large-scale offensive
operations throughout South Vietnam.

"pb. As of 11 February 1968, Headquarters, MACV, reports that
attacks have taken place on 34 provincial towns, 64 district
towns, and all of the autonomous cities.

"e, The enemy has expressed his intention to continue offensive
operations and to destroy the Government of Vietnam and its Armed
Forces.

"4. The first phase of his offensive has failed in that he
does not have adequate control over any population center to
install his Revolutionary Committees which he hoped to form
into a coalition with the NLF.

"ea, He has lost between 30 and 40 thousand killed and captured,
and we have seized over seven thousand weapons.

"f, Reports indicate that he has committed the bulk of his
VC main force and local force elements down to platoon level
throughout the country, with the exception of six to eight
battalions in the general area of Saigon.

">. Thus far, he has committed only 20 to 25 percent of his
North Vietnamese forces. These were employed as gap fillers
where VC strength was apparently not adequate to carry out his
initial thrust on the cities and towns. Since November, he has

2 ‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On that same day, 18 March, Mr. Johnson answered these critics, as
he charged in a speech before the National Farmers’ Union Convention in
Minneapolis, that Hanoi is seeking "to win in Washington what it cannot
win in Hue or Khe Sanh. Your President welcomes suggestions from com-
missions, from congressmen, from private individuals or groups," he
continued, “or anyone who has a plan or program which can stand inspection
and open a hope of reaching our goal of peace in the world." 91/

At this time, the President sought the advice of a group of his friends
and confidants outside of government. These men came to Washington on
18 March at the request of the President to receive briefings on the latest
developments in the war and to advise the President on the hard decision
he faced. Present were: former Undersecretary of State George Ball;
Arthur Dean, a Republican New York lawyer who was a Korean War negotiator
during the Eisenhower Administration; Dean Acheson, former President
Truman's Secretary of State: Gen. Matthew B. Ridgeway, the retired com-
mander of United Nations troops in Korea; Gen. Maxwell Taylor, former
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Cyrus Vance, former Deputy Defense
Secretary and a key troubleshooter for the Johnson Administration; McGeorge
Bundy, Ford Foundation President who had been special assistant for National
Security Affairs to Mr. Johnson and former President Kennedy; former Treasury
Secretary C. Douglas Dillon and Gen. Omar Bradley.

The only published account of this consultation, which is considered
reliable, was written by Stuart H. Loory and appeared in the Los Angeles
Times late in May. According to this report, the group met over dinner
with Secretary of State Dean Rusk; Defense Secretary Clark M. Clifford;
Ambassador W. Averell Harriman; Walt W. Rostow, the President's special
assistant for National security affairs; General Earle G. Wheeler, Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Richard Helms, Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency; Paul Nitze, Deputy Defense Secretary; Nicholas
Katzenbach, Under Secretary of State; and William P. Bundy, Assistant
Secretary of State for Hast Asian and Pacific Affairs.

The outsiders questioned the government officials carefully
on the war, the pacification program and the condition of the
South Vietnamese government after the Tet offensive. They in-
cluded in their deliberations the effect of the war on the
United States.

After dinner the government officials left and the group
received three briefings.

Philip C. Habib, a deputy to William Bundy and now a member
of the American negotiating team in Paris, delivered an unusuelly
; frank briefing on the conditions in Vietnam after the Tet offensive.
He covered such matters. as corruption in South Vietnam and the

growing refugee problem.

74 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Habib, according to reliable sources, told the group that
the Saigon government was generally weaker than had been realized
as a result of the Tet offensive. He related the situation, some
said, with greater frankness than the group had previously heard.

In addition to Habib, Maj. Gen. William E. DePuy, special
assistant to the Joint Chiefs for counterinsurgency and special
activities, briefed the group on the military situation, and
George Carver, a CIA analyst, gave his agency's estimates of con-
ditions in the war zone.

The briefings by DePuy and Carver reflected what many understood
as a dispute over enemy strength between the Defense Department
and the CIA which has been previously reported. Discrepancies in
the figures resulted from the fact that DePuy's estimates of enemy
strength covered only identifiable military units, while Carver's
included all known military, paramilitary and parttime enemy strength
available.

The morning of March 19, the advisory group assembled in the
White House to discuss what they had heard the previous evening
and arrived at their verdict. It was a striking turnabout in
attitude for all but Ball.

After their meeting, the group met the President for lunch.
It was a social affair. No business was transacted. The meal
finished, the advisers delivered their verdict to the President.

Their deliberations produced this verdict for the chief
executive:

Continued escalation of the war--intensified bombing of North
Vietnam and increased American troop strength in the South--would
do no good. Forget about seeking a battlefield solution to the
problem and instead intensify efforts to seek a political solution
at the negotiating table.

He was reportedly greatly surprised at their conclusions.
When he asked them where they had obtained the facts on which the
conclusions were based, the group told him of the briefings by
Habib, DePuy and Carver.

Mr. Johnson knew that the three men had also briefed his
governmental advisers, but he had not received the same picture of
the war as Rostow presented the reports to him.

As a result of the discrepancy, the President ordered his own
direct briefings. At least Habib and DePuy--and almost certainly
Carver--had evening sessions with the President.

73 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Habib was reportedly as frank with the President as he had ~
been with the advisory group. The President asked tough questions.
‘Habib stuck to his guns,' one source reported.

Whatever impact this group's recommendations and the direct briefings
he received had on the President was not immediately apparent in any
decision which affected the deployment of forces. Even as the President
announced, on 22 March, that General William C. Westmoreland would be
recalled from Vietnam to become the Army Chief of Staff, 93/ the Defense
Department continued to plan for the deployment of 43,500 additional
troops. In a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense on 23 March 1968,
the Assistant Secretary (Systems Analysis) forwarded his Program #6
Summary Table based on 579,000 men in South Vietnam, 54,000 over the
approved Program #5 ceiling. This 54,000 was made up of the 10,500
emergency reinforcement package, the 13,500 support forces for it, and
the 30,000 additional package. The Assistant Secretary added, that upon
notification of approval and desire to announce the new plan, the tables
would be published. 9h/

However, these particular tables were not to be published. The
President sought further advice as he wrestled with the problem which
had plagued his Administration. On March 26, General Creighton Abrams,
Deputy COMUSMACV, arrived suddenly and without prior announcement, and
was closeted with the President and his senior officials. These
conferences were conducted in the utmost secrecy amid press speculation
that Abrams would be named to succeed General Westmoreland. Further
press speculation was that the conferences dealt primarily with
expansion and modernization of the South Vietnamese armed forces and
that this tended to buttress earlier predictions that any increase in
American forces in South Vietnam would be modest. 95/

8. The President Decides

Apparently the Presidential decision on deployment of additional
U.§. forces to Vietnam was made on 28 March and concurred in by General
Abrams. In an undated memorandum (probably written on 27 or 28 March)
for the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, the Deputy Chief of Staff for
Military Operations, Lt General Lemley, indicated that the Joint Staff

‘had informed him of: 5

...-ventative decisions arising from the recent conference
between the’ President, the Chairman, and General Abrams, as
well as telecons between the Chairman and General Westmoreland.
It is believed that a Presidential decision may be made by

Friday (29 March) morning.

76 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

New ceiling in RVN: 549,500

a. Program 5: 525,000.

b. Emergency deployment of 82d Abn, 27th RLT: 11,000.*
e. Support and sustain emergency deployment: 13,500.*
d. Total: 549,500.

¥Includes estimated 1,444 Air Force and Navy.

ist Bde, 5th Inf Div (Mech) will replace 27th RLT. :
Reserve call-up of approximately 62,000.
a. Army 533957

(13,301 - Support of 3/82d Abn Div & 1/5th Inf Div)

(10,656 - Reconstitute STRAF)

ec. Air Force 6,590
d. Total 62,000 96/

A Joint Staff paper entitled "MACV Troop List of Program 6 Add-on,”
dated 28 March, summarized service capability to satisfy "MACV's 28 March
1968 request for U.S. forces" as follows:

Two Brigade Increment (Combat Forces)

STRENGTH CONUS AVAIL DATE*
USARV - Inf Bde, Sep 75639 In-Country as 3d Bde /82a
Div
- Mech Bde, Sep 4,882 Jul 68
~ Armored Cav Sqdn 1,049 Aug 68
7th AF - 2 TFS (F-100) (469 ea) 99h Jun/Jul 68
Total Brigade Increment 11,56
Support Increment (Combat Support and Combat Service Support Forces)
STRENGTH CONUS AVAIL DATE*
USARV - 2 FA Bn (155m) 1,132 Aug/Sep 6
- Engr Bn (Cot) 812 Aug 68
- Other Support Units 169 Jun/Jul. 68
2,752 Aug 68
2,219 Sep 68
SOs ad Oct 68
900 Unknown/May 69
hos Roe a
III MAF - Apr/Sep
, Total Support Increment 13,268
TOTAL DEPLOYMENT 24,832 (Excess over 24,500 can be

taken from existing credit/
debit account )

* CONUS availability date based on decision to call up reserve elements. 97/

17 TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

9. The Decision is Announced

On Sunday, 31 March, it was announced that the President would
address the nation that evening concerning the war in Vietnam. The
night before, Saturday, 30 March, a cable was dispatched to the U.S.
Ambassadors in Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, Laos, the Philippines,
and South Korea. This cable, slugged "Literally Eyes Only for
Ambassador or Charge", instructed the addressees to see their
respective heads of government and inform them of the following major
elements of the President's planned policy announcement on Sunday
night: 98/ }

a. Major stress on importance of GVN and ARVN increased
effectiveness, with our equipment and other.support as first
priority in our own actions.

b. 13,500 support forces to be called up at once in order
to round out the 10,500 combat units sent in February.

ce. Replenishment of strategic reserve by calling up
48,500 additional reserves, stating that these would be
designed to strategic reserve.

d. Related tax increases and budget cuts already largely
needed for non-Vietnam reasons.

3. In addition, after similar consultation and concurrence,
President proposes to announce that bombing will be
restricted to targets most directly engaged in the battle-
field area and that this meant that there would be no
pombing north of 20th parallel. Announcement would leave
open how Hanoi might respond, and would be open-ended as to
time. However, it would indicate that Hanoi's response
could be helpful in determining whether we were justified in
assumption that Hanoi would not take advantage if we
stopping (sic) bombing altogether. Thus, it would to
this extent foreshadow possibility of full bombing stoppage
at a later point.

This cable offered the Ambassadors some additional rationale for this
new policy for their discretionary use in conversations with their
respective heads of government. This rationale represents the only
available statement by the Administration of some of its underlying
reasons and purposes for and expectations from this policy decision.

a. You should call attention to force increases that would

be announced at the same time and would make clear our continued
resolye. Also our top priority to re-equipping ARVN forces.

7c TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. You should make clear that Hanoi is most likely to
denounce the project and thus free our hand after a short period.
Nonetheless, we might wish to continue the limitation even after
a formal denunciation, in order to reinforce its sincerity and
put the monkey firmly on Hanoi's back for whatever follows. Of
course, any major military change could compel full-scale
resumption at any time.

e. With or without denunciation, Hanoi might well feel
limited in conducting any major offensives at least in the northern
areas. If they did so, this could ease the pressure where it is
most potentially serious. If they did not, then this would give
us @ Clear field for whatever actions were then required.

d. In view of weather limitations, bombing north of the 20th
parallel will in any event be limited at least for the next four
weeks or so -- which we tentatively envisage as a maximum test-
ing period in any event. Hence, we are not giving up anything
really serious in this time frame. Moreover, air power now used
north of 20th can probably be used in Laos (where no policy change
planned) and in SVN.

e. Insofar as our announcement foreshadows any possibility
of a complete bombing stoppage, in the event Hanoi really exercises
reciprocal restraints, we regard this as unlikely. But in any
case, the period of demonstrated restraint would probably have to
continue for a period of several weeks, and we would have time to
appraise the situation and to consult carefully with them before
we undertook any such action.

Thus, in reassuring our allies of our “continued resolve", the cable
clearly indicated that not very much was expected of this change in policy.
Tt could possibly reinforce our sincerity and "put the monkey on Hanoi's
back for whatever follows." It was not expected thet Hanoi would react
positively although they might "feel limited in conducting any major
offensives at least in the northern areas", admittedly a highly dubious

likelihood.

What, then,was the purpose of this change in policy? If it was not
expected that Hanoi would respond positively, or that any other mejor
military benefits would accrue, what then was expected? The answer to
these questions, of course, could only be speculation at the time,

i although many of the answers were to be contained in the President's

speech on 31. Merch.

79 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

10. I Shall Not Seek, and I Will. Not Accept...

The President's speech to the nation on 31 March began with a
summary of his efforts to achieve peace in Vietnam over the years. 99/

Good evening, my fellow Americans.

Tonight I want to speak to you of peace in Vietnam and
Southeast Asia.

No other question so preoccupies our people. No other
dream so absorbs the 250 million human beings who live in that
part of the world. No other goal motivates American policy in
Southeast Asia.

For years, representatives of our government and others
have travelled the world -- seeking to find a basis for peace
talks. , ;

Since last September, they have carried the offer that I
wade public at San Antonio.

That offer was this:

That the United States would stop its bombardment of North
Vietnam when that would lead promptly to productive discussions --
and that we would assume that North Vietnam would not take
military advantage of our restraint.

Hanoi denounced this offer, both privately and publicly.
Even while the search for peace was going on, North Vietnam rush-
ed their preparations for a savage assault on the people, the
government, and the allies of South Vietnam.

This attack during the TET holidays, the President indicated, failed

to achieve its principal objectives:

It did not collapse the elected government of South Vietnam
or shatter its army -- as the Communists had hoped.

Tt did not produce a ‘general uprising’ among the people
of the cities as they had predicted.

The Communists were unable to maintain control of any of
the more than 30 cities that they attacked. And they took very
heavy casualties.

80 é TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But they did compel the South Vietnamese and their allies
4o move certain forces from the countryside, into the cities.

They caused widespread disruption and suffering. Their
attacks, and the battles that followed, made refugees of
half a million human beings.

The Communists may renew their attack any day.

They are, it appears, trying to make 1968 the year of
decision in South Vietnam -~ the year that brings, if not final
victory or defeat, at least a turning point in the struggle.

This much is clear;

If they do mount another round of heavy attacks, they will
not succeed in destroying the fighting power of South Vietnam
and its allies.

But tragically, this is also clear: many men -=- on both
sides of the struggle -- will be lost. A nation that has
already suffered 20 years of warfare will suffer once again.
Armies on both sides will take new casualties. And the war will

go on.
There is no need for this to be so.

In dramatically announcing the partial suspension of the bombing of
North Vietnam as a new initiative designed to lead to peace talks,
President Johnson did not voice any of the doubts of the State Department
cable of the previous night that this initiative was not expected to
be fruitful. Indeed, the central theme of this portion of the speech
was that our unilateral action was designed to lead to early talks.

The President even designated the United States representatives for

such talks.

There is no need to delay the talks that could bring an end
to this long and this bloody war.

Tonight, I renew the offer I made last August -- to stop
the bombardment of North Vietnam. We ask that talks begin
promptly, that they be serious talks on the substance of peace.
We assume that during those talks Hanoi will not take
advantage of our restraint.

We are prepared to move immediately toward peace through
negotiations.

ul TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

So, tonight, in the hope that this action will lead to
early talks, I am taking the first step to de-escalate the ~
conflict. We are reducing -- substantially reducing -- the
present level of hostilities.

And we are doing so unilaterally, and at once.

Tonight, I have ordered our aircrart and our naval vessels
+o make no attacks on North Vietnam, except in the area north
of the DeMilitarized Zone where the continuing enemy build-up
directly threatens allied forward positions and where the
movements of their troops and supplies are clearly related to
that threat.

The area, in which we are stopping our attacks includes
almost 90 percent of North Vietnam's population, and most of
its territory. Thus there will be no attacks around the
principal populated areas, or in the food-producing areas of
North Vietnam.

Even this very limited bombing of the North could come to
an early end -- if our restraint is matched by restraint in
Hanoi. But I eamnot in good conscience stop all bombing so
jong as to do so would immediately and directly endanger the
lives of our men and our allies. Whether 2 complete bombing
halt becomes possible in the future will be determined by
events.

Our purpose in this action is to bring about @ reduction in
the level of violence that now exists.

It is to save the lives of brave men -- and to save the lives
of innocent women and children, It is to permit the contending
forces to move closer to a political settlement.

And tonight, I call upon the United Kingdom and I call upon
the Soviet Union -- as co-chairmen of the Geneva Conferences, and
as permanent members of the United Nations Security Council ~--
to do all they can to move from the unilateral act of de-
escalation that I have just announced toward genuine peace in
Southeast Asia.

Now, as in the past, the United States is ready to send
its representatives to any forum, at any time, to discuss the
means of bringing this ugly war to an end.

82 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I am designating one of our most distinguished Ameri-
cans, Ambassador Averell Harriman, as my personal repre-
sentative for such talks. In addition, I have asked
Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, who returned from Moscow
for consultation, to be available to join Ambassador
Harriman at Geneva or any other suitable place -- just
as soon as Hanoi agrees to a conference.

I call upon President Ho Chi Minh to respond posi-
tively, and favorably, to this new step toward peace.

If peace did not come through negotiations, however, the President
indicated that our common resolve was unshakable and our common strength
invineible. As evidence of this, he listed the achievements of the South
Vietnamese nation.

Tonight, we and the other allied nations are con-
tributing 600,000 fighting men to assist 700,000 South
Vietnamese troops in defending their little country.

Our presence there has always rested on this basic
belief: the main burden of preserving their freedom
must be carried out by them -- by the South Vietnamese
themselves.

We and our allies can only help to provide a shield --
behind which the people of South Vietnam can survive and
can grow and develop. On their efforts -~ on their
determinations and resourcefulness -- the outcome will
ultimately depend.

That small, beleaguered nation has suffered terrible
punishment for more than twenty years.

I pay tribute once again tonight to the great courage
and endurance of its people. Sonth Vietnam supports armed
forces tonight of almost 700,000 men -- and I call your
attention to the fact that that is the equivalent of more
than 10 million in our own population. Its people maintain
their firm determination to be free of domination by the

North.

There has been substantial progress, I think, in
puilding a durable government during these.last three
years. The South Vietnam of 1965 could not have survived
the enemy's Tet offensive of 1968. The elected govern-
ment of South Vietnam survived that attack ~- and is
rapidly repairing the devastation that it wrought.

83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_TOP SECRET - Sensitive

increased his NVA battalions by about 25. The bulk of :
these and the bulk of the uncommitted NVA forces are in the

I Corps area.

"Hh, It is not clear whether the enemy will be able to
recyele his attacks in a second phase. He has indicated his
intention to do so during the period from 10 to 15 February.

"3. South Vietnamese forces have suffered nearly two
thousend killed, over seven thousand wounded, and an unknown
number of absences. MACV suspects the desertion rate may be
high. The average present for duty strength of RVN infantry
battalions is 50 percent and Ranger Battalions, 43 percent.
Five of nine airborne battalions are judged by MACV to be
combat ineffective at this time.”

Based on this assessment, COMUSMACV voiced to the Joint Chiefs three
major concerns: : ;
"a. The ability of the weakened RVNAF to cope with additional
sustained enemy offensive operations.

"b. Logistic support north of Danang, because of weather
and sea conditions in the Northern I Corps area, enemy inter-
diction of Route 1, and the probability of intensified combat
in that area.

"co. The forces available to him are not adequate at the
moment to permit him to pursue his own campaign plans and to
resume offensive operations against a weakened enemy, consider-
ing the competing requirements of reacting to enemy initiatives,
assisting in defending Government centers, and reinforcing weakened
RVNAF units when necessary."

The three plans for.emergency reinforcement examined by the Joint
Chiefs of Staff were:

"a, .Plan One, which is based upon prompt deployment of the
82nd Airborne Division and 6/9 Marine division/wing team, callup
of some 120,000 Army and Marine Corps Reserves, and appropriate
legislative action to permit extension of terms of service of
active duty personnel and the recall of individual Reservists.

'%. Plan Two, which would deploy as many Marine Corps
battalions as are now available in CONUS, less one battalion
in the Caribbean, the battalion in the Mediterranean, and the
Guantanamo Defense Force. This plan would not be based upon
a callup of Reservists or legislative action.

3 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The South Vietnamese know that further efforts are
going to be required:

-- to expand their own armed forces,

-~- to move back into the countryside as quickly as
possible,

~~ to increase their taxes,

-- to select the very best men that they have for
civilian and military responsibility,

-- to achieve a new unity within their constitutional
government,

-- and to include in the national effort all of those
groups who wish to preserve South Vietnam's control over
its own destiny.

Last week President Thieu ordered the mobilization of
135,000 additional South Vietnamese. He plans to reach --
as soon as possible -- 4 total military strength of more
than 800,000 men.

To achieve this, the government of South Vietnam

. started the drafting of 19-year-olds on March lst. On

May lst, the Government will begin the drafting of 18-year-
olds.

last month, 10,000 men volunteered for military service ~-
that was two and a half times the number of volunteers during
the same month last year. Since the middle of January, more
than 48,000 South Vietnamese have joined the armed forces --
and nearly half of them volunteered to do soa.

All men in the South Vietnamese armed forces have had
their tours of duty extended for the duration of the war,
and reserves are now being called up for immediate active

duty.
President Thieu told his people last week:

"we mast make greater efforts and accept more sacrifices
because, as I have said many times, this is our country.
The existence of our nation is at stake, and this is mainly
a, Vietnamese responsibility."

He warned his people that a major national effort is
required to root out corruption and incompetence at all

Bh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

levels of government.

We applaud this evidence of determination on the part
of South Vietnam. Our first priority will be to support
their effort.

We shall accelerate the re-equipment of South Vietnam's
’ armed forces -~- in order to meet the enemy's increased fire-
power. This will enable them progressively to undertake
a larger share of combat operations against the Communists
invaders.

The token increase in U.S. troop deployments to South Vietnam which
presaged for the first time a limit to our commitment and pointed to a
change in ground strategy, an issue which had caused such great specula-
tion in the press and controversy in Congress and within the Administration,
received short mention in the speech. It seemed almost a footnote to the
dramatic statements which had preceded it.

On many occasions I have told the American people that
we would send to Vietnam those forces that are required to
accomplish our mission there. $0, with that as our guide,
we have previously authorized a force level of approximately
525,000.

Some weeks ago -~ to help meet the enemy's new offensive
-- we sent to Vietnam about 11,000 additional Marine and
airborne troops. They were deployed by air in 48 hours, on
an emergency basis. But the artillery, tank, aircraft, and
other units that were needed to work with and support these
infantry troops in combat could not accompany them on that
short notice.

In order that these forces may reach maximum combat
effectiveness, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have recommended to
me that we should prepared to send -- during the next five
months -- support troops totalling approximately 13,500 men.

A portion of these men will be made available from our
active forces. The balance will come from Reserve Component
units which will be called up for service.

The next portion of the President's speech detailed the cost of
the Vietnam War and made a plea for Congressional action to reduce the
deficit by passing the surtax which had been requested almost a year

before.

In summary, the President reiterated the U.S. objectives in South
Vietnam, end gave his appraisal of what the U.S. in pursuit of those
objectives, hoped to accomplish in Southeast Asie.

85 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I cannot promise that the initiative that I have announced
tonight will be completely successful in achieving peace any
more than the 30 others that we have undertaken and agreed to
in recent years.

But it is our fervent hope that North Vietnam, after
years of fighting that has left the issue unresolved, will
now cease its efforts to achieve a military victory and will
join with us in moving toward the peace table.

And there may come a time when South Vietnam -- on
both sides -- are able to work out a way to settle their ~
own differences by free political choice rather than by

As Hanoi considers its course, it should be in no doubt
of our intentions. It must not miscalculate the pressures
within our democracy in this election year.

We have no intention of widening this war.

But the United States will never accept a fake solution
4o this long and arduous struggle and call it peace.

No one can foretell the precise terms of an eventual
settlement.

Our objective in South Vietnam has never been the
annihilation of the enemy. It has been to bring about a
recognition in Hanoi that its objective -- taking over the
South by force -- could not be achieved.

We think that peace can be based on the Geneva Accords
of 1954 -- under political conditions that permit the South
Vietnamese -- all the South Vietnamese -- to chart their
course free of any cutside domination or interference, from
us or from anyone else.

So tonight I reaffirm the pledge that we made at Manila --
that we are prepared to withdraw our forces from South Viet-
nam as the other side withdraws its forces to the North, stops
the infiltration, and the level of violence thus subsides.

Our goal of peace and self-determination in Vietnam
is directly related to the future of all of Southeast Asia --

B62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

where much has happened to inspire confidence during the past
10 years. We have done all that we knew how to do to contri-
bute and to help build that confidence....

Over time, a wider, framework of peace and security in
Southeast Asia may become possible. The new cooperation of
the nations in the area could be a foundation-stone. Cer-
tainly friendship with the nations of such a Southeast Asia
is what the United ‘States seeks -- and that is all that the
United States seeks.

One day, my fellow citizens, there will be peace in South-
east Asia.

It will come because the people of Southeast Asia want
it -- those whose armies are at war tonight, and those who,
though threatened, have thus far been spared.

Peace will come because Asians were willing to work for
it -- and to sacrifice for it -- and to die by the thousands
for it.

But let it never be forgotten: peace will come also
because America sent her sons to help secure it.

It has not been easy -- far from it. During the past
four and a half years, it has been my fate and my responsi-
bility to be commander-in-chief. I have lived -- daily and
nightly -- with the cost of this war. I know the pain that
it has inflicted. I know perhaps better than anyone the
misgivings that it has aroused.

Throughout this entire, long period, I have been sus-
tained by a single principle:

-- that what we are doing now, in Vietnam, is vital
not only to the security of Southeast Asia, but it is
vital to the security of every American.

Surely we have treaties which we must respect.
Surely we have commitments that we are going to keep.
Resolutions of the Congress testify to the need to
resist aggression in the world and in Southeast Asia.

+ the heart of our involvement in South Vietnam --

under three Presidents, three separate Administrations --
has always been America's own security.

87. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

And the larger purpose of our involvement has always
been to help the nations of Southeast Asia become inde-
pendent and stand alone, self-sustaining as members of a
great world communitsy.

-- At peace with themselves, and at peace with all
others.

With such an Asia, our country -- and the world --
will be far more secure than it is tonight.

I believe that a peaceful Asia is far nearer to
reality, because of what America has done in Vietnam.
I believe that the men who endure the dangers of battle
-- fighting there for us tonight -- are helping the
entire world avoid far greater conflicts, far wider wars,
far more destruction, than this one.

I pray that it will not be rejected by the leaders
of North Vietnam. I pray that they will accept it as a
means by which the sacrifices of their own people may be
ended. And I ask your help and your support, my fellow
citizens, for this effort to reach across the battlefield
toward an early peace.

Finally, the President addressed himself in a highly personal manner
+o the issue that had seemed uppermost in his mind throughout the preceding
month of deliberation, reassessment and reappraisal of our Vietnam policy -- -
the issue of domestic unity.

Yet, I believe that we must always be mindful of this one
thing, whatever the trials and the tests ahead. The ultimate
strength of our country and our cause will lie not in powerful
weapons or infinite resources or boundless wealth, but will
lie in the unity of our people.

This, I believe very deeply.

Throughout my entire public career I have followed the
personel puilosophy that I am a free man, an American, a public
servant and a member of my Party, in that order always and only.

For 37 years in the service of our nation, first as a
Congressman, as a Senator and as Vice President and now as
your President, I have put the unity of the people first.
T have put it ahead of any devisive partisanship.

.

83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

And in these times as in times before, it is true that
a house divided against itself by the spirit of faction, of
party, of region, of religion, of race, is a house that can-
not stand.

There is division in the American house now. There
is devisiveness among us all tonight. And holding the trust
that is mine, as President of all the people, I cannot dis-
regard the peril to the progress of the American people and
the hope and the prospect of peace for all peoples.

So, I would ask all Americans, whatever their personal
interests or concern, to guard against devisiveness and all
its ugly consequences.

Fifty-two months and ten days ago, in a moment of tragedy
and trauma, the duties of this office fell uwpon me. I asked
then for your help and God's, that we might continue America
on its course, binding up our wounds, healing our history,
moving forward in new unity, to clear the American agenda and
to keep the American commitment for all of our people.

United we have kept that commitment. United we have
enlarged that commitment.

Through all time to come, I think America will be a
stronger nation, a more just society, and a land of greater
opportunity and fulfillment because of what we have all done
together in these years of unparalleled achievement.

Our reward will come in the life of freedom, peace, and
hope that our children will enjoy through ages ahead.

What we won when all of our people united just must not
now be lost in suspicion, distrust, selfishness, and politics
among any of our people.

Having eloquently stated the need for unity in a nation divided, the
President then made the dramatic announcement which shocked and electrified
the nation and the world, an announcement intended to restore unity to the

divided nation:

Believing this as I do, I have eoncluited that I should not
permit the Presidency to become inyolved in the partisan
divisions that are developing in this political year.

With America's sons in the fields far away, with America's
future under challenge right here at home, with our hopes

*

8&9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and the world's hopes for peace in the balance every day,

I do not believe that I should devote an hour or a day

of my time to any personal partisan causes or to any duties
other than the awesome duties of this office -- the Presi-
dency of your country.

Accordingly, I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the
nomination of my Party for another term as your President.

But let men everywhere know, however, that a strong, a
eonfident, and a vigilant America stands ready tonight to
seek an honorable peace -- and stand ready tonight to defend
an honored cause ~- whatever the price, whatever the burden,
whatever the sacrifices that duty may require.

Thank you for listening.

Good night and God bless all of you.

11. Epilogue

On April 4, 1968, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, in a memorandum

for the Seeretaries of the Military Departments and the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff established Southeast Asia Deployment Program #6.
This progrem added 24,500 personnel to the approved Program #5, and placed
a new ceiling of 549,500 on U.S, forces in South Vietnam. 100/ None of
the some 200,000 troops requested by General Westmoreland on 27 February
were to be deployed.

Late in the afternoon of April 3, 1968, the White House released the

following statement by President Johnson:

Today the Government of North Vietnam made a statement
which included the following paragraph, and I quote:

“However, for its part, the Government of the Demo-
eratic Republic of Vietnam declares its readiness to
appoint its representatives to contact the United States
representative with a view to determining with the
American side the unconditional cessation of the United
States bombing raids and all other acts of war against
the Democratic Republic of Vietnam so that talks may

start."

Last Sunday night I expressed the position of the
United States with respect to peace in Vietnam and South-

east Asia as follows:

"Now, as in the past, the United States is ready to
send its representatives to any forum, at any time, to
discuss the means of bringing this war to an end."

90 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Accordingly, we will establish contact with the repre-
sentatives of North Vietnam. Consultations with the
Government of South Vietnam and our other allies are now
taking place. 101/

The first step on what would undoubtedly be a long and tortuous road
to peace apparently had been taken. In one dramatic action, President
Johnson had for a time removed the issue of Vietnam from domestic political
contention. In an unexpectedly prompt and responsive reply to his initi-
ative, Hanoi had moved the struggle for South Vietnam into a new path.

As has been indicated, little had been expected to result from the
partial bombing halt and the limitation upon U.S, troop commitments to
South Vietnam. Why, then, were these steps taken?

In March of 1968, the President and his principal advisers were again
confronted with a dilemma which they had faced before, but which they had
postponed resolving. Although seldom specifically stated, the choice had
always been either to increase U.S, forces in South Vietnam as necessary
to achieve military victory or to limit the U.S. commitment in order to
prevent the defeat of our South Vietnamese allies while they put their
political-military house in order. In the past, the choice had not been
so clear-cut. Progress toward military victory had been promised with
small. increases in force levels which did not require large reserve call-
ups or economic dislocations. Military victory would then assure a viable
South Vietnamese political body capable of protecting and gaining the
support of its people.

In March of 1968, the choice had become clear-cut. ‘The price for
military victory had increased vastly, and there was no assurance that
it would not grow again in the future. There were also strong indica-
tions that large and growing elements of the American public had begun
to believe the cost had already reached unacceptable levels and would
strongly protest a large increase in that cost.

The political reality which faced President Johnson was that "more
of the same" in South Vietnam, with an increased commitment of American
lives and money and its consequent impact on the country, accompanied by
no guarantee of military victory in the near future, had become unaccept-
able to these elements of the American public. The optimistic military
reports of progress in the war no longer rang true after the shock of
the TET offensive.

Thus, the President's decision to seek a new strategy and a new road
to peace was based upon two major considerations:

(1) ‘The convictions of his principal civilian advisers, particularly

Secretary of Defense Clifford, that the troops requested by General
Westmoreland would not make a military victory any more likely; and

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

(2) A deeply-felt conviction of the need to restore unity to the
American nation.

For a policy from which so little was expected, a great deal was
initiated. The North Vietnamese and the Americans sat down at the
conference table in Paris to begin to travel the long road to peace; the
issue of Vietnam largely was removed from American political discord;

a limit to the commitment of U.S. forces was established; and the South
Vietnamese were put on notice that, with our help, they would be expected
+o do more in their own defense.

The "A to Z" reassessment of U.S. strategy in South Vietnam in the
wake of the TET offensive did not result in the announcement of a new
ground strategy for South Vietnam. But in placing General Westmoreland's
request for forces squarely in the context of the achievement of U.S.
political-military objectives in South Vietnam, the limited political
nature of those objectives was for the first time affirmed. A new ground
strategy, based on these limited objectives and wpon the ceiling on U.S.
troops became a corollary for the new U.S. commander.

American forces initially were deployed to Vietnam in order to prevent
the South Vietnamese from losing the war, to insure that aggression from
the north would not succeed. Having deployed enough troops to insure that
NVN aggression would not succeed, it had been almost a reflex action to
start planning on how much it would take to "win" the war. Lip service
was given to the need for developing South Vietnamese political institu-
tions, but no one at high levels seemed to question the assumption that
U.S. political objectives in South Vietnam could be attained through mili-
tary victory.

However, it was quickly apparent that there was an embarrassing lack
of knowledge as to how much it would take to win the war. This stemmed
from uncertainty in two areas: (1) how much effort the North Vietnamese
were willing to expend in terms of men and materiel; and (2) how effective
the South Vietnamese armed forces would be in establishing security in the
countryside. As the war progressed, it appeared that our estimates of the
former were too low and of the latter too high. However, committed to a
military victory and having little information as to what was needed mili-
tarily, the civilian decision makers seemed willing to accept the field
commander's estimate of what was needed. Steady progress was promised
and was apparently being accomplished, although the commitment of forces
steadily increased.

The TET offensive showed that this progress in many ways had been
illusory. The possibility of military victory had seemingly become remote
‘and. the cost had become tco high both in political and economic terms.
Only then were our ultimate objectives brought out and re-examined. Only
then was it realized that a clear-cut military victory was probably not
possible or necessary, and that the road to peace would be at least as

92 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

on South Vietnamese political development as it would be on
ey ae eee This realization, then, made it possible to Limit the
American military commitment to South Vietnam to achieve the objectives
for which this force had originally been deployed. American forces would
remain in South Vietnam to prevent defeat of the Government by Communist
forces and to provide a shield behind which that Government could rally,
become effective, and win the support of its people.

93 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

IV.C Evolution of the War (26 Vols.)
Direct Action: The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968
(16 Vols.)
6. U.S. Ground Strategy and Force Deployments: 1965-1967
(3 Vols.)
c. Volume III: Program 6

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ec. Plan Three - One and 3/9 Marine Division/Wing Team."

Moreover, these forces were at various levels of readiness and a high
percentage of their personnel were Vietnam returnees or close to the
end of the obligated active service. The capability of these uncom-
mitted general purpose forces was further constrained, the Joint Chiefs
pointed out, by shortages of critical skilled specialists and shortages
in mission essential items of equipment and materiel. Thus, the Joint
Chiefs emphasized, our posture of readily available combat forces was
seriously strained. Any decision to deploy emergency augmentation
forces should be accompanied by the recall of at least an equivalent
number, or more prudently, additional Reserve component forces and

an extension of terms of service for active duty personnel. Indeed,
the Chiefs, warned,

"Tt is not clear at this time whether the enemy will be able
to mount and sustain a second series of major attacks throughout
the country. It is equally unclear as to how well the Vietnamese
Armed Forces would be able to stand up against such a series of
attacks if they were to occur, In the face of these uncertainties,
a more precise assessment of USMACV's additional force requirements,
if any, must await further developments. The Joint Chiefs of
Staff do not exclude the possibility that additional develop-
ments could make further deployments necessary.”

Based on this assessment of the situation, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff concluded and recommended that:
"a. A decision to deploy reinforcements to Vietnam be
deferred at this time.

"b, Measures be taken now to prepare the 82nd Airborne
Division and 6/9 Marine Division/Wing team for possible deploy-
ment to Vietnam.

"oa. As a matter of prudence, call certain additional
Reserve units to active duty now. Deployment of emergency
reinforcements to Vietnam should not be made without concomitant
Callup of Reserves sufficient at least to replace those deployed
and provide for the increased sustaining base requirements of all
Services. In addition, bring selected Reserve force units to
full strength and an increased state of combat readiness,

"q, Legislation be sought now to (1) provide authority to
call individual Reservists to active duty; (2) extend past
30 June 1968 the existing authority to call Reserve units to
active duty; and (3) extend terms of service for active duty
personnel.

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive |
19.

20.

22.

23.
oh.
25.
26.

28.

29.
30.
Bis

32.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a TOP SECRET =- Sensitive

Halperin notes, op. cit.

Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency,
Memorandum for the Director, Subject: The Outlook in Vietnam,
dated 26 Feb 1968 (S).

Central Intelligence Agency, Memorandum, Subject: Communist

Alternatives in Vietnam, dated 29 Feb 1958 (S)

ibidse, pe 1

Central Intelligence Agency, Memorandum, Subject: Questions Concerning
the Situation in Vietnam, dated 1 March 1968 (S).

W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum for the Group, Subject: Alternative
Gourses-of Action, dated 29 Feb 1968 (7S).

Department of State, Memorandum for the Group, Subject: Checklist of
Factors Affecting Alternative Courses of Action, dated 29 Feb 1968,
initialed by Nicholas deB. Katzenbach (TS-NODIS).

W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum for the Group, op. cit., 29 Feb 68.

W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum for the Group, Subject: Introductory
Paper on Key Elements in the Situation, dated 29 Feb 1968 (TS).

Department of State, "Possible Soviet Responses to Various US Actions
in Indochina -- Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia;" "Probable Chinese
Responses to Certain US Courses of Action in Indochina-~Vietnam,

Laos and Cembodia;" "Probable Western European Reaction to Various
US Courses of Action in Indochina -- Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia,” un-
dated papers (TS).

Cable, MOSCOW 2983, 0115152 March 1968, TS-LITERALLY EYES ONLY for
Under Secretary from Ambassador.

W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum, Subject: European and Other Non-
Asian Reactions to a Major US Force Increase, dated 1 Mar 1958 (TS).

W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Asian Reaction to a Major
U.S. Force Increase, dated 1 Mar 68 (TS).

W. P. Bundy, First Draft, Subject: Options on Our Negotiating
Posture, dated 29 Feb 68 (1S).

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
33-

ho.
hi.

he.

43.

hs.
h6.

Te.

48.
49.

50.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Undated Memorandum, Subject: Viet-Nam Alternatives, signed M.D.T.,
General Taylor took, as the U.S. objective, the statement of Pres.
Johnson in his speech at Johns Hopkins University in April 1965:
"Our objective is the independence of South Viet-Nem and its freedom
from attack. We want nothing for ourselves, only that the people

of South Viet-Nam be allowed to guide their country in their own
way."

OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Deployments - A Discussion of
Alternatives, undated (S).

ibid.

OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Pacification Slowdowm, undated (C)
Ibid., p- 2 7

OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: The Status of RVNAF, undated (TS).

OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Alternative Strategies, dated
29 Feb 1968, pp. 1-2 (7S).

Ibid., pp. 2-4.

OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Data for Analysis of Strategies,
undated (TS).

Phil G. Goulding, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Possible Public Reaction
to Various Alternatives, undated (7S). :

Ibid., p. 5

Memorandum for the President, Subject: Alternative Strategies in
SVN, lst Draft, 29 Feb 1968 (TS-SENS)

Tbid., 3rd Draft, 1 Mar 1968 (TS-SENS)

Ibid., p. 3

Tbid., pn 5-6.

Tbid., pp. 6-7-

Tbid., pp. 8-10.

Ibid., Annex II, Alternative Courses of Military Action, pp. 8-10.

96 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
51.
52.
23°
oh.
22°
56.
5T-
58.

29

60.

61.

62.
63.
6h.
65
66.
67.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensiti

Ibid., Annex II, Population Security, p. 15.

Ibid., p- 16.

“Ibid., pp. 16-17.

TIbid., Appendix, Strategy by Corps Tactical Zone, pp. A-3 - A-8.
Tbid., Appendix, Effects of Strategy on Interior Provinces, pp. A-1 - A-3.
Thid.s, De 2e

Brig. Gen. Harris W. Hollis, Director of Operations, ODCSOPS, DA;
Memorandum for LIG Lemley, Subject: CINCPAC Force Requirements,

dated 27 Feb 1958 (S); Lt Col Spiller, ODCSOPS, DA, Supplemental
Information, Subject: MACY Requirements and Major Ground Forces
Deployment by Option, 1 Mar 1968 (8).

Assistant Secretary of Defense, ISA, Memorandum for the Secretary

of Defense, Subject: General Wheeler's View of the Two Fatal

Flaws in the Population Control Strategy, dated 2 Mar. 1968 (TS-SENS).

MAC 02951, 0209472, from General Westmoreland to General Wheeler,
(TS-LIMDIS,EYES ONLY).

Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Plans and Policy Directorate,
Short Range Branch, J-5, Subject: Analysis of COMUSMACYV Force
Requirements and Altermtives, dated 1 Mar 1968 (TS-SHENS).

Memorandum for the President, 3 Mar Draft (Goulding -Warnke) (TS-SENS).
Tbide, De O-

Tbid., pp- 8-10.

Ibid., pp. 5-6.

Draft Memorandum for the President, 4. Mar 1968 (TS-SENS), pp. 1-2.

Thid., Tab A, The Justification for Imediate Additional Forces
in South Vietnam, pp. 1-2.

o7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
68.

69.

70.

fi.
2.
73.

Th.

75
76.

TT-

78.

19+

80.

81.

83.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Tbid., Tab B, Increasing the Effectiveness of Vietnamese Efforts
in Conjunction with 4 U.S. Troop Increase, pp. 1-7.

Tbid., Tab C, Justification for Increasing the Strategic Reserve,

pp. 1-2.

Thid., Tab D, Necessity for In-Depth Study of Vietnam Policy and

Strategic Guidance, p. l.
Ibid., pp. 1-2.

Tbid., Tab E, Negotiating Posture Options, and Possible Diplomatic

Actions, p. 1.
Ibid., pp- 4-6.

Tbid., Tab F, Military Action Against North Vietnam.

Tbid., Tab G, Difficulties and Negative Factors in the Course of
Action; Tab H, Problems We Can Anticipate in U.S. Public Opinion, p. 4.

cM-3098-68, Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, Subject:
COMUSMACV Force Requirements, dated 8 Mar 68 (T'S-SEINS).

Neil Sheehan and Hedrick Smith, "Westmoreland Requests 206,000 More
Men, Stirring Debate in Administration, New York Times, 10 Mar 1968,

pp. 1,11.

Joseph R.L. Sterne, "War Critics Denounce Any Troop Rises,"
Baltimore Sun, March 8, 1968, p. 1; John W. Finney, "Criticism of

War Widens in Senate on Build-Up Issue," New York Times, 8 Mar 68, p. 1.

Joseph R.L. Sterne, "For Different Aims, Russell, Fulbright Ask
Viet Restudy,” Baltimore Sun, 13 March 1968, p. 1.

Ibid.

Handwritten notes by Alain Enthoven from meeting with Secretary
Clifford, Mr. Warnke, Mr. Resor, General Wheeler, 13 Mar. 1968. (S)

98

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

Ql.

92.

95

96.

oT.

98.

99.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Deputy Secretary of Defense, Memorandum for Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, Subject: Southeast Asia Deployments, dated .
14 Mar 1968. (TS) :

Secretary of the Army, Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense,

14 Mar 1968 (Ss).
Tbid.

Chief of Staff, USA, Memorandum for the Secretary of the Army,
Subject: Call-Up of Reserves and Program 6 Deployment, dated

1 Mar 1968.

Alain Enthoven, Memorandum for the Record, 16 Mar 1968.

Robert H. Phelps, "More U.S. Troops Going to Vietnam," New York Times,
17 Mar. 1968, p. 1. :

John W. Finney, "Third of House Wants Review of War Policy,"
New York Times, 19 Mar. 1968, p. 32.

Muriel Dubbin, "War Foes Censured by Johnson," Baltimore Sun,
19 Mar. 1968, p. 1. aie aes ant

Stuart H. Loory,

Charles W. Corddry, "Westmoreland Attains No. 1 Goal," Baltimore Sun,
23 Mar. 1968, pp. 1, 25. er ee
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Systems Analysis), Memorandum for
Secretary of Defense, Subject: Program #6 Summry Table (Tentative)
(U), dated 23 Mar. 1968, (TS).

Murray Mardes, "General Abrams, LBJ Confer on Vietnam," Washington
Post, 27 Mar. 1968, p. 1; Neil Sheehan, "Gen. Abrams in Capitol, Sees
President and Aides,” New York Times, March 27, 1968, p. 2.

Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Military Operations, Memorandum
for Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, Subject: MACV Requirements, undated, (S).

Joint Staff, Pacific Division, J-3, Subject: MACV Troop List, Program
6 Add-On, dated 28 March 1968. Corrected 5 April 1968.

Department of State Message 139431, 30 March 1968 (TS-NODIS LITERALLY
EYES ONLY, FOR AMBASSADOR. OR CHARGE).

Remarks of the President to the Netion, March 31, 1968.

gg TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

100. Deputy Secretary of Defense, Memorandum for Secretaries of the
Military Departments, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Assistant fecretaries of Defense, Subject: Southeast Asia
Deployment Program #6(U), dated 4 April 1968(s).

101. White House Press Release, 3 April 1968.

100 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"oe, Procurement and other supply actions be taken now to
overcome shortages existing in certain critical items of materiel
and equipment such as munitions, helicopters, and other combat
aircraft."

Thus, for perhaps the first time in the history of American involve-
ment in Vietnam, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended against deploying
the additional forces requested by the field commander, in the absence
of other steps to reconstitute the strategic reserve. At long last, the
resources were beginning to be drawn too thin, the assets became unavail-
able, the support base too small.

Notwithstanding the recommendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the
Secretary of Defense almost immediately approved the deployment of one
brigade of the 82nd Airborne Division and one Marine regimental landing
team to South Vietnam. <A total strength of almost 10,500 was assumed
and publicly announced. - These deployments were directed by the JCS on
13 February. Airlift of the brigade from the 82nd Airborne Division, at
a strength of approximately four thousand, was to begin on 14 February
and the brigade was to close in-country not later than 26 February 1968. 4/
After coordination with CINCSTRIKE and USCONARC, the strength of this
unit was fixed at 3,702. 5/

The Marine Corps Regiment was to close in SVN not later than 26
February also. The Regiment (reinforced) less one battalion, was to be
deployed by air from California at a strength of about 3,600. One bat-
talion (reinforced) which was then embarked, was to be deployed by surface
at a strength of about 1,600. 6/

In view of the wide variation of strength associated with a Marine
Corps Regiment (reinforced), CINCPAC was directed to advise all concerned
of the identity, composition and strength of the force selected for
deployment. 7/ CINCPAC nominated the 27th Marine Regiment, which included
5247 Marine and 327 Navy personnel. Additionally, he included the deploy-
ment of a logistic support element of 389 personnel from Okinawa to reduce
the impact on the already heavily committed logistic units in I CTZ. In
addition, CINCPAC took the precautionary step of identifying, for follow-
on deployment, a sea-tail of reinforcing units totalling 1,400 personnel.
This element, scheduled to follow in April 1968, would provide the regiment
the necessary self-sustaining combat power in the event early replacement
was not provided. 8/ Thus, the total number of troops deployed or alerted
for the follow-on sea-tail numbered 11,065. 9/

The Joint Chiefs of Staff reacted almost immediately to the national
decision to deploy these forces without a concomitant reserve callup.
On 13 February 1968 they forwarded to the Secretary of Defense their
recommendations for actions‘which should be taken relative to callup of
reserves, obtaining legislation and instituting procurement actions to
provide support for these forces and to sustain their deployment. 10/

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A minimum callup of Reserve units to replace deploying forces and
+o sustain and support them was justified, the Joint Chiefs stated, by
the following situation: :

"a, Army. The 82nd Airborne Division represents the only
readily deployable Army division in the CONUS-based active
strategic reserve. The impending reduction of this division by
one-third to meet approved deployments establishes an immediate
requirement for its prompt reconstitution which is possible only
by the callup of Reserve units. In order to replace the forces
deployed from the strategic reserve, to provide support units
+o meet anticipation requirements in I CTZ and to provide a
wider rotation base of requisite ranks and skills, it will be
necessary for the Army to call up two infantry brigade forces
of the Reserve components. This callup will total approximately
32,000 personnel, These two brigades should attain a combat-
ready and deployable status in 12 weeks following callup.

"5. Marine Corps.

"(1) The Marine Corps cannot sustain additional deployments
+o Southeast Asia under current personnel policies. Thus, the
force authorized for deployment must be replaced with a comparable
Reserve unit as soon as possible. The Reserve force required for
this purpose will consist of one Marine regiment, reinforcing
combat support and combat service support units, and one composite
Marine Air Group with one VYNA, one VMP, and two medium helicopter
squadrons (HMM).

"(2) The Reserve force will consist of approximately
12,000 personnel. It will provide the capability to deploy a
balanced, self-sustaining air/ground combat force in relief of
the lightly structured 27th Marines (Rein) and permit return
of the 27th Marine Regiment (Rein) to the training/rotation base
in CONUS/Hawaii. This exchange would commence as soon as the
Reserve unit becomes combat-ready (approximately 60 days after
callup) and must be completed not later than 120 days after
deployment of RLT-27.

"(3) It is envisioned that the Reserve forces will be.
redeployed to CONUS without replacement after 13 months in South
Vietnam. However, if this does not occur, it will be best to
deploy a relief brigade from the 4th Marine Division/wing team.
Alternately, an adequate rotation base in CONUS to sustain the
continued deployment’ can be created but to do so requires
extensions of terms of service and other personnel policy changes.

"(k) In addition, it must be recognized that the anticipated
proportionate increase in personnel losses will require an increase
in the end strength of the active forces to sustain these losses’.

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"ce, Navy. Support of the newly authorized deployments will
require the callup of two Navy mobile construction battalions
(NMCB) totalling 1,700 personnel and 600 individual medical/
dental /chaplain Reservists. These callups will provide for
bringing recalled Marine units up to strength, sustaining the
Navy personnel organic to the deployed RLT, and adding medical
staffing -required by the increased level of activity in South-
east Asia to forward hospital facilities including Guam.

"a. Air Force. The Air Force plans to support this approved
deployment operation without recall of individuals or units.
Reserve airlift augmentation needed to supplement the deployment
airlift can be accomplished by Reservists on a voluntary basis.”

In addition, the Joint Chiefs indicated that it would be both prudent
and advisable to reach a readiness level that could be responsive to
further COMUSMACV force requirements, if the remainder of the 82nd Airborne
Division and one more RLT were required. COMUSMACV had already indicated
the potential need for these units at an early date. To reach such a
readiness level, the Joint Chiefs indicated that the following Reserve
forces would have to be activated:

"a, Army. Should the additional deployments be made, it would
be necessary for the Army to recall (in addition to the two brigade
forces previously discussed) one infantry division force and one
infantry brigade force of the Army Reserve components, totalling
58,000 men. These forces will be needed to reconstitute the
strategic reserve and to broaden the source of critical ranks
and skills to be applied against the increased rotation base
requirements. The Reserve units should be recalled at this time
to bring them closer to a combat-ready status prior to the probable
deployment of the balance of the 82nd Airborne Division. The
Reserve division force should attain a combat-capable status in
15 weeks after recall and the brigade force should require 12 weeks.

"bd, Marine Corps.

(1) The most desirable Reserve callup consists of the
entire th Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF), plus other units
and selected individual Reserves. This totals about 51,000.
Mobilization and subsequent deployment of the Reserve forces
should be accomplished incrementally. This callup permits the
early and orderly replacement of the 5th Marine Division (-)
in South Vietnam and the subsequent redeployment of the 5th
Marine Division (-) to CONUS, or, alternatively, the 4th Division/
Wing Team can meet the additional requirements....

"eo, Navy. Support of these additional deployments. would
require the callup of an additional three NMCB (total of five)
totalling 4,150 personnel and an additional LOO (for a total
of 1,000) medical /dental/chaplain Reservists. These callups

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

would provide for 1k NMCB in RVN for direct construction support
and an adequate rotation base to maintain these deployments.

The additional medical /dental/chaplain personnel will provide
for bringing recalled Marine units up to strength, sustaining
the Navy personnel in the additional deploying RLT, and adding
some medical staffing to forward hospital facilities. Recall
of an additional 2,800 personnel would be required to augment
the logistic operations in Vietnam. The increased requirement
for naval gunfire support for the larger deployments would
necessitate the activation of two heavy cruisers to fill CINCPAC's
requirements for additional shore bombardment capability to
maintain two large calibre gun ships on station in the SEA
DRAGON area and off RVN. Additionally, 15 destroyers should

be activated from the mothball fleet to replace 15 Naval Reserve
Training destroyers to be called to active duty. This would
fill CINCPAC's requirement for an additional five destroyers

on station off Vietnam and provide the rotation base to support
them. The recall of 6,000 Naval Reserve personnel would provide
the additional manpower and skills base to man these reactivated
ships.

"a. Air Force. The deployment of the remainder of the 82nd
Airborne Division to Southeast Asia will require the support of
three tactical fighter squadrons, a tactical reconnaissance
squadron, necessary elements of the Tactical Air Control System,
one PRIME BEEF unit, and one security squadron. In order to
provide support of the deployment and the broadening of the
training and rotetion base and to retain a minimum acceptable
number of combat-ready deployable squadrons in the CONUS, these
Air Force organizations will have to be replaced by activation
of the following Air Reserve Forces: eisht tactical fighter
squadrons, five tactical reconnaissance squadrons, one Tactical
Control Group, two military airlift groups, and one tactical
airlift wing, totalling 22,497 spaces. Activation of these Air
National Guard/Reserve units include organizations not currently
manned under COMBAT BEEF standards (100 percent)."

The Joint Chiefs reiterated their recommendation that legislation
be sought to: "(1) provide authority to call selected individual
Reservists to active duty; (2) extend beyond 30 June 1968 the existing
authority to call Reserve units to active duty; and (3) extend terms
of service for active duty personnel." The provisions of such legisla-
tion would, the Joint Chiefs indicated, impact on the Services in the
following manner:

to, Army.

(1) Extension of terms of Service. Provides an immediate
impact on readiness worldwide in that critical skill specialists
in short supply are retained on active duty, It is estimated that

9 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_TOP SECRET - Sensitive

between 30,000 and 40,000 additional trained personnel will be
retained in the Army for each month of extension. For example,
during the first six-month period of extension of terms of
service, the Army would gain in excess of 500 helicopter pilots,
of which there is a critical shortease. OQther critical skill
shortages would be similarly affected.

"(2) Selective callup of individual Reservists. The
Army Immediate Ready Reserve contains 490,000 personnel, of
which more than 90 percent are in grades of E-4 and E-5. A
selective callup of individual Reservists, coupled with an
extension of terms of service, will alleviate virtually all of
the Army's current critical skill shortages.

"b. Marine Corps.

(1) Involuntary extension of enlistments of all
enlisted personnel would produce an average of 5,766 enlisted
men per month through June. Within this gain, an average of
1,728 experienced NCOs per month would be gained,

"(2) Selective recall of individual Reservists would
be necessary in order to bring mobilized units up, to provide
the essential rank and skills not contained in the organized
Reserve. Within the Marine Corps Reserve, but outside of the
organized units, there is an invaluable pool of key personnel:
noncommissioned officers, officers (particularly pilots), and
Marines possessing long lead time "hard skill" Military Occupa-
tional Specialties.

"o, Navy. In the deploying ships of the Navy, there is a
shortfall of 32,500 in officers and the top six enlisted pay
grades.

(1) Involuntary extension of Reserve Officers and
selected recall of Reserves would fulfill officer manning
requirements in one to three months.

"(2) Gancellation of early releases and selective
involuntary extensions, recall of Fleet Reserves, deferral of
transfers to Fleet Reserve, and recall of Ready Reserves would
achieve 100 percent enlisted requirements by rate/rating in
one to three months.

"q@, Air Force. If extension of terms of service were granted
the Air Force could, on a selective basis, hold approximately
20,000 skilled personnel out of a possible 70,000 that would
be discharged over a six-month period. Retaining these critical

skills would sustain the force at an acceptable level. Should

" 10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

that:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

additional forces be deployed to meet possible future MACV
requirements, legislation would be necessary in order that
active units can be replaced by activation of corresponding
Air National Guard units after 30 June 1968."

Based on all the foregoing, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended

"ea. The following Reserve component units be called to
active duty immediately:

(1) Two infantry brigade forces.

(2) One Marine regiment, plus the support forces —
indicated in paragraph 3b(1).

(3) Two NMCBs.

"5. The following Reserve component units be brought to a
high state of readiness for probable call to active duty on
short notice:

(1) One infantry division force and one infantry
brigade force, in addition to the two brigade forces indicated
above.

(2). The remainder of the ith Marine Expeditionary Force.

(3) Three NMCBs, in addition to the two indicated above.
Also, de-mothball work and long lead time procurement should begin
on two heavy cruisers and 15 destroyers. Fifteen Naval Reserve
Training destroyers should be placed on active duty and commence
immediate installation of modern communications/electronics
equipment.

"(4) Bight TPS, five TPS, one TACS, five ARS, one
PRIME BEEF unit, and one security squadron.

"6, Measures be taken immediately to obtain the legislation
to (1) provide authority to call selected individual Reservists
to active duty; (2) extend beyond 30 June 1968 the existing
authority ‘to call Reserve units to active duty; and (3) extend
terms of service for active duty personnel.

"a, A supplemental appropriation be requested to cover the

unprogrammed cost of the approved and probable future deployments."

si TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In addition, the Joint Chiefs of Staff indicated that an updated
assessment of U.S, military posture worldwide pertaining to additional
problems for U.S, military capabilities, to include specific recommenda-
tions for required improvement, would be reported in the near future.

This request was overtaken, as we shall see, by subsequent require-
ments submitted by COMUSMACY.

2. The Troop Request

Although the new Secretary of Defense, Clark Clifford, was formally
sworn into office by the President on 1 March, his work had begun many days
before.

In order to ascertain the situation in SVN and to determine subsequent
‘MACV force requirements, General Harle Wheeler, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, had been sent by the President to Saigon on 23 February. His report
was presented to the President on 27 February 1968. 11/ On the basis of this
report, and the recommendations it contained, the President ordered the initi-
ation of a complete and searching reassessment of the entire U.S. strategy
and commitment in South Vietnam. The Secretary of Defense-designate, Mr.
Clifford, was directed to conduct this review, aided by other members of the
Cabinet.

In his report, General Wheeler summarized the situation in Vietnam
as follows:

- The enemy failed to achieve his initial objective but
is continuing his effort. Although many of his units were
badly hurt, the judgment is that he has the will and the
capability to continue.

- Enemy losses have been heavy; he has failed to achieve
his prime objectives of mass uprisings and capture of a large
number of the capital cities and towns. Morale in enemy units
which were badly manled or where the men were oversold the idea
of a decisive victory at TET probably has suffered severely,
However, with replacements, his indoctrination system would
seem capable of maintaining morale at a generally adequate level.
His determination appears to be unshaken.

- The enemy is operating with relative freedom in the
countryside, probably recruiting heavily and no doubt infil-
trating NVA units and personnel. His recovery is likely to be
rapid; his supplies are adequate; and he is trying to maintain
the momentum of his winter-spring offensive.

- The structure of the GVN held up but its effectiveness
has suffered.

12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET + Sensitive

- The RVNAF held up against the initial assault with
gratifying, and in away, Surprising strength and fortitude.
However, ARVN is now in a defensive posture around towns
and cities and there is concern about how well they will
bear up under sustained pressure.

- The initial attack nearly succeeded in a dozen places,
and defeat in those places was only averted by the timely
reaction of US forces. In short, it was a very near thing.

- There is no doubt that the RD Program has suffered
a severe set back.

- RVNAF was not badly hurt physically -- they should
recover strength and equipment rather quickly (equipment
in 2 - 3 months -- strength in 3 - 6 months). Their prob-
lems are more psychological than physical.

- US forees have lost none of their pre-TET capability.

- MACV has three principal problems. First, logistic
support north of Danang is marginal owing to weather, enemy
interdiction and harassment and the massive deployment of
US forces into the DMZ/Hue area. Opening Route 1 will
alleviate this problem but takes a substantial troop com-
mitment. Second, the defensive posture of ARVN is permitting
the VG to make rapid inroads in the formerly pacified country-
side. ARVN, in its own words, is in a dilemma as it cannot
afford another enemy thrust into the cities and towns and yet
if it remains in a defensive posture against this eontingency,
the countryside goes by default. MACV is forced to devote
much of its-troop strength to this problem. Third, MACV
has been forced to deploy 50% of all US maneuver battalions
into I Corps, to meet the threat there, while enemy syn-
chronizes an attack against Khe Sanh/Hue-Quang Tri with an
offensive in the Highlands and around Saigon while keeping the
pressure on throughout the remainder of the country, MACV
will be hard pressed to meet adequately all threats. Under
these circumstances, we must be prepared to accept some
reverses. 12

As to the future, General Wheeler saw the enemy pursuing a strategy of
a reinforced offensive in order to enlarge his control throughout the
countryside and keep pressure on the government and the allies. The enemy
is likely, the Chairman indicated:

To maintain strong threats in the DMZ area, at Khe Sanh,
in the highlands, and at Saigon, and to attack in force when
conditions seem favorable. He is likely to try to gain

13 TOP SRCRET - Sensitive |
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

control of the country's northern provinces. He will con-
tinue efforts to encircle cities and province capitals to
isolate and disrupt normal activities, and infiltrate them
to create chaos. He will seek maximum attrition of RVNAF
elements. Against US forces, he will emphasize attacks by
fire on airfields and installations, using assaults and
ambushes selectively. His central objective continues to
be the destruction of the Government of SVN and its armed
forces. As a minimum he hopes to seize sufficient territory
and gain control of enough people to support establishment
of the groups and committees he proposes for participation
in an NLF dominated government. 13/

General Wheeler stated that MACV believed the central thrust of U.S.
strategy must be to defeat the enemy offensive. If this were done well,
the situation overall would be greatly improved over the pre-TET condition.

While accepting the fact that its first priority must be the security
of the GVN in Saigon and in provincial capitals, MACV described its objec-
tives as:

--First, to counter the enemy offensive and to destroy
or eject the NVA invasion force in the north.

-- Second, to restore security in the cities and towns.

-- Third, to restore security in the heavily popu-
lated areas of the countryside.

-- Fourth, to regain the initiative through offensive
operations. 1/

In discussing how General Westmoreland would accomplish these objec-
tives, General Wheeler indicated the following tasks:

(1) Security of Cities and Government. MACV recog-
nizes that US forces will be required to reinforce and
support RVNAF in the security of cities, towns and govern-
ment structure. At this time, 10 US battalions are operating
in the environs of Saigon. It is clear that this task will
absorb a substantial portion of US forces,

(2) Security in the Countryside. To a large extent
the VC now control the countryside. Most of the 54 bat-
talions formerly providing security for pacification are
now defending district Or province towns. MACV estimates
that US forces will be required in a number of places to
assist and encourage the Vietnamese Army to leave the cities
and towns and reenter the country. This is especially true

in the Delta.

nen TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(3) Defense of the borders, the DMZ and the northern
provinces. MACY considers that it must meet the enemy
threat in I Corps Tactical Zone and has already deployed
there slightly over 50% of all US maneuver battalions.

US forces have been thinned out in the highlands, notwith-
standing an expected enemy offensive in the early future.

(4) Offensive Operations. Coupling the increased
requirement for the defense of the cities and subsequent

reentry into the rural areas, and the heavy requirement

for defense of the I Corps Zone, MACV does not have adequate
forces at this time to resume the offensive in the remainder
of the country, nor does it have adequate reserves against
the contingency of simultaneous large-scale enemy offensive
action throughout the country. 15/

The conclusion was obvious:

Forces currently assigned to MACY, plus the residual
Program Five forces yet to be delivered, are inadequate
in numbers and balance to carry out the strategy and to
accomplish the tasks described above in the proper priority.

However, it was the extent and magnitude of General Wheeler's request
that stimulated the initiation of a thorough review of the direction of
U.S. policy in SVN. To contend with, and defeat, the new enemy threat,
MACV indicated a total requirement of 206,756 spaces over the 525,000
ceiling imposed by Program Five, or a new proposed ceiling of 731,756.

All of these forces, which included three Division equivalents, 15 tactical
fighter squadrons, and augmentation for current Navy programs, were to be
deployed into country by the end of CY 68. These additional forces were

+o be delivered in three packages as follows:

(1) Immediate Increment, Priority One: To be deployed
by 1 May 68. Major elements include one brigade of the 5th
Mechanized Division with a mix of one infantry, one armored
and one mechanized battalion; the Fifth Marine Division (less
RLT-26); one armored cavalry regiment; eight tactical fighter
squadrons; and a groupment of Navy units to augment on going
programs.

(2) Immediate Increment, Priority Two: To be deployed
as soon as possible but prior to 1 Sep 68. Major elements
include the remainder of the 5th Mechanized Division, and four
tactical fighter squadrons. It is desirable that the ROK
Light Division be deployed within this time frame.

(3) Follow-On Increment: To be deployed by the end of
cy 68. Major elements include one infantry division, three
tactical fighter sauadrons, and units to further .augment

Navy Programs. 16/

15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
A fo
out in st
troops wo
tion of t

To deny the request for troops, or to attempt to again cut it to a size which
could be sustained by the thinly stretched active forces, would just as surely

signify t
reached.

3.

his first

reassessment of U.S. strategy. Present, in addition to Clifford, were McNamara,

General T

Habib. 17/

President

pe addressed was not whether we should send 200,000 additional troops to Viet-

nam. The
could it

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

rk in the road had been reached. Now the alternatives stood

ark reality. To accept and meet General Wheeler's request for

uld mean a total U.S. military commitment to SVN -- an Americaniza-
he war, a callup of reserve forces, vastly increased expenditures.

hat an upper limit to the U.S. military commitment in SVN had been

"A to Z%" Reassessment

These thoughts were very much on Secretary Clifford's mind during
meeting on 29 February with the people who were to conduct the

aylor, Nitze, Fowler, Katzenbach, Rostow, Helms, Bundy, Warnke, and
Mr. Clifford outlined the task as he had received it from the
. He indicated to the group that he felt that the real problem to

real questions were: Should we follow the present course in SVN;
ever prove successful even if vastly more than 200,000 troops were

sent? The answers to these questions, the formulation of alternative courses

open to t
general a
were to b

he U.S., was to be the initial focus of the review. To that end,
ssignments were made concerning papers to be written. These papers
e prepared for discussion among the Group on Saturday, March 2.

The general division of labor and outline of subjects assigned was indicated
by Mr. Bundy in a memorandum the subsequent day, as follows:

1. What alternative courses of action are available to

the US?

addi

Assignment: Defense - General Taylor - State (Secretary)
2. What alternative courses are open to the enemy?
Assignment - Defense and CIA

3. Analysis of implications of Westmoreland's request for
tional troops.

series of papers on the following.

Military implications = JCS

Political implications - State
(Political implications in their broadest
domestic and international sense to include

internal Vietnamese problem).

Budgetary results - Defense

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Economic implications - Treasury
Congressional implications - Defense

Implications for public opinion - domestic and
international - State.

h, Negotiation Alternatives
Assignment - State 18/

In addition, Secretary Clifford indicated that certain military options
were to be examined in this review. These options were:

Option I: Add approximately 196,000 troops to the present
total authorized force level, i.e. Program 5
(525,000) plus the six additional battalions
already deployed (10,500). Restrictions cur-
rently imposed on air and ground operations in
Cambodia, Laos, and North Vietnam are relaxed
to permit destruction of the ports, mining of
the waterways, attack of complete target systems
in NVN and offensive operations against vc/NVA
Army forces in Laos and Cambodia.

Option IA: No change from Option I except that current
restrictions on ground and air operations in
Cambodia, Laos, and NVN are maintained.

Option II: No change to total authorized force level
(525,000 plus 10,500 augnentation) except to
deploy 3 fighter squadrons authorized within
the ceiling but not deployed.

Option III: Add 50,000 troops above those currently authorized.
Option IV: Add 100,000 troops above those currently authorized. 19/

The main work in preparing a paper for Secretary Clifford to present
to the President was to be done in the Defense Department by a group of
staff action officers working intensively under the direction of Mr. Leslie
Gelb. These staff officers worked as a drafting committee while a group
consisting of Mr. Warnke, Mr. Enthoven, Mr. Halperin and Mr. Steadman
acted as a policy review board. Of the work done outside the Pentagon,
only the papers on negotiations and SVN domestic policies prepared by
Mr. Bundy and Mr. Habib at State and General Taylor's paper on alternative
strategies went to the White House. The other materials contributed by
CIA,. State, Treasury, and the Joint Staff were fed into the deliberative
process at the Pentagon but were not included as such in the final product.
Thus, the dominant voice jn the consideration of alternatives as the reassess~
ment progressed was that of the OSD.

If TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

These agency views were, however, read and assessed by the working
group and, although they were not furnished to the President, they were
part of the background of the deliberative process. It would be mis-
leading, therefore, to say that they were not considered or had no influ-
ence on the decisions taken. In any case, they provided some sense of
the ideas and alternatives being considered and debated during these few
frantic days of late February - early March, 1968.

The CIA furnished three papers which were considered in the reassess-
ment. The first, dated 26 February 1968, was prepared for the Director of
Central Intelligence prior to the formation of the Task Group. Entitled
"the Outlook in Vietnam," this paper stated the following conclusion:

We believe that the Communists will sustain a high level
of military activity for at least the next two or three
months. It is difficult to forecast the situation which will
then obtain, given the number of unknowable factors which
will figure. Our best estimate is as follows:

a. The least likely outcome of the present phase
is that the Communist side will expend its resources to such
an extent as to be incapable thereafter of preventing steady
advances by the US/GVI.

b. Also unlikely, though considerably less so, is
that the GVN/ARVN will be so critically weakened that it can
play no further significant part in the military and political
prosecution of the struggle.

c. More likely than either of the above is that the
present push will be generally contained, but with severe
losses to both the GVN and Communist forces, and that a
period will set in during which neither will be capable of
registering decisive gains. 20/

The second CIA paper, dated 29 February, was entitled "Communist
Alternatives in Vietnam." Two main military alternatives were identified,
as follows:

@. maintain widespread military pressure in Vietnam
at least for the next several months;

b. increase the level of military pressures by one
or more of the following measures:

(1) committing all of their reserves from NVN,
tantamount to an all-out invasion, to gain decisive results
as quickly as possible;

(2) committing two or three additional divisions;

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(3) seeking one major battle which promised significant
political gains.

(4) expanding current efforts in Laos. 21/
Based on this analysis, Communist intentions were assessed as follows:

The Communists probably intend to maintain widespread mili-
tary pressures in Vietnam for at least the next several months.
A special effort will be made to harass urban areas and keep
them under threat. They will probably calculate that the
US/GVN will be forced to defend the towns and the countryside
will be left more vulnerable to Communist domination. At
some time, new Communist attacks will probably be launched
to seize and hold certain cities and towns. Where condi-
tions appear favorable they will engage US forces, seeking
some significant local success which would have a major
political return. The total result of their campaign, they
hope, will be to so strain the resources of the US and the
GVN/ARVN, that the Saigon government will lose control of
much of the country and the US will have little choice but
to settle the war on Communist terms. 22/

The third CIA paper, submitted on 1 March 1968, attempted to answer
specific questions posed by the Secretary of Defense in his initial meeting
with his senior working group on 29 February. Pertinent questions and the
CIA assessment are listed below:

Q@. What is the likely course of events in South Vietnam
over the next 10 months, assuming no change in U.S. policy
or force levels?

A. In the assumed circumstances a total military victory
by the Allies or the Communists is highly unlikely in the next
10 months. It is manifestly impossible for the Communists to
drive U.S. forces out of the country. It is equally out of
the question for US/GVN forces to clear South Vietnam of
Communist forces. It is possible, however, that the over-
all situation in this period will take a decisive turn.

We think it unlikely that this turn could be in the
us/GVN favor...-We see no evidence yet that the GVN/ARVN
will be inspired to seize the initiative, go over to the
attack, exploit the Communist vulnerabilities, and quickly
regain the rural areas. We doubt they have the will and
capability to make the effort.

Far more likely is an erosion of the ARVN's morale
and effectiveness. We do not believe that the GVN will
collapse, or that the ARVN will totally disintegrate. But

19 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

there is a fairly good chance that Communist presssures
will result in a serious weakening of the GVN/ARVIN apparatus
and an end to its effective functioning in parts of the
country. In these circumstances, virtually the entire
burden of the war would fall on US forces.

* + %*

In sum, there is a high risk that both the ARVN
and GVN will be seriously weakened in the next months,
and perhaps decisively so. Our best estimate is that
in the assumed circumstances the overall situation 10
months hence will be no better than a standoff.

Q. What is the likely Communist reaction to a change
in US strategy toward greater control over population
centers, with or without increased forces?

A. In general the Communists would view this move
as a success for their strategy. Their tactical response
in such circumstances would depend mainly on the nature
of US enclaves. If these were fairly large and embraced
much of the outlying countryside, the Communists would
pelieve them to be porous enough to infiltrate and harass,
much as they are doing now. If the defensive perimeters
were fairly solid, however, the Communists would not try
to overrun them in frontal assaults. Instead, they
would concentrate for a time on consolidating the country-
side and isolating the various defended enclaves, in
particular interdicting supply lines and forcing the US
to undertake expensive supply movements from out of
country. A Communist-controlled regime with a "coalition"
facade would be set up in "liberated" areas and attempts
at terrorist activity inside the enclaves would be under-
taken. Hanoi. would hope that a combination of military and
political pressure, together with the dim prospect for
achievement of the original US aims in the Vietnam struggle,
would eventually persuade the US to extricate itself through
negotiations.

Q@. Wheat is the likely NVA/VC strategy over the next
10 months if US forces are increased by 50,000, by 100,000,
or by 200,000? :

A. We would expect the Communists to continue the ware

They still have resources available in North Vietnam and
within South Vietnam to increase their troop strength. Their

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

strong logistical effort and their ability to organize and
exploit the people under their control in the South enable them
+o counter US increases by smaller increases of their own.

Over a ten-month period the Communists would probably be able
to introduce sufficient new units into the South to offset

the US maneuver battalion increments of the various force
levels given above. 23/

These CIA assessments, then, painted very bleak alternatives for
U.S. policymakers. If U.S. policy and force levels did not change, there
was a high risk that ARVN and the GVN would be seriously weakened, perhaps
decisively so. The US would assume the major burden of the war, and the
situation would be no better than a standoff. If U.S. forces were increased
by as much as 100,000, the Communists would probably be able to introduce
sufficient new units in the South to offset this increase. If the U.S.
changed its strategy toward greater control over population centers, with
or without increased forces, the Communists would adjust their strategy
so as to preclude the achievement of U.S. aims.

In his various papers for the Working Group, Assistant Secretary of
State William Bundy attempted a deliberate approach. He furnished one
paper which outlined alternative courses of action which he considered
deserved serious consideration. ah/ Another paper outlined a checklist
"to serve as a rough guide t the papers that need preparation under a
systematic code." 2

The alternative courses listed by Mr. Bundy were:

a. Accept the Wheeler/Westmoreland recommendation aimed
at sending roughly 100,000 men by 1 May and another 100,000
men by the end of 1968.

b. Change our military strategy, reducing the areas and
places we seek to control and concentrating far more heavily
on the protection of populated areas.

ec. Adopt option b above in the south, but extend our
bombing and other military actions against the North to try
to strangle the war there and put greater pressure on Hanoi
in this area.

d. Accept immediately those elements of the Wheeler/
Westmoreland proposals that could hope to affect the situ-
ation fayorably over the next four months or so, but do not
go beyond that in terms of force plans and related actions.

e. "Cut and shave" the Wheeler/Westmoreland proposals
and their action implications, but carry on basically in
accordance with present strategy.

f, "“Ali-out option.” “Announce that we were prepared
to hold in Vietnam no matter what developed." 26

(eal TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Department of State also prepared papers on the following
subjects:

a. Introductory Paper on Key Elements in the Situation 27/
b. Probable Soviet, Chinese, Western European Reactions 28/

ec. Ambassador Thompson's Cable on Soviet Reactions to
Possible U.S. Government Courses of Action 29/

d. European and Other Non-Asian Reactions to Major Force
Increases 30/

e. Asian Reaction to a Major U.S, Force Increase 31/
£. Options on our Negotiating Posture 32/

These papers were presented to the Clifford Group at the meeting on
3 March 1968. However, as will be seen, they were quickly overtaken by
the rapidly moving situation and, with the exception of the paper on nego-
tiating options, did not figure in the final memorandum which was forwarded
to the President on 4 March.

General Maxwell Taylor's paper on alternative courses of action is
of greater interest in that it was furnished both to the Clifford Working
Group and to the White House directly through General Taylor's capacity
as Military Advisor to the President. Although it is not known what weight
was given to this paper, it was received by the President even prior to the
Memorandum from the Clifford Group, and thereby could have gained some
special weight in the deliberations of the President.

After a brief listing of the U.S. objectives in SVN, General Taylor
concluded that, since there was no serious consideration being given at the
moment to adding to or subtracting from our present objective, the discussion
should be limited to considerations of alternative strategies and programs
to attain that objective. 33/

General Taylor concluded that, basically, our government had only two
choices:

a. We can tell General Westmoreland that he must make do
with his present forces in Viet-Nam and ask him to report to
us what he is capable of accomplishing therewith. This would
be an invitation to him to cut back sharply upon the military
objectives he has defined in his latest Combined Campaign
Plan (1968). Alternatively, while making this decision to
provide no further forces, we could give new strategic
guidance to General Westmoreland which would assist him in
establishing the priorities for his efforts necessary to
pring his mission within capabilities of the forces allotted
him. :

*

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. The other broad alternative is to increase his present
forces by some amount varying from less than his figure of
205,000 and ranging up to the full amount. Also in this case,
we might well consider giving him revised strategic guidance
in the light of what we have learned from the Tet offensive
and its sequel.

General Taylor thus indicated that in the reassessment of our strategy,
the government would be required to answer the following questions:

(1) Do we decide at this time to send any additional
reinforcements to General Westmoreland?

(2) If the answer is affirmative, should we agree to
send all or part of the 205,000 requested by General
Westmoreland?

(3) Whether the response is affirmative or negative, should
we send General Westmoreland new strategic guidance, hoping to
limit further demands on U.S. military manpower?

(4) What Strategie Reserve should be retained in the U.S.
in the foregoing situations?

General Taylor then listed some of the political considerations of the
military course of action decided upon. He listed the following political
actions as worth considering in connection with any decision on reinforce-

ment:

(1) A renewed offer of negotiation, possibly with a private
communication that we would suspend the bombing for a fixed period
without making the time limitation public if we were assured that
productive negotiations would start before the end of the period.

(2) A public announcement that we would adjust the bombing
of the North to the level of intensity of enemy ground action
in the South.

(3) As a prelude to sharply increased bombing levels, possibly
40 include the closing of Haiphong, a statement of our intentions
made necessary by the enemy offensive against the cities and
aeross the frontiers.

(4) Announcement of the withdrawal of the San Antonio
formula in view of the heightened level of aggression conducted

by North Viet-Nam.

(5) Keep silent.

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In choosing among these alternatives, General Taylor argued that the
present military situation in South Vietnam argued strongly against a new
negotiation effort or any thought of reducing the bombing of the North.
He further argued that, in any case, we would appear well-advised to
withdraw from the San Antonio formula.

Thus, he concluded, there seemed to be at least three program
packages worth serious consideration. They were:

Package A
a. No increase of General Westmoreland's forces in south Viet—Nam.
b. New strategic guidance.
c. Build-up of Strateeie Reserve.
dad. No negotiation initiative.
e. Withdrawal of San Antonio formula,
f£. Pressure on GVN to do better.

Package B

Be Partial acceptance of General Westmoreland's recommendation.

Io

New strategic guidance.

le
.

Build-up of Strategic Reserve.
d. No negotiation initiative.

Withdrawal of San Antonio formula.

lo

f. Pressure on GVN to do better.

Package C
a. Approval of General Westmoreland's full request.
b. New strategic guidance.
c. Build-up of Strategic Reserve.
d. No negotiation initiative.
e&. Withdrawal of San Antonio formula and announcement of

intention to close Haiphong.

f. Pressure on GVN to do better.

Major effort te rally the homefront.

itis

el TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The working group within ISA had access to all of these documents.
In addition, and at the request of the working group, other papers were
prepared within the Department of Defense by the Assistant Secretary
(Systems Analysis) and the Assistant Secretary (Public Affairs).

Initially, Systems Analysis undertook a capability study in order
to: determine if the MACV requirement could indeed be met. They concluded
that, with the exception of Army aviation units, the MACV manpower request
could be filled essentially as desired. This could even be done, the
analysis concluded, without changing the one-year tour policy, without
drawing down on Europe, and without widespread second tours with less than
2. months in CONUS. This assumed a reserve recall, added funds, and the
required strength increases.

Our maximum capability would be to provide 6 maneuver
battalions in May, 9 more in June, 9 in July and as many as
6 more in August -- faster than the MACV request. These
units would have the necessary artillery, transportation
and engineer support. Added tactical air units could deploy
on a matching schedule.

The only significant shortfall would be in Army Aviation.
Even with a reserve recall, present deployment schedules cannot
be significantly accelerated. Production limitations are such
that at least one year would be required to increase the out-
put of UH-1/AF-1 helicopters. Thus, it would be mid-1969
before any added aviation units could deploy and mid-1971
before the total MACV requirement could be met. 3h/

This SA paper also considered several other deployment options, as
follows: cut 50,000 from present authorization; no increase in current
authorization; increase by 50,000; increase by 100,000; increase by 200,000.
The units required under all these options, it was concluded, could deploy
+o Vietnam in a matter of months. The 50,000 man package could arrive in
May and June; the 100,000 man package by August; and the full 200,000 (with
minor exceptions ) by December. The principal exceptions under all options
would continue to be Army aviation units. A summary of the various options
considered is shown below:

Optional Deployments
A B C D EB

Cut Current Ada Ada Ada
50,000 Plsn 50,000 100,000 200,000

Total U.S. personnel 485,000 535,000 585,000 635,000 631,000

U.S. Maneuver Bns 103 112 118 12h, 133
Artillery Bns 68 72 Te 83 92

Tac Air Sads yy hs 51 56 60

Annual. Cost $23 Bil. $25 Bil. $28 Bil. $30 Bil. $35 Bil.
Reserve Recall -- Lo 65,000 200,000 250,000 35/

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Other papers prepared by Systems Analysis during this period were
furnished to the ISA working group upon their request. Indeed, the subject
matter and thrust of these papers indicated fairly early the bias of the
people preparing them as well as the direction in which the reassessment of
U.S. strategy was moving, at least within the working group in ISA.

Papers were also furnished concerning pacification, costs and probable
results of alternative U.S. strategies in South Vietnam, the status of
RVNAF, problems of inflation, and data for analysis of strategies. The
main thrust of most of these papers was that "more of the same" in South
Vietnam would not achieve decisive results and, indeed, would not be satis-
factory. The paper on pacification indicated that:

Hamlet Evaluation System (HES) reports for CY 1967 indicate
that pacification progressed slowly during the first half of
1967, and lost ground in the second half. Most (60%) of the
1967 gain results from accounting type changes to the HES
system, not from pacification progress; hamlet additions and
deletions, and revised population estimates accounted for
half of the January-June inerease and all of the June-December
increase. In the area that really counts--VC-D-E hamlets
rising to A-B-C ratings--we actually suffered a net loss of
10,100 people between June and December 19067. 36/

Based’ on General Wheeler's statement in his report to the President,
that "to a large extent the VC now control the countryside," the paper con-
eluded that "the enemy's current offensive appears to have killed the program
onee and for all." 37/

In analyzing the status of RVNAF, the Systems Analysis paper concluded:

Highest priority must be given to getting RVNAF moving. In
the short run re-equipping the Vietnamese and helping them
regain their combat power insures that we can prevent unnecessary
loss should the enemy attack the cities or put pressure there
while hitting Khe Sanh. Further, present US force commitments
mean that only a recuperated RVNAF will permit release of US
units for other missions and accomplish any objectives in
pacification. Finally, restoration of security in the cities
in conjunction with the National Police is a major new mission
for RVNAF which requires forces.

What can we do? There are many indications that the man-
power situation is worse than reported. Every effort must be
made to determine how many deserters there are and to approach
them. Rounding up trained manpower delinquent in returning
from Tet will help. US advisors can pressure the JGS to up-
grade selected RF/PF into ARVNin addition to measures already
initiated by RVNAF.

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

COMUSMACV must identify weak RVNAF units. III Corps
need special study and preparation of revised contingency
plans. Priority on remanning, re-equipping and retraining
must be given to the RVMAF elite units (VNMC) which con-
stitute the general reserve. COMUSMACV must plan for the
use of this reserve and earmarked US units to defect VC
attack of week RVNAF units during the interim period.

RVNAF modernization should take precedence over equip-
ping all US forces except those deploying to the combat
zone. The remaining 82,000 M16 rifles must be delivered
ASAP. It is also in the US interest to equip the RF/PF
with Ml6s before equipping the US training base, which is
already programmed.

lastly, COMUSMACV must make decisions about what
missions RVNAF need not accomplish now. RVNAF is stretched
too thin given its past and expected missions. It alone
cannot protect the cities and hold the countryside where
it is still deployed. Decision is needed to permit the
build-up of weak units and better integrated use of US
and RVNAF against whatever enemy scenario develops, 38/

The paper entitled "Alternate Strategies" painted a bleak picture of
American failure in Vietnam:

We lost our offensive stance because we never achieved
the momentum essential for military victory. Search and
Destroy operations can't build this kind of momentum and
the RVNAF was not pushed hard enough. We became mesmerized
by statistics of known doubtful validity, choosing to place
our faith only in the ones that showed progress. We judged
the enemy's intentions rather than his capabilities because
we trusted captured documents too much. We were not alert
to the perils of time lag and spoofing. In short, our set-
backs were due to wishful thinking compounded by a massive
intelligence collection and/or evaluation failure.

Tndeed,. in examining U.S. objectives in SVN, the picture of failure was
manifest:

Since the original commitment of large US forces in 1965,
our stated objectives have been to:

(1) Make it as difficult and costly as possible for
NVM to continue effective support of the VC and cause NVN to

cease its direction of the VC insurgency.

(While we have raised the price to NVN of aggression and

27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

support of the VC, it shows no lack of capability or will

to match each new US escalation. Our strategy of "attrition"
has not worked. Adding 206,000 more US men to a force of .
525,000, gaining only 27 additional maneuver battalions and
270 tactical fighters at an added cost te the US of $10 bil-
lion per year raises the question of who is making it costly
from whon. )

(2) Extend GVN dominion, direction and control over
SVN.

(This objective can only be achieved by the GVN through
its political and economic processes and with the indispensable
support of an effective RVNAF. The TET offensive demonstrated
not only that the US had not provided an effective shield, it
also demonstrated that the GVN and RVNAF had not made real
progress in pacification -- the essential first step along the
road of extending GVN dominion, direction and control.)

(3) Defeat the VC and NVA forces in SVN and force
their withdrawal. (The TET offensive proves we were further
from this goal than we thought. How much further remains
+o be seen.)

(4) Deter the Chinese Communists from direct inter-
vention in SHA. (This we have done successfully so far;
however, greatly increased U.S. forces may become counter-
praductive.)

We know that despite a massive influx of 500,000 US troops,
1.2 million tons of bombs a year, 400,000 attack sorties per year,
200,000 enemy KITA in three years, 20,000 US KTA, etc., our control
of the countryside and the defense of the urban areas is now
essentially at pre-August 1965 levels. We have achieved stale-
mate at a high commitment. A new strategy must be sought. 39/

Several alternative strategies were briefly discussed and all but one
were quickly dismissed as being unlikely to bring success:

(1) No change but increase the resources.
This strategy alternative is implicit in the recommenda-
sions of MACV and CJCS....In brief, the MACV and CJCS recommenda-
tions are for additional forces to regair this ground lost since
January, 1968. Nothing is said as to whether still more US
' forces will be required to finish the job. Another payment on
an open-ended commitment is requested.

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(2) Widen the War.

Adoption of this alternative would require more forces
than are now being considered and it runs further risks of
involving China and the USSR. The course of events already
set in motion could lead to adoption of this alternative;
increasing US forces in SVN would undoubtedly increase ‘the
possibilities of it. And the option is open fcr North
Korea. or other aggressive countries to test our will else-
where. .

(3) Opt Out of the War.

The price of quitting now would include the under-
mining of our other commitments world-wide, bitter dissension
at home, and a probable resurgence of active Chinese-USSR
territorial aggrandizements.

Before TET we could have done this with less risk than
now. * is

(4) Resuscitate GVN and RVNAF.
This option is to return to the concept of a GVN
war with US assistance instead of the present situation of
a US war with dubious GVN assistance. j

Adoption of this alternative requires:

(a) A solid commitment to a US force ceiling.
This commitment must be communicated to the highest levels

of GVN/RVNAF and our own military leaders.

(ob) A skillful conditioning of US and world
opinion to the limited US commitment to the South Vietnamese
war and to our right of withdrawal if GVN/RVNAF determina-
tion or performance wavers. :

(c) A statement that the US objective in SVN is
to develop the GVN capability to defeat the VC and NVA
forces in SVN and force their withdrawal. ho/_

The remaining Systems Analysis paper cited statistics to show that,
in the past, the North Vietnamese had been able to match the U.S. buildup
in SVN with their own buildup. Also statistics were used to project the
cost to the U.S. in casualties resulting from various deployment options
and-various strategies on the ground. These projections showed that a
shift to a population control strategy which was unchallenged by the enemy
would stabilize casualty rates, as some units would be underemployed. 41

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The paper prepared by the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public
Affairs) was entitled "Possible Public Reaction to Various Alternatives."
Five alternative options were examined:

1. Increased mobilization and deployment. This includes
sending General Westmoreland 50,000 to 200,000 more troops
and the additional moves this would require at home -- calling
reserves, extending enlistments, extra expenditures, bigger
tax bill, etc.

2. Increased mobilization/deployment plus expanded bombing
of North Vietnam.

3. Increased mobili zation/deployment plus a bombing pause.

h, Denial of the Westmoreland requests and continuation of
the war "as is" -- as it was being fought prior to the Tet
offensive and Khe Sanh.

5. Denial of the Westmoreland requests and a change in
war-fighting policy with greater concentration on defending
populated areas and less on search-and-destroy in unpopulated
areas. This would include an announced program to begin
troop withdrawal at a fixed date. he/

The Assistant Secretary, Mr. Goulding, emphasized that all options
were being examined from a public reaction standpoint only. He also
emphasized that no action would unite the country. The question to be
attacked was which option will most coalesce supporters and most isolate
the opposition.

In analyzing the various options ebove, Mr. Goulding divided the
public into hawks, doves, and middle~of-the-roaders. Under Option 1,
he argued, increased mobilization and deployment moves, without other
new actions:

.. Will make the doves unhappy because we become more
and more enmeshed in the war. They will make the hawks
unhappy because we still will be withholding our militery
strength, particularly in the North. And the middle-of-
the-roaders who basically support the President out of
conviction ‘or patriotism will be unhappy because they will
see the ante going up in so many ways and still will not
be given a victory date, a progress report they can believe
or an argument they can accept that all of this is in the
national interest. (Further, they will read in the dissent
columns and editorials that 18 months from now, when the
North Vietnamese have added 30,000 more troops, we will be
right back where we started.)

*

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Thus, public reaction to this option would be extremely negative, and
would become increasingly so as the deployment numbers, the financial
costs, and the life-disrupting actions increase.

The next two options, Mr. Goulding indicated, should be considered
together since, from a public affairs standpoint, the decision to deploy
additional troops of any significant number must be accompanied by some
"new" move. The two options discussed were deployment plus expanded
pombing of the North, and increased mobilization plus a bombing pause.

The first course, Goulding concluded,would elicit more support in
the country than does the present course.

This course would clearly bring aboard more hawks and
further isolate the doves. It would also make the war much
easier to accept by the middle-of~the-roaders. It would
help unite the country. Some fence sitters, however, would
be added to those who already view the war as an unforgiveable
sin. I think the campus and "liberal" reaction would sur-
pass anything we have seen.

The other option envisioned continuing to fight as we are in the
south, strengthening General Westmoreland with part or all of his request,
and coupling these moves with a visible "peace" campaign based upon a
cessation of the bombing in the North. This course, Goulding concluded:

--.would alienate those who take the hardest line.
We would be adding much to our cost, both by the extra
deployment and the military price paid for the pause,
without receiving any immediate or concrete results. If
the Communists took advantage of the bombing halt, the
hawks and many of the military would react strongly....
The doves, of course, would enthusiastically endorse the
pause and would immediately begin pleading and praying
that it be continued long enough to explore every possible
and conceivable corridor....Additionally, the doves would
deplore the extra deployments. ‘They would complein that
the pause was not unlimited or unconditional. They would
argue that the deployments plus the failure to be "uncon-
ditional" detracted from the effort. This two-pronged
approach -- strengthen but seck negotiation -- would give
new confidence to the middle-of-the-roaders. They would:
appleud thé government for doing "something" different,
for seeking a way out of the quagmire. They would be
more patient than the hawks to give the pause a chance,
and less disturbed than the doves at the mobilization.
For them, it could be a way out -- and even a "could be":
is better than the frustration they now feel....The deploy/
pause option would be more favorably received by the nation
than the deploy/escalate North, since it would, in the public
mind, offer more hope of ana eventual solution to the war.

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The fourth option, denial of the Westmoreland request and continue
the war "as is," would please no one, according to Mr. Goulding. The
hawks (and the military) would protest vehemently. They would be less
satisfied, and the doves would be no more satisfied by this failure to
take new initiatives toward peace. However, Mr. Goulding concluded,
since fewer people would be affected by this course than by Option One,
and therefore it would be preferable to that Option.

The advantages of Option Five - denial of General Westmoreland's
requests and a change in strategy in South Vietnam -- from a public affairs
standpoint were overwhelming, the paper concluded.

«+.-The pain of additional deployments, Reserve callups,
increased draft calls, increased casualties, extended tours
would be eliminated. The hazards of bombing escalation
would be eliminated. The dangers of a bombing pause would
be eliminated. The frustration of more-and-more-and-more
into the endless pit would be eliminated. What the people
want most of all is some sign that we are making progress,
that there is, somewhere, an end. While this does not
necessarily show progress, it does show change. It does
show the search for new approaches....It would prevent the
middle-of-the-readers from joining the doves. While the
doves want a pause, I would think they would prefer this
to deployment-mobilization plus pause. While the hawks
want to escalate in the North, most of them (not a11) also
want an end to increased ground strength in the South.

I believe that we would be successful in getting members
of Congress to make speeches in support of this.

In summary, then, and strictly from a public reaction standpoint,
Mr. Goulding noted the options as follows:

Acceptable: Only #5 -- Denial of requests and a
change in policy in the South.

Most acceptable of the others: #3 -- Deploy and
pause.

Next most acceptable: #2 -- Deploy and expand Air
War North. ;

Next most acceptable: # -- Deny Westmoreland and
continue as is.

Most objectionable: #1 -- Deploy and continue as is,
north and south. 43

32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

h. Drafting a Memorandum

There is, of course, no way of knowing how much consideration
and weight were given to each of these papers by the small group of action
officers in the Pentagon who were, in the last analysis, charged with
digesting all of these factors, considerations, and views and actually
drafting the reassessment of U.S, strategy required by the President of
his new Secretary of Defense. The predilections of these drafters, per-
haps were hinted at by the subject matter of the backup papers prepared at
their specific request and summarized above.

By 29 February, this group had produced an initial draft of a memoran-
dum for the President which examined the situation in SVN "in light of U.S.
political objectives and General Westmoreland's request for additional
troops, as stated in General Wheeler's report." hh/

This draft was slightly revised by senior officers in ISA and apparently
was Giscussed within the Defense Establishment on 1 March. 45/

This paper began with an assessment of the current situation in South
Viet Nam and a discussion of the prospects over the next 10 months. Quoting
Generel Wheeler's report, the draft memorandum indicated that the most impor-
tant VC goal in the winter-spring offensive was the takeover of the country-
side. In many parts of the country, it was stated, they may have already
succeeded in achieving this goal.

The 'main event’ thus is still to come, not in a one-night
offensive but in a week-by-week expulsion of GVN presence and
influence from the rural areas, showing up on the pacification
maps as a ‘red tide’ flowing up to the edges of the province
and district towns, and over some of them. 46/

Although ARVN held up well under initial assaults, the ISA memorandum
concluded that they would not soon move out of their defensive posture
around the cities and towns. They would, in the future, challenge the VC
offensively much less than before.

In the new, more dangerous environment to come about in
the countryside, and as currently led, motivated, and influ-
enced at the top, ARVN is even less likely than before to
buckle down to the crucial offensive job of chasing district
companies and (with U.S. help) provincial battalions. In that
environment, informers will clam up, or be killed; the VC will
get more information and cooperation, the GVN less; officials
and police will be much less willing to act on information or

, VC suspects and activities. 47/

The memorandum was even more pessimistic concerning the future direction
and abilities of the South Vietnamese Government, and read more into the TET
offensive than had been noted there by other observers.

33 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It is unlikely that the GVN will rise to the challenge.
Tt will not move toward a Government of National Union.
Current arrests of oppositionists further isolate and dis-
eredit it, and possibly foreshadow the emasculation of the
Assembly and the undoing of all promising political develop-
ments of the past year. Furthermore, it is possible that
the recent offensive was facilitated by a newly friendly
or apathetic urban environment, and a broad low-level
cooperative organization that had not existed on the same
seale before. If, in fact, the attacks reflect new VC
opportunities and capability in the cities, then the impact
of the attacks themselves, the overall military response,
and the ineffective GVN political response may still further
improve the VC cause in the cities, as well as in the country-
side. Even if the political makeup of the GVN should change
for the better, it may well be that VC penetration in the
cities has now gone or will soon go too far for real non-
communist political mobilization to develop. 48/

Based upon this bleak assessment of the future of the Government and
Army of South Vietnam, the ISA draft memorandum undertook to examine
alternative military strategies. Two such strategies were to be compared,
the current one and an alternative which emphasized population security.
(Actually, only one was analyzed in detail. ) The two strategies were to be
compared at current force levels and with added increments of 50,000,
150,000 and 200,000.

In analyzing our current strategy, the memorandum undertook a review
of how our strategy in Vietnam evolved. At the time U.S. forces were first
committed in South Vietnam in early 1965, the draft Presidential memorandum
indicated, the political situation was a desperate one. There was imminent
danger of a North Vietnamese-controlled seizure of power in SVN and the
imposition of a communist regime by force. Thus, the immediate objective
of the U.S. was a military one--to arrest this trend and to deny to the
nva/ve the seizure of political control by force.

Once U.S, forces were committed in increasingly large numbers, however,
the military and political situation began to improve significantly. By
the end of 1966, our initial military objective had been achieved--no longer
was it possible for NVN to impose its will upon SVN by force. By this time,
however, our military objectives had been expanded at the expense of our
political objectives.

In the absence of political directives limiting the goals to be
attained by U.S. military force, our objectives became:

a. To make it as difficult and costly as possible for
NVM to continue effective support of the VC and to cause NVN
to cease direction of the insurgency.

*

——

3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

VOLUME TIT 5
U.S. GROUND STRATEGY AND FORCE DEPLOYMENTS, 1965--1967

TABLE OF CONTENTS and OUTLINE

V. PROGRAM 6
Page

1. Emergency AUSMENtaLION. os vcccsccvccccescescscsceccescceveseen L
2. The Troop Request. .sccccsvevevcenereccvvaccevssvververcesssces LO
By. a (A RSS HER SHEL Es wore erere-siniersiece srenaie:d)wrealecdisiw wee eaiesr e wrerecereee LO
Ws) Drafting & MemOrandwieccsa0 navcces esse susieene qaisecescnorwews 35
5. Recommendation to the Presiden. cz sacs ewe saaes cee sis cid wale wares al
6s Whe Cismate Of OpMLOr. 6 oon cere sae swerecees A OS ee a
W. The President: POUGSiS alex wikis oicivieneas: eielee eee bie\wie eal elielie om eleia la oie ae) fall
Gs Merbrestgent Decides uriviews cess eels sciee vecivwiecices sac vesisiewe a 10
9. The Decision is Announced......e+- ielor awry pa Ee oleh lerede oie staota nie WO
10. "ZI Shall Not Seek, and I Will Not Accept”....... sake cutee e OO
LD. EPlLOguel.. c05 cvccncs cecea es Up cis veiee civeee svcee se ccewe vagcees ¢ GO

POOTNOTES . coc cee cece tr de eae ee eee tense eee re rere essen scenes eesese 94

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. To defeat the VC and NVA forces in SVN and force the
withdrawal of NVN forces....

ec. To extend GVN control over all of SVN.

Indeed, in asking for increased forces, General Wheeler and General
Westmoreland described their current tasks as follows:

a. Security of Cities and Government.
b. Security in the Countryside.

ec. Defense of the Borders, the DMZ, and the Northern
Province.

d. Offensive Operations. 4g/

The question to be answered, then, suggested the memorandum, was what
we could hope to accomplish with these increased force levels in pursuit of
our current strategy. The answer was not encouraging.

With current force levels we cannot continue to pursue all
of the objectives listed by General Wheeler. Can we de so with
increased forces? .

MACV does not clearly specify how he would use the addi-
tional forces he requests, except to indicate that they
would provide him with a theater reserve and an offensive
capability. Even with the 200,000 additional troops requested
by MACV, we will not be in a position to drive the enemy from
SVN or to destroy his forces. MACV's description of his key
problems makes clear that the additional forces would be used
to open Route 1, north of Danang; support ARVN units, particu-
larly in the Delta; and to maintain a reserve against enemy
offensives. With lesser increases of 50,000 or 100,000,
MACV would be in an even less favorable position to go on the
offensive. Moreover, even before the TET offensive the
enemy was initiating about two-thirds of the clashes and
could, in response to our buildup, adopt a casualty limiting
posture. r

The more likely enemy response, however, is that with
which he has responded to previous increases in our force
levels, viz., a matching increase on his part. Hanoi has
maintained 2 constant ratio of one maneuver battalion to
1.5 U.S, maneuver battalions from his reserve in NVN of
from 45-70 maneuver battalions (comprising 40,000-60,000
men in 5-8 divisions).

So: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Even if the enemy stands and fights as he did before
TET, the results can only be disappointing in terms of
attriting his capability.

Over the past year the United States has been killing
between 70 and 100 ve/iNVA per month per U.S. combat bat-
talion in theater. The return per combat battalion deployed
has been falling off, but even assuming that additional
deployments will double the number of combat battalions,
and assuming that the kill-ratios will remain constant, we
could expect enemy deaths, at best, on the order of magni-
tude of 20,000 per month, but the infiltration system from
North Viet Nam alone could supply 13,000-16,000 per month,
regardless of our bombing pattern, leaving the remainder --
4,000 -- to be recruited in South Viet Nam -- a demonstrably
manageable undertaking for the VC.

The current strategy thus can promise no early end to
the conflict, nor any success in attriting the enemy or
eroding Hanoi's will to fight. Moreover, it would entail
substantial costs in South Viet Nem, in the United States,
and in the rest of the world. 50/

These substantial costs, the paper indicated, would indeed preclude
the attainment of U.S. objectives. In South Vietnam,

«the presence of more than 700,000 U.S. military can
mean nothing but the total Americanization of the war.
There is no sign that ARVN effectiveness will increase,
and there will be no pressure from the U.S. or the GVN for
ARVN to shape up if the U.S. appears willing to increase
its force levels as necessary to maintain a stalemate in
the country.

The effect on the GVN would be even more unfortunate.
The Saigon leadership shows no signs of a willingness--let
alone an ability--to attract the necessary loyalty or sup-
port of the people. It is true that the GVN did not totally
collapse during TET, but there is not yet anything like an
urgent sense of national unity and purpose. A large influx
of additional U.S, forces will intensify the belief of the
ruling elite that the U.S. will continue to fight its war
while it engages in backroom polities and permits wide-
spread corruption. The proposed actions will also generate
inereased inflation, thereby reducing the effectiveness of
the GVN and making corruption harder to control. Reform
of the GVN will come only when and if they come to believe
that our continued presence in South Viet Nam depends on
what the GVN does. Certainly, a U.S. commitment to a sub-
stantial troop increase before the GVN conmits itself to
reform’ and action can only be counterproductive. Whatever

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

our success on the battlefield, our chances of leaving behind
an effective functioning national government when we at last
withdraw will be sharply diminished.

In the United States, the effects would be equally unfortunate.

We will have to mobilize reserves, increase our budget
by billions, and see U.S. casualties climb to 1,300-1,400
per month. Our balance of payments will be worsened con-
siderably, and we will need a larger tax increase--justified
as a war tax, or wage and price controls....

It will be difficult to convince critics that we are not
simply destroying South Viet Nam in order to "save" it and
that we genuinely want peace talks. This growing disaffection
accompanied, as it certainly will be, by increased defiance
of the draft and growing unrest in the cities because of the
belief that we are neglecting domestic problems, runs great
risks of provoking a domestic crisis of unprecedented pro-
portions. 51

Thus, if our current strategy, even with increased troops, could not
promise an early end to the conflict, what alternatives were available
to the United States? No U.S. ground strategy and no level of U.S. forces,
alone, could by themselves accomplish our objective in South Viet Nam,
the draft memorandum stated.

We can obtain our objective only if the GVN begins to
take the steps necessary to gain the confidence of the people
and to provide effective leadership for the diverse groups
in the population. ARVN must also be turned into an effective
fighting force. If we fail in these objectives, a military
victory over the NVN/VC main forces, followed by a U.S. with-
drawal, would only pave the way for an NLF takeover.

Our military presence in South Viet Nam should be designed
toby the time during which ARVN and the GVN can develop effec-
tive capability. In order to do this, we must deny the enemy
access to the populated areas of the country and prevent hin -
from achieving his objectives of controlling the population and
destroying the GVN.

The memorandum concluded that MACV should be told that his mission
was to provide security to populated areas and to deny the enemy access to
the population; that he should not attempt to attrite the enemy or to
drive him out of the country. MACV should be asked to recommend an appro-
priate strategy and to determine his force requirements to carry out this
objective with the minimum possible casualties.

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

However, in the next section of the Presidential draft memorandum,
the Working Group relieved MACV of this responsibility by sketching one
possible strategy (obviously the preferred one) which should be able to
be pursued "without substantially increasing our level of forces in South
Viet Nam, thus avoiding the adverse domestic and foreign consequences
sketched above." 52/

The strategy outlined in the memorandum was designed to attain the
initiative along the "demographic frontier." It consisted of the following:
Those forces currently in or near the heavily populated
areas along the coast should remain in place. Those forces
currently bordering on the demographic frontier*® should con-
tinue to operate from those positions, not on long search-and-
destroy missions, but in support of the frontier. Eight to
10 battalions from the DMZ areas would be redeployed and become
strategic research in I Corps; six battalions from the interior
of II Corps would be redeployed to Dien Binh province as a
strategic reserve for defense of provincial capitals in the
highlands. As security is restored in the previously neglected
populated areas of coastal Viet Nam, additional U.S, battalions
would move forward to the demographic frontier....

Based just beyond the populated areas, the forces on the
demographic frontiers would conduct spoiling raids, long-
range reconnaissance patrols and, when appropriate targets
are located, search-and-destroy operations into the enemy's
gone of movement in the unpopulated areas between the demo-
graphic and the political frontiers. They would be available
as a quick reaction force to support RVNAF when it was attacked
within the populated areas. Where RVNAF patrolling in the
populated areas is inadequate, U.S. forces would be in a posi-
tion to assist. 53/

The advantages of the "demographic strategy of population security"
were listed as follows:

1. It would become possible to keep the VC/NVA off
balance in their present zone of movement. This area is
now largely available to them for maneuver and massing, no
more than a day's march from any of the major cities north
of Saigon.

2, It would lengthen enemy LOC's from their sanctu-
aries in Laos and Cambodia. Base areas and LOC's within
SVN would be the subject of attack and disruption, without
extending the war to neighboring countries.

¥ this frontier runs along the eastern foothills of the Annamite chain,
fron Quang-Tri Province to Phan Thiet in Binh Thuen, cuts across SVN
along the northern edge of the Delta from Phuc Tuy to the Cambodian
Border in Tay Ninh. Garrisons would be established as at Bong Son

and An Khe. 38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
dum.

In I

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. RVNAF, knowing the availability of support from
U.S. reaction forces, would perform more aggressively.

h, This would permit the patrolling and securing of
populated areas to be accomplished primarily by Vietnamese
forces.

5. U.S. forces would keep active in what is now the
enemy's zone Of movement, no longer presenting static posi-
tions against which the enemy can mass and attack. This,
plus his increased logistical problems, would reduce U.S.
casualties while increasing his. In effect, we would force
him to come to us, fight on terrain of our choosing.

6. The increased patrolling of the populated areas by
RVNAF combined with U.S. actions in the zone of movement
would make it harder for the enemy to mass against and
attack targets within the populated areas. This would
reduce civilian casualties and refugee generation.

7. Garrisoning U.S, forces closer to RVNAF would facili-
tate joint operations at the maneuver level (battalion,
company), again increasing RVNAF aggressiveness.

8. With RVNAF thus supported by U.S. forces, it can be
expected to remain in uniform and engage in operations as
long’as it is paid and fed. 54/

No disadvantages of this strategy were noted. or listed in the memoran-

Details of this strategy, by Corps area, were examined in an appendix.
Corps, our present precarious position could be relieved.

Were MACV to be provided guidance to forego position
defense in areas remote from population centers and concen-
trate upon mobile offensive operations in and contiguous
to the coastal plain, one division equivalent - eight to
10 U.S. maneuver battalions - could eventually be relieved
from operations in, or related to defense of Khe Sanh.
Undoubtedly, however, these eight to 10 battalions would
be required to restore tactical flexibility to and insure
logistical sufficiency for the forces presently disposed in
the Quang-Tri-Hue-Danang area.  MACV presently is planning
operations in the Aeschau [sic] Valley after April 1968;
the new guidance would preclude these.

Guidanee to MACV in II Corps

"should counsel continued economy of force and should
specifically exclude determined defense of all but province

39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘capitals in the highlands. Permissionto withdraw from

Special Forces camps (e.g., Dak To), and other exposed
positions remote from the coastal plain should be included.
Under this guidance, six U.S. battalions could be with-

drawn from border defense operations in the highlands for

use as a mobile reserve or for Operations on the coastal plain.

- In ITT Corps, no redeployment from present positions, with U.S.
forces concentrated in the immediate environs of Saigon were envisaged.

The guidance to MACV should be to concentrate on offensive
operations in and around the densely populated portions of
Tit CTY. MACV should maintain a mobile strike force for
defense of remote province capitals, buthe should otherwise
forego long range or regional search-and-destroy operations.
Withdrawals from Special Forces camps should be authorized.

Fourth Corps - the Mekong Delta region - is the only region of SVN in
which the burden of the war was still borne, chiefly by RVNAF. U.S.
strategy should avoid Americanizing the conflict there. Instead, our
efforts should be aimed at catalyzing increased RVNAF efforts there.

Guidance provided to MACV should be geared to galvanizing
RVNAF by a strategy of:

1. Defending province capitals, major towns, principal
comminication centers, and commercially important routes.

2. Extending GVN control into the countryside, consis-
tent with RVNAF capability to defend RD teams and other
public administration there.

3. Stimulating RVNAF operations by providing U.S. forces
on an occasional basis for combined operations against
particularly promising targets, or in conjunction with key
defensive operations. U.S. forces in the Delta for this
effort should draw on the existing Dong Tam and Saigon bases.

h, Providing limited assistance to RVNAF with sophisti-
cated engineer equipment and reconnaissance apparatus where
such would improve their ability to perform the missions
sketched above.

5. Bringing serious pressure to bear on RVN leaders in
Saigon and within IV CTZ to mount active, sustained, offensive
operations consistent with the foregoing missions. Considera-
tion should be given to:

Providing additional RVNAF battalions to IV CTZ on
a temporary basis from TIT CTZ--conceptually, battalions or
regiments from the 5th or 18th ARVN Divisions would be deployed
to IV CTZ, minus dependents, for periods of one month or more

of active operations. 55
40 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In another eppendix, the memorandum enalyzed the effects of this
strategy on those interior provinces outside the "demographic frontier."
It would be desirable to maintain all interior Province capitals, the
appendix concluded, because "the political consequences of withdrawal from
whole Provinces would be to recreate the atmosphere of 1954 or 1965, and
while the situation may be that grim, we should at least strive to make
it appear otherwise."56/

The Province capitals would be garrisoned with ARVN units of the 22nd
and 23rd Divisions and, initially, some American units. These units would
have as their mission the holding of the Province town for a minimum of
four days, giving time for the arrival of a relief strike force.

Having secured the Province capitals, however, this strategy envisaged
evacuating other installations in the interior Provinces,

-«esuch as the frontier series running from Bu Dop to
Dak To and the interior but vulnerable points as Vo Dat
and Vinh Thanh, Although these points are not held by
allied main force units, they do tie down other assets,
such as Special Forces, CIDG, PF, and RF. Furthermore,
their combined existence represents a potential strain for
the limited reaction ability currently available since we
must respond, as we did at Dak To, when the enemy massed
for an attack. If a presence is required in some of these areas,
it should be in the form of a mobile striking unit, and not a
garrison.

Based upon this "analysis" of our current strategy and a strategy of
protecting the demographic frontier, the draft memorandum recommended the
following actions to the President:

1. Approve a NSAM, stating that our political objective
is a peace which will leave the people of South Viet Nam
free to fashion their own political institutions....The NSAM
should state that the primary role of U.S. military forces is
to provide security in the populated areas of South Viet Nem
rather than to destroy the VC/NVA or drive them out of the
country. We should plan on maintaining the posture necessary
to accomplish this objective for a considerable period.

2. Approve the immediate dispatch of an additional
10,500 military personnel to South Viet Nam.

3. Approve an accelerated and expanded program of
increased fire power and mobility for ARVIN and other ele-
ments of the GVN Armed Forces.

h. Send General. Taylor to Saigon to explain the NSAM
+o MACY and the GVN, and to request General Westmoreland to
develop a strategy and force requirements to implement the
military objectives stated in the NSAM.

a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. Dispatch one or two high-level civilians to Saigon
with General Taylor to warn the GVN that it must broaden
their base of political support, end its internal bickering,
purge corrupt officers and officials, and move to develop
efficient administration and effective forces. They should
also begin a discussion of negotiations while informing the
GVN of the increased support to be provided for ARVN.

6. Deliver a Presidential address to the American public,
explaining our new strategy in light of the enemy's new
tactics. 57/

In short, then, this initial reassessment of our strategy in SVN
indicated to the President that no ground strategy and no level of addi-
tional U.S. forces alone could achieve an early end to the war. That
could be done only if the GVN took the steps necessary to provide effec-
tive military and political leadership to its population. In order to
speed up this process, the U.S. should limit its objectives in SVN and
adopt a strategy of population security. This would give the GVN time to
organize and develop democratic institutions, and would give RVNAF time to
grow in effectiveness while our forces provided a protective screen for
the populated areas at minimum cost in resources and casualties.

This paper was discussed within the military community at a meeting
in the Secretary of Defense's office on 1 March. General Wheeler, the ©
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was appalled at the apparent repudi-
ation of American military policy in South Viet Nam contained in the ISA
Draft Memorandum. He detected two "fatal flaws" in the population security
stratesy.-

1. The proposed strategy would mean increased fighting in or close
to population centers and, hence, would result in increased civilian casualties.

2. By adopting a posture of static defense, we would allow the enemy
an increased capability of massing near population centers, especially north
of Saigon.

In addition, General Wheeler was equally appalled at the statement in
the ISA Draft Presidential Memorandum to the effect that "MACV does not
clearly specify how he would use the additional forces he requests, except
to indicate that they would provide him with a theater reserve and an
offensive capability." MACV had indeed clearly and specifically indicated
to CINCPAC on 27 February, concurrent with General Wheeler's original memoran-
dum to the President, the locations and missions of the requested add-on
units. These had been transmitted through the Joint Staff to each of the
Services, who indeed were engaged in studying and staffing these proposals. 58/
Apparently, this information had not specifically been furnished to the

Office of the Secretary of Defense.

he TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The debate within the Defense Establishment continued into the fol-
lowing day. In a memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, dated 2 March,
Assistant Secretary of Defense Warnke gave his answer to General Wheeler's
"two fatal flaws" of the population control strategy.

1. Increasing Fighting in the Cities. General Wheeler

is concerned that the proposed strategy will mean increased
fighting in or close to population centers and, hence, will
result in increased civilian casualties. This argument over-
looks, I believe, the fact that the enemy demonstrated during
the TET offensive his willingness and ability to attack
populated centers regardless of our strategy. He is demon-
strating that capability again right now in the Quang Tri-Hue
area and may soon do so in the Delta. If the enemy continues
to choose to fight in the cities, we will have no choice

but to engage him in those areas at the cost of civilian
casualties. The proposed strategy may actually reduce civilian
casualties if we can succeed in attacking enemy concentrations
before he can attack the cities. Moreover, in attacking the
cities, the enemy will face American as well as ARVN forces
engaged in offensive patrolling operations around the cities.
This should result in fewer casualties than have come from the
liberation of cities in the post-TET period. By freeing

forces now engaged along the DMZ and in lightly populated high-
lands for active offensive operations near population centers,
we should make the enemy effort against cities less effective.

2. Enemy Ability to Mass Near Population Centers. General

Wheeler's concern that under the proposed strategy the enemy
will be more capable of massing near population centers north
of Saigon is difficult to understand. In fact, prior to TET,
because we were operating primarily along the coast, along the
DMZ, and in the highlands, we were permitting the enemy to
mass along the demographic frontier as he did prior to the TET
offensive. In fact, one of the advantages of the new strategy
is that we will be able to keep the enemy off-balance in this
area. General Wheeler may believe we advocate a posture of
static defense. This is not true. In the strategy sketched in
the paper, one of the primary missions of U.S. forces would be
to operate in this area, remain highly mobile and carry out
attacks against suspected enemy base camps. 59/

h3 2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

General Wheeler fought back with arguments contained in two docu-
ments. The first was a backchannel message from COMUSMACYV, dated
2 March, which answered specific questions concerning the planned use
of additional forces. These questions had been asked by General Wheeler
in a backchannel message the previous day. The first question concerned
the military "and other" objectives additional forces were designed to
advance. General Westmoreland was ambitious, indeed, and stated that
these objectives were to:

(1) Defeat and evict from SVN the new NVA units now
present in Western Quang Tri and Central Thua Trien provinces,
to include the Ashau Valley and base areas 131 and 11h.

(2) Maintain positive governmental and military control
over Quang Tri and Thua Thien provinces, particularly the
populous areas of the coastal lowlands and the DMZ area. Be
prepared to block or interdict the infiltration/invasion routes
from NVN through Laos.

(3) Destroy VC/NVA main force units and base areas in the
remainder of I Corps and in the northeastern coastal and north-
western Laos border areas of II Corps.

(4) Reduce the "calculated risk" currently entailed in our
economy of force posture in II and ITI Corps by providing the
added flexibility and "punch" of an armored cavalry regiment.

(5) Conduct aggressive and continuing offensive campaigns
throughout the coastal areas of ITI Corps and into traditional
enemy base areas and sanctuaries in ITI Corps along the
Cambodian border; especially in war zones "C" and "D". Restore
the offensive combat and pacification momentum lost in III Corps
as a result of the enemy's TET offensive and the requirement
+o transfer the 101st Airborne Division (-) to I Corps to stem the
NVA incursion into Quang Tri.

(6) Be prepared for contingency operations if required.
The second question asked by General Wheeler was:

Question B: What specific dangers are their dispatch to
SVN designed to avoid, and what specific goals would the
inerement of force aim to achieve -

In the next 6 months?

Over the next year?

dd TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In his answer, General Westmoreland was equally optimistic

...additive forces would serve to forestall the danger
of local defeats due to the tactical degeneration or temporary
disorganization of some ARVN units in the event of another
general enemy offensive coupled with a massive invasion across
the DMZ. The need to be prepared to support or reinforce
ARVN units that are surprised by the nature and intensity of
ve/NVA attacks became manifest during the enemy's TET drive
and must be recognized in US troop requirement and deployment
plans for the foreseeable future. By providing a two division
mobile “swing force" which could be positioned and employed as
required, the need to draw down on forces directly engaged in
territorial security tasks probably would be reduced. ‘Thus
the danger of losing popular confidence in and support for
Gvn/usS capabilities, policies and aspirations as a result of
temporary military or psychological setbacks would also be
diminished.

(2) Provision of the immediately required additional
forces also would make it possible to apply continuous pressure
+o some degree in all corps areas and thus reduce the danger
of allowing the enemy the opportunity to solicit support from
the population and to reorganize, refit and recoup so that he
could soon field rejuvenated units, despite heavy losses suffered
during the TET offensive. This is particularly important in
view of the enemy capability to move additional divisions south
through the panhandle or DMZ without any clear intelligence
indicators of such action. (This matter is of particular concern
to me) these forces will also make it possible to retain that
degree of flexibility and rapid responsiveness necessary to
cope with an apparent new enemy tactic of searching for thin
spots in our force structure or deployment in order to launch
his concentrated mass attacks.

(3) In the next six months the presence of the armored
cavalry regiment in II or JII Corps would reduce the degree of
calculated risk inherent in the economy of force posture in
those areas, provide added territorial security and further the
goal of providing added combat flexibility. Addition of another
Marine regiment and its division headquarters in I Corps would
thicken troop density in critical I CTZ, add to combat flexi-
bility and improve command and eontrol capabilities in that critical

area.

(4) Over the next year the increment of force would make
it possible to:

his TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A. Move progressively from north to south with a continuing
series of hard hitting offensive campaigns to invade base Areas,
interdict and disrupt infiltration routes, and eliminate or
evict VC/NVA forces from SVN.

B. At the same time, the highly mobile exploitation force
(two divisions) would be available to counter enemy aggression
or to exploit opportunities for tactical success anywhere in
SVN without reducing the minimal essential force necessary to
guarantee maintenance of security in those areas where success-
ful military campaigns have already been waged.

C. Addition of the new division in III Corps during this
time frame would re-establish the capability for conducting
constant operations in and around war zones "C" and "D" and make
possible the constant use of a division size force in the
IV CTZ which capability was removed with transfer of the 10lst
Airborne Division (-) to I Corps. In addition, combat operations
conducted by this division would provide added security for
LOC and the vital seat of government and economic center of
Saigon.

D. With the total additive combat forces requested it will
be possible to deal with the invader from the north, and to face
with a greater degree of confidence the potential tank, rocket and
tactical air threat as well as the ever present possibility that
he may reinforce with additional elements of his home army. 60/

The second docwnent available to General Wheeler was an analysis of
the military implications in South Vietnam of the deployment of various
increments of U-S. forces. This analysis was done by the Short Range
Branch, Plans and Policy Directorate, Joint Staff. It was an informal
staff document which had not been addressed by the Joint Chiefs of
Starf or any of the military services separately. 61/ The five
options addressed were those indicated by the Secretary of Defense in
his meeting of 29 February (see pages 7-8). This paper documented the
large enemy buildup in South Vietnam:

1. The enemy, since November, has increased his forces
in South Viet Nam by at least 41 maneuver battalions, some armored
elements, a large number of rockets, and additional artillery.
There are indications he is preparing for the use of limited air
support, including logistical air drops and bombing missions.
The Joint Staff paper took exception to COMUSMACV's stated first
priority of insuring "the security of the GVN in Saigon and in the
provincial capitals."

46 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The basic strategy which must be followed by MACV in any
circumstances is to defeat the current enemy offensive both
in Northern I Corps Tactical Zone where it is the most formidable,
in the Highlands where it is highly dangerous, and throughout
South Vietnam in defense of the government and the cities and
towns..--Allied forces are not conducting offensive operations
of any great magnitude or frequency and therefore they are not
wresting control of the countryside from the enemy....

If the enemy offensive can be broken with sustained heavy
casualties, then, and only then, will the cities be secure and
the countryside reentered. Even with the largest force
contemplated (Option 1) it will not be possible to perform
adequately all of the tasks unless the current enemy offensive
is decisively defeated. This, therefore, is the first and most
important task upon which all else depends....

If the forces now in Vietnam or the forces under any of the
options prove to be inadequate to break the enemy offensive, or if,
conversely, the enemy sustained offensive breaks the Vietnamese
armed forces (even short of destroying the GVN), then our objectives
in South Vietnam and the tasks associated with them will be un-
obtainable. Specifically, we would be unable to regain the
initiative, that is, we would not be able to conduct offensive
operations at the scope and pace required either to prevent further
enemy buildup or to reenter the countryside. This would force US
and allied forces into a defensive posture around the major
population centers....

Therefore, immediate action to break the enemy's current
offensive is not only the first but the decisive requirement.

In specifically addressing each of the options, the Joint Staff reach-
ed the following conclusions;

Liz TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

OPTIONS
ip

Ada approximately 196,000
+o the present MACV Pro-
gram 5 authorized level
(525,000) plus 6 addi-
tional bus already de-
ployed (10,500). Relax-
ation of restrictions on
operations in Cambodia/
Laos/NVN.

TOTAL - 133 maneuver bns

I-A

Same additive forces as
Option I.

No relaxation of restric-
tions on operations.

II

No change to present

MACV Program 5 author-
ized level (525,000)

plus 6 additional bus
already deployed (10,500).
TOTAL - 112 maneuver bns

na

Add 50,000 US troops to the
approximately 535,000 in
Option Il.

TOTAL - 118 maneuver bns

IV

Add 100,000 to the ap-
proximately 535,000 in
Option Il.

TOTAL - 124 maneuver bns

kg

CONCLUSIONS
(To Defeat the VC/NVA in SVN)

This Option would:

a. Assuming no additional deployments
break enemy offensive and permit
early and sustained operations
against the enemy.

b. Permit simultaneous operations
against enemy main force, base
areas, and border sanctuaries.

c. Permit resumption of program to
develop effectiveness of RVNAF.

d. Permit greater employment of air as-
sets in conducting an expanded air
campaign against NVN, Laos, Cambodia.

Essentially the same as Option I except:

a. The rate of conducting operations
would be reduced by higher military risk.

b. The enemy would enjoy sanctuary
across the Cambodian/Laotian/NVN borders.

c. The rebuilding of the RVNAF would be
at a slower pace.

US objectives in SVN cannot be achieved
as allied forces must remain in defensive
posture.

At present levels, allied forces can
expect increasingly grave threats to
their security with high casualty rates.

This option could probably secure the
cities but would be insufficient to
counter the current enemy offensive or
to restore security in the countryside.

The results of this Option are essentially

the same as Option I, except:

a. The rate of progress would be slower.

b. The enemy would retain the initiative
in the border areas.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The paper, then, concluded that the larger forces of Option I and
TA would “greatly reduce risks to Free World forces in SVN and will ac-
complish U.S. ebjectives more rapidly than the forces of the other
options," and recommended that immediate action be taken to provide the

forces of Option I.

Read another way, however, the Joint Staff analysis could be taken
to indicate that the United States could successfully pursue a strategy
of “population security" by adopting Option ITI, adding 50,000 troops
to the current level in SVN,

At the 2 March meeting of the senior members of the Secretary of
Defense's Working Group conducting the reassessment, no consensus was
reached on & new U.S. strategy. Apparently, Mr. Warnke and Mr. Goulding
were given the task of drafting a new memorandum for the President which
would be less controversial than the initial ISA document.

The draft memorandum for the President, dated 3 March 1968, which
was prepared by these two individuals, differed markedly in tone from the
initial memorandum presented to the Clifford Group on 2 March. Gone was
any discussion of grand strategy. This memorandum recommended simply:

1. Meeting General Westmoreland's request by deploying as
close to May 1 as practical 20,000 additional troops (approximately
1/2 of which would be combat).

2. Approval of a Reserve call-up and an increased end
strength adequate to meet the balance of the request and to
restore a strategic reserve in the United States, adequate for
possible contingencies.

3. Reservation of the decision to deploy the balance of
General Westmoreland's new request. While we would be in a
position to make these additional deployments, the future
decision to do so would be contingent upon:

a. Continuous reexamination of the desirability of
further deployments on a week-by-week basis as the situation
develops;

b. Improved political performance by the GVN and
inereased contribution in effective military action by the

ARVN;

‘ c. The results of a study in depth, to be initiated in-
mediately, of a possible new strategic guidance for the conduct
of US military operations in South Vietnam.

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Two appendices to this paper addressed the basis for these recom-
mendations and the context in which additional troop commitments to Vietnam
should be examined.

In explaining the basis for the recommendation to deploy 20,000
troops, the memorandum indicated that the first increment of forces re-
quested by General Westmoreland should be provided as an emergency
measure to meet the prospect of continued abnormal levels of enemy
activity. "This would, by May 1st, furnish him with an additional 20,000
troops, 10,500 of whom would be for combat purposes. Because of the
possibility that the North Vietnamese leaders may decide to launch a
larger scale invasion by main force units, we should put ourselves ina
position to provide the other 1855 000 ground, sea, and air forces in-
volved in General Westmoreland's request." 63/ |

Additional forces, however, should not be dispatched until the
situation in Vietnam developed.

A continuing and intensive review should focus not only on
future enemy activity but also on the demonstrated ability of the
GVN and the ARVN to pull themselves together, to get back into
business, and to demonstrate significant improvements both in
their ability to win popular support and their willingness to
fight aggressively for their own security. Unless these qualities
are evidenced, there can be no real hope for the accomplishment
of our political aims.

Finally, we believe that the striking change in the enemy's
tactics, the willingness to commit at least two additional divisions
to the fighting in the South over the past few weeks, the obvious
and not wholly anticipated strength of the Viet Cong infrastructure,
there can be no prospect of a quick military solution to the
aggression in South Vietnam. Under these circumstances, we should
give intensive study to the development of a new strategic guidance
+o General Westmoreland. This guidance should make clear the
fact that he cannot be expected either to destroy the enemy forces
or to rout them completely from South Vietnam. The kind of
American commitment that would be required to achieve these
military objectives cannot even be estimated. There is no reason
to believe that it could be done by an additional 200,000 American
troops or double or triple that gquantity....

The exact nature of the strategic guidance which should be
adopted cannot now be predicted. It should be the subject of a
detailed inter-agency study over the next several weeks. During
the progress of the study, discussions of the appropriate strategic
guidance and its nature and implications for the extent of our
military commitment in South Vietnam should be undertaken with cee
General Westmoreland and Ambassador Bunker. 6h/

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In placing these additional troop commitments in a larger context,
an edditional appendix concluded:

No matter what the result in South Vietnam itself, we will
have failed in our purposes if:

a. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where it is
a major conflict leading to direct military confrontation
with the USSR and/or China;

b. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where we
are so committed in resources that our other world-wide
commitments -- especially NATO -- are no longer credible;

ec. The attitudes of the American people towards "more
Vietnams"” are such that our other commitments are brought
into question as a matter of US will;

d. Other countries no longer wish the US commitment
for fear of the consequences to themselves as a battlefield
between the East and the West.

Under these circumstances, we recommend that under the leader-
ship of the State Department, with the assistance of the Office of
the Secretary of Defense, the JCS, and the Treasury, a review of
our Vietnamese policy in the context of our global politico-military
strategy be undertaken with a due date of May 15. 65/

Thus, the net result of this period of frantic preperation, consul-
tation, writing, and reassessing was similar to all previous requests
for reinforcement in Vietnam. The litany was familiar: "We will furnish
what we can presently furnish without disrupting the normal political and
economic life of the nation, while we study the situation as it develops."
No startling reassessment of strategy was indicated, although for the
first time it was recognized that such a reassessment was needed, that a
limit to U.S. involvement in SVN had to be determined, and that any
number of U.S. troops could not achieve our objectives without-significant
improvement in the ability of the GVN to win popular support and to
fight aggressively for their own security.

5. Recommendation to the President

This draft memorandum was discussed again within the Defense
Department on 3 March, and several changes were made. The 4 March draft
memorandum for the President was apparently approved by the Secretary
of Defense and forwarded to the President. The paper which was forwarded
+o the President bore a great resemblance to the 3 March draft, although
the Systems Analysis influence on the 4 March paper was evidenced by its
greater detail, especially concerning actions to be required of the GVN.

gill TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The memorandum recapitulated General Westmoreland's request for

personnel and indicated that General Wheeler believed that we should
meet this request, and should act to increase and improve our strategic
reserve in the United States. To achieve both these goals, the paper
stated, staff examination indicated that the following actions would be

required:

a. A call-up of reserve units and individuals totaling
approximately 262,000 (194,000 in units, 68,000 as individuals).

bd. Increased draft calls.

ec. Extension of terms of service. These actions would preduce
a total increase in end strength in the Armed Forces of approxi-
mately 511,000 by June 30, 1969. (The staff examination referred
to above included spaces to add 31,500 troops in South Korea and
a US naval proposal to add two cruisers and fifteen destroyers to
the naval forces in Southeast Asia. If these proposals are
disapproved in their entirety, the figures above will be decreased
to approximately 242,000 and 454,000 respectively.

The Secretary of Defense then recommended:

1. An immediate decision to deploy to Vietnam an estimated
total of 22,000 additional personnel (approximately 60% of which
would be combat). An immediate decision to deploy the three
tactical fighter squadrons deferred from Program 5 (about 1,000
men). This would be over and above the four battalions (about 3700
men) already planned for deployment in April which in themselves
would bring us slightly above the 525,000 authorized level....

2. Wither through Ambassador Bunker or through an early
visit by Secretary Clifford, a highly forceful approach to the GVN
(Thieu and Ky) to get certain key commitments for improvement,
tied to our own increased effort and to increased US support for
the ARVN....

3. Early approval of a Reserve call-up and an increased end
strength adequate to meet the balence of the Westmoreland request
and to restore a strategic reserve in the United States, adequate
for possible contingencies world-wide....

lh. Reservation of the decision to meet the Westmoreland request
in full. While we would be putting ourselves in a position to make
these additionel deployments, the future decision to do so would
be contingent upon:

52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a. Reexamination on a week-by-week basis of the desir-
ability of further deployments as the situation develops;

b. Improved political performance by the GVN and
increased contribution in effective military action by the
ARVN;

ec. The results of a study in depth, to be initiated
immediately, of possible new political and strategic guidance
for the conduct of US operations in South Vietnam, and of our
Vietnamese policy in the context of our world-wide politico-
military strategy...

5. No new peace initiative on Vietnam. Re-statement of our terms
for peace and certain limited diplomatic actions to dramatize Laos
and to focus attention on the total threat to Southeast Asia....

6. A general decision on bombing policy, not excluding future
change, but adequate to form a basis for discussion with the Congress
on this key aspect. Here your advisers are divided:

@. General Wheeler and others would advocate a substantial -
extension of targets and authority in and near Hanoi and Haiphong,
mining of Haiphong, and naval gunfire up to a Chinese Buffer
Zone;

b. Others would advocate a seasonal step-up through the
spring, but without these added elements. 66/

In proposing this course of action, the Secretary of Defense indicated
that he recognized that there were many negative factors and certain
difficulties. Nevertheless, he indicated the belief that this course of
action, at least in its essential outline, was urgently required to meet
the immediate situation in Vietnam, as well as wider possible contingencies
there and elsewhere.

Eight tabs to the draft memorandum elaborated upon the reasoning
which led to the recommendations contained therein. TAB A reviewed the
justification for immediately sending additional forces to Vietnam.
‘The situation in SVN was analyzed as follows:

Hanoi has made a basic change in its strategy and scale of
operations. Perhaps because they thought they were losing as the
war and pacification were going, Hanoi is pressing hard for

i decisive results over the next few months. They are committing
a high proportion of their assets, although it appears likely that
they would retain poth the capability and will to keep up the
pressure next year if this effort does not succeed. There is hope
that, if this year's effort could be thwarted, Hanoi and Viet Cong
morale would be sufficiently affeoted to open up possibilities of
peace, ‘but this cannot be assessed as likely.

53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Within South Vietnam, there are key variables that could
move the situation sharply, one way or the other, in the
coming months. Specifically:

a. The degree to which Hanoi and the VC are
able to keep pressing, and how effectively they are
countered in the military sphere.

b. The degree to which the VC are able to extend
their control in the countryside and recoup their losses --
or whether conversely the South Vietnamese can take the
initiative and either neutralize such recoupment cr set in
motion a new favorable trend.

ec. The degree to which the GVN improves its per-
formance and galvanizes potentially greater popular support
than it can now have.

Thus, there was created an urgent need, both practical and psycho-
logical, to send such forces as could be effective within the next four
or five months.

The following additional forces of about 22,000 men could
be deployed by June 15 in accordance with the schedule set
forth below:

Six Tactical Pighter Squadrons - 3,000 men
: 2 Squadrons by - 1 April
3 Squadrons by - 1 May
1 Squadron by - 1 June

lth Marine Expeditionary Force (minus) - 18,100 men
by - 15 June

aval Mobile Construction Battalion - 700 men
by - 1 May

In addition, it was reiterated that an urgent effort was required to
improve and modernize the equipment of the SVN Armed Forces.

Tab B elaborated on what should be done to increase the effectiveness
of Vietnamese efforts in conjunction with the U.S. troop increase. Two
possible GVN reactions were foreseen to the ceployment of additionel U.S.
forces. The reaffirmation of the U.S, commitment would be welcomed, would
add to the feeling of confidence, and might stiffen the GVN's will at a
time "when the tasks it faces are rather monumental.” On the other hand,
there was always the danger that the Vietnamese would be tempted to relax
behind the refuge of American power, and the sense of anxiety and urgency
which had resulted from the TET offensive could suffer. The memorandum
indicated, however, that the GVN had the capacity to take those civil and

military actions which would materially improve the political and security

5h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

V. PROGRAM 6

1, Emergency Augmentation

Thus, the year ended with the combat elements of Program 5 either
closing in Vietnam or on their way to Vietnam on an accelerated schedule.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff, however, could only promise that, even with
these deployments, the rate of progress in Vietnam would continue to be
slow in light of the continuing restrictions imposed on the conduct of
military operations. c

In his year-end assessment of the military situation, however,
COMUSMACV had a somewhat more optimistic outlook. He indicated that
the Program 5 deployments had "provided us with an increased force
structure and logistics base for offensive operations". The past year,
he indicated, had been marked by steady free world progress, a notice-
able deterioration of the enemy's combat effectiveness, and his loss of
control over large areas and population.

"During 1967, the enemy lost control of large sectors of
the population. He faces significant problems in the areas
of indigenous recruiting, morale, health and resources control.
Voids in VC ranks are being filled by regular NVA. Sea infiltra-
tion through the Market Time area has diminished to near-insignifica-
tion proportions. Interdiction of the enemy's logistics train
in Laos and NVN by our indispensable sir efforts has imposed
significant difficulties on him. In many areas the enemy has
been driven away from the population centers; in others he has
been compelled to disperse and evade contact, thus nullifying
much of his potential. The year ended with the enemy increasingly
resorting to desperation tactics in attempting to achieve military/
psychological victory; and he has experienced only failure in
these attempts. Enemy bases, with sparse exception, are no
longer safe havens and he has necessarily become increasingly
reliant on Cambodian and Laotian sanctuaries..."

"The friendly picture gives rise to optimism for increased
successes in 1968, In 1967, our logistics base and force
structure permitted us to assume a fully offensive posture...
A greatly improved intelligence system frequently enabled us
to concentrate our superior military assets in preempting enemy
military initiatives leading us to decisive accomplishments in
conventional engagements. Materiel and tactical innovations
have been further developed and employed: Long range recon-
naissance patrols, aerial reconnaissance sensors, new 0-2A
observation aircraft, Rome plows, 47 (Spooky) gunships, air-
mobile operations and the Mobile Riverine Force (MRF), to name

z TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

climate of South Vietnam, as well as the image of the GVN in the United
States. This involved, the memorandum indicated, a readiness for the

U.S. to make specific demands upon the GVN in order to get it to take a

wide range of decisions and actions. Among those things considered essential
and feasible, the following actions were listed:

1. Mobilization - The Vietnamese Armed Forces should be
increased to the maximum. As a first step, present plans to
increase Vietnamese forces by 65,000 men should be amended to
provide for an additional 30,000 men under arms by the end of
1968. The draft of 18 and 19 year olds should proceed as
presently scheduled. This should be consistent with the ability
to train and supply the forces, but avoid undercutting the
need for key civilians in other governmental functions by
diversion of skilled personnel.

2. The Thieu-Ky Relationship and Unity of Leadership -
The failure of Thieu and Ky to cooperate fully and apply
their individual talents to the needs of the situation has
continued to plague the effective management of the Vietnamese
effort. In turn this has had ramifications down the line in
poth the military and civilian chain of command. It has also
complicated the chances of rallying the various elements in
the society, as the rivalry translates itself into interference
with attempts at forming a national anti-communist front.

Thieu and Ky and their followers, as well as other
elements in the society not associated directly with them,
must be brought to realize that we are no longer prepared to
put up with anything but the maximum effort on their part.

A clear and precise role for Ky should be defined. Thieu

and Ky must bring their followers into line. The government
should be prepared to engage the services of people with
administrative and executive talent who are now not participating
in the common task. Our expectations in this regard have to

be made crystal clear to each and every Vietnamese leader in

and out of Government. Without this fundamental change in

the attitude and dedication of the leadership, the necessary
reforms and the necessary inspiration of the Vietnamese people
Will not be forthcoming quickly or sufficiently.

3. Getting the Govermnent Back into the Countryside -
We must win the race to the countryside, go on the offensive,
re-establish security in the rural areas, and restore the
government's presence in the villages. The ARVN and other
security forces must deploy aggressively, the RD cadre must
return to-their tasks, and governmental services reach out

from the province capitals.

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In the final analysis rural security, the sine qua non
of popular identification with the GVN, must be provided by
the Vietnamese themselves. The two keys here are (1) the
calibre and role of the 4h province chiefs (and their sup-
porting staffs) and (2) a properly offensive sense of mission
on the part of ARVN units - and their commanders - assigned
to rural security support missions. In every area (village,
district, province, DTZ and corps) the RVNAF unit commanders
responsible for security in that area must be graded (i.e.
promoted, commended or sacked) primarily on their ability
to find, fix and eradicate the VC Force indigenous to that
area. They must also be graded (with commensurate effect
on their careers) with respect to the behavior of their
troops vis-a-vis the populace in that area.

4, Drive on the Viet Cong Infrastructure - In our con-
cern over the behavior of our allies, we must not neglect our
enemies and the present opportunity to compound and exacerbate
communist problems. Operation Phoenix which is targetted
against the Viet Cong must be pursued more vigorously in closer
diaison with the US. Vietnamese armed forces should be devoted
to anti-infrastructure activities on a priority basis. The
Tet offensive surfaced a good deal of the infrastructure and
the opportunity to damage it has never been better. This
would force the VC on the defensive and head off the estab-
lishment of local VC administrative organizations and VC
attempts to set up provisional governmental committees.

5. US-ARVN Command Relationships - While we accept the

Mission's reluctance to create a joint command, we believe
that alternative arrangements which give the US a greater
role in ARVN employment are necessary. This can be done at
the Corps level and below. It would involve US participation
in the planning and control of ARVN operations. It might
even call for the prior approval by US advisors of ARVN
operational plans -- this now exists in certain cases
depending upon individual advisor relationships. We

should request MACV to study the matter and come up with

a specific plan to meet the requirement.

6. Government Reform and Anti-Corruption Campaign -

The beginning steps at administrative reform which President
Thieu has innounced must be accelerated. This should be
directly associated with a new deal on corruption, which must
be dealt with by relief of a specified list of corrupt offi-
cials now and the promise of severe action in the future.

A capable Inspectorate should be established. Incompetent
ARVN officers must be removed, beginning with a specific

list that should be made available by MACV. Incompetent
province chiefs who have plagued our efforts in the past
must be removed. The removal of incompetent commanders

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

«
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and officials is now more feasible in the light of per=
formance during the Tet offensive. We should not hesitate
to make our desires known and back them up by refusing to
provide support for the incompetent. For key commanders,
we should require the right of prior approval on a secret
and discreet basis. The precise tools of leverage to be
applied in this regard should be left to the US Mission,
but could include withholding advice and assistance at
jJocal levels in extreme cases.

7. The Prime Minister - We should solicit Ambassador
Bunker's views on the desirability of replacing the Prime
Minister. If he is to be replaced we should agree on his
successor beforehand, in consultation with Thieu and Ky.

8. The United Front - A nationalist spirit of coopera-
tion and unity came to the fore in the immediate wake of
the Tet offensive. It is being manifested incompletely in
attempts to organize groups in support of the national task.
Despite the personal misgivings of old antagonists there has
been some success. This is now threatened by personal rival-
ries, and most significantly by differences between Thieu and
Ky. We need to find a formula for joint efforts. Ambassador
Bunker suggests that the optimum result would be a "super front"
of the anti-communist groups. Although not directly tied to
the government, such a front could serve to rally the people
proadly and emotionally against the Viet Cong. To succeed it
must. be backed by the leadership of the government - both
Thieu and Ky - but not appear to compete with the National
Assembly. It should encompass all elements in the society,
but not be the vehicle for any one power group.

9. Economic Measures - There will be increased inflation
in Vietnam this year, and additional US troops will make it
more severe. Steps need to be taken now to counter the
threat of inflation, if we are not to be faced with a severe
erisis next fall and winter. The GVN needs to move on tax
increases, and U.S, and GVN expenditures for non-essential
programs in Vietnam should be restrained. On the other hand,
wage increases for civil and military personnel in the GVN
are needed if inflation is not to weaken their will and support.

Additionally, we must demand of the GVN some measure of
action on their part to compensate for the effect of addi-
tional US troops on the US balance of payments. This can
be done by having the GVN provide to the US at no cost the
additional piaster costs incurred by our troop increase. We
should also insist that GVN reserves be reduced to $250 mil-
lion from the present maximum reserve level of $300 million
and that a significant portion of the reserve be invested in
medium and long term US securities. The details of these

57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

economic measures cannot be discussed in this paper, but

a comprehensive economic package should be prepared and
presented to the GVN - to include what the US is prepared

to do in the way of increased financing of commercial imports.

10. Resource Allocation - Non-essential use of resources
should be eliminated. Present government programs to
eliminate new luxury construction. must be tightened and con-
tinued. Bars and night clubs should remain closed. Austerity
should be fostered. 68/

The Appendix recommended that a high-level mission, probably headed
by the Secretary of Defense, should go to Saigon to emphasize to the GVN
that we consider improved GVN performance essential; that any further U.S.
support must be matched by GVN actions; and that the above recommendations
would be used as a checklist for judging Vietnamese performance. In addi-
tion, this Appendix emphasized that we should do what was necessary to
improve the capability of RVNAF. Although no details were given, the state-
ment was made that: "On the basis of current planning estimates, this
would involve additional expenditure of about $475 million over a period
of 18 months."

Tab C of the Memorandum for the President consisted of a brief justif-
ication for increasing the strategic reserve. The basic argument was that
we would then be prepared to provide the additional ground, sea, and air
forces involved in General Westmoreland's request if the military situation
required. In addition, the paper indicated:

If these additional forces are not deployed to Vietnam,
our action in thus reconstituting the strategic reserve would
nevertheless be fully warranted. Our strategic reserve has
been appreciably depleted because of Vietnam demands. At
present, the active division forces in the Continental United
States, Hawaii and Okinawa, and including the Marine units
in the Caribbean and Mediterranean, consist of 4-2/3 Army
divisions and 1-1/3 Marine divisions. This compares with
the 9 Army divisions and 3 Marine divisions in our strategic
reserve on 30 June 1965. A call-up of 245,000, with no
deployments to South Vietnam in excess of the 20-30,000
now recommended, would yield a strategic reserve of 7 Army
divisions and 2 Marine divisions. The unsettled situations
in many parts of the world make this build-up a prudent
action entirely apart from possible Vietnam contingencies. 69/

Relegated to Tab D of the Memorandum for the President was what had
begun as the major task of the Working Group--the necessity for in-depth
study of Vietnam policy and strategic guidance.

General Westmoreland's request, this Appendix pointed out, does not
purport to provide any really Satisfactory answer to the problem in Vietnam.

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

There can be no assurance that this very substantial
additional deployment would leave us a year from today in
any more favorable military position. All that can be said
is that the additional troops would enable us to kill more
of the enemy and would provide more security if the enemy does
not offset them by lesser reinforcements of his own. There
is no indication that they would bring about a quick solution
in Vietnam and, in the absence of better performance by the
GVN and the ARVN, the increased destruction and increased
Americanization of the war could, in fact, be counter-
productive. 70/

There were many other reasons for conducting a study of our Vietnamese
policy in the context of the U.S. worldwide political/military strategy.
No matter what the result in Vietnam itself, we will have failed in our
purpose, the memorandum stated, if:

a. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where it is
a major conflict leading to direct military confrontation
with the USSR and/or China;

b. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where we
are so committed in resources that our other world-wide
commitments -~ especially NATO -- are no longer credible;

ec. The attitudes of the American people towards "more
Vietnams" are such that our other commitments are brought
into question as a matter of US will;

d. Other countries no longer wish the US commitment for
fear of the consequences to themselves as a battlefield between
the Hast and the West. 71/

In addition, any intensive review should focus on the ability of the
GVN and the ARVN to demonstrate significant improvement, both in their
ability to win popular support and their willingness to fight aggressively
for their own security.

Finally, the memorandum stated:

..-the striking change in the enemy's tactics, his
willingness to commit at least two additional divisions
to the fighting in the South over the pist few weeks
and the obvious and not wholly anticipated strength of
the Viet Cong infrastructure, shows that there can be
no prospect of a quick military solution to the aggression
in South Vietnam. Under these circumstances, we should give
antensive study to the development of new strategic guidance
+o General Westmoreland. This study may show that he should
not be expected either to destroy the enemy forces or to
rout them completely from South Vietnam. The kind of American
commitment that might be required to achieve these military

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

objectives cannot even be estimated. There is no reason
to believe that it could be done by an additional 200,000
American troops or double or triple that quantity....

The exact nature of the strategic guidance which should
be adopted cannot now be predicted. It should be the subject
of a detailed interagency study over the next several weeks.
During the progress of the study, discussions of the appro-
priate strategic guidance and its nature and implications
for the extent of our military commitment in South Vietnam
should be undertaken with both General Westmoreland and
Ambassador Bunker. 72/

Thus, the "A to Z reassessment" of U.S. strategy requested by the
President was relegated by the Working Group to a future date.

Tab E remained intact from the original 29 February draft memorandum.
Prepared by the State Department, it discussed negotiating options and
possible diplomatic actions in connection with a buildup of U.S. forces.
Concerning our negotiating posture, three broad options were listed:

1. Stand pat on the San Antonio formula and on our basic
position toward the terms of a negotiated settlement -- the

Geneva Accords plus free choice in the South, rejecting a

coalition or any special position for the NIF.

2. Take some new initiative, either privately or publicly,
that might involve a change in our position on the San Antonio
formula, and/or a change in our position on the elements of a
settlement. -

3. No change in our position for the present, but pitching
our course of action toward a strong move for negotiations when
and if we have countered Hanoi's offensive -- i.e., in a matter
of four months or so perhaps. 73/

The crucial question, the paper indicated, was really to examine
what we could conceivably do by way of a new initiative under Option 2.
After examining the situation, however, the conclusion was reached that:

..-any change in our position on the terms of a peaceful
settlement would be extremely unwise at the present time. We
may well wish to work on opening up channels to the NLF, but
this must be done in the utmost secrecy and in full consulta-
tion with the GVN. We do not know what the possibilities
may be in this direction, but any public stress on this avenue
would feed the fires of a VC propaganda line that has already
had significant disturbing effect in South Vietnam.

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As to our conditions for stopping the bombing and
entering into talks, we continue to believe that the San
Antonio formula is "rock bottom." The South Vietnamese
are in fact talking about much stiffer conditions, such
as stopping the infiltration entirely. Any move by us to
modify the San Antonio formula downward would be extremely
disturbing in South Vietnam, and would have no significant
offsetting gains in US public opinion or in key third countries....

This being said, we believe that it would strengthen our
over-all posture, and involve no significant risks in Vietnam,
if we were to reiterate our basic position on our terms of
settlement in South Vietnam. A systematic restatement of our
position on the Geneva Accords and free choice in the South
could be a vital part of selling our whole course of action
to the public, to Congress, and the world. Although we have
stated all the elements at different times, we have not pulled
them together for a long time and we could get a considerable
impression of freshness, even novelty, and certainly reasonable-
ness by identifying more precisely the elements of the Geneva
Accords; our position on free choice, and perhaps adding
something on external guarantees, which have always been a
generalized part of our position and that of the South Viet-
namese. 7

Further diplomatic actions, the Appendix indicated, would be designed
to dramatize the Communist threats to Laos, Thailand, and Cambodia. Among
the actions suggested were the following:

First, that the restatement of our position on South Viet-
nam include substantial emphasis on restoration of the Laos
Accords of 1962 and on the preservation of the neutrality and
territorial integrity of Cambodia under the 1954 Accords.

Indeed, we could go still further and take the occasion
to talk in terms of an over-all settlement for Southeast Asia
that would specifically provide that each nation was free to
assume whatever neutral or other international posture it
wished to take. We could explicitly state that we were pre-
pared to accept a Southeast Asia that was "neutral" in the
sense of not adhering to any power bloc or forming a part
of any alliance directed at others.

We could say a favorable word about regional arrange-
ments in Southeast Asia consistent with the concept, and
could indicate our willingness to join with other outside
nations to consider what kind of general assurances of sup-
port could be given to such a Southeast Asia....

Second, there are strong diplomatic steps that could be

61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

taken to dramatize the situation in Iaos. We could encourage
Souvanna to take the case to the UN where Lacs and Souvanna

have strong appeal. Concurrently, but we believe less effec-
tive in practice, Souvanna could press the British and Soviets

to take action or even to reconvene the Geneva Conference of 1962.

Third, we could attempt similar action for Cambodia. This
might be through the Australians, to get Sihanouk to take his
ease also to the UN. Even if he made some accusations against
us in the process, he would be likely at the present time to
highlight his internal Chinese-backed threat, and the net result
eould be useful.

A further possibility would be to seek to enlist India more
deeply in the Cambodian situation. This is worth trying, but
the Indians are a weak reed for action or for effective diplo-
matic dramatization.

Fourth, we could consider getting the Thai to dramatize
their situation more than they have done. This takes careful
thought, since they do not wish to alarm their own people. 75/

Other possibilities discussed were the enlisting and engaging of other
Asian nations in the search for peace in Vietnam and the Soviet Union in an
effort to find peace in Southeast Asia.

In Tab F appeared a discussion of military action against North Viet-
nam. This tab contained two contrary views concerning the bombing campaign
against NVN, and is discussed in detail in another Task Force paper. This
is the first place that any written discussion of the bombing campaign ;
against the North appears in any of the papers of the Working Group. it is
interesting to note, in the light of subsequent developments, that neither
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff nor the Secretary of Defense made
mention of @ partial or complete bombing suspension of the North at this
time. They differed only on the extent to which the bombing campaign
against North Viet Nam should be intensified. 76/

Tabs G and H, the final Tabs, considered the public affairs problems
in dealing with increased U.S. troop commitments to SVN and to the calling
up of reserve forces. In dealing with public opinion and with Congress,
these Appendices concluded that from a public affairs viewpoint:

Beyond the basic points of establishing that the war is in
the national interest, that there is a plan to end it satis-
factorily and that we can identify the resources needed to
carry out that plan, we must prove:

1. That General Westmoreland needs the additional troops
being sent him.

62 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. That he does not need further additional troops at
this time.

3. That the Strategic Reserve does need reconstitution
at this time.

h. That the possible need of General Westmoreland for
possible future reinforcement is sufficiently important
to merit the callup.

5. That there is not a bottomless pit.

6. That the nation still has the resources for the ghetto
fight. 77/

Thus, the memorandum forwarded to the President by the Secretary of
Defense in response to the Presidential request for an "A to Z% reassessment"
of our Vietnam policy again represented a compromise. In this case, it
was @ compromise brought about by differences between the Assistant Secre-
tary of Defense for International Security Affairs and his staff, and the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and his officers. Initially, ISA had
prepared a draft Presidential memorandum which had indeed reassessed U.S.
strategy in SVN, found it faulty, and recommended a new strategy of protecting
the "demographic frontier" with basically the U.S. forces presently in-
country. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff found "fatal flaws " in
this strategy, could not accept the implied criticism of past strategy in
the ISA proposal, did not think that the Defense Department civilians should
be involved in issuing specific guidance to the military field commander,
and supported this field commander in his request for the forces required
to allow him to “regain the initiative.” The compromise reached, of course,
was that a decision on new strategic guidance should be deferred pending a
complete political/military reassessment of the U.S, strategy and objectives >
in Vietnam in the context of our worldwide commitments.

The recommendation for additional forces was also a compromise and
was based, as had past decisions of this nature, on what could be done by
the forces in-being without disrupting the nation. However, there were addi-
tional reasons adduced for not meeting all of COMUSMACV's requirements for
forces. The situation in SVN was not clear. The ability of the Government
and of the Army of South Vietnam to survive and to improve were in serious
question. The ability of the U.S, to attain its objectives in SVN by mili-
tary force of whatever size was not clear. Weighing heavily upon the minds
of the senior officials who prepared and approved the 4 March memorandum to
the President was, indeed, what difference in the war, what progress toward
wictory such 2 puildup as requested by MACV would make. These leaders were,
finally, prepared to go a long way down the road in meeting COMUSMACV's
request. They recommended to the President that the first increment of
this request be met. They also recommended a partial mobilization so as
to be prepared to meet additional requirements if and when it was demon-
strated that these forces were necessary and would make a strategic difference.

63 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

More importantly, however, these officials finally came to the realization
that no military strategy could be successful unless a South Vietnamese
political and military entity was capable of winning the support of its
people. Thus, for the first time, U.S. efforts were to be made contingent
upon specific reform measures undertaken by the GVN, and U.S. leverage was
to be used to elicit these reforms. South Vietnam was to be put on notice
that the limit of U.S. patience and commitment had been approached.

Concerning negotiations and the bombing of the North, the Memorandum
for the President was conventional. No changes in our negotiating position
were recommended and no really new diplomatic initiatives were suggested.
Concerning the bombing of the North, the only issue indicated concerned
the degree of intensification. There was no mention made of a partial reduc-
tion or cessation.

Thus, faced with a fork in the road of our Vietnam policy, the Working
Group failed to seize the opportunity to change directions. Indeed, they
seemed to recommend that we continue rather haltingly down the same road,
meanwhile consulting the map more frequently and in greater detail to insure
that we were still on the right road.

6. The Climate of Opinion

This memorandum was presented to the President on Monday evening,
hk March, and at his request, the recommendations were passed to General
Westmoreland for his comments. These comments were received by the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and passed to the Secretary of Defense on
8 March 1968. General Westmoreland welcomed the additional airpower which
"would greatly enhance the tactical air support available to ground units."
The chairman indicated, however, that there had been no change in General
Westmoreland's requirements as originally proposed and, indeed, additional
eombat service-support forces had been requested.

General Westmoreland states that although immediate
authorization for deployment of 22,000 additional personnel
would provide much needed combat and combat support forces,
the combat service support forces now in Vietnam are insuffi-
cient to support our present force structure. This is especi-
ally critical in view of the recent deployment of the 3rd
Brigade of the 82d Airborne Division and RLT 27 to the I Corps
tactical zone without the appropriate slice of combat support.
He emphasizes the absolute reduirement to provide the support
forces identified with the increased deployments prior to or
at the same time the tactical forces are deployed. In this
regard, General Westmoreland has this date forwarded his
specific strength recommendations for the immediate essential
combat service support forces to provide adequate support for
combat units in I CTZ, including the 3rd Brigade of the 82d
Airborne Division, RLT 27 and Army units which have been

redeployed to Northern I Corps tactical zone. This request

64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a few. The MRF has been significantly successful in depriving
the enemy of freedom and initiative in the population and
resources rich Delta areas. The heliconter has established
itself as perhaps the single most important tool in our
arsenal -- and we will welcome more. To air support in both
RVN and NVN (Army, Navy, Marine and Air Force) goes much of
the credit for our accomplishments." 1/

The enemy's TET offensive, which began with the attack on the U.S.
Embassy in Saigon on 31 January 1968, although it had been predicted, 2/
took the U.S. command and the U.S. public by surprise, and its strength,
length, and intensity prolonged this shock. As the attacks continued,
the Secretary of Defense, on 9 February, requested the Joint Chiefs of
Staff to furnish plans which would provide for emergency reinforcement
of COMUSMACY.

After extensive backchannel communication with General Westmoreland,
the JCS forwarded these plans on 12 February. 3/ The Joint Chiefs’
assessment of the current Vietnam situation differed markedly from
COMUSMACV's year-end assessment submitted only 17 days earlier:

"a, The VC/NVA forces have launched large-scale offensive
operations throughout South Vietnam.

"pb. As of 11 February 1968, Headquarters, MACV, reports that
attacks have taken place on 34 provincial towns, 64 district
towns, and all of the autonomous cities.

"e, The enemy has expressed his intention to continue offensive
operations and to destroy the Government of Vietnam and its Armed
Forces.

"4. The first phase of his offensive has failed in that he
does not have adequate control over any population center to
install his Revolutionary Committees which he hoped to form
into a coalition with the NLF.

"ea, He has lost between 30 and 40 thousand killed and captured,
and we have seized over seven thousand weapons.

"f, Reports indicate that he has committed the bulk of his
VC main force and local force elements down to platoon level
throughout the country, with the exception of six to eight
battalions in the general area of Saigon.

">. Thus far, he has committed only 20 to 25 percent of his
North Vietnamese forces. These were employed as gap fillers
where VC strength was apparently not adequate to carry out his
initial thrust on the cities and towns. Since November, he has

2 ‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

has not yet been validated by CINCPAC, but is currently under
consideration here by the Joint Staff in anticipation of early
action by Admiral Sharp's headquarters.

Finally, General Westmoreland recognizes that the forces
which were contained in the Committee's recommendations were
apparently based upon the capabilities of the Services to
produce troops for deployment. He states that there has been
no change in his appraisal of the situation since my visit to
Vietnam and thus there has been no change in his reauirements
as originally proposed. 78/

From the 4th of March until the final Presidential decision was announced
to the country, the written record becomes sparse. The debate within the
Administration was argued and carried forward on a personal basis by the
officials involved, primarily, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary
of State.

The decision, however, had been placed squarely on the shoulders of
the President. The recommendations of the 4 March memorandum had left him
a profound political/military dilemma. The memorandum had recommended "a
little bit more of the same" to stabilize the military situation, plus a
level of mobilization in order to be prepared to meet any further deteriori-
ation in the ground situation. Any new strategic guidance, any new direction
in policy, however, were to be left to a subsequent study.

But many political events in the first few weeks of March 1968 gave
strong indications that the country was becoming increasingly divided over
and disenchanted with the current Vietnam strategy, and would no longer
settle for "more of the same" with no indication of an eventual end to the
conflict. That the President was aware of these external political pres-
sures and that they influenced his decision is evident.

Focus to this political debate and sense of dissatisfaction was given
by a startlingly accurate account, published in The New York Times on
10 March, of General Westmoreland's request and of the strategic reassess-
ment which was being conducted within the executive branch of the government.
Tt also indicated the growing doubt and unease in the nation concerning this
policy review.

Written by Neil Sheehan and Hedrick Smith, the article stated:

General William C. Westmoreland has asked for 206,000
more American troops for Vietnam, but the request has touched
off a divisive internal debate within high levels of the
Johnson Administration.

A number of sub-Cabinet civilian officials in the Defense

Department, supported by some senior officials in the State
Department, have argued against General Westmoreland's plea

65 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for a 40 per cent increase in his forces 'to regain the
initiative’ from the enemy.

-»--Many of the civilian officials are arguing that
there should be no increase beyond-the movement of troops
now under way.-.-.

The contention of these high ranking officials is that
an American increase will bring a matching increase by
North Vietnam, thereby raising the level of violence with-
out giving the allies the wpper hand.

Senior Pentagon civilians have put forward a written
counter-proposal to President Johnson, calling for 4
shift in American strategy to a concept of close-in
defense of populated areas with more limited offensive
thrusts then at present. Much of the military hierarchy
is reported to oppose this approach....

The President has not yet decided on the question of
substantial increases in American forces in Vietnam....

Nonetheless, the scope and depth of the internal debate
within the Government reflect the wrenching uncertainty
and doubt in this capitel about every facet of the war left
by the enemy's dramatic wave of attacks at Tet, the Asian
New Year holiday, six weeks ago. More than ever this has
left a sense of weariness and irritation over the war.

Officials themselves comment in private about wide-
spread and deep changes in attitudes, a sense that a water-
shed has been reached and that its meaning is just now
beginning to be understood....

But at every level of Government there is a sense that
the conflict, if expanded further, can no longer be called
's limited war.* Officials acknowledge that any further
American involvement carries serious implications for the
civilian life of the nation--not only the call-up of mili-
tary reserves and enactment of a tax increase but problems
with the budget, the economy and the balance of payments.

In Congress, uneasy and divided, as the Senate debate
on Thursday showed, there is a rising demand that Capitol Hill
be consulted. before any critical new step is taken. Even
supporters of Administration policy, such as Senator Richard
B. Russell, Democrat of Georgia, who is chaizman of the
Senate Armed Services Committee, are openly critical of
American combat strategy. Mr. Russell has suggested that the

66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a a ey ae.
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

United States has lost the battlefield initiative not only through
the enemy's bold tactics but by what he calls its own defensive,
gradualist psychology....

General Westmoreland's request for another 206,000 troops,
beyond the present authorized 525,000-man level to be reached by
next fall, was brought from Saigon last month by Gen. Earle G.
Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff....

General Wheeler presented the request to President Johnson at
the White House on Feb. 28, when he delivered a report on his three-
day survey of the war situation in South Vietnam. The request was
also forwarded to the President by the Joint Chiefs as a body
‘with our approval'....

Military leaders also contend that only a massive infusion of
troops will restore the allied initiative. They say it would also
permit the allied forces to resume the pacification of the country-
side and the war of attrition against the Vietcong that they contend
was being successfully waged before the Tet offensive.

The main lines of the case against General Westmoreland's
request are contained in a position paper prepared over the last
weekend by senior civilian officials in the Defense Department,
including assistant secretaries. Most of these officials were
brought into the Government by former Secretary of Defense Robert S.
McNamara.

The argument goes like this:

Since the United States military build-up began in 1965, Hanoi
has gradually increased its forces in South Vietnam and maintained
a reasonable ratio to the fighting strength of the American Forces.
There is every reason to believe, these officials contend, that
Hanoi is able and willing to continue to do so if more American
troops are sent to Vietnam within the next year.

_ The reinforcements that General Westmoreland wants would thus
not restore the initiative. They would simply raise the level of
violence. The United States would spend billions more on the war
effort and would suffer appreciably higher casualties.

North Vietnam would likewise endure substantially greater losses.
But the experience of the Tet offensive shows, according to this
line of reasoning, that American Military commanders have gravely
underestimated the capacity of the enemy to absorb such punishment
and to be still able to launch bold offensive operations.

‘So there would just be a lot more killing,’ one analyst said.

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The White House is also reported to have received an analysis
from the Central Intelligence Agency that support this view of
North Vietnam's manpower resources and its will to resist.

'essentially,' said one official, ‘we are fighting Vietnam's
birth rate.'

The Defense Department's paper was yerbally endorsed by Deputy
Secretary of Defense Paul T. Nitze and forwarded by him to Clark
M. Clifford, the new Defense Secretary, for transmittal to the
President on Monday. ;

Mr. Clifford was impressed with the caliber of the analysis,
informants said, but it is not known whether he endorsed the
document personally.

The thrust of the argument in the Pentagon paper is reported
to have gained the sympathetic support of a number of senior State
Department officials, including Under Secretary Nicholas deB.
Katzenbach, William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Fast Asian
and Pacific Affairs, and others close to Vietnam policy.

'I can tell you that all of us in this building are against a
troop increase,’ one State Department official said. However,
Secretary Rusk's position on the matter was unknown.

The defense position paper concludes by proposing a change in
American strategy in South Vietnam. This would entail withdrawing
from exposed positions like Khesanh in the sparsely populated
frontier regions and concentrating on a mobile defense of the
cities and populated areas nearer the sea.

But some military officials contend this is not a realistic
option.

'Rach town will become a Khesanh,' they assert, and civilian
casualties will soar.

Although most civilian officials declined to use the term
tenclave' to describe their proposed strategy, some conceded that
it does amount to a modification of the theory advanced by Lieut.
Gen. James M. Gavin, retired. He has for months urged that the
allies pull back to defensive positions around cities and other
important enclaves along the coast.

The Pentagon document suggests that on the political side the
United States encouraged the Saigon regime to broaden itself by
including non-Communist opposition elements such as the followers of
the militant Buddhist leader Tri Quang. A broader base would help
the regime establish a better relationship with its population and
make its army more effective, the paper asserts.

68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In their discussion of the American predicament in Vietnam,
some Civilian officials go significantly further and suggest
that the Administration should concede that ‘you cannot completely
defeat the enemy.’ The United States, they say, should instead
"buy time' with its present forces while the non-Commmist South
Vietnamese can strengthen themselves to the point where they
‘believe in their ability to survive against the Communists
after some sort of internal compromise. '

Officials are vague about the ingredients of this compromise,
put they acknowledge that it would probably involve negotiations
between the Vietcong and the non-Communists in the South.

Although it clearly entails abandonment of the military
solution that is implicit in current Administration policy, they
argue that such a compromise would not violate any public
American commitment to South Vietnam.

While avoiding any decision so far, President Johnson has
gained time by putting pressure on General Westmoreland to obtain
maximum use of the troops he now has. The President has instructed
the general to justify in detail his request for reinforcements.

Mr. Johnson has also set in motion extensive staff studies of
the full political, economic and military ramifications of giving
General Westmoreland more troops. Included among these may be an
examination of the possibility of acquiring additional forces
from Washington's allies in South Vietnam--Australia, South Korea,
Thailand and the Philippines.

The thrust of the President's concern, however, has been with
the consequences of troop increases. There is no indication at this
time that Mr. Johnson and his closest advisers, Mr. Rusk, Mr.
Clifford and Mr. Rostow are seriously interested in extending the
war to Cambodia and Laos or in changing to a strategy of close-in
defense of populated areas.

They reject @ political compromise with the Vietcong at this
point. Some senior civilian officials, in fact, believe Mr.
Johnson is ‘still intensely committed to a military solution.'

These officials consider General Westmoreland's request for

an additional 206,000 men ‘unrealistic,’ however, and do not believe
the President will grant it. 79/

69 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Even prior to this article, there had been a great deal of speculation
in the press concerning the need for additional troops in SVN, and the
general conclusion seemed to be that some additions would be required.
Members of Congress had already demanded that Congress be consulted
before any decision was made to increase troop strength in Vietnam
significantly. A number of prominent senators had interrupted debate
on civil rights on 7 March to make this demand because of "disturbing
information that a Presidential Decision was imminent." 80/

The Sheehan article appeared one day before Secretary of State Dean
Rusk appeared to testify before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
His 2-day grilling indicated a considerable growth in open dissent
within the Committee concerning U.S. policy in South Vietnam. Rusk even
came under criticism from one of the few Administration supporters on
the Committee, Senator Karl E. Mundt (R-SD), who warned him, "You are
as aware as we are that the shift of opinion in this country is in
the wrong direction" - meaning away from support of U.S. policy in Viet-
nem. "Something more convincing," said Mundt, "has to come from the
Administration as to what this is all about ‘to match' the sacrifices
.we are making." Rusk sidestepped all attempts by Senators Fulbright,
Gore, and other questioners to pin him down on a possible increase in
troops or Other element of future Vietnam strategy. It would "not be
right for me to speculate about numbers of possibilities," said Rusk,
"while the President is consulting his advisors." 81/

Later, on 12 March, both friends and foes of the President's policy
in Vietnam served notice that the present course must be reassessed
before more troops were sent to Vietnam.

"Senator Fulbright (D-Ark), Foreign Relations Committee chairman,
warned against an escalation that could lead to ‘all-out war,' and
insisted during a televised hearing with Dean Rusk, Secretary of State,
that Congress be consulted before crucial new decisions are made."

But Senator Russell (D-Ga), Armed Services Committee chairman, took
a different tack, contending that air and sea power should be used to
the fullest extent before ground-force levels are increased.

"Tf we are not willing to take this calculated risk," Russell told
a Veterans of Foreign Wars dinner, "we should not still be increasing
the half-million men in Vietnam who are exposed to danger daily from
weapons that might have been kept from the hands of our enemies." 82/

These comments from two powerful committee chairmen demonstrated
the cross-currents of opinion swirling around the President as he con-
templated General Westmoreland's request and the recommendations of his

advisors.

70 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Adding fuel to this controversy was the unexpected triumph in the
New Hampshire Presidential Primary on 12 March of the Democratic "peace"
candidate, Senator Eugene McCarthy. This triumph was widely heralded
as @ repudiation by the voters of the present Administration and its
Vietnam policies, and it encouraged another critic of these policies,
Senator Robert Kennedy, to announce on 16 March his intention to seek
the Democratic Presidential nomination.

7. The President Ponders

At a meeting at the White House on 13 March, the President
decided to deploy 30,000 troops to South Vietnam in addition to the 10,500
emergency augmentation already made. This would substantially meet
General Westmoreland's initial package request. Army forces would
replace those Marine Corps forces requested, as the Marine Corps could
not sustain the requested deployments. Also an additional Army brigade
(7,363 personnel) would be deployed to replace Marine RLT 27, and its
associated support. RLT 27 sould begin to return to CONUS on 15 July.
The forces to be deployed were as follows:

Deployment Date

A. US ARMY
Inf Bde (3 Inf Bns) © 4,500 15-30 June
Mech Bde (1 Inf Bn, 1 Inf

Bn (Mech), 1 Tk Bn) 5,041 12 July

Avn Co, Sep Bde 238 15 July
Armd Cav Sqdn 1,030 15-30 June
MP Bn 955 15-30 June
Cbt Sve Spt 3,316 15-30 June
Cbt and Cbt Sve Spt 9,120 15-30 June
SUB-TOTAL 2h ,200 15-30 June

B. 7th AF
h TFS 2,164 5 April
FAC/TACP 191 1 June
Airlift Th1 1 June
Support 929 i June
SUB-TOTAL 4,025

Cc. USN
NSA Da Nang Support 1,775 ~ i2.June
SUB-TOTAL 1470s —

D. TOTAL MACV 30,000

fal. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

There would be two reserve callups to meet and sustain these deploy-
ments, one in March and one in May. The callup in March would support
the 30,000 deployment. The one in May would reconstitute the strategic
reserve at seven active divisions. Other ground rules decided upon were:
(1) those Reservists to be called in May would not now be notified; (2)
there would be no extensions of terms of service for personnel presently
on active duty; (3) no individuals would be recalled, only units. 83/

This decision was formalized by the Deputy Secretary of Defense in a
memorandum to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on 14 March 1968.
Mr. Nitze asked the chairman to inform General Westmoreland of these pro-
posals, and to ask him whether he considered the substitutions satisfactory. 8h/

On 14 March, the Secretary of the Army forwarded to the Secretary of
Defense his recommendations concerning these Program Six deployments, and
the Reserve callup necessary to sustain them and to reconstitute the
strategic reserve. Secretary Resor pointed out, however, that an addi-
tional 13,500 men would have to be added to the figure of 30,000 to be
deployed. "If the 3d Brigade of the 82nd Airborne is to be left in-country
permanently and if the Army is to replace the RLT with an infantry brigade
on a permanent basis then units with TO&E strength of 13,500 must be
ineluded in the March 15 call-up and deployed....In addition, the MACV
ceiling will have to be increased from 565,000 to 578,500, unless MACV can
provide trade-off spaces for all or part of this add-on." 85/

The strength of units to be called up in March would be 45,000, as
follows:

a. Units to provide for the additional deployments - 31,563.

b. Units to provide the sustaining troops for 82d Airborne
and RLT 27 replacement - 13,437.

The May 15 callup would comprise the following:

1 division plus 1 IST 32,000
1 brigade 4,000

Post, camp and station comple-
ment to open 1 additional station 5,000
Total 71,000

This would reconstitute the STRAF at the following levels:

Division :
Isl
SSI 1-1/3 86/

72 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In addition, the Secretary indicated that the Chief of Staff of the
Army recomnended:

-.-tvhat one division, its ISI and the station comple-
ment, a total of 37,000 TOR strength, be alerted 15 March
and called up 15 April instead of 15 May in order to provide
an earlier capability to react to the unpredicted, a stronger
STRAF in light of growing uncertainties in Southeast and
Northeast Asia and to assure an earlier improvement of the
sustaining base to support the increased deployments and to
avoid drawdown on Europe. 87/

The approval of an additional 13,500 deployment to support the emer-
gency augmentation was apparently approved very quickly.

In a memorandum for the record on 16 March, the latest tentative plan

for Vietnam Deployments and reserve call-ups were listed as follows by the
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Systems Analysis):

Bit Deployment
Program #5 525,000

Emergency Augmentation 10,500
Support fox 10,500 13,500
Additional Deployment 30,000
Total 579,000
2, The March reserve call, to be announced around 20 March
will be:
Support deployment 36,621
Support personnel for the 10,500 13,437

Total 50,058

The March call will waive the 30 days notice, so troops
will report around March 27.

3. Around a week or 10 days later, "after a study" there will
be a second call of 48,393....These reservists will be given
30 days, therefore reporting around 1 May. 88/

Still, the ‘President was troubled. In public he continued to indicate
firmness and resoluteness, but press leaks and continued public criticism
continued to compound his problem. On March 17, the New York Times, again
amazingly accurate, forecast that the President would ap approve dispatch
of an additional 35,000 to 50,000 men to Vietnam over the next six months.. 89/
On March 18, nearly one-third of the House of Representatives, a total
of 139 members, - 98 Republicans and 41 Democrats - joined in sponsoring a
resolution calling for an immediate Congressional review of the United

States policy in Southeast Asié. 90

73 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On that same day, 18 March, Mr. Johnson answered these critics, as
he charged in a speech before the National Farmers’ Union Convention in
Minneapolis, that Hanoi is seeking "to win in Washington what it cannot
win in Hue or Khe Sanh. Your President welcomes suggestions from com-
missions, from congressmen, from private individuals or groups," he
continued, “or anyone who has a plan or program which can stand inspection
and open a hope of reaching our goal of peace in the world." 91/

At this time, the President sought the advice of a group of his friends
and confidants outside of government. These men came to Washington on
18 March at the request of the President to receive briefings on the latest
developments in the war and to advise the President on the hard decision
he faced. Present were: former Undersecretary of State George Ball;
Arthur Dean, a Republican New York lawyer who was a Korean War negotiator
during the Eisenhower Administration; Dean Acheson, former President
Truman's Secretary of State: Gen. Matthew B. Ridgeway, the retired com-
mander of United Nations troops in Korea; Gen. Maxwell Taylor, former
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Cyrus Vance, former Deputy Defense
Secretary and a key troubleshooter for the Johnson Administration; McGeorge
Bundy, Ford Foundation President who had been special assistant for National
Security Affairs to Mr. Johnson and former President Kennedy; former Treasury
Secretary C. Douglas Dillon and Gen. Omar Bradley.

The only published account of this consultation, which is considered
reliable, was written by Stuart H. Loory and appeared in the Los Angeles
Times late in May. According to this report, the group met over dinner
with Secretary of State Dean Rusk; Defense Secretary Clark M. Clifford;
Ambassador W. Averell Harriman; Walt W. Rostow, the President's special
assistant for National security affairs; General Earle G. Wheeler, Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Richard Helms, Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency; Paul Nitze, Deputy Defense Secretary; Nicholas
Katzenbach, Under Secretary of State; and William P. Bundy, Assistant
Secretary of State for Hast Asian and Pacific Affairs.

The outsiders questioned the government officials carefully
on the war, the pacification program and the condition of the
South Vietnamese government after the Tet offensive. They in-
cluded in their deliberations the effect of the war on the
United States.

After dinner the government officials left and the group
received three briefings.

Philip C. Habib, a deputy to William Bundy and now a member
of the American negotiating team in Paris, delivered an unusuelly
; frank briefing on the conditions in Vietnam after the Tet offensive.
He covered such matters. as corruption in South Vietnam and the

growing refugee problem.

74 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_TOP SECRET - Sensitive

increased his NVA battalions by about 25. The bulk of :
these and the bulk of the uncommitted NVA forces are in the

I Corps area.

"Hh, It is not clear whether the enemy will be able to
recyele his attacks in a second phase. He has indicated his
intention to do so during the period from 10 to 15 February.

"3. South Vietnamese forces have suffered nearly two
thousend killed, over seven thousand wounded, and an unknown
number of absences. MACV suspects the desertion rate may be
high. The average present for duty strength of RVN infantry
battalions is 50 percent and Ranger Battalions, 43 percent.
Five of nine airborne battalions are judged by MACV to be
combat ineffective at this time.”

Based on this assessment, COMUSMACV voiced to the Joint Chiefs three
major concerns: : ;
"a. The ability of the weakened RVNAF to cope with additional
sustained enemy offensive operations.

"b. Logistic support north of Danang, because of weather
and sea conditions in the Northern I Corps area, enemy inter-
diction of Route 1, and the probability of intensified combat
in that area.

"co. The forces available to him are not adequate at the
moment to permit him to pursue his own campaign plans and to
resume offensive operations against a weakened enemy, consider-
ing the competing requirements of reacting to enemy initiatives,
assisting in defending Government centers, and reinforcing weakened
RVNAF units when necessary."

The three plans for.emergency reinforcement examined by the Joint
Chiefs of Staff were:

"a, .Plan One, which is based upon prompt deployment of the
82nd Airborne Division and 6/9 Marine division/wing team, callup
of some 120,000 Army and Marine Corps Reserves, and appropriate
legislative action to permit extension of terms of service of
active duty personnel and the recall of individual Reservists.

'%. Plan Two, which would deploy as many Marine Corps
battalions as are now available in CONUS, less one battalion
in the Caribbean, the battalion in the Mediterranean, and the
Guantanamo Defense Force. This plan would not be based upon
a callup of Reservists or legislative action.

3 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Habib, according to reliable sources, told the group that
the Saigon government was generally weaker than had been realized
as a result of the Tet offensive. He related the situation, some
said, with greater frankness than the group had previously heard.

In addition to Habib, Maj. Gen. William E. DePuy, special
assistant to the Joint Chiefs for counterinsurgency and special
activities, briefed the group on the military situation, and
George Carver, a CIA analyst, gave his agency's estimates of con-
ditions in the war zone.

The briefings by DePuy and Carver reflected what many understood
as a dispute over enemy strength between the Defense Department
and the CIA which has been previously reported. Discrepancies in
the figures resulted from the fact that DePuy's estimates of enemy
strength covered only identifiable military units, while Carver's
included all known military, paramilitary and parttime enemy strength
available.

The morning of March 19, the advisory group assembled in the
White House to discuss what they had heard the previous evening
and arrived at their verdict. It was a striking turnabout in
attitude for all but Ball.

After their meeting, the group met the President for lunch.
It was a social affair. No business was transacted. The meal
finished, the advisers delivered their verdict to the President.

Their deliberations produced this verdict for the chief
executive:

Continued escalation of the war--intensified bombing of North
Vietnam and increased American troop strength in the South--would
do no good. Forget about seeking a battlefield solution to the
problem and instead intensify efforts to seek a political solution
at the negotiating table.

He was reportedly greatly surprised at their conclusions.
When he asked them where they had obtained the facts on which the
conclusions were based, the group told him of the briefings by
Habib, DePuy and Carver.

Mr. Johnson knew that the three men had also briefed his
governmental advisers, but he had not received the same picture of
the war as Rostow presented the reports to him.

As a result of the discrepancy, the President ordered his own
direct briefings. At least Habib and DePuy--and almost certainly
Carver--had evening sessions with the President.

73 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Habib was reportedly as frank with the President as he had ~
been with the advisory group. The President asked tough questions.
‘Habib stuck to his guns,' one source reported.

Whatever impact this group's recommendations and the direct briefings
he received had on the President was not immediately apparent in any
decision which affected the deployment of forces. Even as the President
announced, on 22 March, that General William C. Westmoreland would be
recalled from Vietnam to become the Army Chief of Staff, 93/ the Defense
Department continued to plan for the deployment of 43,500 additional
troops. In a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense on 23 March 1968,
the Assistant Secretary (Systems Analysis) forwarded his Program #6
Summary Table based on 579,000 men in South Vietnam, 54,000 over the
approved Program #5 ceiling. This 54,000 was made up of the 10,500
emergency reinforcement package, the 13,500 support forces for it, and
the 30,000 additional package. The Assistant Secretary added, that upon
notification of approval and desire to announce the new plan, the tables
would be published. 9h/

However, these particular tables were not to be published. The
President sought further advice as he wrestled with the problem which
had plagued his Administration. On March 26, General Creighton Abrams,
Deputy COMUSMACV, arrived suddenly and without prior announcement, and
was closeted with the President and his senior officials. These
conferences were conducted in the utmost secrecy amid press speculation
that Abrams would be named to succeed General Westmoreland. Further
press speculation was that the conferences dealt primarily with
expansion and modernization of the South Vietnamese armed forces and
that this tended to buttress earlier predictions that any increase in
American forces in South Vietnam would be modest. 95/

8. The President Decides

Apparently the Presidential decision on deployment of additional
U.§. forces to Vietnam was made on 28 March and concurred in by General
Abrams. In an undated memorandum (probably written on 27 or 28 March)
for the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, the Deputy Chief of Staff for
Military Operations, Lt General Lemley, indicated that the Joint Staff

‘had informed him of: 5

...-ventative decisions arising from the recent conference
between the’ President, the Chairman, and General Abrams, as
well as telecons between the Chairman and General Westmoreland.
It is believed that a Presidential decision may be made by

Friday (29 March) morning.

76 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

New ceiling in RVN: 549,500

a. Program 5: 525,000.

b. Emergency deployment of 82d Abn, 27th RLT: 11,000.*
e. Support and sustain emergency deployment: 13,500.*
d. Total: 549,500.

¥Includes estimated 1,444 Air Force and Navy.

ist Bde, 5th Inf Div (Mech) will replace 27th RLT. :
Reserve call-up of approximately 62,000.
a. Army 533957

(13,301 - Support of 3/82d Abn Div & 1/5th Inf Div)

(10,656 - Reconstitute STRAF)

ec. Air Force 6,590
d. Total 62,000 96/

A Joint Staff paper entitled "MACV Troop List of Program 6 Add-on,”
dated 28 March, summarized service capability to satisfy "MACV's 28 March
1968 request for U.S. forces" as follows:

Two Brigade Increment (Combat Forces)

STRENGTH CONUS AVAIL DATE*
USARV - Inf Bde, Sep 75639 In-Country as 3d Bde /82a
Div
- Mech Bde, Sep 4,882 Jul 68
~ Armored Cav Sqdn 1,049 Aug 68
7th AF - 2 TFS (F-100) (469 ea) 99h Jun/Jul 68
Total Brigade Increment 11,56
Support Increment (Combat Support and Combat Service Support Forces)
STRENGTH CONUS AVAIL DATE*
USARV - 2 FA Bn (155m) 1,132 Aug/Sep 6
- Engr Bn (Cot) 812 Aug 68
- Other Support Units 169 Jun/Jul. 68
2,752 Aug 68
2,219 Sep 68
SOs ad Oct 68
900 Unknown/May 69
hos Roe a
III MAF - Apr/Sep
, Total Support Increment 13,268
TOTAL DEPLOYMENT 24,832 (Excess over 24,500 can be

taken from existing credit/
debit account )

* CONUS availability date based on decision to call up reserve elements. 97/

17 TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

9. The Decision is Announced

On Sunday, 31 March, it was announced that the President would
address the nation that evening concerning the war in Vietnam. The
night before, Saturday, 30 March, a cable was dispatched to the U.S.
Ambassadors in Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, Laos, the Philippines,
and South Korea. This cable, slugged "Literally Eyes Only for
Ambassador or Charge", instructed the addressees to see their
respective heads of government and inform them of the following major
elements of the President's planned policy announcement on Sunday
night: 98/ }

a. Major stress on importance of GVN and ARVN increased
effectiveness, with our equipment and other.support as first
priority in our own actions.

b. 13,500 support forces to be called up at once in order
to round out the 10,500 combat units sent in February.

ce. Replenishment of strategic reserve by calling up
48,500 additional reserves, stating that these would be
designed to strategic reserve.

d. Related tax increases and budget cuts already largely
needed for non-Vietnam reasons.

3. In addition, after similar consultation and concurrence,
President proposes to announce that bombing will be
restricted to targets most directly engaged in the battle-
field area and that this meant that there would be no
pombing north of 20th parallel. Announcement would leave
open how Hanoi might respond, and would be open-ended as to
time. However, it would indicate that Hanoi's response
could be helpful in determining whether we were justified in
assumption that Hanoi would not take advantage if we
stopping (sic) bombing altogether. Thus, it would to
this extent foreshadow possibility of full bombing stoppage
at a later point.

This cable offered the Ambassadors some additional rationale for this
new policy for their discretionary use in conversations with their
respective heads of government. This rationale represents the only
available statement by the Administration of some of its underlying
reasons and purposes for and expectations from this policy decision.

a. You should call attention to force increases that would

be announced at the same time and would make clear our continued
resolye. Also our top priority to re-equipping ARVN forces.

7c TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. You should make clear that Hanoi is most likely to
denounce the project and thus free our hand after a short period.
Nonetheless, we might wish to continue the limitation even after
a formal denunciation, in order to reinforce its sincerity and
put the monkey firmly on Hanoi's back for whatever follows. Of
course, any major military change could compel full-scale
resumption at any time.

e. With or without denunciation, Hanoi might well feel
limited in conducting any major offensives at least in the northern
areas. If they did so, this could ease the pressure where it is
most potentially serious. If they did not, then this would give
us @ Clear field for whatever actions were then required.

d. In view of weather limitations, bombing north of the 20th
parallel will in any event be limited at least for the next four
weeks or so -- which we tentatively envisage as a maximum test-
ing period in any event. Hence, we are not giving up anything
really serious in this time frame. Moreover, air power now used
north of 20th can probably be used in Laos (where no policy change
planned) and in SVN.

e. Insofar as our announcement foreshadows any possibility
of a complete bombing stoppage, in the event Hanoi really exercises
reciprocal restraints, we regard this as unlikely. But in any
case, the period of demonstrated restraint would probably have to
continue for a period of several weeks, and we would have time to
appraise the situation and to consult carefully with them before
we undertook any such action.

Thus, in reassuring our allies of our “continued resolve", the cable
clearly indicated that not very much was expected of this change in policy.
Tt could possibly reinforce our sincerity and "put the monkey on Hanoi's
back for whatever follows." It was not expected thet Hanoi would react
positively although they might "feel limited in conducting any major
offensives at least in the northern areas", admittedly a highly dubious

likelihood.

What, then,was the purpose of this change in policy? If it was not
expected that Hanoi would respond positively, or that any other mejor
military benefits would accrue, what then was expected? The answer to
these questions, of course, could only be speculation at the time,

i although many of the answers were to be contained in the President's

speech on 31. Merch.

79 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

10. I Shall Not Seek, and I Will. Not Accept...

The President's speech to the nation on 31 March began with a
summary of his efforts to achieve peace in Vietnam over the years. 99/

Good evening, my fellow Americans.

Tonight I want to speak to you of peace in Vietnam and
Southeast Asia.

No other question so preoccupies our people. No other
dream so absorbs the 250 million human beings who live in that
part of the world. No other goal motivates American policy in
Southeast Asia.

For years, representatives of our government and others
have travelled the world -- seeking to find a basis for peace
talks. , ;

Since last September, they have carried the offer that I
wade public at San Antonio.

That offer was this:

That the United States would stop its bombardment of North
Vietnam when that would lead promptly to productive discussions --
and that we would assume that North Vietnam would not take
military advantage of our restraint.

Hanoi denounced this offer, both privately and publicly.
Even while the search for peace was going on, North Vietnam rush-
ed their preparations for a savage assault on the people, the
government, and the allies of South Vietnam.

This attack during the TET holidays, the President indicated, failed

to achieve its principal objectives:

It did not collapse the elected government of South Vietnam
or shatter its army -- as the Communists had hoped.

Tt did not produce a ‘general uprising’ among the people
of the cities as they had predicted.

The Communists were unable to maintain control of any of
the more than 30 cities that they attacked. And they took very
heavy casualties.

80 é TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But they did compel the South Vietnamese and their allies
4o move certain forces from the countryside, into the cities.

They caused widespread disruption and suffering. Their
attacks, and the battles that followed, made refugees of
half a million human beings.

The Communists may renew their attack any day.

They are, it appears, trying to make 1968 the year of
decision in South Vietnam -~ the year that brings, if not final
victory or defeat, at least a turning point in the struggle.

This much is clear;

If they do mount another round of heavy attacks, they will
not succeed in destroying the fighting power of South Vietnam
and its allies.

But tragically, this is also clear: many men -=- on both
sides of the struggle -- will be lost. A nation that has
already suffered 20 years of warfare will suffer once again.
Armies on both sides will take new casualties. And the war will

go on.
There is no need for this to be so.

In dramatically announcing the partial suspension of the bombing of
North Vietnam as a new initiative designed to lead to peace talks,
President Johnson did not voice any of the doubts of the State Department
cable of the previous night that this initiative was not expected to
be fruitful. Indeed, the central theme of this portion of the speech
was that our unilateral action was designed to lead to early talks.

The President even designated the United States representatives for

such talks.

There is no need to delay the talks that could bring an end
to this long and this bloody war.

Tonight, I renew the offer I made last August -- to stop
the bombardment of North Vietnam. We ask that talks begin
promptly, that they be serious talks on the substance of peace.
We assume that during those talks Hanoi will not take
advantage of our restraint.

We are prepared to move immediately toward peace through
negotiations.

ul TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

So, tonight, in the hope that this action will lead to
early talks, I am taking the first step to de-escalate the ~
conflict. We are reducing -- substantially reducing -- the
present level of hostilities.

And we are doing so unilaterally, and at once.

Tonight, I have ordered our aircrart and our naval vessels
+o make no attacks on North Vietnam, except in the area north
of the DeMilitarized Zone where the continuing enemy build-up
directly threatens allied forward positions and where the
movements of their troops and supplies are clearly related to
that threat.

The area, in which we are stopping our attacks includes
almost 90 percent of North Vietnam's population, and most of
its territory. Thus there will be no attacks around the
principal populated areas, or in the food-producing areas of
North Vietnam.

Even this very limited bombing of the North could come to
an early end -- if our restraint is matched by restraint in
Hanoi. But I eamnot in good conscience stop all bombing so
jong as to do so would immediately and directly endanger the
lives of our men and our allies. Whether 2 complete bombing
halt becomes possible in the future will be determined by
events.

Our purpose in this action is to bring about @ reduction in
the level of violence that now exists.

It is to save the lives of brave men -- and to save the lives
of innocent women and children, It is to permit the contending
forces to move closer to a political settlement.

And tonight, I call upon the United Kingdom and I call upon
the Soviet Union -- as co-chairmen of the Geneva Conferences, and
as permanent members of the United Nations Security Council ~--
to do all they can to move from the unilateral act of de-
escalation that I have just announced toward genuine peace in
Southeast Asia.

Now, as in the past, the United States is ready to send
its representatives to any forum, at any time, to discuss the
means of bringing this ugly war to an end.

82 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I am designating one of our most distinguished Ameri-
cans, Ambassador Averell Harriman, as my personal repre-
sentative for such talks. In addition, I have asked
Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, who returned from Moscow
for consultation, to be available to join Ambassador
Harriman at Geneva or any other suitable place -- just
as soon as Hanoi agrees to a conference.

I call upon President Ho Chi Minh to respond posi-
tively, and favorably, to this new step toward peace.

If peace did not come through negotiations, however, the President
indicated that our common resolve was unshakable and our common strength
invineible. As evidence of this, he listed the achievements of the South
Vietnamese nation.

Tonight, we and the other allied nations are con-
tributing 600,000 fighting men to assist 700,000 South
Vietnamese troops in defending their little country.

Our presence there has always rested on this basic
belief: the main burden of preserving their freedom
must be carried out by them -- by the South Vietnamese
themselves.

We and our allies can only help to provide a shield --
behind which the people of South Vietnam can survive and
can grow and develop. On their efforts -~ on their
determinations and resourcefulness -- the outcome will
ultimately depend.

That small, beleaguered nation has suffered terrible
punishment for more than twenty years.

I pay tribute once again tonight to the great courage
and endurance of its people. Sonth Vietnam supports armed
forces tonight of almost 700,000 men -- and I call your
attention to the fact that that is the equivalent of more
than 10 million in our own population. Its people maintain
their firm determination to be free of domination by the

North.

There has been substantial progress, I think, in
puilding a durable government during these.last three
years. The South Vietnam of 1965 could not have survived
the enemy's Tet offensive of 1968. The elected govern-
ment of South Vietnam survived that attack ~- and is
rapidly repairing the devastation that it wrought.

83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The South Vietnamese know that further efforts are
going to be required:

-- to expand their own armed forces,

-~- to move back into the countryside as quickly as
possible,

~~ to increase their taxes,

-- to select the very best men that they have for
civilian and military responsibility,

-- to achieve a new unity within their constitutional
government,

-- and to include in the national effort all of those
groups who wish to preserve South Vietnam's control over
its own destiny.

Last week President Thieu ordered the mobilization of
135,000 additional South Vietnamese. He plans to reach --
as soon as possible -- 4 total military strength of more
than 800,000 men.

To achieve this, the government of South Vietnam

. started the drafting of 19-year-olds on March lst. On

May lst, the Government will begin the drafting of 18-year-
olds.

last month, 10,000 men volunteered for military service ~-
that was two and a half times the number of volunteers during
the same month last year. Since the middle of January, more
than 48,000 South Vietnamese have joined the armed forces --
and nearly half of them volunteered to do soa.

All men in the South Vietnamese armed forces have had
their tours of duty extended for the duration of the war,
and reserves are now being called up for immediate active

duty.
President Thieu told his people last week:

"we mast make greater efforts and accept more sacrifices
because, as I have said many times, this is our country.
The existence of our nation is at stake, and this is mainly
a, Vietnamese responsibility."

He warned his people that a major national effort is
required to root out corruption and incompetence at all

Bh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"co, Plan Three, which would deploy the 82nd Airborne
Division but would leave Marine Corps battalions in CONUS.
This plan would likewise envisage no Reserve callup and no
legislative action.”

Under Plan One, elements of one brigade of the 82nd Airborne
Division could commence movement within 2h hours and the division itself
36-48 hours later. 6/9ths of a Marine Corps Division/wing team could be
ready for deployment to Vietnam in one week without utilizing Vietnem
replacement drafts. Dependent upon the availability of aircraft and
the degree of drawdown on the current level of Southeast Asia airlift
support, the deployment could be completed within three to four weeks.

Under Plan Two, elements of two CONUS Marine Divisions, consisting
of 12 battalions could be air transported to Vietnam, although two weeks
preparation would be required. This deployment, however, would deplete
Marine Corps assets except for three battalions -- one afloat in the
Mediterranean, one afloat in the Caribbean, and one ashore at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba.

Under Plan Three, as under Plan One, elements of one brigade of the
82nd Airborne Division could commence movement in 24 hours, the division
itself 36-48 hours later.

All of these plans, however, would require drawdowns on previously
protected CONUS stocks during procurement lead-time for new production
and would further aggravate the shortage of long procurement lead time
items currently short, such as helicopters, tracked combat vehicles,
and ammunition.

An examination was also made of the feasibility of an increased
acceleration in the deployment of the four infantry battalions scheduled
to deploy in March-April under Program 5. It was concluded that these
units could not be deployed earlier "except under the most critical
circumstances.”

In examining the capacity to meet the possibility of widespread
civil disorder in the United States, the Joint Chiefs of Staff concluded
‘that, whether or not deployments under any of the plans were directed,
it appeared that sufficient forces would still be available for civil

disorder control.

However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff cautioned that the residual CONUS-
based active combat-ready ground forces that would result from the exten-
sion of each of the plans examined would be:

a. Pian One - 6/9 Marine Division/Wing Team.

>. Plan Two - One Airborne Division.

.

hy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

levels of government.

We applaud this evidence of determination on the part
of South Vietnam. Our first priority will be to support
their effort.

We shall accelerate the re-equipment of South Vietnam's
’ armed forces -~- in order to meet the enemy's increased fire-
power. This will enable them progressively to undertake
a larger share of combat operations against the Communists
invaders.

The token increase in U.S. troop deployments to South Vietnam which
presaged for the first time a limit to our commitment and pointed to a
change in ground strategy, an issue which had caused such great specula-
tion in the press and controversy in Congress and within the Administration,
received short mention in the speech. It seemed almost a footnote to the
dramatic statements which had preceded it.

On many occasions I have told the American people that
we would send to Vietnam those forces that are required to
accomplish our mission there. $0, with that as our guide,
we have previously authorized a force level of approximately
525,000.

Some weeks ago -~ to help meet the enemy's new offensive
-- we sent to Vietnam about 11,000 additional Marine and
airborne troops. They were deployed by air in 48 hours, on
an emergency basis. But the artillery, tank, aircraft, and
other units that were needed to work with and support these
infantry troops in combat could not accompany them on that
short notice.

In order that these forces may reach maximum combat
effectiveness, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have recommended to
me that we should prepared to send -- during the next five
months -- support troops totalling approximately 13,500 men.

A portion of these men will be made available from our
active forces. The balance will come from Reserve Component
units which will be called up for service.

The next portion of the President's speech detailed the cost of
the Vietnam War and made a plea for Congressional action to reduce the
deficit by passing the surtax which had been requested almost a year

before.

In summary, the President reiterated the U.S. objectives in South
Vietnam, end gave his appraisal of what the U.S. in pursuit of those
objectives, hoped to accomplish in Southeast Asie.

85 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I cannot promise that the initiative that I have announced
tonight will be completely successful in achieving peace any
more than the 30 others that we have undertaken and agreed to
in recent years.

But it is our fervent hope that North Vietnam, after
years of fighting that has left the issue unresolved, will
now cease its efforts to achieve a military victory and will
join with us in moving toward the peace table.

And there may come a time when South Vietnam -- on
both sides -- are able to work out a way to settle their ~
own differences by free political choice rather than by

As Hanoi considers its course, it should be in no doubt
of our intentions. It must not miscalculate the pressures
within our democracy in this election year.

We have no intention of widening this war.

But the United States will never accept a fake solution
4o this long and arduous struggle and call it peace.

No one can foretell the precise terms of an eventual
settlement.

Our objective in South Vietnam has never been the
annihilation of the enemy. It has been to bring about a
recognition in Hanoi that its objective -- taking over the
South by force -- could not be achieved.

We think that peace can be based on the Geneva Accords
of 1954 -- under political conditions that permit the South
Vietnamese -- all the South Vietnamese -- to chart their
course free of any cutside domination or interference, from
us or from anyone else.

So tonight I reaffirm the pledge that we made at Manila --
that we are prepared to withdraw our forces from South Viet-
nam as the other side withdraws its forces to the North, stops
the infiltration, and the level of violence thus subsides.

Our goal of peace and self-determination in Vietnam
is directly related to the future of all of Southeast Asia --

B62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

where much has happened to inspire confidence during the past
10 years. We have done all that we knew how to do to contri-
bute and to help build that confidence....

Over time, a wider, framework of peace and security in
Southeast Asia may become possible. The new cooperation of
the nations in the area could be a foundation-stone. Cer-
tainly friendship with the nations of such a Southeast Asia
is what the United ‘States seeks -- and that is all that the
United States seeks.

One day, my fellow citizens, there will be peace in South-
east Asia.

It will come because the people of Southeast Asia want
it -- those whose armies are at war tonight, and those who,
though threatened, have thus far been spared.

Peace will come because Asians were willing to work for
it -- and to sacrifice for it -- and to die by the thousands
for it.

But let it never be forgotten: peace will come also
because America sent her sons to help secure it.

It has not been easy -- far from it. During the past
four and a half years, it has been my fate and my responsi-
bility to be commander-in-chief. I have lived -- daily and
nightly -- with the cost of this war. I know the pain that
it has inflicted. I know perhaps better than anyone the
misgivings that it has aroused.

Throughout this entire, long period, I have been sus-
tained by a single principle:

-- that what we are doing now, in Vietnam, is vital
not only to the security of Southeast Asia, but it is
vital to the security of every American.

Surely we have treaties which we must respect.
Surely we have commitments that we are going to keep.
Resolutions of the Congress testify to the need to
resist aggression in the world and in Southeast Asia.

+ the heart of our involvement in South Vietnam --

under three Presidents, three separate Administrations --
has always been America's own security.

87. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

And the larger purpose of our involvement has always
been to help the nations of Southeast Asia become inde-
pendent and stand alone, self-sustaining as members of a
great world communitsy.

-- At peace with themselves, and at peace with all
others.

With such an Asia, our country -- and the world --
will be far more secure than it is tonight.

I believe that a peaceful Asia is far nearer to
reality, because of what America has done in Vietnam.
I believe that the men who endure the dangers of battle
-- fighting there for us tonight -- are helping the
entire world avoid far greater conflicts, far wider wars,
far more destruction, than this one.

I pray that it will not be rejected by the leaders
of North Vietnam. I pray that they will accept it as a
means by which the sacrifices of their own people may be
ended. And I ask your help and your support, my fellow
citizens, for this effort to reach across the battlefield
toward an early peace.

Finally, the President addressed himself in a highly personal manner
+o the issue that had seemed uppermost in his mind throughout the preceding
month of deliberation, reassessment and reappraisal of our Vietnam policy -- -
the issue of domestic unity.

Yet, I believe that we must always be mindful of this one
thing, whatever the trials and the tests ahead. The ultimate
strength of our country and our cause will lie not in powerful
weapons or infinite resources or boundless wealth, but will
lie in the unity of our people.

This, I believe very deeply.

Throughout my entire public career I have followed the
personel puilosophy that I am a free man, an American, a public
servant and a member of my Party, in that order always and only.

For 37 years in the service of our nation, first as a
Congressman, as a Senator and as Vice President and now as
your President, I have put the unity of the people first.
T have put it ahead of any devisive partisanship.

.

83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

And in these times as in times before, it is true that
a house divided against itself by the spirit of faction, of
party, of region, of religion, of race, is a house that can-
not stand.

There is division in the American house now. There
is devisiveness among us all tonight. And holding the trust
that is mine, as President of all the people, I cannot dis-
regard the peril to the progress of the American people and
the hope and the prospect of peace for all peoples.

So, I would ask all Americans, whatever their personal
interests or concern, to guard against devisiveness and all
its ugly consequences.

Fifty-two months and ten days ago, in a moment of tragedy
and trauma, the duties of this office fell uwpon me. I asked
then for your help and God's, that we might continue America
on its course, binding up our wounds, healing our history,
moving forward in new unity, to clear the American agenda and
to keep the American commitment for all of our people.

United we have kept that commitment. United we have
enlarged that commitment.

Through all time to come, I think America will be a
stronger nation, a more just society, and a land of greater
opportunity and fulfillment because of what we have all done
together in these years of unparalleled achievement.

Our reward will come in the life of freedom, peace, and
hope that our children will enjoy through ages ahead.

What we won when all of our people united just must not
now be lost in suspicion, distrust, selfishness, and politics
among any of our people.

Having eloquently stated the need for unity in a nation divided, the
President then made the dramatic announcement which shocked and electrified
the nation and the world, an announcement intended to restore unity to the

divided nation:

Believing this as I do, I have eoncluited that I should not
permit the Presidency to become inyolved in the partisan
divisions that are developing in this political year.

With America's sons in the fields far away, with America's
future under challenge right here at home, with our hopes

*

8&9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and the world's hopes for peace in the balance every day,

I do not believe that I should devote an hour or a day

of my time to any personal partisan causes or to any duties
other than the awesome duties of this office -- the Presi-
dency of your country.

Accordingly, I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the
nomination of my Party for another term as your President.

But let men everywhere know, however, that a strong, a
eonfident, and a vigilant America stands ready tonight to
seek an honorable peace -- and stand ready tonight to defend
an honored cause ~- whatever the price, whatever the burden,
whatever the sacrifices that duty may require.

Thank you for listening.

Good night and God bless all of you.

11. Epilogue

On April 4, 1968, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, in a memorandum

for the Seeretaries of the Military Departments and the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff established Southeast Asia Deployment Program #6.
This progrem added 24,500 personnel to the approved Program #5, and placed
a new ceiling of 549,500 on U.S, forces in South Vietnam. 100/ None of
the some 200,000 troops requested by General Westmoreland on 27 February
were to be deployed.

Late in the afternoon of April 3, 1968, the White House released the

following statement by President Johnson:

Today the Government of North Vietnam made a statement
which included the following paragraph, and I quote:

“However, for its part, the Government of the Demo-
eratic Republic of Vietnam declares its readiness to
appoint its representatives to contact the United States
representative with a view to determining with the
American side the unconditional cessation of the United
States bombing raids and all other acts of war against
the Democratic Republic of Vietnam so that talks may

start."

Last Sunday night I expressed the position of the
United States with respect to peace in Vietnam and South-

east Asia as follows:

"Now, as in the past, the United States is ready to
send its representatives to any forum, at any time, to
discuss the means of bringing this war to an end."

90 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Accordingly, we will establish contact with the repre-
sentatives of North Vietnam. Consultations with the
Government of South Vietnam and our other allies are now
taking place. 101/

The first step on what would undoubtedly be a long and tortuous road
to peace apparently had been taken. In one dramatic action, President
Johnson had for a time removed the issue of Vietnam from domestic political
contention. In an unexpectedly prompt and responsive reply to his initi-
ative, Hanoi had moved the struggle for South Vietnam into a new path.

As has been indicated, little had been expected to result from the
partial bombing halt and the limitation upon U.S, troop commitments to
South Vietnam. Why, then, were these steps taken?

In March of 1968, the President and his principal advisers were again
confronted with a dilemma which they had faced before, but which they had
postponed resolving. Although seldom specifically stated, the choice had
always been either to increase U.S, forces in South Vietnam as necessary
to achieve military victory or to limit the U.S. commitment in order to
prevent the defeat of our South Vietnamese allies while they put their
political-military house in order. In the past, the choice had not been
so clear-cut. Progress toward military victory had been promised with
small. increases in force levels which did not require large reserve call-
ups or economic dislocations. Military victory would then assure a viable
South Vietnamese political body capable of protecting and gaining the
support of its people.

In March of 1968, the choice had become clear-cut. ‘The price for
military victory had increased vastly, and there was no assurance that
it would not grow again in the future. There were also strong indica-
tions that large and growing elements of the American public had begun
to believe the cost had already reached unacceptable levels and would
strongly protest a large increase in that cost.

The political reality which faced President Johnson was that "more
of the same" in South Vietnam, with an increased commitment of American
lives and money and its consequent impact on the country, accompanied by
no guarantee of military victory in the near future, had become unaccept-
able to these elements of the American public. The optimistic military
reports of progress in the war no longer rang true after the shock of
the TET offensive.

Thus, the President's decision to seek a new strategy and a new road
to peace was based upon two major considerations:

(1) ‘The convictions of his principal civilian advisers, particularly

Secretary of Defense Clifford, that the troops requested by General
Westmoreland would not make a military victory any more likely; and

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

(2) A deeply-felt conviction of the need to restore unity to the
American nation.

For a policy from which so little was expected, a great deal was
initiated. The North Vietnamese and the Americans sat down at the
conference table in Paris to begin to travel the long road to peace; the
issue of Vietnam largely was removed from American political discord;

a limit to the commitment of U.S. forces was established; and the South
Vietnamese were put on notice that, with our help, they would be expected
+o do more in their own defense.

The "A to Z" reassessment of U.S. strategy in South Vietnam in the
wake of the TET offensive did not result in the announcement of a new
ground strategy for South Vietnam. But in placing General Westmoreland's
request for forces squarely in the context of the achievement of U.S.
political-military objectives in South Vietnam, the limited political
nature of those objectives was for the first time affirmed. A new ground
strategy, based on these limited objectives and wpon the ceiling on U.S.
troops became a corollary for the new U.S. commander.

American forces initially were deployed to Vietnam in order to prevent
the South Vietnamese from losing the war, to insure that aggression from
the north would not succeed. Having deployed enough troops to insure that
NVN aggression would not succeed, it had been almost a reflex action to
start planning on how much it would take to "win" the war. Lip service
was given to the need for developing South Vietnamese political institu-
tions, but no one at high levels seemed to question the assumption that
U.S. political objectives in South Vietnam could be attained through mili-
tary victory.

However, it was quickly apparent that there was an embarrassing lack
of knowledge as to how much it would take to win the war. This stemmed
from uncertainty in two areas: (1) how much effort the North Vietnamese
were willing to expend in terms of men and materiel; and (2) how effective
the South Vietnamese armed forces would be in establishing security in the
countryside. As the war progressed, it appeared that our estimates of the
former were too low and of the latter too high. However, committed to a
military victory and having little information as to what was needed mili-
tarily, the civilian decision makers seemed willing to accept the field
commander's estimate of what was needed. Steady progress was promised
and was apparently being accomplished, although the commitment of forces
steadily increased.

The TET offensive showed that this progress in many ways had been
illusory. The possibility of military victory had seemingly become remote
‘and. the cost had become tco high both in political and economic terms.
Only then were our ultimate objectives brought out and re-examined. Only
then was it realized that a clear-cut military victory was probably not
possible or necessary, and that the road to peace would be at least as

92 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

on South Vietnamese political development as it would be on
ey ae eee This realization, then, made it possible to Limit the
American military commitment to South Vietnam to achieve the objectives
for which this force had originally been deployed. American forces would
remain in South Vietnam to prevent defeat of the Government by Communist
forces and to provide a shield behind which that Government could rally,
become effective, and win the support of its people.

93 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
12.
13.
1h.
15.
16.
a7.

18.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

FOOTNOTES

COMUSMACV 61712, 260755 Jan 68, Subject: "Annual Assessment."

".S. Aides Predict All-Out Red Drive as Prelude to Talks," by
George R. Packard, Philadelphia Bulletin, 11 Jen 68, p. 1.

JCSM 91-68, 12 Feb 68, Subject: “Emergency Reinforcement of COMUSMACV."

JCS Msg 9926, 130218Z Feb 68, Subject: "Deployment of Brigade Task
Force of 82nd Airborne Division to SVN (S)."

Ibid.

JCS Msg 9929, 1303412 Feb 68, Subject: "Deployment of Marine Corps
Regiment (Reinforced) to SVN (S)."

GINCPAC Msg to JCS/CINCSTRIKE, 150125Z Feb 68, Subject: “Deployment
of Marine Regiment (U)" JCS in 12316.

DISM 259-68, Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, Subject:
"Marine Deployments to Vietnam (U)," dated 6 Mar 68.

JOSM 95-68, 13 Feb 68, Subject: "Emergency Reinforcement of COMUSMACV(¢c)."

Report of Chairman, JCS on Situation in Vietnam and MACV Force
Requirements, 27 Feb 1968 (TS).

Ibid., pp- 1-2,
Tbid., p. Ea
Ibid., pp. le-13.
ibid., p- 13.
ibid, Hs dt.

Handwritten notes by Morton Halperin from conversation with
Paul Warnke, 29 Feb 1968 (TS-EYES ONLY).

Memorandum from William Bundy to General Taylor and Mr. Warnke,
29 Feb 1968 (TS-NODIS).

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

9h
