Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a FOREIGN RELATIONS, 1944, VOLUME III

As of possible interest to you I am enclosing two brief memoranda
citing the more important public statements or commitments by our-
selves and the British with regard to the future of French territory
after the vvar. :

C[orpett] H[vr1]

[Enclosure 1]

January 7, 1944,

Unitep Sratres Posrrion Wire Resrecr ro Frenca Terrtrory Arter
THE War

During the past three years there have been a number of public
pronouncements, as well as unpublished statements, by the President,
the Secretary of State, and other high ranking officials of this Govern-
ment regarding the future of French territory after the war. The
most important of these pronouncements and statements are set forth
below.

1. In a statement issued on August 2, 1941, concerning the agreo-
ment entered into between the French and Japanese Governments re-
garding French Indochina, the Secretary of State said:

“This Government, mindful of its traditional friendship for France,
has deeply sympathized with the desire of the French people to main-
tain their territories and to preserve them intact. In its relations
with the French Government at Vichy and with the local French au-
thorities in French territories, the United States will be governed by
the manifest effectiveness with which those authorities endeavor to
protect these territories from domination and control by those powers
which are seeking to extend their rule by force and conquest, or by
the threat thereof.” (Department of State Press Release No. 374)

2. In a letter to Marshal Pétain in December, 1941, President
Roosevelt stated that so long as “French sovereign control remains in

reality purely Fregch” the American Government has no desire to see ©

existing French sovereignty over French North Africa or any of the
‘French colonies “pass to the control of any other nation”.
8. A State Department press release of March 2, 1942%° (No. 85)
relative to the situation in New Caledonia, included the following
words:

“The policy of the Government of the United States as regards
France and French territory has been based upon the maintenance of

‘a For ee text of statement, see Department of State Bulletin, August 2,
1941, p. 87.

on text of letter of December 27, 1911, see Forcig.s Relations, 1941, vol. m1,
Pp. ia
=Department of State Bulletin, March T, 1942, p. 208.

27

a a eee =
