eee ee ee ee ee ee ee

—— ee
Lt .

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Py
a

ae ed ee ee

PROPOSED CAMPAIGN IN INDOCHINA

The whole matler should be left to the discretion of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and tothe Commanding Officersin the area. This is essentially
amilitary problem.

; F[ranxuin] D. R[oostverr]

740.0011 Pactic War/3620

The Delegate of the French Committee of National Liberation
(Hoppenot) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Transintion]

No. 759 Wasuinctron, December 15, 19435.

Dear Mr. Bertu: I have already had oceasion to speak to you of
the interest which the French Committee of National Liberation
would attach to being associated in the inter-Allied deliberations con-
cerning the conduct of the war in the Far East, particularly when it
is a matter of operations which may involve Indochina. I refer par-
ticularly to the aide-mémoire which J transmitted to you on this sub-
ject October 21, and which contemplated on the one hand the entrance
of a representative of the Committee into the Pacific Council, and on
the other hand the apprehensions caused at Algiers by 2 proposed
Chinese offensive against the frontier of Indochina.

M. Massigli has just requested me to recall this question again to
your high attention.

The cooperation of the French staff with the Allied staffs in the
Far East has as 2 matter of fact entered into a new phaso following
the sending to Delhi, with the accord of the British War Office, of
a French military mission commanded by General Blaizot. This new
fact seems to make it more desirablo that a parallel collaboration
should be established at Washington, by the asscciation of a French
representative in the deliberations of the Pacific Council of which
delegates of all the Powers participating in the war effort against
Japan are members.

We have learned, moreover, that the proposed Chinese operations
on the frontier of Indochina have not been abandoned and that irreg-
ular Chinese troops, staffed by American officers, are said to be trained
at the present time for this purpose near the said frontier. The Chi-
nese elements in question are precisely the ones whose incursions and
pillaging have frequently created, in the course of recent decades, a
state of insecurity and trouble in that region, and their reappearance
on Indochiness territory, even with the corrective of 9 staff of Ameri-
can officers, would aggravate further the repercussions of any Chinese
action on those frontiers. Knowing personally the mentality both
of the French of Indochina and of the native populations of the Union,

SO TE AEM Sessp oe
