Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

?

FOREIGN RELATIONS, 1943, CHINA

The post-war status of French Indochina is a matter of speculation:
return to France; international control; and even British control. It
is our belief that the Annamites are fundamentally capable of self-
government and that it should be the objective of any post-war ad-
ministration to train Annamites to resume the responsibilities of self-
government. This objective might be achieved by a continuation of
French administration for a definitely limited period or by interna-
tional administration. There would seem to be no reasonable basis for
British ediministration. In any event, the Chinese Government should
be consulted and its views given full consideration in regard to plans
for the future of Indochina,

740.0011 Pactfie War/8521
Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Wasiincton, November 8, 1948.

M. Henri Hoppenot, the Delegate of the French Committee of
National Liberation, has left with the State Department a communi-
cation, a copy of which in translation is attached hereto,’ giving the
reasons why, in the opinion of the Committee, it would be a mistake to
entrust to Chinese troops the launching of military operations against
Indo-China. The main reason advanced is that the Chinese are the
hereditary enemies of the Annamites and that an attack by the
Chinese would therefore be resisted by the local population as well as
by French troops. It is our belief that this presentation of the case
involves allegations not in accord with the facts, and that the Annam-
ites, by and large, have for the Chinese a feeling of friendliness and
cultural affinity.

The problem to which these representations relates seems primarily
to be a military problem for the Joint Chiefs of Staff. We under-
stand that it has already been brought to the attention of that body
by General Bethouart, Chief of the French Military Mission.

; - Epwarp R. Srerrintcs, Jr.

740.0011 Pacific War/3567
Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Acting Secretary of State

Wasuincton, November 9, 1948.

In regard to the use of Chinese troops against Annam, I agree with
the State Department that the French presentation of the case is not
sufficiently valid to take any action.

* Ante, p. 882.

