Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

PRESS RELEASE ISSUED BY eae OF ST!TE ON AUGUST 2,
1941

The acting Secretary of State, Mr. Sumner Welles, issued the
following statcmnt on fugust 2 in reply to inquiries from the
press concerning the agreement entered into between the French and
Jepanese Governments regarding French Indochina:

"The French Government at Vichy has given repeated
assurances to the Government of the United States thet it
would not cooperete with the fxis powers beyond the
obligations imposed on it by the armistice, and that it
would defend the territory under its control egeinst eny
aggressive action on the part of third powers,

"This Government has now received informetion of the
terms of the agreement between the French and Jmanese Governments
covering the so-called 'comnon defense! of French Indochine,
In effect, this agreement virtually turns over to Japan an
important part of the French Empire.

"Effort has been made to justify this agreement on the
ground that Japanese 'assistance!? is needed because of some
menace to the territorial integrity of French Indochina by other
powers, The Government of the United States is unable to
accept this explanation, As I stated on July 2), there is no ques.
tion of any threat to French Indochina, unless it lies in
the expansionist aims of the Japanese Governmait,

"The tuming over of bases for military operetions and
of territorial rights under pretext of 'common defense! to
a power whose territorial aspirations are apparent, here
presents a situation which has a direct bearing upon the
vital problem of American security, For reasons which are
beyond the scope of any known agreement, France has now
decided to permit forcign troops to enter an integral pert
of its Empire, to occupy bases therein, and to prepare opera-
tions within French territory which may be directed against
other peoples friendly to the people of France,

"he. French

Vas printeddin Foreign Relations of the United States: Javan
1931-1942, vol. II, pp. 320-321. For earlier stetements on this
subject, see Department’s Press Releases of Sept. 4 end 23, 1940, and
tel, bho to Vichy of Sept 9, 1940. (ot included here).

il
