Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

PROPOSED CAMPAIGN IN INDOCHINA

A Chinese attack against Tonkin would have the immediate effect
of causing the whole Indo-Chinese population te rise against the
Allies. ow"

For the Annamites, the Chinese, who have so frequently in the past
invaded and ravaged their frontier regions, represent the hereditary
enemy. Far from greeting them as liberators, the local population
would impede their advance by every means in their power. More-
over, the population and the French troops, who would take the side
of the Allies if it were French, American and British forces which
were coming to their help, might very well react against an attack
by the Chinese, whose true intentions could easily be confused by
enemy propaganda. The position which a Chinese attack apparently
will cause civilian and military French Indo-Chinese to take will in
the future be difficult to modify and the consequences of such a mistake
run the risk of weighing heavily upon tho development of the
campaign.

The French Committee of National Liberation believes, therefore,
that it is of the highest importance to set aside a project which, far
from serving Allied interests, runs the risk of causing the greatest
harm. The Committee, likewise, equally believes that, as concerns
military operations whose theatre would be French territory, it is
imperative to ask the Allies that no decision should be taken without
our previous agreement.

740.0011 Paclie War/3531

Memorandun of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State
(Berle)

[Wasutreton,] October 21, 1945.

M. Hoppenot came in to see me at his request. He handed me the
attached memorandum,’ which states that the French National Com-
‘mittes understands that Chinese operations will presently open against
the Japanese within the frontiers of Indochina. This gave great con-
cern to the Committee of National Liberation. If Chinese troops
attacked there, plainly there would not be any support from the
French, since the Chinese had always claimed interest there, and it
was not unlikely that the French troops would defend against a
_ Chinese attack.

I asked whether this matter had already been brought to the atten-
tion of the Chiefs of Staff. M. Hoppenot said it had, through General

* Supra.

Ne
