Ls a ~

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FRANCE fica

aud are now in regular communication with them. AI that is neces-
sary to exploit the situation is the presence in South East Asia Com-
mand of the necessary French personnel from whom alone the French
in French Indo China will take the direction necessary to produce
the action required.

7. Admiral Mountbatten has pointed out that French Indo China
constitutes an area of vital importance to the operation of his Com-
mand since it lies on the Japanese land and air reinforcement route to
Burma and Malaya. Irregular activities therefore on the lines en-
visaged in the proposals which are the subject of this aide-mémoire
are for him a matter of urgency.

8. His Majesty’s Government, therefore, ear nestly hope that the
United States Government will concur as to the desirability and
urgency of pushing on with the irregular operations outlined above
and will take such action as will make possible the issue of a directive
by the Combined Chiefs of Staff (a) confirming the oral understand-
ing already existing between the Generalissimo and Admiral Mount-
batten, and (b) approving the program set out in the opening para-
graph of this aide-mémoire. Such action would in no way prejudice
the question of the ultimate settlement of the boundary between the
China Theatre and the South East Asia Command, which, by the
agreement between Admiral Mountbatten and the Generalissimo, is
at present left open, nor the wider question of the participation of
regular French armed forces in the Far Eastern War.

WaAsuincron, 22 November, 1944.

851G.01/12-2744
Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

[Wasfitneron,] December 27, 1944.
With reference to the British aide-mémoire of November 22, re-
questing approval of the Fren¢éh Military Mission to the Southeast
Asia Command and French military participation in the liberation
of Indochina, a proposed reply to which was sent to you with a memo-
randum on December 11,” the British are obviously perturbed about
the situation.
On December 8 Lord Halifax called at his Se ag and stressed to
me the importance of a prompt reply.”
Ambassador Winant has now reported that Mr, Bennett, head of
the Far Eastern. Department in the British Foreign Office, has ex-
pressed his concern that the United States apparently Las not yet de-

"Memorandum not printed; proposed reply not found in Department files.
“Memorandum by the Secretary of State of this conversation not printed. ;

}

. ' i” ae. . . ‘ ‘
a ar et el ee ee see ee el ae eg Ms th lt Me a lt ig naa gly sot Se

themes ett a en at ae re we

ia
