e

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FOREIGN RELATIONS, 1944, VOLUME IIT

740.0011 P.W./11—344

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Under Secretary of State

~ (Stettinius)

Wasuinctoy, November 8, 1944.

I have yours of November second, enclosing memorandum on re-
cent developments in relation to Indo- China. I wish you would make
it clear that:

1. We must not give American approv al to any French military
mission, as it appears we have done in the first sentence of the first
paragraph.

2. Referring to the third paragraph, it must be made clear to alt
our people in the Far East that they can make no decisions on political
questions with the French mission or anyone else.

8. We have made no final decisions on the future of Indo-China.
This should be made clear.

4, In the final paragraph it is stated the British and Dutch have
arrived at an agreement in regard to the future of Southeast Asia
and are about to bring the French into the picture. It should be made
clear to all our people that the United States expects to be consulted
with regard to any future of Southeast Asia. I have no objection to
this being made clear to the British, the Dutch or the French.

F[ranxuy] D. R[oostevertr]

851G.01/11-444 : Telegram
The Ambassador in France (Cajfery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, November 4, 1944—1 p. m.,

’ [Receiv ed 2:37 p. m.]

816. ReEmbs 279, November 1, 4 [8] p. m.** Chauvel * remarked
yesterday that Franceé €s most desirous of participating to the greatest
possible extent its capacity permits in the recovery of Indochina (he
recalled that little less than a division has been training at two points
in North Africa for service in the Pacific). He added that there
is a token detachment of a couple of thousand men already in India.
Moreover, he said recruiting has been active and training has already
commenced in metropolitan France for a French expeditionary force
to the Pacific. It is hoped that these forces may eventually amount
to two normal divisions. Personnel is to be drawn from the regular
army and the FFI; ** the whole force is to be under the command of
General Blaizot (Corps d’Armée) who recently arrived in India.

_ * Not printed.

% Jean Chauvel, of the French Foreign Office,
= Forces Francaises de I'Intérieur,

ho
