Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

7h0,0011 Pacific War/856

PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT TO EMPEROR HIROHITO OF JAPAN

: Aasuincton/ Deceaber 6, 1941.

More than a year ago Your Majesty's Government concluded en
agreement with the Vichy Government by which five or six thousand
Jepanese troops were permitted to enter into Northern French Indo-
China for the protection of Japanese troops which were operating
against China further north, And this Spring and Summer the Vichy
Government permitted further Japanese military forces to enter into
Southern French Indo-China for the common defense of French Indo-
China, I think I am correct in saying that no attack has been made ~
upon Indo-China, nor that any has been contemplated.

During the past few weeks it has become clear to the world that
Japanese military, naval and air forces have been sent to Southern
Indo-China in such large numbers as to create a reasonable doubt on
the part of other nations that this continuing concertration in
_ Indo-China is not defensive in its character,

Because these continuing concentrations in Indo-China have z
reached such large proportions and because they extend now to the
southeast and the southwest corners of that Peninsula, it is only
reasonable that the people of the Pailippines, of the hundreds of
Islands of the East Indies, of Malaye and of Thailand itself are
asking themselves whether these forces of Japan are preparing or
intending to make attack in one or more of these many directions,

I am sure that Your Majesty will understand that the fear of
ell these peoples is a legitimate fear in as much as it involves their
peace and their national existence. I am sure that Your Majesty will

understand why the people of the United States in such large

numbers look askance at the establishment of military, naval and air
bases manned and eouipped so greatly as to constitute. armed forces
capable of measures of offense.

—

tas printed in Foreign Relations of the United States:
Japan; 1931-1941, vol. II. pp. 7845786.

-14
