Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FOREIGN RELATIONS, 1941, VOLUME IV

settlement in the Pacific. The United States Government, Mr. Hull
said, could only be driven to the conclusion that our discussions for
a friendly settlement had been wiped out by the Indochina develop-
ment. The Secretary said that if we waited until he came home to tel]
Ambassador Nomura the foregoiug, then it would come too late as a
warning to Japan. We must let them see the seriousness of the step
they hav e taken and let them know that such constitutes an unfriendly
act because it helps Hitler to conquer Britain. The Secretary said that
if we did not tell the Ambassador all this, he would not sit down with
Admiral Nomura when he came back to Washington. It would be a
farce to do so.

There followed quite a bit of discussion about counter measures on
the part of the United States, with Mr. Welles explaining what the
British proposed to do, what our Army and Navy boards favored,
what the President favored, et cetera, and, as I understood it, fie
Secretary left the decision on these questions to the judement of
those on the ground.

Secretary Hull then came back to the subject of Mr. ‘Welles’ for th-
coming talk with Admiral Nomura, and he said that Mr. Welles
might begin the conversation by speaking to Admiral Nomura con-
cerning a readjustment of the United States position vis-A-vis Japan
somewhat as follows: There is a profound belief everywhere, in
view of many reports from many sources, that the Japanese movement
into Indochina has two probable purposes, or at least two possibilities
this Government cannot ignore: (1) if this Government is to be safe,
it is bound to assume that this act constitutes definite notice of the
launching of a policy of force and conquest on the part of the Japanese
Government; (2) this Government, in the interest of its own safety
and in the light of all Japanese utterances and acts, must assume
that by its actions and preparations Japan may be taking one
more vital and next to the final step in occupying all the South S$
area. Such a statement to the. Ambassador would lay the basis ioe
our own future acts and would let the Japanese understand fully our
position.

It was agreed between the Secretary and Mr. Welles that there was
no use to pursue our discussions for a friendly settlement with the
Japanese unless the Japanese policies are to coincide with their pro-
fessions. We could get any kind of an agreement from the British
and other governments looking to the safeguarding of Japanese levi-
‘timate interests so that there is no real basis for Japanese claims
of being threatened or in danger.

It was agreed between the Secretary and Mr. Welles that some-
thing must be said to the’press along the lines of the foregoing pat:-
