Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

—_ oS = ee oe oe

becomes importent in view of the fact that it would soon
get back to the Prench, etc. lir. hull seid thet te mew

no more about the metter than the Anbassedor end had

only heard the President make these remarks occasionally
just about as the Smbassador had neard him make them. He
adaed that in his judgment, "the rresident and lir.Churchill
woule find it desireble to telk this matter over fully
deliberately end perhaps finslly at some future steues!

In a menorandaum for the President of January 1)
Hr. Kull reported nis conversation with the British
Amoessador and asked if the rvesident's o¢inion, pre-
viously expressed, that indochins should be teilzen atiay
from the French and edinitnistersd by an internationsl
trusteeship, represented his final conclusions on the
matter. The Secretery stated thet he had informed the
British Anbassedor that he did not know whether the rresi-
dent hed come to any finel conclusion on the subject.

On February 17, 19h, in a memoranc¢um for the vresi-
dent frou the Under Secretary, on the subject of Civil
Affairs problems in indochine, the statement wae made
thet"Subject to your aporoval, the State Department will
proceed on the assumption that French arnied forces will
be employed to at least some extent in the military opsr-
ations, and that in the edministration of Indochina it
will be desirable to emoloy French nationals vho have an
intimate lnovledge of the country and its problems.”
Acrogs the f2ce of the document the rresident, in reaffir-
mation of his previously expressed opinion, wrote: "No
French help in Jndochina __ country on trusteeshin."”

On February 25, 19, in a memorendum to fir. Dunn,
the Under Secretary mentioned the rresident's recevtion
of the memorsndum of February 17 above referred to and
steted that the "“rresident expressed the view that no
French troops whestever should be used in operstions
there findochina/. He feels the operations should be
fnzlo-Americen with internationel trustéeship following."

. j {brat tec by K. 2. Landon;
initlaled by J. W. B.7
