Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

19h2 Page »

8. U.S. assures France that she will be restored to full indepen-
dence “in all the greatness and vastness" which she possessed
before the war in Europe and in her colonies overseas. Letter
from Mr. Murphy to General Giraud, 2 November 1942. (Other
U.S. policy statements for 1942 are quoted in Document No, 11,
Dare Ge! TO TEOWAMDN 56-010 e:b:d alee beeen te erie sana ee teeceerecveesee 16

1943

9. There follows a series of commuications concerning the use of
Chinese troops in Indochina. The U.S. rejected the French
protestations and contended that the problem was primarily
military. (President Roosevelt's decision was influential
in the eventual Chinese occupation of Tonkin and their subse-
quent replacement by the French.)..scccccccsccscccecsssccscscses LT

a. Expressions of concern over Chinese participation in the
liberation of Indochina by the French Committee of National
Liberation. M. Henri Hoppenot memorandum to Mr. Adolph
Berle, Assistant Secretary of State, 20 October 1943........ 18

b. Mr. Berle expresses to the French that it is a military
problem but privately expresses the fact that Chinese
intervention forces the issue of Western colonialism
versus Eastern liberation as a policy. Memorandum of
Conversation by Mr. Berle, 21 October 1943.......seeeeee-e-- 18

e. Berle writes to Edward Stettinius, Under Secretary of State,
that military matters must predominate because if the
Chinese do not intervene, then the U.S. must reconquer
Indochina single-handed and later police and protect it
against the Chinese. Memorandum by Berle to Stettinius,
BO OCR GUGY: BLOM ve ovs.-a bie Blo/tre Malek craniole ieee vrais oiele wch:ale datas Tan aD

d. Mr. John Carter Vincent, Assistant Chief of Far Eastern
Affairs, views the post-war status of Indochina as a matter
of speculation but does not rule out the influence of the
Chinese. Memorandum by Vincent to Berle, 2 November 1943... 20

e. Stettinius recommends to the President that the problem
is primarily military. Memorandum by Stettinius to
President Roosevelt, 8 November 1943...+ssecseceeccesecevees OL

f. President Roosevelt defers judgment on Chinese involve-
ment and leaves the whole matter to the "distretion of

' the Joint Chiefs of Staff" as essentially a military
problem. Memorandum by President Roosevelt to Stettinius,
November LOtsy cpccuvuscevbassbees perewetessvsereceserecear lel

iii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
