Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FAO. Ww/8-1245
The Secretary of State to thé VE iench Anibershdor Bonnet)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency
the Ambussnclor of the Freach Republic and acknowledges the receipt
of the Embassy's note No, 303 of March 12, 1945 on the matter of the
Japanese occupation of French Indo-China.

The Government of the United States has given most careful and-.

sympathetic consideration to the subject matter of the communication
of the Provisional Government of the French Republic. . Tt has also
given consideration to all available information in regard to recent
events in Indo-China. The deep concern of the Provisional Govern-
ment in regard tothe situation is fully appreciated.

With regard to the request that the Government of the United States
intervene with the Combined Chiefs of Stat! to the end that \lied
Forces ji. sie Far Bast will furnish limediate assistance to the French

resistance in Indo-China, it is noted that this subject is already before
the Combined Chiefs of Stull in the form of a letter from General de
Si. Didier and there necordinaly appears to be no reason for farther
_presentation_of themarter to the Combined Chiefs of. Stull by the
Gover ninent of BAne eS States at Sthtettine:

troops based i inc ine intervene in ‘ge ov of the French Forces in Indo-
China, the Secretary of State is glad to confirm the information given
the Ambassador orally some days ago that the American Air Porves_
in China have already assisted the French Forces in Indo-China and
have been’ authorized for the present, in aid of the French, to wnder-
take operations against, the Japanese in Indo-China, provided such
action does not-interfere with operations planned elsewhere. The
resources of the Allied Forces in the Fav East in men, munitions, and
transport tation must be concentrated on and employed in attaining
our main objectives, and the Ambassador will therefore readily ap-
preciite that no commitment can be given with regard to the amount
or character of any assistance which may be provided. However, in
appreciation of the importance and urgency which the French Pro-
visional Government attaches to this question, immediate steps are
being taken to ascertain whether any further assistance ean be given
from the China Theater to the resistance groups in Indo-China without
jeopardizing the over-all war eifort in other areas. The Secretary of
State will be happy to keep the Ambassador informed of any further
developments in that regard,

Wasuryeren, April 4, 1945.

72
