Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

PROPOSED CAMPAIGN IN INDOCHINA

answer the I'rench Committee that their representation will receive
consideration, but that military factors must predominate in the
decision.

Frankly, I doubt if we could defend before the Congress a very
considerable expenditure of American lives for the sole purpose of
keeping Indo-China in French, a3 against Chinese or Indo-Chinese,
hands. ...

A[potr] A. Blerre], Jr.

740.0011 Pacific War/35351
Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Far Eastern
Affairs (Vincent) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)®

[Wasurnctron,] November 2, 1943.

Mr. Bratu: We have read with keen interest your memorandum of
conversation with Mx. Hoppenot and his aide-mé:oire, and concur in
the opinion expressed in your note.

There is at the bottom of page 1 of the aide-mémoire the following
statement which we feel should not pass without comment: “Pour
PAnnamite, les Chinois, qui ont si frequemment dans le-passé envahi
et ravag6 leurs régions frontitres, représentent l’ennemi héreditaire.”
This statement is grossly misleading, if not actually false. In 1879
the Annamites sought military aid from China to drive out the French.

It was China’s weakness, not Annamite dislike or fear of China, that
permitted the French to remain. Recurrent waves of Annamite na-
tionalism have looked to Chinese nationalism for inspiration and guid-
ance, particularly since 1920. Today there is understood to bo in
southern China a group of Annamites which advocates independence
for Indochina and seeks Chinese support. It is our belief that the
Annamites, by and large, have for the Chinese a fecling of friendliness
and cultural affinity.

The Chinese Governinent’s attitude regarding the post-war status
of Indochina has been cautious. Officials of the Government have
disclaimed territorial ambitions but they have at times intimated that
China would desire an arrangement which assured access to the sea
from Yunnan Province through Tonkin to Haiphong. Independence
for Indochina is included in the Chinese Government’s general ad-
vocacy of self-government for eastern psoples,

request that the Chinese be asked not to conduct military operations within
eet should be referred both to the President and to the Joint Chiefs
of Staff.”

*Initialed by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs (Ballantine).

20

ip Oe eee tnt ee sar een eames Ares ce OEE sr Ate er eae OM oe ESI TS

-

salto letter alicia se neces

-
