Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(Enclosure to Despatch No. lll,’ dated January
from the American Smbassy, Chungking, China.

GOUVERNEMENT PROVISOIRS Di LA REPUBLIQUE FRANCAISE
AMBASSADE Di FRANCE EN CHINE

No. dBi COUN horns tohongking, le 20th January 1945

Confidential ° c

——————

NOTE

"he political position taken, by the Provisional
Government of the French Republic regarding Indochina is —
phases A zor sentences will be sufficient to make it clear.

“5 First, * France eanuss admit: any discussion about the
principle of her establishment in Indochina. Her presence
founded on agreements consistent with international law and
established on the immense task carried out by her for the
sake of the Indochinese population has never been disputed
by any Power. The occupation of Indochina by the Japanese
has not changed anything in that state of things. This
occupation is nothing but a war incident similar to the
invasion by the Japanese forces of Malaya, of the Netherlands
Bast Indies and Burma. The activity of the underground
movement, the formation of the expeditionary forces that we
are ready to send to the Far Hast, are a clear proof of

the energy with which France intends to take part in the
liberation of those of her territories that have been
momentarily torn away from her by the enemy.

This being clear, the French Government are prepared
to consider with its allies all the measures that may be
taken to insure security and peace for the future in the
Pacific area; it expects that its participation in those
measures will be the one it is entitled to get owing to
the importance of French interests in the Far East.

Furthermore, the French Government has already fixed

at the Brazzaville conference the principles of the policy
’ 4t means to'follow in its overseas possessions. Accordingly

it will set up together with the populations concerned

the status of Indochina on a basis that will secure for

the Union a satisfactory autonomy within the frame of the
French Empire. Besides, Indochina will be granted an
economic regime that will enable her to profit widely by

the advantages of international competition. Such decisions,
having no international character, come within the competence
of the French Government only. Thoroughly aware of the

“importance of the principles at stake in the present war,

France will not shrink fron nee responsibilities.
63
