Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FOREIGN RELATIONS, 1941, VOLUME IV

bassador when I didn’t see him here to go over the whole situation,
Then we sent Hamilton again to ses his two associates for the purpose
of keeping alive the whole situation that we had under discussion,
Then finally, before they got to a face-saving stage, after it was ap-
parent that they were preparing the Indochina move, this was followed
up by a final step of summing up for the record the pros and cons
and making 2 final appeal to the Japs before it was too late. That
is the record wo made. I think it ought all to be kept in mind. It is
a fact that, in justice to the Administration, the Government and
the State Department, as the Chinese-Japanese difliculties developed,
we not only expressed opposition and condemnation at appropriate
times, but we gradually took steps of retaliation. I need not men-
tion all the steps. When the question of oil became most seriously
considered for the first time, there was not a long period between
that point and the point when Japan and the Netherlands proceeded
with their trade negotiations, which involved oil and raised the whole
oil question. Now, in those circumstances, not with the idea of
appeasing Japan ourselves, but merely to deal practically with an
international situation that had become acute, so far as oil was con-
cerned, in connection with those negotiations, and which was clearly
to remain acute until those negotiations were concluded, we rested
our position before those negotiations had ended. The Japanese
Government through its Ambassador came to us with a proposal for
a peaceful settlement covering the entire Pacific area, including the
question of oil and everything else, and I have had, as you know,
‘seventeen conferences with him. There is a strong so-called peace
group in Japan back of him (the Ambassador). Naturally, it would
have been utterly impractical for us to have followed a purely appease-
ment policy when every consideration would prevent us from putting
on embargoes and penalties and retaliation during these negotiations.
My judgment is that the State Department and the Government should
not say too much on this Japanese question. The first thing we know
we will run into a storm. It is so delicate and there are so many
angles to it. I am sure Japan is going on unless something happens
to stop her. This is a world movement. The Japanese are seeking
to dominate militarily practically one-half the world and apply the
barbarous methods that they are applying to China and that Hitler
is applying in Europe, and if they have their way, they will carry
out what they are saying of their right to be supreme in that half of
the world, by which they mean military supremacy with methods of
arbitrary, selfish domination and the Hitler method of piracy anil
naval control of the seas and commerce. At any rate, I just want you
to keep that in mind. ,
O[zcr.] W. G[rix]

a lee tp
