Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

4 {pRawor 1 ==) TSA

General Blaizot has been instructed to report to Lord Louis
Mountbatten. :

Adverting to France’s primary -interest in Indochina, Chauvel
made the point that the French Government is interested not only in
a French force in India but also would be interested in French units

to be included in forces which might strike from the Philippines to- —

ward Indochina if such plans were on foot.
CaFrrery

740.0011 P.W./11-2344

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Under Secretary of State
, (Stettinius)

Wasurneron, November 23, 1944.

My Dear Ep: I send you herewith an Aide-Mémoire concerning
proposals for the use of the French in pre-operational activities in
Indo-China.

This is a matter which Mountbatten and all of us have very much
at heart. Until we have the all-clear from your side he cannot effec-
tively carry out sabotage etc, activities which he is satisfied should
contribute very considerably to his task.

You will see that the matter is urgent and I would be grateful if
you could let ushave a very early reply.

V. sin[cerely,] Hairax
[Annex]
The British Embassy to the Department of State
Are-Mésrorte

1. In August last His Majesty’s Government invited the concur-
rence of the United States Government in the following proposals:

(1) The establishment of a French military mission with the South
East Asia Command. This would facilitate the work of the Secret
Operations Executive and of the Office of Strategic Services and
would serve as the nucleus of the operational headquarters which may
be required later. The function of the mission would be primarily
to deal with matters concerning French Indo China and it would not
participate in questions of general strategy. It would, therefore,
be much on the same basis as the Dutch and Chinese missions attached
to the South East Asia Command.

(2) The establishment in India of 2 “Corps Léger d’Intervention”
composed at the start of 500 men and designed to operate exclusively
in Indo China on Japanese lines of communication. The activities of

“Supreme Allied Commander, Southeast Asia Command.

4h

a ee a a

