Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

740.0011 PAW/S-15-45 > Telegram
The Ambassador in France (Caffery) to the Secretary of State
Panis, Mareh 15, 1945—T p.m.
[Received March 14—1:28 p.m.J
1196. Gener: al de Gaulle asked nie to come to see him at 6. Te’

© Gen. Charles de Gaulle, Head of the Provisional French Government.
spoke in very quiet, affable, friendly fashion, but this is what he said:
“We have received word that our troops still fighting in Indochiny
have appealed for-sid_to_your military xuthorities in C ‘hina and the
British military authorities in Burma. We e have received word that -
they_ replied that under instructions no aid could be sent.["] They
were given to understand that the British simply followed our lead.

He ‘said also that several expeditjcnary forces for Indochina had
heen prepared: Some troops were in North Africa, some in southern
France and some in Madagasear, and the Lritish had promised to
transport them but at the last minute they were given to understand
that owing to American insistence they could not transport them. He
observed: “This worries me a great deal for obvious reasons and it
comes at a particularly inopportune tinte, As I told Mr, Hopkins ™

“ Harry L, Hopkius, Special Assistant to President Roosevelt.
when he was here, we do not understand your policy. What are you
driving at? Do you want us to become, for example, one of the fed-
erated states under the Riissian aegis? The Russians are advancing
apace as you well know. When Germany falls they will be upon ns.
Tf the public here comes to realize that you are against us in Indochina
there will be terrific disappointment and nobody knows to what that
will lead. Wedo not want to become Communist; we do not want to
fall into the Russian orbit, but I hope that you do not push us into it.”

He then went ou to say that dificulties were being created too in re-
gard to the promised armanient—difliculties he could not understand
unless that were part of our policy too. I told him I had been given
to understand that the armament was arriving here as promised.

In any event, Tsaid, T would elegy at once to Washington all

“Flint he had said. Fi)
Cirreny

65
