a i tae! tei eae ee Sema tn a ean es SRI en

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FRANCE =

there, but reportedly declined to say more until Blaizot’s arrival.
Blaizot, 2 Lieutenant General, was formerly Chief of Staff in Indo-
china. Heisa “colonial” general,

Although SEAC was advised specifically that only military, and
‘not political, questions might be discussed with the French Mission,
political questions are in fact under discussion.

The British SOE “ which is actively engaged in undercover op-
erations in Indochina has recently received orders from the Foreign
Office that they should have nothing to do with any Annamite or other
native organizations in Indochina, but are to devote their efforts to
the French.

The OWI * representative at New Delhi has received indication that
the British wish OWI activities directed at the native populations in
Thailand and Indochina be eliminated so as not to stir up native re-
sistance to the Japanese and so incite the Japanese to send more troops
into those areas. Colombo states that it is apparent SOE desires
severely to restrict OSS * operations in the SEAC theatre and to give
SOE preeminence or, failing that, to establish combined SOE-OSS
operations.

British propaganda agencies are emphasizing the recent appeal by
the French War Ministry for recruits to participate in the campaign
for liberation of Indochina on the ground that news of any French
military efforts to recover Indochina would encourage the French
in Indochina. OWI has so far refrained from mentioning the French
appeal or other phases of French preparations for military participa-
tion fearing the adverse effect on the native populations in Indo-
china and elsewhere in the Far East on the restoration of the sfatus
. quo ante which such preparations would appear to imply. OWT has
specifically requested State Department guidance on United States
policy in this regard, and have been advised to be silent on the subject
despite the anticipated British’ broadcasts. :

General Donovan has submitted to the Secretary of State a report
from the OSS representative in SEAC reading in part:

“There can be little doubt that the British and Dutch have arrived
at an agreement with regard to the future of Southeast Asia, and now
it would appear that the French are being brought into the pic-
ture... .* It would appear that the strategy of the British, Dutch
and French is to win back and control Southeast Asia, making the

fullest use possible of American resources, but foreclosing the Ameri-
~eans from any voice in policy matters.”

pede RU i le, each ihe et a We E RSet esl atl et eed Ne a St

“Secret Operations Executive.
” Office of War Information.
™ Office of Strategie Services.
™ Omission indicated in the original memorandum.

39

Ly
