Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

“EFFORTS FOR AGREEMENT WITH JAPAN

raphs. This would be for the purpose of making a record about
the real significance of the Japanese movement and likewise to acquaint
the public with the fact that we knew what was going on. Mr. Welles
then read to the Secretary a draft of a statement prepared by the
Far Eastern Division. The Secretary made specific comment os
follows: make clear the fact that the occupation of Indochina by
Japan possibly means one further important step to seizing control
of the South Sea area, including trade routes of supreme importance
to the United States controlling such products as rubber, tin and other
commodities. This was of vital concern to the United States. The
Secretary said that if we did not bring out this point our people will
not understand the significance of this movement into Indochina,
The Secretary mentioned another point to be stressed: there is no
theory on which Indochina could be flooded with armed forces, air-
craft, et cetera, for the defense of Japan. The only alternative is that
this venture into Indochina has a close relation to the South Sea
area and its value for offense against that area.

The Secretary closed by suggesting that Mr. Welles make clear to
Admiral Nomura that we are ready and desirous of going forward
with our discussions should cireumstances permit, and that if an
agreement were reached between our two countries, it would safeguard
Japan far more securely than taking over Indochina. He said for

Mr. Welles to ask the Ambassador to send this to his Government.
C. W. Grax

740.0011 P. W./421
Memorandum by Mr. Cecil W. Gray, Assistant to the Secretary
of State-

[Wasnincron, July 25, 1941.]

Excerpts From Srcrerary Hvuwi’s Resarss ry Teternons Conver-
sation Witn Acrine Srcrerary WELLES on Juty 25, 1941

We have had conversations for several months with the Ambassador
and his associates covering this matter completely and we couldn't
have offered more assurance to Japan for her entire satisfaction from
every standpoint than we did in those discussions. I told him (the
Ambassador) repeatedly that if this matter progressed I expected to
get a similar agreement with the British, the Dutch, et cetera. We
have followed that up as the Indochina phase developed. You will
remember we first considered sending a cable of inquiry to Japan
about the Irdochina matter. Then we sent Hamilton to see the Am-

“For press release issned by the Department of State on July 24, 10-41, see
Foreign Relations, Japan, 1931-19-41, vol. m1, p. 315.
