Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FRANCE

assistance to all resistance groups whether French or native, but that

‘without such collaboration, it would not be possible effectively to

assist resistance groups among the French military forces in Indo-
china, and that this would result in retarding resistance efforts,
Subject to your approval, the Department will reply to General
Donovan that it has no objection to furnishing supplies and equip-
ment to resistance groups, both French and native, actually within
Indochina, nor to American collaboration with the French Military
Mission at Chungking or other French officers or officials in further-
ance of the contemplated operations or any other military operations
in Indochina for the defeat of Japan.
C[orpetr.] H[ctx]

851G.00/10-1644
Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Wasuincrton, October 16, 1944.

In regard to this Indochina matter, it is my judgment on this date
that we should do nothing in regard to resistance groups or in any
other way in relation to Indochina. You might bring it up to me
a little later when things are alittle clearer.

F[ranxutx] D, R[ooseverr]

851G.01/11-24

en ie, by the Deputy Director of the Office of European
Affairs (Matthews)*

[Wasurncton,] November 2, 1944.

According to Ambassador Winant’s** recollection, Indochina was
dealt with only briefly at the White House conversation on March 27,
1943 and in other conversations with Mr. Eden. In the March 27
conversation the question of trusteeship was discussed at some length,
Mr. Eden advocating the advantages of national rather than inter-
national administration. There was considerable inconclusive dis-
cussion as to the degree to which governments other than the one
haying sovereignty or administrative responsibility for a particular
area might properly intervene in matters involving the administration
of the area or its relations with other areas. Mr. Eden emphasized

* Addressed to the Deputy Director of the Office of Far Sastern Affairs
(Ballantine) and to the Chief of the Division of Southwest Pacific Affairs
(Moffat).

“ American Ambassador in the United Kingdom.

“ For correspondence regarding the visit of ‘Mr. Eden to Washington, March 12-
30, 1943, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. rt, PD. 1 ff.

554-183—65——00

37

aie

BP ee lyfe

si ered il m1 ’ ‘
pe Ad arate 1 pa A * i
Ne ee ae a eee ar eee ee en

wer

——w
