a ea

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED ENTRY OF CHINESE
TROOPS INTO INDOCHINA TO COMBAT JAPANESE
FORCES IN THAT COLONY?

740.0011 Pacific War/2531

The Washington Delegation of the French Committee of National
Liberation to the Department of State*

[Translation]
Wasuincron, October 20, 1948.
Mexroranpuat

According to certain information which has come to the knowledge
of the Committee of National Liberation, Allied plans of operation
in the Far East would, in the near future, include the start of opera-
tions against the frontiers of Indo-China, operations entrusted to
Chinese troops.

The Washington Delegation of the Committee has already had
occasion to call the Department of State’s attention to the absolute
importance to the Allied cause of associating the competent French
authorities with the detailing of Allied war plans in the Far East,
especially when their execution involves French Indo-China. The
aforementioned authorities possess, in this field, documentation and
experience which can be of the greatest use to the Allied High Com-
mand. The role which France has traditionally played in the Far
East, the important interests which she has there, the dispositions
already taken by the Algiers Committee to participate when the time
comes in the struggle for the liberation of Indo-China, are all, as many
more, reasons for an effective French participation in Inter-Allied
Councils where the general strategy of the United Nations in the Far
East is determined.

As concerns the project of a Chinese offensive against Indo-China,
the Algiers Committee—if the information which has reached it on
this subject is correct—must very seriously draw the attention of the
American Government to the great danger which its realization would
present.

* Continued from Foreign Relations, 1942, China, pp. 749-760.
* Handed on October 21 to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) by Henri
Hoppenot, Delegate of the French Committee of National Liberation,
