Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Bs FOREIGN RELATIONS, 1944, VOLUME III

the belief that the goal for small colonial areas should be economic,
social, and political advancement and an autonomous status rather
than independence, which would subject them to both economic and

military dangers.
The Ambassador does not recall that the question of restoring Indo-
china in full sovereignty in France was discussed at the time but
- expressed the opinion that the French will be highly sensitive about the
restoration of all parts of their colonial empire to the status quo ante
and that the British Government will firmly support the French po-
sition in view of its desire for the closest possible relations with France.
H. Freeman Marrnews

740.0011 P.W./11-244

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Stettinius) to
President Roosevelt

[Wasuincton,] November 2, 1944.
Inpocurna

In order that you may be kept fully informed on developments in
relation to Indochina, there has been prepared the memorandum at-
tached hereto.

- Epwarp R. Sterriivs, Jr.

[Annex]
[Wasuincton,] November 2, 1944.
Recent DEyELOPMENTS In ReLation to INDOCHINA

The following are recent developments in relation to Indochina:
Colombo * has reported that:

The British staff at headquarters of SEAC has protested to the
British Chiefs of Staff in London against the inclusion of Indochina
in the theatre under the new United States Army Commanding Gen-
eral in China, urging that Indochina be included in the SEAC theatre.

The French Military Mission, which is large, has arrived in Ceylon
and has received American approval and is now recognized openly and
officially. .Apparently, General Blaizot has not yet arrived. Baron
de Langlade who parachuted into Indochina some weeks ‘ago with
a letter of introduction from de Gaulle is also in Ceylon. He spent
-twenty-four hours with French Army officers in Indochina, and stated,
upon his return that a basis for a French resistance movement exists

“Seat of the American Consulate in Ceylon.

