Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

= ine FOREIGN RELATIONS, 1944, VOLUME II

this body would correspond to those of the American and British
Secret Operational organizations and its establishment. could be with-
out prejudice to the wider question of from what sources French forces
participating inthe Far Eastshouldbeequipped. ;
(@) rench participation in the planning of political warfare in
the Far East. This would be a matter for arrangement between the
South East Asia- Command and the French Military Mission.

2. The United States Chiefs of Staff, from a military point of view
concurred with these proposals except that they believe that French
participation in the planning of political warfare should be restricted
to the area of the South East Asia Command. No further action
could be taken by them in this matter as it was understood that the
President had expressed the desire first to discuss the question of
French Indo China orally with the Prime Minister.

8. The United States Chiefs of Staff took occasion to point out
that in their view, French Indo China was part, not of South East
Asia Command, but of the China Theatre and was an American
sphere of strategic responsibility. They recognised that an oral un-
derstanding had been come to between Admiral Mountbatten and the
Generalissimo by which both Commanders would be free to attack
Thailand and French Indo China, and boundaries between the two
Theatres would be decided at an appropriate time in the light of
progress made by the two forces.

4. This agreement was recognised by the Generalissimo after
Sexranr” as applying to preoperational activities. It has however
never been formally confirmed by the Combined Chiefs of Staff.

5. No further steps could be taken in obtaining the necessary ap-
proval by the Combined Chiefs of Staff to the proposals outlined in
paragraph 1 of this aide-mémoire until the President and the Prime
Minister had had an opportunity to discuss them. It was anticipated
that this discussion would take place at the Quebec Conference. but
in fact the subject wag never raised. Consequently no further prog-
ress has been made in this matter which is becoming increasingly
urgent.

6. Admiral Mountbatten is strongly of the opinion that useful and
important work on irregular lines could immediately be done in
French Indo China. The French Army and Civil Service are un-
questionably anxious to take part in the liberation of the country
from the Japanese and constitute virtually a well-organised and
ready-made Maquis.* The secret organisations operating from
South East Asia Command have made contact with these elements

"Code werd for the Cairo Conference of December, 1648; for correspondence
on this Conference, see Foreign Relations, The Conferences at Cairo and Tehraa.

3. :
™ French underground force.
