Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FRANCE

the integrity of France and of the French empire and of the eventual

restoration of the complete independence of all French territories.”

The above statement was qualified by the following words:

“Tn its relations with the local French authorities in French terri-
tories the United States has been and will continue to be governed by
the manifest effectiveness with which those authorities endeavor to
protect their territories from domination and control by the common
enemy.”

4. In a note of April 13, 1942,*° to the French Ambassador at Wash-’

ington, relative to the establishing of an American consular estab-
lishment at Brazzaville, the Acting Secretary of State said:

“The Government of the United States recognizes the sovereign
jurisdiction of the people of France over the territory of France and
over French possessions overseas. The Government of the United
States fervently hopes that it may see the reestablishment of the inde-
pendence of France and of the integrity of French territory.”

5. At his press conference on May 21, 1942, in reply to an inquiry
as to whether the United States considered itself bound to the res-
toration of the whole French Empire after the war, the Secretary of
State said that this question had not arisen.

6. In an unpublished letter of November 2, 1942, to General Giraud,
the President’s Personal Representative, Mr. Murphy, wrote:

“Tt is thoroughly understood that French sovereignty will be re-

established as soon as possible throughout all the territory, metropoli-
tan and colonial, over which flew the French flag in 1939.”

7. The landing of American forces in North Africa on November 8,
194227 was the occasion for a number of assurances to the French
people regarding American motives Among them were the
following:

In his message to Marshal P&ain ** the President said:

“T need not tell you that the ultimate and greater aim is the libera-
tion of France and its empire from the Axis yoke.”

The President’s message * to Admiral Esteva, Resident General at
Tunis, concluded with these words:

“I know that I may count on your understanding of American
friendship for France and American determination to liberate the
French empire from the domination of its oppressors.”

* Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. m, p. 561. ;

"For correspondence concerning the landings of November 8, 1942, see ibid.,
pp. 420-482.

™Department of State Bulletin, November 14, 1942, pp. 904, 905.

* Toid., p. 908. : .

28

ast
aed a a A I ig ll eh A a em

wid hizs

ee

a ee
