Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

T40.0001 TAW./S-10465

Memorandum of Conversation, hy the Assistant Scéretary of State
(Dunn)

[Wasutnerox.] Mareh 19, 1945.
Yesterday afternoon (Sunday) about six o'clock the French Am-
bassador called me by telephone and asked whether he could come |
to see me. F inimediately offered to go to the Embassy, which he
accepted, When T arrived there he informed me that under instrue-
tions from his Government, Admiral Fenard was taking up—with.
Admiral Leahy “ the following matter.

“ Adu. William D, Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commandéer in Chief of the
Army and Nivy.

He said the Fourteenth Air Force.of the United States forces, in
China had planes loaded and all ready to transport supplies and muni-.
tions to units of the French forces in Indo-China which were resist-

“ing the imposition of total control over Tndo-China by the Japanese,
this inyposition having been recently inaugurated by the Japanese
forees in Indo-China. He said the French Government had direct
reports from the resistance forces in Indo-China to the effect that
if they were granted assistance they would be able to make a very
good showing ayainst the Japanese effort to take over the whole coun-
uy. He said that his Government requested that authorization be
given by the United States Chiefs of Staif to send these su pplies for-

ward ‘to the # rench Q thine Acinin al He eli ast was Mn oes oe monet ot
aise of | the 1 President for sitipeisnteg for U nited States SEs
ance to these Spey forces.

Mr. MeCloy, Assistant Secrenary., of War, telephoned me this morn-
ing to_say that Admiral Fenard had made the above vequest to Ad-
minal Leahy and that_Admiral Leahy had authorized the (War
Department_to send a message to Gen eral. W redemey. er giving him_

authority to send whatever assistance ¢ould be spared without i
interfering: with the war elfort of the American and Chinese forces.

Mr. MeCloy said he would send me a copy of the authorization which
was being sent to. Gener: aL. a redeney’ er, for our information. I am
asking Mr. Bohlen * to disenss this matter a little further with Ad-

* Charles i. Bohlen. Assisiaut to rhe Secretary of Staite,
miral Leahy_as it has occurred to me that it might be well for this
Department to be in a position to inform the French Ambassador
here of the action which has been taken in response to his request and
also to inform Ambassador Caflery in Paris in order that he may know
the latest developnients in this situation.
Jamis Crement Dox»:

69
