Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

EFFORTS FOR AGREEMENT WITH JAPAN

In a telephone conversation this afternoon with she“irst Secretary
of the Chinese Embassy on a routine matter, Mr. Tsui repeated sub-
antially the same question asked by Mr. Liu, My reply was the
ne as given to Mr, iu. Afler some hesitation and speaking in
Ciinese, Mr. Tsui said that the Embassy was very much concerned
yer these reports. He said that the Central Government felt
tat... Lung Yun (Chairman of Yunnan Province) . .. might be
expected to be ‘subjected to greut Japanese pressure... .

The foregoing situation would seem to be an additional reason for
the taking of strong action in the event of the Japanese occupation
ofthe » French colony.

+p2.o011 P, W./420
Memorandum by Mr, Cecil W. Gray, Assistant to the Secretary
of State

[Wasutncron,] July 24, 1941.

Ina telephone conversation with Acting Secretary Welles at 12:30
rin. on July 23, there was considerable discussion about the Far
Exzstern situation. The Secretary spoke of the latest venture of
Japan toward acquiring bases in Indochina in the face of the fact that
Japan was not threatened by any nation on the globe. This south-
ward movement, he said, stermmed from a policy of force and con-
nuest. He referred to the friendship of Darlan ™ and Hitler and of the
«ements in the French Government who were in favor of turning all
France over to Hitler.

‘The Secretary said that, of course, our own Goyernment would do
its utmost to carry out any understanding that might be arrived at
with Japan, and that Japan was not in danger in the South Sea
ares. Hence that country must be bent on conquest, in which case
«me future Japanese Government would take the final steps toward
domination of that entire region.

There followed an exchange of views as to what Mr. Welles should
2ty to the Japanese Ambassador later in the externocn when he kept
. appointment with Mr. Welles.

"The Secretary’s general idea was that if the J apanese Ambassador
sttempted to explain away the Indochina move by saying that it had
tven brought about by peaceful means, then such “peaceful means”

-»ere completely contrary to the spirit of the discussions between tha
United States and Japanese Governments looking toward a friendly

“Adin. Franco!s Darlan, French Minister for Foreign Affairs and Vice Prest-
wens of the Council of Ministers (Vice Premier).
She meinuorandium by the Acting Secretary of State, July 23, 1011, Foreign.
tuna, Japan, 1931-1921, vol. m, p. 522.

ee ns
