Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

.. 2... FRANCE

Much earlier, in connection with his note of August 7, 1940, to
General de Gaulle, Mr. Churchill, in an unpublished letter of the
same date, had said:

“I think ic necessary to put on record that the expression ‘full res-
‘toration of the independence and greatness of France’ has no precise
relation to territorial frontiers. We have not been able to guarantee
such frontiers in respect of any nation now acting with a“ but, of
course, we shall do our best.”

2. Like the United States, the British Government has made a
number of commitments relative to the maintenance of French
sovereignty in North Africa, and on March 17, 1943, the Lord Privy
Seal stated in the House of Lords * that

“North Africa is French territory”;
and

“The relationship of the British and United States Commanders
is not that of an occupying power toward the local authority of an
occupied region”.

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State ™

: [Wasuincton,] January 24, 1944.

I saw Halifax last week and told him quite frankly that it was
perfectly true that I had, for over a year, expressed the opinion that
Indo-China should not go back to France but that it should be ad-
ministered by an international trusteeship. France has had the coun-
try—thirty million inhabitants for nearly one hundred years, and the
people are worse off than they were at the beginning.

Asa matter of interest, I am wholeheartedly. supported in this view
by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek ** and by Marshal Stalin* I see
no reason to play in with the British Foreign Office in this matter.
The only reason they seem to oppose it is that they fear the effect it
‘would have on their own possessions and those of the Dutch. They
have never liked the idea of trusteeship because it is, in some instances,
aimed at future independence. This is true in the case of Indo-China,

Each case must, of course, stand on its own fect, but the case of Indo-
‘China is perfectly clear. France has milked it for one hundred years.
The people of Indo-China are entitled to something better than that.

F[rangutyx] D. R[oosrvert]

*See Parlitmentary Debates, House of Lords, 5th series, vol. 126, col. 737.
, COPY obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.
_ ™ President of the National Government of China and Supreme Allied Com-
mander of the China Theater,

* Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars of the Soviet Union.

sl
