Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FOREIGN RELATIONS, 1943, CHINA

”

Bethouart. I thanked him for the information and said that the

matter presented was primarily for military consideratioh,
A[votr] A. B[ertr], Jn.
Nors: But it is not only for military consideration. This brings us
squarely up to the problem of whether, in the Far Bast, we are re-
establishing the western colonial empires or whether we are letting
the East liberate itself if it can do so. I feel that the matter should
be discussed on a high level with the President for his decision. I
do not know that we need to settle matters with the French Commit-
tee in Algiers. If the Chinese can do anything against the Japanese
in French Indochina to the general advantage of the war, I have

difficulty in seeing why we should stop them.
Al[norr] A. BEerre], Jr.

740.0011 Paclfic War/3531

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the
Under Secretary of State (Stettinius)

[Wasiineron,] October 22, 1943.

Mr. Srerimivs: In connection with the application of the French
Committee of National Liberation for membership on the Pacific War
Council, it is of interest that the representative of the Committee
yesterday presented us with a request that we do not permit the
Chinese to take part in oporations against the Japanese troops which
are presently occupying Indo-China. The Committee observed that
if British and American troops accomplished the reconquest this
would be quite all right; but the French, and particularly those in
Indo-China, considered the Chinese as their hereditary enemies
(erbfeinde) ; if they took part in the liberation of Indo-China, prob-
ably they would claim new territory.

The French would push this view in the Pacific War Council. This
would probably be supported by the British and the Dutch. This
would present us, for all practical purposes, with the task of recon-
quering Indo-China almost single-handed (since the British interest
stops with Burma) for the sole purpose cf returning Indo-China to
France. France is unlikely to be able to maintain herself in control
of, or protect, that province for a good while; so that we should have
the added job of policing and protecting it against the Chinese as well
as the Japanese in the interest of the French Colonial Empire.

It strikes me that this fact should be called to the attention of the
President and also of the Joint Chiefs of Staff4 I think we should

“On October 29 Mr. Stettinius replied to Mr. Berle: "I agree with you that the
matter of French representation on the Pacific War Council and also their

19
