10.

13.

14.

15.

16.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

g. The French offer a renewed expression of concern over the
apparent intent to use Chinese troops in Indochina and a
last minute warning of dire consequences to the Allied
eause if the Chinese were used. Letter from M. Hoppenot
to Berle, 13 December TONS ies aie wa wines v malsreie wie wae-ale 4iae¥iece%e 4's

President Roosevelt conversation with Marshal Stalin on the
possibility of a trusteeship for Indochina which he had dis-

. cussed with Chiang Kai-shek. Extract from Tehran Conference,

DE NOV EMDE? D-OUAS sas siha sie eveid's «'nlslow o-t-6 ola g-eloiele bei ece-cin/aie Wipla'g ie aetecaie re
19h4

Secretary Hull conveys British interest in U.S. policy on
French Indochina to Roosevelt with summaries of stated U.S.

and British positions. The U.S. had continuously promised

to restore to France its independence and sovereignty over its
territorial possessions. The British, on the other hand,
avoided guarantees of "French Empire" integrity but alluded to
the "greatness of France” and the lack of British designs on
French territory, 14 January TON. cc cwrcvcincescccccesnnissiacaa ees

Roosevelt reiterates his opinion to the British that Indochina
should not go back to France and that he was supported by
Stalin and Chiang Kai-shek in this view. Memorandum by
Roosevelt to Secretary of State, 24 January 19b4.......... ce eeee

Stettinius seeks approval from Roosevelt to assume that French
armed forces or French nationals would be used in the libera-
tion of Indochina without prejudicing the question of ultimate
status. Memorandum by Stettinius to Roosevelt, 17 February

Ay eet ceneeee eee ee eee eee eee ee Oe eee eee ee ehhh

Views of President Roosevelt with respect to setting up a
trusteeship for Indochina and expressions of these views to

the British are’ summarized. Memorandum by Mr. Grew, Far East
POPATES., LO! TUT LOWE. oa sieceit sic asin wa aiecvaeiewiaewnwere + sleeknwes-siteeis

Cordell Hull seeks a decision from Roosevelt on the French
role in the Far East military operations. The British had
requested of Hull affirmative answers on the attachment of
a French Mission to Mountbatten and the establishment of a
Corps in India. Memorandum by Hull to Roosevelt, 26 August

LO Sac ou eb ans oh 4S < eka See e le pie aw elias sep alsaee sk esew re ceeeaeelee

Roosevelt defers decision on French role in the Far East until
after the Second Quebec Conference, 11-16 September 1944.
Memorandum by Roosevelt to Hull, 28 August 19U4.........cceeenes

22

ak

26

30

31

32

34

35

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
