Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

uy FOREIGN RELATIONS, 1944, VOLUME III

The British requested American concurrence on the first two points
by August 29, You informed me orally that you planned to discuss
the French proposals with the British Prime Minister at Quebec;
accordingly no reply has been made to the British aide-mémoire.

The Consul at Cotombo has reported that on October 4 it was learned
from an unimpeachable source that the British plan to bring a French
Mission under General Blaizot to SEAC headquarters in the immedi-
ate future; that full collaboration is to be given the French Mission
which will participate officially in activities of the SEAC; that as
American agreement has not been obtained, the Mission will be ostensi-
bly unofficial and will be housed at first in a hotel; that as soon as the
concurrence of the Allies is forthcoming it is planned to move the
‘Mission into permanent quarters; and that French parachutists are
continuing to be trained by the British in groups of four or five for
clandestine activities in Indochina.

As you will recall, the British proposed in their aide-mémoire that
all details of French political warfare relating to Indochina should
be a matter for arrangement between SEAC and the French Military
Mission, although, according to the latest information in the Depart-
ment, Indochina is in the China theater and not in the SEAC theater.

Will you inform me whether the reported sending of this Mission
is in accordance with any understanding which may have been reached
with My. Churchill on the French requests together with an indica-

’ tion of whether you desire the Department to take any action?

C{orvet,] H{ci1]

* 851G.48/10-1044

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to President Roosevelt
a

[Wasurncron,] October 13, 1944.

A letter has been yeceived from General Donovan, Director of the

Office of Strategic Services, asking the views of the State Department
on the following contemplated operations:

“The staff of the Theater Commander for the CBI * theater has

under consideration operational plans involving the furnishing of

supplies and equipment to fesistance groups. It is contemplated that

these operations will be under American command although there will
be collaboration with the French.” ;

In amplification of the foregoing, it was explained orally that the
proposed assistance would be to resistance groups within Indochina;
that the proposed collaboration would be with the French Military
Mission at Chungking; that such collaboration would not prevent

“China, Burma, India.

36

ee ee geet RR Re ot ee ee ee ee ae ee ee
