Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Shortly following President Truman's entry into office, the U.S.
assured France that it had never questioned, "even by implication,
French sovereignty over Indo-China." The U.S. policy was to press
France for progressive measures in Indochina, but to expect France to
decide when its peoples would be ready for independence; "such deci-
sions would preclude the establishment of a trusteeship in Indochina
except with the consent of the French Government." These guidelines,
established by June, 1945 -~ before the end of the war -- remained
fundamental to U.S. policy.

With British cooperation, French military forces were reestablished
in South Vietnam in September, 1945. The U.S. expressed dismay at the
outbreak of guerrilla warfare which followed, and pointed out that while
it had no intention of opposing the reestablishment of French control,
"it is not the policy of this government to assist the French to reestab-
lish their control over Indochina by force, and the willingness of the
U.S. to see French control reestablished assumes that [the French claim
to have the support of the population in Indochina is borne out by future
events." Through the fall and winter of 1945-1946, the U.S. received a
series of requests from Ho Chi Minh for intervention in Vietnam; these
were, on the record, unanswered. However, the U.S. steadfastly refused
to assist the French military effort, e.g., forbidding American flag
vessels to carry troops or war materiel to Vietnam. On March 6, 1916,
the French and Ho signed an Accord in which Ho acceded to French re-
entry into North Vietnam in return for recognition of the DRV as a
"Free State," part of the French Union. As of April 1946, allied occu-
pation of Indochina was officially terminated, and the U.S. acknowledged
to France that all of -Indochina had reverted to French control. MThere-
after, the problems of U.S. policy toward Vietnam were dealt with in the
context of the U.S. relationship with France. (Tab 1)

In late 1946, the Franco-Viet Minh War began in earnest. A chart
(pp-A37 ff) summarizes the principal events in the relations between
France and Vietnam, 196-1949, describing the milestones along the route
by which.France, on the one hand, failed to reach any lasting accommo-
dation with Ho Chi Minh, and, on the other hand, erected the "Bao Dai
solution" in its stead. The U.S. during these years continued to regard
the conflict as fundamentally a matter for French resolution. The U.¢.
in its representations to France deplored the prospect of protracted war,
and urged meaningful concessions to Vietnamese nationalism. However,
the U.S., deterred by the history of Ho’s communist affiliation, always
stopped short of endorsing Ho Chi Minh or the Viet Minh. Accordingly,
U.S. policy gravitated with that of France toward the Bao Dai solution.
At no point was the U.S. prepared to adopt an openly interventionist
course. To have done so would have clashed with the expressed British
view that Indochina was an exclusively French concern, and played into
the hands of France's extremist political parties of both the Right and
the Left. The U.S. was particularly apprehensive lest by intervening
it strengthen the political position of French Communists. Moreover,

A-3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -

' Sensitive
EF MMUNIST ORGANIZATIONS IN INBDOCGI 1832-45
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMUNIST RGANIZATION I :
[RBOCHINESE
COMMUNIST
PARTY
{
Figure 3 ¢
BROKER UP ORY FRE RCH PIO OE ACT AON
REQORGANIZATEOR
. LEAGUE ees se "STRUGGLE" "OCTOBER® 1033
AGAINST COMMUNIST OE aoe ¢
IKPERFALISM PARTY
ee Se SS ate aS =F = 4
Fe ae SP Pe, ee De Ae Le te
| COMIKTERN - 7TH WORLD CONGRESS 1235
COMMU IST—
TROTSKY IST
CONFLICT
CHINESE | 1938
eed 2. a aa ke th i Me 0 ace So eo eee
SnEMRRTC Faent* | TROTSKYITES WIN
— - CONTROL OF
*STRUCGLE® 1937
—— GeouP
INDOCHINESE KGUYEH FOURTH
COMMUNIST VAN TAO INTERNATIONAL 1926
PARTY ORGANIZATION PARTY
- - - - - - - - -
to, aS Sole aS Yikes x hs ae NG Ee Ps 3
POLIGE PELSSORYE ORGARIZATIOGRHS poac
ve INDOCHINESE a
VIET HIRH COMMUNIST Sci
aid PARTY
ARTY DISSOLVE Sei erRtEe
PARTY DISS £0 Se onKRUe HATER ws me
mies .
GROUP COnRu tts
LEAGUE

v

she B-16

ie SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"4, There cannot be any alliance with or any concession
to the Trotskyite group. We must do everything possible to
lay bare their faces as henchmen of the fascists and annihilate
them politically.

"5. To increase and consolidate its forces, to widen its
influence, and to work effectively, the Indochinese Democratic
Front must keep close contact with the French Popular Front
because the latter also struggles for freedom, democracy, and
can give us great help.

"6. The Party cannot demand that the Front recognizes its
leadership. It must instead show itself as the organ which
makes the greatest sacrifices, the most active and loyal organ.
It is only through daily struggle and work that the masses of
the people acknowledge the correct policies and leading capacity
of the Party and that it can win the leading position.

"7, To be able to carry out this task, the Party must un-
compromisingly fight sectarianism and narrow-mindedness and
organize systematic study of Marxism-Leninism in order to raise
the cultural and political level of the Party members and help
the non-Party cadres raise their level. We must maintain close
contact with the French Communist Party.

"8. The Central Executive Committee must supervise the
Party press to avoid technical and political mistakes. (Bases
in publishing comrade R's biography, the Lao-Dong revealed his
address and his origin, ete. It also published without comment
his \" of saying that Trotskyism is a product of boastfulness,
etc.)."

In August, 1939, however, the Hitler-Stalin alliance was contracted, and
the following month all varieties of communists, both domestic and colonial,
were declared anathema by the French. In Vietnam, communist organizations
were once more thoroughly destroyed by police action, the Trotskyites
suffering particularly. 10/ Once the covert segments of the ICP survived.

That the ICP endured the French purges of 1930 - 1932 and 1939 - 19h0
testifies to its strength, for the same attacks emasculated the VN@DD and
all other revolutionary Vietnamese political parties. At the outset of
World War II, the ICP enjoyed a virtual monopoly on organized Vietnamese
nationalism, & position attributable to (1) ruthlessness of the French
in eliminating competition; (2) superior communist discipline, training,
and hence, survivability; (3) inherently better communist strategy and
tactics for balking the French colonial administration and mobilizing popu-
lar opinions; and (4) French tolerance of "popular front" communists gener-
ated by the ascendancy of the Left in metropolitan France during the mid-
30's. The French, by denying political expression to moderate Vietnamese
nationalists, polarized native political sentiments, and invited popular
support of the more vehement and radical solutions proffered by the ICP.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-17
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. World War II and the Viet Minh

(1) Formation of the Independence League, 1941

The fall of France in June 1940 was followed immediately

by a Japanese demand for permission to occupy Indochina. On 19 June 190,
Japan presented the French the first of a series of ultimatums, which cul-
minated, after some ungraceful maneuvering by the Vichy government, in

an order signed September 2, 1940, by Marshall Petain, directing the
colonial administration to negotiate terms by which Japanese armed forces
might enter Indochina and use military bases there. Within the month,
after demonstrations by the Japanese Navy off the Tonkin coast, and an
actual invasion of Tonkin from China by the Japanese Army, the terms sought
by the Japanese were forthcoming. The French ruled in Vietnam as hosts

to the Japanese until 1945, but the presence of Japanese bayonets rendered
their sovereignty largely titular. The Vichy administration under Rice
Admiral Jean Decouz developed a peculiarly Indochinese French nationalism
which dignified its client status, extolled France's tutelage functions
for the Vietnamese, and foreclosed any concessions whatever to native
aspirations for political independence. Above all, it attempted to pre-
serve the fiction that the Japanese had been stationed in Indochina with
its permission. Admiral Decoux held that:

"A country is not occupied if it keeps its own army free
in its movements, if its government and all the wheels of its
administration function freely and without impediment, if its
general services and particularly its police and security forces
remain firmly in the hands of the sovereign authority and out-
side of all foreign interference." 11/

But, the very emphasis the Vichy government placed upon its "freedom" dra-
matized among Viet patriots the extent of its collaboration. I+ was soon
evident that the Decoux regime served the purposes of Japanese policy, and
was "free" only to the degree the Japanese chose. Early in 1941 Japan
countenanced a Thai invasion of laos and Cambodia. French military actin
was successful in halting the Thais, but the Japanese, requiring Thai co-
operation for their drive into Malaya, forced the French to grant Thailand
all the territory it sought. On May 6, 1961, the first of a series of
Franco-Japanese commercial treaties was signed, which had the effect of
diverting from France to Japan all the exploitive gains from French colonial
enterprise, without Indochina's receiving in return such goods as it nor-
mally received in trade from France. Japanese armed forces were granted
full run of the country, and after December 7, 1941, Decoux declared Indo-
china part of the "Greater East Asia, Co-Prosperity Sphere."

The Japanese entry into Indochina kindled, in 1940 ana 1941, Vietnamese
insurrections against the French, who now appeared more reprehensible and
vulnerable than ever. Too, some Vietnamese nationalists had long looked
to the Japanese to liberate their nation. The communists were apparently
undecided whether to risk another premature insurrection. While it appears

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-18
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that the Central Committee of the ICP may have actually ordered subordinate
echelons to refrain from violence, communists, first in Cochinchina, and
then in Tonkin, led armed uprisings. The results were disasterous for

the rebels. The Japanese, who probably encouraged the revolts to the extent
they could, stood aside while the French reacted swiftly and savagely to
erush the Vietnamese. 12/ Numerous ICP and other nationalist leaders died
in the fighting, or in the harsh ministrations of French colonial justice
which followed. The outcome of the rebellions of 1940 and 191 was thus

yet another French purge, exile of Vietnamese nationalist movements. While
small scale covert operations continued in Vietnam, party headquarters were
forced to move abroad, mostly to Nationalist China. In 1946, the Vietnamese
government published a tract which acknowledged its debt to China:

"Thus it came to pass that southern China became the by-word
of all Vietnam revolutionists. It was the birthplace of the
Vietnam revolutionary movement, the base from where were directed
all revolutionary activities "beyond the border' -- on Vietnam's
own territory." 13/

Chinese motives for sponsoring the Vietnamese nationalists included a de-
sire to acquire intelligence of Japanese forces on their southern flank,
and to tie down Japanese through sabotage and other operations in Indochina;
there may have been a longer range interest in political influence over
postwar Indochina.

In May, 1941, the head of the ICP, Nguyen Ai Quoc -- the person later
to be called Ho Chi Minh -- convened the Eighth Plenum of the ICP Central
Committee to approve the forming of a new united front organization to
which Vietnamese patriots wishing to resist the Japanese and oppose the
French might rally. The Party meeting was followed by a "congress" of
Vietnamese nationalists who had recently escaped from their homeland, and
others WHO had been in exile for years; there were also representatives
of the "national liberation associations" of workers, peasants, soldiers,
women, and youth -- most of them ICP organized and dominated. ‘The "con-
gress" adopted the recommendations of the ICP ae and established Ff
the Vietnam Independence League, Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi, which
became: known as the Viet Minh. Neuyen . Ai Quoc was named Ge General Secretary
of the new League, and most of its key positions were assigned to ICP menm=-
bers. Nguyen Ai Quoc issued a letter on the occasion, including the follow-
ing appeal:

"Compatriots throughout the country: Rise up quickly! Let
us follow the heroic example of the Chinese people! Rise up quickly
to organize the Association for National Salvation to fight the
French and the Japanese.

"Blders!

"Prominent personalities!

"Some hundreds of years ago, when our country was endangered by
the Mongolian invasion, our elders under the Tran dynasty rose up

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-19
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

indignantly and called on their sons and daughters throughout
the country to rise as one in order to kill the enemy. Finally
they saved their people from danger, and their good name will

be carried into posterity for all time. The elders and prominent
personalities of our country should follow the example set by

our forefathers in the florious task of national salvation.

"Rich people, soldiers, workers, peasants, intellectuals,
employees, traders, youth, and women who warmly love your
country: At the present time national liberation is the most
important problem. Let us unite together! As one in mind and
strength we shall overthrow the Japanese and French and their
jackals in order to save people from the situation between boil-
ing water and burning heat.

"Dear compatriots!

"National salvation is the common cause to the whole of
our people. Every Vietnamese must take part in it. He who has
money will contribute his money, he who has strength will contribute
his strength, he who has talent will contribute his talent. I
pledge to use all my modest abilities to follow you, and am ready
for the last sacrifice.

"Revolutionary fighters!

"The hour has struck! Raise aloft the insurrectionary banner
and guide the people throughout the country to overthrow the Japanese
and French: The sacred call of the Fatherland is resounding in
your ears; the blood of our heroic perdecessors who sacrified
their lives is stirring in your hearts: The fighting spirit of
the people is displayed everywhere before you. Let us rise up
quickly! United with each other, unify your action to overthrow
the Japanese and the French.

"Victory to Viet-Nam's Revolution!
"victory to the World's Revolution!" 14/

(2) Component Parties and Program

D The Viet Minh was originally an "anti-fascist" league
of the following Viet nationalist groups:

-- The New Vietnam Party (Tan Viet Dang)

-- The Vietnam Revolutionary Youth League (Viet Nam Thanh
Nhien Cach Menh Dong Chi Hoi) = i al

-- Vietnem Nationalist Party (VNQDD ) (Only certain factions -
of this party elected to join the Viet Minh)

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-20
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-- The several "National Liberation Associations"
-- The Indochinese Communist Party (ICP)

Beginning in October, 1940, the Central Committee of the ICP had withdrawn
its specifically communist slogans (e.g., "To confiscate landlords' lands
and distribute it to the tillers," was toned down to "Confiscation of the
land owned by traitors for distribution to the poor farmers.") and had be-
gun instead to emphasize “national liberation." 15/ “Within the Viet Minh,
"national liberation" became central to the Party program, but the ICP
from the outset dominated the league. According to Vo Nguyen Giap, the
Party set political goals for the Viet Minh at the expense of its historic
“anti-feudal task," but necessarily:

"Mo rally the different strata of the people and the national
revolutionary forces in the struggle against the main enemy, that
is the French and Japanese fascist imperialists...

"Tt is precisely for this reason [emphasis on national libera-
tion/ that within a short period, the Viet Minh gathered together
the great forces of the people and became the most powerful politi-
eal organization of the broad revolutionary masses." 16/

By 1943, the Viet Minh was in fact attracting a broad spectrum of national-
ists and intelligentsia, as well as extending its organization steadily
among the peasants. A 1946 official history presented this formulation

of its program at that time: i

"At a conference in 1943, delegates of all anti-fascit revo-
lutionary organizations adopted the following political program:
(1) Election of a constituent assembly to work out the constitu-
tion for a free Indo-China on the basis of adult suffrage; (2)
Restoration of democratic liberties and rights, including freedom
of organization, press and assembly, freedom of belief and opinion,
the right to property, the right of workers to strike, freedom of ¥
domicile and freedom of propaganda; (3) The organization of a
national army; (4) The right of minorities to self-determination;
(5) Equal rights for women; (6) Nationalization of banks belong-
ing to fascists and the formation of an Indo-Chinese national
bank; (7) The building up of a strong national economy by the
development of native industry, communications, agriculture and
commerce; (8) Agricultural reforms and the extension of cultiva-
tion to fallow lands; (9) Labor legislation, including the intro-
duction of the eight-hour working day and progressive reforms in
social legislation; (10) Development of national education and
culture.

"In the international sphere the program stands for the

‘revision of unequal treaties and an alliance with all democratic
nations for the maintenance of peace. More important for the

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-21.
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

anti-Japanese war, however, is the immediate program of action
which is: (1) Organization of the masses -- workers, peasants,
women, and youth -- for the anti-fascist struggle. This has al-
ready attained promising successes. (2) Preparation of an in-
surrection by the organization of the people into self-defense
corps. (3) The formation of guerrilla bands and bases ‘which
will assume greater importance as we gradually approach the time
of country-wide military action.'" 17/

(a) Dong Minh Hoi

From the outset, the Chinese were suspicious of the
Viet Minh. In 1942, they arrested Nguyen Ai Quoc, and imprisoned him.
In October, 1942, more than one year after the founding of the Viet Minh,
the Kuomintang sponsored a second "united front” of Vietnamese nationalists
named the Vietnam Revolutionary League (Viet Nam Cach Menh Dong Minh Hoi).
Colocated with headquarters of the Viet Minh in Kwangsi Province, China,
Liuchow, the Dong Minh Hoi -- as it came to be known -- included:

-- The Vietnam Nationalist Party (VNDD)

-- The Vietnam Restoration League (Viet Nam Phuc Quoc
Dong Minh Hoi )

-- The Great Vietnam Nationalist Party (Dai Viet Quoc
Dan Dang)

-- The Viet Minh
-- The Liberation League (Giai Phong Hoi)

The Dong Minh Hoi was launched with the official sanction of Marshall Chang
Fa-kuei, the quasi-autonomous Chinese warlord; its initial program was ex-
pressly modeled after the Kuomintang's Three People's Principles of Sun

Yat Sen, and its paramilitary organizations were established with a view

to close cooperation with the Nationalist Army. However, after more than

a year in prison, Nguyen Ai Quoc was released by the Chinese -~ perhaps
on Chang Fa-kuei's orders, and without knowledge or sanction of Chiang
Kai-Shek's headquarters -- and installed, under the new alias of Ho Chi

Minh, as Chairman of the Dong Minh Hoi. The Viet Minh alone profitted by
this duality of leadership. Only in the person of Ho Chi Minh, and in
Luichow itself, was there any merger of the two “united front” organiza-
tions. Afield, and especially in Tonkin, they competed -- and occasionally
fought -- with one another.

The Dong Minh Hoi acquired only modest political and military power
in Vietnam, and became a significant political factor there only after
Chinese Nationalist forces occupied Tonkin in late 195. On March 28, 1944,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-22
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a "Provisional Republican Government of Vietnam" was proclaimed in Iuichow,
China, with Viet Minh officials occupying only a minority of positions in
the government. 18/ But in Vietnam, the Viet Minh formed the only effec-
tive and extensive resistance movement.

(b) Collaborator Parties

Both the French and the Japanese sponsored Vietnamese
political parties. On the whole, the Japanese enjoyed significantly greater
success in manipulating the Vietnamese, and they thereby emasculated Decoux's
colonial administration. Through direct support of the theocratic movements,
such as the Cao Dai and the Hoa Hao, and a variety of nationalist political
parties, they maintained the potential for popular dissidence in balance
with available French force. As a result, large portions of Vietnamese
territory, especially in Cochinchina, were vacated by the French to Viet-
namese rule. Japanese sources reported during World War II that the more
important of the collaborating Viet nationalists were in two groups: The
Great Vietnam Nationalist Association (Dai Viet Quoc Dan Hoi) -- an out-
growth of rightist elements within the VNQDD; and the Vietnam Restoration
League (Viet Nam Phuc Quoc Dong Minh Hoi) -- based on the nationalist groups
which had been in exile in Japan. According to Japanese reports, in Annam
and Tonkin, these included:

Great Vietnam Party (Dai Viet)

(1) The Great Annam People's Party (Dai Viet Quoc Dan Dang), which
at its height -- about 1940 -- had about 25,000 members; but
as a result of the pressure of the French authorities in Indo-
china, it is now somewhat reduced. Its members are chiefly from
the lower clases, students or boy scots, and its influence extends
from the provinces of Ha Dong, Hai Duong, Bac Ninh and Central
Annam to the Laos District.

(2) The Great Annam Democratic Party, which was disbanded in 1941
as a result of official pressure but reformed in 1942 and consists
chiefly of intellectuals and men of letters; its members number
about 2,000. This was probably the section of the Vietnam
Nationalist Party known as the Dai Viet Dan Chinh and directed
by Nguyen Tuong Tam.

(3) Three other groups whose total membership is two or three thousand.
One of these smaller groups was probably the Youth Patriots (Than
Nhien Ai Quoc), led by Vo Xuan Cam, which has been described as
a terrorist party that maintained a flow of violent anti-Prench
propaganda. Another was the Servants of the Country (Phung Xa,
Quoe Gioi), directed by Pham Dinh Cuong. hes

Restoration League (Phuc Quoc)

(1) The Annam National Party, consisting of a volunteer corps, @
civilian section, and a military section. The volunteer corps,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(2)

(3)

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

which is the principal element, counts 1,500 in the north, 3,000
in the center, and 5,000 in the south and has influence amongst
business men, officials, and intellectuals.

The Vietnam Patriots' Party (Viet Nam Ai Quoc Dang), made up of
doctors, lawyers and intellectuals in the liberal professions
and having latent power among young intellectuals.

The National Socialist Party (Dai Viet Quoc Xa), having about
2000 members and its chief sphere of influence in the light
industry towns of Haiphong and Hanoi. This party was directed
by Tran Trong Kim, late premier of the Bao Dai government, and
is said to have been inspired by the Japanese Military Police
and Intelligence Organization (Kempei Tai) to recruit Vietnamese
for the puppet military forces. 19

In Cochinchina, the Restoration League was preeminent:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(7)

Restoration League

a a Tan Whon. Some of the elements of the dissolved Vietnam
Revolutionary Party (Viet Nam Cach Menh Dang), which had been
founded in 1939, joined the new organization. The Party was
markedly pro-Japanese in orientation. It favored collaboration
with the Japanese Army and the adherence of EOC to the
Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.

The Vietnam Patriots' Party (Viet Nam Ai Quoc Dang), a group
of intellectuals and students.

The Great Vietnam Nationalist Party (Dai Viet Quoc Dan Dang),
an outgrowth of the Cochinchina Vietnam am Nationalist eye
consisting of pro-Japanese elements.

“The Vietnam National Party (Viet Nam Quoc Gia Dang), a minor

political group.

The Youth Justice Association (Thanh Nhien Nghia Dong Doan),
a minor youth group.

The Youth Patriots (Thanh Nhien Ai Quoc), the southern branch
of a terrorist youth group. Elements of this southern group
created an organization known as the Vietnam Democratic Party
(Viet Nem Dan Chu Ngia Dang).

The Hoa Hao Buddhist Sect (Phat Giao Hoa Hao), also known as
the Vietnam Independence Restoration Party (Viet Nam Doc Lap
Van Dang), a militant Buddhist sect led by Huynh Phu So.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-2h
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in 1946 and 1947, France and Britain were moving toward an anti-
Soviet alliance in Europe, and the U.S. was reluctant to press a
potentially divisive policy. The U.S. considered the fate of Viet-
namese nationalism relatively insignificant compared with European
economic recovery and collective security from communist domination.

Tt is not as though the U.S. was not prepared to act in circum-
stances such as these. For example, in the 1945-1946 dispute over
Dutch possessions in Indonesia, the U.S. actively intervened against
its Dutch ally. In this case, however, the intervention was in con-
cert with the U.K. (which steadfastly refused similar action in Indo-
china) and against the Netherlands, a much less significant ally in
Europe than France. In wider company and at projected lower cost, the
U.S. could and did show.a determination to act against colonialism.

The resultant U.S. policy has most often been termed "neutrality."
It was, however, also consistent with the policy of deferring to French
volition announced by President Roosevelt's Secretary of State on
3 April 1945. It was a policy characterized by the same indecision
that had marked U.S. wartime policy. Moreover, at the time, Indochina
appeared to many to be one region in the troubled postwar world in
which the U.S. might enjoy the luxury of abstention.

In February, 1947, early in the war, the U.S. Ambassador in Paris
was instructed to reassure Premier Ramadier of the "very friendliest
feelings" of the U.S. toward France and its interest in supporting
France in recovering its economic, political and military strength:

"In spite any misunderstanding which might have arisen
in minds French in regard to our position concerning Indochina
they must appreciate that we have fully recognized France's
sovereign position in that area and we do not wish to have
it appear that we are in any way endeavoring undermine that
position, and French should know it is our desire to be helpful
and we stand ready assist any appropriate way we can to find
solution for Indochinese: problem. At same time we cannot
shut our eyes to fact that there are two sides this problem
and that our reports indicate both a lack French understanding
of other side (more in Saigon than in Paris) and continued
existence dangerously outmoded colonial outlook and methods
in area. Furthermore, there is no escape from fact that trend
of times is to effect that colonial empires in XIX Century
sense are rapidly becoming thing of past. Action Brit in India
and Burma and Dutch in Indonesia are outstanding examples this
trend, and French themselves took cognizance of it both in new
Constitution and in their agreements with Vietnam. On other
hand we do not lose sight fact that Ho Chi Minh has direct
Communist connections and it should be obvious that we are
not interested in seeing colonial empire administrations sup-
planted by philosophy and political organizations emanating
from and controlled by Kremlin....

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
A-h a ase
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(8) The Great Religion of the Third Amesty (Dai Dao Tam Ky Pho Do),
a Cao-Daist sect led by Tran Quang Vinh, the principal subordi-
nate of the Cao-Daist Pope, Pham Cong Tac. The Cao-Daists had
been furnished arms by the Japanese and were used as an auxiliary
police force throughout Cochinchina. 20/

Whatever short term advantages these groups gained vis-a-vis the Vichy
French, however, collaboration with the Japanese had the longer run effect
of discrediting a significant number of Vietnamese nationalists, putting
their movements at particular disadvantage in postwar competition with

the Viet Minh, which preserved its aura of unwavering faith to resistance
against all foreign domination.

(c) Trotskyists

In Cochinchina radical communists survived, and
as the war progressed, gained a following concentrated in Saigon. In 19h4
the "October" Group announced the forming of the International Communist
League, and in March, 1945, issued a manifesto condemning the "Stalinists"
of the ICP who supported the Allies, and the "feudalist" collaborators
with the Japanese:

"The future defeat of Japanese imperialism will set the
Indochinese people on the road to national liberation. The
bourgeoisie and feudalists who cravenly serve the Japanese rulers
today, will serve equally the Allied imperialist states. The
petty-bourgeois nationalists, by their aimless policy, will _
also be incapable of leading the people towards revolutionary
victory. On the working class, which struggles independently
under the flag of the Fourth International, will be able to
accomplish the advance guard tasks of the revolution.

"The Stalinists of the Third International have already
abandoned the working class to group themselves miserably with
the ‘democratic' imperialisms. They have betrayed the peasants
and no longer speak of the agrarian question. If today they
march with foreign capitalists, in the future, they will help
the class of national exploiters to destroy the revolutionary
people in the hours to come.” 21/

The Trotskyite "Struggle" Group also re-emerged in May, 1945, to resume
its rivalry with the "October" faction, but both parties advocated world
revolution, |a worker-peasant government, arming of the people and general
expropriation of land and industry. Their principal significance was to
debilitate the ICP in Cochinchina, and to impair the effectiveness of the
Viet Minh there.

| (4) Viet Minh Operations in Vietnam

The ICP, at the heart of the Viet Minh, commumicated to
the League the lessons it had painfully learned in the uprisings of

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-25 SSS Se
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

1930-31, and 1940-41: (1) however eager the people were to take up arms,
insurrection had to be correctly timed in order to exploit both maximum
confusion in enemy ranks and the fullest support from the non-committed;
(2) little faith could bE placed on defectors from enemy forces -- reli-
ance had to rest rather "chiefly on the great masses of the people"; (3)
bases for the support of operations had to be carefully prepared before-
hand. 22/ According to its own histories, the ICP began in 1941 to pre-
pare for a general uprising in Vietnam. In Cochinchina, up until April
1945, the ICP continued to operate largely underground and without much
regard for the Viet Minh mantle; in Tonkin, however, all ICP undertakings
were given Viet Minh identity. Throughout Vietnam, the ICP initiated
patient political action: the dissemination of propaganda, the training
of cadres, the establishment of a network of cells down to hamlet level.
The Central Committee of the ICP adopted this four point program in 1941:

"1. Develop new organizations among the people, and consolidate
those which exist within the Viet Minh.

2. Expand organizations into the cities.

2. Organize the minority peoples within the Viet Minh.

4. Form small guerrilla groups." 23/

The Viet Minh assigned priority to political tasks ahead of military missions.
Cadres were repeatedly impressed with the essentiality of a properly pre-
pared political and material base for guerrilla warfare. Even where the
latter was countenanced, they were enjoined to put "reliance on the masses,
continual growth, extreme mobility, and constant adaptation." ah/ In the
mountainous region of North Vietnam above Hanoi the first permanent Viet
Minh bases were established in 1942-1943. Then followed shadow government
by Viet Minh agents, and in September, 1943, after the people had been
well organized, the first locally recruited guerrilla forces were fromed
under Viet Minh auspices. Not until December 22, 1944, was the first unit
of the Viet Minh Liberation Army created, but cies is little evidence of
concerted guerrilla operations until after March, 1945; by that time the
underground organization was pervasive. As of the end of 194), the Viet
Minh claimed a membership of 500,000, of which 200,000 were in Tonkin,
150,000 in Annam, and 150,000 in Cochinchine. 25/ The aim was for each
village to have a Viet Minh committee, responsive to a hierarchy of com-
mittees; in most instances where the village committee existed, it was

in a position to challenge the government authority. According to Giap,
by 1945 the Viet Minh was the de facto government in many areas:

"There were regions in which the whole masses took part
in organizations of national salvation, and the village Viet
Minh Committees had, as a matter of course, full prestige
among the masses as an underground organization of the revo-
lutionary power." 26/

On 9 March, 1945, the Japanese overturned the Vichy regime in Indo-
china, and set up the Emperor of Annam, Bao Dai, as the head of a state
declared independent of France, but participating in the Greater East Asia

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-26
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Co-Prosperity Sphere. This unification of Vietnam by the faltering
Japanese under the ineffectual Annamese Emperor opened new political
opportunity for the Viet Minh. On April 6, 1945, the ICP Central Committee
directed the forming of a shadow government throughout Vietnam, to extend
to every echelon of the society, prepared to mobilize the whole people

for war. In May, 1945, a Viet Minh "liberated zone" was established near
the Chinese border. '

Whatever may be said for the distortion of the historical record by
communist historians to magnify the importance of the Viet Minh, it is
fact that the American 0.8.8. during World War II dealt with the Viet Minh
as the sole efficient resistance apparatus within Vietnam, for intelligence
and for aid in assisting downed allied pilots. 27/ It also seems clear
that in terms of popular reputation in Vietnam, no Viet political movements
save the ICP and the Viet Minh added to their stature for their wartime
activities.

(5) The Liberation of North Vietnam

As the war drew to a close, the Viet Minh proved to be
as adroit strategically as it had showed itself on the tactical level --
or, as Truong Chinh, the Secretary General of the ICP was careful to point
out in 1946, the ICP proved to be adroit. According to Truong Chinh, on
August 13, 1945, the Party, informed of Japan's collapse, decided to pre-
empt Allied occupation of Vietnam, and hurriedly convened a Viet Minh congress
that had been pending since June:

"During the historic Congress, the Indochinese Communist
Party advocated an extremely clear policy: to lead the masses
in insurrection in order to disarm the Japanese before the
arrival of the allied forces in Indo-China; to wrest power from
the Japanese and their puppet stooges and finally as the people's
power, to welcome the allied forces coming to disarm the Japanese
troops stationed in Indo-China." 28/

A possibly more accurate record -- since it jibes with other accounts and
alludes to spontaneous local uprisings in advance of Party's "order for
general revolution" -- was published by the DRV in September, 19h6:

"These epoch-making developments prompted the Viet Minh
Party to convene without further delay the National Congress.
A revolutionary committee was crated and the general revolution
was ordered on the night of August 13, immediately after the
news of Japan's unconditional surrender.

“On August 16, the National Congress opened at Tan Trao,
a locality in Thai Nhuyen province, in the liberated zones.
Sixty representatives from all parts of the country came to
learn additional details on the order for the General Revolu-
tion. The home and foreign policies of the Revolutionary

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-27
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Government were mapped out and the Viet Nam people's Liberation
Committee, which became later the Provisional Government of the
Viet Nam Democratic Republic, was created.

"At this historical gathering, the Viet Minh Party laid
down a clear-cut program which bore on the following points:

a) to disarm the Japs before the entry of Allied forces into
Indochina;

b) to wrest the power from the hands of the eneny;

c) to be in a position of authority when receiving the Allied
Forces.

"In some areas, the order for the general revolution was not
received. Acting on their own initiative, members of the Viet
Minh Front ordered a general mobilization and led the population
into the fight for power. Thus, on August 11, our compatriots
of Ha Tinh took up arms against the Japanese fascists while
uprisings also took place at Quang Ngai.

"On August 14 and 15, ovr forces seized numerous enemy advanced
positions in the vicinity of the liberated zones.

"On August 16, with the news of the Japanese capitulation,
millions of people throughout the country rose up to the occasion
and a general attack on Japanese barracks and military establish-
ments begen.

"On August 17-18, huge demonstrations took place in the
capital city of Hanoi. The fight for power effectively started
here, on the 19, with the local militia forces going over to the
Revolutionists' side. Spearheaded by youth formations, the peo-
ple"’s army under the command of the Viet Minh forced their way
into the compounds of the Home Ministry Building. Governor Phan
ke Toai had already fled with his closest collaborators. The
Tran trong Kim puppet government promptly gave way while at the
former capital of Annam, Emperor Bao Dai signed his act of abdi-
cation in the presence of representatives of the Viet Minh Central
Headquarters.

"Thus, a new Power came into being, as the people's Revolu-
tionary Government was officially proclaimed and was given the
unqualified support of the entire population,

"A few days later, members of the National Liberation Con-
mittee met in session in Hanoi. In view of the changed situation,
the New Power was re-organized and a provisional Government which
included several non-party members was established with Ho Chi
Minh as its president." 29/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-28
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ho Chi Minh issued an "Appeal for General Insurrection" following the
August 16 conference:

".,.This is a great advance in the history of the struggle
waged for nearly a century by our people for their liberation.

"This is a fact that enraptures our compatriots and fills
me with great joy.

"However, we cannot consider this as good enough. Our
struggle will be a long and hard one. Because the Japanese are
defeated, we shall not be liberated overnight. We still have
to make further efforts and carry on the struggle. Only a united
struggle will bring us independence.

"The Viet Minh Front is at present the basis of the struggle
and solidarity of our people. Join the Viet Minh Front, support
it, make it greater and stronger!

"At present, the National Liberation Committee is, so to
speak, in itself our provisional government. Unite around it
and see to it that its policies and orders are carried out
throughout the country!

"In this way, our Fatherland will certainly win independence
and our people will certainly win freedom soon.

"Me decisive hour in the destiny of our people has struck.
Let us stand up with all our strength to free ourselves!

"Many oppressed peoples the world over are vying with each
other in the march to win back their independence. We cannot
allow ourselves to lag behind.

"Forward: Forward! Under the banner of the Viet Minh Front,
move forward courageously!” 30/

The hapless Bao Dai -- the first Vietnamese to govern a nominally
ited, independent nation in nearly a century -- on August 18, 1945,
dispatched to General de Gaulle of France the following poignant and
rophetic message:

"I address myself to the people of France, to the country
of my youth. I address myself as well to the nation's leader
and liberator and I wish to speak as a friend rather than as
Head of State.

"You have suffered too much during four deadly years not
to understand that the Vietnamese people, who have a history
of twenty centuries and an often glorious past, no longer wish,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-29
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

can no longer support any foreign domination or foreign administra-
tion.

"You could understand even better if you were able to see
what is happening here, if you were able to sense this desire
for independence which has been smoldering in the bottom of all
hearts, and which no human force can any longer hold back. Even
if you were to arrive to re-establish a French administration
here, it would no longer be obeyed; each village would be a nest
of resistance, every former friend an enemy, and your officials
and colonists themselves would ask to depart from this unbreathable
atmosphere.

"IT beg you to understand that the only way to safeguard French
interests and the spiritual influence of France in Indochina is
to recognize frankly the independence of Vietnam and to renounce
any idea of re-establishing French sovereignty or administration
here in whatever form it may be.

"You would be able to listen to us so easily and become our
friends if you would stop aspiring to become our masters again.

"Making this appeal to the well recognized idealism of the
French people and the great wisdom of their leader, we hope that
peace and the joy which has rung for all the people of the world
will be guaranteed equally to all people who live in Indochina,
‘native as well as foreign." 31/

De Gaulle never replied; the message was in any event moot, because within
a week Bao Dai formally ceded his powers to the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam, and thereafter France was faced in North Vietnam not by the
Francophile mandarin-king, but by Ho Chi Minh, the implacable professional
revolutionary -- dedicated nationalist-communist.

| (6) The Liberation of South Vietnam

The overturning of Japanese power in Cochinchina followed
a separate course. Bao Dai's government had waited until August 14, 1945

to proclaim the incorporation of Cochinchina into a united Vietnam, but

this move came much too late to have any impact. The first effective steps
toward consolidating the disunited Vietnamese political groups in the South
was undertaken by the Trotskyist "Struggle" faction and formerly collabora-
tionist parties, who merged on August 14, 1945, to form a "United National
Front" (Mat Tran Quoc Thong Nhut). Participants included the Cao Dai League,
the Hoa Hao Sect, and the Buddhist League. The United National Front adopted
the Trotskyist platform, and directed its energies principally against

Bao Dai's representatives in Saigon. The Viet Minh seems to have delayed
until 2 August to launch its program in Cochinchina, apparently moving

at that time in response to the seizure of power by the Viet Minh in Annam
and Tonkin. In the meantime, the ICP, led by Tran Van Giau, quietly seized

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-30
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

power. On 25 August 1945, the Viet Minh sponsored a meeting at which a
government entitled "Provisional Executive Committee of the Southern
Vietnam Republic" was formed. The Committee of the South, though domi-
nated by Tran Van Giau and other members of the ICP, purported to repre-
sent both the Viet Minh and the United National Front, and to be the
southern arm of Ho Chi Minh's Hanoi government. The United National
Front was represented at the 25 August meeting, but formal negotiations
for an alliance between the Viet Minh and the Front did not commence until
30 August. The following is purported to be a transcript of the proceed-
ings of this meeting, following a report by Tran Van Giau as Chairman of
the Executive Committee of the South:

“Huynh Phu So (Hoa Hao leader) - 'Will Mr. Giau let us know
what groups formerly secretly collaborated with the Viet Minh,
and later publicly participated in it?’

"Tran Van Gieu - 'In Nembo (Cochinchina) during the under-
ground stage, these were the parties in the Viet Minh Front:
the Indochinese Communist Party, the New Vietnam Democratic
Party (Tan Dan Chu Dang), the Youth for National Liberation
(Than-Nien Cuu. Quoc), the officials for National Liberation
(Quan-Nhan Cuu Quoc), the Vietnam National Party (Viet-Nam
Quoc Cia Dang), and now the United National Front.’

"Tran Van Thach (Trotskyist ['Struggle"7 leader) - 'When was
the Executive Committee established and who chose it? Will Front
policy be followed and will there be communication with the Front?
Adn since this assembly is held today, would the Government act
in line with the Assembly, or is this the only meeting to be
held?'

"“Pran Van Giau - 'Now, I will answer Mr. Thach. The establish-
ment of the Executive Committee was not my sole decision. It was
established some time ago in order to take over the government.

The Executive Committee is only a temporary one, pending the t
national election. In the interim, no one is willing to take

power or obey orders. Although Mr. Thach's questions was not

fully explained, I can tell what is in his mind. He would like

to ask why a man like himself did not have a position in the
government. Isn't that so, Mr. Thach? I repeat that this
Government is only a temporary one. Later on when we have the
general elections, if he is capable, Mr. Thach needn't worry

about not having a seat in the Government. As for the work of

the parties, between you and me, we will meet again.'

"Huynh Van Phuong (Intellectual Group) - "Due to the cir-
cumstances that now face us, the United National Front felt that
there should not be two fronts in the country. For this reason,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-31
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the United National Front called all parties and groups to meet
together and selected Phan Van Hum, as its representative, to
negotiate with the Viet Minh in order to fuse the two fronts
into one.

‘After negotiating, Mr. Hum returned and reported that
the Viet Minh has refused to dissolve into the United National
Front. They state that the Viet Minh is already a consolidated
front in the eyes of the nation and has fought against Japanese
imperialism. Today, in order to unite our strength, the United
National Front has to affiliate with the Viet Minh.

"Since the Viet Minh view point was sound, after hear-
ing Mr. Hum's views, the United National Front affiliated with
the Viet Minh...’

"Tran Van Giau - 'The Viet Minh does not wish to race for
power. If a man is able, no one will stand in his way. The
United National Front represents many parties and groups which
are affiliated to the Viet Minh...'" 32/

Although the 30 August meeting produced no formal merger, on 7 September
1946 the Viet Minh was able to announce the forming of a "national bloc
committee” with the United National Front. It was Tran Van Giau's Com-
mittee of the South which was the de facto government in Saigon when the
British occupation forces arrived.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-32
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

1.B.2.
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a. Baey
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
2. The Democratic Republic of Vietnam......... sinidumsRareae ete lste ee 470i slerevelsemeU ey
a. Establishment of the Republic......... biessloteraterete e Piste ats ay hseeeat se B=53

b. Short-lived Independence in Cochinchina............se+.ee00+. B36

ec. Nationalist Government in North Vietnam, 1945-1946.......... . B-o
(1) The Government of 2 September ee ee es pia ehns . B-hO
(2), Whe Goverment of 6 March L945... ..senecucceeeuaesauies ea 1B-40
(3) Chinese Withdrawal ovis ossis ac canoes cas eae Nets tneteeaen Boot
(4) The Government of 3 November 1946.....cccsscecesecccocce B-9
2. The Democratic Republic of Vietnam
a. Establishment of the Republic .

On 26 August in a ceremony at Hue, the Emperor Bao Dai re-
linquished his power to Ho Chi Minh's representatives. He spoke of "mighty
democratic forces in the north of Our Realm," and of apprehension that’
"conflict between the North and the South should be inevitable.” To avoid
such conflict, and to deny an invader opportunities to capitalize on inter-
nal struggle, he would assume the status of "free citizen of an independent
country." Bao Dai called upon "all parties and groups, all classes of
society as well as the Royal Family to strengthen and support unreservedly
the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in order to consolidate our national
independence." 33/ Bao Dai adopted the name Vinh Thuy, and accepted the
title of "Supreme Political Adviser" to Ho Chi Minh's government.

On 2 September 1945 -- the day Japan signed the surrender instrument --
Ho proclaimed the foundation of a new state, issuing the following "Declara-
tion of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam":

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-33
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Frankly we have no solution of problem to suggest. It
is basically matter for two parties to work out themselves
and from your reports and those from Indochina we are led to
feel that both parties have endeavored to keep door open
to some sort of settlement. We appreciate fact that Vietnam
started present fighting in Indochina on December 19 and that
this action has made it more difficult for French to adopt a
position of generosity and conciliation. Nevertheless we
hope that French will find it possible to be more than gener-
ous in trying to find a solution."

The U.S. anxiously followed the vacillations of France's policy
toward Bao Dai, exhorting the French to translate the successive "agree-
ments" they contracted with him into an effective nationalist alternative
to Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh. Increasingly, the U.S. sensed that
French unwillingness to-concede political power to Vietnamese heightened
the possibility of the Franco-Viet Minh conflict being transformed into
a struggle with Soviet imperialism. U.S. diplomats were instructed to
"apply such persuasion and/or pressure as is best calculated /to/ pro-
duce desired result [of France's/ unequivocally and promptly approving
the principle of Viet independence." France was notified that the U.S.
was willing to extend financial aid to a Vietnamese government not a
French puppet, "but could not give consideration of altering its present
policy in this regard unless real progress is/ made in reaching non-
Communist solution in Indochina based on cooperation of true nationalists
of that country."

As of 1948, however, the U.S. remained uncertein that Ho and the
Viet Minh were in league with the Kremlin. A State Department appraisal
of Ho Chi Minh in July 1948, indicated that: ;

"1. Depts info indicates that Ho Chi Minh is Communist.
His long and well-known record in Comintern during twenties
and thirties, continuous support by French Communist news-
paper Humanite since 1945, praise given him by Radio Moscow
(which for past six months has been devoting increasing attention
to Indochina) and fact he has been called "leading communist" by
recent Russian publications as well as Daily Worker makes any
other conclusion appear to be wishful thinking.

"2. Dept has no evidence of direct link between Ho and
Moscow but assumes it exists, nor is it able evaluate amount
pressure or guidance Moscow exerting. We have impression Ho
must be given or is retaining large degree latitude. Dept
considers that USSR accomplishing its immediate aims in Indo-
china by (a) pinning down large numbers of French troops, (b)
causing steady drain upon French economy thereby tending retard
recovery and dissipate ECA assistance to France, and (¢c) denying
to world generally surpluses which Indochina normally has avail-
able thus perpetuating conditions of disorder and shortages

A-5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"All men are created equal; they are endowed by their Creator
with certain unalienable Rights; among these are Life, Liberty,
and the pursuit of Happiness.

"This immortal statement was made in the Declaration of
Independence of the United States of America in 1776. In a broader
sense, this means: All the peoples on the earth are equal from
birth, all the peoples have a right to live, to be happy and free.

"The Declaration of the French Revolution made in 1791 on
the Rights of Man and the Citizen also states: 'All men are
born free and with equal rights, and must always remain free and
have equal rights.'

"Those are undeniable truths.

"Nevertheless, for more than eighty years, the French imperi-
alists, abusing the standard of Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity,
have violated our Fatherland and oppressed our fellow citizens.
They have acted contrary to the ideals of humanity and justice.

"In the field of politics, they have deprived our people of
every democratic liberty.

"They have enforced inhuman laws; they have set up three
distinct political regimes in the North, the Center, and the
South of Viet-Nam in order to wreck our national unity and pre-
vent our people from being united.

"They have built more prisons than schools. They have
mercilessly slain our patriots; they have drowned our uprisings
in rivers of blood.

"They have fettered public opinion; they have practiced
obscurantism against our people.

"To weaken our race they have forced us to use Opium and
alcohol.

"In the field of economics, they have fleeced us to the
backbone, impoverished our people and devastated our land.

"They have robbed us of our rice fields, our mines, our
forests, and our raw materials. They have monopolized the issu-
ing of bank notes and the export trade.

"They have invented numerous unjustifiable taxes and reduced

our people, especially our peasantry, to a state of extreme
poverty.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-34
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"They have hampered the prospering of our national bourgeoisie;
they have mercilessly exploited our workers.

"In the autumn of 1940, when the Japanese fascists violated
Indochina's territory to establish new bases in their fight against
the Allies, the French imperialists went down on their bended
knees and handed over our country to them.

"Thus, from that date, our people were subjected to the
double yoke of the French and the Japanese. Their sufferings
and miseries increased. The result was that, from the end of
last year to the beginning of this year, from Quang Tri Province
to the North of Viet-Nam, more than two million of our fellow
citizens died from starvation. On March 9 fous, the French
troops were disarmed by the Japanese. The French colonialists
either fled or surrendered, showing that not only were they in-
capable of "protecting" us, but that, in the span of five years,
they had twice sold our country to the Japanese.

"On several occasions before March 9, the Viet Minh League
urged the French to ally themselves with it against the Japanese.
Instead of agreeing to this proposal, the French colonialists
so intensified their terrorist activities against the Viet Minh
members that before fleeing they massacred @ great number of
our political prisoners detained at Yen Bay and Cao Bang.

"Notwithstanding 211 this, our fellow citizens have always
manifested toward the French a tolerant and humane attitude.
Even after the Japanese Putsch of March, 19115, the Viet Minh
League helped many Frenchmen to cross the frontier, rescued
some of them from Japanese jails, and protected French lives
and property.

"From the autumn of 1940, our country had in fact ceased
to be a French colony and had become a Japanese possession. +

"After the Japanese had surrendered to the Allies, our whole
people rose to regain our national sovereignty and to found the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.

"The truth is that we have wrested our independence from
the Japanese and not from the French.

"The French have fled, the Japanese have capitulated,
Emperor Bao Dai has abdicated. Our people have broken the chains
which for nearly a century have fettered them and have won inde-
pendence for the Fatherland. Our people at the same time have
overthrown the monarchic regime that has reigned supreme for
dozens of centuries. In its place has been established the
present Democratic Republic.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-35
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"For these reasons, we, members of the Provisional Government,
representing the whole Vietnamese people, declare that from now
on we break off all relations of a colonial character with France};
we repeal all the international obligation that France has so far
subscribed to on behalf of Viet-Nam, and we abolish all the special
rights the French have unlawfully acquired in our Fatherland.

"The whole Vietnamese people, animated by a common purpose,
are determined to fight to the bitter end against any attempt
by the French colonialists to reconquer their country.

"We are convinced that the Allied nations, which at Teheran
and San Francisco have acknowledged the principles of self-
determination and equality of nations, will not refuse to ac-
knowledge the independence of Viet-Nam.

"A people who have courageously opposed French domination
for more than eighty years, a people who have fought side by
side with the Allies against the fascists during these last
years, such a people must be free and independent.

“For these reasons, we, members of the Provisional Govern-
ment of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, solemnly declare
to the world thatViet-Nam has the right to be a free and indepen-
dent country -- and in fact it is so already. The entire Viet-
namese people are determined to mobilize all their physical and
mental strength, to sacrifice their lives and property in order
to safeguard their independence and liberty." 34/

b. Short-lived Independence in Cochinchina

September 2, 1945, found South Vietnam in profound political
disorder. The successive collapse of French, then Japanese power, followed
by the dissension among the political factions in Saigon had been accom-
panied by widespread violence in the countryside. The Cao Dai set up 4
state at Tay Ninh; the Hoa Hao established a capital in Can Tho; jacquerie
flared, and a number of rural officials and landlords were murdered. On
September 2, violence in Saigon took the lives of a French priest on the
threshold of the Cathedral, several other French, and a number of Vietnamese;
French homes were sacked, and an atmosphere of fear-ridden tension descended
upon the city.

On 12|Septentber 1945, the first British troops arrived in Saigon --
a Gurkha battalion; they were accompanied by a company of Free French soldiers.
General Douglas D. Gracey, commanding, arrived on 13 September. Prior to
his departure from India, Gracey had announced that:

"The question of the government of Indochina is exclusively
French. Civil and military control by the French is only a matter
of weeks." 35/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-36
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It appears that Gracey's instructions from the Allied Command in Southeast
Asia explicitly limited his mission to the disarming of the Japanese, and
certainly did not require him to undertake revision of the Vietnamese
political system. 36) But in fact, General Gracey used his troops and
his position to overturn the Committee of the South, Neither communism nor
Viet nationalism seems to have concerned the British commander. On

10 September, the Viet Minh had accepted a reorganization of the Committee
of the South in which Tran Van Giau was replaced as Chairman by Phan Van
Bach, @ prominent independent nationalist, and ICP members occupied only
four of thirteen Committee seats. Gracey apparently regarded the Viet-
namese government with disdain, if not contempt, not because of its
political complexion, but because of its lack of authority from the French,
and because of the civil disorder over which it presided. The British
commander ordered the Japanese to assist in maintaining order, and directed
the disarming of Vietnamese; both directives were ignored, but added to
the mounting tension.

The attitude of the occupation forces reinforced the position of the
Trotskyites who had denounced the Viet Minh, the ICP, and the Committee
of the South as a “bourgeois-democratic government, even though the com-
munists are now in power," and decried any attempts to cooperate with the
Allies. The Trotskyite International Communist League called for the arm-
ing of the people, and incited the populace against the British. Beginning
on 12 September, the Vietnamese police in Saigon launched a violent cam-
paign to suppress the Trotskyites, in which many Trotskyite leaders were
killed. In the rural areas, fighting broke out between Viet Minh troops
and the forces of the Cao Dai and the Hoa Hao. The spreading intra-Viet
violence rendered futile further attempts to draw together the Vietnamese
factions, and heightened apprehension among Westerners in Saigon.

On 17 September 1945, the Committee of the South called a general
strike to protest the Allied lack of cooperation, and arrested some sixteen
French. The French then importuned Gracey to permit them to step in to
restore order. On 19 September, the French "Commissioner" for Cochinchina,
Cedile, announced that there would be no negotiations with Vietnamese
nationalists until civil order was restored. On 20 September, General
Gracey suspended all Vietnamese newspapers, and took over the Vietnamese
police force. On 21 September, martial law was declared, outlawing all
demonstrations, and the bearing by Vietnamese of any weapon whatsoever,
including bamboo rods. On 22 September, the British freed some 1400 French
parachutists that had been incarcerated outside Saigon by the Japanese,
and these promptly descended on the city to beat Vietnamese wherever they
could lay their hands on them. On the morning of 23 September, French
troops occupied the police stations, the post office, and other public
buildings, and began to arrest Vietnamese politicians and public officials,
although members of the Committee of the South escaped. The official British
account noted that:

"T+ was indeed unfortunate that the manner in which this
coup d'etat was executed together with the behavior of the

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-37
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

French citizens during the morning of Sunday, 23 September,
absolutely ensured that countermeasures would be taken by the
Annamites [Vietnamese/. The more emotional of the French
citizens, who, after all, had suffered considerably at the hands
of the Annamites during the past few months, unfortunately took
this opportunity of taking what reprisals they could. Annamites
were arrested for no other reason than that they were Annamites;
their treatment after arrest, though not actively brutal, was
unnecessarily violent." 37/

The following day, the Vietnamese struck back: the economic life of
Saigon was paralyzed by strikes, and that night groups of Vietnamese --
principally a gangster sect called the Binh Xuyen -- began a series of
attacks on municipal utilities. On 25 September, in an assault through
a French residential district, over one hundred Westerners were killed,
and others carried off as hostages; on 26 September, the U.S. commander
-of the 0.8.5. in Cochinchina was killed. Thus, the Indochina War began
in Cochinchina in late September, 1945, and American blood was shed in
its opening hours.

The Committee of the South issued a statement deploring the British
actions:

"Suppression of the press, which was unanimously defending
the independence of Vietnam, prevented us...from controlling
and directing public opinion at a time when the mob was already
exasperated by provocations of the French...The British Army,
to accomplish its mission of disarming the Japanese forces, had
no need to disarm our police force and suppress our government
as it did. Yet we have demonstrated by our actions that our
government is most cordial in its desire to lend every possible
assistance to the British Army in the accomplishment of its
task." 38/

At that juncture, the ICP in Cochinchina was in a particularly vulntra-
ble position. The ICP -- the core of the Viet Minh -- had permitted the
Independence League to pose as the arm of the Allies, and had supported
cooperation with the British and amnesty for the French. The Party had
even undertaken, through the Committee of the South, to repress the Trot-
skyites. It was apparent that advocacy of political moderation, public
order, and negotiations with the French -- by the ICP, by the Viet Minh,
or by the Committee of the South -- was quite futile. Further, the ICP
was apparently assured by French communists that they would received no
assistance from Party brethren abroad. An American correspondent in
Saigon was shown a document dated 25 September 1945, which:

",,.advised the Annamite /Vietnamese/ Commmmists to be sure,
before they acted too rashly, that their struggle 'meets. the

requirements of Soviet policy." It warned that any 'premature
adventures' in Annamite independence might "not be in line with

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-38
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Soviet perspectives.' These perspectives might well include
France as a firm ally of the USSR in Europe, in which case the
Annamite independence movement would be an embarrassment. There-
fore, it urged upon the Annamite comrades a policy of 'patience.'
It advised them in particular to wait upon the results of the
French elections, coming up the following month, in October,
when additional Communist strength might assure the Annamites

a better settlement. In the meantime, it baldly proposed that
an emissary be sent not only to contact the French Communist
Party but also the Russians ‘in order to acquaint yourselves
with the perspectives of coming event.'" 39/

Whether the circumstances were propitious or not, conflict had been |
thrust upon the Vietnamese of Cochinchina. The question before the com-
munists there was how to respond, and apparently the Partly leadership
determined that violence was the sole recourse, and that to regain leader-
ship of the nationalist movement they had to make the Viet Minh the fore-
most proponent of war, the most unbending foe of compromise with the French.
General Gracey, on the urgings of Admiral Lord Mountbatten's Allied Command,
made a determined effort to effect a compromise with the Viet Minh, and
succeeded in obtaining a truce on 2 October. But this broke down quickly
in the face of truculence on both sides. French reinforcements under
General Leclere began pouring into Saigon, bolstering French resolve.

A representative from Ho's Hanoi government arrived to buttress the Viet
Minh's position with tales of Viet Minh ascendancy in Annam and Tonkin.
The French sought to negotiate on the premise that they would rule, and
allow some Viet participation; the Viet Minh demanded return to the status
guo prior to 22 September, and eventual French evacuation. On October 9,
1945, France and the U.K. concluded an agreement in London in which the
British formally recognized the French civil administration in Indochina
as the sole legitimate authority south of the sixteenth parallel. Foreign
Minister Ernest Bevin described to the House of Commons of Vietnamese
disorder and looting, and of the difficulties presented by clashes between
French troops under Gracey's command and Vietnamese forces. Britain, he
announced, would assist in transporting to Vietnam enough French troops

to permit them to take over from Gracey, and that in the interim British
policy would support “close and friendly cooperation between the British -
and French commanders." 40/ On 11 October, the truce broke down, and
fighting resumed. On 25 October, the French under General Leclerc thrust
southward from Saigon to My Tho, the temporary capital of the Committee

of the South, and, victorious there, to the northwest into Tay Ninh, where
they subdued the Cao Dai. The Viet Minh opened a guerrilla campaign which
greatly slowed the French, and demonstrated almost at once that neither
French air power nor armor would suffice for pacification against that
determined foe. The eminent French journalist, Philippe Devillers, who
accompanied Leclerc's initial forays, wrote that:

"From this time on the work of pacifying the country re-
vealed an aspect it would never lose again; to be forever put
in question. The Viet Minh would suddenly start shooting at
night at a village protected by one of our posts...to pull

B-39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

defenders to one side while on the other set fire to the houses
and killed allsuspicious persons. If we departed, believing

a region pacified, they would arrive on our heels and the terror
would start again. There was only one possible defense: to
multiply the posts, to fortify them, to arm the villagers, and
to train them for a coordinated and enlightened self-defense
through a thorough job of information and policing.

"But this required men and weapons. What was needed was
not 35,000 men (of which Leclerc was then disposed) but 100,000,
and Cochinchina was not the only problem.” 41/

c. Nationalist Government in North Vietnam, 1945-1946
(1) The Government of 2 September 195

The salient problem other than Cochinchina facing the
French in the fall of 1945 was the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. The
Hanoi government of Ho Chi Minh claimed dominion over all of Vietnam,
but as far as French challenge to its authority was concerned, ruled in
fact only in Annam and Tonkin. The DRV was neither wholly Viet Minh nor
communist composition. Despite the vigor and initiative of the Viet Minh,
the salient political fact of life in North Vietnam was Chinese Nationalist
army of occupation, and the Chinese presence had forced Ho Chi Minh and
the Viet Minh to accommodate Chinese-backed Viet Nationalists, and defer
to Chinese policy in other respects.

The numbers of Chinese who entered North Vietnam is not known precisely,
the totals having been obscured not only by inadequate reports, but by
the Nationalists' use of Tonkin for passage of troops from Yunnan and
Kwangsi en route to other parts of China. French estimates ran as high
as 180,000, but the Chinese occupation forces per se probably numbered
about 50,000. he/ Even fewer foreign troops would have gravely overbur-
dened North Vietnam, where because of a bad crop year, and war-disturbed
commerce, famine was rampant. Most of the Chinese troops were ill-
disciplined and poorly-equipped, living, perforce, off the land. Their
exactions of the peasantry stirred the traditional animosities of the
Vietnamese for the Chinese -- resentments untempered by gratitude to the
Chinese as liberators, since the Vietnamese believed they had already
been liberated by the Viet Minh. And the transgressions of the Chinese
troops were matched by the Chinese high command; the warlords promptly be-
gan to plunder North Vietnam. The Chinese dollar was made legal tender
at an exorbitant rate of exchange with the Vietnamese piastre, which
exacerbated an already serious inflation, and opened new vistas for the
black market. Chinese profiteers began large scale buying of French and
Vietnamese enterprises and real estate. 43/

As the Chinese forces marched into North Vietnam, they ousted local
Viet Minh governments, and replaced them with VNQDD, and Dong Minh Hoi
groups; Phuc-Quoc (Restoration League ) groups seized power elsewhere.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-L0
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Backed by Chinese troops, and drawing on Chinese funds, the VNQDD and the
Dong Minh Hoi opened newspapers, and launched a political campaign against
the Viet Minh and the DRV government. The resultant situation in North
Vietnam in autumn, 1945, is depicted in Figure }.

A

eae
C 2 a
ay gon MASONS cao as tae NORTH
eS 3 VIETNAM
> 4
LAIGHAU

A
(yc DIEN BIEN PHU
%

t
eae

—=__|ZONES HELD BY THE VIET-MINH

COM ZONES HELD BY THE PHUC-Quéc

EZZAZONES HELD BY THE DONG-MINH-HOI

ZONES HELD BY THE V.N.Q.0.D.

[—JLOGAL NEUTRAL ADMINISTRATION
H¢ Chinese Nationalist Garrisons

Map of the political situation in North Vietnam in September—October 1945.

Source: Cooper,Killigrew, and LaCharite',
Case Studies in Insurgency and

. Revolutionary Warfare: Vietnam
1941-1954 (Washington:SORO 31964 )>

FIGURE

ol! TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The realities of the Chinese presence alone required Ho Chi Minh to
use circumspection in dealing with rival nationalist groups. Why the
Chinese did not follow through, and simply oust Ho's government in favor
of a VNQDD/Dong Minh Hoi coalition is not known. It appears that venality
played a part -- Chiang Fa Kuei and other warlords were direct benefici-
aries of an official DRV "gold week" in September, 1945, in which the state
appealed to the citizenry for scraps of gold as "a contribution to the
finance of national defense." 4/ Allegedly this campaign produced some
800 pounds of gold and 20 million piastres, and for it the DRV received
from the warloards, besides toleration, weapons the Japanese had in their
possession -- a reported 40,000 arms, including mortars, artillery pieces,
and 18 tanks. 45/

But Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh were constrained to go well beyond
bribery. In setting up the government of 2 September 1945, they had been
carefuly to include non-Viet Minh politicians, and to hold ICP representa-
‘tion to 6 to 16 cabinet seats. On 23 October, the Viet Minh signed a pact
with a dissident faction of the Dong Minh Hoi, purportedly in the interest
of the "common struggle against the aggressive attempts of the colonial
French, in order to defend the liberty and independence of the Democratic
Republic of Vietnam." 46/ But other elements of the Dong Minh Hoi and
the VNQDD persisted in their attack on the Viet Minh, making a particular
point of communist domination.

Ho Chi Minh and the ICP then decided on a drastic move. Following
a three day ICP conclave of 9 to 11 November, 1945, the IcP leadership
issued the following declaration:

"1. Whereas, in consideration of the given historical
situation, both internationally and internally, the present
moment is precisely an exceptional occasion for Viet Nam to
reconquer her unitary independence;

"2. Whereas, in order to complete the Party's task in this
immense movement of the Vietnamese people's emanicipation, a
national union conceived without distinction of class and parties
is an indispenseble factor;

"3, Wishing to prove that the communists, in so far as
they are advance guard militants of the Vietnamese people, are
always ready to make the greatest sacrifices for national
liberation, are always disposed to put the interest of the
‘country above that of classes, and to give up the interests
of the Party to serve those of the Vietnamese people;

"h. In order to destroy all misunderstandings, domestic
and foreign, which can hinder the liberation of our country,
the Central Executive Committee of the Indochina Communist
Party in meeting assembled on November 11, 1945, has decided
to voluntarily dissolve the Indochina Communist Party.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-2
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

which favorable to growth communism. Furthermore, Ho seems
quite capable of retaining and even strengthening his grip

on Indochina with no outside assistance other than continuing
procession of French puppet govts."

In the fall of 1948, the Office of Intelligence Research in the Depart-
ment of State conducted a survey of communist influence in Southeast
Asia. Evidence of Kremlin-directed conspiracy was found in virtually
all countries except Vietnam:

."Since December 19, 1946, there have been continuous
conflicts between French forces and the nationalist govern-
ment of Vietnam. This government is a coalition in which
avowed communists hold influential positions. Although the
French admit the influence of this government, they have
consistently refused to deal with its leader, Ho Chi Minh,
on the grounds that he is a communist.

"To date the Vietnam press and radio have not adopted an
anti-American position. It is rather the French colonial
press that has been strongly anti-American and has freely
accused the U.S. of imperialism in Indochina to the point of
approximating the official Moscow position. Although the
Vietnam radio has been closely watched for a new position
toward the U.S., no change has appeared so far. Nor does there
seem to have been any split within the coalition government of
Vietnam....

"Evaluation. If there is a Moscow-directed conspiracy
in Southeast Asia, Indochina is an anomoly so far. Possible
explanations are:

1. No rigid directives have been issued by Moscow.

2. The Vietnam government considers that it has no
rightest elements that must be purged.

3. The Vietnam Communists are not subservient to
the foreign policies pursued by Moscow.

4. A special dispensation for the Vietnam government
has been arranged in Moscow.

"Of these possibilities, the first and fourth seem most likely."
(Tab 2).
The collapse of the Chinese Nationalist government in 1949 sharp-

ened American apprehensions over communist expansion in the Far East,
and hastened U.S. measures to counter the threat posed by Mao's China.

A-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Those followers of communism desirous of continuing their
theoretical studies will affiliate with the Indochina Association
of Marxist Studies.

CENTRAL COMMITTEE INDOCHINA COMMUNIST PARTY
November 11, 1945" 47/

The dissolution of the ICP was opposed by Tran Van Giauv and others from
Cochinchina, where the ICP rather than the Viet Minh, as such, had con-
stituted the primary political organization among the people, but Ho's
views prevailed.

Evidently Ho was also compelled by the opposition's constant demands
for representation in the government to schedule national elections for
January, 1946. However, fearful of Viet Minh control of the polls, and
respectful of its popular strength, the VNQDD and the Dong Minh Hoi on
23 December, 1945, negotiated with the Viet Minh an agreement to seat,
irrespective of the vote, 50 VNQDD and 20 Dong Minh Hoi delegates among
some 300-360 members of the National Assembly. 48/ the elections were
held as scheduled, openly in Tonkin and Annam, and clandestinely in
Cochinchina .

The chief of the American 0.5.8. group in Hanoi from 22 August to
12 December, 1945, in a debriefing in the Department of State on 30 Janu-
ary 1916, Segevibed the political situation in North Vietnam as follows:

"General Gallagher pointed out that little love was lost
between the Chinese and the French; that the presence of the
American group in Hanoi restrained anti-French Chinese action;
and that he himself had influenced General Iu Han (Commanding
General of Chinese armed forces in Indochina) to bring Sainteny
and Ho Chi Minh together and confront both with a strong direc-
tive that order must be maintained. The existence of a vacuum in
the north with neither French nor Chinese troops present would
be extremely dangerous, for the Annamese would react strongly
against all French in the area, who would be helpless in protecting
themselves. To take over successfully, the French would need a
sufficient force to cover the whole north. One or two modern
French divisions could, in General Gallagher's opinion, defeat
the Annamese.

"In response to the question whether the French could do more
than take key cities, he admitted that the Annamese would take to
the hills and continue guerrilla warfare. Even in Saigon, he
pointed out, things are far from peaceful despite British and
French claims to the contrary. Establishment of French control
could be speeded up if they were able to make large-scale air
drops throughout the north. The Annamese, however, are well
organized and, so far as small arms go, are quite well armed,
although they have no navy, shore batteries and probably little
artillery.

TOP SECRET -— Sensitive
Bel3 ea
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"The question was raised whether the French mission in Hanoi
was in fact negotiating with Ho Chi Minh. General Gallagher
replied that the Viet Minh Provisional Government was at first
willing to negotiate; then in October, after de Gaulle's pro-
nouncements on colonial policy, the Annamese refused to negotiate
with the French and reacted vigorously against all French nationals
in Hanoi. The Chinese may succeed in putting in a less anti-
French Annamese government so that negotiation might go forward.
All French efforts to stimulate a palace revolution against Ho
were of no avail. Ho himself will not deal with the French. The
Viet Minh is strong and, regardless of possible superficial changes
in the Provisional Government, Ho will be behind any continuing
Annamese movement. General Gallagher said that Sainteny had told
him he expected peaceful agreement between the French and the
Annamese would be reached by negotiation.

"General Gallagher was asked how effective the Viet Minh admin-
istration would be with neither French nor Chinese forces present.
He replied that on the whole he was impressed by the remarkably
effective Annamese administration. There was an able personnel;
they were all enthusiastic and young, but there were too few of
them. Whatever their technical skill, they perhaps lack executive
ability and experience since the technical services in Hanoi were
at first very well rum but gradually deteriorated. Trained people
for the government and at the municipal level are lacking. In
General Gallagher's opinion the Annamese are not yet ready for
self-government and in full-fledged competition with other nations
they would ‘lost their shirts.' However, the demand for inde-
pendence is widespread and even in the villages the peasants refer
to the example of the Philippines.

"Ho is willing to cooperate with Great Britain, USSR, or the
United States and would perhaps even settle for French tutelage if
that were subordinated to control by the other nations. French y
control alone, however, will be strongly resisted. The deep-seated
hatred for the French has been fanned by exceedingly clever Viet
Minh propaganda.

"General Gallagher was asked whether the Annamese were realistic
regarding their ability to stand up against French military force.
While they are too enthusiastic and too naive, he said, they prob-
ably know that they will be licked. They are strong on parades
and reiterate their willingness 'to fight to the last man,’ but
they would be slaughtered and they have been told that and probably
know it. The Annamese would be no match for forces with modern
arms even if they themselves have some, which they may have since
the Chinese found no Japanese rolling artillery and numerous Japanese
anti-aircraft guns seem to have completely disappeared. United States
Army representatives never did learn the extent of arms controlled
by the Viet Minh. Certainly the Chinese are not turning Japanese
arms over to them. Before V-J Day the Japanese undoubtedly had

B-y TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

armed and trained many Annamese. A Japanese general claimed

they had taken over on March 9 simply because the French could

no longer control the Annamese, but this statement General
Gallagher characterized as a lie. He had heard that under the
pretext of arming Annamese gendarmes for police duty in Hanoi,

the Japanese had actually armed three distinct contingents, dis-
missing each group when armed and bringing in a new one to be

armed and trained. Furthermore, the Annamese had acquired Japanese
arms from arsenals which had been opened. General Gallagher did not
know whether or not Tai Li (Deputy Director, Bureau of Investigation
and Statistics, Chinese National Commission of Military Affairs) was
sending arms to the Viet Minh.

"General Gallagher was asked whether the presence of French
hostages in the north would restrain French forces when they enter
the region. He pointed out that only a few French civilians had
been removed by air. All the rest, besides some five thousand
disarmed French troops, were still to be removed. The Chinese can-
not take them out nor would Iu Han even permit their evacuation to
the Do Son Peninsula. Their presence had been a constant restraining
influence on Sainteny. Asked whether the Annamese would let these
French be evacuated, General Gallagher replied that they would have
to if the Chinese were still there, but that these French nationals
would be a real problem if the Chinese were moved out. ‘The American
Army group had to exert considerable pressure on the Chinese to get
them to give any freedom at all to French civilians in Haiphong,

Hué and other centers besides Hanoi. However, the Chinese and French
alone had arranged for shipments of food from the south. The Ameri-
can group, incidentally, had to intervene to prevent the monopoly

by the French of such food or of food distributed by the U.S. Amy.
The French nationals could be evacuated from Hongai and Tourane by
the United States when the Japanese were removed if the Chinese

would concentrate them at those ports. However, General Gallagher
noted, that would place us in 4a position of working against the
Annamese «

"Originally, General Gallagher explained, the French expected
the United States to play the same role in the north that the British
were playing in the south. When they found us neutral they became
more and more antagonistic and did everything possible to persuade
United States personnel to favor the French position. They had no
appreciation of the actual help which the American group gave to
the prisoners. of war and some of the civilian French in the form of
food, medical aid, and so on. The Annamese, too, expected American
help originally, having been thoroughly indoctrinated with the
Atlantic Charter and other ideological pronouncements. In our neutral
role we were thus a disappointment to both sides....

"At the present time the Hanoi radio is controlled by the Chinese
so that there is communication between Hanoi and Saigon. A British

B-45- TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

military and civilian liaison team was sent to Hanoi and a
Chinese counterpart to Saigon. The British in Hanoi at first
made little progress with the Chinese but General Gallagher
understands they have since made more headway.

"The Chinese 60th Army in the south of the Chinese zone and
the 93rd Army around Hanoi, both totalling some 50 thousand men,
have been told to concentrate for removal to Manchuria, but whether
they have actually moved out or not General Gallagher does not know.
By December, however, the Chinese 53rd Army had begun to come in
from Yunnan and would probably provide replacements for the other
two Armies.

"General:Gallagher noted that magnetic mines have not been
entirely cleared at least from the northern ports and that the
threat provided by these mines has helped and would continue to
help .keep the French from undertaking large-scale landing opera-
tions in that area. He felt that regular rail communications
between Saigon and Hanoi might not be opened for another year." *

In early 1946, Ho Chi Minh attempted to bring Ngo Dinh Diem into
his government, but Diem, whose brother, Ngo Dinh Khoi, had been killed
by the Viet Minh, refused. In February, attacks on Ho from both the com-
munist left and the non-Viet Minh nationalists reached such intensity
that Ho reportedly proposed his own resignation, and the forming of a
state under Bao Dai. ho/ The Bao Dai substitution, Ho felt, would not
only mollify his internal foes, but improve the DRV's position with the
Americans and French: to the U.S. Ho had sent a series of unanswered
appeals for internationalizing Vietnam; and with the French, Ho had
opened talks trending toward a French-protected, French-recognized, inde-
pendent DRV.

(2) The Government of 2 March 1946

The National Assembly "elected in January met on 2 March
1946, and approved the new DRV government at its opening session. Its
top echelon of 12 contained only @ ICP members, but 3 VNQDD and 1 Dong
Minh Hoi; Ho remained President, but his Vice President was the leader: of
the Dong Minh Hoi, and the key portfolios of Interior and Defense went
to neutrals.

The new government faced at the outset a crisis in relations with
France. Though General Leclerc's “pacification” operations in South Viet-
nam had fallen short of expectations, French troops and shipping had arrived
in Indochina in sufficient quantity for them to contemplate operations in
North Vietnam. Simultaneously, the French undertook negotiations with
the Chinese, seeking to have them relinquish their occupation of North
Vietnam, and with the DRV, seeking to have it accept the reintroduction

* Reproduced from Memorandum of Conversation by Mr. Richard L. Sharp,
of the Division of Southeast Asian Affairs, Department of State,
dated January 30, 1946.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-h6 ee ee
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of French forces. In the meantime, the British withdrew from Cochinchina;
on 4 March 1946, the Allied Southeast Asia Command deactivated Indochina
as a territory within its purview. In February, the French deployed an
amphibious task force prepared for operations in North Vietnam. On

28 February, they obtained Chinese agreement (from Chunking, not the
Chinese satraps in North Vietnam) to turn over the occupation to France
by April. Ho Chi Minh, faced with French military power and Chinese with-
drawal, and denied succor from the United Nations or the U.S., had no re-
course save to negotiate with the French.

The Accord signed by Ho with the French on 6 March, 1946, taxed Ho's
popularity to the utmost. The VNQDD had vehemently opposed compromise, and
even negotiations with the French, but Ho was careful to bring. opposition
representatives into his talks with Sainteny, the French spokesman, and to
see ot it that the March 6 Accord was signed not only by Ho and Sainteny,
but also by Vu Kong Kanh, the leader of the VNQDD. Still, feeling ran
high against the French, and it took all of Ho's prestige to prevent re-
bellion against the Viet Minh. On 7 March, Ho and Vo Nguyen Giap defended
the Accord before a crowd of 100,000 in Hanoi, in which Ho assured his
people that: "You know that I would rather die than sell our country." 50/
On 8 March French troops landed in Haiphong, and re-entered Hanoi ten days
later.

Upon French return -- Ho's coalition cabinet and Vu Kong Kanh's signa-
ture on the March 6 Accord notwithstanding -- a number of VNQDD leaders
withdrew their support of Ho's government in protest against what they
termed a “pro-French" policy of the Viet Minh. The Emperor Bao Dai left
the country on 18 March, the day the French entered Hanoi. Ho, thereupon,
moved to merge the Viet Minh into a larger, more embrasive Front organiza-
tion, which would consolidate the several parties of the DRV, and thereby
ease political stress. On 27 May 1946, the formation of the Popular National
Front (Lien Hiep Quoe Dan Viet Nam) ~- subsequently known as the Lien Viet --
was announced, to bring about "independence and democracy." Prominent leaders
of all political parties were among the founders, and they jointly pledged
"to safeguard our autonomy, so as to later attain complete independence.” 51/
The Viet Minh, VNQDD, the Dong Minh Hoi, the Socialist Party and the Demo-
cratic Party were all roofed under the Lien Viet, but maintained separate
organizations.

(3) Chinese Withdrawal

Agreement among the several parties in the Lien Viet
lived, however, only so long as the Chinese remained in North Vietnam.
Despite Chungking's contract to withdraw by April,1946, the warlords
lingered at their looting into June. On June 10, 1946, Chinese Nationalist
troops evacuated Hanoi, and on June 15, the last detachments embarked at
Haiphong. On June 19, the official Lien Viet organ Qui Quoc published
a sharp rebuke of "reactionary saboteurs of the March agreement," pointedly
directed at the VNQDD. Reaffirming a policy of cooperation with France,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-L7
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Vietnamese government invited the French to join in a campaign
against "enemies of the peace." The French, recognizing in the Lien
Viet their sole Vietnamese support, willingly acceded.

One of the more remarkable chapters in the tragic history of Viet-
namese nationalism then ensued. On the heels of the withdrawing Chinese,
Vo Nguyen Giap's DRV troops struck into the regions governed by the
Dong Minh Hoi, VNQDD, and Phuc Quoc. In a series of skirmishes, they
routed the partisan bands, and overturned the civil administrations of
the opposition parties. The French not only provided equipment, but in
some instances actually maneuvered their own forces with, and furnished
artillery support for, the Vietnamese. Some strongholds held out for
months -- Jao Kay on the Yunnan border remained in VN@DD hands until
November, 1946 -~- but the issue was decided before the end of July. 52/

On July 11 to 13, in a series of raids in Hanoi, DRV forces with
French armor in support occupied the opposition party headquarters and
printing plants, and arrested over 100 political figures. With that,
most of the opposition leaders returned to exile in China whence they
had come less than a year before. Among these were Nguyen Hai Than of
the Dong Minh Hoi -- Ho's Vice President -- and Vu Khong Kanh and Nguyen
Tuong of the VNQDD -~- the former one of the three signatories of the
March 6 Accord, the latter Ho's Minister of foreign Affairs and one of
the negotiators of the Accord.

The U.S. Vice Consul in Hanoi submitted the following report to the
Department of State concerning the political situation at that juncture:

"Please pass to General Marshall for information.
"There are three important political parties in Viet Nam.

"They are Viet Minh League, composed of former Indo-Chinese
Comunist Party (PCI dissolved itself November 30, 1945) ana
Democratic Party, son [sic] Vietnam Cach Menh Dong Minh Hoi,
generally referred to as Dong Minh Hoi or DMH; and Vietnam Quoc
Dan Dang.

"There are in addition several splinter parties which seem to

serve chiefly as vehicles for organized banditry.
| ,

"Both Dong Minh Hoi and Quoc Dan Dang seem have support of
Chinese. Most active part of Viet Minh is factor composed of
former, PCI members.

|

“Viet Minh strength seems to be spread throughout northern

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-18
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Indo-China. Dong Minh Hoi and Quoc Dan Dang control territory
in Moneay, Langson, Vinh Yen area.

"As yet no Catholic party has appeared nor do Catholics
appear to be committed to support of any one party. Viet Minh
league has been making tentative moves to capture Catholic
support but is said to be too radical to obtain full coopera-
tion from church. In view of fact church claims million mem-
bers in Tonking and Annam (large percentage believed to be
'rice Christians'), it seems probable that Catholics as group
will [not2/ remain long absent from politics." *

In July, the same. source reported that Viet Minh was steadily eliminating
the Dong Minh Hoi and VNQDD as organized opposition. **

: Ho Chi Minh was absent from Vietnam during the summer and early
fall of 1946, engaged first by the abortive Fontainebleau negotiations
and then by their aftermath, the modus vivendi he signed with France
on 14 September 1946. During Ho's absence, Vo Nguyen Giap -- Acting
Minister of the Interior and Minister of National Defense -- policed
the Vietnamese political battlefield, arranging for the VNQDD and
other "opposition" parties to survive -- suitably disarmed and manned
with cooperative nationalists -- within the Lien Viet. The Lien Viet
proceeded to forge new "unity" within the Front, and to tighten Front
control over the DRV. On Ho's return, the National Assembly was called
back into session, presented with a reorganized government and a new

constitution.

(4) The Government of 3 November 1946
The National Assembly elected in January, 1946 -- in
dubiously honest elections -- convened in Hanoi in late October. Of

the original membership, 291 delegates presented themselves. The con-
position at opening was as follows:

* Telegram, Hanoi 20 to State, 20 May 1946

** Telegram, Hanoi 69 to State, 26 July 1946

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-4.9 a
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DRV
Political Parties in the DRV National Assembly 53/
October 28, 1916 eS
Independents 90
Democratic hs
Socialist ey
Marxist 5
Lien Viet 80
Dong Minh Hoi 17
VNQDD 20

291

The VNQDD and the Dong Minh Hoi, allocated 50 and 20 seats respec-
tively, were thus less than 50% represented, and the Marxists group, the
smallest in the Assembly, was, according to all surviving evidence, the
most active and influential. During the two weeks the Assembly was in
session, a number of opposition members were arrested and charged with
criminal offenses. When the Assembly closed, 20 Dong Minh Hoi and VNQDD
members remained, and of these, only 2 registered dissenting votes.

The new constitution, ratified on 8 November 1946 by the National
Assembly with a vote of 240 to 2, ordained in phrases reminiscent of
Jefferson and Rousseau a state of guaranteed civic freedoms, of delineated
duties and rights of citizens, and of a people's parliament supreme in
power. Thereafter, the Assembly adjourned until late 1953, and never
did get around to transforming itself into constitutionally prescribed
form. 5h/ The 1946 Constitution declared Vietnam to be a democratic
republic in which all power belonged to the people "without distinction
of race, class, creed, wealth, or sex." Its territory, "composed of Bac-
Bo, or Northern Viet Nam (Tonkin), Trung-Bo or Central Viet Nam (Annam),
and Nam-Bo or Southern Viet Nam (Cochinchina) is one and indivisible...
The capital of Viet Nam is Hanoi." 55/ However, the Constitution of
1946 never became institutionalized; instead, the exigencies of the war
with the French eventuated in a government which was literally an adminis-
trative extension of 4 rigidly disciplined politico-military apparatus
headed by Ho Chi Minh, and a cadre of his old comrades from the Indochina
Communist Party. 56/

The government approved by the National Assembly on 3 November 196,
however, preserved some of the facade of coalition; although the key cabi-
net positions were filled by communists, the government included indepen-
dents, democrats, socialists and even one nominal VNQDD. Figure 5 presents
the several Vietnamese governments in the period 1945-1949. Ho Chi Minh
throughout that period preserved coalition, at least pro forma; the DRV
government in 1949 was still composed of a minority of ICP members and
included one VNQDD and one Dong Minh Hoi. (The chart ignores the Lien
Viet, using the more familiar Viet Minh throughout; the Vietnamese
Nationalist Party is the VNQDD. )

TOP SECRET -— Sensitive
B-50
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

VIEVHAMESE GOVERIMENTS 1945 ~ 194
Date Cabinet ;
Government Established Capital Composition Title Incundent Party
State of 10 March 1945 HUE Not Prime MinisterTran Trong Kim Conservative
Vietnam Available . Nationalist
{ ¥a0 Iai, Emperor, abdicated on 26 August 1945 in favor of the Democratic
Republic of Vietnam
People's 16 August 1945 Hanoi 12 Viet Minh
liberation (6 IcP) Not Available
Committee 2 VN Democratic
Farty
{[ Superceded by Prov Gov't IRV, 2 September 1945 7
Provisional 25 Auguet 1945 Saigon 6 Viet Minh Chairman Tran Van Glau ICP
Executive (4 IcP)
Committee of 1 VN Democratic
the Southern Party
Vietnam 2 Non-party
Republic 1 National
Independence
Party
[ Overthrown by French Coup d'etat 23 September 1945
Provisions], 2 Sep 1945 Hanol. 9 Viet Minh President Ho Chi Minh Communist-Viet Minh
Gov't of 6 Icp) Minister of Ho chi, Minh Conmunist-Viet Minh
the Democratic 4 VN Democratic Foreign Affairs
Republic of Party Minister of Vo nguyen Giap Communist-Viet Minh.
Vietnam 1 Catholic Interior
i 2 Non-Party Minister of Tran huy Iieu Comminist-Viet Minh
2 r Propaganda
i Superceded by
LG Minister of Chu van Tan Viet Minh
GONE EI /2 René: 19KC_) National
Defense
Minister of Duong duc Hion Democrat
Youth
Minister of Nguyen manh Ha Catholic
National
Economy
Minister of Nguyen van To Non-party
Social Welfare
Minister of Vu trong Khanh Democrat ¥
Justice
Minister of Pham ngoc Thach Viet Minh
Health
Minister of Tao trong Kin Non-party
Public Works &
Commnications :
Minister of le van Hien Commnist-Viet Minh
Labor
Minister of Pham van Dong Communist-Viet Minh
Finance
Minister of Vu dinh Hoe Democrat
National
Education
Minister with- q) ron
out Portfolio = —*
Minister with- Nguyen van Xuan Viet Minh
out Portfolio
Government Jk Feb 1946 Seigon French Consultative
of South 8 Vietnamese Couneil of
Vietnam Cochinchina

BS.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The U.S. sought to create and employ policy instruments similar to those
it was bringing into play against the Soviets in Europe: collective
security organizations, economic aid, and military assistance. For
example, Congress, in the opening paragraphs of the law it passed in
1949 to establish the first comprehensive military assistance progran,
expressed itself "as favoring the creation by the free countries and

the free peoples of the Far East of a joint organization, consistent

with the Charter of the United Nations, to establish a program of self-
help and mutual cooperation designed to develop their economic and social
well-being, to safeguard basic rights and liberties, and to protect their
security and independence...." But, the negotiating of such an organiza-
tion among the disparate powers and political entities of the Far Fast was
inherently more complex a matter than the North Atlantic Treaty nations
had successfully faced. The U.S. decided that the impetus for collective
security in Asia should come from the Asians, but by late 1949, it also
recognized that action was necessary in Indochina. Thus, in the closing
_months of 1949, the course of U.S. policy was set to block further com-
munist expansion in Asia: by collective security if the Asians were
forthcoming; by collaboration with major European allies and commonwealth
nations, if possible; but bilaterally if necessary. On that policy course
lay the Korean War of 1950-1953, the forming of the Southeast Asia Treaty
Organization of 1954, and the progressively deepening U.S. involvement in
Vietnam.

January and February, 1950, were pivotal months. The French took
the first concrete steps toward transferring public administration to Bao
Dai's State of Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh denied the legitimacy of the latter,
proclaiming the DRV as the "only legal government of the Vietnam people,"
and was formally recognized by Peking and Moscow. On 29 January 1950,
the French National Assembly approved legislation granting autonomy to
the State of Vietnam. On February 1, 1950, Secretary of State Acheson
made the following public statement:

"The recognition by the Kremlin of Ho Chi Minh's communist
movement in Indochina comes as a surprise. The Soviet acknowl-
edgment of this movement should remove any illusions as to the ~
‘nationalist’ nature of Ho Chi Minh's aims and reveals Ho in
his true colors as the mortal enemy of native independence in
Indochina.

"Although timed in an effort to cloud the transfer of
sovereignty by France to the legal Governments of Laos, Cam~
bodia and Vietnam, we have every reason to believe that those
legal governments will proceed in their development toward
stable governments representing the true nationalist senti-
ments of more than 20 million peoples of Indochina.

"Brench action in transferring sovereignty to Vietnam,
laos and Cambodia has been in process for some time. Fol-
lowing French ratification, which is expected within a few
days, the way will be open for recognition of these legal

A-7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Inte Cabinet.

Government Established Capital Composition Title Incumbent
Danocratic 2 March 1946 Hanoi 2 IcP President Ho chi Minh
Republic of : Vice President Nguyen hai Than
_ Vietnam Minister of Nguyen tuong Tam

Foreign Affairs

3 VN Nationalist Minister of Huynh thue Khang
Interior
Minister of Phan Anh
National Defense
Minister of Chu ba Phuong
Natioral :
Economy

1 Dong Minh Hol Minister of Vu dinh Hoo
Justice

2 Democrats Minister of Tang thai Mai
Education ‘
Minister of Bo »sn Inat
Agriculture

1 Socialists Minister of Truong dinh Tri
Social ‘
Welfare

3 Independents Minister of Io van Hien
Finance
Minister pf Tran dang Khoa
Public Works &
Communications

Party
Commnist-Viet Minh

Pong Minh Hoi
Vietnam Nationalist

Party
Independent
Socialist

Vietnam Nationalist
Party

Democrat
Viet Minh *
Dong Minh Hoi#*

Vietnam Rationalist
Party

Communist-Viet Minh

Democrat

* The post of Minister of National Education was held
only temporarily by Dang thai Mai for Cao van Thinh

(Independent).

#* Bo XUBN Tuat became Vice Minister of Agriculture
and Huynh thien Loc (Independent) assumed the Ministry.

The Vice Ministries were divided as follows:

wok Vice Minister Heang minh Giam
of Interior
Vice Minister Ta quang Bau
of Hational
Defence
Vice Minister ‘Nguyen van Huong
of Justice
Vice minister Dang phuc Thong
of Public Works
& Communications
Vice Minister of Trinh Van Binh
Finance
Vice Minister Do duc Duc
of National
Education

[Reorgantsed under constitution Vice Minister . Bo Xuan Tat
adopted by National Assembly, of Agriculture
Novenber 1986 7 : Vice Minister Do Tiep

of Social
Welfare
Vice Minister Nehiem ko To
of Foreign
Affairs

Socialist

Independent

Independent

Viet Minh

Independent

Democrat

Dong Minh Hoi

Dong Minh Hoi

Vietnam Nationalist
Party

In addition, the following were elected: (1) a Consultative
High Council headed by Nguyen vinh Thuy(ex-emperor Bai
Tai); (2) A Ste council of National Defense with

Vo nguyen Giap (Commnist) as president and Vu Ehong

Khanh (Nationalist Party) as vice-president; (3) the
President of the National Assembly, Ngo tu Ha (Catholic);

(4) the permanent Committee of the Assen
Bul bang Doan (Independent ) e Agsembly headed by

Republic of 1 dune 1946 Saigon All French President Nguyen van Thinh Democratic
Cochinchina Appointees

B-52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Government

Democratic
Republic of
Vietnam

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

VIETHAMESE GOVERIMENT 1945 - 194

CONT'D)
Tate Cabinet
Established Capital Corpo eition Title Incumbent
3 Nov 1946 Hanoi 5 IcP President Ho chi Minh
Vice-President Vacant™
Minister of Ho chi Minh
Foreign Affaira
Minister of Huynh thue Khang
Interior
Minister of Vo nguyen Giap
National
Defense
5 Independents Minister of Vacant*
National
Economy
2 Democrat Minister of Vu dinh Hoe
Justice
1 Socialist Minister of Lo van Hion
Finance ‘
1 Hationalist Minister of Nguyen van Huyon
National
2 Vacant Education
Minister of
Agriculture eee
Minister of fran dang Khoa
Commnicotions
& Public Works
Minister of Nguyen van Tao
Labor
Minister of Hoang tich Tri
Health
Minister of

B-53

Chu ba Phuong
Social Welfare

Minister without Nguyen Van To
Portfolio

Minister without Bo xuan Luat
Portfolio

Suprene Nguyen vinh Tauy
Councillor (Ea0 Dai)

Vice Minister Hoang minh Gian
of Foreign

Affairs

Vice Minister Hoang huu Kan

of Interior

Vice Minister Ta quang Buu

of National

Defense

Vice Minister
of National

Vice Minister
of Agriculture

Phan ven Dong

Cu huy Can

Vice Minister
of Justice
Vice Minister
of Finance
Vice Minister
of National
Education
Vice Minister
of Comunnication
& Public Works
Vice Minister
of Health
Vice Minister
of Labor

Vice Minister
of Social
Welfare

Tran cong Tuong
Trinh van Binh

Nguyen khanh Tean
Dang phue Thong

Vacantst*
Vacant

Vacant

Party
Communist-Viet Minh
Commnist-Viet Minh
Independent

Communist-Viet Minh

Democrat
Communist-Viet Minh

Socialist

Independent
Democrat

Commmunist-Viet Minh
Independent
Vietnam Nationalist
Party
Independent

Independent

Socialist

Communist-Viet Minh
Independent
Communist-Viet Minh

ES

Democrat

Democrat
Independent.

Communist-Viet Minh

Socialist

* Pham ngoe Thach (Viet Minh) apparently acted as

assistant to Ho chi Minh in the cabinet.

The Vice-

president was not filled until July 1949, when Pham
van Dong (Commnist-Viet Minh) was given the post.
4 Phan Anh (Socialist) wae appointed Minister of
National Economy on January 26, 1947.

#** Neuyen kinh Chi (Independent) was appointed to

the Vice Ministry of Health.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

VIETHAMESS GOVERMENT 19)

Date Cabinet
Government Eotabliched Capital Composition Title Incumbent Party
Democratic * Vice Minister Ton that Tung Independent
Republic of : of Health
Vietnam Vice Hinister Vacant
(Cont'd) of Labor
Vice Minister Vacant
of Social
Welfare
Vice Minister Ngo tu Ba Independent (Catholic)
of War Veterans —
and Invalids
Provisional 13 Oct 1947 Saigon French-sponsored regime
Government Nguyen Van Xuan,President
of South :
Vietnan
Administrative May 19h7 Hanoi French-sponsored regime
Committee of
Tonkin
Administrative May 1947 Hue French-sponsored regime
Comnittee of
Annsm
= i ——————
BrovietonaL 6 June HanoL Nguyen Van Xuan, President
Vietnan 8
Central 19 wt
Government
Government 1 July Saigon Emperor Bao Dai, Head of State
of
Vietnan 1949

B-5}. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Tate
Estebliched Capital
As of July 19h9

Cabinet
Composition

5 IcP

5 Independent
2 Democrat

3 Socialist

1. Fationsliet
1 Dong Min Hoi

B59

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Title

President
Vice President
Minister of
Foreign Affairs
Minister of
Interior
Minister of
Fationsl
Defence
Minister of
Kational
Econony
Minister of
Justice
Minister of
Finance
Minieter of
National
Education
Minister of
Agriculture
Minister of
Coumunications
& Public Works
Minister of
labor
Minieter of
Health
Minister of
Social Welfare
Minister of
War Veterans

& Invalids

Minister with-
out Portfolio
Minister with-
out Portfolio

Vice Ministers

Vice Minister
of Forelgn

- Affairs

Vice Minister
of Interior
Vice Minister
of National
Defense

Vice Minister
of Fational
Econony

Vice Minister
of Agriculture
Vice Minister
of Justice
Vice Minister
of Finance
Vice Minieter
of National
Education
Vice Minister

Incumbent

Ho chi Minh
Pham van Dong
Hoang minh Giam
Phan ke Toai

Vo nguyen Giap
Phan Anh

Vu dinh Hoe
Lo ven Hien

Nguyen van Ruyen

Nga tan Nhon

Tran dang Khoa

Nguyen van Tao
Hoang tich Tri
Chu ba Phuong

Vu dinh Tung

Bo xuan Luat

Dang van Huong

Vacant

Tran duy Hung

Ta quang Buu
Cu huy Can

Nghiem xuan Yen
Tran cong Tuong
Trinh van Binh

Kguyen khanh Toan

Dang -phuo Thong

of Commmication

& Public Worke

Party
Communiat-Viet Minh
Communist-Viet Minh
Socialist
Independent

Communist-Viet Minh
Socialist

Democrat
Communist-Viet Minh

Socialist

Independent

Democrat

Communist-Viet Minh
Independent
Vietnam Nationalist

Party :
Independent (Catholic )

Dong Minh Hoi

Independent (Buddhist )

were divided as follows:

Independent

Independent.
Democrat

Independent
Democrat
Independent

Cosmunist-Viet Minh

Socialist

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. Nationalism During the Franco-Viet Minh War

Both the DRV constitution and the government of November, 1946,
were soon submerged as the Viet Minh geared for war with France. A series
of armed incidents in November, followed by large scale fighting in Hanoi
in late December, destroyed what was left of the Franco-Viet modus vivendi.
The DRV goverrment took to the hills to assume a status of shadow state.
The Viet Minh -- properly, the Lien Viet -- transformed itself into a semi-
covert resistance organization, and committed itself to the military de-
feat of the French. During the opening year of the war, 1947, the DRV
took steps to enhance its coalition nature, and to broaden the appeal
of the Viet Minh. Communists, including Vo Neuyen Giap, were removed
from the cabinet, and prominent Catholics and independents added. There-
after, the government shifted steadily leftward. In the summer of 198,
Giap was reappointed Minister of National Defense, and a year later, Pham
Van Dong, top communist, became Vice President. Moreover, while at first
resistance against the French was offered by disparate political groups,
eventually the Viet Minh, by superior organization and leadership, recap-
tured their monopoly over revolutionary nationalism.

Following is a survey of the principal Vietnamese political movements
in the period 1947-1950. Two main groupings existed: the communist-centered
Viet Minh and its auxiliaries in resistance to the French, and those national-
ists finding common cause in the restoration of Bao Dai.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-56
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnamese Political Movements, 1947-1950

PARTY or FACTION DESCRIPTION

The Resistance Groups

Viet Minh (or Lien Viet Only political apparatus which extended
Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong throughout Vietnam and Vietnamese society.
Minh Hoi) Drew on World War II reputation, but cre-

ated new doctrine for political and mili-
tary action. Leadership effective, and
capitalized well on Ho's prestige as pre~
eminent nationalist. Formally merged with
the Lien Viet in March, 199.

Communist Party Ostensibly dissolved, but evidently func-

(Viet Nam Cong San Dang) tioning as the core of the Viet Minh. CIA
estimates membership grew over the years
as follows:

1931: 1500 1946: 50,000 1950: 400,000

Party adhered strictly to "popular front”
line, remaining covert, and working through
the Viet Minh.

Vietnam Democratic Part A small, middle class, largely Tonkinese
(ict fen ten css daa) group Within the Viet Minh, loyal to Ho
ara alk Chi Minh, and solid supporters of the DRV
government.
Vietnam Socialist Part A Hanoi-echo of European Social-Democratic
Gict tan Se Wet Dene) parties, narrowly based and small in num-

bers; created in 1946 within the Viet Minh,
and a consistent supporter of the DRV

government.
:
Vietnam Nationalist Part A small, uninfluential faction of the VNQDD,
(VNQDD) operating within the Viet Minh.

Vietnam Revolutionary League A second splinter group of little political
(Dong Minh Hoi) power.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-57
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

PARTY or FACTION

Resistance Groups (Continued)

Trotskyist Movement

The Bao Dai Restoration Movements

National Union Front

(Mat fran Thong Nhut Quoc

Gia Lien Hiep)

Vietnam Revolutionary League
(Dong Minh Hoi)

Vietnam Nationalist Party
VNNQDD

DESCRIPIION

A Saigon centered, left-wing communist
faction opposed to the French and to the
Viet Minh alike. Principal significance
was its continued impairment of communist
effectiveness in Cochinchina.

Formed in Nanking in February, 1947, by
VNQDD and Dong Minh Hoi leaders; gained
support of Tran Trong Kim (Bao Dai's
premier in the March-August 1945 government) ,
Nguyen Hai Than (Ho's onetime Dong Minh Hoi
Vice President), and Nguyen Tuong Tam
(VNQDD, sometime Foreign Minister of the.
DRV). Claimed to unite the VNQDD, the Dong
Minh Hoi, the Cao Dai, and the Buddhists
behind Bao Dai, but splintered with with-
drawal of sect supporters, and under impact
of French political maneuvers.

Re-established in China in 1946, but never
again influential in Vietnam; probably
numbered 5,000 or less. When war broke

out, sought reconciliation with Viet Minh,
but was rebuffed. Swung to Bao Dai, al-
though supporting a hard line with the’ French.

Enjoyed prestige of tradition dating to
1930's, but fortunes waned with Chiang
Kai-shek's, with whom it had associated
itself closely. Probably numbered 5,000

or less, and influence within Vietnam
largely confined to Hanoi, and to northern
Tonkin, in Viet Minh heartland. Support for
Bao Dai highly tentative and heavily condi-
tioned.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

PARTY or FACTION

DESCRIPTION

The Bao Dai Restoration Movements (Continued)

Vietnam Democratic Socialist
Party

Popular Movement
(Doan The Dan Chung)

Vietnam Nationalist Youth
Alliance

(Viet Nem Quoc Gia Thanh

Nien Doan

Cao Dai League
(Doan The Cao Dai)

Hoa Hao
(Phat Giao Hoa Hao)

A Cochinchinese faction which splintered
from the Viet Minh over quarrels with Viet
Minh leaders. Included Cao Dai, Hoa Hao,
and Binh Xuyen leaders, and participated
in the National Union Front. Party frac-
tured in November, 1947, over dispute with
Hoa Hao, and thereafter became defunct.

A Hanoi-centered anti-DRV Tonkinese move-
ment which acquired no widespread follow-

ing, and by 1949 seemed to have fallen
apart.

Another small Tonkinese movement which was
of little significance.

Headed by Pham Cong Tac, the Cao Dai Pope
(in 1946 returned by the French from exile
in Madagascar). The League claimed
1,000,000 to 2,000,000 adherents in Cochin-
china and maintained (with some French aid)
armed forces. Clashes between the Cao Dai
and Niet Minh troops were frequent within
the regions governed by the Cao Dai. ‘The
Cao Dai were divided on the issue of French
support, since xenophobia was common within
the sect. In January, 1948, the Cao Dai
signed a peace with the Hoa Hao, and pledged
support for Bao Dai. Pham Cong Tac’ openly
aligned himself with the Bao Dai government
in July, 1949. Nonetheless, the sect re-
mained religiously, rather than politically
oriented, and harbored a wide range of poli-
tical opinion. The principal commitment
remained Cao Daism.

Another Cochinchinese armed sect with a
following of 200,000 to 1,000,000. During
World War II the sect, with Japanese support,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B=59
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

governments by the countries of the world whose policies
support the development of genuine national independence in
former colonial areas...."

Formal French ratification of Vietnamese independence was announced on

2 February 1950; on the same date, President Truman approved U.S. recog-
nition for Bao Dai. French requests for aid in Indochina followed within
a few weeks. On May 8, 1950, the Secretary of State announced that:

"The United States Government convinced that neither
national independence nor democratic evolution exist in any
area dominated by Soviet imperialism, considers the situation
to be such as to warrant its according economic aid and mili-
tary equipment to the Associated States of Indochina and to
France in order to assist them in restoring stability and per-
mitting these states to pursue their peaceful and democratic
development."

The U.S. thereafter was deeply involved in the developing war. But
“it cannot be said that the extension of aid was a volte-face of U.S.
policy precipitated solely by the events of 1950. It appears rather as
the denouement of a cohesive progression of U.S. policy decisions stem-
ming from the 1945 determination that France should decide the political
future of Vietnamese nationalism. Neither the modest 0.5.5. aid to the
Viet Minh in 1945, nor the U.S. refusal to abet French recourse to arms
the same year, signaled U.S. backing of Ho Chi Minh.: To the contrary,
the U.S. was wary of Ho, apprehensive lest Paris'imperialism be suc-
ceeded by control from Moscow. Uncertainty characterized the U.S.
attitude toward Ho through 1948, but the U.S. incessantly pressured
France to accommodate "genuine" Vietnamese nationalism and independence.
In early 1950, both the apparent fruition of the Bao Dai solution, and
the patent alignment of the DRV with the USSR and Communist China, impelled
the U.S. to more direct intervention in Vietnam. (Tab 3)

T.A. DISCUSSION
Tab 1 - Indochina in U.S, Wartime Policy, 1941-1950
2 - U.S. Neutrality in the Franco-Viet Minh War, 1946-199

3 - Origins of the U.S. Involvement in Vietnam

A-8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

PARTY or FACTION

DESCRIPTION

The Bao Dai Restoration Movements (Continued)

Hoa Hao (Continued)
Phat Giao Hos. Hao)

Buddhist Grou
(Tinh Do Cu Si)

Vietnam Catholic League
(Viet Nam Lien Doan

Cong Giao

Binh Xuyen
(Lien Khu Binh Xuyen)

preached an anti-foreigner creed, and in
1945 joined the anti-French, anti-British
resistance. In 1917, Huynh Phu So, the
sect's leader, was executed by the Viet
Minh, which led to the defection of the
Hoa Hao from the resistance, and the sect's
support of Bao Dai's restoration. Rela-
tions with the French, and with rival
Vietnamese factions, remained strained.

A movement centered chiefly on the over-
seas Chinese community, and advocated
passive resistance to the Viet Minh.

Organized by and around the Catholic
clergy, the League exercised varying de-
grees of influence over some 2,000,000
Catholics, chiefly in Annam. The League
supported the DRV in 1945 and 1946, and
approved struggle for Vietnam's independence.
Ngo Dinh Diem led the League into the
National Union Front, but the League split
with the Front over the desire of the
majority to back the resistance, and the
repugnance of the remainder, including
Diem, at Bao Dai'’s inability to break
France's control over Vietnam.

A Saigon-sited gangster apparatus which
originally fought as allies of the Viet
Minh, but -- like the Hoa Hao -- were
disaffected by the Viet Minh's shooting
of several of their leaders. Provided
tepid support for Bao Dai, and remained
wary of the French.

An outgrowth of the National Union Front
formed in December, 1947, in Hanoi, the
Rally attempted to merge the various pro-
Bao Dai parties in Cochinchina, Annam, and
Tonkin. Such success as it enjoyed was a
matter of form rather than substance, and
its influence was quite limited.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

PARTY or FACTION DESCRIPTION

The Bao Dai Restoration Movements (Continued)

Vietnam Restoration League Revived in 1947, the descendant of
(Viet Nam Phuc Quoc Dong Japanese-oriented nationalist groups,
Minh Hoi) the Phuc Quoc, under Prince Cuong De,

at first attempted to offer an alterna-
tive to both the Viet Minh and Bao Dai.
In June, 1947, and May, 1948, Prince
Cuong De vainly solicited aid from the
President of the United States against
the French, and urged reconciliation
between Ho Chi Minh and Bao Dai. The
party remained chiefly in exile, and
was unable to exert any appreciable
influence over events in Vietnam.

French Sponsored Movements With French encouragement, a number of
Vietnamese parties were formed to give
body to the several governments established
by the French. These included the Indo-
chinese Democratic Party, the Cochin-
chinese Democratic Party, the Popular
Front of Indochina, and the Popular
Movement of Cochinchina. In general,
these parties supported the French poli-
cies of maintaining Cochinchina separate
from Annam and. Tonkin, and of strong
ties with France. Eventually, such
minimal popular support as they commpnded
was thrown behind the "Bao Dai solution.”

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-61
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The foregoing demonstrates the poverty of Vietnamese nationalist
movements in the period 1946-1950; only the Viet Minh can be said to have
been a "national" movement at the outset of the war with France, and it
built its popularity throughout the years of struggle. The Viet Minh
stressed the primacy of political action among the people and the care-
ful preparation of bases as preconditions for military action. Their care-
ful attention to the former included extraordinary efforts to inculcate
in their troops attitudes and habits which would win the respect, and
eventually the cooperation of the populace. The following extracts from
Viet Minh doctrine are dated 1948:

"TWELVE RECOMMENDATIONS

"The nation has its root in the people.

"In the Resistance war and national reconstruction, the main
force lies in the people. Therefore, all the people in the army,
administration, and mass organizations who are in contact or live
with the people, must remember and carry out the following recom-
mendations:

"Six forbiddances:

1 - Not to do what is likely to damage the land and crops or
spoil the houses and belongings of the people.

2 - Not to insist on buhing or borrowing what the people are
not willing to sell or lend.

3 - Not to bring living hens into mountainous people's houses.

) - Never to break our word.

5 - Not to give offense to people's faith and customs (such
as to lie down before the altar, to raise feet over the hearth,

.to play music in the house, etc. )

6 - Not to do or speak what is likely to make people believe
that we hold them in contempt.

"Six permissibles:

1 - To help the people in their daily work (harvesting, fetching
firewood, carrying water, sewing, etc.)

2 - Whenever possible to buy commodities for those who live
far from markets (knife, salt, needle, thread, pen, paper, etc.)

3 - In spare time, to tell amusing, simple, and short stories
useful to the Resistance, but not to betray secrets.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

4 - To teach the population the national script and elementary
hygiene.

5 - To study the customs of each region so as to be acquainted
with them in order to create an atmosphere of sympathy first, then
gradually to explain to the people to abate their superstitions.

6 - To show to the people that you are correct, diligent, and
disciplined."

"STIMULATING POEM

The above-mentioned twelve recommendations
Are feasible to all.
He who loves his country,
Will never forget them.
When the people have a habit,
All are like one man,
With good army men and good people,
Everything will be crowned with success.
Only when the root is firm, can the tree live long,
And victory is built with the people as foundations.

April 5, 1948" —57/

Appraisals of Vietnamese nationalist parties available to the U.S.
Départment of State in 1949, on the eve of U.S. involvement in the Indochina
war, were, on the whole, perceptive. A paper submitted in February, 1949,
by George M. Abbott, one of the few American diplomats who had talked with
Ho face to face, summarized issues in the following terms:

"CG, International Relations.

1. United States - Post war relations between the United
States and Indochina got off to a bad start with President Roosevelt's
views on international trusteeship for strategic areas in the hands
of powers unable to defend them, followed by the overenthusiastic
activities of certain OSS agents in the period just before and after
the Japanese surrender. The belief that the policy of the United
States is to throw the French out of Indochina still persists in
many circles both in Indochina and in France. We are also blamed
for permitting the Chinese and English to occupy the northern
and southern halves of the country to disarm Japanese troops. Our
persistent refusal to supply equipment and arms for French military
operations in Indochina is a sore subject with most French army
officers. Another source of irritation has been the almost uni-
versal tendency of American correspondents visiting Indochina to
write articles extremely critical of the French...

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-63
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"In recent weeks the French have actively supported proposals
for four power cooperation in Southeast Asia to prevent the spread
of communism, and there has been much talk about the strategic
importance of Indochina as a bastion against the southward spread
of Chinese Communists.

"As far as the Annamites are concerned, they were encouraged
to believe that after the defeat of Japan we would assist them
in obtaining independence. As it became apparent that our sym-
pathies were tempered by strategic considerations in Europe, the
popularity of the United States has diminished. Nevertheless,
the prestige of the United States is still high, and even Ho Chi
Minh has been careful to prevent any public anti-American propa-
ganda...

-"No one knows how many communists there are in Indochina,
but the number of real party members is certainly small. The highest
estimate is 20% of the troops fighting with Ho Chi Minh and this
includes sympathizers. However, the number is undoubtedly growing,
and at the same time non-communist military units are being steadily
infiltrated with secret agents. Units under communist command are
generally better armed. Thus the problem for the leader contemplat-
ing changing sides is not an easy one.

"Another point on which definite information is lacking is
the channel of communications with Moscow and the center of re-
gional control...Certainly satisfactory communications exist
since Moscow publications of fairly recent date are frequently
seized by the French...

"One peculiar thing about Vietnam Communism is that there
has been very little anti-American propaganda. It is obvious
that this is not due to ignorance of the current party line. It
apparently represents a hope on the part of Ho Chi Minh that he
may still obtain American support for or at least acceptance of
a Viet Minh government under his leadership. Evidence that this
hope is diminishing is furnished in a regional party directive
dated in November 1948 which stated that active anti-American
propaganda, should be conducted in party circles and by word of
mouth among the people but should not yet appear on the radio,
in the press, or in public speeches...

"Opposed to the French forces are about 75,000 Vietnamese
troops of various political complexions, largely under communist
dominated leadership. There is considerable French-furnished
evidence of communist political commissars and indoctrination
extending down to company strength levels. It is certain that
the disciplined communist element has been the largest factor

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-O}
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in maintaining the vigor and cohesiveness of the resistance.
In this, they have been greatly’ helped by French indecision and
pad faith, and the terrorism of French troops.

"In spite of arms captures and occasional defections, there
is no sign of large scale weakening of Vietnamese resistance
abilities or morale. The large areas under Vietnamese control
lack luxuries and medicines, but are wholly self-sufficient
in the basic necessities and tolerably well administered, accord-
ing to what few reports are available. They continue to form
a source of supplies and of fresh troops that are only limited
in numbers by the arms available.

"Although there are rumors of a Chinese Communist treaty
with Ho Chi Minh, and of a Chinese Communist general and his
staff in Northern Tonkin, there is little evidence, as yet, that
the Chinese are of any considerable help in the resistance,
French sources feel that there is little danger of a Chinese
Communist 5th column in Cochinchina, or of an invitation on the
part of Ho Chi Minh to the troops of the age-old national enemy
to enter Indochina in force, in spite of the communist link.

All French military sources consulted, however, feel that a large
scale Chinese Communist invasion would make most, if not all, of
Tonkin, militarily untenable.

"For many months past, observers feel that the resistance
has not put forth its maximum effort, perhaps because the leaders
are waiting for the outcome of political negotiations going on
between the High Commissariat, the French Government and the
Xuan-Bao Dai elements. If these should break down, the resistance
will be greatly strengthened by the adhesion of many now neutral
or pro-French elements. If the negotiations are successful, the
resistance army is sure to be a dominant factor in any form of
Vietnamese self-government...” 58/

An extensive State Department intelligence report on "Political Alignments
of Vietnamese Nationalists" 59/ of October, 1949, highlighted the impor-
tance of the Viet Minh:

"The Viet Minh. The Vietnam Independence League (Viet Nam
Doe Lap Dong Minh Hoi), or Viet Minh, is the most influential
political organization within the Vietnam Government /DRV/. It
is the only political group whose organization extends down to
the smallest villages. Its members include both individuals and
parties, i.e., the Vietnam Socialist Party, the Vietnam Democratic
Party, etc. As a League, it groups together a wide coalition of
political personalities from moderate nationalists to doctrinaire
communists. It most closely resembles the Chinese Kuomintang

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-65
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

during the period 1924-26, when the communists and Chang Kai-shek
collaborated in China's nationalist movement.

"The Viet Minh Executive Committee, or Tongbo, is the real
repository of power in Vietnam territory. The influential govern-
ment paper, National Salvation (Cun Quoc), is the organ of the
Tongbo and reflects the line of the government. A majority of
the Tongbo members are believed to be former members of the
dissolved Indochinese Communist Party. Within the mass national-
ist movement, the communists are undoubtedly the most cohesive
political factor. President Ho Chi Minh is a communist but
has great prestige as a nationalist leader among the mass of
Vietnamese. He is the outstanding political personality in
Indochina. He plays down his past communist connections, empha-
sizes the nationalistic aspects of his program, and is popularly
considered a man above parties.

"The Viet Minh exercises its control over the mass national-
ist movement through a variety of ‘national welfare! organizations
of women, youth, peasants, soldiers, etc., which in their totality
embrace most of the population of Vietnam. Hoang Quoc Viet, the
General Secretary of the Viet Minh, claims that the organization
has a total membership of nine million..."

The collapse of the Chinese nationalists in 1949 reverberated within
the Vietnamese nationalist movements. The Kuomintang-oriented parties --
principally the VNQDD -- were severely discredited, and the exile movements
in China dispersed. The DRV began to shift into the communist bloc in search
of material support, and there was a concomitant further leftward movement
within the Viet Minh. By 1951, the Communist Party was “legalized.” ‘The
Iao Dong Party (Dang Lao Dong Viet Nam, or Vietnamese Workers' Party) there-
after became the dominant political power within the DRY. The Lao Dong
Party was expressly Marxist-Leninist, and proudly claimed an unbroken lingage
to the Indochinese Communist Party founded by Ho Chi Minh, including leader-
ship of all the major nationalist "front" movements through 1951. Vo Nguyen
Giap explained in 1961 that:

"The Vietnamese people's war of liberation was victorious
because we had a wide and firm National United Front...organized
and led by the Party of the working class: the Indochinese
Communist Party, now the Viet Nam Workers' /Tao Dong/ Party.

In the light of the principles of Marxism-Leninism. ..the Party
found a correct solution to the problems..." 60/

The Lao Dong Party official history has credited communist machination
for the key developments in Vietnamese history through 1951:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-66
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

RR ey ae

- MILES
iS Fu _ Z

- i) 100
re ey YS6, ce Le eee es The Gud ckeand Wor |
es Ca atc elcity Ne = = z,
ty «

CM Ont aaa ia

, ey
ry on ffl ah, =
ad ja

3119) « Site

oe

}
Die abrenp 173 a
<j o

Lf a ee Se

Nae ov Alda Ce
Me 2 ipl if ea a eae

x ee —_~

= Bee wy eo = GU: : re, 2
¢Louang LEE Se 2 vam parts Safe 33
Prabatig S525 057, Sa hee ane Kiaw—= - |

4

Xfeng. < es pee .
Khoueng! G2G; HAINAN T=

ORK ee ee
ey SOUT Fil |
* . . ——|
ee RSE z =
: ’ a FMS =4
: aay sy aa = =|
; Gas LHe ta CHINA
= Se eee
a Ce TOU aie. =
ats as
D Attopeu f Pee MOuanguigal — =a)
Ms ©

Sp Se re Se co ee

}
© DakteA— GAN ==]

4 - a se
as ° Konttak..—

—
Binhdiate peas =
= Za.Quinhon
©2= @Z =|
i

gs iat é
‘Ban Me Thuo ——
wo iat

» Angkor
<8 Sremreap

i,

= Pnompenh (4

a |
| INDOCHINA IN 1949 =

ee

fo UDOT in 1Y. 1)

eZ Vietminh-

a ee ea

ee ama? ————
dominated 2 SS

- ae a | ee
ZORGS VIA | pe eS i Foute taymtore = ———
ae B- OT eer TOP SECRET - Sensitive Xs isad

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Phe policy of founding the Indochinese democratic front
between 1936 and 1939, the Viet Minh front between 1941 and
1951, and the Lien Viet front /1946-1951/; the decision of
signing the 6 March 1946...preliminary accord [Ho's accommo-
dation with France/... -- all these are typical examples of
the clever application of the...instruction of Lenin." 61/

In 1951, Ho Chi Minh himself set forth a Leninist account of the ori-
gins of the Viet Minh and its role in the forming of the DRV and the war
against France. In February, 1951, addressing the Congress of the Viet-
namese Communist Party (Lao Dong), Ho explained his political maneuvers
over the previous decades. Reviewing the history of the Russian and Chinese
revolutions, he pointed out that Vietnam, too, had felt the stirrings of

change, and the Vietnamese working class"...began to struggle and needed
& vanguard team, a general staff to lead it. On January 6, 1930, our Party
came into being..." He described how the Party had brought about the forria-

tion of the Viet Minh, and the foundation of the DRV. Then in 1945 the
French colonialists reappeared in South Vietnam and Chinese-sponsored re-
actionary government seemed in prospect in North Vietnam:

"In the face of that grave and pressing situation, our
Party did everything possible to keep itself in existence,
to work and develop to give discreet and more effective
leadership in order to have the time gradually to consoli-
date the forces of the People's power and to strengthen
the National United Front.

"At that time, the Party could not hesitate: Hesitation
meant failure. The Party had to make quick decisions and
to take measures -- painful ones -- to save the situation.
The greatest worry was about the Party's proclamation of
dissolution. But in reality it went underground. And
though underground, the Party continued to lead the admin-
istration and the people...

"Mention should be made of the [agreements with the French
in 19467 because they were considered as ultrarightist and
caused much grumbling. But in the opinion of our comrades
and compatriots in the South, they were correct. Indeed
they were, because our comrades and compatriots cleverly
availed themselves of the opportunity to build up and de-
velop their forces.

"Lenin said that even if a compromise with bandits was
adyantageous to the revolution, he would do it..." 62/

Ho then went on to discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the resistance
against the French, to describe the world situation in terms of a monolithic
bloc of "democratic" nations against which was arrayed the United States

' and other reactionary powers, and to depict, as part of that larger clash,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

I.A.1.
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnam's war in common with Lactians and Cambodians against the French and
the United States. He called for "a legal party appropriate to the situation
in the world and at home in order to lead our people's struggle to victory.
This party is the Vietnam Worker's Party /Tao Dong/. As regards its com-
position...it will admit the most enthusiastic and most enlightened workers,
peasants, and intellectuals. As regards theory, it adheres to Marxism-
Leninism. As regards discipline, it has an iron discipline..."

Thus ended the Viet Minh as a non-communist nationalist coalition.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Noté
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

I. B. FOOTNOTES

1. Joseph Buttinger, Vietnam: A Dragon Embattled (New York: Praeger,
1967, 2 vols.), I, 172-174.

2. Tbids
3. Data on Vietnamese political parties is drawn principally from U.S.

Department of State, Political Alignments of Vietnamese Nationalists
(Office of Intelligence Research, Report No. 3708, October 1, 1949),

passin.
Ly sibid.g ese tf.
5. Ibid.
6. Ibid., 31-32

Ss. Ibid. 136: £2.

9. Bernard B. Fall, ed., Ho Chi Minh on Revolution (New York: Praeger,
1967), 130-131. 3

10. The Hitler-Stalin Pact was signed in August, 1939. On 26 September 1939,
France outlawed the Communist Party. Ibid., and Buttinger, op. cit.,
I, 224-226. mia

11. Ibid., 236-250.

12. Ibid., 2he-2hh.,

13. U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments..., op. cit., 58.

14. Fall, ed., Ho Chi Minh on Revolution, op. cit., 133-13}

15. George Modelski, "The Viet Minh Complex," in Cyril E. Black and
Thomas P. Thorton, eds. Communism and Revolution (Princeton: Princeton

University Press, 1964), 189-190. Cf. Bernard B. Fall, The Two Viet-Nams
(New York: Praeger, 2nd Edition, 1963), 62.

16. Vo Nguyen Giap, People's War, People's Army (Hanoi, 1961), 75, quoted

in ibid.
17. U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments..., op. cit., 60.

18. Fall, The Two Viet-Nams, op. cit., 62-63.

B-790 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
19.
20.

2l.

Pore

23.

2h.

25.

26.
27.

28.
29.

30.
BL

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments..., op. cit., 54-55.
Ibid.

I. Milton Sacks, "Marxism in Vietnam," in Frank N. Trager, ed.,
Marxism in Southeast Asia (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1959),
ESO.

Modelski, loc. cit., paraphrasing the official Vietnamese Communist
Party history, Thirty Years of Struggle of the Party.

Bert Cooper, John Killigrew, Norman La Charité, Case Studies in Insur-

gency and Revolutionary Warfare: Vietnam 1941-1954 (Washington: Special

Operations Research Office, The American University, 1964), 87-88.
Modelski, op. cit., 189, quoting Thirty Years...
Cooper, et al, op. cit., 88-89. French sources estimated 50,000 Viet

Minh in Tonkin as of August, 1944; U.S. Dept of State, Political Align-
METLCS «0 ce Cie Cid... Gl

Cooper, et al, loc. cit.

Some French authors have been prone to credit the U.S. for Ho Chi Minh
and the Viet Minh; e.g., Lucien Bodard, The Quicksand War (Boston:
Little, Brown, 1967), 221-222. The ranking American official in northern
Vietnam in 1945, Brigadier General Philip E. Gallagher, has attested:
",.-throughout the months before the Japanese capitulation, 0.S.S.
officers and men operated behind Japanese lines, to arm, lead and train
native guerrillas who were organized by the Viet Minh." (A situation
report, undated, in the Gallagher Papers, quoted in Bert Cooper, John
Killigrew, and Norman La Charité, Case Studies in Insurgency and Revolu-
tionary Warfare: Vietnam 191-1954 /Washington, D. C.: Special Opera-
tions Research Office, The American University, 1964, 107.) But 0.8.8.
assistance to the Viet Minh-led guerrillas was quite limited, although
it gave the Viet Minh the opportunity to proclaim that they were part
of the Allied effort against the Japanese. Cf., Fall, Le Viet-Minh:

La République Démocratique du Viet-Nam [Paris: Librairie Armand Colin,
1960/7, 34. Fall, Two Viet-Nams, op. cit., 66-71, details the case

for the postwar American aid and comfort to the Viet Minh, which adds
up to a more substantial charge -- but similarly is without foundation
in the record.

Quoted in ibid., 63.

U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments..., op. cit., 66-67, quoting
The Factual Record of the August Revolution (Hanoi, September, 1946).

Fall, ed., Ho Chi Minh on Revolution, op. cit., 11-12.

Buttinger, op. cit., I, 435-436.

B-71 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
32.
33-
3h.
35.
36.
31.

38.
39.
ho.
hi,
he,
43.
Wh
hs.
h6.
L7.
48.
hg.
50.

pier

Des

54.
55.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments..., op. Ane. 146-147.
Hammer, op. cit., 104.
Marvin E. Gettleman, ed., Viet Nam (New York: Fawcett, 1965), 57-59.
Buttinger, op. cit., I, 325-327.
Ibid., 328-331; Hamner, op. cit., 115-116.
Hammer, op. cit., 117, quoting Supreme Allied Command, Southeast Asia,
Commission No. 1, Saigon, Political History of French Indochina South
of 16°, 13 September - 11 Mia ss,
U.S. Dept of State,. Political Alignments..., op. cit., 73-74.
Hammer, op. cit., 117
Hammer, op. cit., 120.
Buttinger, op. cit., I, 337
Buttinger, op. cit., 351-354.
Ibid.
Buttinger, op. cit., 356, 634.
Ibid; Sacks, op. cit., 157; Fall, ed., Ho on Revolution, op. cit., 146.
Sacks, op. cit., 158.
Ibid.
U.S. Dept cf State, Political Alignments..., 77-78.
Hammer, op. cit., 150.
Buttinger, op. cit., 371-372.
Ibid., 399-401; U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments..., op. cit.,
78; George A. Carver, Jr., "The Faceless Viet Cong,” Foreign Affairs
(Vol. 44, No. 3, April, 1966), 350.
Buttinger, op. cit., I, ho2-403.
U.8. Dept of State, Political Alignments..., op. cit., 81-82.
|
Fall, Two Viet-Nams, op. cit., 131.

Hammer, op. cit., 179.

B-72 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
56.

it
58.

59.

60.

61.
62.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Pham Van Dong (presently Premier, then Vice President) announced in
1950 that promulgation of the 1946 Constitution had been postponed
"because several of its provisions require for:their application the
cessation of the state of war," and in 1951, after Ho had openly
aligned with the Sino-Soviet powers, the Viet Minh radio explained
that "a gang of traitors" had been evolved in its formulation, and
hence a “progressive character was lacking." During the "Rectifica-
tion of Errors," in late 1956, after the peasant uprisings of that
year, the DRV set up a constitutional reform committee. In December,
1958, Ho invited the public to submit recommendations on a new draft
basic law, and the second Constitution was promulgated in 1960.

Ibid., 178-181; U.S. Dept of the Army, Pamphlet 550-40, U.S. Army
Area Handbook for Vietnam (Washington: Government Printing Office,
1962), 235.

Gettlemen, ed., op. cit., 88-89.

American Consulate General, Saigon, Despatch 34, February 12, 19h9.

Op. cit., 90-91.

Vo Nguyen Giap, People's War, People's Army (Hanoi: Foreign Languages
Publishing House, 1961), 35, also 67-108; Cf., “Let Us Step Up The
Theory-Formulating Task of The Party," Hoc Tap (No. 9, September 1966),
in Joint Publications Research Service, “Translations from Hoc Tap"
(No. 38,660, November 16, 1966), 2.

Ibid.

Fall, Ho on Revolution, op. cit., 206 ff.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-73
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

suee

GOL MODY
: UIW 14D CH
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I. C. HO CHI MINH: ASIAN TITO?
SUMMARY

Among the more cogent critiques of U.S. policy toward Vietnam is
the contention that the U.S. failed to recognize in Ho Chi Minh a
potential Asian "Tito." This view holds that Ho has always been more
concerned with Vietnam's independence and sovereign viability than
with following the interests and dictates of Moscow and Peking. With
U.5. support, the argument runs, Ho would have adopted some form of
neutrality in the East-West conflict and maintained the DRV as a
natural and durable bulwark against Chinese expansion southward. Thus ,
were it not for "U.S. communist blinders," Ho would have served the
larger purposes of American policy in Asia. Though the focus of inquiry
in this study is the period immediately following World War II, when it
would have been relatively easy to support an anti-Japanese, anti-
colonial Ho, it is often argued that the U.S. neglected another oppor-
tunity after the Geneva Conference of 195) -- and indeed, that U.S.
acceptance of Ho, and a communist dominated Vietnam, may be the only
path to peace in Southeast Asia today. The historical (1945-1954)
argument has a persuasive ring. In the light of the present costs
and repercussions of U.S, involvement in Vietnam, any prior way out
ean seem attractive. It is possible, however, that a dynamic and uni-
fied communist Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh could have been vigorously
expansionist, thus causing unanticipated difficult problems in some
ways comparable to current ones.

Many authors have advanced one version or another of the "Tito"
hypothesis. Some develop the principal thesis that a different U.S.
policy could have moved Ho to non-alignment and opposition to Peking;
others stress the corollary that Ho was forced into dependence upon
Peking and Moscow by American opposition or indifference. Whether Ho
was a nationalist or a communist is not at issue; all of the authors
quoted seem to accept that Ho was a communist, and that a communist
Vietnam would probably have eventuated under his leadership. Rather,
their arguments center on what they perceive to be Ho's willingness to
subordinate communist goals, forms, and international discipline to
attaining Vietnam's independence and unity. A few openly favor a
communist Vietnam on the grounds that only a national communism led
by Ho would be sufficiently strong to survive adjacent to China. They
stress Ho's attempts in 1945 and 1946 to obtain Western backing, and
point out that antipathy to China is a pillar of Viet nationalism.
Many concede that the Tito analogy is not wholly appropriate. Unlike
Tito, Ho came to power after the war without the aid of another com-
munist state. More basically, there was no analogy to be made until
late 1948, when the experiment with Tito seemed like it would work.

C-1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Nonetheless, these authors point out that if the U.S. found it advan-
tageous to set aside its repugnance to Tito's communism in the interest
of stemming Russian expansion in Europe, it should have been willing
to accommodate Ho Chi Minh's communism for similar ends in Asia. This
eritique generally ends with the accusation that the U.S. purpose in
Southeast Asia is simply and solely to stop communism. (Tab 1)

An examination of Ho Chi Minh's political development through 1950
may provide a basis to narrow the range of speculation concerning Ho
and U.S. policy. From such a review, it is evident that the man who in
1945 became President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam was a mature,
extraordinarily dedicated revolutionary who had undergone severe hard-
ships serving the cause of Vietnam's freedom from France. Fifty-five
years of age in 1945, he had been a communist for twenty-five years --
one of the founding members of the French Communist Party -- and a Con-
intern agent in Asia for fifteen years before World War II. He was
originally of Nghe-An, a province traditionally a spawning ground of
revolutionists; of a father imprisoned by the French for nationalist
activism; and of a Hue school known for radical nationalism among its
students. Exiled fron Vietnam from 1910 to 19}0, imprisoned in Hong.
Kong and in China, deprived of home, family, fame, fortune and companion-
ship outside the Comintern's conspiratorial circles, he apparently devoted
himself selflessly all those years to revolution in Vietnam. Ruth Fischer,
a well-known German former communist who knew Ho during this period, has
written, "It was Ho Chi Minh's nationalism which impressed us European
Communists born and bred in a rather grey kind of abstract internationalism."

For Ho, now back in Asia, World War II opened new avenues to the
attainment of his life-long goals. France discredited itself in Vietnam
through Vichy's collaboration with the Japanese, and then in 1945 was
toppled from power altogether by Japanese arms. In the meantime, Ho had
built the Viet Minh into the only Vietnam-wide political organization
capable of effective resistance to either the Japanese or the French.

Ho was the only Vietnamese wartime leader with a national following, and
he assured himself wider fealty among the Vietnamese people when in
August-September, 1945, he overthrew the Japanese, obtained the abdica-
tion of Bao Dai, established the DRV, and staged receptions for in-coming
allied occupation forces --in which the DRV acted as the incumbent Viet~-
namese government. For a few weeks in September 1945, Vietnam was -- for
the first and only time in its modern history -- free of foreign domin-
ation, and united from north to south under Ho Chi Minh.

Ho Sa the focus of the nationalist fervor evoked by these and
subsequent events. leaders of the rival Vietnamese Nationalist Party
(VN@DD) and the Revolutionary league (Dong Minh Hoi), although admitted
to the DRV government, commanded no grass-roots organizations, and since
they were closely associated with the Chinese Nationalists, shared in

c-2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Arete

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. Indochina in U.S. Wartime Policy, 1941-1945......cececeecseeee A-10

a. “Roosevelb si irusteeship Oonceptic...« ceca « <ise/e a crease cise ene, Le
(1) Military Strategy PPE MCULLIACL Gate wicleeretalereistecavecslecaisivie atelote A-14
(2) Failure of the Trusteeship Proposal....sseeeseseseceee A-19

(3) Decision in Indochina Left to France....cessesscesees A-20

b. ‘Truman and the Occupation of Indochina, 1945............-. A+20

A-9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

full measure in the anti-Chinese odium among the people of North Vietnam.
In South Vietnam, French intrigue, and Vietnamese disunity precluded the
emergence of a competitor to Ho. When France resorted to force to restore
its control over Vietnam, Ho again became the head of Viet resistance,

and the Viet Minh became the primary nationalist protagonists. Hence,

Ho Chi Minh,both on his own merits and out of lack of competition, became
the personification of Vietnamese nationalism.

Ho, nonetheless, found himself, his movement, and his government
under intense pressure. From within the nation, the Chinese-backed Viet
parties attacked communist domination of his government. For the sake
of national unity, Ho dissolved the Communist Party, avoided comunist
cant, announced general elections, and assured the contending factions
representation in the government well out of proportion to their popular
support. External pressures from France and from China proved more diffi-
cult. The French capitalized on the relative weakness of the Viet Minh
in South Vietnam, and the dissension among the Vietnamese there to over-
throw the DRV government in Saigon, and to force the Viet Minh to resort
to guerrilla warfare. In famine-wracked North Vietnam, Chinese hordes
under booty~minded warlords descended on the DRV, supplanting its local
governnent with committees of their own sponsoring and systematically
looting. Ho vainly sought aid abroad; not even the Soviet Union proved
helpful. Ho eventually (March, 1946) negotiated with the French, accepting
@ French military presence in North Vietnam for a period of five years in
return for vague French assurances to the DRV as a "Free State within the
French Union." When Ho was attacked for this by the pro-Chinese elements
within the DRV, he declared:

"You fools! Don't you realize what it means if the Chinese
stay? Don't you remember your history? The last time the
Chinese came, they stayed one thousand years!

"The French are foreigners. They are weak. Colonialism
is dying out. Nothing will be able to withstand world pressure
for independence. They may stay for a while, but they will
have to go because the white man is finished in Asia. But if
the Chinese stay now, they will never leave.

"As for me, I prefer to smell French shit for five years,
rather than Chinese shit for the rest of my life."

The unresolved historic problem, of course, is to what extent Ho's
nationalist goals over-rode his communist convictions in these maneuvers.
Ho seemed to place the former above the latter not solely as a matter of
dissemblance, as he might have done in the dissolution of the Party and
the simultaneous formation of a "Marxist Association," but possibly as
a result of doubts about communism as a political form suitable for
Vietnam. Bao Dai is reputed to have said that: "I saw Ho Chi Minh
suffer. He was fighting a battle within himself. Ho had his own strug-
gle. He realized communism was not best for his country, but it was

C-3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

too late. Ultimately, he could not overcome his allegiance to com~
munism." During negotiations for a modus vivendi with the French in
Paris in autumn, 1946, Ho appealed to the French to "save him from the
extremists" within the Viet Minh by some meaningful. concession to Viet-
namese independence, and he told the U.S. Ambassador that he was not a
communist. He is reputed to have asserted at that time that Vietnam
was not ready for communism, and described himself as a Marxist. In
reply to a journalist's inquiry, Ho claimed that he could remain neutral,
"like Switzerland” in the developing world power struggle between com-
munism and the West. But these and other such statements could have
come either from a proper Leninist or a dedicated nationalist. Ho's
statements and actions after 1949, and his eventual close alignment with
the Sino~Soviet Bloc, support the Ieninist construction. But, then,
U.S. insistence on Ho's being a doctrinaire communist may have been a
self-fulfilling prophesy. (Tab 2)

There remains, however, the matter of Ho's direct appeals for U.S.
intervention in Vietnam, at which even a Leninist might have scrupled.
These occurred (late 1945, early 1946) just after France has reasserted
itself militarily in South Vietnam, while Chinese Nationalist warlords
were ensconced in Hanoi, and before the 6 March 1946 Accord with France.
Desperately, Ho turned to the United States, among other powers, asking
for "immediate interference” in Vietnam.

There were, at least, eight communications from Ho to the President
of the United States, or to the Secretary of State, from October, 195,
to February, 1946. Ho had conveyed earlier, in August and September, ~
1945, via 0.5.8. channels, proposals that Vietnam be accorded "the same
status as the Philippines," for an undetermined period of tutelage pre-
liminary to independence. With the outbreak of hostilities in South
Vietnam, September-October 1945, he added formal requests for U.S. and
U.N. intervention against French aggression, citing the Atlantic Charter,
the U.N. Charter, and a foreign policy address of President Truman in
October, 1945, endorsing national self-determination. Ho's last direct ¢&
communication with the U.S. was in September, 1946, when he visited the
U.S. Ambassador in Paris to ask vaguely for U.S. assistance in obtaining
independence for Vietnem within the French Union.

There is no record of U.S. reply to any of Ho's appeals for aid.
Extant instructions to a U.S. diplomat in contact with Ho in December,
1946, reveal U.S. preoccupation with his known communist background, and
apprehension that he might establish a “communist-dominated, Moscow~
oriented state." Two months later, when the Franco-Viet Minh war in
North Vietnam was underway, Secretary of State Marshall emphasized that
"we do not lose sight /of the/ fact that Ho Chi Minh has direct Con-
munist connections and it should be obvious that we are not interested
in seeing colonial empire administrations supplanted by philosophy and
political organizations emanating from and controlled by the Kremlin."

ch TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In May, 1949, Secretary of State Acheson admitted that as a "theoretical
possibility" the establishment of a "National Communist state on pat-
tern Yugoslavia in any area beyond reach [ot the/ Soviet Army," but
pointed out that: ae

"Question whether Ho as much nationalist as Commie is
irrelevant. All Stalinists in colonial areas are nationalists.
With achievement national aims (i-e., independence) their
objective necessarily becomes subordination state to Commie
purposes and ruthless extermination not only opposition groups
but all elements suspected even slightest deviation...."

When, in early, 1950, Ho's DRV lay within reach of Mao's Chinese Amny,
and Ho had openly embraced communism, Secretary Acheson declared that
bloc recognition of the DRV "should remove any illusion as to the
nationalist character of Ho Chi Minh's aims and reveals Ho in his true
colors as the mortal enemy of native independence in Vietnam."

But Ho's behavior in 1949-1950, however convincingly it endorsed
U.S. policy at that juncture, does not necessarily explain away his
earlier eagerness for U.S. and U.N. intervention in Vietnam, nor other-
wise gainsay the "Tito" hypothesis as applied to the 1945-1947 period.
Of that period, it can be sald that the U.S. offered Ho only narrow
options. He received no replies to his appeals. After 1946, not only
were Ho's direct communications with the U.S. cut, but also the signals
he received from the U.S. were hardly encouraging. By the time the
Indochina war began in earnest in late 1946, U.S. military equipment
had already been used by French forces against the Vietnamese, and the
U.S. had arranged credit for France to purchase $160 million worth
of vehicles and miscellaneous industrial equipment for use in Indochina.
Secretary of State George C. Marshall's public comment on the outbreak
of war in January, 1947, was limited to a hope that "a pacific basis
for adjustment of the difficulties could be found,” and within six months
the Marshall Plan threw even greater U.S. resources behind France.

The simple truth seems to be that the U.S. knew little of what was
transpiring inside Vietnam, and certainly cared less about Vietnam than
about France. Knowing little and caring less meant that real problems ~
and variety of choices were perceived but dimly. For example, the U.S.
could have asked itself -- "Did we really have to support France in
Southeast Asia in order to support a non-communist France internally
and in Europe?" Another question we could have asked ourselves was -~
"Tf the U.S. choice in Vietnam really came down to either French coloni-
alism or Ho Chi Minh, should Ho automatically be excluded?" Again, "If
the U.S. choice was to be France, did France have any real chance of
succeeding, and if so, at what cost?"

Even before World War II was over, Washington had placed the decision
on Ho's fate in the hands of France. It can be argued, nonetheless,

c-5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that the U.S. could have insisted that Paris buy Ho and provide
Indochinese independence without endangering the more basic relation-
ship between the U.S. and France in Europe. Just as the U.S. came to
recognize the prime importance of Europe over any policy it pursued
elsewhere, so the French government would have soon realized (if it

had not already done so) that nothing should be done to impair seriously
U.S. acceptance of common interests in European recovery and collective
security. Moreover, it was not as if there were not sizeable segments
of the French community which would not have supported graceful U.S.
attempts to extricate France from Indochina. It may well be, however,
that the "Tito hypothesis" assumes a compliance from France of which
France was demonstrably incapable. No French government is likely to
have survived a genuinely liberal policy toward Ho in 1945 or 196;
even French communists then favored redemption of control in Indochina.
From '46 on, however, bloodshed hardened policy in France. As before,
the Ho alternative was never seriously contemplated.

French representations to the contrary notwithstanding, Ho Chi
Minh possessed real political strength among the people of Vietnam.
While calling Ho another George Washington may be stretching the point,
there is no doubt about his being the only popularly~recognized war-
time leader of the Vietnamese resistance, and the head of the strongest
and only Vietnam-wide political movement. There can be no doubt either
that in a test by ballot only Ho's Viet Minh could have delivered votes
at the hamlet level. Washington and Paris, however, did not focus on
the fact of Ho's strength, only on the consequences of his rule. Paris
viewed Ho as a threat to its regaining French economic, cultural and
political prerogatives in Indochina. The U.5S., wary of Ho's known
communist background, was apprehensive that Ho would lead Vietnam into
the Soviet, and later Chinese, orbit. President Eisenhower's later
remark about Ho's winning a free election in Vietnam with an 80% vote
shone through the darkness of our vision about Vietnam; but U.S. policy
remained unillumined.

In the last speculation, U.S. support for Ho Chi Minh would have
involved perspicacity and risk. As clear as national or independent
or neutral communism may seem today, it was a blurred vision in 1945-
1948. Even with the benefit of seeing Tito successfully assert his
independence, it would have been hard for Washington to make the leap
from there to an analogy in Asia. Recourse to "national communism" in
Vietnam as an eventual bulwark against China, indeed, would have called
for a perspicacity unique in U.S. history. The risk was there, too.
The reality of Ho's strength in Vietnam could have worked seriously
against U.S. interests as well as against Chinese Communist interests.
Ho's well-known leadership and drive, the iron discipline and effective-
ness of the Viet Minh, the demonstrated fighting capability of his
armies, a dynamic Vietnamese people under Ho's control, could have pro-
duced a dangerous period of Vietnamese expansionism. Laos and Cambodia
would have been easy pickings for such a Vietnam. Ho, in fact, always

C-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

considered his leadership to extend to Indochina as a whole, and his
party was originally called the Indochinese Communist Party. Thailand,
Malaya, Singapore, and even Indonesia, could have been next. It could
have been the "donino theory" with Ho instead of Mao. And, it could

have been the dominoes with Mao. This may seem implausible, but it is
only slightly less of a bad dream than what has happened to Vietnam since.

The path of prudence rather than the path of risk seemed the wiser choice.
(Tab 3)

I.C. DISCUSSION

Tab 1 - Versions of the "Asian Tito” Hypothesis

Tab 2 - A Political Biography of Ho Chi Minh, 1890-1950

Tab 3 - Ho Chi Minh's Communications With the U.S., 1945-1946

C-7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ligh Tein Zab VERSIONS OF THE "ASIAN TITO" HYPOTHESIS

Following are extracts from authors who have advanced arguments
that Ho Chi Minh, with the stimulus of U.S. support, might have adopted
a non-aligned or, at least, counter-Peking foreign policy. The corol-
lary contention is that Ho. was forced to accept dependency on Peay and
Peking by American opposition or indifference.

Generalizations

(1) None argue that Ho was not a communist or that a communist
Vietnam would not have eventuated under Ho's leadership.

(2) Rather, they point out that Ho demonstrated willingness to
subordinate communist goals and forms to attaining nationalist objectives. ,
They accept a communist Vietnam, indeed even favor it, on the grounds that
only a national communism led by Ho would be sufficiently strong to main-
tain independence of the Chinese.

(3) They stress the historic Vietnamese aut aperhy to the Chinese >
as a pillar of Viet nationalism, and point to Ho's attempts in 1945 and
1946 to obtain Western backing.

(4) No really close parallel can be drawn between the origins of
Ho Chi Minh and Tito, since unlike Tito, Ho fought his way to power in
virtual isolation, without the intervention of an external communist
power. However, it can be accurately said that U.S. policies in Europe
have generally been directed at widening the split between Tito and
Moscow, while in Asia, our policy has tended to force Ho into closer
relations with Peking and Hanoi.

(5) The "Tito" issue raises pointedly the question of whether U.S.
strategy in Asia is anti-communist or anti-Chinese. Since to block
Soviet expansion in Europe the U.S. set aside its repugnance to Tito's
communism, it is argued, the U.S. should similarly renounce its opposition
to Ho to serve its larger strategic interests in Asia.

Synopses
Page
Isaacs, Harold; No Peace for Asia. ae
In 1947, Ho was motivated by a deep nationalism aimed
principally at independence, and was sorely disenchanted
with communism, having received little or no help or
encouragement from foreign parties. Literally the U.S.
was the only power to whom Viet nationalists could turn
with hope, but even then the U.S. actions in support of
France stood in contrast to its principled pronouncements
in favor of self-determination and against colonialism...... C-11

c-8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Page
Shaplen, Robert; The Lost Revolution.
There was a strong possibility in 1945 and 1946 that French
and American policy could have "Titofied" Ho Chi Minh, and
that Vietnam--albeit under left-wing leadership--might have
been a bulwark against Communist Chinese expansion. But
the possibility of Vietnam's now becoming a Yugoslavia is
POMC Rua vac sale Pee Aine aia leer ateatelg anh arlatasavaratets| Gane eileen see ee

Zinn, Howard; Vietnam: The Logic of Withdrawal.
A Communist government in Vietnam is the best avenue for
improving the lot of the Vietnamese; Ho Chi Minh's dicta-
torship would be preferable to any elitist dictatorship in
South Vietnam. If the U.S. wants to contain China, the
U.S. should recognize that Ho Chi Minh would strive to
maintain his independence, and thus would accomplish what
Our mney POLES CANNOb. «simian gin mera $08 is dele wlelele/eserereratereiete ts c-18

Bator, Victor; Vietnam: <A Diplomatic Tragedy.
1954: China is most important problem facing Vietnam.
Double-satellite relationship affords the DRV potential
independence. Diem's fanaticism obtruded........c.cecccecee CHO

Sacks, Milton; "Marciem in Southeast Asia."
1946-1949: Ho attempted to preserve neutrality, uoueh
this conflicted with his desire for international support
SVG Ere GOST OL POY LIM Viatiia «Rinne aiaik Fs iace latsustata akaclereeere tere metintete ae eee C-21

Buttinger, Joseph; Vietnam: <A Dragon Embattled.
1946-1947: Ho realized that he could not rally Vietnamese
to his struggle for independence with the banner of com-
munism. Hence, the facade of democracy to lend righteousness
to the forceful communist campaign to align the people with
he VWELEE Mh ariel 5 es Rs ere owl e nn spel we w/e eunie lee a lars aha ea sie . 0-23

Kennedy, John F., quoted in Schlesinger, Arthur M., ed.,
A Thousand Days. in
1951: U.S. has joined France in a desperate attempt to
preserve empire. U.S. must not rely on arms alone to halt
southward thrust of communism, but must harness nationalism..(C- ol,

Schlesinger, Arthur M.; The Bitter Heritage.
The most effective bulwark against an aggressive communist
state may well be national communism. A rational U.S,
policy aimed at containing China could have recognized
communist Vietnam in 1954, vice backing a shaky Saigon
regime led by right-wing mandarins or generals......seene00e2072)

Fall, Bernard B.; Viet-Nam Witness.
The Vietnamese Communists had to conduct their revolution
without aid from abroad, even from French Communists.........C-26

= TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Page
Eden, Anthony, Earl of Avon; Toward Peace in Indochina.
' he Ho-Peking relationship is not a close parallel to the
Tito-Moscow one. Yet Ho has much to gain from neutrality,
and much at risk in failing to maintain its Moscow links,
or to open’a way to American withdrawal...ss sess caaeaiwenaes C-27

Fulbright, Senator J. William; The Arrogance of Power.
Ho Chi Minh is the only truly national leader of the
Vietnamese; he is also a communist. Vietnamese communism
is perhaps the only potential bulwark against Chinese
domination. Hence, the U.S. should try to come to terms....C-28

Reischauer, Edwin 0.; "What Choices Do We Have In Vietnam?"
The U.S. could have taken a stand against colonialism in
1945, refused to support France in 1950, backed the
Geneva settlement in 1954, and declined to increase its
military commitment in 1961. Four Presidents rejected
the alternative of furthering Ho Chi Minh's cause, but
had any done so, the outcome would have been a highly
nationalist Vietnam fiercely independent of China. More-
over, Ho's cordial World War II relations with the U.S.
indicated a potential for a Tito-like U.S.-Vietnam relation-
ship of no more baleful consequences for Southeast Asia
than the present war-torn states. But a nationalist Viet-
nam would be far preferable, from the U.S. long-range
Viewpoint, to StAtTUS QUO.sceereeeceeserrccceseccesecssecaes slPed

C-10
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from No Peace for Asia by Harold Isaacs, 1947, quoted in
Viet Nam: History, Documents, and Opinions on a Major World Crisis,
Marvin E. Gettleman, ed., 1965, pp. 49-50, 53-55.

Ho Chi Minh was born in the province of Vinh, in northern Annam.
"The home of revolutionists," the Annamites call that place with its
sparse hills and valleys, its thickly crowded population. From out
of that mass grubbing in the soil to live has come a peculiarly large
proportion of Indochina's greatest national leaders. As a boy of
twelve, Ho began his revolutionary career as a courier, carrying
messages from village to village for his conspiring elders. Today,
at fifty-five, he likes to think of himself as a man who has cast
aside parties and programs. He speaks not in class political terms
but in nationalist terms. "My party is my country," he liked to say;
"my program is independence.” In long discussions we had of the
problems of the Nationalist movement in general and in Indochina in
particular, he would impatiently wave aside all misgivings. "Inde-
pendence is the thing," he said. "What follows will follow. But
independence must come first if there is to be anything to follow at
all later on."

ie GA

Upon whom could [the Vietnamese now/...count? Certainly not now
upon the Chinese. China was so immensely larger than the little
Republic of Vietnam--and perhaps there would come a day when China
would haye realized her capacities and assumed her place as the leader
of Asia. On that day Vietnam would profit, perhaps, from being China's
neighbor. But China now was weak and assailed, rent by internal
struggles and external pressures. Jt was ruled by the kind of men
who were in northern Indochina now, sucking at the land like leeches.
Because they held the French at arm's length, they were temporarily
helpful. But that could not last. The Chinese were already negoti-
ating their settlement with the French and would be interested only in
gaining their own immediate ends. From those ends, Annamite nationalism
had little enough to gain.

What of the Russians? Would they bring any strong political sup-
port to the Annamite cause? I met no Annamite who thought so; and I
spoke to many Annamite Communists. The Annamite Communists, like all
their fellow nationalists, suffered from a terrifying sense of their
isolation. They were unusually frank and cynical about the Russians.
Eyen the most orthodox among them, like shaggy-haired Dran Van Giau,
the partisan organizer, granted that the Russians went in for “an excess
of ideological compromise," and said he expected no help from that
quarter, no matter how distant or verbal it might be. "The Russians
are nationalists for Russia first and above all," another Annamite

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-11
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ty Ns U.S. POLICY, 1940-1950

1. Indochina in U.S. Wartime Policy, 1941-1945

In the interval between the fall of France in 1940, and the Pearl
Harbor attack in December, 1941, the United States watched with increasing
apprehension the flux of Japanese military power into Indochina. At first
the United States urged Vichy to refuse Japanese requests for authoriza-
tion to use bases there, but was unable to offer more than vague assur-
ances of assistance, such as @ State Department statement to the French
Ambassador on 6 August 1940 that:

"We have been.doing and are doing everything possible within
the framework of our established policies to keep the situation
in the Far East stabilized; that we have been progressively
taking various steps, the effect of which has been to exert
economic pressure on Japan; that our Fleet is now based on Hawaii,
and that the course which we have been following, as indicated
above, gives a clear indication of our intentions and activities
for the future." *

The French Ambassador replied that:

"In his opinion the phrase ‘within the framework of our
established policies,' when associated with the apparent reluc-
tance of the American Government to consider the use of mili-
tary force in the Far East at this particular time, to mean
that the United States would not use military or naval force
in support of any position which might be taken to resist the
Japanese attempted aggression on Indochina. The Ambassador
reared] that the French Government would, under the indicated
pressure of the Japanese Government, be forced to accede..." *

The fears of the French Ambassador were realized. In 19}1, however, Japan

went beyond the use of bases to demands for a presence in Indochina tanta-

mount to occupation. President Roosevelt himself expressed the heightening
U.S. alarm to the Japanese Ambassador, in a conversation recorded by Acting
Secretary of State Welles as follows:

“The President then went on to say that this new move by
Japan in Indochina created an exceedingly serious problem for
the United States...the cost of any military occupation is

tremendous and the occupation itself is not conducive to the

¥U.5. Departnent of State Memorandum from J.C, Dunn to Under §
of State Welles, 6 August 190, ecretary

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
A-10
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Communist said with some bitterness. "They would be interested in us
only if we served some purpose of theirs. Right now, unfortunately,
we do not seem to serve any such purpose."

"How about the French Communists?" TI asked. He snorted with
disgust. “The French Communists," he said, "are Frenchmen and coloni-
alists first and Communists after. In principle they are for us, but
in practice? Oho, that is quite another thing!" One of the top-
ranking Annamite Communists spoke contemptuously of Thorez, who in a
Paris speech has said he was in favor of the Annamites "finally arriving
at their independence." He laughed sourly. "A fine rubber phrase, is
it not? You can stretch it into any shape or any meaning. They are
the dominant party in France now. And look what Frenchmen are doing
now in Indochina." '

"From the small handful of French Communists in Indochina, the
Annamite comrades learned a remarkable lesson in their kind of politics.

There were only twenty in the French Communist group in Saigon. "Of
these only one," said my Annamite Communists companion, "only one soli-
darized with us. The rest stood aside." The French group prepared 4

document for the Indochinese Communist Party which bore the date of
September 25--two days after the French had seized power in the city.

I was able to read the document, but not to copy it, so.the notes I made
immediately afterward are not verbatim. But the substance was as
follows: It advised the Annamite Communists to be sure, before they
acted too rashly, that their struggle "meets the requirements of Soviet
policy." It warned that any "premature adventures" in Annamite inde-

" pendence might "not be in line with Soviet perspectives.” These
perspectives might well include France as a firm ally of the USSR in
Europe, in which case the Annamite independence movement would be an
embarrassment. Therefore it urged upon the Annamite comrades a policy
of "patience." It advised them in particular to wait upon the results
of the French elections, coming up the following month, in October,
when additional Communist strength might assure the Annamites a better
settlement. In the meantime it baldly proposed that an emissary be
sent not only to contact the French Communist Party but also the
Russians “in order to acquaint yourselves with the perspectives of
coming events."

This document displayed with remarkable and unusual bluntness the
Communist Party's notion of the relation between a revolutionary move-
ment and Soviet foreign policy. It apparently came as a shock to the
Annamite Communists, who were thrown into considerable confusion by it.
There was a sharp internal argument within the party which ended in a
decision to dissolve the party entirely, to cease functioning within
the Vietminh as a distinct unit but to work in it purely as individuals.
In this way the party apparently figured on avoiding any responsibility
at a time when its responsibility was the heaviest. I do not know what

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-12
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the internal development was in any detail, but I do know that the
Annamite Communists I met were men bitten deeply with the bitterness
of having been abandoned by their ideological comrades overseas.

They had consequently taken refuge in a pure and simple nationalism.
Ho Chi Minh was making no idle phrase when he said: "My party is my
country." They were oppressed, in common with all the non-Communist
Annamite nationalist leaders, by a fearful sense of loneliness. There
seemed to be support for them against the French nowhere, none from
the Chinese they could count on, none that could be anticipated from
the Russians, none from the French Communists, who did gain enormous
strength in those October elections without effecting any noticeable
change in Indochinese affairs. What then of the United States?

Annamite nationalists spoke of the United States as men speak of
a hope they know is forlorn but to which they desperately cling all
the same. Could all the fine phrases of the Atlantic Charter, of the
United Nations pact, of President Roosevelt and his successor, really
have meant nothing at all? Nothing? All right, let us make allowances
for expediency, for big-power politics, for all the shabby realities.
Would not the United States still find it wiser for the sake of its
position in the Far East to win support among the people rather than
to cling to the rotten imperial system of the past? It seemed not.
For the only indication the Annamites had of America's role in their
struggle came in the form of lend-lease weapons and equipment being
used against them by the French and British, and the stunning announce-
ment of an American deal with France for the purchase of $160,000,000
worth of vehicles and miscellaneous industrial equipment for the French
in Indochina. To the Annamites this looked like American underwriting
of the French reconquest. The Americans were democrats in words but
no help in fact, just as the Russians were communists in words but
no help in fact. "We apparently stand quite alone," said Ho Chi-minh
simply. "We shall have to depend on ourselves."

c-13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from The Lost Revolution by Robert Shaplen

Chapter II - Ho Chi Minh - the Untried Gamble, pp. 27, 46-50

I have always shared the belief of many, if not most, observers
who were in Indochina at the time that a serious mistake was made by
both the French and the Americans, especially by the dominant French
policymakers in Paris, in not dealing more realistically with Ho in
1945 and 1946, when there was a strong possibility that he might have
been "Titofied" before Tito and Titoism were ever heard of; that the
whole course of events might thereby have been altered and a great
deal of bloodshed averted; and that today a unified Vietnam, even
under some form of left-wing leadership, might have been the bulwark
of a neutral bloc of Southeast Asian states seeking, above all, to
avoid Chinese Communist domination. Some of the highest American
officials have privately told me, in recent years, that they now
believe the gamble with Ho should have been taken; in fact, a con-
siderable number of them are again talking about Vietnam becoming a
Southeast Asian Yugoslavia, a possibility that seems to me now rather
remote.

x gh oe

In Biarritz, where he first rested, in Paris and then at the
conference in Fontainebleau, Ho enjoyed huge personal success. He
charmed everyone, especially the press. He distributed roses to girl
reporters, signed his name in blood for an American male correspondent.
He was widely compared to Confucius, to the Buddha, to St. John the
Baptist, to anyone's doting grandfather, and it was noted that he was
an ascetic, since, among other things, he refused to take a drink.
Everywhere he went, whether to the opera, to a fancy reception, to
a picnic, or to a press conference, he appeared in his simple, high-
buttoned linen work suit. "As soon as one approaches this frail man,
one shares the admiration of all men around him, over whom he towers
with his serenity acquired from wide experience," wrote one reporter.
Noting his “tormented face and his eyes of blue which burn with an
inner light,” another declared that he "hides a soul of steel behind
a fragile body." His wit, his Oriental courtesy, his savoir-faire,
his mixed profundity and playfulness in social intercourse, his open
love for children, above all his seeming sincerity and simplicity,
captured one and all.

Unfortunately, in point of accomplishment Ho's trip was far less
successful. The fault, now generally admitted, was chiefly that of

c-14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive -
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the French, who, while the conference went on, continued to violate
its spirit by further fostering the idea of the separate south and
central federation in Indochina....

When he and Sainteny finally flew up to Paris for the start of the
talks, Sainteny described him as "pale, eyes brilliant, and tight-
throated," and he quoted Ho as saying, when the plane was settling down,
"Above all, don't leave me, whatever you do." As the conference dawdled
in the shadow of defeat, by now the result of the activities of the
Vietminh extremists in Hanoi as well as of the French maneuvers in
Cochin China, Ho grew more and more restless. Sainteny agreed he ought
to return to Hanoi as soon as possible. “What would I be able to do if
I went home empty-handed?" Ho asked. "Don't let me leave this way,"
he begged Sainteny and Marius Moutet, the Socialist Minister of Overseas
Territories. “Arm me against those who would seek to displace me. You
will not regret it." It was a significant plea, as significant as what
Ho said on another evening to Sainteny and Moutet, "If we have to fight,
we will fight. You will kill ten of our men and we will kill one of
yours, and in the end it will be you who will tire of it."

At midnight on September 14, 1946, the frail figure of Ho Chi Minh,
in its military tunic, walked out of the Hotel Royal-Monceau in Paris
(the Fontainebleau sessions had ended) and strolled to Moutet's house
nearby. There Ho and Moutet signed a modus vivendi, which, while it
underlined Vietnamese (and some French) concessions for safeguarding
French rights in Indochina, only postponed agreement on basic political
questions; it at least placed upon the French the responsibility for
restoring order in Cochin China. This was nothing more than had been
agreed to in the spring and been vitiated since, but Ho publicly called
the modus vivendi “better than nothing." He murmured to a security
officer who accompanied him back to the hotel early in the morning, how-
ever, "I have just signed my death warrant."

Despite the failure of his mission, Ho, in his true cosmopolitan
fashion, had enjoyed his stay in Paris, a city he had always loved.
Years before, standing on a bridge across the Seine, he had remarked
to a Communist comrade, "What a wonderful city, what a wonderful scene!”
When his friend had replied that Moscow was also beautiful, Ho had
said, "Moscow is heroic, Paris is the joy of living." During the 1946
conference, Ho had revisited some of his former haunts and, mixing
socially with several foreign correspondents, had talked freely about
himself and his politics. "Everyone has the right to his own doctrine,"
he had said. "I studied and chose Marx. Jesus said two thousand years
ago that one should love one's enemies. That dogma has not been realized.
When will Marxism be realized? I cannot answer....To achieve a Communist
society, big industrial and agricultural production is necessary....I do
not know when that will be realized in Vietnam, where production is low.
We are not yet in a position to meet the conditions."

0-15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ho's self-analysis, in.relation to Indochina's development is a
markedly honest one, in Marxist terms. From the outset, Marxism was
far more than a blueprint for him. It was a logique, and as one of
' the keenest Indochina scholars, Paul Mus, has pointed out, it was
acguired by Ho as a vital Western weapon, an arsenal in fact, with
which, as an Asian, he could combat his French masters. Ho, as a
Marxist, was quick to appreciate how his country was being robbed,
kept in economic penury by a purposefully unimaginative colonial power.
While the French took out rubber or rice or whatever else they wanted
and sold it in the world marker at a high profit, the Vietnamese lived
under a system in which only human labor and not money, in any inter-
national sense, counted; goods were in effect bartered for subsistence.
Such an economic condition became the fulcrum of Ho's anger and drove
him way back, almost inevitably, to Marxism and thence to Communism.
"Ho had to build on what every Asian must build per se," Mus says, "a
Western logic to deal with us Europeans. Whether it be a profession
such as the law or medicine or what have you, an Asian must find this
logique or be lost. Ho found it first in Marxism and he became a
Leninist, since Lenin was faced in Russia with the same problem of the
vacuum at the village level. Ho was successful because he remained true
to Leninism and Marxism, In this sense, straightforward according to
his view, he belongs to a proper fraternity.”

Along with Sainteny, Mus is one of those Frenchmen who admit that
France and the Western world missed a proper opportunity with Ho in
1946. Mus himself, as a French negotiator, met Ho a year later, and
he has the same queer fondness for him most men who knew him have
retained. "I have no reason, as a Frenchman, to like Ho for what he
has done," Mus told me long afterward, "but still I like him. TI am
not afraid to say so. I like him for his strong mind. Although he
is a great actor--one cannot afford to be naive with him--he does not
go back on his word. He believes in the truth as he sees it. But he
is a Marxist, and that is where we part company." He quotes Ho as
telling him, in 1947, "My only weapon is anger....I won't disarm my
people until I trust you." Ho's willingness to deal with the French,
Mus believes, was largely predicated on his need for French advice, above
all for financial advisers. "Marxist doctrine calls for the proletarian
state to use, at least temporarily, the accountancy of the bourgeois-
capitalist countries," Mus says. Because of the inbred economy imposed
by the Bank of Indochina, Ho knew that Vietnam could not stand on its
own feet, either in terms of money or trade. He also knew he could not
rely on the colonial French. His political approach was through metro-
politan France. He wasn't convinced that this was his only chance, but
he was determined to play the possibilities. He wavered between his
affection and regard for France, which had given him his self in the
Marxist image, and his new disillusion of 1946. "If we had supported

Ca16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

him more strongly then," Mus added, "we might have won....We thought

we could crush him if it came to war. We did not appreciate how hard
he could fight. But we must not forget that he really wanted an agree-
ment with France at the time of Fontainebleau because it would have
served him. That part of his motivation afterward died, of course, but
we should understand that it existed at the time and that he was truly
disappointed."

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from Vietnam: The Logic of Withdrawal, 1967, by Howard Zinn

Pages 101-102

The perspective of history suggests that a united Vietnam under Ho
Chi Minh is preferable to the elitist dictatorship of the South, just as
Maoist China with all its faults is preferable to the rule of Chiang, and
Castro's Cuba to Batista's. We do not have pure choices in the present,
although we should never surrender those values which can shape the future.
Right now, for Vietnam, a Communist government is probably the best avenue
available to that whole packet of human values which make up the common
morality of mankind today; the preservation of human life, self-determination,
economic security, the end of race and class oppression, and that freedom
‘of speech and press which an educated population begins to demand.

In the debate on Vietnam, there has been little or no discussion on
exactly what would be the evil consequences of a united Communist Vietnam.
It has become an article of faith that what is good or bad in international
relations is a matter of counting up the countries that are on the Commun-
ist side, and the number that are on our side. There is the black eye,
and, there is the feather in the cap. And the difference is worth a moun-
tain of corpses.

We need to get accustomed to the idea that there will be more Commun-
ist countries in the world, and that this is not necessarily bad. The
physical security of the United States is not diminished by that fact in
itself; Communist nations in their international affairs behave very much
like other nations (this is why they are so often disappointing to their
sympathizers); some are friendly, some are hostile. Each is a unique re-
sultant of Marxist theory and local conditions. The more there are, the
greater diversity there will be among them. It is several years now singe
scholars in the field of Communist studies began taking note of "polycen-
trism," but American officials still often act as if there were one Commun-
ist center in the world,

One thing we should have learned by now is that Communist nations are
as prone to the emotion of nationalism as other nations; they crave inde-
pendence and resist domination by any other nation, whether capitalist or
Communist. What this means is that a small but effective Communist nation

which is neighbor to a large one can guard its independence far better
' than a non-Communist, semifeudal dictatorship. A Communist Vietnam under
Ho Chi Minh can be expected to retain its independence as surely as Tito
has maintained his.

The idea of "containment" has always been ambiguous: Is it our aim
to contain China, or to contain Communism? And if it is both, then what
do we do if the two aims turn out to be in conflict with one another?

c-18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

To base our entire Asian policy on "containing" China is to risk
billions of dollars and thousands of lives on the idea that China plans
to take over other countries by military expansion -- a hypothesis not
supported either by her words or by the history of her behavior so far,
and. one that in the case of the Soviet Union turned out to be false. And
to make the hypothesis doubly faulty, it assumes that even if China wanted
to expand, she could.

C-19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from Vietnam: A Diplomatic Tragedy by Victor Bator, 1965

Pages 226-227

In spite of the dangerous geographic proximity of China and the earlier
dependence of Ho Chi Minh on Chinese military support, there was, in 1954,
some possibility that Ho Chi Minh's government might have been amenable to
diplomatic contacts looking to real stabilization. He had in his govern-
ment several non-Marxists who might have helped such an undertaking. Viet-
nam's millennial history is filled with intermittently successful attempts
to free the country from Chinese domination. "The most important question
facing both North and South Vietnam," wrote an anti-Diem and anti-Communist
Vietnamese of high repute, "is how to safeguard the future of the whole
Vietnamese nation now threatened by such number and such great dynamism
(of the Chinese)."

North Vietnam's double-satellite relationship (to Moscow and Peking)
potentially creates a limited measure of independence from both. ‘The Viet-
namese Communists turned to Russia and her European satellites for the
help they needed after Geneva in order to recover from the devastations:
of a seven-year civil war. With this help North Vietnam may now be increas-
ingly independent of China. Even if the rank and file of the leadership
were impervious to the pride of independence, it is a safe assumption that
Ho Chi Minh himself, now an "elder statesman" of the Communist world, is
not unlike other national leaders: He most certainly does not enjoy being
a mere puppet. He seems to have the talent and subtlety to maneuver between
the Scylla and Charybdis of commitment to China and Russia. Thus, diplo-
macy directed at real neutralization of Vietnam, even if not fully approved
by Peking, might have achieved some success in the years 1955-1960. Of
course, to the irreconcilable fanatic, Diem, any contact with Ho Chi Minh
would have been anathema. But American policy was not necessarily condemned
to serve Mr. Diem's nervous system, especially since there was plenty of
opposition to him among his own countrymen.

0-20 - TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from "Marxism in Vietnam" by Milton Sacks, in Marxism in
Southeast Asia, Frank N. Trager, ed., 1959.

Pages 163-164

During this same period (1946-1949), the Ho Chi Minh government
carefully sought to maintain friendly relations with the Thai and
Nationalist Chinese governments. In addition, a determined propaganda
effort was made to enlist the sympathy of the other Southeast Asian
states for the Vietnamese struggle. In the developing cold war situ-
ation that polarized international relations, the Viet Minh leadership
publicly refused to take sides and announced a policy of neutrality.
Even when the Soviet Union and the world Communist press affirmed that
Ho Chi Minh was a. Communist or stressed that the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam was part of the "world Democratic Front" fighting against
"American imperialism,” the Viet~Nam government itself maintained a
‘discreet silence. The Vietnamese Communists did not feature the usual
pro-Soviet, anti-American vituperative attacks so common to the world
Communist movement. As late as March 1949, President Ho Chi Minh con-
tinued to denounce the charge of "communist domination" of the govern-
ment he headed as “pure French imperialist propaganda."

This policy of denying links to Communism conflicted with the
Ho Chi Minh government's practice of strengthening the ties between
mass organizations in Viet-Nam and the agencies of international Com-
munism. Supporters of the Viet Minh government claimed that this
practice was the only way the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nem was able
to get some international recognition. The conflict was there none-
theless, and such participation in front organizations raised difficulties:
for example, when representatives of the youth organizations in the
Democratic Republic of Vietnam attended the regional meeting of the
World Federation of Democratic Youth at Calcutta in February 1948. Since
this meeting was used as a means of publicly emphasizing the new Communist
strategy in Southeast Asia that led to Communist insurrections in Malaya
Burma and Indonesia, the Vietnamese representatives were placed in an ‘3
ambiguous position. They could and did point with pride to the "libera-
tion struggle" that they had been waging. Yet, at the same time, they
did not repudiate the ayowedly successful policy of coalition with the
"national bourgeoisie" pursued in Viet-Nam. They simply avoided the
issue posed by the new policy that stressed attacks on the "bourgeois
nationalists," the need for Communist party leadership of liberation
struggles, and the necessity of direct ties with the Soviet world camp.

This deviation from general Southeast Asian Communist policy during
1948-49 may be described as another demonstration of the tactical flexi-
bility of Ho Chi Minh's leadership. The Viet Minh was already leading
to a highly effective armed struggle against the French in Viet-Nam and
enjoyed the support of many Vietnamese nationalists who believed the
non-Communist declarations of the spokesmen for the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam. Moreover, its government had a measure of sympathy and

C-21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

production by civilians in occupied countries of food supplies
and yew materials of the character required by Japan. Had Japan
undertaken to obtain the supplies she required from Indochina

in a peaceful way, she not only would have obtained larger quanti-
ties of such supplies, but would have obtained them with complete
security and without the draining expense of a military occupa-
tion. Furthermore, from the military standpoint, the President
said, surely the Japanese Government could not have in reality
the slightest belief that China, Great Britain, the Netherlands
or the United States had any territorial designs on Indochina
nor were in the slightest degree providing any real threats of
aggression against Japan. This Government, consequently, could
only assume that the occupation of Indochina was being undertaken
by Japan for the purpose of further offense and this created a
situation which necessarily must give the United States the most

serious disquiet...

"...The President stated that if the Japanese Government
would refrain from occupying Indochina with its military and naval
forces, or, had such steps actually been commenced, if the Japanese
Government would withdraw such forces, the President could assure
the Japanese Government that he would do everything within his
power to obtain from the Governments of China, Great Britain,
the Netherlands, and of course the United States itself a bind-
ing and solemn declaration, provided Japan would undertake the
same commitment, to regard Indochina as a neutralized country
in the same way in which Switzerland had up to now been regarded
by the powers as a neutralized country. He stated that this
would imply that none of the powers concerned would undertake
any military act of aggression against Indochina and would re-
main in control of the territory and would not be confronted with
attempts to dislodge them on the part of de Gaullist or Free
French agents or forces." *

The same date, Secretary of State Cordell Hull instructed Sumner Welles
to see the Japanese Ambassador, and

"Make clear the fact that the occupation of Indochina by
Japan possibly means one further important step to seizing con-
trol of the South Sea area, including trade routes of supreme
importance to the United States controlling such products as
rubber, tin and other commodities. This was of vital concern
to the United States. The Secretary said that if we did not
bring out this point our people will not understand the signi-
ficance of this movement into Indochina. The Secretary mentioned
another point to be stressed: there is no theory on which Indo-
china could be flooded with armed forces, aircraft, et cetera,

|
* Memorandum of Conversation by Sumner Welles, Acting Secretary of States

24 July, 1941; the President's proposal for neutralization was submitted
to Japan in a note of 8 August, 1941.

A-11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

support internationally from non-Communist, anticolonialist world
opinion. To squander these assets simply to enunciate idealogical
statements commensurate with Communist-bloc pronouncements would

have been a high price to pay at any time. Yet, the view may well

be entertained that Ho Chi Minh and some other Viet Minh leaders wanted
the greater measure of independence that nonalignment with either bloc
would afford, and hoped perhaps to escape thereby the inevitable polar-
ization of the nationalist movement in Viet-Nam with all its attendant
negative consequences.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C-22
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpts from Vietnam: A Dragon Embattled (Vol I: From Colonialism to
the Viet Minh) by Joseph Buttinger, 1967

1

Pages 406-408

But no one knew better than Ho Chi Minh that the struggle for
independence could not be conducted under the banner of Communism. The
establishment of an open dictatorship of their party would only have brought
about the collapse of the ingenious political edifice through which they
dominated the entire nationalist movement. The more the regime evolved
toward one-party rule, the greater became the need for democratic rhetoric
and ritual, and for a splendid facade of democratic institutions. The
constitution submitted to the Assembly was designed for this pose.

It was adopted, with 240 against 2 votes, on November 8 [ighs}.

*¥ * *

If the lofty principles of this constitution had no influence on the
political evolution of the Hanoi regime, the reason is not that the out-
break of the war several weeks later prevented the D.R.V.N. from realizing
the promise contained in its name. The Communists determined the nature
of the regime even more after the outbreak of the war than before,.and
as far as they were concerned, the purpose of the constitution was not to
create the basis for a democratic Hee anes It was their contention, in
Vietnam no less than in the “people's democracies" of Fastern Europe, that
the regime they had set up was democratic, was in fact a "higher form of
democracy" than existed in any Western state. Outsiders, and especially
people who believe that Communist political theory is basically dishonest,
find this hard to understand. But the democratic principles of the con-
stitution were laid down not merely as a means to camouflage the progressive
development of the regime toward a Communist-led one- party dictatorship.
These freedoms were meant for the entire people, to be denied only to

"reactionaries ," "traitors," "collaborators," "troublemakers," and other
"enemies of the people," in brief anyone whose political activities the
Communists considered harmful to the national cause, the political and
organizational custodian of which was the Viet Minh and later es Lien
Viet.

Even before the armed conflict spread over the entire country, the
Communists ‘felt perfectly justified in demanding that their nationalist
rivals exercise their political rights only in support of the Viet Minh
regime. Opposition to the Viet Minh was synonymous with acting against
the interests of the state. There is no denying that the Communists in-
troduced, radical democratic reforms such as Vietnam had never known before,
and. that they established almost every known type of democratic institu-
tion. But is is equally true that they had no compunction about imprison-
ing or even murdering people who tried to enjoy these reforms or use these
institutions to oppose the Viet Minh.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
C-23
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section a3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from Arthur M. Schlesinger, A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy

in the White House, Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, 1965, De Seu

1951: “In Indochina," Kennedy said, on his return to Washington,
“we have allied ourselves to the desperate effort of a French regime
to hang on to the remnants of empire....To check the southern drive
of communism makes sense but not only through reliance on the force
of arms. The task is rather to build strong native non-communist
sentiment within these areas and rely on that as a spearhead of defense
rather than upon the legions of General de lattre. To do this apart
from and in defiance of innately nationalistic aims Spells foredoomed
failure." The trip gave Kennedy both a new sympathy for the problems
of Asia and a new understanding of the power of nationalism in the
underdeveloped world.

c-2) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from The Bitter Heritage, 1967, by Arthur M. Schlesinger

Pages 75-76

«--The two heaviest blows recently suffered. by Peking -- the destruction
of the Communist Party in Indonesia and the declaration of independence by
North Korea -- took place without benefit of American patronage or rhetoric.
Indeed, too overt American intervention may actually have the effect of
smothering the forces of local nationalism or driving them to the other
side and thereby ultimately weakening the containment of China.

In the unpredictable decades ahead, the most effective bulwark against
an aggressive national communist state in some circumstances may well be
national communism in surrounding states. A rational policy of containing
China could have recognized that a communist Vietnam under Ho might be a
better instrument of containment than a shaky Saigon regime led. by right-
wing mandarins or air force generals. Had Ho taken over all Vietnam in
1954, he might today be soliciting Soviet support to strengthen his re-
sistance to Chinese pressure, and this situation, however appalling for
the people of South Vietnam, would obviously be better for the United States
than the one in which we are floundering today. And now, alas, it may be
almost too late: the whole thrust of United States policy since 1954,
and more than ever since the bombing of the north began, has been not to
pry Peking and Hanoi apart but to drive them together.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
C-25 a et
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from Viet-Nam Witness 1953-1966 by Bernard B. Fall

July 1965 - pages 119-120

It is vital to remember that, unlike any other successful communist
movement, the Vietnamese party fought its way to ruling power in virtual
isolation. In Eastern Europe, Soviet troops were always present in the
countries where communist takeovers took place; in fact, they were an es-
sential ingredient. In China, the turnover to the communists of vast stores
of Japanese arms by the Soviet Forces in Manchuria was of vital importance
to the CCPs military success, and the Russian military presence in North
Korea ensured the creation of a "people's democracy" there. In Albania,
Tito's partisans played the role of Soviet troops elsewhere. In the Viet-
Nam of 1945, on the contrary, the D.R.V.N. had no such support from either
the Soviets or even the Chinese Communists (then bottled-up in the hills
of northwestern China); and. connections with the French CP, then just
emerging from four years of clandestinity, were probably nonexistent for
the simple reason that the first postwar ships to go from France to Indo-
china only reached Saigon in late September 1945 -- and these were troop
transports bringing the vanguard of the French Expeditionary Force. In
other words, the Vietnamese Communists literally had to play their revo-
lution alone and by ear.

C-26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from Toward Peace in Indochina, 1966, by Anthony Eden, Earl of Avon

Pages 22-2)

IfPeking is obsessed by its wrongful impression of American intentions,
Hanoi's opinion may eventually prove less decided. Moscow's judgment has
influence in North Vietnam which can at times balance Peking's. If China's
support is the tougher and more resolutely proclaimed, a number of Hanoi's
communist leaders are Moscow trained, including Ho Chi Minh himself. More-
over, historic instincts can be strong, however Left the leaders. The
Vietnamese might not relish a fate which could relegate them to serve as
China's southernmost imperial outpost, even for a time.

There are risks also for North Vietnam in the growing Sino-Soviet
bitterness. Recently the Chinese Government have even ignored all anniver-
saries of friendship with their Vietnam campaign a cause of complaint against
Russia, while dawdling Soviet supplies on their journey. That is not cozy
for Hanoi, which has no wish to quarrel with either communist great power
but could find the extreme Chinese demands increasingly prickly to live
with.

The parallel which is sometimes drawn between Marshal Tito and Moscow
and Ho Chi Minh and Peking is not, however, close. North Vietnam is at
war and in no position to quarrel with its chief provider of arms and sup-
plies. Even in less arduous conditions, China would still be the big neigh-
bor, as well as the big brother, and difficult to defy, if such a thing
could, be even dreamed of. All the same there is more scope for eventual
agreement with Hanoi than with Peking, despite the tragic trail of blood
and suffering, or maybe because of it.

It is Vietnam, not China, which has had the losses in life and in
wealth, from schools to communications. Some day, somehow this has to etd.
Moreover, even the North has much to gain from forming part of a girdle
of neutral states, or at least from seeing such a girdle formed to the
south and southwest of its territory. For this to be possible, Hanoi must
accept two glimpses of reality, though they need never be publicly pro-
claimed. The first is that the United States cannot be beaten, the second
is that while a United States military withdrawal might find its place in
a phased timetable within an agreement, there is not a remote chance of
even a partial American withdrawal unless North Vietnam plays its part,
although a negative one, to make this possible.

C-27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from The Arrogance of Power, 1966, by Senator J. Williem Fulbright

Pages 111-114

At the heart of the Vietnam tragedy is the fact that the most
powerful nationalist movement in that country is one which is also com-
munist. Ho Chi Minh is not a mere agent of Communist China, much less
of the "international communist conspiracy" that we used to hear so much
about. He is a bona-fide nationalist revolutionary, the leader of his
country's rebellion against French colonialism. He is also a communist,
and that is the essential reason why since at least 1950 he has been re-
garded as an enemy by the United States.

i hk

This outline, highly abbreviated though it is, illustrates a most
important fact -- the merger of nationalism and communism in Vietnam under
the leadership of Ho Chi Minh. It is not meaningful to speak of the Viet
Minh as more nationalist than communist or as more communist than national-
ist; it is both. The merger is a misfortune from the viewpoint of American
interests and preferences, but it is also a fact, a fact with which we
can and. should come to terms. Even today, after all that America has done
to sustain the South Vietnamese government, there is only one politician
whose name is known to peasants all over Vietnam: Ho Chi Minh.

It is important to be very clear about what is meant by "nationalism."
It has been best described, by Hans Kohn as a "state of mind” which regards
the nation as "the ideal form of political organization and the nationality
as the source of all creative cultural energy and of economic well being."
Understood in this way, nationalism is not necessarily humane or democratic,
socially constructive or responsive to individual needs. It is merely
powerful -- powerful in a sense of being able to mobilize the loyalty ang
active support of vast numbers of ordinary people. When one describes
Ho Chi Minh or the Viet Minh or the Viet Cong as "nationalist," it is not
to be inferred that they are regarded as saints. Far from it: they have
demonstrated again and again that they are fanatical and cruel, but they
have also shown that they are patriots, that they have identified them-
selves with the nation and:its mystique, with that "state of mind” which
more than any other in our time inspires ordinary people to acts of loyalty,
bravery, and self-sacrifice.

For our purposes, the significance of Ho Chi Minh's nationalism is
that it is associated with what Bernard Fall has called "the 2,000-year-
old distrust in Vietnam of everything Chinese." Vietnamese communism is
therefore a potential bulwark -- perhaps the only potential bulwark --
against Chinese domination of Vietnam. It is for this reason that I be-
lieve that we should try, if it is not yet too late, to come to terms with
North Vietnam and the Viet Cong.

c-28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from "What Choices Do We Have in Vietnam?" by Edwin 0. Reischauer

Look, September 19, 1967, page 27

The obvious alternative was to allow Ho and his Commmist-dominated
Vietminh to take over the whole of Vietnam. This would have happened early
if the United States had made quite clear in 1945 that it did not approve
of the revival of colonialism in Asia and would give it no support. It
would still have happened if we had not given massive aid to the French
war effort after 1949. It would have happened if we had been willing in
1954 to support the Geneva agreements and had not tried to build up a per-
manent regime under Diem in South Vietnam. It would have happened if we
had. not steadily increased our military commitments to South Vietnam between
1960 and 1963. It would have happened if we had decided against massive
participation in the war in the winter of 1964-'65. ‘Thus, under each of
our last four Presidents, decisions were clearly made, even if not fully
thought out, to reject this one obvious alternative.

What would. have happened if, at any of these moments of decision,
we had chosen the alternative? If we had clearly favored Vietnamese
nationalism over French colonialism in 1945, it seems obvious that Ho,
in short order, would have established effective control over the whole
of Vietnam. He probably would have set up the same sort of dictatorial,
oppressive, Communist rule over all Vietnam that he actually did over the
North. He would probably have encountered much the same sort of problems
he did in the North, and the economic progress of Vietnam would have been
slow, though, of course, not as slow as in a war-torn land.

The society and government of this unified Vietnam would probably
not have been something we would have approved of, but we have not found
much we could approve of in the society and government of a divided Viet-
nam either. Quite possibly, a unified Vietnam under Ho, spared the ravages
of war, would have gone at least as far toward the evolution of a stable
and. reasonably just society as has the divided, war-torn land we know today.
For us, however, the question is what that sort of Vietnam would have meant
in international politics. I believe it would be safe to assume that it
would have been a highly nationalistic Vietnam. By the same token, I be-
lieve it also would have been free of Chinese domination. The Vietnamese
have instinctive fears of their great northern neighbor. While they have
always admired and imitated China, for more than a millennium they have
had a deep national tradition of resistance to its domination. If they
had had. no specific reason to fear or resent us, the chances are that their
fears and resentments would have come to focus on China, whether or not
it, too, were Communist.

)
It seems highly probable that Ho's Communist-dominated regime, if it

had been allowed by us to take over all Vietnam at the end of the war, would
have moved to a position with relation to China not unlike that of Tito's

C-29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Yugoslavia toward the Soviet Union. Ho, like Tito, had had cordial wartime
relations with us. He apparently expected our continued friendship and. had
more to hope for in economic aid from us than China. He and his associates
were ardent nationalists and probably had deeper fears and, suspicions of

the Chinese than the Yugoslavs had of the Russians. While such a Vietnam
might have been more circumspect and. respectful toward China then Tito has
been toward the Soviet Union, it would probably have been even more fiercely
independent. The way in which Hanoi has sought to maintain its independence
of Peking and. Moscow, despite the military dependence on both, which was
forced on it by the protracted war with us, suggests how strongly independent
a Communist Vietnam would have been, if not pushed by these military necessi-
ties.

Would such a Communist regime in all Vietnam have been a serious menace
to its neighbors or to world peace? I doubt it. A Communist take-over
in all Vietnam shortly after the end of the war would probably have seemed
to the rest of the world no more of a Communist triumph than the successive
victories of Communists over anti-Communists that have taken place in Viet-
nam since 1945. It is hard to believe that a united Commnist Vietnam would °
have had any more harmful an influence on Laos than a divided war-torn
Vietnam has had. Laos and Cambodia might have fallen under Vietnamese in-
fluence, but this at least would have kept them out of Chinese control.
Or, possibly, Cambodia's traditional animosity toward Vietnam would have
induced it to veer further away than it has from association with the Com-
munist nations, if South Vietnam, too, had been Communist. ‘Thailand would
probably have been less adversely affected by an entirely Communist Vietnam
than it has been by the prolonged war there. Meanwhile, a united, strongly
nationalistic Vietnam, while paying lip service to Communist China, would
probably have served as a far more effective dike against the southward
extension of Chinese power and influence than have a North Vietnam forced
into military dependence on China and an unstable South Vietnam. And this
general situation in Vietnam and Southeast Asia, which would have been so
much less unsatisfactory for us than what we have today, would have been
achieved without any of the terrible costs that have mounted so high.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-30
i

‘
‘
eve,

eee) ee
or ae Te

=

ee |

ee!

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for the defense of Japan. The only alternative is that this
venture into Indochina ‘has a close relation to the South Sea
area and its value for offense against that area." *

In a press statement of 2 August 1941, Acting Secretary of State
Welles deplored Japan's "expansionist aims" and impuned Vichy:

"Under these circumstances, this Government is impelled
to question whether the French Government at Vichy in fact
proposes to maintain its declared policy to preserve for
the French people the territories both at home and abroad
which have long been under French sovereignty.

"This Government, mindful of its traditional friend-
ship for France, has deeply sympathized with the desire of
the French people to maintain their territories and to
preserve them intact. In its relations with the French
Government at Vichy and with the local French authorities
in French territories, the United States will be governed
by the manifest effectiveness with which those authorities
endeavor to protect these territories from domination and
control by those powers which are seeking to extend their
rule by force and conquest, or by the threat thereof."

On the eve of Pearl Harbor, as part of the U.S. attempt to obtain
Japanese consent to a non-aggression pact, the U.S. again proposed neutrali-
zation of Indochina in return for Japanese withdrawal. The events of
7 December 1941 put the question of the future of Indochina in the wholly
different context of U.S. strategy for fighting World War II.

a. Roosevelt's Trusteeship Concept
U.S. policy toward Indochina during World War II was ambivalent.
On the one hand, the U.S. appeared to support Free French claims to all

of France's overseas dominions. The U.S. early in the war repeatedly ex-
pressed or implied to the French an intention to restore to France its

* Memorandum by Cecil W. Gray, Assistant to the Secretary of State,
July 24, 1942.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A-12
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A POLITICAL BIOGRAPHY OF
HO CHI MINH, 1890-1950

TABLE OF CONTENTS and OUTLINE

Page

ty Forming the Political Meni ycsesecciess acu acetal wiles oe oie aint te ES tee C-32

a Comintern Heer -< cts vies wee eee ee ose oP Mee et eeenee oe C-35

C-36 .

. Prison and Obscurity...... elols age) eiaceheletalerele/crerettveya/ openers

ies Nod

c-38

Wartime Leader...seecosecs misiehelsiekeiatensisieval oletcbere ai ateters

Head of State eee eene ee ee ee ee ee . c-38
= “Ho, dgein “She: Nebioga lists a. eainivs aaanawis oer remiee Se Chee : c-40

c=L1
c-46

U.S. Perceptions Of Ho.w...csesesccccesccscccsecces

Ho, AsienNeutral?......... er Pe ening sty tee

mor leah Sp On aay

C-h7
c-h8

Ho, REA tleyenstetekehalerscetans .6 eee eee eee ee eee eee 20 00 8s 8 6

WO! Ho Cha Mink Chronology. 2+... s+ swie + sl «1s ol skanete eae

C-31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I. C. 2. A POLITICAL BIOGRAPHY OF HO CHI MINH, 1890-1950

There have been two periods in the life of Ho Chi Minh, President
of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV), in which he ostensibly devoted
himself wholly to Vietnamese Nationalism. The first period was in the
early years before 1920 when Ho Chi Minh was an avid anti-colonialist,
but not yet caught up in the communist revolution. The second period of
seeming nationalist preoccupation was from 1945 to 1950, when Ho tried to
negotiate with the French, appealed to the U.S., UK and China for inter-
vention in Vietnam, denied being a communist, and avoided any ostensible
link between the DRV and the Kremlin. ‘The remainder of Ho Chi Minh's
political life has been that of a classic communist, anti-colonial,
nationalist revolutionary -- exile, Moscow schools, prison, covert opera-
tions, guerrilla warfare, party politics. A chronology of his career
through 1950 is attached, (pp. C-48 ff).

1. Forming the Political Man

Ho Chi Minh was born Nguyen Van Thanh, 19 May 1890, in Kim-Lien
in the northern Annam province of Nghe-An (in what is now North Vietnam).
Ho was exposed early in life to bitter resentment of the French presence
in Vietnam; his father was jailed at Poulo Condore for participation in
nationalist activities. Ho's secondary education took place in a hotbed of
nationalism, Hue's Lycee Quoc-Hoc. His schooling terminated around 1910
before he received 2 diploma, but still he acquired more education than
most of his compatriots. His decision to work as a mess boy on a French
liner in 1912 has been regarded by Bernard Fall as a key political deci-
sion -- that is, Fall held that Ho, unlike most conservative fellow
Nationalists, thereby opted for the West (republicanism, democracy, popu-
lar sovereignty, etc.), against the East (militarism, mandarinal society,
etc.). 1/ If the going to sea were a significant decision at all, it
probably showed only that Ho was not inclined to follow the normal path
of Vietnamese nationalism. This fact was borne out by Ho's break with
his father, Nguyen Tat Sac, who had given him a letter for Phan Chu Trinh,
a veteran Viet nationalist, in Paris. Sac had hoped Fhan would tutor
Ho in Vietnamese nationalis , but Ho could not accept Phan's "peaceful
cooperation with the French," and left Paris; thereafter he severed his
ties with his father. 2/

As a young Asian struggling to earn a living in pre-World War I
Europe and America, Ho had been exposed to the racial inequalities of the
Western civilization and perhaps sought security when he joined the Chinese-.
dominated Overseas Workers Association, a clandestine, anti-colonialist
organization concerned with improving the working conditions of foreign
laborers but increasingly a political force. Ho went to France from London
in 1917 with the war in the forefront, and the Russian Leninist revolution
in the background. Looking on himself as a political organizer and writer
of sorts, Ho signed his articles Nguyen Ai Quoc (which means "Nguyen-the-
Patriot") -- an alias by which all Vietnam came to know him until be became

ee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ho Chi Minh in 1943. As a Paris writer, anti-colonialist nationalism was
the major theme for his back room newspaper -- Viet Nam Hon (The Soul of
Vietnam). Ho also produced a widely-read attack on French colonial policy
called French Colonization on Trial, which purportedly became the "bible

of nationalists" in Vietnam. 3/ Caught up in the patriotic fervor of the

armistice, Ho produced an eight-point program to present at Versailles:

"Attracted by the promise of Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen
Points, spokesmen of the various peoples who wanted independence
followed the leaders of the victorious Allies to Paris in 1919.
Along with the Indians, the Koreans, the Irish, and the Arabs,

Ho Chi Minh came with a list of Vietnamese grievances and a plea
for Vietnamese autonomy. He arrived at Versailles in rented
evening clothes to deliver his appeal. But the statesmen assem-
bled in Paris had no time for the problems of the subject peoples
of the French Empire, and nothing came of it." 4

This was Ho's last major fling at non-communist nationalism before
1920, since increasingly he began to move in the circles of Leon Blum,
Marcel Cochin, Marius Moutet, and other left-wing political figures, and
became a member of the French Socialist Party. In May, 1920, Ho was a
delegate at the Socialist Congress in Tours, and joined in the founding
of the French Communist Party. Ho much later in life recalled those days
in describing "The Path Which Led Me To Leninism."*

"After World War I, I made my living in Paris, now as a
retoucher at a photographer's, now as painter of ‘Chinese antiqui-
ties' (made in France!). I would distribute leaflets denouncing
the crimes committed by the French colonialists in Viet-Namn.

"At that time, I supported the October Revolution only
instinctively, not yet grasping all its historic importance.
I loved and admired Lenin because he was a great patriot who
liberated his compatriots; until then, I had read none of his
books. ¥

"The reason for my joining the French Socialist Party was
that these ‘ladies and gentlemen' -- as I called my comrades
at that moment -- had shown their sympathy toward me, toward
the struggle of the oppressed peoples. But I understood neither
what was a party, a trade-union, nor what was Socialism or Com-
munism.

"Heated discussions were then taking place in the branches
of the Socialist Party, about the question of whether the Socialist
Party should remain in the Second International, should a Second-
and-a-half International be founded, or should the Socialist
Party join Lenin's Third International? I attended the meetings
regularly, twice or thrice a week, and attentively listened to
the discussions. First, I could not understand thoroughly.

*Article written in April, 1960, for the Soviet review Problems of the East,
for the 90th anniversary of Lenin's birth. From Fall, Ho on Revolution, 5-7.

C-33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Why were the discussions so heated? Either with the Second,
Second-and-a-half, or Third International, the revolution could
be waged. What was the use of arguing then? As for the First
International, what had become of it?

"What I wanted most to know -- and this precisely was not
debated in the meetings -- was: Which International sides with
the peoples of colonial countries?

"I raised this question -- the most important in my opinion --
in a meeting. Some comrades answered: It is the Third, not the
Second, International. And a comrade gave me Lenin's 'Thesis
on the National and Colonial Questions,' published by 1'Humanite,
to read.

"There were political terms difficult to understand in this
thesis. But by dint of reading it again and again, finally I
could grasp the main part of it. What emotion, enthusiasm, clear-
Sightedness, and confidence it instilled into me! TI was over-
joyed to tears. Though sitting alone in my room, I shouted aloud
as if addressing large crowds: ‘Dear martyrs, compatriots! This
is what we need, this is the path to our liberation!'

"After then, I had entire confidence in Lenin, in the Third
International,

"Formerly, during the meetings of the Party branch, I only
listened to the discussion; I had a vague belief that 211 were
logical, and could not differentiate as to who were right and
who were wrong. But from then on, I also plunged into the debates
and discussed with fervor. Though I was still lacking French
words to express all my thoughts, I smashed the allegations attack-
ing Lenin and the Third International with no less vigor. My
only argument was; ‘If you do not condemn colonialism, if you
do not side with the colonial people, what kind of revolution
are. you waging?’

"Not only did I take part in the meetings of my own Party
branch, but I also went to other Party branches to lay down ‘my
position.* Now I must tell again that Comrades Marcel Cachin,
Vaillant Couturier, Monmousseau, and many others helped me to
broaden my knowledge. Finally, at the Tours Congress, I voted
with them for our joining the Third International.

"At first, patriotism, not yet Communism, led me to have
confidence in Lenin, in the Third International. Step by step,
along the struggle, by studying Marxism-Leninism parallel with
participation in practical activities, I gradually came upon
the fact that only Socialism and Communism can liberate the
oppressed nations and the working people throughout the world
from slavery.

C-3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"There is a legend, in our country as well as in China, on
the miraculous "Book of the Wise.’ When facing great difficulties,
one opens it and finds a way out. lLeninism is not only a miracu-
lous 'book of the wise,' a compass for us Vietnamese revolutionaries
and people: it is also the radiant sun illuminating our path to
final victory, to Socialism and Communism.”

2. Comintern Agent

Later in 1920 Ho Chi Minh also attended the Baku Conference (First
Conference of the Peoples of the Far East) on his first visit to Russia.
It is also likely that he took part in the Conference of Workers of the
Far Fast in 1922 in Moscow which was concerned with establishing communism
in the Far East. He returned to France and

_"Ho Chi Minh stayed on in France until 1923, when the French
Communist Party chose him as its delegate to the Congress of the
Peasant International (the Krestintern) which met in Moscow
that October...he did not leave the Soviet Union after the meet-
ing, but remained there for more than a year, studying Communism,
its techniques, and its organization, first-hand. He came to
know many of Communism's great and near-great during this period,
as before he had come to know the leaders of the Left-Wing move-
ment in Paris." 5/

In 1924, Ho became a student at the Eastern Workers University and studied
Marxism-Leninism and bolshevik tactics. 6

In 1925, he accompanied Michael Borodin, the Comintern delegate to the
Kuomintang to Canton, China, as a Chinese translator to the Soviet consu-
late. After a few months, Ho had organized the Association of Vietnamese
Revolutionary Young Comrades. Vv The Whampoa, Political and Military
Academy in Canton, which had attracted revolutionaries, especially Viet-
namese, was the center of Ho's training program of revolution and Marxism.
Ho is alleged to have displayed political ruthlessness in exposing a rival
nationalist, Pham Boi Chau, a renowned Vietnamese patriot and idealist;

Ho is supposed to have received 100,000 piasters from the security police
for his betrayal. Ho also set up @ personnel security system which reputedly
impaired other Vietnamese nationalist organizations. He and his assistant,
one Lam Duc Thu, required two photographs of each incoming recruit to
Whampoa, Academy. Upon graduation, if the student had joined Ho's Youth
League, he returned to Vietnam in secrecy. If the student displayed inter-
est in other parties, Thu sold his photograph to the French consulate,
which would then have the student arrested at the border. Thus Ho
strengthened his own secret cells, while weakening his nationalist opposi-
tion. 8/ At Whampoa in 1926 Ho wrote that “only a communist party can
faltimately/ insure the well-being of Annan." 9/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C-35
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In 1927, Chiang Kai-shek broke with the communists, and Borodin was
forced to return to Moscow. Ho Chi Minh returned to Moscow with him,
but before departing turned over leadership of the Youth League to a
trusted assistant who was arrested within the year. The League leader-
ship then fell to Thu, who was still living sumptiously in Hong Kong on
French blood money. Thu called a congress in Hong Kong in 1929 which
resulted in the Vietnam delegates walking out in disgust, and forming an
Indochinese Communist Party (ICP) in Tonkin. The emigré leadership of
the League conceded the necessity of organizing a communist party, but in
reality, was unwilling to deviate from the political line set by Ho Chi
Minh -- which was to build a revolutionary nationalist party with socialist
tendencies. 10/ As the ICP grew in strength, the Youth League adopted
the name "Annamese Communist Party.”

After leaving China in 1927, Ho Chi Minh travelled to Moscow, Berlin,
and in 1929 was in Thailand working secretly with 30,000 Viet ‘emigrés.
Ho returned to Hong Kong in January, 1930, and resolved the disunity among
the several Indochinese Communist factions. A new party was set up, with
a central committee at Haiphong, named the Vietnam Communist Party. In
October, 1930, at Comintern insistence, it was renamed the Indochinese
Communist Party, to include Cambodian and Laotians; the Central Committee
was transferred to Saigon. 11/ French police repression of communists
shortly after nearly destroyed the organization; a number of Ho's lieutenants,
Pham yan Dong, Giap and others, were sent to Poulo Candou for long prison
terms.

3. Prison and Obscurity

Ho, who had been sentenced to death in absentia by the French,
was arrested in Hong Kong in 1931 by the British. Bernard Fall wrote
this account:

"Legality, however, prevailed in the genteel world of Hong
Kong's Anglo-Saxon law. Defended by Sir Stafford Cripps before
Britain's Privy Court, Ho was found not subject to extradition
since he was a political refugee. Still, the British did not
want him and he was a marked man. He slipped out of Hong Kong,
into the nearby but isolated Chinese province of Fukien.

"Somehow, only a year later, Ho was in Shanghai, the only
foreign place in Asia then where a substantial Vietnamese com-
munity could be found. He was desperately seeking contact with
the Comintern apparatus, which was now prudently concealing its
operations in China. It was understandable that what was left
of the Chinese Communist Party outside of Mao's forces was not
about to advertise its presence all over Shanghai. But there
may have been another reason as well for Ho's difficulties in
making contact with the Communists: Ho had been released from
British prison for reasons which a suspicious Communist “might
find difficult to swallow. To a Communist apparatus emerging
from the blows it had been subjected to ‘in the early Thirties,
it was normal procedure to isolate Ho Chi Minh as a potential

C-36
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

agent provocateur until more was known about what he had said and
done while in British custody.

"Finally, Ho made contact and early in 1934 the Communist
apparatus smuggled him back to Moscow, where he had been preceded
by a fairly large group of Vietnamese trainees studying in many
fields, from engineering to plain agitprop (agitation and propa-
ganda). He naturally turned to the latter.

"Ho first attended the Institute for National and Colonial
Questions in Moscow, and then the famous 'graduate school' for
senior Communist leaders, the Lenin School. Moscow, in 1935-38,
also provided an education of a far different sort: the Stalin
purges. It would be interesting to know what Ho's feelings were
as he saw some of his best friends accused, convicted, and executed
for crimes which they patently had not committed. What is remarka-
ble is that Ho, as a well-known member of the Comintern group,
was not purged right along with them, for hundreds of thousands
of people of lesser distinction than he became victims of Stalin's
mania." 12

The record of Ho's travels in the period of 1933-1939 is otherwise obscure}
the communist movement in Vietnam was led by Tran Van Giau and others dur-
ing those years.

Ho emerged from his retreats in 1939, a difficult year. Ho, as a
disciplined communist had to follow the Party's tactical guidance, which
was intended to safeguard the Soviet Union as the base of the international
movement, even when this brought him into temporary conflict with his long
term gaale for Vietnam. Of the period just preceding World War II, Fall
has written:

",.Ho probably was then unconditionally loyal to Stalin,
and Stalin knew it. This became particularly clear when Nazism
began to loom as a threat and the Communist parties decided in
1936 to apply the policy of di eu fronts' with the Western
democracies.

"This policy was a bitter pill for the colonial Communist
governments such as that of Indochina, for it meant giving up
advocacy of outright independence in favor of a policy of coopera-
tion with the French colonial regime. But Ho, returning to Com-
munist bases in Northwest China in 1937, gritted his teeth and
rammed this line down the throat of his reluctant following in
its most minute vagaries, and his report on the results, addressed
to the Comintent in 1939, demonstrated his success.

"It was probably Ho's lowest point. He had to forswear
publicly all he had stood for, had to cooperate with the French,
the people he hated most, and had to sell out the Trotskyist

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
C-37 eat
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

allies who had helped the Communists from time to time in beating
French-sponsored candidates for elections in CochinChina (a French
colony, then part of the Federation of Indochina which, as a
protectorate, enjoyed a measure of legislative representation).
And the worst was not yet over. Not authorized by the Comintern
to expose himself through a premature return to Vietnam, he now
worked only as a low-level communications operator to the Chinese
Communist 8th Route Army, then fighting the Japanese." 13/

h. Wartime Leader

In 1940 Ho was reported in Liuchow, Kwang-Si Province, South China,
engaged in training guerrillas under the sponsorship of the local warlord.
Shortly thereafter Ho, with the remnants of the central committee of the
‘ICP, crossed into Vietnam, and in 1941 began organizing a resistance move-
ment on a large scale. The ICP prepared for, and advocated, armed insurrec-
tion against French Imperialism and Japanese Fascism. However, Ho Chi Minh
organized the Viet Minh as a Vietnamese nationalist movement of resistance.
The Viet Minh program centered on collaboration with the Allies to defeat
Japan and liberate Indochina. In the course of his work, Ho was arrested
in May 1942 by Chinese nationalists, under mysterious circumstances, and
in June 1943 was as mysteriously released. Ho re-joined tle Viet Minh,
re-entered Vietnam, and led the Viet Minh to power in August, 1945.

Ho, at the time he became President of the DRV, was undoubtedly
a communist in the sense that he had spent twenty-five years in the embrace
of Party discipline and doctrine, and that he had been an agent of the
Communist International. He was also a dedicated revolutionary nationalist
whose cause had exacted of him years of hardship, imprisonment, exile, and
conspiratorial isolation. In his Notes from a Prison Diary, he wrote:

"People who come out of prison can build up a country.

Misfortune is a test of people's fidelity. ¥
Those who protest at injustice are people of true merit.

When the prison doors are opened, the real dragon will fly out." 14/

5. Head of State

Whatever else he was, Ho was a leader and organizer par excellence,
an astute manipulator of men who had successfully threaded a way through
the tangle of international intrigue in China to political power for himself
and his followers of the ICP and the Viet Minh. He came to power in North
Vietnam under the aegis of the Allies, and by popular acclaim. He did
not establish a communist government, although besides himself in the Presi-
dency, he had arranged that communist lieutenants would hold the portfolios
of interior, national defense, finance, propaganda, education, and youth.
The communists, although thus centrally placed, were in a minority, and
full account had been taken of independents and several of the principal

c-38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

non-comunist nationalist parties in determining representation on the
cabinet. 15/

In November, 1945, Ho disestablished the Indochinese Communist Party;
and Association for Marxist Studies was formed when the ICP was abolished,
but it was not until 1951 that the Communist Party again asserted itself
openly in DRV politics. 16/ Ho ostensibly threw his entire energies into
the Viet Minh, which he described in 1945 as having:

".. millions of members from all social strata: intellec-
tuals, peasants, workers, businessmen, soldiers, and from all
nationalities in the country..." 17/

Subsequently, he moved to cut down the number of communists in cabinet
posts within the government, and otherwise to enhance its coalition nature.

Ho, the Viet Minh, and the DRV government stressed their identity
with the people, and their patriotic, democratic and nationalist goals,
foregoing communist cant. Ho's own writings of the period are to point: 18/

"October, 1945: We must realize that all Government organs,
from the Central to the Communal level, are the people's servants,
that is to say they are appointed to work for the sake of the
whole peoples interests.

"October, 1945: We neither dislike nor hate the French
people. On the contrary, we respect them as a great people
who were first to propagate the lofty ideals of liberty, equality,
and fraternity.

"November, 1945: The colonialists...have run counter to
the promises concerning democracy and liberty that the Allied
powers have proclaimed. They have of their own accord sabotaged
their fathers' principles of liberty and equality. In consequence,
it is for a just cause, for justice of the world, and for Vietnam's
land and people that our compatriots throughout the country have
risen to struggle, and are firmly determined to maintain their
independence.

"January, 1946: With a view to winning complete independence
and bringing about a close cooperation between the various politi-
cal parties to further strengthen the Government, it is now named
the Provisional Coalition Government. At this moment, if all
parties unite together, the Government can overcome difficulties.

Political Objectives: To carry out satisfactorily the
elections...to unify the various administrative organs
according to democratic principles.

Economic Objectives: To endeavor to develop agriculture;

to encourage cultivation and stock breeding in order to
check famine.

C~39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Military Objectives: To unify the various armed forces...

"October 1946: We must show to the French Government and
people and to the world at large that the Vietnamese people are
already in possession of all the required conditions to be inde-
pendent and free, and that recognition of our freedom and inde-
pendence is & necessity...

"December 1946: Compatriots! Rise up! Men and women,
old and young, regardless of creeds, political parties, or
nationalities, all the Vietnamese must stand up to fight the
French colonialists to save the Fatherland...

"April 1948: The nation has its roots in the people. In
the Resistance War and national reconstruction, the main force
lies in the people..."

6. Ho, Again the Nationalist

The sincerity of Ho's nationalism, then and since, seems as
beyond question as that of Stalin, or Harry Truman. Among his countrymen,
Ho was preeminent among all nationalists. Ho had led the forces which
welcomed the Allies as they entered Indochina to accept the surrender of
Japanese forces there; Ho headed the DRV in 1945-1946 when national unity,
independence, and peace seemed close at hand. Ho was popular, respected,
even revered. He cultivated an image calculated to appeal to the peasant:
venerable age, rustic austerity, and humility. He insisted on "Uncle Ho"
in introducing himself, and it was an "Uncle Ho" that the countryside came
to regard him. No other Vietnamese was so widely known, or so universally
respected. 19/ Moreover, unlike any of his competitors, he had at his
service a disciplined political organization of national scope, trained in
the arts of revolution, and skilled in the techniques of mobilizing opinion
and stimulating political action. In truth, then, Ho was, to the extent
that such existed in 1945 or 1946, the embodiment of Vietnamese national-
isn. 20/

The historical problem, of course, is to what extent Ho's national-
ist goals might have modified his communist convictions. To many observers
of the day, Ho seemed to place the former above the latter not solely as a
matter of dissemblance, as he might-have done in the simultaneous dissolu-
tion of the Party and the formation of the Marxist Association, but as
@ result of deeply held doubts about the validity of communism as a politi-
cal form suitable for Vietnam. Sainteny who negotiated the 6 March 1946
Accord with Ho for France wrote that: "His proposals, his actions, his
attitude, his real or assumed personality, all tended to convince that he
found a solution by force repugnant..." Bao Dai is reputed to have said
that: "I saw Ho Chi Minh suffer. He was fighting a battle within himself.
Ho had his own struggle. He realized communism was not best for his coun-
try, but it was too late. Ultimately, he could not overcome his allegiance
to communism." 21/ During the negotiations for a modus vivendi with the

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-40
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

overseas empire after the war. These U.S. commitments included the
August 2, 1941, official statement on the Franco-Japanese agreement;
a December, 1941, Presidential letter to Pétain; a March 2, 192,
statement on New Caledonia; a note to the French Ambassador of
April 13, 1942; Presidential statements and messages at the time

of the North Africa invasion; the Clark-Darlan Agreement of Novem-
ber 22, 1942; and a letter of the same month from the President's
Personal Representative to General Henri Giraud, which included

the following reassurance:

",..The restoration of France to full indepen-
dence, in all the greatness and vastness which it
possessed before the war in Europe as well as
overseas, is one of the war aims of the United
Nations. It is thoroughly understood that French
sovereignty will be re-established as soon as
possible throughout all the territory, metropoli-
tan or colonial, over which flew the French flag
in 1939." 1/

On the other hand, in the Atlantic Charter and other pronouncements
the U.S. proclaimed support for national self-determination and inde-
pendence. Moreover, the President of the United States, especially
distressed at the Vichy "sell-out" to Japan in Indochina, often cited
French rule there as a flagrant example of onerous and exploitative
colonialism, and talked of his determination to turn Indochina over
to an international trusteeship after the war. In early 1944, Lord
Halifax, the British Ambassador in Washington, called on Secretary
of State Hull to inguire whether the President's “rather definite"
statements "that Indo-china should be taken away from the French and
put under an international trusteeship" -- made to "Turks, Egyptians
and perhaps others" during his trip to Cairo and Teheran -- repre-
sented "final conclusions in view of the fact that they would soon
get back to the French..." 2/ (The French marked well the Presi-
dent's views -- in fact as France withdrew from Vietnam in 1956, its
Foreign Minister recalled Roosevelt's assuring the Sultan of Morocco
that his sympathies lay with colonial peoples struggling for inde-
pendence. 3/) Lord Halifax later recorded that:

|

| TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A-13
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

French in Paris in autumn, 1946, Ho appealed to the French to "save him
from the extremists" within the Viet Minh by some meaningful concession
to Vietnamese independence. 22/ In reply to a journalist's inquiry,
Ho claimed that he could remain neutral, "like Switzerland” in the
developing world power struggle between communism and the West. 23/

7. U.S. Perceptions of Ho

Personally, Ho was charming, and he was especially captivating
with Americans. Ho's public statements resonated well with the anti-
colonial sentiments of most Americans, and he presented an appealing
figure, fragile, humble, ascetic, yet humorous and cosmopolitan. 2k/
General Gallagher, who was the senior U.S. officer in contact with Ho
in 1945, was impressed with Ho's resoluteness and nationalist dedication.
Upon his return, he told State Department officials that "Ho was willing
to cooperate with Great Britain, USSR, or the United States and would
perhaps even settle for French tutelage if that were subordinated to
control by other nations."

"Asked how ‘communist’ the Viet Minh were, General
Gallagher replied that they were smart and successfully
gave the impression of not being communist. Rather, they
emphasized their interest in independence and their
interest in independence and their Annamese patriotism,
Their excellent organization and propaganda techniques,
General Gallagher pointed out, would seem to have the
earmarks of some Russian influence. General Gallagher
stated that the minority Cao Dai group were definitely
Communist. In his opinion, however, the Viet Minh should
not be labeled full-fledged doctrinaire communist." *

On 11 September, 1946, the U.S. Ambassador in Paris reported a visit fs
from Ho:

* From Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard L. Sharp, of the
Division of Southeast Affairs, Department of State, dated Janu-
ary 30, 1946.

c-41 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"I have the honor to report that at his request, I re-
ceived a visit this morning from M. Ho Chi-minh, 'President
of the Republic of Viet-Nam', who confirmed the news pub-
lished in the local press that the Fontainebleau negotiations
between the Viet-Nam representatives and the French repre-
sentatives have practically broken down and the Viet-Nam
delegation will be returning to Indochina within the next
few days....He said that he and his party aspired to Viet-
Nam ‘independence’ in an ‘Union Francaise’. He said that
they would like to receive some 'help' from us, but did not
specify what he meant by that. He took occasion to say that
he was not a communist.

"From the general fuzziness of his remarks, I gathered
that he would like us to get into the game and he would be
very pleased if he could use us in some way or other in his
future negotiations with the French authorities.

"I expressed our interest in Indochina and the people
of Indochina but made no commitments.” 25/
fanderlining added/

Under Secretary of State Dean Acheson, for one, was not alto-
gether persuaded by Ho's representations. In December, 196, he cabled
a U.S. diplomat in Hanoi the following instructions:

"Assume you will see Ho in Hanoi and offer following
summary our present thinking as guide.

"Keep in mind Ho's clear record as agent international

communism, absence evidence recantation Moscow affiliations,

confused political situation France and support Ho receiving

French Communist Party. Least desirable eventuality would

be establishment Communist-dominated, Moscow-oriented state
Indochina in view DEPL, which most interested INFO strength
non-communist elements Vietnam. Report fully, repeating or
requesting DEPT repeat Paris....

"If Ho takes stand non-implementation promise by French
of Cochinchina referendum relieves Vietnam responsibility

compliance with agreements, you might if you consider advis-
able raise question whether he believes referendum after such

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

c-42
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

long disorder could produce worthwhile result and whether he
considers compromise on status Cochinchina could possibly be
reached through negotiation.

"May say American people have welcomed attainments Indo-
chinese in efforts realize praiseworthy aspirations greater
autonomy in framework democratic institutions and it would
be regrettable should this interest and sympathy be imperilled
by any tendency Vietnam administration force issues by intran-
Sigence and violence.

"May inform Ho /U.S. Ambassador, Paris/ discussing situa-
tion French similar frankness....

"Avoid impression US Govt making formal intervention this
juncture. Publicity any kind would be unfortunate." 26/

In response to Under Secretary Acheson's telegram, the following
was reported to Washington on December 17, 1946 -- just before the out-
break of hostilities in Hanoi:

"After conversations with French and Vietnamese officials
and British, Chinese and US Consuls Hanoi Mr. Abbot Moffat,
who is at present in SEA, has developed views in which Consul
Saigon concurs along the following lines:

"The Vietnam Government is in control of a small Commu-
nist group possibly in indirect touch with Moscow and direct
touch with Yenan. A nationalist group is utilizing Communist
party techniques and discipline with which they are familiar.
The people are conservative landowners and attempts to com-
munize the country are secondary and would await successful
operation of a nationalist state. Apparently some leaders,
like Ho Chi Minh, consider collaboration with the French
essential; those like Giap (Vo Nguyen Giap, Minister of Na-
tional Defense) would avoid collaboration fearing French
domination but might not reject French influence and aid.
Nationalist sentiment runs deep among the Vietnamese and
does opposition to the French, and they might easily turn
against all whites. French influence is important not only
as an antidote to Soviet influence but to protect Vietnam
and SEA from future Chinese imperialism. Delay in achieving
a settlement will progressively diminish the possibility of
ultimate French influence.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The honesty of both French and Vietnamese officials is
questionable in connection with recent incidents. O'Sullivan
(U.S. Vice-Consul, Hanoi) believes the Vietnamese were re-
sponsible for the November 20 incident, but it seems clear
that with a different French commander at Haiphong than
Colonel Debes, who is notorious for graft and brutality and
who has admitted that he cannot control his own troops, the
trouble might have been confined to the original incidents.

"According to the French, the Vietnamese enlarge their
claims after each agreement and are so impractical and
doctrinaire that all conversations are ineffectual. The
Vietnamese feel that the French renege on each agreement
and are trying to reestablish control. However, both say
they have approximately the same objectives, although Giap
says Vietnam opposes a political Indochinese federation but
favors a federation dealing with common economic problems.
Moffat has mentioned to the French three apparent basic
troubles: (a) complete mutual distrust, (b) failure of the
French to resolve their own views on 'free state within
French Union’, (c) almost childish Vietnamese attitude and
knowledge of economic questions and vague groping for
‘independence’. Agreement cannot be reached by trying to
reach accords on incidental problems. Basic Vietnam powers
and relations with France must first be established. Not
only new faces are needed but neutral good offices or even
mediation may be essential." *

The U.S. official position remained essentially unchanged there-
after. A few months later, after fighting broke out in North Vietnam,
Secretary of State Marshall stated that:

"Furthermore, there is no escape from fact that trend of

times is to effect that colonial empires in XIX Century sense

are rapidly becoming thing of past. Action Brit in India and

Burma and Dutch in Indonesia are outstanding examples this

* U.S. Department of State Telegram, from Washington, 17 December
1946.

C-bh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive.

trend, and French themselves took cognizance of it both in new
Constitution and in their agreements with Vietnam. On other
hand we do not lose sight fact that Ho Chi Minh has direct
Communist connections and it should be obvious that we are

not interested in seeing colonial empire administrations
supplanted by philosophy and political organizations emanat-
ing from and _ controlled by Kremlin. Fact does remain, however,
that a situation does exist in Indochina which can no longer
be considered, if it ever was considered, to be of a local
character. 27/

In May, 1949, Dean Acheson, then Secretary of State, instructed the U.S.
representative in Hanoi to warn Vietnamese nationalists against any ac-
ceptance of a coalition with Ho and the Viet Minh:

",..You may take following line as representing consensus
informed Americans:

"In Light Ho's known background, no other assumptions
possible but that he outright Commie so long as (1) he fails
unequivocally repudiate Moscow connections and Commie doc-
trine and (2) remains personally singled out for praise by
internat'l Commie press and receives its support. Moreover,
US not impressed by nationalist character red flag with
yellow stars. Question whether Ho as much nationalist as
Commie is irrelevant. All Stalinists in colonial areas are
nationalists. With achievement nat'l aims (i.e., indepen-
dence) their objective necessarily becomes subordination
state to Commie purposes and ruthless extermination not
only opposition groups but all elements suspected even
slightest deviation. On basis examples eastern Eur it must
be assumed such wid be goal Ho and men his stamp if included
Baodai Govt. To include them in order achieve reconcilia-
tion opposing polit elements and QTE national unity UNQTE
wild merely postpone settlement issue whether Vietnam to be
independent nation or Commie satellite until circumstances
probably even less favorable nationalists than now. It
must of course be conceded theoretical possibility exists
estab National Communist state on pattern Yugoslavia in any

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-h5 Cot ray an
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

area beyond reach Soviet army. However, US attitude cld take
acct such possibility only if every other possible avenue
closed to preservation area from Kremlin control. Moreover,
while Vietnam out of reach Soviet army it will doubtless be
by no means out of reach Chi Commie hatchet men and armed
forces. 28/

8. .Ho, Asian Neutral?

Ho may indeed have never been other than a crafty Leninist,
seeking a passing accommodation with the French or the U.S. while he
gathered strength. His word and deed after 1949 support such a con-
struction: In January 1950, the DRV declared itself to be the “only
lawful government of the entire Vietnamese people,” 29/ joined the
Sino-Soviet Bloc, and began attacks on the U.S. "imperialists" and
"interventionists." 30/ Early in 1951, the DRV legalized the Lao
Dong Party, expressly communist. 31/

There remains, however, irresolvable doubt concerning Ho's
earlier predilection for neutralism, or even a western affiliation.
It can be said that, whatever Ho might have preferred, he was offered
only narrow options. No reputable Westerner is known to have inter-
viewed Ho face to face from an abortive French attempt in 1917 to ne-
gotiate a Cochinchina settlement through late 1954. 32/ Ho had no direct
means of communication with the U.S. after 1946, and the signals he re-
ceived from the U.S. could hardly have been encouraging. 33/ By 19475
U.S. military equipment had already been used by French and British forces
against the Vietnamese, and the U.S. had arranged credit for French
purchase of $160 million worth of vehicles and miscellaneous. industrial
equipment for use in Indochina. 34/ Secretary of State George C.
Marshall's January, 1947, public statement on Vietnam had been confined
to a hope that "a pacific basis for adjustment of the difficulties
could be found," 35/ and the Marshall Plan for Europe definitely threw
U.S. resources behind France. But assurances from the Russians were not
materially stronger. While the Soviets excoriated colonial powers other
than France, potential imminence of a French Communist government
muffled even their verbal backing of Ho, let alone recognition and

aid. 36/

|

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-h6
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201]

TOP SECRET - Sensitive.

As a political realist, Ho must have been impressed that the
DRV was as unlikely to rise in priority over France in U.S, foreign
policy, as Vietnam was to assert claims on Soviet support over Russian
preoccupation with Europe. In 1946 he put his plight in these terms:
"We apparently stand quite alone; we shall have to depend on ourselves ."37/
After 197, events conspired to alter Ho's isolation, for while prospects
for U.S. support dimmed, and in 1950, vanished, Mao Tse Tung -- in whose
service Ho had spent eight years -- was moving from triumph to triumph,
and by late 1949, was in a position to render direct assistance to Ho
across his northern border. 38/ Faced with an increasingly serious
military threat, Ho gravitated quickly toward the Bloc. From Viet Minh
jungle hideouts came blasts at the U.S. "Marshallization of the world,"
taking note that the Russians opposed "Marshallization."™ 39/ In 1949,
after the U.S. had publicly welcomed the formation of Bao Dai's "new and
unified state of Viet Nam," Ho sent delegates to a Peking conference
where Liu Shao-Chi, in the keynote speech, declared that only the Commu-
nist Party could lead a "national liberation movement." 40/ Ho and Mao
exchanged messages of amity, and neutralist Tito was taken under attack
by the Viet Minh radio. In January, 1950, in response to Ho's declara-
tion that the DRV was Vietnam's only legitimate government, Mao tendered
formal recognition, and Stalin's followed immediately thereafter. ka/
The die was cast: U.S. Secretary of State Dean Acheson declared in
February, 1950, that these recognitions “should remove any illusion as
to the nationalist character of Ho Chi Minh's aims and reveals Ho in his
true colors as the mortal enemy of native independence in Indochina." he/
Ho responded in August, 1950, to the first shipments of U.S. aid to
French forces in Vietnam in the following sharp language,

"Since the beginning of the war the Americans have tried
to help the French bandits. But now they have advanced one
more step to direct intervention in Viet Nam. Thus we have
now one principal opponent -- the French bandits -- and one
more opponent -- the American interventionists....

"On our side, a few years of resistance have brought our
country the greatest success in the history of Viet Nem --
recognition of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam as an equal
in the world democratic family by the two biggest countries
in the world -- the Soviet Union and democratic China -- and
by the new democratic countries. That means that we are
definitely on the democratic side and belong to the anti-
imperialist bloc of 800 million people.” 43/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
C-L7
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

10,

1890

1895

1904-1905
1905

1906-1910

1910-1911

1912

1913

1914
1915 )
1916 )

1917

1918

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ho Chi Minh Chronology

On 19 May born Nguyen Van Thanh, youngest son of three children
of Nguyen Tat Sac, a minor government official and revolutionary,
in Kim Lien Village, Nghe An Province, Annam (Central Vietnam).

Attended village school and French lycee at Vinh (14 miles from
Kim Lien). Carried messages for anti-French underground. Noted
for his political tirades (Fall).

(Russo-Japanese War. Japanese victory greatly influenced Viet-
namese political developments.)

Dismissed from school for reasons of politics (NVN historians),
or poor grades (teachers).

Transferred to Llycee Quoc Hoc, a prestigious high school, in

Hue. Quoc Hoc was a hotbed of Vietnamese resistance to outside
influence; among its graduates were Ngo Dinh Diem, Vo Nguyen Giap,
and Pham van Dong. (To this day, the students of Hue continue

to strongly influence Vietnamese politics, e.g., Hue riots against

Ky in 1966.)

Left school without a diploma; taught school at Lycee Dac-Thanh
in Phan-Thiet. Left Phan Thiet in October to attend trade
school (probably cooks and bakers) in Saigon.

Worked as messboy aboard French liner SS Le Touche-Treville on
Saigon-Marseille run. Ho carried letter of introduction to
Phan Chu Trinh, prison mate of Ho's father at Poulo Condore
and veteran nationalist of Dong Bao (Haircutters ) movement in
1907. Failing to accept Trinh's nationalism, Ho returned to

| working on liners travelling the world.

| Worked in kitchens of Carlton Hotel in London under Escoffier,
| famous French chef. Joined Overseas Workers Union, a clandestine

anti-colonialist group dominated by Chinese.

(1914-1916 is an obscure period -- sometime during the period
Ho went back to sea and visited New York, later writing on the
U.S. race problem in La Race Noire.)

Ho turned up in Paris, France, to spread influence of anti-
colonialist nationalism to Indochinese conscripted for war
service in France. Communist revolution in Russia under Lenin
which promised national independence for colonials stimulated
Ho to deeper involvement in politics.

Conducted a photograph retouching business and advertised in
Socialist Party's newspaper under the name of Nguyen Ai Quoc
(The Patriot).

Bel TOP SECRET - Sensitive
1919

1920

1921

1922

1923

192)

1925

1926

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(A Vietnamese sailor, Ton Duc Thang, mutinied with another
communist to turn over a French ship to Russia. Thang was
imprisoned at Poulo Condore and today is Ho's Vice President
in North Vietnam.) Ho prepared a 8-point program of colonial
grievances to present to the Versailles Peace Conference,

but his offerings were rejected.

Attended Baku Conference (First Conference of the Peoples

of the Far East) on first visit to USSR. On return to France,
Ho attended 18th National Congress of the Socialist Party as
an Indochinese Delegate in December. There he opted for the
Third International over the Second, because of the former's
position against colonialism, and thus became a founding mem-
ber of the French Communist Party (PCF).

Organized "Union Intercoloniale"-- started as a "front" to
attract members to the Party from colonial territories --
which published periodical La Paria; edited Viet Nam Hon
(Soul of Vietnam) which was smuggled to Indochina.

Attended first Comintern-sponsored conclave (Conference of
the Workers of the Far East) devoted to communist organization
of the Far East in Moscow.

Left France in June to attend several congresses of Kresintern
(Peasants International) in Moscow as a PCF delegate in October.
Lived in USSR for 18 months as colonial representative on
Kresintern permanent directing committee.

In Moscow Ho attended Eastern Workers' University and served
on Kresintern.

Assigned to Soviet consulate at Canton under Michael Borodin
as "Chinese translator" -- a cover for organizing Indochina,
Communist Party into communist groups. Launched Vietnam
Revolutionary Youth League (Viet Nam Cach Menh Thanh Nien
Hoi), a training school for Indochinese students and emigres,
in June. Ho published a brochure Le Proces de la Colonisation
Francaise which was carried into Vietnam and bacame the student
"nationalist" bible. Also in June, Ho is alleged to have
betrayed Phan Boi Chau, a prominent Vietnamese nationalist
leader, progenitor of the Vietnamese Nationalist Party (VNQDD) ,
to the French security police. Ho's intent said to be desire
for martyr to produce a surge of patriotic sentiment for revo-
lution in Annam -- which it did.

Translated Marxist terminology into Sino-Annamite. Stated

that “only a communist party can insure the well-being of Annam."
Selected members of Ho's youth organization were enrolled in
Whampoa, Military Academy, where Chinese nationalists and com-
INMunists were trained as future leaders for Kuomintang.

c-49 . aw
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The President was one-of the people who used conversation
as others of us use a first draft on paper...a method of trying
out an idea. If it does not go well, you can modify it or drop
it as you will. Nobody thinks anything of it if you do this
with a paper draft; but if you do it with conversation, people
say that you have changed your mind, that ‘you never knew where
you have him,' and so on." 4/

But in response to a memorandum from Secretary of State Hull putting
the question of Indochina to F.D.R-., and reminding the President of
the numerous U.S. commitments to restoration of the French empire,
Roosevelt replied (on January 24, 1944) that:

"I saw Halifax last week and told him quite frankly that
it was perfectly true that I had, for over a year, expressed
the opinion that Indo-China should not go back to France but
that it should be administered by an international trusteeship.
France has had the country -- thirty million inhabitants for
nearly one hundred years, and the people are worse off than
they were at the beginning.

"As a matter of interest, I am wholeheartedly supported in
this view by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and by Marshal Stalin.
I see no reason to play in with the British Foreign Office in
this matter. The only reason they seem to oppose it is that
they fear the effect it would have on their own possessions and
those of the Dutch. They have never,liked the idea of trustee-
ship because it is, in some instances, aimed at future inde-
pendence. This is true in the case of Indo-China.

"Rach case must, of course, stand on its own feet, but the
ease of Indo-China is perfectly clear. France has milked it for
one hundred years. The people of Indo-China are entitled to
something better than that." 5/

(1) Military Strategy Pre-eminent

Throughout the year 194, the President held to his
views, and consistent with them, proscribed U.S. aid to resistance
groups -- including French groups -- in Indochina. But the war in the
Asian theaters moved rapidly, and the center of gravity of the American
effort began to shift northward toward Japan. The question of U.S.
strategy in Southeast Asia then came to the fore. At the Second Quebec
Conference (September, 194), the U.S. refused British offers of naval
assistance against Japan because Admiral King believed "the best occu-
pation for any available British forces would be to re-take Singapore,
and to assist the Dutch in recovering the East Indies," and because he
suspected that the offer "was perhaps not unconnected with a desire
for United States help in clearing the Japanese out of the Malay States
and Netherlands East Indies." 6/ Admiral King's suspicions were not

A-14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Conspired to betray Vietnamese "nationalist" students who
did not join his Youth League at Whampoa.

1927 Departed Canton in April with Borodin after break between
Chiang Kai-shek and Mao's communists. In Hong Kong transferred
leadership of Youth League.

1928 Attended Communist Congress Against Imperialism at Brussels.
Travelled to Thailand, and there often disguised himself as
a Buddhist monk. Acted as an agent of Third International.

1929 In July, Ho worked in a colony of Vietnamese emigres numbering
30,000 in Thailand. Organized Annamite Fraternity of Siam
(Hoi Than Ai Nguoi Annam 0 Xiem). Ordered to Hong Kong to
organize Indochina Communist Party. His own Youth League
the previous May had split into two factions -- one called
"Indochinese Communist Party"; the other, later, the Annamese
Communist Party.

1930 Ho arrived in Hong Kong in January. Fused Indochinese Communist
Party, Annamese Communist Party and Indochinese Communist Alli-
ance into Vietnam Communist Party (Viet Nam Cong San Dang) by
March. Central Committee transferred to Haiphong. In October,
per Comintern wishes, adopted new name of Indochinese Communist
Party (Dong Duong Cong San Dang). Ho attended Third Confer-
ence of the South Seas Communist Party in Singapore in April.
French sentenced Ho Chi Minh to death in absentia, probably
as a result of the aftermath of the Yen Bay insurrection in
February.

1931 Arrested by British in Hong Kong and imprisoned in June.
|British acted on French pressure which was suppressing comaunist/
nationalist unrest in Vietnam at the time. Entire apparatus
of Indochinese Communist Party was smashed.

1932 After series of trials in British courts (including appeal on
Hots behalf by Sir Stafford Cripps in England), Ho was released
from Hong Kong Prison in late 1932. Went to Singapore, arrested
again and sent back to Hong Kong. Admitted to hospital for
tuberculosis.

1933 Nguyen Ai Quoc reported dead in Hong Kong by French records.
Disappeared without a trace. Believed he was released to
work secretly for British Intelligence Service.

(Congress of ICP held in Ban-Mai, Thailand in April.)

| (Attempts to reconstitute ICP were under leadership of Tran van
| Giau, who had studied at Moscow's Oriental Institute.)

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
1934

1935
1936
1937

1938

1939

1940

1941

19h2

1943

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ho returned to Moscow in early 1934 for attendance at political
schools. First attended Institute for National and Political
Questions in Moscow. Later attended "graduate school” for
senior communist leaders, the Lenin School,

(Stalin purges 1935-1938 did not involve Ho. Apparently, un-
conditionally loyal to Stalin, Ho had to adopt new party line
of “popular front” as a result of emerging Nazism.)

Moscow schools.
Moscow schools.

With Chinese Communist Eighth Route Army in China. Also located
in Kunming at one time.

With Eighth Route Army as communications operator. (Popular
Front collapsed in France.)

(French Communist Party dissolved in September at outbreak of
World War II.) Ho addressed report to Comintern on success of
"ynopular front” policy in Far East. ICP Central Committee

at November congress adopted new Comintern "anti-war" line of
Stalin-Hitler pact.

In late 1940, Ho was Political Commissar of a Chinese Communist
guerrilla training mission under General Yeh Chien-ying training
nationalists at Liuchow, Kwang-Si Province.

(In June, France fell to Hitler.)

Ho headed external directing Bureau of ICP in Kunming, China,
in September.

(French crushed Saigon insurrection of ICP, 22 November 190.
Numerous arrests followed.)

Ho turned up in Moscow, and thence travelled to Yenan with
Neuyen Khanh Toan, Vietnamese teacher at Moscow University.
Crossed into Vietnam at Cao Bang Province in February.
Organized Viet Minh (Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi) on

19 May, as a "united front" group of Vietnamese nationalists
in China. Organized resistance movement in northern Tonkin.

Ho was arrested by Chinese warlord on August 28 as a French
spy (and jailed for 13 months) after crossing border into
China to make contact with Chinese and emigre groups.

(October 10, the KMT-controlled Vietnam Revolutionary League --
Dong Minh Hoi -- was recognized by Chinese Marshal Chang Fa~kuei.)

In prison until 16 September, Ho was released to gather informa-
tion on Japanese troop movements in Indochina for Chinese.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-51 a a ee
19h)

1945

196

1947

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Adopted the name "Ho Chi Minh" (He Who Enlightens). Still
leader of Viet Minh, Ho became a member of Central Committee --
and temporary Chairman -- of Dong Minh Hoi (Vietnam Revolu-
tionary League). Both groups received support from China and
U.S. Ho returned to Tonkin clandestinely, devoting efforts

_to the Viet Minh.

Ho operated in the jungles in North Vietnam. He constantly
sought aid from the U.S. through the 0.8.8.

May 1945 established liberated zone of six provinces in Tonkin
and was visited by U.S. officer of 0.8.8. In June, Ho called
for National Congress, but convening was postponed to August 16
at Tan Trao. Viet Minh program:

(1) disarm Japs before Allied entry
(2) wrest power from enemy
(3) be in authority to receive Allied forces.

August 19, Governor fled, Bao Dai abdicated, and few days
later National Liberation Committee proclaimed "provisional
government" with Ho Chi Minh president.

September 2, Ho Chi Minh declared independence of Vietnam
Democratic Republic.

(British land in Saigon-Chinese enter Hanoi.)

On November 11, Ho dissolved ICP and formed Marxist Study
Group. Ho wrote to President Truman in October and November.

Appealed to U.S., U.K. USSR and China in February. Wrote
letters to President Truman on 16 and 18 February.

Ho formed "coalition" government under Chinese occupation on
March 2, 1946. Exercised personal prestige to gain acceptance
6 March 1946 Agreement providing for French replacement of

| Chinese in Tonkin.

| Ho at Dalat Conference in May, and Fontainebleau, France, in
| August, failed to produce negotiated settlement of differences

with French. On 11 September, Ho told U.S. Ambassador Caffrey
in Paris that he was not a communist. Ho signed modus vivendi
on 14 September following breakdown of Fontainebleau talks,
and returned to Hanoi.

French seized local government in Haiphong and Langson in
November. DRV armed forces attacked French in Hanoi on 19
December 1946. Ho moved DRV government into mountains.

On April 30, Ho relinquished the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
to his Socialist Under Secretary. Ho had Vietnam government
reshuffled twice to form broadest coalition possible against
French and to avoid "extremist" label by foreigners.

(French negotiated with Bao Dai to split resistance. )

et TOP SECRET - Sensitive
1948
1949

1950

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(Giap appointed Minister of National Defense by Ho.)

In March, Ho denounced the charge of "Communist domination"
of DRV as pure French imperialist propaganda.

In interview by Franc-Tireur, Ho stated his ideology was
"real unity and independence of our country."

(Bao Dai established puppet government in July.) —

(Nationalist China falls to Mao Tse-tung; Chinese troops arrive
on Sino-Tonkin border. )

Ho appeals for international recognition of DRV.
(Russia and China recognize DRV. )

(On Sune 25, North Korea attacked South Korea. )

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C-53
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ee Ore ~ FOOTNOTES

1. Bernard B. Fall, "Ho Chi Minh: Like It Or Not," Esquire, November, 1967,
De wei

2. Hoang Van Chi, From Colonialism to Communism, Frederick A. Praeger (New
York: 1965), pp. 37-38.

3. Ellen J. Hammer, The Struggle for Indochina 1940-1954, Stanford Uni-
versity Press, Stanford, Calif., 1965, p. 76.

4. Bernard B. Fall, Ho Chi Minh: On Revolution, Frederick A. Praeger,
New York: 1967, p. 27. This is a collection of selected writings by
Ho Chi Minh, 1920-1966. Hereafter reference will be made to this volume
as Ho Chi Minh on Revolution. :;

5. Hammer, op. cit., p. 76.

6. Hoang Van Chi, op. cit., p. 40.

wa SEbids; Pp. He:

8. Ibid., p. 19-19.

9. U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments of Vietnamese Nationalists,
(OIR Report No. 3708, 1949), p. 30. ate,

TOs. Ebley eps: See

Ta tds pe Se

12, Fai. ops elt.. pe 208;

135. ADIs. 205s

14, Fall, ed., Ho On Revolution, p. 137.

15. Hammer, op. cit., pp. 98-105; Fall, Two Viet-Nams (New York: Praeger,
1964), pp. 83-103; Buttinger, Vietnam: A Dragon Embattled (New York:
Praeger, 1967), I, pp. 292-300, 344-351.

16. Fall, ed., Ho On Revolution, p. 141; CIA, Biographic Handbook, CIA/

CR BH 6.6, entry for Ho dated 21 January 1965.

17. Ibid.; George A. Carver, Jr., "The Faceless Viet Cong," Foreign Affairs
(Vol 4h, No. 3, April, 1966), pp. 349-351.

18. Fall, ed., Ho On Revolution, 150 ff. (by dates).

C-5h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
19.

20.

vais

(eis

23.
eh.

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

33.
3h.

36.

37.
38.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Fall, Two Viet-Nams, pp. 101-103; Buttinger, op. cit., I, pp. 266-269;
Central Intelligence Agency, "Probable Developments in North Vietnam
to July 1956," (NIE 63.1-55, 19 July 1955), p. 4.

Ibid.; Robert Shaplen, The Lost Revolution (New York: Harper & Row, 1965);
XIV.

Ibid., p. 52; Shaplen also quotes Ho as saying in 1946 "To achieve a
communist society, big industrial and agricultural production is neces-
sary..-I do not know when that will be realized in Vietnam where pro-
duction is low. We are not yet in a position to meet the conditions.’
Ibid., pp. 48-49. Buttinger, op. cit., I, pp. 266-269, 637 cf., Fall,
Two Viet-Nams, op. cit., p. 101. =?

1

Shaplen, op. cit., p. 48; Hammer, op. cit., p. 173.
Shaplen, op. cit., p. 53.
EB. g-, Isaacs in Gettleman, ed., oes cit.; Fall, Two Viet-Nams, op. cit.,

pp. 81-82; Shaplen, pp. 28-35, 42-lik, 17; CIA, Biographic Handbook,
op. cit.

U.S. Dept of State telegram from Paris, 6131, to Acheson, September 11,
1945.

U.S. Dept of State telegram to Saigon, Acheson 305, December 5, 19h5.
U.S. Dept of State telegram, Marshall 431 to Paris, February 3, 1947.
U.S. Dept of State telegram to Hanoi 36, May 20, 1949.

Fall, ed., Ho on Revolution, p. 198

Ibid. s pp. 199-200

Carver, op. cit., p. 3523; CIA, Biographic Handbook, op. cit.

U.S, Dept of State, Far Eastern Notes (No. 8, May 7, 195k), p. 63
Shaplen, op. cit., p. 52.

[intelligence Files, osp/, Buttinger, op. cit., II, p. 699.
Gettleman, ed., op. trai Get De

Ibid., p- 75; Hammer, op. cit., p. 202.

battineen, op. cit., p. 363; Hammer, op. cit., pp. 201-202.
Gettlenan, op. cit., p. 55.

Shaplen, op. cit., p. 533; Hammer, op. cit., p. 250.

SE TOP SECRET - Sensitive
39.
ho.
hi.
he,
43.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

Shaplen, op. cit., p. 52.
Hammer, op. cit., pp. 249-250.
Ibid.

Department of State Bulletin (February 13, 1950), p. ohh.
Hammer, op. cit., p. 251.

c-56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
ey per E ecitive Order - 13526, Section 3.3

: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

'
'
ry
'

ul
aga

tf

a <

f

Li
“ wi
a ps he 2
a |

— -
;

*
el

= <— A
- & i thee ‘ +
3 aa gee i

‘ i q ae ricthates : 7 M * : E

PEAa ><. Le Ae * 2 ae. Pe aa di. © Lott thee Foes

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Ze Ce Se
HO CHI MINH'S COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE U.S.
985-45
TABLE OF CONTENTS and OUTLINE
Page
(oe AR AMS RM aod |, otal eS ie iy a see ee eee tee eee eee eee eee c-58

DYTOPSES is css ao os wince sb ansieis ss 40 os 0 sinc 0iss)6 ass bso ne os esis rele C-63

C-57 ‘
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ts Cs 3. HO CHI MINH'S COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE U.S.
1945-19

Li
Resume

Ho's earliest representations to the United States were via the
0.S8.S. teams assigned to work with the Viet Minh. ‘The Americans
found Ho genial, and cooperative. One American officer subsequently
reported his experiences with Ho to Robert Shaplen:

"There are many facets to the story of Ho's relations
with the West during and after the Second World War. Let us
start with the somewhat naive but at the same time revealing
account of a former young lieutenant in the United States
Army--I shall haye to refer to him only as John--who in May,
1945, parachuted into Ho's jungle headquarters near the vil-
lage of Kim Lung in northern Tonkin on a mission to establish
an underground that would help Allied personnel escape to
freedom. Kim Lung lies on the edge of a heavy rain forest,
thickly underlaid by brush. Amid sugar-loaf formations of
mountains lie tiny valleys, and it was in one of these, near
a small stream half-way up a tall hill, that Ho Chi Minh's
camp, consisting of four huts, lay sequestered. Each of the
huts was twelve feet square, set four feet off the ground on
bamboo stakes, and Ho's was as bare as the others.

"In this crude revolutionary cradle, deep in Japanese
territory, John had the unique experience of living and
working with Ho for several months. He found Ho completely
co-operative in lending the support of his guerrillas for
scouting and raiding parties, including one to rescue some
French internees near the China border. John used his portable
radio to put Ho in preliminary touch with French negotiators
who were in Kunming, China, and who would soon be debating
Indochina's postwar future with Ho in Hanoi, but John himself
played a more immediate role in Vietnamese affairs by inforn-
ally helping Ho frame a Declaration of Independence.

"'He kept asking me if I could remember the language of
our Declaration,’ John says. ‘I was a normal American, I
couldn't. I could have wired up to Kunming and had a copy
dropped to me, of course, but all he really wanted was the
flavor of the thing. The more we discussed it, the more he
actually seemed to know about it than I did. As a matter of
fact, he knew more about almost everything than I did, but
when I thought his demands were too stiff, I told him anyway.
Strange thing was he listened. He was an awfully sweet guy.

c-58
TOP SECRET -- Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

well-founded, at least insofar as Churchill's strategic thought was con-
cerned. The Prime Minister was evidently as unwilling to invite an active
American role in the liberation of Southeast Asia as the U.S. was to
undertake same; as early as February, 1944, Churchill wrote that:

"A decision to act as a subsidiary force under the
Americans in the Pacific raises difficult political ques-
tions about the future of our Malayan possessions. If the
Japanese should withdraw from them or make peace as the
result of the main American thrust, the United States
Government would after the victory feel greatly strengthened
in its view that all possessions in the East Indian Archi-
pelago should be placed under some international body upon
which the United States would exercise a decisive concern." v

The future of Commonwealth territories in Southeast Asia stimulated
intense British interest in American intentions for French colonies there.
In November and December of 1944, the British expressed to the United
States, both in London and in Washington, their concern "that the United
. States apparently has not yet determined upon its policy toward Indo-
china." 8/ The head of the Far Eastern Department in the British
Foreign Office told the U.S. Ambassador that:

"Tt would be difficult to deny French participation in the
liberation of Indochina in light of the increasing strength of
the French Government in world affairs, and that, unless a
policy to be followed toward Indochina is mutually agreed be-
tween our two governments, circumstances may arise at any
moment which will place our two governments in a very awkward
situation." 9/

President Roosevelt, however, refused to define his position further,
notifying Secretary of State Stettinius on January 1, 1945:

"J still do not want to get mixed up in any Indo-China
decision. It is a matter for postwar.--...I do nob want to Ly
get mixed up in any military effort toward the liberation of
Indo-China from the Japanese.--You can tell Halifax that I
made this very clear to Mr. Churchill. From both the military
and civil point of view, action at this time is premature."10/

However, the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff were concurrently planning
the removal of American armed forces from Southeast Asia. In response
to approaches from French and Dutch officials requesting aid in expelling
Japan from their former colonial territories, the U.S. informed them that:

"All our available forces were committed to fighting
the Japanese elsewhere in the Pacific, and Indochina and
the East Indies were therefore not included within the
sphere of interest of the American Chiefs of Staff." 11/

When the Combined Chiefs of Staff met at Malta at the end of January, 1945,

A-15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

If I had to pick out one quality about that little old man sit-
ting on his hill in the jungle, it was his gentleness.'

"He and John exchanged toasts and shared stewed tiger livers.
John now admits his naivete in being ready to believe that Ho was
not a Communist. But even if he was, John felt certain that Ho
was sincere in wanting to co-operate with the West, especially
with France and the United States. Some of Ho's men impressed John
less. ‘They go charging around with great fervor shouting 'inde-
pendence, ' but seventy-five per cent of them don't know the meaning
of the word,’ he wrote in his diary. John still has two letters
in English Ho sent him in the jungle. One of them, written soon
after the Japanese surrender, when the Vietminh was about to seize
control of the nationalist movement, reads as follows:

Dear Lt. [Jonn/,

I feel weaker since you left. Maybe I'd have to follow your
advice--move to some other place where food is easy to get, to
improve my health....

I'm sending you a bottle of wine, hope you like it.
Be so kind as to give me foreign news you got.

»+ePlease be good enuf to send to your H.@. the following
wires.

i Abea ele [an anti-Vietminh nationalist group/ plans to exer-
cise large terror against French and to push it upon shoulder of
VML [Wietminh League/. VML ordered 2 millions members and all
its population be watchful and stop Daiviet criminal plan when
& if possible. VML declares before the world its aim is national
independence. It fights with political & if necessary military
means. But never resorts to criminal & dishonest act. »

Signed--NATIONAL LIBERATION COMMITTEE

OF VML

2. National Liberation Committee of VML begs U.S. authorities
to inform United Nations the following. We were fighting Japs
on the side of the United Nations. Now Japs surrendered. We
beg United Nations to realize their solemn promise that all
nationalities will be given democracy and independence. If
United Nations forget their solemn promise & don't grant Indo-
china full independence, we will keep fighting until we get it.
Signed--LIBERATION COMMITTER OF VML

Thank you for all the troubles I give you....Best greetings!
Yours sincerely, Hoo [sic7." *

* Robert Shaplen, The Lost Revolution (New York: Harper & Row, 1965), 28-30.

C-99 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

Similar representations were conveyed to the U.S. via Vietnamese in
Kunming (see the memorandum from General Donovan, Director of the 0.5.5.,
inclosed).

In October, warfare between Vietnamese and French forces began in
South Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh thereupon dispatched a series of communica-
tions to the U.S., to China, and to the other great powers, denying
France's right to speak on behalf of Vietnam in the U.N. or other inter-
national forums, and denouncing its "aggression" in Vietnam. Ho, in a
telegram on 17 October 1945, called President Truman's attention to the
"facts" that establishment of the U.N. Far East Advisory Commission over-
looked Vietnam membership, that France was not entitled to membership,
and that the DRV qualified for nation status under the Atlantic Charter.
Requesting the U.S. to convey his points to the United Nations, Ho
threatened that absence of Vietnam would bring forth instability in the
Far East. The telegram was referred from the White House to State which
duly noted "SEA considers that no action should be taken...." Within a
week, Ho Chi Minh appealed via Radio Hanoi to Truman, Attlee, and De Gaulle
and stated that the "Annamite Nationalist Government" intended to hold a
plebiscite to give a constitution to Indochina. (The French took the
view that they were not opposed to Ho per se, but wanted assurance that
Ho represented the entire population of Indochina.) Ho repeatedly referred
to President Truman's Navy Day address on foreign policy of 27 October
1945, and pleaded for application of its principles to Vietnam and the
DRV. ' In that speech, the President did not refer to Indochina in any
fashion, but the following passage evidently stirred Ho's hopes:

"The foreign policy of the United States is based firmly
on fundamental principles of righteousness and justice. In
carrying out those principles we shall firmly adhere to what we
believe to be right; and we shall not give our approval to any
compromise with evil.

"But we know that we cannot attain perfection in this world
overnight. We shall not let our search for perfection obstruct
our steady progress toward international cooperation. We must
be prepared to fulfill our responsibilities as best we can, within
the framework of our fundamental principles, even though we recog-
nize that we have to operate in an imperfect world.

"Let me restate the fundamentals of that foreign policy of
the United States:

"]. We seek no territorial expansion or selfish advantage.
We have no plans for aggression against any other state, large
or small. We have no objective which need clash with the peace-

ful i of any other nation.

"2. We believe in the eventual return of sovereign rights
and self-government to all peoples who have been deprived of them
by force.

c-60
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"3. We shall approve no territorial changes in any friendly
part of the world unless they accord with the freely expressed
Wishes of the people concerned.

"h. We believe that all peoples who are prepared for self-
government should be permitted to choose their own form of
government by their own freely expressed choice, without inter-
ference from any foreign source. That is true in Europe, in
Asia, in Africa, as well as in the Western Hemisphere.

"5. By the combined and cooperative action of our war allies,
we shall help the defeated enemy states establish peaceful demo-
cratic governments of their own free choice. And we shall try to
attain a world in which Nazism, Fascism, and military aggression
cannot exist.

"6. We shall refuse to recognize any government imposed upon
any nation by the force of any foreign power. In some cases it
may be impossible to prevent forceful imposition of such a govern-
ment. But the United States will not recognize any such government.

"7, We believe that all nations should have the freedom of
the seas and equal rights to the navigation of boundary rivers and
waterways and of rivers and waterways which pass through more than
one country.

"8. We believe that all states which are accepted in the
society of nations should have access on equal terms to the trade
and the raw materials of the world.

"9. We believe that the sovereign states of the Western Hemis-
phere, without interference from outside the Western Hemisphere,
must work together as good neighbors in the solution of their
common problems. ¢

"10. We believe that full economic collaboration between all
nations, great and small, is essential to the improvement of living
conditions all over the world, and to the establishment of freedom
from fear and freedom from want.

"11. We shall continue to strive to pranote freedom of expres-
sion and freedom of religion throughout the peace-loving areas of
the world.

"12. We are convinced that the preservation of peace between
nations requires a United Nations Organization composed of all the
peace-loving nations of the world who are willing jointly to use
force if necessary to insure peace." *

® Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States (Harry S. Truman,
April-December 1945), 433-434.
C~61
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Ho Chi Minh forwarded to the Secretary of State the D.R.V. Declaration
of Independence, Bao Dai's abdication rescript, general DRV foreign
policy declarations, and its expressed position on the war in South
Vietnam. He cited the Atlantic Charter as the “foundation of future
Vietnam" and the San Francisco Charter as eradicating colonial oppres-
sion. Ho appealed for "immediate interference" and submitted several
requests -- the key one being that the United Nations should recognize
the full independence of Vietnam. Again, in November, he made three
points: (1) the French had ignored all treaties at the end of the war
and attacked Saigon in September; (2) the Vietnamese people were willing
to support the United Nations, but would fight any French troops coming
into Vietnamese territory; and (3) any bloodshed would be the responsi-
bility of the French. Two weeks later, Ho appealed to President Truman
and UNRRA for assistance to combat starvation caused by flood, drought,
and French conflict. Also in November, Ho wrote to the Secretary of
State asking to establish cultural relations with the U.S. by sending
fifty Vietnamese students to the U.S., and to complain of the absence
of Vietnamese representation at the Washington Conference for the Far
East. Prompted by Truman's appointment of General Marshall as special
representative in China, early in 1946 Ho Chi Minh again appealed for
direct intervention by the U.S. to provide an immediate solution of the
Vietnamese issue. On 16 February 1946, a tone of irritation was intro-
duced: Ho wrote once more to President Truman implying "complicity,

or at least, the connivance of the Great Democracies" in the French
aggression; but still Ho pleaded with the U.S. to take a "decisive step”
in support of Vietnamese independence asking only what had been "graci-
ously granted to the Philippines." Ho then addressed an urgent broad-
cast appeal to the U.S., China, Russia, and Great Britain for “interference
by the Big Four to stop the bloodshed and to bring the Indochina issue
before the United Nations.

4

It became abundantly clear, however, that the U.S. would do nothing
to aid the Viet Minh. Assuming the sincerity of Ho Chi Minh's appeals,
the most opportune time for the U.S. to have intervened in Vietnam
passed in autwm, 1945, and prospects for U.S. action dimmed as DRV
negotiations with the French proceeded in February-March 1946. Paradox-
ically, it was the possibility of communist accession to power in France
that both added to Ho's incentive to negotiate with the French, and
stimulated stronger U.S. support for France. Ultimately, the U.S. was
deterred from backing Viet Minh anti-colonialism (though the U.S. pres-
sured France for concessions to Viet nationalism) because its interests
seemed more directly engaged in shoring up the-French as a key part of
its assistance to European recovery. On the other hand, Ho Chi Minh
continued to hope for a new France, breaking away from its old coloni-
alist policies under a Socialist or Communist government.

Ho Chi Minh's correspondence with the U.S. ceased after the 6 March
1946 Accord with France, although Ho Chi Minh did visit the U.S. Embassy
in Paris on 11 September 1946,

aie TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

August 22, 1945:

September 29, 1945:

October 17, 1945:

October 22, 1945:

October 23, 1945:

Synopses

F

Memorandum for the Secretary of State from the
Director, 0.8.8. Reports a liberal French
attitude towards Indochina (based on assertions
of Major Sainteny) and desire of Vietnamese for
protectorate status under U.S. (based on asser-
tions of Viet Minh and Dong Minh Hoi repre-
sentatives)......- dSpovad canine a Se Se Ere Otte SM eee oe
Telegram from U.S. Embassy, Chungking, to

Secretary of State, dated October 18, 1945.

Summarizes letter from Ho Chi Minh to Presi-

dent of U.S., expressing sympathy at the

death of Colonel Peter Dewey, 0.58.8. Comman-

der-in Saigon. Enjoins President to provide

advance notice of movements of American

nationals, but expresses appreciation for

"U.S. stand for international justice and

WEACEs | Evade es setae seemaiar e's dhe aleve rile

Telegram, Ho Chi Minh to President Truman.

Appeals for DRV membership on UN Advisory

Commission for the Far East, citing Atlantic

Charter to advance its claims to membership

vice those OF RYOTICE weno tiv case elaine snake dais oleae Ome:

Letter, Ho Chi Minh to U.S. Secretary of State,

calls for immediate interference by the UN.

Appealing to the Atlantic Charter and the UN

Charter, and warning of general warfare in Far

East, Ho calls for UN action to interfere

with France, including an "Inquiry Commission.".. C-80

U.S. Ambassador in Paris reports newspaper
reports of radio appeal of Ho to President
Truman and other western leaders, announcing
plan to hold plebescite. French government
announces it would not oppose in principle

_ such a plebescite if Ho Chi Minh represents

November 1, 1945:

all of Indochina and not merely Viet Minh........ C-715

Letter from Ho Chi Minh to James Byrnes,

Secretary of State, proposing to send a

delegation of 50 Viet youths to the U.S.

to promote friendly cultural relations and

to study at U.S. universitiesS.....sscccccscccrsre CHO

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-63
November 5, 1945:

November 8, 195:

November 23, 1945:

November 26, 1945:

January 18, 1946:

February 16, 1946:

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Page
Despatch, Philip D. Sprouse, U.S. Consul,
Kunming, to Secretary of State. Incloses
22 October letter of Ho, surveys situation
in Vietnam based on reports of Colonel

Nordlinger, USA, and reports Ho and Bao
Dai attempt to visit Chiang Kai-shek.......+++0+++C-76

U.S. Embassy, Chungking summarizes Ho Chi

Minh letter addressed to President Truman

and Chiang Kai-shek underscoring French loss '

of sovereignty, DRV acquisition of same, and
aggression by French to regain it. Asserts

Freneh bear onus of resuming war of aggression

daeRe AGG cnc te eevee area e wet Wietee pre's migiaeitp ae tras AER

Telegram from U.S. Embassy, Chungking, para-

phrases letters from Ho Chi Minh to President

Truman and Director General of UNRRA, des-

eribing famine in North Vietnam, and appeal-

Ingat ORO MeL OR: once eee yc ws eUisth alty eure ana eee

Despatch from U.S. Embassy, Chungking, in-

closing Ho's letter of 1 November; letter of

28 October from Ho to ChiargKai-shek urging

Chiang to stop the British-French-Japanese

action in Cochinchina; and an undated tele-

gram to the Secretary of State protesting

that France did not have the right to speak

for Vietnam in international councils, and

appealing to all free nations of the world

to stop conflict in South Vietnam.........00. 3 ¢ aap OHO9

Telegram from U.S. Embassy, Chungking, dated
13 February 1946, paraphrasing letter from

Ho to President Truman, dated 18 January 1946,
reminding that peace is indivisible and re-
questing President's intervention for immedi-
ate resolution of Vietnam issue. Telegram
describes identical letter to General Marshall,

_ Same date...... Cra cauio ian ao ere Caner seeee 0-93

Letter signed by Ho Chi Minh to President of

the U.S. cites the principles supported by

the U.S. before, during and after the war,

and in the UN, to call for U.S. aid to Viet-

nam in the face of French aggression. Ho

asks what has been granted the Philippines --

"like the Philippines our goal is full inde-

pendence and full cooperation with the

THEE THEY TAR cur ciyysiata.a civ iene # field e paislew vaigtemaeeeees oe

C-64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

February 18, 1946:

February 27, 1946:

September 11, 1946:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Note from the DRV to Governments of China, USA,
USSR, and Great Britain, calls attention to
Vichy-French collaboration with Japan in Indo-
china, and to policies which led to famine among
the Vietnamese. Again on March 9, 1945, the
French acceded to the Japanese seizure of power.
By contrast, the Vietnemese resistance had
fought the Japanese all through the years, and
in August, 1945, ousted Nippon's regime, and
founded the DRV. The DRV is based on principles
enunciated by Sun Yat Sen and President Truman.
Impressive progress has been achieved by the
DRV in North Vietnam, but in South Vietnam,
French aggression has obtruded. DRV urgently
appeals for interference by allies to halt the
conflict, and the placing of the Indochina
issue before the UN.......0. eiaisterstelelehsiatstelets

ua

onoenweae

Telegram from Assistant Chief of the Division
of Southeast Asian Affairs, U.S. Department

of State (Iandon), to the Secretary of State,
from Hanoi, received in Washington February 27.
Summarizes state of negotiations between French
(Sainteny) and DRV. Reports that Ho Chi Minh
handed Landon two letters addressed to President
of the U.S., asserting that Vietnamese will
fight until UN intervenes in Vietnem. Requests
U.S. support Vietnamese independence "according
to Philippines example." .......... Rt ake

Memorandum of conversation with Ho Chi Minh
by the First Secretary, U.S. Embassy, Paris,
dated September 12, 1946. Ho describes his
0.8.8. contacts, denies having communist
connections and indicates that he hoped to
obtain aid from the United States. He refers
specifically to economic aid, but hints at
military and naval assistance, e.g., mentions

g

c-98

c-101

the. navel) base at. Cam Ravh Bay. vesccws ces svels sess Omawe

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

c-65
er Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

Declassified p 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

NND Project Number: NND 633

a -
x . i eis, hry, pein
56 Cy ee igs eal ere ae 9 cen
OFFICE OF STRA TEGIC SERVICES we Pla bbei git:
; amis Y fea _ 4 i 4 {3 j 1 hat
gy eT ee e
WASHINGTON 25, D. c. i ee beet Ss
eile a ak |
‘ = : 5
Gare yd Fphitz) DH BG bi REP ARY Gi SPATS: ;

my, 0 -.. F
the Oss representa’ Live in Bunn 4 ans ai he g twas sn b ted the fo] i: gc net
eacie Ae aenie' = |

information concer Qing the Frenen abbitude toward the Indo-Ghi-~
nese Provisional Govarnnent. the Provisional Roe auaene yas the
subject of our two memoranda of 21 August.

The Frene See are has decided to adopt a passive diplomatic
avviuude toward the reocoupation of Indo- ‘Chine because of their
inability to te an entry with | a powerrul show of arms. A com-
mittee of three has been anpoin

ved by the French Government in
Paris, composed_of the chie? ox the Kunming DGER /french Intel-
ligence ee e/, the Minister of Colonies, and the Administra-
tor General of Colonies. Its mission s tO contact Annamite
leaders thE negotiate with then.on terms favorable to the Tndo~
Chinese, according to Major Soong @ ae will répresent the
committee in Hanoi. ‘The ‘French polic will be one of liberal
administration in the capac itv of edvisors to the Indo-Chines

Py Ata nnat Government, to be established by the Kuomintang An-
hnanite and the Vietminh, which tic tans form a committes of na-~

tional liberation. (The Vietminh is a 100% Communist party, with

a membership of approximately 20% of the active politic al native
elenent. The Kuomintang Party coiorises six minority parties and
a score of independent ones.) The French Conmittee has been
charged with the task of negotiating Girectly with Indo-Chinese
leaders and deciding on the best modus opverendi. It has full

= aay |

powers of signing treaties in the n ane of France., The committee ~~ -

will in turn report. to Paris, which retains the prerogative of
fia aking minor amendments to the general agreoment. Annamite lead-
ers in Kunming and representatives of the Central Liberation Com-
mittee recently from Hanoi, have expressed a desire to bring

ee

Ingin fanent/ in ee China uncer the status of an American.
protectorate, and are hoping that the US will intercede with
the United | ations. fp the exelnsion of the French, as well as
Chinese, from the reocoupation of indo-China.

{fe Paar

ees ees any gested) >

ee ee
lan
+ a LSE

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a
my

5) Po
o

a

2 Gt ADHAMSSe COUPGeS state that ti ent
‘ Ae Lent
"VE VOC a = Rye : 2
ths iyi noe = ye ae ARCs : ; at vapanesa mila Ley ,
ae 4 it a *s math vagy a * * . =
OF Ab1e8 sor the purchase, of guns and-amenition. with ‘~ne in-
* 7 ee tee A dee nt et
staler Ay 1.4. mee 4 x n=
3 ARLE mak ‘al at ia . 4 rs, 1G 1S ii To ai OD Chin aga ab taAmYG
rear O13 eee et | Ue,
i o - : ae Qon, fear a Chinana paso.
cuvation be ag Uninase Will becone sqvabber

4
raping, and Jooting, T

living off the land, pillaging,

concur in this opinion only in so far as to wish exclusive ad-
ministrative rigubs for themselves. The-leader of the Annamite
Kuomintang Party in China and a direst representative of the

Central Liberat LON ye es in Hanoi, made the following siane-

"Should the French abtempt. to return to , Indo. China with the
intention of goy MEENE the country, and to ee once nore as
ine

oppressors, the Indo-Chinese peovle are prepared ht
o the end against eh reououpation, A the eee

nds to establish commerce, in-~
ions to governmental rule, they
a

a
hend, if they cane a
a i
as any other foreign power. The
1

dustry and without

will be welcomed the san f
Central Committee wishes to make know to the United States
Government that the Indo-Chinese psople first of all desire
the independence of Indo-China, and are hoping that the
United States, as a Shana of democracy, willl assist her
in securing this indevendence in the following manner:

(1) Prohibiting, or not assisting the French to enter Inilo-
China; (2) keeping the Chinese under control, in o: a

po |

looting and pillaging will be kept to a mininum; (3) send-
ing technical advisors to assist the Indo-Chinese to ex-
ploit the resources of the land; and (4) ¢ eveloping ' those
industries that Indo-China is capable of support ie.

.
oe

"In conclusion, the Indo-Chinese would ike to be placed on.
the same status as the Philippines for an undetermined per-

jod."
The French representative in Kunming, Major Sainteny, 3 is nov re-
csiving material aid from the Seation Liaison Francaiss--Extrene
Orient (SIE
sonnel for +
pared to leay

3 we - -
) eutta in making arrengemants and reedying per-
te eee into Indo-China. His group were pre-
@ the morning of 1/7 Avsust. However, on arrival
'

Sa eS ee ee

Np rd reese a ny ree la ee

'

: Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
ND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

epee PLS
- —
a That aso and American
pag Ling them froin
tis at day with Major
Ls French had been be-
s. He stated further that the Americans
ig ong been playing tho Chinese game, although
nily stated there was nothing for the French to do
uetions from Chunckine. The French DGER in Kun-
rated teams of msn into Halvhong under the lead-
tain Blenchard. He has made contact with Lt. Col.
liaison officer betreen the Japanese military head-
n Hanoi and Admiral Decoux! administration. Kamiya de-
tained this team in Haiphong, confining their activities to trans-
Q Lecrological data

mitting messages concerning the surrender and met
to the French headquarters in Kunming. pat

Revorts from Kandy state that Col. Reos, Chief of the SEFEO in
Calcutta, is now en rout i b si
3% .

cr
4
tra
©
et)
po
©
+
Le)
or
ae
et
chy
ke}
iv]
ny
or
pote
a

Oo piy French Air Atteche in} MNMINE »
mhose exact stetus is uadeterained, but vho is a member of Lord
Mountbatten's starr. | BLE) tate gee ane sy

¢ -

William J. Donovan — cot Ag
Director ce ae

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘American willingness to forego further operations in Southeast Asia
led to a directive to Admiral Lord Mountbatten, Supreme Commander in
that theatre, to liberate Malaya without U.S. assistance. 12/ After
the Yalta Conference (February, 1945), U.S. commanders in the Pacific
were informed that the U.S. planned to turn over to the British respon-
sibility for operations in the Netherlands East Indies and New Guinea.
The President, however, agreed to permit such U.S. military operations
in Indochina as avoided "alignments with the French," and detraction
from the U.S. military campaign against Japan. 13/ The latter stric-
ture precluded, in the U.S. view, the U.S. cooperation with the French
at Mountbatten's headquarters, or the furnishing of ships to carry Free
French forces to Indochina to undertake its liberation. This U.S.
position came under particularly severe French criticism after 11 March
1945, when the Japanese overturned the Vichy regime in Vietnam, and
prompted the Enperor Bao Dai to declare Vietnam unified and independent
of France under Japanese protection. On 16 March 1945, a protest from
General de Gaulle led to the following exchange between the Secretary
of State and the President: 1)/

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington

-March 16, 1945
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
Subject: Indo-China.

Communications have been received from the Provisional
Government of the French Republic asking for:

(1) Assistance for the resistance groups now fighting
the Japanese in Indo-China.

(2) Conclusion of a civil affairs agreement covering
possible future operations in Indo-China.

These memoranda have been referred to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff in order to obtain their views concerning the military
aspects of the problems, and I shall communicate with you
further on the subject upon receipt of the Joint Chiefs’ reply.

Attached herewith is the text of a recent telegram from
Ambassador Caffery describing his conversation with General
de Gaulle on the subject of Indo-China. From this telegram and
de Gaulle's speech of March 14, it appears that this Government
may be made to appear responsible for the weakness of the

A-16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Seaaieihiaiiiamene tent

a

eatin hat ce il a
age eee can

‘ 7 nee

chilis tN iN a oe ae neetlcni ceric omnes neh SEITE Nw Tee sible ahaa ashen = cn ae eee .

LOVLOI CL gfe a: |
Tiroe .

5 EC-L920 aS Chunckine via Var

ie Thin telesran nunt bo

C closely paraphrased bo- Datod Ootobor 18, 1046 | |
Etne8 foro bein; oonnunicated :

PE@2 to anyono., (SECRET) Roo'd 1 peli, ‘|
Te <k |

Soorotary of State
Vachington

3620, Ootobor 18, 10 aene | |
‘ |
Thore follows sunnary of lottcr dated at Hanot
; |
Soptenbor 29 adircssod to President of US by Ko Cnt ich

wao eicned as "President of Provisional Govt of Aepudlic

Oe ee ene
epg er ag At EEO A OE LIL, LEELA LL LL LEE A

of Viot-Nan®; letter was delivered to US Gonoral Gallagner
€ +. pead of Chiness Canbat Conn Liaicon Group with Gatinese C)
forces in North Indooh!na and forwarded to Enbassy through
US Arny channels? ; .
Saigon radio Soptonbor 27 poportoa killing of US |
Coloncl Peter Dowoy in course of Feonoh instigated elnach

‘potwoon Viot-Nanose nationrlists and French acgrascors

|
in Cochin as as Saigon is in hands of Franco-British

ROP ce seed Som On epee ens
*

foroes report eannot bo investigated now but wo hope
pincoroly 1% 16 not truo, But sf corrcet inoident may have

boon due to confusion in darknesa or oticr unfortunne |

elrounstanoos or may have boon provoked by Fronech or
Britiehs |

i
|

egy ey ree Sere

ee EOE FEET SN =
age LET t r i re er mea

(gk ne Sp 0 ie ain epee ne r 1 -
eamllew: . tacbeee TH ais Cee lentes nel te NS Su sewtugie
iesheiielicimmnsiees hone tedtae Tent et ee
ee ee ee

5s c-69 i

7

ee
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

i oe

fe ok ren ce Ti a ls Mile ited ele te ae tah li aN ap aan nile beeen lbs eye ee lel an ne ccenh isekain ae an
/

:
=2- £1620, Cotobor 18, 10 nome, fron Churgking vin War,
a t

}

British, Wo matter what the once nows novus us dooply antl

we wlll do utmost to sonroh out ovlprite and punish then
sovoroly. MHoasures aro doing tnken to provont furthor | |
. fuch inoidents. Wo nosure you vo aro an profoundly atlroatoa
by death of any eanorloan rosident in thia country asa by
that of doarost rolativese ' ,
Wo ack only of your roprosontativos in this country to
Give ua advance notioe of novononts of your nationale
- and to be noro cautious in "trospascing® fighting ares,
Thio will evold acoidonte and aid in woleoning denonstrac
tions. (Sont to Dopt ropoated to Paris) | iC
I assuro you of adniration and friondship we fool |
toward Anoricen neooplo and its roproscntatives horo, - | |
That ouoh fricndly feclings hava boon exhibited nGe only | :

to Ancricans thensclvor but also to inpostors in decntias Acie
uniforn io »roof that US stand for international justice
and penec 1# appreeieted by ontiro Victelinnoso nation | |
. and "overning sphorcea®, |
I convey to you Ir, Proaidont and to &nerlean pooyio t
cxprcenion of our groat rcopeat and adniration (cxp ce)
GULLARY). ~ se

ROLANTOOU *

: O Get te ts : 0-70 at ed]
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

2 A Se
x boa A - . /
~) ‘i oar -
Oe te a S Re
: tf \ ss a
i j |
ra = ao .
Lt eh : : Mile TR era ae *

Off 306 a) oe siash 1900 « RE TEES DEES ORE

|
Po apts pau; Nov. 15, 1945 |
|

SEA cons ction should
be taken on ti egram Fror
Ro Chi Ihinh t requesting
membership of Yiet-Nan
Republic on t Ldvisory

77 2. xt SE Se
as ee ca Or

Cotimission. f ae “U3 :
a ed "
Nee c ie .
is es Fi fi
: srr \ *
Ge Ly & Fi w a
Le len i) and ol * Zz are
+ cry =
Sy ge J os = >
a igs r tere
1
i i
| |
ee
: 1 aNs
z ca ae as 7 ~~ =~ -
OF tne seta, Leek et ee {
EA 4
se
&

C-71
Se

aan

wow bl

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

THE WHITE HOUSE c Rs
WASHINGTON
|
October 17, 1945 ie: ,
ate x

pete oS tee a.
pe Lit Fag a ; aiG at f
ary of State.
: } x .

© : :
Execubive Cleri:

+
4 .
~
T
’ . +
a
5 a
4
|
! *
I ~~
! ™~.
i =

c-72
»

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

4

anew Lea Pisce SE \f

T/N RA. 349- Via ROA

Hawot, Vid Kunming, OcrcBer

ti. Ho Cut Mita Presibent OF THE PROVISIONAL OF VIETNAR PEbOge she
REPUeLIC 70 Pre RESIDENT | Truvian, “ASHINGTON. = Sara ae ee Va

Est ABLISHMEHT OF ADVISORY COMMISSION FOR THE FAR EAST [S HEARTILY

HELCOME BY VIETHAMESE PEOPLE IM PRINCIPLE Stop. TAKING INTC CONSIGER-

T1OH PRIMO THE STRATES DON, BAD ECONOMICAL IMPORTANCE OF VIETNAM

SECUNDO THE EARNEST DESIRE WHICH VIETNAM DEEPLY FEELS AND HaS UNANIMOUS:

MANIFESTED TO COOPERATE WITH THE OTHER CEMOCRACICS IN THE ESTABLISHMENT,
AND CONSOLICATION OF WORLD PEACE AND PROSPERITY WE WISH TO CALL TRE
ATTENTICN OF THE ALLIED NATIONS ON THE FOLLOWING POINTS COLON

Firsy ABSENCE OF VIETNAM AND PRESENCE OF FRANCE IN THE ADVISORY

COMMISSION LEADS TO THE CONCLUSICN THAT FRANCE (S To REPR ESENT THE

VIETNAMESE PEOPLE AT THE comMissicn stop Sucw REPRESENTATION IS GROUIE

LESS EITHER DE your O# DE Facto. Stop. De JURE NO ALLEGIANCE EXISTS

ANY MORE BETWEEN France AND VieTNaw Coton Baobal aBOL:!SHED TREATIES
cr 1854 ano 7863 coma Baodal VOLUNTARILY ABDICA TED TO HAND OVER

GOVERN-MENT TO DEMOCRATIC REPUBLICAN GCOVERNHENT COMMA PROVISIONAL

4

GOVERNMENT RECTORATED ABCLISHMENT OF TREATIES OF 1884 ano 18645 Srop

De Facto since MarRcH NINTH FRANCE HAVING HANDED OVER GOVERNHAG RULE

TO JAPAN HAS BROKEN ALU ADMINISTRATIVE LINKS WITH VIETNAM, SERCE AUGUST

|
7@, 1945, PROVIS!IGNAL Go SVERNIE NT HAS BEEN A DE FACTO INDEPENDENT ?

GOVERNMENT 1N EVERY RESPECT, RECENT INCIDENTS th SAtGON INSTIGATED BY

THE FRENCH ROUSED UNANIMOUS DISAPPROVAL LEADING TO FIGHT FOR INDEPENOEH

C-73

errs rr. r]

DPA Soe

>t

ane
an ee

“of

Lae Oh

2Oaiy f

¢

‘a
han ee

’
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

i pee mn F
Hi i ye ey gaa Dos Le {|
cn tectasd Neat A OE AEYVE

tl ches Bit ae

Nebr carl

ne eis

SEcoND FRANCE 1S NOT ENTITLED BECAUSE SHE HAD” LGNOM TH LOUSLY

SOLD 1kDO CHINA TO JAPAN AND BETRAYED THE ALLIES Tar ao Vetoes

—_—__——_

—_—_—=——

IS QUALIFIED BY ATLANTIC CHa ARTER AND SUBSEQUENT PEACE AGREEMENT
AND BY HER GOODWILL AND HER UNFLINCHING STAND FOR DEMOCRACY an
BE REPRESENTED AT THE Aovis SORY Comission. SToP “WE ARE CONVINCED
THAT VIETNAM AT fay SSION WiLL BE ABLE TO BRING EFFECTIVE ete
BUTION TO SOLUYICH OF PENDING PROBLEMS Iv Far East wieReas HER
ABSENCE WOULD BRING FORTH UNSTABILITY AND TEMPORARY ChagacTER TO
SOLUTICNS OTHERWISE REACH, THEREFORE WE EXPRESS EARNEST REQUEST
TO TAKE PART 1 ADVISORY CoMMISSIGN FoR Far East. Stor. He SHOULD
BE VERY GRATEFUL TO YOUR EXCELLENCY AND PREMIER ATYLEE PREMIER
va GENERALISS IO ToHane es OHEK FOR THE CONVEYANCE OF OUR

ESIDERATA TO THE Unite D NATIONS»

RESPECTFULLY, ' ~ 25

Hocuinins.

Reco/1720ata

c-74
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

DEPARTMENT PI CSCY MTP
meee OE PASTE fa ls f VELEN ES
Gr . . wis
wp reich “irl Ie Gr ho A Bs aaa
STATE # EE Bites Bec tas UL wih eo oe | foost
Raven Di rts
e “3 ‘ -
CULON? NOM ‘ fame
aes EP-1720«¢ Paris: Sega
ha . = A i s ~ ie ee D
S This telegram must be ae ©
U paraphrased before being Dated Sct. 23, 1945. “
3 communicated to anyone a
HSC other than 2a Government Rec'd 12:48 a.m., 24th.
FUR“3 Agency. (RESTRICTED) “VON A cee ah.
ew Wry ” i
oJ ? fg “|e
DorLeC .
SPq-2 Secretary of State, act aoe
FO-14 :
NTC Washington. Poste
i
OPL "I be
IBA orat 6196, Oct. Bote yf
AB ye os : 5 as :
SPA Lumber of papers toca article
Sh rT. m
SA/GH reporting to Chin Eph, pre inh, has
aes - é : : es .
appealed cver Hanoi radio to Yfresident ee Prime A
‘ .
a ahaa Attlee and General de Gaulle and announced .
Mos Tass Hationalist Govt" intends to hold plebiscite ~
: eo
oe re es: ; é
zi ae a, two months to vive constitution to Inde-Chinay 3
: nee. &rticle continues "official French relay “Yes 5
=) Vs “mark it dots not seem Viicely Viet Minh will wa able ;
o siito hold such plebiscite. However, French Govt -is nov r ¢
-. « Opposed in principle te such plebiscite: if Ho Chip Tina “*
ae. PEPPEesents entire population oP eindesthina and not
merely Viet Minh Party. x :
Se hts , 2 BR
.) Only contacts which French authorities have had =
~#°. with Viet Minh, concludes article, have. been undertaken
x solely to stop bloodshed and it would be inexact to “
speak of reel negot Lations. Soars eon
af 3

JUS

RESTRICTE

C-75

CHppeRy See ee
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ae ot HORE AMERICAN CONSULATE GENERAL J Md,
sais SF es Kunming, China, October 24, 1945...) Ge

A subject: Letters from Annamite Leaders: : ZES

\_ : Situation in Indochina, Veet eer ae

) Bes ISEQ iG 670:

| oe eg “Y — i
an oie IME. YI1% 5

AL ‘ — wie FY Sa Pei Hy
[) ce <> FUE Honorable “A q) O Y\ AGTAT (orrans : Ve Me
Sic The Secretsry of state, we HOV fe Mg 4 i .)
Le ro Aa Washington, D. C, (' barcavele rae
: . PASTOR AtrATS Ut bid
Sir: oS
/. LJ ft Lh)

: )
Referrin; to the Consulate General's despatch No. | XK
el of September 27, 1945, in regard to the situation in
Indochina, { have the honor to enclose; (a) copy of a
letter addressed by HO Chi Minh, President of the "pro-
visional Government of the Democratic Republic of yiet-
Wan", to tne Seeretary of Gtate under date of Octobe
2a, (b) translation of 4 letter dated oo bobes 22,
945, addressed by HGIAO Vien, Division of Overseas
Affairs official serving with the Chinese Occupation
Forces in Indochina, to Gcneral CHR cheng, Chinese Min-

a ee

i ister of var; and (c) translation of a letter dated
ml October 22, 1945, addressed by Ho Chi Minh (Wade romani-
a ae Zavion written WU Chih-ming) and WAN Yung-jui (Annamite
Fata ‘|| ex-.miperor Pao Tai) to Generalissimo Chiang Koei-snek,.
‘ Lp Se aA ‘ ,
(Rep es Tt Tne originals of these messages were brought to

fa 3 ta =]
om au, ~:; Kunming on uctober a4 by two United States army officers
lat 6s 52“) who have been serving in the Hanoi area sinee the latter
jrt4 ban
ey KT TY part of August as menbers of a G-5 Team for prisoner of
id ee}

v4, wor rescue work. CGolonel stephen Jjordlinger, Commanding

“officer of the Team, informs me that he is carrying with

henteemeererme! him to Jasiington tue original of the letter to the oec-
retary of State for apvropriate delivery upon his arrival
there. The originals of the letters to General Uhen Cheng
and to Generalissino Chiang Kai-snek in a sealed envelope
addressed by the senders to General Cneng are being for-

warded by this office to the imbassy st Chunsking for

) delivery through United States Army chinnels. The officers

‘% who brougit tiese messages to Kuniing were not told by

‘.. Ho Chi iuinh of -the contents thereof and the information

aac contained in the letters to General Cheng and the General-
he aN issimo will ostensibly be known only to the Chinese
\ att autuorities.- The Consulate General was reyuested to make
Ki a travslation of the letters in as much 98 it was believed

that they mitht conisin information of a military nature
of concern to the United Gtates Apmy authorities.

summary of sznelosures: In his letter to tie occretary
of Stace, lio Uni winh staves tint he is forwarding verious
' Goounents recardin: tue present situation in Indochina.

These docurents are being forware-2~98 accompaniments to

ee: : Senn war Te
a sonarsbe despaten.) de rerers vw svench oppression of
bE CeSpavelis

the Annamites and blie desire or tne “nnamites for realiza-

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

= he
fion ot bin principles ct the atlantic ond San #raneisco

Charters, [ie blames tie wrench Tor the present disturb-

ances in Indochina ana asks Lor *dimedlate intorwerenee
by the United ations lest the situation result in the
spread of courlict throughout the var 2H8%. be makes

four requests: (1) The situation should be discussed at
the first meeting of the ar sastern Advisory Commission;
‘(&) Annomite delezates should be allowed to present the
views of the "Vietnamese Government"; (3) an investication
committee should be sent to Indochina; nnd (4) the United —
Nations should recognize Annanite independence.

The Chinese Overseas Affairs official states thot to
Chi Minh and Pao Tai desire to proceed secretly to Chung-
King to talk with the Gcneralissiuo and asks that a plarme
be sent to Indochina for that purpose. Jn the letter from
the annamite leaders to the Generalissino, they express
their desire to proceed to Vhunsking to pay their respecus
to him and ask for a reply. ind of SUNMALY

The United States Army officers deseribe conditions in
Indocnina as rollows;:

The situation is complicated by the food problem, age~
eravated by the failure of the Chinese Oceunation Forces
to brinz food supplies with thon. There are estimated to
be approximately 100,000 Chinese troops in Indochina at
present find tuey have taken over large rice stocks in the
naiphong area which obiuerwise might have been used to
relieve the suffering. The french have expressed their
Willingness to transport rice from Saigon, which tiey wish
to give to dealers in tie Hanoi and taiphong areas for sale,
as the most effective metiod of distribution. Ho Chi finh
is willing to permit the transport of such rice and has
azreed to sec to its distribution as a gift of the rench
people but not aS o gift from the ifreneh Government, Floods
have caused a fifty percent loss in crops in the north while
in Saigon there are large exces; stocks of rice. The
Chinese are now endeavoring to arrance for the transport ofF
rice overland from Saigon but that wiil, of course, be a
slow process, given the present condition of conmunications
facilities.

Tne Annamites have been fcuilty of excesses, having
killed 20 to 30 ¢rench womenanda children held as hosta,3es
at Saigon and.navins taken many other French hostuses in
the Hanoi-[laiphony; and Vinh-Hue areas, In ifanoi annamite
armed squads are continually searching French homes Tor
hidden wenpons and the sicht of #renechmen stending against
the wall outside tieir homes under guard by arned Annamites
while,others search the house is a frejuent one.

Americans ere extrenely populer with the 4nnamites, ,
who do everything vossible to convince tiem of tue justice
of their cause. ‘There are still evidences of pro-Vichy
sentiment in the Hanoi area and those french who have not
been held prisoner in the citadel are apt to be suspect
to te those who played a part in the resistance movement.

=a

C-17 - The
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘ “
4 i)

qne reason for lic Leilure of the reneh renresentutive,
General nllessandri, to “articipute in the Japanese “surrender
cerenonics at Hanoi was the display of the Annomites of all
United Nations flags except’ thut of tae french at tne place
of tne ceremony. The annsmites refused to display the |french
flag on the grounds that the French had collaborated with the
Japanese in Indochina and the Chinese authnowities supoorted
the 4nnamites in the contention. This feeling against the \
French was seen in monster mass meetings held frequently in
Hanoi, Lue annamites having taken over sll administration ©
buildings and public unilities in that area. They placarded -
the city with signs and slogans, such as those reading "xill
the french"" ~- some of them in snzlish for the eyes of Americans.

~The Freneh con, of course, return to Indochina bit it
will be a mistake unless they are prepared to reentcr in
strength sufficicnt to overpower the Annamite resistance in
snort order. Jr the frenen attenpt to return to Indochina
without overwhelming forces ond impressive air supzgert, the
strugsle will be long and bloody. The ‘innamites have only
ligut arms - rifles, carbines oad hand grenades » and could
not stand up against heavy weapons, These have been pro-
vided them by the Americans as well as by the Japanese, the
American arms havin, been siven for use against the Japannse
prior to the latter's surrender. Yrouble at present is con-
fined larsely to the Hanoi-iiaiphong aud Vinh-liue areas with
tie .aigon" arca somewhnet better because of the presence of
Jar;e numbers of British troops, Laos and Cambodia are
practically frec of Anmimite influence.

The Chinese Cecupation Forces have been circunspect and
have compelled the annsmites in some cases, at Anerican” ~~
sussestion, to releise.arencl politital prisoners, They have
eiven no arms to thé aunonites, being interested” in obtaining
as wony as possible for tuemselves. Tne Chinese have, however,
now brougat in their own Annamite puppet, one Nsu Yen Hai Tan,
who is & member of the Annamite Revolutiohary League spon-
sored by the Kuomintang in Uhina. He is said to have been an
exile in China for the past twenbty-fy—" rears. He is associ-
ated with the independence movement, as 18 his party, but
has no place in the Government.

i

—
—.,/ -

Colonel Nordlinger, the sourcs of no:-— —/ th forssoings

—

information, states tuot he is proceeding to Washi icton

shortly and that ne will call at the Vepartnent in connection

with the delivery of Ho Chi Minh's letter to the Secretury of
State,

Respectfully yours,
ee (hed. e EM sip Fas

I ah as eee
Fhili’p LD. \Sprouse
American Vonsul

fnelosures:
C-78
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

resistance to Japan in Indo-China. The British may likewise

be expected to encourage this view. It seems to me that with-
out prejudicing in any way our position regarding the future _
of Indo-China we can combat this trend by making public our
desire to render such assistance as may be warranted by the
circumstances and by the plans to which we are already com-
mitted in the Pacific area. To this end I attach a draft of

a suggested statement for publication, subject to your approval,
by the State Department.

/s/ E.R. Stettinius, Jr.

Enclosures:
1. Proposed Statement.
2. Copy of telegram
from Ambassador Caffery
[not included here/

[Enclosure Bas
PROPOSED STATEMENT

The action of the Japanese Government in tearing away the
veil with which it for so long attempted to cloak its domination
of Indo-China is a direct consequence of the ever-mounting pres-
sure which our arms are applying to the Japanese Empire. It is
a link in the chain of events which began so disastrously in the
summer of 1941 with the Franco-Japanese agreement for the "common
defense" of Indo-China. It is clear that this latest step in
the Japanese program will in the long run prove to be of no avail.

The Provisional Government of the French Republic has requested
armed assistance for those who are resisting the Japanese forces r
in Indo-China. In accordance with its constant desire to aid all
those who are willing to take up arms against our common enemies,
this Government will do all it can to be of assistance in the
present situation, consistent with plans to which it is already
committed and with the operations now taking place in the Pacific.
It goes without saying that all this country's available resources
are being devoted to the defeat of our enemies and they will con-
tinue to be employed in the manner best calculated to hasten

their downfail.

A-17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ow Am
Inclosures; “' (0) 3
1. Letter from Ho Chi iinh to the
; secretary of Stute, October 22, 1945.

2. Translation of Letter from Hsiao Wen to
General Chen Cheng, October 22, 1945.

3. Translation of Letter from Ho Chi Minh and
Pao Tai to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek,
October 22, 1940.

Leo
Original and hectograph to the Department.
Copy to Bnbassy, Chungking.

800 PDSprouse/pds °
i
>: *.
“y.

C-719
»

ny

0 Le

I

\

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ywopry L
Rat UBLIC Oe Viste /ai
3 ' ah a eos es
f HANOT, _ October a2, 1945, *
The Minister of foreicn Affairs
tao tle SeChwrary OF “SPT EP ARN di

ant
* =

WAGLIUG LOU, Ds

dence,

The
stage,

Situation in south Viebnam has reached its critical

and chlls for inmvinte luterference on the part of

tie United Nations. I wish by the present letter to bring Ps
your wxcellency sone more light on the case of Vietnam wii oh

hos cone
linelight.

for the iofst tbree weeks into the international

first of all, I beg to forward to your Government a
few docunentory date, aon, Whieh our Declaration of indepen-~

iF

tie Imperial Rescript of wx-iinperor BAO DAL on the

eacasion of his nbdicaticn, bie declaration of our Govern«
went conecrn ing iy ries é2ne) Of es 0) rei ATL poli by ant 4a note def ininre
our pos 7

i

Lion towards tle south Viebnam incident,

AS those docunents will show your sxecllency, the Viot-

Nanes

pe

‘ople has knovn during the last fow years an evolubion

which naturally briiss the Vietnamese nation to its present
Situation. After 60 years of ireneh oppression and unsucces-
buouch obstinate Viotnannse resistance, we at last saw
France defeated in wurope, then her betrayal of the Allies
successively on behalt of Germany and of Janan. Thousl the
odds wer
leaving
in tne
against the Japanese. eanvhile , the Atlantic Charter w “he 8
concluded, defining tue war ims of the allies and laying the

sful

V

eat taat tine against the Allies, the Vietnamese,
aside all differcnees in political opinion, ,unibed
Leotmink Leégue ana sterted on a ruthless Dist

So ~ . rtp
Foundation of peace-work, The noble principles of international

justice ana equality of status laid down in that charter
strensly aynealed to tne Vietnamese Anda contributed in making
of the Vietminh resistence in the war zone a nation-wide
anti-Japnanese woveuent wuich found @ powerful echo in the
democratic aspirations of the people. The Atlantic RASnveR
was looked upon es tic foundation of future Vietnam, <A

nablion-buildins pro La aim Was was advefted which was later found in
with San Francisco Cusrter and which has been rully

keeping

earrio

1d out these last years: continuous Light asainst the

Japanese
on August 19th, voluntery abuication of Mk~ainperor BaONeT,
esbablishwent of the Democratic spublic of Vietnam, assist-
ance given le the allies Vations in the disarnaient of the

dé par:

she

fe!

=

bringing about fue recovery of national independence

anpointient of a provisional Government whose nission

was to carry out tne atlantic Se#av6en Bnd San iranciseo Char-

‘ters suv have them carrica out by otuer nations.

As _& matter_of Pact, tae poze vee e oh of the atlantic

and Gan l're
4Alisam ana All forms of eolon TaD “oppress ‘ion. This” Wels UN=
fortunotely contrary to Uile intereste of sone vrenchnen, ana

raneciseo 0 Charts Me Lali tue 2 eradication of imper-

c-80 wrance

ae

.
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fvinec, Lo wuom the colonists tuve lon; ecmeealad the truth on
Indochina, instead of ciuberiia; into peacerble ne-otiabious .
resorted to an ausressive iuvesion, with ull the meang at ‘ine
coca eb ‘cucyn nuabion. worcover, haying persuaded the
sritish that tue Vietuauese ure wisiing for a return of the

French rule, tuey obteinced, tirst fron the Brivish coumang in
Southeast Asia, buen frem London, 4 tacit recognition of their
Sovercigney ond, administrative responsidility os far as South
Vietuen is conderned. ‘the British gave to understand tht bey
aad asrecd to this on the ground that the reestablishwentof :
French administration and, censeyuently, of “ranco-Vietnamese
collaboration would help tiem to speed up the demobilization .
and tie disarmament of the Japunese. But subsequent aetate .
Wi.11 prove the fallacy of tus argunent. The whole Vietnamese
nation rooe up As one inon awiningst trench 9~ ression. The first
street-suiping: which was launched by the french in the guall
hours of oceptenber 2ard soon devélored into real anu or.-anized
wartare in whicn losses are heavy oa,both sides. ‘The bringing
in of #reneh iuportant reinforcements on board of the sost =
powertul of their remaining warships will extend the war zone
furboer. As murderous Cisuting 18 still going on in Indonesia
and as sfivase acts on the part of #renepmen are revorted ovory.
es pine the flaring up of a general conflagration in
she Mare wast.

ds it _is, the sityuitis
ate faterfertnes. The eetil islnent of the Consultative Com-
mission Gor the far-sust las oven enthusiastically welcomed here
ag the first effective step towards an equitable settlenent of
tie pending problems. The people of Vietnam, which only asks
for full inependence and for the respect of truth and justice,
puts before your “xcellency our following desiderata;

Jo - the South Vietnam incident should be discussed at
the first meeting of the Yonsult:tive Connmssion for the Har-
ast;

20 - Vietnamese delrgates should be admitted to state the
views of the Vietnamese Government;

$0 - An Inquiry Commission should be sent to south Vietnam;

4o = the full independence of Vietnam should be recosgnizea
by the United Nations.

I aveil myself of this opportunity to send your sxeellency
my best wishes,

sa Respectfully,
b]

President HO CHI MIN

pds
c-81
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Le | rs

HKG I OPPs, ae “bh EL IL eth Tee
dated ~ofobur ot, 145 Bron ianming

TRAVSLSLLO ‘ an

Division of Overseas Affairs,

First #ront Army,
Hanoi, October 22, 1945.

Tvhe Honorable
fiinister Chen. .

Sirs *

T have the honor to report that all the officials and
people as well as the various parbies and factions through-
out Indociina have been unanimously united. JI have been
ancroeacued by ir. HU Chiheming, Cnairnan of the Provisional
CGovernuent of Indochina, and iir. YAW Yunge-jui, who was
formerly Ymperor Peso Ta of Annam, with the request that
arran ‘ements be made whereby they may be secretly conducted
so Chun:king to call on you and to be introduced to His
mxcellency Chairman Chiang; at an ing eCW.

With your approval, J res pectfully request that an

airplane be sent to Indochina in order that fT may accompany --77— >
weSsSrs. Hu and Yuen on their tH: . bo Churgictng. _— the joint
letter from Kessrs. Hu and Yuan is transmitbed-i-~ewith.

Your instructions are reyuested for my guidance in the
premises /

I have the honor to be, Sir,

Your obedient servant,

(sealed) HSIAO WHI

pds

a

c-82
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ane Losures i Cit a a Ley Cc pee “rit

Pron ntionubnygs

TRAN ol, ATIC A,

——= ee! .

Hanoi, October 22, 1945

45 *
His xexcecllency
chairngan Chians nai-shek,
Care of iinister Chen.
exe@lleney: — a be ha

i | '
t

\ we have the honor to abate that we ‘s “iu Chih-min-,
Chairnan of the Provisional Governtent of the Denoeratic
‘Republic of Indochina, and High Advisor YAN Yung- jui
(former imperor Fao Ta) - desire to proeced to Chuns-king
to pey our resvects to your “xcellency and to call on
Linister Chten. Jf this meets with your approval, we
shall appreciate your being good enough to favor us with
Seni yh. .

We have tae honor to be, Your sxeellency,

Your obedient servants,

HU CHIM-MING
YUAN YUNG-JIUI

pds

c-83
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

: nn veer
’ TRH DAPTMENT NOY ALAS 5. ayn iSiON CG;
We a mY Eat ib 2 oe ga_* ra 4. + ; pibooe ys i a. Seal co
cs an . oe ss hay CENTRAL SERVICES
a = Sere . bed "peal Mstel| eps ae 7 TE ass 5 epee
= ST ei =~ b Sas Pesan — Se a! Ny if AY ELE ad ee a, © os i ae | }
ei : or, $

ACTION? WE, CL.

INFO:
Ss RGS~1835-K

U a telecram must be 7 eet
Cc osely paraphrased be- Tita:
EUR a being communiceted . ange aya
FE to anyone. (S=iCReET) Rec td 9715 pete, Sth 4
FG EN at een ee pe te A ae ree ee,
MK Sceretary of State ‘ “ah en ‘ porte dt
z = 3 ag! Hp b FO a i f mee
ae «! : et, 612 au 2 Lee. ~
-, Ee met * Sar = zy G
1948, November 8, 6 p.m. ee C
There follows substance of letter addressed to ak
, ‘ e
President Truman by lio-Chi-liinh who signs as ."Presi- £

Gent of Provisinal Government of Republic of Viete

. Nami: Letter was given to General Gallas

x
forwarded to Embassy through U,Se army e
Tecan Aah nf
(Embassy's 1820 Octover 16 to Department repeated.% uf
Paris). : :

I wish to give following information concerning

situation of Viet-Fam: -

at
1
2,
Pills
we

(1) When Japanese cane to Indo-China from Se

Erber 1940 Eo September 194] Trance, by protocol July

i

Les]
a
fe
ry
mi
is}
as
in|
I=
in
oy

= r ee
SECRE - Saas

—“ _ ECTE ONS WEy, OS

Tm e

LN) 2etos

~

o

.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Sea EL. ; Mig Tope el 5

7 eek ee IL be

-MG-1928 =F CORRECTED PAGE THO AND THREE
This telegram must d6

closely paraphrased be- Be
fore veing comaunicated ot <p
to anyone. ’ (SE so eae pg
* M eo ——
Es 2
= “r = : ‘ a, x “y
* — . = ci P er
—_—
RT a Fe eae
Sa piv
‘ F. r Ke r ; 2
“2m G1 9E8, November 8, 6 Delt, from Chungkines via Navy

oF. i
Surrendered to Japanese contrary to plecges contained

————

—————— ee

in protective treatics March 1874 and June 1884, thus

. a a ae
breaking all legal and administrative ¢
oO cir ets

je

es with veaple

of Indo-China, Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam was

set up sugust 19, 1945 after independence of entire
country was wrested from Japanese. After Japanese

surrender, while Viet-Nam Provisional Government in
capacity of an independent Government was carrying

g-up prosram in conformity with Atlantic

uilding

g
5

out 2

ana San Francisco Charters, French, ignoring del-—
= as =

iberately all peace treaties concluded by United
Nations at end of World War II, attackec us treac ner
ously in Naigon, September 25, and are plannin

of agsression against Viet-Nan, (Sent to Department

is),

ia

repeated to

—_—

oS

United Nations in_erection of lasting world peace and,
Eee One eS
having sufferec so severcly under direct domination of

French and much more from barpein made by French wi

Javan. in:. :

c-85

2} “Pe geatene of Viet-Nan are willing cooperate with -

Ot @ pers EAN Se aeeray LENE cas

)

(rd
Le gon

wee

if
Yh

FS
He

WUD:

XY

}

Tt
cy

“yt
it
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~3- #1948, November 8, 6 p.m. from Chungking via Navy

Japan in 1941, are determined never to permit French to return to
Indo China. If French troops coming either from China where they
fied during Japanese occupation of Indo-China or from other places
put foot on any part of Viet-Namese territory the people of Viet-Nam
are determined to fight them under any circumstances.

(3) ck; therefore, disorder, bloodshed or general conflagration
due to causes mentioned above in paragraph (2) break out in Far
Eastern Asia entire responsibility must be imputed to French. (End
substance letter).

Identical message from Ho-Chi-Min addressed to Generalissimo
Chiang Kai-Shek has also been received by same army channels.
Binbassy will not deliver message to Gimo unless so directed by

Department.

ROBERTSON

c-86
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘ ah nee
ie
: ~ ora aed By Foy gory A PP ee f
aah ped he fee he mad We a a) i a t if yea Tas ig aA A.
Lidar. breed § a Lard ee ava d WSS pe eet Pe
BR tethy ot BE) St WE aie
he OS eRe Chis 1:3 Al oe ca
4 atm a inal pela |b ree ay 8, JT a a tat eyes 5
- 3 ry ie: eet Peeve AED Chiat art
STATE ELE Scie AL EV TELEGRAPH SECTION
- s ed

LCTIO!
INFO

S

U:

C
AeCel
LD

EUReS ~~

FE+S
DC/L»K

yen
i shenee y

million Vietnamese died of starvation during winter

DC/L

TIES at 56 «0

This telegram must be -
closely paraphrased: DE Dated November 25,
fore being communicated : ees

to anyone. Se Rectd. 12:25 aome, 24t!

Vv &

aera

Chungking via Arny

1945

Secretary of State, os og; . s
ona A CCie ,
2026, Nov 25, Pelilo, “77 a

Below is given substance of identionl

ow

communication
addressed by Ho-Chieilinh to President Truman and to

era General of

~~ WIRRA3 cornmunications were given to
ee C +} AS
General Gallagher and forwarded to Embassy through US
TR OO TSS fipnees
ade

Aray channels. (Emba Nov 9 to Depi/ rede ented to
Pe CR ES

Cc

ssyts 1952,

Paris):

i
{ Wish to invite attention of your cxcEllency for
strictly humanitarian reasons to following Matter, Two

1944 and spring 1945

peste of starvation

pelicy of.

French who seized a nd sto

red until. Abe rotted ¢ si) avail=

able vice (Sent Dept; repeated Paris Three-fourths

chil

eyltivated land was flooded in SUMED 194 55 vWoieh w

followed by a-stvere drouth; of normal Harve

!

WOSs lost. The prés ene i or Cri n Es (sh ,cecupati 4 Or el ey Lad
ee ee 1
ri a AYES a
‘ WO ae es \ ey
i 5 ae increases Se Be S
a BO ee Pee aa sae fe
aE ota ee ry VEU ‘eg
SECRET Gf i a
3 Gnd ‘ 52540 ere ys
Pou Vieug
c-87 ay ak 2

Ci

‘
a
~

%,
~

a
~

ome,
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fens
wes
No

“SECRET

ac ey
= aa -

~2- 2026, Nov 23,.4 peme, from Chungking via Army

increases number of persons who must be fed with stocks
already not sufficient, Also transport of rice fron
Cochinchina is made impossible by conflict provoked: by
French. Many people are starving and casualtics increase
EVEry day « Everything possible has been cone under these
circumstances by Provisional Government of Vietnaa
Republic. Unless great world ownee and international
relief organizations bring us’ immediate assistance we
face imminent catastrophee Tt cavnest ly appeat to Your
Excellency, therefore, for ang available assistance, I
request your Excellency to accept my heartfelt and antici»

pated thanks in name of my people.
ROBERTSON

UPS
SECRET
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

[Response]

THE WHITE HOUSE
Washington

March 17, 1945

MEMORANDUM FOR
The Secretary of State
By. direction of the President, there is returned
herewith Secretary of State Memorandum of 16 March, subject
Indo-China, which includes a proposed statement on the
Japanese action in Indo-China.
The President is of the opinion that it is inad-

visable at the present time to issue the proposed statement.

/s/ William D. Leahy

The French were also actively pressuring the President and his key
advisors through military channels. Admiral Leahy reported that, fol-
lowing Yalta:

"The French representatives in Washington resumed their
frequent calls to my office after our return from the Crimea.
They labeled most of their requests ‘urgent.' They wanted to
participate in the combined intelligence group then studying
German industrial and scientific secrets; to exchange informa-
tion between the American command in China and the French forces
in Indo-China; and to get agreement in principle to utilizing
the French nayal and military forces in the war against Japan
(the latter would assist in returning Indo-China to French
control and give France a right to participate in lend-lease
assistance after the defeat of Germany.)

"Most of the time I could only tell them that I had no use--
ful information as to when and where we might make use of French
assistance in the Pacific.

"However, we did attempt to give a helping hand to the

French resistance groups in Indo-China. Vice Admiral Fenard
called me on March 18 to say that planes from our lth Air

A-18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
%

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

—

ce ee ~~
ee : tg iry
THE FOREIGN SERVICE ie eae ah \ aS
te rhs ie i 7 THE . 26 re { f
a ‘A asc ae : or THE io = € fr. , iE Dae era
ey eh UNITED STATES OF AMERICA yp Diks 7 —
ok oy ot vil Mi
maa Bey Wy. as thee
f Sag 1
é +
baa =
. “ ory
7 sey, ae
ORES Ute Oy
WNTTAL Gar arte
ae j - Ths
890 ; :
Ee fron ae foae eens Government of the
=< Rooublic of Viotnnia",
The Charge a*Affaires a.i. bas the honor to rafter
to recent SeLeRvanis from the znbaasy regarding Indo~
china and to transmit copios of three cammuntestions
from President Ho Chieminh of tao "“Spovisional Covarne C9
ment of tho Republia of Vietnan", hoc © conmunteations Cj
wera delivered to Genoral Gallaghex, Tnitod Statea Army, ws
heed of the Chinese Combat Lialson Grou» wlth tho {)
Chinese forcos in North Indochina, and forwarded to she 5
Embasayp through United Staten Axiny channels, » O
The communieatibn far Generalisaine Ghinne Kateshek \ o..
will not bo delivered to hin by the Embassy unleas rete) i bn
jnstructed by the Department, i —<
i
fi}
()
| rin
Enclosures; att, kh. Gi
1. Copy of letter from Prenident io Chi-minh,
Vietnam Domocratia Republic to neere tary of
‘State dated Novenbar 1, 1945,
ee Copy of telegran to Ganora -Lissino Chiang
Kai-shek dated Ostobcr 23, 1945,
3. Cony of telegram toa Socrosary or Stato, undated,
! io)
| (f)
=
; “
fon 3 “a = C.
* opiginel and pectonr as 30 the Deoortment, gio +7}

-—F

Copy, tor Imbasay, Paris, thoaugh Devartment “|
7

2 ¢

ae ere divaxetngs =
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

PncLocnrrs NO. ) Fo dagpateh no, G20 dnted Novoinbay 26, 1945

ron Hnbasay, Chungikiny. Cine

a

Nanot Lnt of Noveibor 19-45

Prenident RochiNinh of Provisional Goverament of VieseMom
Donocratic Renublis

to Hie Exeollency Jamon Brunog .
ih ASoerotary of State Dopnrvtmiuis of tha Unitod States of America
Wanhington, D,G.

Mxeollency,

On behalf of the Viotnon culiural Atisoolation, I beg to expross:
the desiva of this Asgoclatilon to send to tho United States of
Auerica a dolegation of chout Litty Vietnam youths with a view
to establishing frlendly cultural rolations with the Amorican
yoush on tho ono hand, and careylog on further studies An
Engineering, Agriculture a3 well as other linos of special

Location on tho other, :

Tho dasiroe which I am conveying to yours Excellency has been
expressed to me by all the Vietnam Rasineays, Lawyors, Pro-
fessora ,Aas Well an other reprosontatives of oup intelligentsia

whom I have come acrons,

They havo been all these yoarn keenly Interested in things
Amerhean ond earnestly desirous to G28 into touch with the
American people whose fino ntand for tha noble jdoals of
Anternational Justica and Humanity, and whose modern teehnierdl
achievements have so strongly appealed to thom re

I sincerely wish that this plan would be favored hy your 5
approbation and assistanco and avail mysolf of this opportunity
to express to your Excellency my boast wishen,

President Ho-CHI~MINH

(sigried) HochiMinh

c-90
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Kneloaure en ae denanpatelh no, 899 datoad November 25, 1945
from Bubauny, Changekte:. -
TPLUNGAAT R Ae

Hanot October 28th 1945

HOCHTININIT President of PROVISTONAL GOVERNNENT of VIBTNAIT | eet
REPUBLIC ogo ot ar
to Marochall CHIANG KAT SHGSK Renn die _of CHINA >

: Pa

In the namo of the Provinionel Covernnent of Vietnam
Republic wo enphatheally nzotest againnt usa of Japancsa
Troops by BrLs Ash 7nd). anny undes comnannd of Goneral
Gracey and by French ama under comand of General Leclere
in the reprassion of Vietnamane national lAberation movement
in South Indochina svor

Under pretenco of dis aiming che Javanese Generals
Gracey and Leclere dispersed Japanaas Sxooos throughout
South Vietnain provinces as vanguard to British Indien
and Nreneh troops with view to reootablishing French
domination ovor Indochina stop,

The Vietnamese people having rutblossly fourht againnt
Japanese fascism and having just eatablished donocratic
regime throughout ts country feels greatest indignation
in prascneo of such unjustifiable behaviour on the part of

British and French stop
‘Therefore we strongly appeal to and eacerly roquest your
Excellency to

primo lssuo order to stop massaaro of a people
defending its legitimate rights according to principles
laid down in Atlantic and San Francisco charters

secundo recognize full independence of Vietnam
Republic final stop
RespectruLly

HQ CHI MINH

c-91
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

f-3 |
Inelosaura to denpateh no, APO, datel Novenbexy 26, 1945 Lron
Fnbassy, Cnungiting.

ZELEGRAH

Hocbililnk President Provisional Governments Vietnam Repubile

to Its Exeellenoy the Seeretary of State Department Yadhington
D.C. E
On occeanion of inapguration Washinston Conferenca foc tho

Far East wo rograt absonen of Vietnomenc dologation Sto Ous
nenin, wo deny Trance avery right to apanak on bobnlt of Vinte
nameso people Stop Franco under caver of British-Tndian and
Japenese troops having perpetrated an erserossion on Vietnanesa
Ropublio Jn order to Ainposo her doitaation has deliberataly

violated all principics procinined in Atlantic and San Fran-
eink Charters Stop Vietnanana TMightine fop mor than a
month aenpite bloody ‘opposition of AngtLo-~Indlan French and
Japanese Troops has proclaimed their wlll to live froe and
independent under democratlo construction Stop The Vietnamese

people expresses sincere hone that all free nationa in world

Fi

Poa]

comma carrying out hich ideal of Generosity and humanity

expressed in Prosident Truman’s speoch comma recogniso
ee eae eee ee

independence of Vietnam republic and nut a stop to merderous

Ss

conflict 4n South Vietnam Stop Respectfully HochiMinh

C-92
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

C-O-P-Y
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Incoming Telegram
PEM-P 4936
Paraphrase before com-
municating to anyone. Chungking via War
Dated February 13, 1946
SECRET ‘

Rec'd 6:18 a.m., lth
Secretary of State,
Washington.
281, Feb 13, 10 a.m.

There follows substance of letter dated Jan 18, 1946 addressed
to President Truman by Ho Chi-Minh just received by Embassy through
US Army channels: he extends congratulations to President on occasion
of opening of first Assembly of United Nations in London, and on efforts
of American Govt to maintain peace and security throughout world.

EMBTEL 1948 Nov 8, 6 p.m.

Since peace is indivisible and Far East is receiving particular
consideration by appointment of General Marshall as Special Representa-
tive in China, he believes it his duty to inform President of develop-
ments in Indochina and consequences for world security of French aggression.

Sent Dept as 281 repeated Paris as l.

In 1941 Vietnam rose up to oppose Japanese Fascism and sided with ¢
Allies. After Japan surrendered a provisional government was set up
to eradicate Fascism in Vietnam and restore order. Supported by whole
nation, it carried out a democratic program, and restored order and
discipline. Under difficult circumstances general elections for national
Congress were held on Jan 6, 1946. Ninety percent of the nine million
electors voted. French colonialists on contrary surrendered to Japan
in Sept 1941 and for four years cooperation with Japanese against the
Allies and in oppression of Vietnam. By a second surrender March 9,
1945, five months before Japanese defeat, French lost all right and control
in Indochina.

French attacked population of Saigon on Sept 23, 1945 while Vietnam
Democratic Republic was endeavoring to carry out reconstruction program.
It was followed by systematic destruction and murderous warfare. Fach
day brings new reports of looting, violence, assassination of civilians,
and indiscriminate bombing of non-strategical places by military planes.
It is French intention to invade entire country and reestablish their

‘domination.

SECRET C-0-P-Y
C-93
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

C-0-P-Y
SECRET

- #281, Feb 13, 10 a.m., from Chungking via War

After “offer of interference (intervention?)" made by Mr. John
Carter Vincent, people of Vietnam enthusiastically welcomed President
Truman's address of October 28, 1945 in which he set forth the principles
of self-determination and equality of status laid down in Atlantic and
San Francisco Charters. Since then, French have greatly increased their
fighting forces with result that millions will suffer, thousands will
die and invaluable properties will be destroyed unless United States
intervenes to stop bloodshed and unlawful aggression.

On behalf of people and Govt of Indochina, he requests President's
intervention for an immediate solution of Vietnamese issue. People of
Vietnam earnestly hope that the great American Republic will help them
achieve full independence and support them in their reconstruction work.

Thus, with assistance of China and United States, in capital and
technique, Vietnam Republic will be able to contribute her share to
building up world peace and prosperity.

Another letter was received addressed to General Marshall which
is identical with one addressed to President, except that opening para-
graph extends Ho Chi-Minh's congratulations to General Marshall on his
appointment to China and expressed conviction that an understanding of
real situation in Vietnam can make some small contribution to task in
China which confronts him.

SMITH
Shown to WO 8:45 p.m. Feb 14.
WID

SECRET

C-0-P=¥

c-94,
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

VI TeNASE DAN -CHG¢ ONE
HOG-LAP — SR — MWANIEPAL

Fresiéent 1.0 Ci IM,

Eien Ag Acre seer

3 OV eae of
rs re Das OGRAT IG Hs oe

To the FRESIDUUT
of the CiITTsd Se AES OF 4.ERICA,
Ale sal GG ie sl

DEAR aR Fred Stee
I avail wyeelf of this opportunity to thank you and the people of

United Stetes for the interest shown by your representatives at the United

ao £1

Fations Organization in favour ef the Cepencent peoples,

Our VILTNAL. rectle, as enrly 2s 1941, stood by the ‘ilies! side and

"fought against the Jayanese. and their associates, the French colonialists.

us
¢
Pro PI04i to 1925 we fought bitterly, sustained by ts1e ratrictis:
hi = ay a | 2 = r 7S
ef our fellow-country.en and b: the prosises rade by the Allies at YALTA,
é
SAN FRASCISCG and FUSILA.,

when the Jayunees were cefeated in August 1945, the whole Vietmin

territory was united uncer 9 Previsional Republican Goverarent which imiediste-

ly set out to work, In five voaths, pesce and order were

toe

tee

4)

atic rcpuolic. wis establ cd ou leral bases, and adequate help wma ziven to

the carrying owt of their disorranent scission,

» To had betrayed in wmr-—tire hoth the

: “Ts 2 ln my ae 2 2 + Sone = . “Wy = t *
Alijes and the Victnrresc, heave core baat and are wmcine on us a rurcerous and
pitiless “ar Tn order to reestvbilish treir doinsticn, Thetr invasion hes
: : eee ie piesa a aaa eae = ie ; Senne
extenced fo Sous Vre ud ae Ss Teneo ws! a Nerth Vietunar Tt foula oS
vs,
dluzes to give even sn ab wevieted rerort cf the erdres and assnssinetvions

fn eras aes aay te

<Neeeee

ee AE eget

ent a

Se Se ee ee ee ee
VU NGO

0

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

AL-~GiAO Bo) ene : :
Vibe eM CA GP CONG 26024

.

DOGLAP - Se es — I] BNE: PLCC

raees ,
this esreseion is contrary + ined
Ms Serre selon is contrary to all-princirles of internsticn-

yh Ee se 4. ee on Dermee A + Lf = *
el Jas-and to the pledves tade by the Allies during the orld var, It
; > the world car,
is a challenze to tne noble attitude sho:m before, durins and aft
m8 rey, et og Ih Wet fel or
ie war by the United States Goverrsent and Feople, It ae
PS PRE Shae ee

contrasts vith tne firs. stand yeu hay .
: AG peu seve: taken si ese vuelve point

-!

istic

a
jt

declaration, and with pis
ae oftiness and renerosity expressed

uw oH ur F617 acne 4 tee Trited ou +
by your celesntes to the United Mations Assebly, Mii BYRS3S, STZTTINIUS
; SG OL oud a ea fe Lis sa

menace: to world security, It imclics

ce

connivance of tre Groot Desocracies, ibe United Eations cught to.
L ” chi to: keep
' a

Ea)
“hod ue de he - 440 ea
their werds, They ougnt to interfere to ston this unjust “ar. snd to
eas : = es g Tea 1")
«

shew that they neon to carry out in =< Lit i
\ ¥ im perce-tire the prineivles for

which tt ey
Our Vietnos reople Pt ry y
tnrc people, after so rany yenrs of spolintion and *
Gevastation, is just beginning it: ildine “Oy
; just beginning its building-uv vork, It needs security

end freedci, first to achieve interne] este pit ; .
' . aleve internal presperity and welfare, and

f+

ruction

in

Ata 4 See Sere Es : 5 attri i 5
later to bring its s:all contribution to world-recons

.
These security and = nly be 3
he se ‘rity and zreedomcan only be gurrantead by our
inderendence frou any colonisl power, and our free cooperation «with.

rr Pa]

Sil other movers, It is 22th thas a
eee

fe

ri. convict

tho United Stntes as eg nordions and ehaipions of “orld Justice to tke
ne we oe he

tep in sutrert of our incerentence,

Be Bie 3. : aes? :
shat we selt has been graciously mranted

eae

a
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_v KiGQAL-~GIAO

VIET-NAM HAN CHE “CONG FIO ;
POCLAL. TE DO: — TASE-PHEG

SO

*

Lixe the Fhiliprines ar of is ff x
tho Philiprines our f091 is full inéepentence and full
soncen and full cooneration

2M aid EL re wah baad 43 ‘ " 5
" e will do cur best to make this ind
make this indexnencence

and cooperatiory ee |
h iS jon profitable te the whole world,’ |
; |

Te

Iam, Dear tr FRESIDEAT

Fat egg

Ags

Ses ek

C-97
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

C-0-P=-¥
Viet-Nam Dan Chu Cong Hoa ;
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM

Chinh Phu Lam Thoi
BO NGOAI GIAO NOE

to the Governments of CHINA, UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA, UNION OF SOCIALIST SOVIETIC REPUBLICS
and GREAT~BRITAIN.

I.- In 1940, the French in Indochina betrayed the Allies. They
deliberately opened the doors of Indochina to the Japanese troops, signed
with the latter a military, political and economical pact. The Nippo-
French cooperation policy, promoted and carried out with conviction and
industry by JEAN DECOUX, former Governor-General of Indochina, was directed
against the democratic movements inside Indochina and the Allied Nations
outside. In fact the French put at the disposal of the Japanese forces
the strategic bases, the economic and financial resources of Indochina.

The technical services, especially the Indochinese Intelligence Service
supplied the Japanese with precious informations. The French airfields

of GIALA, TAYSONNHAT and others were handed over to the Japanese Air
Forces, new metalled tracts were created with the collaboration of French
technicians at TRAICUT, SONIA, PHUTHO, BACGIANG, PHANHHOA, PHUCTHO, PHUCYEN,
VIWHYEN. French colonialis launched violent propaganda campaigns against
the Allies, and personal instructions were given by Governor-General Decoux
to the I.P.P. (Information, Press, Propaganda Service) to that effect. The
French administration requisitioned considerable stocks of rice, thus
starving a population of 20 million inhabitants among whom 2,000,000 died
of famine and hardships, in the course of five months (from January to May
1945), all this to feed the Japanese army in their Western and Southern
operations.

In the meanwhile, the Vietnamese nationalist parties made repeated
appeals to the French for a joint action against the Japanese. These
appeals were ignored by the French Government.

r

On March 9, 1915, the French surrendered to the Japanese, after a sham .
fight which did not last a couple of days. Stocks of arms, ammunitions,
fortifications, airfields, millions of liters of oil were handed over to
the Japanese. This extraordinary carelessness denoted, if not complicity,,
at least an obvious goodwill on the part of the French. Thus, twice in
the course of five years, the French have willingly helped the fascists
in their fight against the democracies. Twice the French have willingly
handed over to the Japanese capital strategic, economical and technical
advantages, for the prosecution of the Pacific Battle.

II.- In August 1945, the Japanese surrendered to the Allies. The
popular forces of Vietnam which, since 1940, had made incessant attacks
on the Japanese forces, and which had, in 194, succeeded in creating a
"Pree Zone" in Northern Indochina, went down to conquer the capital-city
and the governing rule. The population, fired with democratic aspirations

C-0-P-Y

c-98
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Force in China were loaded with relief supplies for the
undergrounders but could not start without authority from
Washington. I immediately contacted General Handy and told

him of the President's agreement that American aid to the
Indo-China resistance groups might be given provided it

involved no interference with our operations against Japan." 15/

allure © e Trusteeship Proposa
(2) Fail f the Trusteeship posal

In the meantime, the President's concept of postwar
trusteeship status for dependent territories as an intermediate step
toward autonomy had undergone study by several interdepartmental and
international groups, but had fared poorly. In deference to British
sensibilities, the United States had originally sought only a declara-
tion from the colonial powers setting forth their intention to liberate
their dependencies and to provide tutelage in self-government for sub-
ject peoples. Such a declaration would have been consistent with the
Atlantic Charter of 1941 in which the U.S. and the U.K. jointly agreed
that, among the "common principles...on which they base their hopes
for a better future for the world,” it was their policy that:

"...they respect the right of all peoples to choose the
form of government under which they will live; and they
wish to see sovereign rights and self-government restored to
those who have been forcibly deprived of them...." 16/

In November, 1942, Secretary Hull submitted to the President a proposed
draft US-UK declaration entitled "The Atlantic Charter and National
Independence," which the President approved. Before this draft could
be broached to the British, however, they submitted a counter~proposal,
a statement emphasizing the responsbility of "parent" powers for
developing native self-government, and avoiding endorsement of trustee-
ships. Subsequent Anglo-American discussions in March 1943 addressed
both drafts, but foundered on Foreign Secretary Eden's opposition.
Secretary Hull reported in his memoirs that Eden could not believe that
the word "independence" would be interpreted to the satisfaction of all
governments: |

",,.the Foreign Secretary said that, to be perfectly frank,
he had to say that he did not like our draft very much. He
said it was the word ‘independence’ that troubled him, he had
to think of the British Empire system, which was built on the
basis of Dominion and colonial status.

"He pointed out that under the British Empire system there
were varying degrees of self-government, running from the
Dominions through the colonial establishments which had in
some cases, like Malta, completely self-government, to backward
areas that were never likely to have their own government. He

A-19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

C-0-P-¥

and spirit, enthusiastically welcomed them and manifested their desire

to maintain their unity for the grandeur of the Fatherland once lost

and now found again. On September 2, 1945, the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam was solemnly proclaimed. Twice, first through Emperor Bao-Dai

of the NGUYEN Dynasty, then, through the solemn proclamation of the new
Government on Independence Day, the new State abrogated all the treaties
formerly forced upon us by the French victors. The new Republic of Vietnam,
thus legally instituted, is in the reconstruction of the world a factor of
peace and progress. She is entitled for her safeguard to refer to the
most sacred principles of SAN FRANCISCO and ATLANTIC Charters. She is
based on and draws her strength from, the first of SUN YAT SEN's Three
Principles and the second, fourth, sixth points of President TRUMAN's
twelve-point declaration.

III.- But, on September 23, 1945, the French troops attacked Saigon,
starting an invasion which is now in its fifth month. That invasion is
menacing North Vietnam and French troops have begun to filter through our
Chinese frontier. That aggression, carried on by an experienced and
numerous army, fully equipped with the most recent inventions of modern
warfare, has brought about the destruction of our towns and villages, the
assassination of our civilian population, the starving of a great part of
our country. Untold atrocities have been committed, not as reprisals
upon our guerrillas troops, but on women and children and unarmed old
people. These atrocities are beyond imagination and beyond words, and
remind one of the darkest ages: assault on the sanitary formations, on
Red Cross personnel, bombing and machine-gunning of villages, raping of
women, looting and indiscriminate pillaging of Vietnam and Chinese houses,
etc... Yet, despite the maltreatments of the civilian population, we have, -
for 5 long months, opposed a stubborn resistance, fought in the worst
conditions, without food, medicine and without clothings. And we shall
carry on, sustained by our faith in international honour, and in our final
victory.

IV.- In the free zone of our national territory, especially in the
area under Chinese control, North of the 16th parallel, our civilians have
set out to work. The results of these five months of building-up work
are most favourable and give rise to the brightest hopes.

First of all, democracy has been established on solid foundations.
On January 6 last, general elections were organized with the greatest
success. In a few days 400 representatives of the entire country will hold
the first session of the Constituent National Assembly. A new administrative
organization has replaced the old mandarinate system. The most unpopular
taxes have been abolished. The anti-illiteracy campaign organized along
efficient lines, has yielded unexpectedly optimistic results. The primary
and secondary schools as well as the University have been reopened to more
and more numerous students. Peace and order are restored and smoothly
maintained. :

C-0-P-Y

C-99
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

C-O-P-Y

In the economic field, the situation is bettering every day. All
the vexatory measures imposed by colonial planned economy have been
abrogated. Commerce, production, the transformation and consummation
of raw materials, once subjected to very strict regulations, are now
operated on an entirely free basis. The shortage of rice, though still
eritical, has been relieved by the intensive production of other food-
stuffs and the price of rice has been reduced some 40 % of its 1945 figures.
Cereals, matches, salt, tobacco, once monopolized by speculators, are now
offered on the normal markets at prices within reach of the common man.
All public services have resumed their prewar activities, and the Viet-
namese staff under their Vietnamese Directors, are working with industry
and efficacy. The communications have been reestablished, the dam system
not only mended but still fortified.

All this program was carried out while in the South, the French
aggression has intensified every day. The Vietnam people, despite the
difficulties of the present, and the heavy heritage of five years of
Nippo-French condominium, has shown the world what it is worth. Foreign
correspondents and members of the Allies Missions who have come to the
country can bear witness to the new life in regenerated Vietnam, to our
capacity to self-government, our desire to live free and independent, and
our faith in the ATLANTIC and SAN FRANCISCO Charters.

CONCLUSTON.-

For those reasons, we think it our duty to send this note to the Great
Powers -- which had led the anti-fascist crusade to final victory and
which had taken up the reconstruction of the world with a view to
definitely outlawing war, oppression and exploitation on the one hand,
misery, fear and injustice on the other. We request of these great
_powers:

a) To take all proper steps to stop by an urgent interference, the
bloodshed that is taking place in South Vietnam, and to arrive at an
urgent and fair settling of the Indochinese issue. We are confident in
their mediation that may be given to us in this Pacific World a status
worthy of a people that had fought and suffered for the democratic ideals.
So doing, they will give a solid foundation to peace and security in this
part of the world, and fulfill the hopes that the oppressed peoples had
placed in them. While waiting with confidence for a positive measure
from the Governments of WASHINGTON, MOSCOW, LONDON, and CHUNGKING, we
have determined to fight to our last drop of blood against the reestab-
lishment of French imperialism.

b) To bring the Indochinese issue before the United Nations' Organiza-
tion. We only ask full independence, independence that is so far a fact,
and that will enable us to cooperate with the other nations in the building-
up of a better world and lasting peace. Such aspirations are but legiti-.
mate and the cause of world peace must be defended.

Hanoi, February 18, 1946.
C-0-P-Y

C-100

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

¢-0-P-¥

SECRET HANOI, undated.
[Received February 27 - 11:45 a.m./

From Landon for Moffat and Culbertson.

1. Sainteny stated that in conversation with Ho Chi Minh he offered
Annamese complete independence within French community: That this meant
that Annamese would have benefit of French advisers in every department of
Government: That for instance Annamese Foreign Office would express its
policies through French channels: That Annamese Army and War Ministry would
be coordinated with French Army and War Ministry: And that Annamese if
[int] Finance and Commerce Ministries would heed French advisers as Annamese
were inexpert in these matters and might jeopardize [apparent garble/ French
investment. Sainteny said that Annamese in Cochin China would probably pre-
fer to remain French Colony rather come under northern Annamese Government.
In this connection Ho Chi Minh said that French officials had conferred with
him but that they were vague in their comments and had avoided the real
issues of Annamese independence so that he had asked them to get specific
terms from Paris which would make clear whether the French really offered
Annamese independence or were merely using new language to describe usual
French control Annamese affairs.

2. Ho Chi Minh handed me two letters addressed to President of USA,
China, Russia, and Britain, identical copies of which were stated to have
been forwarded to other governments named. In two letters Ho Chi Minh re-
quests USA as one of United Nations to support idea of Annamese independence
according to Philippines example, to examine the case of the Annamese, and
to take steps necessary to maintenance of world peace which is being endangered
by French efforts to reconquer Indochina. He asserts that Annamese will
fight until United Nations interfere in support of Annamese independence.
The petition addressed to major United Nations contains:

a. Review of French relations with Japanese where French Indochina
allegedly aided Japs: ¥

b. Statement of establishment on 2 September 1945 of peaisetenst
Government of?/ Democratic Republic of Viet Minh:

ce. Summary of French conquest of Cochin China begun 23 Sept 1945
and still incomplete:

d. Outline of accomplishments of Annamese Government in Tonkin
including popular elections, abolition of undesirable taxes, expansion of
education and resumption as far as possible of normal economic activities:

e. Request to four powers: (1) to intervene and stop the war in
Indochina in order to mediate fair settlement and (2) to bring the Indochinese
issue before the United Nations Organization. The petition ends with state-
ment that Annamese ask for full independence in fact and that in interim while
awaiting UNO decision the Annamese will continue to fight the reestablishment
of French imperialism. Letters and petition will be transmitted to Department
soonest.

tanpon]

c-101 C-O-P-¥
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

1 - in ot , > : . 4]
Oe UNITED STATES OF AMERICA Wey eae,

if: ees BePtenber 12, MSE sed

77, No.6141 be os ee,
mm = Jo ne : is STate lf
= ~ \
rie] =
Be E Subject: Transmitting Memorandum of
a 4 Conversation with Ho Chi-minh, ‘
is eel - - : : . ‘a * r}
ule =< the Secretary of ay oe ie error, 66 /! I,
Ain = Pate : ‘
ent ea © ' * «

nED LET AE
1008 Arp
le poe i
SB +c
aS
os
ne
€

‘Ga MY,
i have the hon ee refer to ny 2a No. 6 ayn
f Cs

10 3/

dated September 11, 1946, regarding my conversation 2 09

with Ho ee ESaoidens of the i Republic of Viet-tiew, ih

y end to enclose herewith a memorandum prepared by First =
; Secretary George . Apvott covering his conversation Wie? } 5

with i io Chi-minh later in the day. oe

8 i RS: ee ae Respectfully yours > saat
Be \gnolosure: ("" ’ oy
iS

pi
vel Memorandum of conversation * J
with Ho Chi-minh prepared. ty

\GE First Secretary George M, Abbott ¥
nai thy 4 © } ve ‘G-102 ‘a |
a ( 4, Original and hectograph to Departi Lent

es saliva | been nr ac tha Gaiann TannAnan ann TMaseow
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Paris, September 12, 1946.
-MemorinDUM

To; The Ambassador
From: George M. Abbott

In accordance with your request, I called last night
on Ho Chi-minh and had a conversation lasting an house

Ho Chi-minh first discussed his contacts with
Americans dating back to his guerrilla warfare against
the Japanese when OSS and Army officers were parachuted
into his jungle headquarters and culminating in his talk
with youe He emphasized his admiration for the United
States and the respect and affection for President
Roosevelt which is found even in the remote villages of
his. country. He referred particularly to our policy
toward the Philippines and pointed out that it was only
‘natural that his people, seeing an independent Philippines
on one side and India about to gain its freedom on the .
other, Should expect France to understand that simila
measures for Indochina are inevitable, - ‘ :

He then took up the question of his supposed Com-—
munist connections which he, of course, denied. Ho
_Chi-minh pointed out that there are no Communist
ministers in his government and that the Viet-Nam con-
stitution opens with a guarantee of personal liberties
and the so-called rights of man and also guarantees
the right to personal property. He admits that thore
are Communists in Annam but claims that the Communist
Party as such dissolved itself several months agoe

The President then outlined his relations with
France in general and the developments during the
Fontainebleau Conference in particular. He pointed out
that all of the various provisions of the preliminary
agreemont of March 6, 1946, had been fulfilled except
the provisions regarding a referendum in Cochinchina.
The VietNam has its own government, its parliament,

. its army, and controls its finances. ' Regarding Cochin~

china, however, the French have been unwilling to set

any date for the referendum or to agree to the proposal

that a joint Viet-Nam-French commission should be named

to arranges for and supervise the referendum. At the

‘ same time the French authorities in Indochina have not

_ respected the truce in Cochinchina and have continued
military operations against resistance elements loyal
to the Vict~Name = wie

. Ho Chi-minh realizes that the present French

. Government is a provisional one and that until a French
 gonstitution was adopted, the outlines of the French

C-103 Union
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Union established, and a permanent government chosen,

4% was difficult for French officials to sign any pores
manent treaty or agreement with the Viet-Nan. For that
reason he was quite Willing to adjourn the Fontainebleau
Conference until January or thereabouts.

With regard to the modus vivendi which should have
been signed September 10, 1946, Ho Chi-minh said that
agrecnents had beon reached regarding French economic
and cultural rignuts in the Vict-Nam, a eustoms union
for Indochina, and a common currency, although there
had been some difficulty over the drafting since he
refused to ailow the phrase "Indochinese Federation",
since it does not yet existe The French, however, have
not accepted the Viet-Nam demand that "democratic
Liberties" be restored in Cochinchina. Ho Chi-minh
explained that by this he meant freedom of the press,
freedom of assembly, and the release of political
prisoners. The Viev~Nam also insists that they be ver-
mitted to send a delegation to Cochinchina to make sure
that the French live up to these provisions and to co~
operate with the French in bringing about the ond of
guerrilla warfare. Hse admitted that there are many
unsavory elements within the resistance movement in
Cochinchina, but argued that if his representatives
could go through the country and talk to local leaders

4% would be possible to distinguish between bandits

and pstriots, and the former could then be liquidated
by either his or the French forces,

Ho Chi-minh stated that he still hoped to reach
an agreement with the French before his departure on
September 14, but that in any case he must return on
that date since he had already been too long away from

his country. :

Ho Chi-minh spoke at various times of the aid
which he hoped to get from the United States, but was
vague except as regards economic aid, With regard to
the latter,he explained that the riches of his country
were largoly undeveloped, that he felt that Indochina
offered a fertile field for American capital and enter-
prise. He had resisted and would continus to resist

the French desire for a continuation of their former

policy of economic monopoly. He was willing to give
the French priority in such matters as advisers, con~
cessions, and purchases of machinery and equipment,
put if the French were not in a position to mest his
country's needs he would insist on the right to ap-
proach other friendly countries. He hinted that the
policy might apply to military and naval matters as
well and mentioned the naval base at Cam Ranh bay.

oP i:
' As I left, Ho Chi-minh stated that he hoped that
through his contacts with the Eubassy the Ans Tican
public would be informed of the true situation in

Indochina.

C-10! George M. Abbott —
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

added that Australia and New Zealand also had colonial posses-
sions that they would be unwilling to remove from their super-
visory jurisdiction." 17/

U.S. inability to work out a common policy with the U.K. also pre-
eluded meaningful discussion, let alone agreement, on the colonial issue
at the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations in 1944. 18/ Through March, 1945,
the issue was further occluded by debates within the U.S. Government
over the postwar status of Pacific islands captured from the Japanese:
in general, the War and Navy Departments advocated their retention under.
U.S. control as military bases, while State and other departments ad-
vocated an international trusteeship.

(3) Decision on Indochina Left to France

Secretary of State Stettinius, with the approval of
President Roosevelt, issued a statement on April 3, 1945, declaring
that, as a result of international discussions at Yalta on the concept
of trusteeship, the United States felt that the postwar trusteeship
structure:

"...should be designed to permit the placing under it of
the territories mandated after the last war, and such terri-
tories taken from the enemy in this war as might be agreed
upon at a later date, and also such, other territories as aN
be voluntarily be placed under trusteeship." 19/

Indochina thus seemed relegated to French volition.

Nonetheless, as of President Roosevelt's death on April 12, 1945,
U.S. policy toward the colonial possessions of its allies, and toward
Indochina in particular, was in disarray;

-- The British remained apprehensive that there might. be a con-
tinued U.S. search for 4 weusteceins formula which might impinge on the
Commonwealth.

-- The French were restive over continued U.S. refusal to pro-
vide strategic transport for their forces, resentful over the paucity
of U.S. support for French forces in Indochina, and deeply suspicious
that the United States -- possibly in concert with the Chinese -- intended
to block their regaining control of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

b. Truman and the Occupation of Indochina, 1945

Within a month of President Truman's entry into office, the
French raised the subject of Indochina at the United Nations Conference
at San Francisco. Secretary of State Stettinius reported the following
conversation to Washington:

",..Indo-China came up in a recent conversation I had with
Bidault and Bonnet. The latter remarked that although the French

A-20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Government interprets /Under Secretary: of State/ Welles'
statement of 1942 concerning the restoration of French
sovereignty over the French BEupire as including Indo-
China, the press continues to imply that a special status
will be reserved for this colonial area. It was made quite
clear to Bidault that the record is entirely innocent of
any official statement of this government questioning, even
by implication, French sovereignty over Indo-China. Certain
elements of American public opinion, however, condemned
French governmental policies and practices in Indo-China.
Bidavlt seemed relieved and has no doubt cabled Paris that
he received renewed assurances of our recognition of French
sovereignty over that area." 20,

In early June 1945, the Department of State instructed the United
States Ambassador to China on the deliberations in progress within the
‘U.S. Government and its discussions with allies on U.S. policy toward
Indochina. He was informed that at San Francisco:

.",,.the American delegation has insisted upon the neces-
sity of providing for a progressive measure of self-govern-
ment for all dependent peoples looking toward their eventual
independence or incorporation in some form of federation
according to circumstances and the ability of the peoples
to assume these responsibilities. Such decisions would
preclude the establishment of a trusteeship in Indochina
except with the consent of the French Government. The latter
seems unlikely. Nevertheless it is the President's intention
at some appropriate time to ask that the French Government
give some positive indication of its intentions in regard to
the establishment of civil liberties and increasing measures
of self-government in Indochina before formulating further
declarations of policy in this respect." 2

The United Nations Charter (June 26, 1945) contained a "Declaration™
Regarding Non-Self-Governing Territories":

Article 73

"Members of the United Nations which have or assume respon-
sibilities for the administration of territories whose peoples
have not yet attained a full measure of self-government recog-
nize the principle that the interests of the inhabitants of
these territories are paramount, and accept as a sacred trust
the obligation to promote to the utmost, within the system of
international peace and security established by the present
Charter, the well-being of the inhabitants of these terri-
tories, and, to this end:

A-21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
i
\

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date; 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-"a. to ensure, with due respect for the culture of
the peoples concerned, their political, economic, social,
and educational advancement, their just treatment, and
their protection against abuses;

"b. to develop self-government, to take due account
of the political aspirations of the peoples, and to assist
them in the progressive development of their free political
institutions, according to the particular circumstances
of each territory and its peoples and their varying stages
of advancement;..." 22/

Again, however, military considerations governed U.S. policy in
Indochina. President Truman replied to General de Gaulle's repeated
offers for aid in Indochina with statements to the effect that it was
his policy to leave such matters to his military commanders. At the
Potsdam Conference (July, 1945), the Combined Chiefs of Staff decided
that Indochina south of latitude 16° North was to be included in the
Southeast Asia Command under Admiral Mountbatten. 23/ Based on this
decision, instructions were issued that Japanese forces located north
of that line would surrender to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, and
those to the south to Admiral Lord Mountbatten; pursuant to these
instructions, Chinese forces entered Tonkin in September, 1945, while
a small British task force landed at Saigon. Political difficulties
materialized almost immediately, for while the Chinese were prepared to
accept the Vietnamese government they found in power in Hanoi, the
British refused to do likewise in Saigon, and deferred to the French
there from the outset.

There is no evidence that serious concern deyeloped in Washington
at the swiftly unfolding events in Indochina. In mid-August, Vietnamese
resistance forces of the Viet Minh, under Ho Chi Minh, had seized power
in Hanoi and shortly thereafter demanded and received the abdication of
the Japanese puppet, Bnperor Bao Dai. On V-J Day, September end, Ho Chi
Minh, had proclaimed in Hanoi the establishment of the Democratic Repub-
lic of Vietnam (DRV). The DRV ruled as the only civil govermment in
all of Vietnam for a period of about 20 days. On 23 September 1945,
with the knowledge of the British Commander in Saigon, French forces
overthrew the local DRV government, and declared French authority re-
stored in Cochinchina. Guerrilla war began around Saigon. Although
American OSS representatives were present in both Hanoi and Saigon and
ostensibly supported the Viet Minh, the United States took no official
position regarding either the DRV, or the French and British actions in
South Vietnam. 2h In October, 1945, the United States stated its
policy in the following terms:

"US has no thought of opposing the reestablishment of

French control in Indochina and no official statement by US
GOVT has questioned even by implication French sovereignty

A-22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

over Indochina. However, it is not the policy of this GoyT
to assist the French to reestablish their control over Indo-
china by force and the willingness of the US to see French
control reestablished assumes that French claim to have the
support of the population of Indochina is borne out by future
events." 25

French statements to the U.S. looked for an early end to the
hostilities, and spoke reassuringly of reforms and liberality. In
November, Jean Chauvel, Secretary-General to the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs, told the U.S. Ambassador that:

"When the trouble with the Annamites broke out de Gaulle
had been urged by the French Mission in India to make some
sort of policy statement announcing France's intention to
adopt a far-reaching progressive policy designed to give the
native population much greater authority, responsibility and
representation in govt. De Gaulle considered the idea but
rejected it because in the state of disorder prevailing in
Indochina he believed that no such policy could be imple-
mented pending restoration of French authority and would
therefore just be considered by everyone as 'merely more fine
words.' Furthermore de Gaulle and the Foreign Minister
believe that the present situation is still so confused and
they have so little information really reliable on the overall
Indochina picture that such plans and thoughts as they held
heretofore may have to be very thoroughly revised in the light
of recent developments.

"Despite the fact that the French do not feel that they
can as yet make any general statements outlining specific
future plans for Indochina, Chauvel says that they hope 'very
soon’ to put into operation in certain areas programs including
local elections which will be designed to grant much greater r
authority and greater voice in affairs to the natives. This
he said would be a much better indication of the sincerity of
French intentions than any policy statement....The French hope
soon to negotiate an agreement with [the King of Cambodia/
which will result in the granting of much greater responsibility
and authority to the Cambodians. He mentioned specifically
that there would be many more natives integrated into the local
administrative services and it was ‘also hoped that local elec-
tions could soon be held. The French he said intend to follow
the same procedure in Laos when the situation. permits and eventu-
ally also in Annam and Tonkin. When order is restored throughout
Indochina and agreements have been reached with the individual
states Chauvel said the French intend to embody the results of
these separate agreements into a general program for all of
Indochina.” 26/

A-23. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

From the autumn of 1945 through the autumn of 1946, the United
States received a series of communications from Ho Chi Minh depicting
calamitous conditions in Vietnam, invoking the principles proclaimed
in the Atlantic Charter and in the Charter of the United Nations,
and pleading for U.S. recognition of the independence of the DRV, or --
as a last resort -- trusteeship for Vietnam under the United Nations.
But while the U.S. took no action on Ho's requests, it was also unwilling
to aid the French. On January 15, 1946, the Secretary of War was
advised by the Department of State that it was contrary to U.S. policy
to "employ American flag vessels or aircraft to transport troops of
any nationality to or from the Netherlands Kast Indies or French Indo-
china, nor to permit use of such craft to carry arms, ammunition or
military equipment to these areas." 27/ However, the British arranged
for the transport of additional French troops to Indochina, bilaterally
agreed with the French for the latter to assume British occupation
responsibilities, and signed a pact on 9 October, 1945, giving "full
recognition to French rights" in Indochina. 28/ French troops began
arriving in Saigon that month, and subsequently the British turned
over to them some 800 U.S. Lend-Lease jeeps and trucks. President
Truman approved the latter transaction on the grounds that removing the
equipment would be impracticable. 29/

The fighting between the French and the Vietnamese which began in
South Vietnam with the 23 September, 1945, French coup d'etat, spread
from Saigon throughout Cochinchina, and to southern Annam. By the end
of January, 1946, it was wholly a French affair, for by that time the
British withdrawal was complete; on 4 March, 1946, Admiral Lord Mountbatten
deactivated Indochina as territory under the Allied Southeast Asia Com-
mand, thereby transferring all control to French authorities. 30/ From
French headquarters, via Radio Saigon, came announcements that a military
"mopping-up" campaign was in progress, but pacification was virtually
complete; but these reports of success were typically interspersed with
such items as the following:

"20 March. 1946:

"Rebel bands are still (wreaking destruction) in the areas
south of Saigon. These bands are quite large, some numbering
as many as 1,000 men. Concentrations of these bands are to be
found...in the villages. Some have turned north in an attempt
to disrupt (communications) in the Camau Peninsula, northeast
of Batri and in the general area south of (Nha Trang). In the
area south of Cholon and in the north of the Plaine des Jones
region, several bands have taken refuge...."

"571 March 1946:

"The following communique was issued by the High Commissioner
for Indochina this morning: ‘Rebel activities have increased in

A~-2) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Bien Hoa area, on both banks of the river Dong Nai. A
French convoy has been attacked on the road between Bien Hoa
and Tan Uyen where a land mine had been laid by the rebels.

'In the (Baclo) area, northwest of Saigon, a number of
pirates have been captured in the course of a clean-up raid.
Among the captured men are five Japanese deserters. The dead
bodies of three Japanese, including an officer, have been
found at the point where the operation was carried out.

'A French detachment was ambushed at (San Jay), south
Annam. The detachment, nevertheless, succeeded in carrying
out its mission. Several aggressions by rebel parties are
reported along the coastal road.'" 31

Violence abated in South Vietnam somewhat as Franco-DRV negotia-
tions proceeded in spring, 1946, but in the meantime, French forces
moved into further confrontation with Vietnamese "rebels" in Tonkin.
In February, 1946, a French task force prepared to force landings at
Haiphong, but was forestalled by diplomatic, maneuver. A Franco-
Chinese agreement of 28 February 1946 provided that the Chinese would
turn over their responsibilities in northern Indochina to the French
on 31 March 1916. 32/_

On March 6, 1946, a French-DRV accord was reached in the following
terms; 33/

"]. The French Government recognizes the Vietnamese
Republic as a Free State having its own Government, its
own Parliament, its own Army and its own Finances, forming
part of the Indochinese Federation and of the French Union.
In that which concerns the reuniting of the three “Annamite
Regions" [Cochinchina, Annam, Tonkin/ the French Government
pledges itself to ratify the decisions taken by the populations
consulted by referendum.

"2. The Vietnamese Government declares itself ready io
welcome amicably the French Army when, conforming to inter-
national agreements, it relieves the Chinese Troops. A
Supplementary Accord, attached to the present Preliminary
Agreement, will establish the means by which the relief
operations will be carried out.

"3- The stipulations formulated above will immediately
enter into force. Immediately after the exchange of signatures,
each of the High Contracting Parties will take all measures
necessary to stop hostilities in the field, to maintain the
troops in their respective positions, and to create the favor-
able atmosphere necessary to the immediate opening of friendly

A-25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and sincere negotiations. These negotiations will deal par-
ticularly with:

_& diplomatic relations of Viet-nam with Foreign States
b. the future law of Indochina
ec. French interests, economic and cultural, in Viet-nam.

Hanoi, Saigon or Paris may be chosen as the seat of the conference.
DONE AT HANOI, the 6th of March 1946

Signed: Ho-chi Minh Signed: Sainteny
and Vu Hong Khanh

French forces quickly exercised their prerogative, occupying Hanoi on
18 March 1946, and negotiations opened in Dalat in April. 34/

Hence, as of April 10, 1946, allied occupation in Indochina was
officially over, and French forces were positioned in all of Vietnam's
major cities; the problems of U.S. policy toward Vietnam then shifted
from the context of wartime strategy to the arena of the U.S. relation-~
ship with France. 35/

A-26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

LsA.28

.
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

T.A.2

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

2. U.S. Neutrality in the Franco-Viet Minh War, 1946-19l9.........A-28

a. Failures of Negotiated Settlement.ccrcsccscccscccccceceees A-28

b. U.S. Polley Toward the Conflict, 1947-1010...scscccccccssc choo

A-27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. U.S. Neutrality in the Franco-Viet Minh War, 1946-199
a. Failures of Negotiated Settlement

The return of the French to Tonkin in March, 1946, created
an explosive situation. North Vietnam, a traditionally rice-deficit
area, had experienced an extraordinarily bad harvest in 1945. Severe
famine was scarcely helped by the concentration of armies in the Red
River Delta -- Vietnamese irregular forces, the most numerous belonging
to the Viet Minh; some 150,000 Chinese; and then the French Expedition-
ary Corps. The people were not only hungry, but politically restive;
the popular appetite for national independence had been thoroughly
whetted by the Viet Minh and the formation of the DRV. While feeling
against all foreign occupiers ran high, the French remained the primary
target of enmity. But the March 6 Accord deferred a reckoning, serving
to mollify extremists in Tonkin, and to dampen guerrilla operations in
South Vietnam. The accord in any event underwrote peaceful cooperation
between France and the DRV in North Vietnam for eight months.

Yet the March 6 accord constituted an admission of defeat
for Ho Chi Minh, because his policy had been directed toward inter-
nationalizing the Indochina problem. Ho made repeated overtures to
the United States, to the United Nations, and to China, the USSR, and
the U.K. 36/ His letters presented eloquent appeals for U.S. or U.N.
intervention in Vietnam on the grounds of the principles embodied in
the Atlantic Charter, the U.N. Charter, and on humanitarian grounds.
The last such to be forwarded to the U.S. prior to the Accord of
6 March 1946, is summarized in the following telegram from an American
diplomat in Hanoi, received in Washington 27 February 196;

"Ho Chi Minh handed me 2 letters addressed to President
of USA, China, Russia, and Britain identical copies of which
‘ were stated to have been forwarded to other governments named.
In 2 letters to Ho Chi Minh request [sic] USA as one of United
Nations to support idea of Annamese independence according to
Philippines ety example, to examine the case of the Annamese,

A-28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and to take steps necessary to maintenance of world peace
which is being endangered by French efforts to reconquer
Indochina. He asserts that Annamese will fight until
United Nations interfere in support of Annamese indepen-
dence. The petition addressed to major United Nations
contains:

"A. Review of French relations with Japanese where
French Indochina allegedly aided Japs:

"B. Statement of establishment on 2 September 1945
of PENW /sic/ Democratic Republic of Viet Minh:

"CG. Summary of French conquest of Cochin China begun
23 Sept 1945 and still incomplete:

"D. Outline of accomplishments of Annamese Government
in Tonkin including popular elections, abolition of un-
desirable taxes, expansion of education and resumption as
far as possible of normal economic activities:

"ER. Request to 4 powers: (1) To intervene and stop
the war in Indochina in order to mediate fair settlement
and (2) to bring the Indochinese issue before the United
Nations organization. The petition ends with statement
that Annamese ask for full independence in fact and that
in interim while awaiting UNO decision the Annamese will
continue to fight the reestablishment of French imperial-
ism. Letters and petition will be transmitted to Depart-
ment soonest." 37/

There is no record that the U.S. encouraged Ho Chi Minh thus to submit
his cause to the U.S., beyond the 0.8.8. support he received during
and immediately after World War II; nor does the record reflect that
the U.S. responded affirmatively to Ho's petitions. Rather, the U.S.

_ Government appears to have adhered uniformly to a policy of looking

to the French rather than to Vietnamese Nationalists for constructive
steps toward Vietnamese independence. On 5 December, 156, after the
November incidents, but before the fighting broke out in earnest, State
instructed the U.S. diplomatic representative in Hanoi as follows: 38/

A-29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Assume you will see Ho in Hanoi and offer following
summary our present thinking as guide.

"Keep in mind Ho's clear record as agent international
communism, absence evidence recantation Moscow affilia-
tions, confused political situation France and support Ho
receiving French Communist Party. Least desirable eventu-
ality would be establishment Communist-dominated Moscow-
oriented state Indochina in view DEPT, which most interested
INFO strength non-communist elements Vietnam. Report fully,
repeating or requesting DEPT repeat Paris.

"Recent occurrences Tonkin cause deep concern. Consider
March 6 accord and modus vivendi as result peaceful negoti-
ation provide basis settlement outstanding questions between
France and Vietnam and impose responsibility both sides not
prejudice future, particularly forthcoming Fontainebleau
Conference, by resort force. Unsettled situation such as
pertains certain to offer provocations both sides, but for
this reason conciliatory patient attitude especially necessary.
Intransigence either side and disposition exploit incidents
ean only retard economic rehabilitation Indochina and cause
indefinite postponement conditions cooperation France and
Vietnam which both agree essential.

"If Ho takes stand non-implementation promise by French
of Cochinchina referendum relieves Vietnam responsibility
compliance with agreements, you might if you consider advis-
able raise question whether he believes referendum after
such long disorder could produce worthwhile result and whether
he considers compromise on status Cochinchina could possibly
be reached through negotiation.

"May say American people have welcomed attainments Indo-
chinese in efforts realize praiseworthy aspirations greater
autonomy in framework democratic institutions and it would be
regrettable should this interest and sympathy be imperilled
by any tendency Vietnam administration force issues by intransi-
gence and violence.

"May inform Ho [U.8. Ambassador Paris/ discussing situation
French similar frankness. For your INFO, [Foreign Of fice/ in
DEC 3 conversation stated (1) no question reconquest Indochina
as such would be counter French public opinion and probably
beyond French military resources, (2) French will continue
base policy March 6 accord and modus vivendi and make every
effort apply them through negotiation Vietnam, (3) French would
resort forceful measures only on restricted scale in case
flagrant violation agreements Vietnam, (4) d'Argenlieu's use-
fulness impaired by outspoken dislike Vietnam officials and

A-30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

. PART I.

VIETNAM AND THE UNITED STATES

1940 ~ 1950

Foreword

This portion of the study treats U.S. policy towards Vietnam in
the decade of World War II and its aftermath. It is subdivided into
three essays. Section A describes U.S. policy toward Indochina ,and
the developing conflict between France and the Viet Minh as viewed
from Washington. Section B analyzes the character and power of the
Viet Minh and probes the role of Vietnamese communists within the
Viet Minh. Section C discusses Ho Chi Minh's political development
to assess his potentiality for adopting neutrality in the East-West
confrontation. Each monograph is supported by the maps and charts
tabulated below.

Section A - U.S. Policy, 1940-1950
Section B - The Character and Power of the Viet Minh

Section C - Ho Chi Minh: Asian Tito?

Maps and Charts
Blue Tabs

Cochinchina, Annam, Tonkin
France-Vietnam Relations

Vietnam Nationalist Party
Communist Party, 1921-1931
Communist Party, 1931-1945

Politics in North Vietnam, 1945
Vietnamese Governments, 1945-1949
Viet Political Movements, 1947-1950
Extent Viet Minh Control, 1919

Ho Chi Minh Chronology

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

replacement perhaps desirable, (5) French Communists embar-
rassed in pose as guardian French international interests

by barrage telegraphic appeals from Vietnam. /Ambassador/
will express gratification this statement French policy with
observation implementation such policy should go far obviate
any danger that (1) Vietnamese irreconcilables and extremists
might be in position make capital of situation (2) Vietnamese
might be turned irrevocably against West and toward ideologies
and affiliations hostile democracies which could result per-
petual foment Indochina with consequences all Southeast Asia.

"Avoid impression US Govt making formal intervention this
juncture. Publicity any kind would be unfortunate.

"Paris be guided foregoing.

"Acheson, Acting.”

For a while, the French seemed genuinely interested in pursuing
a policy based on the March 6 Accord and the modus vivendi, and in
avoiding a test of arms with the DRV. If there were contrary utterances
from some, such as Admiral d'Argenlieu, the High Commissioner of Indo-

China, -- who recorded his "amazement that France has such a fine
expeditionary corps in Indochina and yet its leaders prefer to nego-
tiate rather than to fight...." -- there were many such as General

Leclerc, who had led French forces into Hanoi on 18 March 1946, and
promptly called on Ho Chi Minh, announcing every intention of honoring
the March 6 Accord. "At the present time," he said, "there is no ques-
tion of imposing ourselves by force on masses who desire evolution and
imnovat ion." 39/ The French Socialist Party -- the dominant political
party in France -- consistently advocated conciliation during 1946. In
December, 1946, even after the armed incidents in November between
French and DRV armed forces in North Vietnam, Leon Blum -- who had
become Premier of France, at the head of an all-Socialist Cabinet --
wrote that France had no alternative save to grant the Vietnamese inde-
pendence:

"There is one way and only one of preserving in Indochina ~
the prestige of our civilization, our political and spiritual
influence, and also those of our material interests which are
legitimate: it is sincere agreement [with Viet Nam/ on the
basis of independence...." 40

The Communists, the other major Leftist party in France, were also vocally
conciliatory; but, expectant of controlling the government, if not alone
at least as part of a coalition, they tended to be more careful than the
Socialists of their ability to sway nationalist sentiment. In July of
1946, L'Humanité, the Communist newspaper, had emphasized that the Party

A-31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

did not wish France to be reduced to "its own small metropolitan terri-
tory," but warned that such would be the consequence if the colonial
peoples turned against France:

"Are we, after having lost Syria and Lebanon yesterday,
to lose Indochina tomorrow, North Africa the day after?" 41/

In the National Assembly in September, 1946, a Communist deputy had
declared that:

"The Communists are as much as the next person for the
greatness of the country. But...they have never ceased to
affirm that the French Union...can only be founded on the
confident, fraternal, and above all, democratic collaboration
of all the peoples and races who compose it...." ho/

However, Ho Chi Minh was unable to capitalize upon his connection with
the French Left (Ho had been one of the founding members of the French
Communist Party in the early 1920's) to turn the expressed convictions
of either the Socialists or the Communists to the advantage of the DRY.
The Communists were not prepared to press the case for the Vietnamese
at the cost of votes in France. The Socialists in power paid only lip
service to conciliation, and allowed the more militant colonialists,
especially those in Vietnam, to set France's policy in Indochina; thus,
Admiral d'Argenlieu, not General Leclerc, spoke for the French Govern-
ment.

In mid-December, 1946, as soon as Blum took office, Ho sent hin
a telegram with proposals for easing tension in Vietnam, but the message
did not reach Paris until December 26. 43/ By that time the flash-
point had been passed. In Hanoi, on 19 December 19/16, Vietnamese troops,
after several days of mounting animosity punctuated with violence, cut
off the city's water and electricity, and attacked French posts using
small arms, mortar and artillery. The issue of who was the aggressor
has never been resolved. The fighting flared across North Vietnam, and
two days later, the guerrilla war in South Vietnam quickened pace. The
French responded to the initial attacks with an occasional savagery which
rendered increasingly remote restoration of status quo ante.

On 23 December 1946, Premier Leon Blum addressed the National Assem-
bly on the Indochina crisis. His-speech was characteristically principled
and characteristically ambiguous: he talked peace, but endorsed mili-
tant French officials in Vietnam. Although he declared that, "The old
colonial system founded on conquest and maintained by constraint, which
tended toward exploitation of conquered lands and peoples is finished
today," he ‘also stated that:

Nye have been obliged to deal with violence. TI declare
that the men who are fighting out there, the French of Indochina,

2

A-32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the friendly populations, may count unreservedly on the vigi-
dJance and resolution of the government.

"It was our common task to try everything to spare the
blood of our children -- and also the blood that is not ours,
but which is blood all the same, that of a people whose right
to political liberty we recognized ten months ago, and who
should keep their place in the union of peoples federated
around France....

"Before all, order must be reestablished, peaceful order
which is necessarily the basis for the execution of contracts." })/

Premier Blum was succeeded within a week of his speech by the first
government of the Fourth Republic under Paul Ramadier. France sent three
emissaries to Vietnam at this juncture: Admiral d'Argenlieu, General
Leclerc, and the Socialist Minister of Overseas France, Marius Moutet.
Admiral d'Argenlieu became the High Comaissioner of Indochina, and
accused the Vietnamese of breaking faith with France. He stated emphat-
ically that France intended to preserve in Indochina:

",..the maintenance and development of its present influ-~
ence and of its economic interests, the protection of ethnic
minorities with which it is entrusted, the care of assuring
the security of strategic bases within the framework of defense
of the Federation and the French Union....

"France does not intend in the present state of evolution
of the Indochinese people to give them unconditional and total
independence, which would only be a fiction gravely prejudicial
to the interests of the two parties." 45/

The other two representatives of France were dispatched on fact-
finding missions. Their reports contained diametrically opposing policy
recommendations. General Leclere wrote:

"In 1947 France will no longer put down by force a group-
ing of 24,000,000 inhabitants which is assuming unity and in
Which there exists a xenophobic and perhaps a national ideal....

. "The capital problem from now on is political. It is a
question of coming to terms with an awakening xenophobic
nationalism, channeling it in order to safeguard, at least in
part, the rights of France.” 46/

The General had been sent to examine the military situation, and
returned recommending a political solution. The Socialist Marius Moutet
had been sent to inquire into the political prospects, and returned with
the conclusion that only a military solution was promising. Like

A-33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Admiral d'Argenlieu, Moutet believed that there could be no negotia-
tions with Ho Chi Minh. He wrote of the "cruel disillusionment of
agreements that could not be put into effect...," and he declared that:

"We can no longer speak of a free agreement between
France and Vietnam....

"Before any negotiations today, it is necessary to have
a military decision. I am sorry, but one cannot commit such
madness as the Vietnamese have done with impunity." 47/

It was the politician's ideas, rather than the general's, which
prevailed in Paris. Premier Ramadier -- himself a Socialist -- spoke
of peace in Vietnam, and announced that his government favored inde-
pendence and unity for Vietnam:

"Independence within the French Union /and/ union of the
three Annamese countries, if the Annamese people desire it." 48/

At the same time, however, his government permitted Admiral d'Argenlieu
to launch a military campaign of major proportions and punitive intent.

Very early in the war, the French raised the spectre of Communist
conspiracy in Vietnam. Admiral d'Argenlieu in Saigon called for an
internationally concerted policy to array the Western powers against
the expansion of communism in Asia, beginning with Vietnam. In the
National Assembly debated in March, 1947, a Rightist deputy introduced
the charge that the violence in Vietnam had been directed from Moscow:

"Nationalism in Indochina is a means, the end is Soviet
imperialism." h9/

Neither the government nor the people of France heeded General Leclere's
statement of January, 1947: r

_ "ASnti-communism will be a useless tool as long as the
problem of nationalism remains unsolved." 50/

Ho Chi Minh, for his part, issued repeated appeals to France for
peace, even offering to withdraw personally:

"When France recognizes the independence and unity of Viet-
nam, we will retire to our village, for we are not ambitious
for power or honor." 51/

In February, 1947, the French offered terms to Ho tantamount to uncon-
ditional surrender. Ho flatly rejected these, asking the French repre-
sentative, "If you were in my place, would you accept them? ...In the

French Union there is no place for cowards. If I accepted these condi-
tions I should be one." 52/ On 1 March 1947, Ho appealed publicly to

A-34 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the French government and the French people:

"Once again, we declare solemnly that the Vietnamese
people desire only unity and independence in the French
Union, and we pledge ourselves to respect French economic
and cultural interests....If France would but say the word
to cease hostility immediately, so many lives and so much
property would be saved and friendship and confidence would
be regained." 53,

But the French displayed little interest in negotiations. Premier
Ramadier stated in March, 1947, that:

"We must protect the life and possessions of Frenchmen,
of foreigners, of our Indochinese friends who have confidence
in French liberty. It is necessary that we disengage our garri-
sons, re-establish essential communications, assure the safety
of populations which have taken refuge with us. That we have
done.” 5h/

Ramadier and his ministers spoke repeatedly in the spring of 1947 of an
imminent end to the "military phase" of the crisis, and of the beginning
of a “constructive phase," in which presumably economic and political
assistance would supplant the military instrument; but in what was to
become a pattern of expectation and frustration, the Fourth Republic
discovered that its military forces were incapable of controlling even
the principal lines of communication in Vietnam, and that the military
solution severely taxed the full resources of the French Union. In
March, 1947 an additional division of troops for the French Expeditionary
Corps, dispatched to Vietnam per General Leclerec's recommendation, had
to be diverted en route to quell an insurgency in Madagascar.

By the summer of 1947, the French Government was aware that the
situation in Indochina was at an impasse. Having failed in its attempt
to force a military decision, it turned to a political solution, as
suggested by General Leclerc. But again the ideas of Admiral d'Argenlieu
weighed heavily. In January, 1947, d'Argenlieu wrote that:

"Tf we examine the problem basically, we are led to inquire
whether the political form unquestionably capable of benefiting
from the political prestige of legitimacy is not the traditional
monarchic institution, the very one that existed before the
Japanese surrender....The return of the Emperor [Bao Dai/ would
probably reassure all those who, having opposed the Viet Minh,
fear they will be accused of treason." 55

Tt was with Bao Dai, not Ho Chi Minh, that the French elected to nego-
tiate for a political settlement with Vietnamese Nationalists.

A-35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

French emissaries approached Bao Dai with terms not unlike those
Ho Chi Minh had negotiated on 6 March 1946: unity and independence
within the French Union, provided Bao Dai formed a government which
would furnish a clear alternative to Ho Chi Minh's DRV. With French
encouragement, a group of Vietnamese Nationalists formed a political
party advocating the installation of Bao Dai at the head of a non-
Viet Minh Vietnamese regime. Bao Dai was at first evasive and skep-
tical, but was eventually convinced that the French situation in
Indochina was sufficiently desperate that they would have to honor
commitments they made to him. Bao Dai also seems to have believed
that he could attract American support and material aid -~ a view
which may have stemmed in part from a 1947 Life magazine article by
William C. Bullitt, the influential former U.S. Ambassador to France,
endorsing Bao Dai as a solution to France's dilemma. 56/

France then proceeded to contract with Bao Dai a series of agree-
ments, each of which ostensibly brought Bao Dai closer to genuine
autonomy for Vietnam. It was not, however, until February, 1950, that
the French National Assembly acceded to political independence and
unification for Vietnam. Chronicled below are the principal steps by
which France failed on the one hand to reach an accommodation ston
Ho Chi Minh, and on the other hand erected the “Bao Dai solution" in
its stead. 57/

A-36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

PRINCIPAL EVENTS
FRANCE - VIETNAM RELATIONS

1946 - 1950
Event Description Outcome
Accord of Agreement signed by Ho Chi Minh Le

6 March 1946

Led to French
occupation of
Tonkin Delta.

with French provides that:

1. France recognizes DRV as:
"Free State ... forming a
part of the Indochina
- Federation and the
French Union."

No significant
step taken by
France toward
DRV autonomy.

2. DRV welcomes French Army
into Tonkin for 5 years.

3. Further negotiations to
spell out details for
DRV independence.

First Dalat
Conference,
19 April -

11 May 1946

French and DRV delegates attempt 1.
to negotiate differences, but

are able to enact only minor
agreements on cultural and
educational matters.

Overshadowed by
continuing
guerrilla war
in Cochinchina.,

2. A commission was
set up to arrange
an armistice;
futile.

Establishment of
Provisional
Government of
Cochinchina,

1 June 1946 |

French announce formation of 1. Touched off new

an independent Cochinchina with-
in the Indochina Federation and
the French Union.

wave of guerrilla
war in South
Vietnam.

Possibility of
divided Vietnan
pressured DRV in
negotiations with
France; stiffened
DRV attitudes.

aN

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Event Description Outcome
Fontainbleau Formal negotiations in France DRV delegation with-
Conference, between DRV delegation drew in protest over
6 July - headed by Ho Chi Minh and convening of Second

10 September 1916

second-rank French officials
leads to no agreement on any
substantive issue.

Dalat Conference
(below), resumed talks,
then acceded to

adjourment without
progress.

Second Dalat
Conference,
1 August 196

Conference among French, t
Cochinchinese, Laotians,

Cambodians, Montagnards of

Annam:

As

Announces formation of ca
"federal states" under
French High Commissioner.

Denounces DRV delega-
tion at Fontainbleau as
unrepresentative.

Cambodians and Cochin-
chinese move for direct
representation in French
Union and abroad, but
French refuse.

Caused break-
down of
Fontainbleau
Conference.

Erected new
facade of federa-
tion, but led to
no significant
political con-
cessions by
French.

Franco-DRV
Modus Vivendi,

14 September
1946

After DRV delegation departed 1

from Fontainbleau, Ho Chi Minh
Signs agreement with France
which provides, effective

30 October 1946:

1. Reciprocal rights for 2s
citizens.
2. Reciprocal property rights

and restoration seized
French property in Vietnam.

Piastre related to franc.

Customs union and free trade
within Indochina Federation.

Armistice Commission to deal
with guerrilla war in Cochin-
china.

A-38

Led to some
release of
prisoners, and
lull in guerrilla
operations.

No substantial
French political
concessions
eventuated.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Event Description Outcome

6. Referendum to decide Cochin-
china's relationship to DRV.

7. ‘France-DRV talks to resume
in January, 1947.

eS rrr inn nn

"Tncidents” at Local disputes lead to clashes 1. French seized
Haiphong, Langson, between French and DRV troops. unilateral control
and Tourane, over Haiphong and
November, 1946 Langson.

2. French reinforce-
ments landed at
Tourane in viola-
tion of March 6
Accord,
ee ee ee

Hanoi Incident, Large-scale conflict begins, Complete breakdown
19 December 1946 spreads throughout Vietnam. of relations between
France and DRV

‘ SES ee

Declaration of the French High Commissioner 1. President Le Van
Freedom of Cochin- extends powers of the Saigon Hoach of Cochin-
china, 4 February Government to include: china admitted
19-7 Viet Minh con-
1. Legislative and executive trolled greater
action on all internal part of Cochin-
affairs. china.
2. Universal suffrage for 2. Elections
election of legislature. repeatedly post-

poned because of
civil disorder.

First Ha Long Bay 1. Bao Dai associates himself 1. French took no
Agreement, with French-sponsored action toward
7 December 1947 nationalist movement. releasing their
: control in
2. French promise in vague Vietnam.
terms national inde-
| pendence for Vietnam. 2. Bao Dai withdrew
to Europe.

3. Agreement con-
demned by non-Viet ~
Minh nationalists;
e.g., Ngo Dinh Diem.

————— EES

A-39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Event

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Description

Outcome

Second Ha Long Bay 1. France solemnly recognizes 1. France trans-
Agreement, 5 June the independence of Vietnam ferred no sig-
1948 within the French Union. nificant political
power to Viet-
2. Bao Dai reassociates himself namese.
with the attempt to form a
nationalist government, 2. Led only to
further negotiations
between Bao Dai and
France.
Elysee Agreement, In an exchange of letters 1. French economic

8 March 199

between Bao Dai and President
Auriol, France:

1

Reconfirms Vietnam's status
as an independent Associated
State within the French
Union. ;

2h

Agrees to unifying Vietnam,

and placing it under Viet-
namese administration,

under terms to be nego-

tiated subsequently. 3

Retains control of Viet-
namese armed forces and
foreign relations.

and political
primacy remained

“unchanged, even

in principle.

Cochinchina
formally merged
with Annam and Ton-
kin in State of
Vietnam in June,

1949.

Plans for internal
administrative
transfer announced
30 December 1919.

Practical matters
of transfer of
administrative func-
tions in principal
external affairs
were deferred to
Pau Negotiations

of 1950.

Recognition of

the Independence of
the State of Viet-
nam, 14 June 1949

French High Commissioner for

ts

Indochina and Emperor Bao Dai
exchange letters in Saigon
formalizing Elysee Agreement.

oe

Cochinchina
government
tendered resigna-
tion to Bao Dai,
merging in prin-
ciple with new
State of Vietnam.

No actual trans-
fer of political
power occurred.

eS ee ee

A-ho

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Event | Description Outcome
French Ratifica- Following National Assembly i. U.S. recognized
tion of the Inde- approval (29 January 1950), State of Vietnam
pendence of France announces ratification (3 February
Vietnan, of the status for Vietnam 1950).
2 February 1950 described in the Elysee
Agreement. 2. Details of trans-

fer of powers awaited
Pau Negotiations
(March-November,
1950).

A-4] TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. U.S. Policy Toward the Conflict, 1947-1949

The U.S. manifested increasing concern over the conflict
in Indochina, but through 1949 American policy continued to regard the
war as fundamentally a matter for French resolution. It is clear on
the record that American policy-makers of the day perceived the vacuity
of French policies in 1946 and 1947. The U.S., in its representations
to France, consistently deplored the prospect of protracted war in
Vietnam, and urged meaningful concessions to Vietnamese nationalism.
However, the U.S. always stopped short of endorsing Ho Chi Minh,
deterred by Ho's history of communist affiliation. Accordingly, U.S.
policy gravitated with that of France toward the Bao Dai solution. At
no point was the U.S. prepared to adopt an openly interventionist
course. To have done so would have clashed with the expressed British
view that Indochina was an exclusively French concern, and played into
the hands of France's extremist political parties of both the Right
and the Left. The U.S. was particularly apprehensive lest by inter-
vening it strengthen the political position of French Communists.
Moreover, in 1946 and 1947, France and Britain were moving toward an
anti-Soviet alliance in Europe, and the U.S. was reluctant to press
a potentially divisive policy. Compared with European recovery, and
escape from communist domination, the U.S. considered the fate of
Vietnamese nationalism relatively insignificant. Further, the dispute
in 1946 and 1945 over the Dutch possession in Indonesia had furnished
& precedent: there the U.S. had moved cautiously, and only after long
delays, to internationalize the conflict. Extensive American ana
British investments in Indonesia, moreover, afforded common ground for
intervention. No similar rationale or commonality existed for inter-
vention in Indochina, since Indochina was almost exclusively a French
economic preserve, and a political morass which the U.K. was mani- r
festly interested in avoiding.

A-he TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The resultant U.S. policy has most often been termed "neutrality."
It was, however, also consistent with the policy of deferring to French
volition announced by President Roosevelt's Secretary of State on
3 April 1945. It was a policy characterized by the same indecision
that had marked U.S. wartime policy. It was, moreover, a policy formu-
lated with an undertone of indifference: at the time, Indochina
appeared to be one region in which the U.S. might enjoy the luxury of
abstention. .

When open warfare broke out between the DRV and France in December,
‘1946, John Carter Vincent, Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs,
in a memorandum to Under Secretary Acheson of 23 December 19h6, recom-
mended that the latter call in the French Ambassador to highlight inher-
ent dangers. The memorandum included this acute analysis:

"Although the French in Indochina have made far-reaching
paper-concessions to the Vietnamese desire for autonomy,
French actions on the scene have been directed toward whittling
down the powers and the territorial extent of the Vietnam
‘free state.' This process the Vietnamese have continued to
resist. At the same time, the French themselves admit that
they lack the military strength to reconquer the country. In
brief, with inadequate forces, with public opinion sharply at
odds, with a government rendered largely ineffective through
internal division, the French have tried to accomplish in
Indochina what a strong and united Britain has found it unwise
to attempt in Burma. Given the present elements in the situ-
ation, guerrilla warfare may continue indefinitely.”

Secretary Acheson acted on Mr. Vincent's suggestion, and expressed to
the Ambassador views summarized as follows:

"We had anticipated such a situation developing in November
and events have confirmed our fears. While we have no wish to

A-43 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

offer to mediate under present conditions we do want the French
GOVT to know that we are ready and willing to do anything which
it might consider helpful in the circumstances. We have been
gratified to learn of Moutet's mission and have confidence in

his moderation and broad viewpoint. We believe however that the
situation is highly inflammatory and if present unsettled con-
ditions continue, there is a possibility that other powers might
attempt to bring the matter up before the Security Council. If
this happens, as in the case of Indonesia, the question will arise
whether the matter is one of purely French internal concern or a
situation likely to disturb the peace. Other powers might like-
wise attempt some form of intervention as has been suggested in
the Chinese press. We would be opposed to such steps, but from
every point of view it seems important that the question be
settled as soon as possible. Mr. Acheson added that he wondered
whether the French would attempt to reconquer the country through
military force which was a step that the British had found unwise
to attempt in Burma." 58/

On 8 January, 1947, the Department of State instructed the American
Ambassador in Paris that the U.S. would approve sale of arms and arma-
ments to France “except in cases which appear to relate to Indochina." 59/
On the same date, 8 January 1947, the French conveyed to the Department —
of State a message that:

"...the French Government appreciated the understanding
attitude that Mr. Acheson had shown in discussing the problen
of Indochina; that it had taken note of Mr. Acheson's offer of
"good offices’ and appreciated the spirit in which the offer
was made; and that the French Government did not feel that it
could avail itself of our offer but must continue to handle
the situation_single~handedly along the lines stated by Moutet.
[The emissary/ went on to say that the principal objective of
the French military was to restore order and reopen communica-
tions. He said that after this was done the French Government
would be prepared to discuss matters with the Vietnamese. He
said that the French Government had every intention of living
up to the agreement of last March 6 and the modus vivendi of
September 15, once order was restored. [Be was/ asked...whether
he thought the French military could restore order within any
foreseeable future time. He seemed to think, without much
evidence of conviction, that they could." 60

=¥

There then ensued an interesting exchange between the U.S. official and
the French representative in which the Frenchman sketched a claim of
American culpability for the war:

enn TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Speaking personally, I told him that I thought there was
one flaw in the French approach to the problem worth men-=
tioning. JI had in mind an apparent assumption by the French
that there was an equality of responsibility as between the
French and the Vietnamese. I said that this did not seem to
me to be the case; that the responsibility of France as a
world power to achieve a solution of the problem was far
greater than that of the Vietnamese; and that the situation
was not one which could be localized as a purely French-
Vietnamese one but might affect adversely conditions through-
out Southeast Asia.

" /The emissary/ quickly substituted the word ‘authority!
for ‘responsibility’ and said that the French were now faced
with the problem of reasserting their authority and that we must
share the responsibility for their delay in doing so because
we had not acceded to French requests in the autumn of 1945
for material assistance." 61/

Farly in February, the U.S. Ambassador in Paris was instructed to
reassure Premier Ramadier of the "very friendliest feelings" of the U.S.
toward France and its interest in supporting France's recovering eco-
nomic, political and military strength:

"In spite any misunderstanding which might have arisen in
minds French in regard to our position concerning Indochina
they must appreciate that we have fully recognized France's
sovereign position in that area and we do not wish to have it
appear that we are in any way endeavoring undermine that posi-
tion, and French should know it is our desire to be helpful and
we stand ready assist any appropriate way we can to find solution
for Indochinese problem. At same time we cannot shut out eyes
to fact that there are two sides this problem and that our reports
indicate both a lack French understanding of other side (more in
Saigon than in Paris) and continued existence dangerously out- ¥
moded colonial outlook and methods in area. Furthermore, there
is no escape from fact that trend of times is to effect that colonial
empires in XIX Century sense are rapidly becoming thing of past.
Action Brit in India and Burma and Dutch in Indonesia are out-
standing examples this trend, and French themselves took cognizance
of it both in new Constitution and in their agreements with Viet-
nam. On other hand we do not lose sight fact that Ho Chi Minh has
direct Communist connections and it should be obvious that we are
not interested in seeing colonial empire administrations supplanted
by philosophy and political organizations emanating from and con-
trolled by Kremlin...."

"Frankly we have no solution of problem to suggest. It is
basically matter for two parties to work out themselves and from
your reports and those from Indochina we are led to feel that
both parties have endeavored to keep door open to some sort of

A-hs5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

settlement. We appreciate fact that Vietnam started present
fighting in Indochina on December 19 and that this action has
made it more difficult for French to adopt a position of
generosity and conciliation. Nevertheless we hope that French
will find it possible to be more than generous in trying to
find a solution." 62/

Thus, the U.S. chose to remain outside the conflict; the announced
Wipes position WAS, in the words of Secretary of State George C. Marshall,
to hope that "a pacific basis of adjustment of the difficulties could be
found.” 63/ Events conspired against this hope, however, and as the
fighting continued, the prospect of a Moscow-controlled state in Vietnan
continued to draw the U.S. nearer to involvement. On 13 May 1947, the
Department of State furnished the following guidance to U.S. diplomats
in Paris, Saigon, and Hanoi:

"Key our position is our awareness that in respect develop-
ments affecting position Western democratic powers in southern
Asia, we essentially in same boat as French, also as British
and Dutch. We cannot conceive setbacks to long-range interests
France which would not also be setbacks our own. Conversely we
should regard close association France and members French Union as
not only to advantage peoples concerned, but indirectly our own.

"In our view, southern Asia in critical phase its history
with seven new nations in process achieving or struggling inde-
pendence or autonomy. These nations include quarter inhabitants
world and their future course, owing sheer weight populations,
resources they command, and strategic location, will be momentous
factor world stability. Following relaxation European controls,
internal racial, religious, and national differences could plunge
new nations into violent discord, or already apparent anti-Western
Pan-Asiatic tendencies could become dominant political force, or
Communists could capture control. We consider as best safeguard
against these eventualities a continued close association between
newly-autonomous peoples and powers which have long been respon-
sible their welfare. In particular we recognize Vietnamese will
for indefinite period require French material and technical
assistance and enlightened political guidance which can be provided
only by nation steeped like France in democratic tradition and
confirmed in respect human liberties and worth individual.

"We equally convinced, however, such association must be
voluntary to be lasting and achieve results, and that protraction
present situation Indochina can only destroy basic voluntary
cooperation, leave legacy permanent bitterness, and irrevocably
alienate Vietnamese from France and those values represented by
France and other Western democracies.

A-hi6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"While fully appreciating difficulties French position this
conflict, we feel there is danger in any arrangement which might
provide Vietnamese opportunity compare unfavorably their own
position and that of other peoples southern Asia who have made
tremendous strides toward autonomy since war.

"While we are still ready and willing do anything we can
which might be considered helpful, French will understand
we not attempting come forward with any solution our own or
intervene in situation. However, they will also understand
we inescapably concerned with situation Far East generally, upon
which developments Indochina likely have profound effect....

"For your INFO, evidence that French Communists are being
directed accelerate their agitation French colonies even extent
lose much popular support France (URTEL 1719 Apr 25) may be
indication Krenlin prepared sacrifice temporary gains with
4O million French to long range colonial strategy with 600 mil-
lion dependent people, which lends great urgency foregoing
views....DEPT much concerned lest French efforts find QUOTE
true representatives Vietnam UNQUOTE with whom negotiate result
creation impotent puppet GOVT! along lines Cochinchina regime,
or that restoration Baodai [sic/ may be attempted, implying
democracies reduced resort monarchy as weapon against Communism.
You may refer these ES ons views if nature your conversations
French appears warrant." 64/

The U.S. position may have influenced the French to revise the first

Ha Long Bay Agreement (December, 1947) and when the second agreement
was signed in June, 1948, the U.S. pranptly instructed the U.S.
Ambassador to "apply such persuasion and/or PreSaune as is best
calculated /to/ produce desired result" of France's "unequivocally

and promptly approving the principle of Viet independence." 65/ Again,
however, the Ambassador was instructed to avoid ostensible intervention
while making it clear that the U.S. foresaw France's losing Indochina
if it persisted to ignore American advice. These instructions were
repeated at the end of August, 1948, with the assertion that the Depaxt=
ment of State "believes nothing should be left undone which will
strengthen truly nationalist groups in Indochina and induce present
supporters of the Viet Minh to come to the side of that group." 66/

r

The first suggestions that the U.S. became tangibly involved in
Vietnam appear in a reported conversation of the U.S. Ambassador with
the French Foreign Office in September, 1948. The U.S. Ambassador
again urged on France legislation or other definite action to move
toward the unification of Vietnam, and the immediate negotiation of
concrete steps toward autonomy as envisaged by the Ha Long Bay Agreement.
He then told the French representative that:

A-h7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-..US is fully appreciative difficulties which face French
Government in Indochina at this time and reminds him that Us
had already indicated its willingness, if French Government so
desired, to give public indication its approval of concrete
steps by French Government to come to grips with basic political
problem of Indochina. JI informed him that US also willing
under similar circumstances to consider assisting French Govern-
ment with respect to matter of financial aid for Indochina
through ECA but could not give consideration to altering its
present policy in this regard unless real progress made in
reaching non-Communist solution in Indochina based on coopera-
tion of true nationalists of that country." 67/

As negotiations proceeded with Bao Dai preliminary to the Elysee
Agreement, the Department of State instructed the American Ambassador
in Paris, on 17 January 1949, that:

“While the Department is desirous of the French coming to
terms with Bao Dai or any truly nationalist group which has a
reasonable chance of winning over the preponderance of Viet-
namese, we cannot at this time irretrievably commit the U.S.
to support of a native government which by failing to develop
appeal among Vietnamese might become virtually a puppet govern-
ment separated from the people and existing only by the presence
of French military forces." &/

Following the Elysee Agreement, the U.S. was better disposed toward
providing aid in Indochina. On 10 May 1949, the American Consul in
Saigon was informed that the U.S. desired the "Bao Dai experiment" to
succeed, since there appeared to be no other alternative.

"At the proper time and under the proper circumstances, the
Department will be prepared to do its part by extending recog-
nition to the Bao Dai government and by expressing the possibility
of complying with any request by such a government for U.S. arms
and economic assistance. It must be understood, however, that an
aid program of this nature would require Congressional approval.
Since the U.S. could, however, scarcely afford backing a govern-
ment which would have the color and be likely to suffer the fate
of a puppet regime, it must be clear that France will offer all
necessary concessions to make the Bao Dai solution attractive to
the nationalists. This is a step of which the French themselves
must see the urgency and necessity in view of the possibly short
time remaining before Communist successes in China are felt in
Indochina. Moreover, the Bao Dai government must through its
own efforts demonstrate the capacity to organize and conduct
affairs wisely so as to insure the maximum opportunity for ob-
taining requisite popular support, inasmuch as a government
created in Indochina analogous to the Kuomintang would be fore-
doomed to failure." 6/

A-48 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But "anti-communism" initially proved to be no better guideline
for the formulation of American policy in Indochina than it had been
for the French. Indeed, early U.S. attempts to discern the nature
and extent of communist influence in Vietnam devolved to the seeming
paradox that if Ho Chi Minh were communist, he seemed to have no
visible ties with Moscow. For example, a State Department appraisal
of Ho Chi Minh provided to the U.S. Ambassador in China in July,
1948, was admittedly speculative:

"1. Depts info indicates that Ho Chi Minh is Com-
munist. His long and well-known record in Comintern
during twenties and thirties, continuous support by French
Communist newspaper Humanite since 1945, praise given him
by Radio Moscow (which for past six months has been devoting
increasing attention to Indochina) and fact he has been
called "leading communist' by recent Russian publications
as well as Daily Worker makes any other conclusion appear
to be wishful thinking.

"2. Dept has no evidence of direct link between Ho
and Moscow but assumes it exists, nor is it able evaluate
amount pressure or guidance Moscow exerting. We have
impression Ho must be given or is retaining large degree
latitude. Dept considers that USSR accomplishing its
immediate aims in Indochina by (a) pinning down large
numbers of French troops, (b) causing steady drain upon
French economy thereby tending retard recovery and dissi-
pate ECA assistance to France, and (c) denying to world
generally surpluses which Indochina normally has available
thus perpetuating conditions of disorder and shortages
which favorable to growth communism. Furthermore, Ho seems
quite capable of retaining and even strengthening his grip
on Indochina with no outside assistance other than con-
tinuing procession of French puppet govts." 70/

In the fall of 1948, the Office of Intelligence Research in the
Department of State conducted a survey of communist influence in
Southeast Asia. Evidence of Kremlin-directed conspiracy was
found in virtually all countries except Vietnam:

"Since December 19, 1946, there have been continuous
conflicts between French forces and the nationalist govern-
ment of Vietnam. This government is a coalition in which
avowed communists hold influential positions. Although the
French admit the influence of this government, they have
consistently refused to deal with its leader, Ho Chi Minh,
on ans grounds that he is a communist.

A-ki9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section cS
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Fe fora dics 8 See ee Ab a ca

| BURMA

HAINAN

d

THAILAND

SOUTH

VIETNAM

relays

foF™  SNHATRANG ©}
LAD YQ SAIGON 2h
a aan

:
e

i
i
'
‘

Source: Cooper,Killigrew,and LaCharite',
Case Studies in Insurgency and
Revolutionary Warfare: Vietnam

1941-1954 Washington :SORO, 196% )

al
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"To date the Vietnam press and radio have not adopted
an anti-American position. It is rather the French colonial
press that has been strongly anti-American and has freely
accused the U.S. of imperialism in Indochina to the point
of approximating the official Moscow position. Although the
Vietnam radio has been closely watched for a new position
toward the U.S., no change has appeared so far. Nor does
there seem to have been any split within the coalition govern-
ment of Vietnam....

"Evaluation. If there is a Moscow-directed conspiracy
in Southeast Asia, Indochina is an anomoly so far. Possible
explanations are:

1. No rigid directives have been issued by Moscow.

2. The Vietnam government considers that it has
no rightest elements that must be purged,

3. The Vietnam Communists are not subservient to
the foreign policies pursued by Moscow.

hk, A special dispensation for the Vietnam govern-
ment has been arranged in Moscow.

Of these possibilities, the first and fourth seem most likely."71/

A-50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

1.A.3.
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5 ee

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

3. Origins of the U.S. Involvement in Vietnam............0..0000. A-51
Ge The Policy CONTEKE eee eeeeeeeeeeseccceeeesecccceesceeseses A-SI]

Ds The Use Enters the War ecscceccccsssccceccccsceccsssveeees A-58

3. Origins of the U.S. Involvement in Vietnam
a. The Policy Context

Events in China of 1948 and 1949 brought the United States
to a new awareness of the vigor of communism in Asia, and to a sense of
urgency over its containment. U.S. policy instruments developed to
meet unequivocal communist challenges in Europe were applied to the
problem of the Far East. Concurrent with the development of NATO, a
U.S. search began for collective security in Asia; economic and military
assistance programs were inaugurated; and the Truman Doctrine acquired
wholly new dimensions by extension into regions where the European em-
pires were being dismantled. In March, 1947, President Truman had set
forth the emeree policy guidelines:

"T believe that it must be the policy of the United

States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted
subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.

A-51 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I believe we must assist free peoples to work out their
own destinies in their own way...." 72/

The President went on to underscore the U.S. determination to commit
its resources to contain communism. While he clearly subordinated
military aid to economic and political means, he did assert the U.S.
intent to assist in maintaining security:

"To insure the peaceful development of nations, free
from coercion, the United States has taken a leading
part in establishing the United Nations. The United
Nations is designed to make possible freedom and inde-
pendence for. all its members. We shall not realize our
objectives, however, unless we are willing to help free
peoples to maintain their free institutions and their
national integrity against aggressive movements that seek
to impose upon them totalitarian regimes." 73/

In the year 1947, while U.S. military assistance began to flow
into Greece to ward off subversive aggression, the U.S. inaugurated
the European Recovery Plan (ERP). ERP was aimed at economic recovery
in Western Europe, especially in countries such as France and Italy
where post~war depression was fostering marked leftward political
trends. In one of the high level appraisals of the situation that
the U.S. had to counter in 1947, the Harriman Committee on Foreign
Aid has coneluded that:

"The interest of the United States in Europe...cannot
be measured simply in economic terms. It is also strategic
and political. We all know that we are faced in the world
today with two conflicting ideologies....Our position in
the world has been based for at least a century on the
existence in Europe of a number of strong states committed
by tradition and inclination to the democratic concept...." 7h/ ¥

The fall of the Czechoslovakian Government in February 198 brought
about the Brussels Pact, a Western European collective defense and
economic collaboration arrangement. The blockade of Berlin, which
began on 1 April 1948, accelerated U.S. movement toward membership
in the alliance. On June 11, 1948 the U.S. Senate adopted a resolu-
tion advising the Executive to undertake the:

"...Progressive development of regional and other
collective arrangements for individual and collective
self-defense in accordance with the purposes, principles,
and provisions of the Charter /of the UN/, association of

A-52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the United States, by constitutional process, with such
regional and other collective arrangements as are based
on continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid, and
as affect its national security." 75/

That same month, Congress passed the Economic Cooperation Act, and in
July, 1948, opened negotiations for a North Atlantic Alliance. ‘The
North Atlantic Treaty was signed in April, 1949, and entered into
force in August of that year.

In the same omnibus foreign assistance legislation which had
authorized ECA in June, 1948, Congress had provided for a China Aid
Program. This measure met almost immediate failure, for Mao's armies
spread unchecked over the China mainland, and by mid-1949 the posi-
tion of the nationalists there was untenable. The "failure" of U.S.
aid -- which was termed such by Congressional critics -- no less
than the urgent situation in Europe and the exploding of the first
Soviet nuclear device in September, 1949, figured in Congressional
action on military assistance legislation. 76

On October 6, 1949, Congress passed the Mutual Defense Assist-
ance Program (MDAP) through which U.S. arms, military equipment and
training assistance might be provided world-wide for collective
defense. In the first appropriations under MDAP, NATO countries
received 76% of the total, and Greece and Turkey (not yet NATO mem-
bers), 16%. T/ But Korea and the Philippines received modest aid,.
and the legislators clearly intended the law to underwrite sub-
sequent appropriations for collective security in Asia. The opening
paragraph of the law not only supported NATO, but foreshadowed the
Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty:

"An Act to Promote the Foreign Policy and Provide for
the Defense and General Welfare of the United States

by Furnishing Military Assistance to Foreign Nations,
Approved October 6, 1949.

"Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representa-
tives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
That this Act may be cited as the ‘Mutual Defense Assistance
Act of 1949.'

"PTNDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY
"The Congress of the United States reaffirms the policy of

the United States to achieve international peace and security
through the United Nations so that armed force shall not be

A-53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

used except in the common interest. The Congress hereby finds
that the efforts of the United States and other countries to
promote peace and security in furtherance of the purposes of

the Charter of the United Nations require additional measures

of support based upon the principle of continuous and effective
self-help and mutual aid. These measures include the furnishing
of military assistance essential to enable the United States

and other nations dedicated to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter to participate effectively in arrange-
ments for individual and collective self-defense in support

of those purposes and principles. In furnishing such military
assistance, it remains the policy of the United States to con-
tinue to exert maximum efforts to obtain agreements to provide
the United Nations with armed forces as contemplated in the
Charter and agreements to achieve universal control of weapons
of mass destruction and universal regulation and reduction of
armaments, including armed forces, under adequate safeguards to
protect complying nations against violation and evasion.

"The Congress hereby expresses itself as favoring the cre-
ation by the free countries and the free peoples of the Far
East of a joint organization, consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations, to establish a program of self-help and
mutual cooperation designed to develop their economic and
social well-being, to safeguard basic rights and liberties
and to protect their security and independence,

"The Congress recognizes that economic recovery is essen-
tial to international peace and security and must be given
clear priority. The Congress also recognizes that the increased
confidence of free peoples in their ability to resist direct or
indirect aggression and to maintain internal security will
advance such recovery and support political stability." 78/

While Congress was deliberating on MDAP, the staff of the National
Security Council, at the request of the Secretary of Defense, had been
reexamining U.S. policy toward Asia. In June, 1949, the Secretary had
noted that he was:

",..inereasingly concerned at the...advance of communism

in large areas of the world and particularly the successes of

communism in-China...."

"A major objective of United States policy, as I understend
it, is to contain communism in order to reduce its threat to
our security. Our actions in Asia should be part of a care-
fully |considered and comprehensive plan to further that objec-
tive." 79/ ay

A-5h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The NSC study responding to the Secretary's request is remarkable
for the rarity of its specific references to Indochina. ‘The staff
study focused, rather, on generalities concerning the conflict between
the interests of European metropoles and the aspirations of subject
Asian peoples for independence. The following extract is from the
section of the study dealing with Southeast Asia:

"The current conflict between colonialism and native
independence is the most important political factor in south-
east Asia. This conflict results not only from the decay of
European imperial power in the area but also from a widening
political consciousness and the rise of militant nationalism
among the subject peoples. With the exception of Thailand and
the Philippines, the southeast Asia countries do not possess
leaders practiced in the exercise of responsible power. The
question of whether a colonial country is fit to govern itself,
however, is not always relevant in practical politics. The
real issue would seem to be whether the colonial country is
able and determined to make continued foreign rule an overall
losing proposition for the metropolitan power. If it is,
independence for the colonial country is the only practical
solution, eyen though misgovernment eventuates. A solution of
the consequent problem of instability, if it arises, must be
sought on a non-imperialist plane. Im any event, colonial-
nationalist conflict provides a fertile field for subversive
communist activities, and it is now clear that southeast Asia
is the target of a coordinated offensive directed by the Kremlin.
In seeking to gain control of southeast Asia, the Kremlin is
motivated in part by a desire to acquire southeast Asia's
resources and communication lines, and to deny them to us.

But the political gains which would accrue to the USSR from
communist capture of southeast Asia are equally significant.

The extension of communist authority in China represents a

grievous political defeat for us; if southeast Asia also is
swept by communism we shall have suffered a major political 3
rout the repercussions of which will be felt throughout the

rest of the world, especially in the Middle East and in a then
critically exposed Australia. The United States should con-

tinue to use its influence looking toward resolving the colonial
nationalist conflict in such a way as to satisfy the fundamental
demands of the nationalist-colonial conflict, lay the basis for
political stability and resistance to communism, and avoid

weakening the colonial powers who are our western allies. How-

ever, it must be remembered that the long colonial tradition

in Asia has left the peoples of that area suspicious of Western
influence. We must approach the problem from the Asiatic point

of view in so far as possible and should refrain from taking

the lead in movements which must of necessity be of Asian

origin. It will therefore be to our interest wherever possible

A=55 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to encourage the peoples of India, Pakistan, the Philippines
and other Asian states to take the leadership in meeting the
common problems of the area....

"Tt would be to the interest of the United States to make
use Of the skills, knowledge and long experience of our European
friends and, to whatever extent may be possible, enlist their
cooperation in measures designed to check the spread of USSR
influence in Asia. If members of the British Commonwealth,
particularly India, Pakistan, Australia and New Zealand, can
be persuaded to join with the United Kingdom and the United
States in carrying out constructive measures of economic,
political and cultural cooperation, the results will certainly
be in our interest. Not only will the United States be able
thus to relieve itself of part of the burden, but the coopera-
tion of the white nations of the Commonwealth will arrest any
potential dangers of the growth of a white-colored polarization." 80 /

On December 30, 1949, the National Security Council met with President
Truman presiding, discussed the NSC staff study, and approved the fol-
lowing conclusions:

"As the basis for realization of its objectives, the United
States should pursue a policy toward Asia containing the following
components:

"a. The United States should make known its sympathy
with the efforts of Asian leaders to form regional associations
of non-Comnunist states of the various Asian areas, and if in
due course associations eventuate, the United States should be
prepared, if invited, to assist such associations to fulfill
their purposes under conditions which would be to our interest.
The following principles should guide our actions in this respect:

(1) Any association formed must be the result of
a genuine desire on the part of the participating nations to
cooperate for mutual benefit in solving the political, economic,
social and cultural problems of the area.

(2) The United States must not take such an active
part in the early stages of the formation of such an associa~
tion that it will be subject to the charge of using the Asiatic
nations to further United States ambitions.

(3) The association, if it is to be a constructive
force, must operate on the basis of mutual aid and self-help in
all fields so that a true partnership may exist based on equal
rights and equal obligations.

(4) United States participation in any stage of the

development of such an association should be with a view to sccom-
plishing our basic objectives in Asia and to assuring that any

A-56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

association formed will be in accord with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations dealing with regional arrange-
ments.

"b. The United States should act to develop and strengthen
the security of the area from Communist external aggression or
internal subversion. These steps should take into account any
benefits to the security of Asia which may flow from the develop-
ment of one or more regional groupings. The United States on its
own initiative should now:

(1) ‘Improve the United States position with respect
to Japan, the Ryukyus and the Philippines.

'(2) Scrutinize closely the development of threats
from Communist aggression, direct or indirect, and be prepared to
help within our means to meet such threats by providing political,
economic, and military assistance and advice where clearly needed
to supplement the resistance of the other governments in and out
of the area which are more directly concerned.

(3) Develop cooperative measures through multi-
lateral or bilateral arrangements to combat Communist internal
subversion.

(4) Appraise the desirability and the means of
developing in Asia some form of collective security arrangements,
bearing in mind the following considerations:

(a) The reluctance of India at this time to
join in any anti-Communist security pact and the influence this
will have among the other nations of Asia.

(b) The necessity of assuming that any collec-
tive security arrangements which might be developed be based on r
the principle of mutual aid and on a demonstrated desire and
ability to share in the burden by all the participating states.

(c) The necessity of assuring that any such
security arrangements would be consonant with the purposes of
any regional association which may be formed in accordance with
paragraph 3-a above.

(ad) The necessity of assuring that any such
security arrangement would be in conformity with the provisions
of Article 51 of the Charter relating to individual and collec-
tive self-defense.

"ce, The United States should encourage the creation of
an atmosphere favorable to economic recovery and development in
non-Communist Asia, and to the revival of trade along multi-
lateral, non-discriminatory lines. The economic policies of the

A-57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP. SECRET - Sensitive

United States should be adapted to promote, where possible,
economic conditions that will contribute to political stability
in friendly countries of Asia, but the United States should
carefully avoid assuming responsibility for the economic wel-
fare and development of that continent...."

Sus BGR hes

"h. The United States should continue to use its influ-
ence in Asia toward resolving the colonial-nationalist conflict
in such a way as to satisfy the fundamental demands of the
nationalist movement while at the same time minimizing the strain
on the colonial powers who are our Western allies. Particular
attention should be given to the problem of French Indo-China and
action should be taken to bring home to the French the urgency of
removing the barriers to the obtaining by Bao Dai or other non-
Communist nationalist leaders of the support of a substantial
proportion of the Vietnamese....

"i, Active consideration should be given to means by
which all members of the British Commonwealth may be induced
to play a more active role in collaboration with the United
States in Asia. Similar collaboration should be obtained to
the extent possible from other non-Comnunist nations having
interests in Asia.

"j- Recognizing that the non-Communist governments of
South Asia already constitute a bulwark against Communist
expansion in Asia, the United States should exploit every oppor-
tunity to increase the present Western orientation of the area
and to assist, within our capabilities, its governments in their
efforts to meet the minimum aspirations of their people and to
maintain internal security." 81/

Thus, in the closing months of 1949, the course of U.S. policy was
set to block further communist expansion in Asia: by collective security
if the Asians were forthcoming, by collaboration with major European
allies and commonwealth nations, if possible, but bilaterally if neces-
sary. On that policy course lay the Korean War of 1950-1953, the forming
of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization of 1954, and the progressively
deepening U.S. involvement in Vietnam.

b. The U.S. Enters the War

On December 30, 1949, the French signed over ten separate
implementing agreements relating to the transfer of internal adminis-
tration in Vietnam to Bao Dai's State of Vietnam, in accordance with the
Elysee Agreement of March 8, 1949. By January, 1950, Mao's legions had
reached Vietnam's northern frontier, and North Vietnam was moving into
the Sino-Soviet orbit. A Department of State telegram reviewed U.S.
policy as of 20 January 1950:

A-58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ee es

061 -OréL

“AD1|Og *S*Q *V
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By; NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"DEPT still hopeful Bao Dai will succeed in gaining in-
creasing popular support at Ho's expense and our policy remains
essentially the same; to encourage him and to urge FR toward
further concessions.

"The start made by Bao Dai, the qualities exhibited by hin,
and his initial reception seem to have been better than we
might have anticipated, even discounting optimism of FR sources.
Transfer of power apparently well received. FR success in dis-
arming and interning fleeing CHI Nationalists without serious
intervention to the present by CHI COMMIES also encouraging.

"However, more recently, marked opposition has been encoun-
tered which demonstrates at least that Bao Dai's popular support
has not yet widened. Increased Viet Minh MIL activity is dis-
quieting. This CLD be special effort by Ho, timed to coincide
with transfer of power and the arrival of CHI COMMIES armies on
frontier, and to precede Bangkok Conference, or CLD be evidence
of increasing strength reinforced by hopes of CHI COMMIE support,
direct or indirect.

"DEPT has as yet no knowledge of negotiations between Ho and
Mao groups although radio intercept of New China News Agency
release of JAN 17 indicates that Ho has messaged the 'GOVTS of
the world' that ‘the GOVE of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
is the only legal GOVT of the Vietnam people’ and is ‘ready to
establish DIPL relations with any GOVI which WLD be willing to
cooperate with her on the basis of equality and mutual respect
of national sovereignty and territory so as to defend world
peace and democracy. Ho's radio making similar professions....

"Nature and timing of recognition of Bao Dai now under
consideration here and with other GOVTS...." 82/ d
¥
First the Chinese Communists, and then the Soviets recognized the
DRV- On 29 January 1950, the French National Assembly approved legis-
lation granting autonomy to the State of Vietnam. On February 1, 1950,
Secretary of State Acheson made the following public statement:

"The recognition by the Kremlin of Ho Chi Minh's commun-
ist movement in Indochina comes as a surprise. The Soviet
acknowledgment of this movement should remove any illusions
as to the ‘nationalist’ nature of Ho Chi Minh's aims and
reveals Ho in his true colors as the mortal enemy of native
independence in Indochina.

"Although timed in an effort to cloud the transfer of

sovereignty by France to the legal Governments of Laos, Cambodia
and Vietnam, we have every reason to believe that those legal

A-59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

governments will proceed in their development toward stable
governments representing the true nationalist sentiments of
more than 20 million peoples of Indochina.

"French action in transferring sovereignty to Vietnam, Laos
and Cambodia has been in process for some time. Following French
ratification, which is expected within a few days, the way will
be open for recognition of these legal governments by the countries
of the world whose policies support the development of genuine
national independence in former colonial areas. Ambassador Jessup
has already expressed to Emperor Bao Dai our best wishes for
prosperity and stability in Vietnam, and the hope that closer
relationship will be established between Vietnam and the United
States." 83/

Formal French ratification of Vietnamese independence was announced
on 2 February 1950. President Truman approved U.S. recognition for
Bao Dai the same date, and on 4 February, the American Consul General
in Saigon was instructed to deliver the following message to Bao Dai:

"Your Imperial Majesty:

"I have Your Majesty's letter in which I am informed of
the signing of the agreements of March a 1949 between Your
Majesty, on behalf of Vietnam, and the President of the French
Republic, on behalf of France. My Government has also been
informed of the ratification on February 2, 1950 by the French
Government of the agreements of March 8, 1949.

"Since these acts establish the Republic of Vietnam as
an independent State within the French Union, I take this
opportunity to congratulate Your Majesty and the people of
Vietnam on this happy occasion.

"The Government of the United States of America is pleased
to welcome the Republic of Vietnam into the community of peace-
loving nations of the world and to extend diplomatic recognition
to the Government of the Republic of Vietnam. I look forward to
an early exchange of diplomatic representatives between our two
countries...." 64

Recognition of Bao Dai was followed swiftly by French requests for
U.S. aid. On May 8, 1950, Secretary of State Acheson released the fol-
lowing statement in Paris:

"The /French/ Foreign Minister and I have just had an ex-
change of views on the situation in Indochina and are in general
agreement both as to the urgency of the situation in that area
and as to the necessity for remedial action. We have noted the

A-60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

fact that the problem of meeting the threat to the security

of Viet Nam, Cambodia, and Laos which now enjoy independence
within the French Union is primarily the responsibility of
France and the Governments and peoples of Indochina. The
United States recognizes that the solution of the Indochina
problem depends both upon the restoration of security and upon
the development of genuine nationalism and that United States
assistance can and should contribute to these major objectives.

"The United States Government, convinced that neither
national independence nor democratic evolution exist in any
area dominated by Soviet imperialism, considers the situation
to be such as to warrant its according economic aid and mili-
tary equipment to the Associated States of Indochina and to
France in order to assist them in restoring stability and
permitting these states to pursue their peaceful and demo-
eratic development." 85/

On May 11, 1950, the Acting Secretary of State made the following
statement:

"A special survey mission, headed by R. Allen Griffin, has
just returned from Southeast Asia and reported on economic and
technical assistance needed in that area. Its over-all recom-
mendations for the area are modest and total in the neighborhood
of $60 million. The Department is working on plans to imple-
ment that program at once.

"Secretary Acheson on Monday in Paris cited the urgency of
the situation applying in the associates states of Viet-Nam,
Laos and Cambodia. The Department is working jointly with FCA
to impelment the economic and technical assistance recommenda-~
tions for Indochina as well as the other states of Southeast
Asia and anticipates that this program will get underway in the
immediate future.

"Military assistance for Southeast Asia is being worked out
by the Department of Defense in cooperation with the Depart-
ment of State, and the details will not be made public for
security reasons. :

"Military assistance needs will be met from the President's
emergency fund of $75 million provided under MDAP for the general
area of China.

"Keonomic assistance needs will be met from the ECA China
Aid funds, part of which both Houses of Congress have indicated
will be made available for the general area of China. Final

A-61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

legislative action is still pending on this authorization
but is expected to be completed within the next week." 86/

The United States thereafter was directly involved in the developing
tragedy in Vietnam.

A-62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

I.A.
Notes
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Slee Ne FOOTNOTES

ae

12.

13.

U.S. Department of State, Documentary History of United States Policy
Toward Indochina, 1940-1953 (Historical Office, Research Project No.

354, April, 1954) TS; see also U.S. Congress, House, Foreign Relations
of the United States Diplomatic Papers, 1944 (House Document No. 303,

1965), Ill, 769-784; Ruth B. Russell, A History of the United Nations

Charter (Washington: Brookings Institution, 1958), 173-174.

Ibid. Included in the Documentary History..., op. cit., is a Memoran-
dum of Conversation between Roosevelt and Stalin, Teheran, Noveniber 28,

1943 (SECRET). The President is said to have then considered that
a twenty-to thirty-year period would be necessary before the Indochinese
peoples would be ready for independence.

Speech of Foreign Minister Pineau, New York Times, March 5, 1956.

Russell, op. cit., 79.

Tbid., 174, quoting Cordell Hull, Memoirs, II, 1957; U.S. Department
of State, Documentary History..., Op. cit., A-10.

Ernest J. King and Walter M. Whitehill, Fleet Admiral King: A Naval
Record (1952), 569; quoted in Russell, eee ea

John Ehrman, Grand Strategy: August 1943-September 1944, vol. v. (1956),
423; quoted in Russell, op. cit., 574.

U.S. Department of State, Documentary History..., op. cit., A-16.

Extract from Stettinius Diary; quoted in U.S. State Department Study,
Documentary History..., op. cit., A-17.

William D. Leahy, I Was There (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1950), 24h, 269,

Russell, op. cit., 575.

In March 1945, the President remarked to Gen. Wedemeyer, then command-
ing officer for U.S. forces in China, "that he must watch carefully
to prevent British and French political activities in the area and
that he should give only such support to the British and French as
would be required in direct operations against the Japanese." U.S,

Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States, Diplomatic
Papers:' The Conference of Berlin (the Potsdam Conference), 1945, I,
917. |

A-63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

14. The de Gaulle representations were made orally to the U.S. Ambassa-
dor. See U.S. Department of State, telegram 1196 from Paris,
13 March, and Documentary History..., A~19, A-20.

15. Leahy, I Was There, op. cit., pp. 338-339. On the basis of
research into the Air Force archives, Bernard Fall wrote in
Street Without Joy (Harrisburg, Pa.: Stackpole, 1967, 4th ed.)
note, p. 25, that General Claire Chennault, commander of the
sth Air Force, "...Did indeed fly support missions in behalf of
the retreating French forces." /After the Japanese take-over in
March./ In his The Two Viet-Nems, moreover, Fall cited the memoirs
of General Lionel-Max Chassin, commander of the French Far Fast Air
Force, to the effect that the 14th Air Force provided supplies and
even fighter support to the French until at least April 26, 1945.
(New York: Praeger, 1967, 2nd revised ed.) n. 10, pp. 468-69. In
both books, however, Fall presents a strong case for the paucity
of U.S. aid to the French in the 1945-1946 period. See also U.S.
Department of State, Memorandum of Conversation by Assistant Secre-
tary of State Dunn, 19 March 1945, and telegram to Paris 1576 of
19 April 1945.

16. Russell, op. cit., 975.

17. Russell, op. cit., 91; quoting from Cordell Hull, The Memoirs
of Cordell Hull, 2 Vols., (New York: Macmillan Co., 1908).

18. Russell, op. cit., pp. 176-177, 573-589.

19. Ibid., 585, US Dept State, Documentary History..., op. cit., B-2,

20. U.S. Department of State, Documentary History..., op. cit., B-l.

21. U.S. Department of State, Documentary History..., op. cit., B-2, p. 2.

22. Russell, op. cit., p. 1047. ©

23. U.S. Department of State, Memorandum by the Director of the Office
of European Affairs (Matthews) to the State-War-Navy Coordinating
Committee, May 23, 1945. The proposal for a division of respon-
sibility between Chinese Nationalist and British forces was first
made by General Marshall, head of the Combined Chiefs of Staff, on
July 18, 1945. After some negotiation with Chiang Kai-shek over

the precise dividing line, the British accepted the 16th parallel;
Truman and Churchill formally agreed to the arrangement on July 2).

See Foreign Relations of the United States (Potsdam), op. ‘cits, 1.95
377, 922; and II, 1313, 1319, 1465.

A-6), TOP SECRET - Sensitive
2h.

25,
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31.

3e.

33.

34.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As for the 0.8.5., the ranking American official in northern
Vietnam in 1945, Brigadier General Philip E. Gallagher, has
attested: "...throughout the months before the Japanese capitu-
lation, 0.5.5. officers and men operated behind Japanese lines,

to arm, lead and train native guerrillas who were organized by

the Vietminh." (A situation report, undated, in the Gallagher ~
Papers, quoted in Bert Cooper, John Killigrew, and Norman LaCharite,
Case Studies in Insurgency and Revolutionary Warfare: Vietnam 1941-
1954 /Washington, D.C.: Special Operations Research Office, The
American University, 19647, p. 107-) Other sources conelude, how-
ever, that 0.8.5. assistance to the Viet Minh-led guerrillas was
extremely limited, although it gave the Viet Minh the opportunity

to proclaim that they were part of the Allied effort against the
Japanese. (See Fall, Le Viet-Minh: La Re ubligque Democratigque

du Viet-Nam /Paris: Librairie Armand Colin, 1960/, p. 3h; Cooper,
Killigrew, and LaCharité, op. cit.)

U.S. Department of State, Documentary History..., Op. cit., B-3.

U.S. Department of State, telegram from Paris 6857, 28 Novenber 1945.

U.S. Department of State, Documentary History..., op. cit., B-h,
B-6, B-9.

U.S. Department of State, Political Activities Along the South
China-Indochina Border (Office of Intelligence Research, Report

No. 4575, December 29, 1947), 5.
U.S. Department of State, Documentary History..., op. cit., B-5.

U.S. Department of State, Political Activities Along the South
China-Indochina Border, op. cit., 5. rs

U.S. Department of State, Indochina Since 1939 (Office of Intelli-

gence Research, No. 3602, 25 March 1946), 6.

U.S. Department of State, Brief on Issues in Dispute Between France
and Vietnam (Office of Intelligence Research, OIR Report No. 4303,
March 10, 1947), 6.

U.S. Department of State, Indochina Since 1939: A Factual Survey
Office of Intelligence Research, No. 3602, 25 March 196), Appendix A.
Appended to the Accords of 6 March were a series of supplementary
agreements, among which was a plan for withdrawing all French troops
within five years.

|
Tid... Tp ITs

A-65 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
35.

36.

37

39.

ho.
hi.
he,
43.
dh.
hs,
46.
LT.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In a note to the French Ambassador, of 10 April 1946, the Depart-
ment of State confirmed that: "...the Franco-Chinese agreement
completes the reversion of all of Indo-China to French control...."
and that the Combined Chiefs of Staff "offer no objection" to the
arrangement.

U.S. Department of State, Documentary History..., op. cit., B-9, B-6.
The Department of State files contain at least 6 communications from
Ho in the period September, 1945, to February, 1946, addressed to
the U.S. Government in his capacity as "President of the Provisional
Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam" or as President and Foreign
Minister of the "Provisional Government of the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam": (1) Letter to President Truman, September 29, 1950
(confidential; file 851G.00/10-1845). (2) Letter to the Secretary
of State, October 22, 1945 (from Kumming, desp. 38, October 2h, 1945,
confidential; file 851G.00/10-2445). (3) Letter to Secretary of
State, November 1, 1945 (from Chungking, desp. 890, November 26,
1945, unclassified). (4) Letter to President Truman, undated (from
Chungking, tel. 1948, November 8, 1945, confidential; file 851G.
00/11.845). (5) Letter to President Truman, January 18, 1946 (fron
Chungking, tel. 281, February 13, 1946, confidential; file 740.00119
Pw/2-1346). (6) Letter to President Truman, February 16, 1946
(unclassified file 851G.10/2-20)6).

Ibid.
U.S. Department of State, telegram to Saigon 305, December 5, 1946.
Ellen J. Hammer, The Struggle for Indochina, 1940-1955, (Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1966); p- 155. ~~CS*CS

Ibid., p. 186; Buttinger, op. cit., II, pp. 676-678.

Hammer, op. cit., p. 190.

Ibid.

Tbid., p. 186.

Tbid., p. 191.

Toid., p. 192.

Ibid., p. 193.

Ibid., pp. 193-19}.

A-66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
ho.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
D2
56.

58.

29

él.

63.
64.
65.

66.
GT.
6.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Tbid., p. 195.

Tbid., p. 197.

padi ean ho Gis

Ibid., p. 207.

Tbid., p. 20h.

Ibid., p. 199.

Ibid., p. 208.

Buttinger, op. cit., 806-807.

Chart is based on contemporary publications of the U.S. Depart-~
ment of State, Office of Intelligence Research, together with
Hammer, op. cit., and Buttinger, op. cit., passim.

U.S. Department of State telegram to Paris 6586 of 2) December
1946, CONFIDENTIAL.

U.S. Department of State telegram to Paris 75, 8 January 1947.

U.S. Department of State memorandum for Mr. Acheson, dated
8 January 1947, subject “French Indochina."

Ibid.

State Department telegram 431 to Enbassy in Paris, 3 February
1947, SECRET.

Hammer, op. cit., 20e.
U.S. Department of State telegram to Paris 1737, 13 May 1947.

U.S. Department of State telegram from Paris 3621 of 9 July 1948,
and telegram to Paris 2637 of 14 July 1948.

U.S. Department of State telegram to Paris 3368, 30 August 1948.
U.S. Department of State telegram from Paris 5129, 30 September 19h8.

U.S. Department of State telegram to Paris 145, 17 January 19h9.

A-67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

T.. A. U.S. POLICY, 1940-1950
SUMMARY

Significant misunderstanding has developed concerning U.S. policy
towards Indochina in the decade of World War II and its aftermath. A
number of historians have held that anti-colonialism governed U.S. policy
and actions up until 1950, when containment of communism supervened.

For example, Bernard Fall (e.g. in his 1967 post-mortem book, Last
Reflections On a War) categorized American policy toward Indochina in

six periods: “(l1) Anti-Vichy, 1940-1945; (2) Pro-Viet Minh, 1945-1946;

(3) Non-involvement, 1946 - June 1950; (4) Pro-French, 1950 - July 1954;
(5) Non-military involvement, 1954 ~ November 1961; (6) Direct and full
involvement, 1961 - ." Commenting that the first four periods are those
"least known even to the specialist," Fall developed the thesis that
President Roosevelt was determined "to eliminate the French from Indo-
china at all costs," and had pressured the Allies to establish an inter-
national trusteeship to administer Indochina until the nations there

were ready to assume full independence. This obdurate anti-colonialism,
in Fall's view, led to cold refusal of American aid for French resistance
fighters, and to a policy of promoting Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh as
the alternative to restoring the French bonds. But, the argument goes,
Roosevelt died, and principle faded; by late 1946, anti-colonialism
mutated into neutrality. According to Fall: "Whether this was due to

a deliberate policy in Washington or, conversely, to an absence of policy,
is not quite clear....The United States, preoccupied in Europe, ceased to
be a diplomatic factor in Indochina until the outbreak of the Korean War."
In 1950, anti-communism asserted itself, and in a remarkable volte-face,
the United States threw its economic and military resources behind France
in its war against the Viet Minh. Other commentators, conversely --
prominent among them, the historians of the Viet Minh -~ have described
U.S. policy as consistently condoning and assisting the reimposition of *
French colonial power in Indochina, with a concomitant disregard for the
nationalist aspirations of the Vietnamese.

Neither interpretation squares with the record; the United States
was less concerned over Indochina, and less purposeful than either assumes.
Ambivalence characterized U.S. policy during World War II, and was the
root of much subsequent misunderstanding. On the one hand, the U.S.
repeatedly reassured the French that its colonial possessions would be
returned to it after the war. On the other hand, the U.S. broadly com-
mitted itself in the Atlantic Charter to support national self-determination,
and President Roosevelt personally and vehemently advocated independence
for Indochina. F.D.R. regarded Indochina as e flagrant example of onerous
colonialism which should be turned over to a trusteeship rather than
returned to France. The President discussed this proposal with the Allies
at the Cairo, Teheran, and Yalta Conferences and received the endorse-
ment of Chiang Kai~shek and Stalin; Prime Minister Churchill demurred.

A-1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
69.
70.

Hide

72.

13.
Th.

5.

76.

78.
19.

80.

81.

82.
83.
8h.
85.

86.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

U.S. Department of State telegram to Saigon 77, 10 May 19h9.

U.S. Department of State telegram, Marshall 9741 to Nanking,
2 July 1948.

U.S. Department of State, Appraisal of Communist Efforts in South-
east Asia: 1948 (Office of Intelligence Research Report No. 710,

October 12, 1918), 12-13.
U.S. Department of State Bulletin, Vol. 16 (March 23, 1947), 536.
Ibid.

Committee of European Economic Cooperation, General Report, Vol. 1
(U.S. Department of State Publication 2930, 1947), 13.

Congressional Record, Vol. 94, Part VI, 80th Congress, 2a Session,
7191.

Charles Wolf, Jr., Foreign Aid: Theory and Practice in Southern
Asia (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 19 » 40-52.

Ibid., 53-5.

Documents on American Foreign Relations, 1949, 626.

Memorandum for the Executive Secretary, National Security Council,
from the Secretary of Defense, dated June 10, 19h9, subject:
United States Policy toward Asia.

A Report to the National Security Council by the Executive Secre-
tary on "The Position of the United States with Respect to Asia"
(NSC 48/1, December 23, 1949).

A report to the President by the National Security Council on

"The Position of the United States with Respect to Asia" (NSC 48/2,
December 30, 1949).

U.S. Department of State, telegram to Saigon 25, January 20, 1950.
U.S. Department of State, Press Release No. 10h, February 1, 1950.
U.S. Department of State telegram to Saigon 59, February 4, 1950.

Background Information Relating to Southeast Asia and Vietnam, Com-

mittee on Foreign Relations, March 1966, p. 30.

U.S. Department of State, Documentary History..., op. cit., B-48.

A-68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

eH

“@

SMI eA St
yO 4@M0g pud
JOJODIDYT) SUL

re

Ht
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I. B.

THE CHARACTER AND POWER OF THE VIET MINH
SUMMARY

One of the recurrent themes of criticism of U.S. policy in Vietnam
has been that from the end of World War II on, there was a failure to
recognize that the Viet Minh was the principal vehicle for Vietnamese
nationalism and that it, in fact, was in control of and effectively
governing all of Vietnam. Evidence on issues like popularity and con-
trol is always somewhat suspect--especially when dealing with an exotic
country like Vietnam at a time when what Americans knew about it was
largely dependent on French sources. Nonetheless, some generalizations
can be made and supported.

First, the Viet Minh was the main repository of Vietnamese nationalism
and anti-French colonialism. There were other such groups promoting Viet
independence but none were competitive on a country-wide scale. It is
also true that the disciplined, well-organized, and well-led Indochinese
Communist Party was the controlling element in the Viet Minh. The Icp
was not, however, in the numerical majority either in total membership
or in leadership posts held. This gap between control and numbers can
be explained by two factors: (a) ICP strategy was to wify nationalist
elements to achieve the immediate objective of independence; and (b) the
other components of the Viet Minh were sizable enough to fractionalize
the whole movement. In other words, from World War II on, the ICP was
strong enough to lead, but not to dominate Vietnamese nationalism.

Second, the Viet Minh was sufficiently popular and effective to
turn itself into a Vietnam-wide government that could have extended its
authority throughout the country after World War II--except for the
obstacle of reasserted French power, and, to a lesser degree, of indi-
genous political opposition in Cochinchina. The Viet Minh was always
more powerful in Tonkin and Annam than in South Vietnam. However, it
seems likely that in the absence of the French, the Viet Minh through
its governmental creation, the DRV, would have overridden indigenous
tribal, religious, and other opposition in short order.

Vietnamese nationalism developed three types of political parties
or movements:

Reform parties. Narrowly based among the small educated Viet-

namese elite, these parties made little pretense at representing the
masses of the peasantry--except in the ancient mandarinal sense of

B-1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

paternal leadership. In general, they advocated reform of the relation-
ship between France and Vietnam to establish an independent and united
nation, but would neither sever beneficial bonds with the metropole, nor
alter drastically the Vietnamese social structure. Members included
many men of impeccable repute and undoubted nationalist convictions--
among them Ngo Dinh Diem--but also a number of known opportunist and
corrupt Vietnamese. The reformist parties were further discredited by
collaboration with the Japanese during World War II. These parties
formed the basis for the "Bao Dai solution" to which France and the

U.S. gravitated in the late 1940's.

Theocratic parties. In Cochinchina--and almost exclusively
there--during the 1930's there emerged religious sects commanding firm
loyalties of hundreds of thousands of peasants. Two of these--the Cao
Dai and the Hoa Hao~-aspired to temporal as well as spiritual power,
fielded armed forces, and formed local governments. They opposed both
French political and cultural hegemony, and domination by other Vietnamese
parties. Some elements collaborated openly with the Japanese during
1940-1945. Because these parties were of local and religious character,
any parallel with other Viet political organizations would be inexact.
These movements account in large measure for the distinctive character
of South Vietnamese nationalism as compared with that of Annam or Tonkin.

Revolutionary parties. The numerous remaining Vietnamese polit-
ical parties fall into the revolutionary category: they advocated Viet-
nam's independence from France and some degree of radical reorganization
of the Viet polity. Their political coloration ranged from the deep
red of the Saigon-centered Trotskyites (who advocated anti-imperialist
revolution throughout the world, and within Vietnam, expropriation for
the workers and peasants) through the less violent hues of communism
and Kuomintang~styled nationalism, to the indistinct, eclectic nationalism
of the Binh Xuyen criminal fraternity (another Saigon phenomenon) . Only
two of these movements developed a Vietnam-wide influence: the Indochinese
Communist Party (IcP), and the Vietnam Nationalist Party (VNQDD). Both
these parties were troubled throughout their history by factionalism, and
by repeated (French police) purges. Both aspired to politicizing the
peasants; neither wholly succeeded. Of the two, the ICP consistently
demonstrated the greater resiliency and popularity, attributable to
superior conspiratorial doctrine and technique, and to more coherent
and astute leadership. Both the ICP and the VIQDD figured in peasant
uprisings in 1930-1931, and 1940-1941. ach played a role in the Viet-
namese resistance against the Vichy French and the Japanese during World
War II: the ICP as the nucleus of the Viet Minh, and the VNQDD as the
principal component of the Chinese Nationalist-sponsored Dong Minh Hoi.

The Viet Minh--Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi, League for the Inde-
pendence of Vietnam--came into being in May, 1941, at the 8th Plemm
of the Indochinese Communist Party, held in South China. It was formed
as a “united front" organization with Ho Chi Minh at its head, and was

B-2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

initially composed of the ICP, Revolutionary Youth League, the New
Vietnam Party, and factions of the Vietnam Nationalist Party (VNQUD).
Membership was held open to any other individuals or groups willing to
join in struggling for "national liberation." The announced program

of the Viet Minh called for a wide range of social and political reforms
designed mainly to appeal to Viet patriotism. Enphasis was placed on
an anti-Japanese crusade and preparation for "an insurrection by the
organization of the people into self-defense corps," not on communist
cant.

Though a Kuomintang general originally sponsored the Viet Minh,
Ho soon became suspect, and in 1942 was jailed by the Chinese. While
he was in prison, probably to offset the Viet Minh's growing appeal, and
to assure tighter Chinese control of the Vietnamese, the KMT fostered a
rival Viet "popular front," the Vietnam Revolutionary League (Dong Minh
Hoi), which was based on the VNQDD, the Great Vietnam Netionalist Party
(Dai Viet), and a number of smaller groups, but was Supposed to include
the Viet Minh. In fact, however, the Dong Minh Hoi never acquired more
than a nominal control over the Viet Minh. In 1943, Ho was released
from prison and put in charge of the Dong Minh Hoi-~-a status apparently
conditioned on his accepting overall Chinese guidance and providing the
allies with intelligence. But as the war progressed, Ho and the Viet
Minh drew apart from the Dong Minh Hoi, and the latter never succeeded
in acquiring apparatus within Vietnam comparable to the Viet Minh's.

During the war, some Vietnamese political parties collaborated with
the Japanese or the Vichy French. These were put at a disadvantage during
and after the war in competition with the ICP, the Viet Minh, or the
Dong Minh Hoi--all of which developed an aura of unwavering faith to
resistance against all foreign domination. But only the ICP and the
Viet Minh established their reputations by extensive wartime operations
among the people of Vietnam. In Cochinchina, up until surfacing in
April 1945, the ICP continued to operate largely underground and without
much regard for the Viet Minh mantle; in Annam and Tonkin, however, all
ICP undertakings were given Viet Minh identity. Throughout Vietnam, the
IcP initiated patient political action: the dissemination of propaganda,
the training of cadres, the establishment of a network of cells dow to
hamlet level. The ICP was during the war the hard core of the Viet Minh,
but the bulk of the Viet Minh membership were no doubt quite unaware of
that fact: they served the Viet Minh out of a patriotic fervor.

The American 0.S.S. during World War II dealt with the Viet Minh
as the sole efficient resistance apparatus within Vietnam, depending
upon it for reliable intelligence, and for aid in assisting downed allied
pilots. However, the Viet Minh itself assigned priority to political
tasks ahead of these military missions. The first permanent Viet Minh
bases were established in 1942-43 in the mountains north of Hanoi. Only
after its political network was well established did it field its first
guerrilla forces, in September 1943. The first units of the Viet Minh
Liberation Army came into being on December 22, 1944, and there is little

B-3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

evidence of large scale, concerted guerrilla operations until after
"March 1945.

At the end of 19, the Viet Minh claimed a total membership of

_ 500,000, of which 200,000 were in Tonkin, 150,000 in Annam, and 150, 000
in Cochinchina. The Viet Minh political and military structure was
significantly further developed in North Vietnam. In May 1945, a Viet
Minh "liberated zone" was established near the Chinese border. As the
war drew to a close the Viet Minh determined to preempt allied oceupa-
tion, and to form a government prior to their arrival. The Viet Minh
ability to do so proved better in the north than in the south. In
August 1945, Ho Chi Minh's forces seized power from the Japanese and
Bao Dai in North Vietnam, forced the emperor to abdicate, and to cede
his powers to Ho's Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV). In Cochinchina,
however, the Viet Minh were able to gain only tenuous control of Saigon
and its environs. Nonetheless, when the allies arrived, the Viet Minh
were the de facto government in both North and South Vietnam: Ho Chi
Minh and his DRV in Hanoi, and an ICP-dominated "Committee of the South"
in Saigon.

On 12 September 1945, the British landed a Gurkha battalion and a
company of Free French soldiers in Saigon. The British commander regarded
the Vietnamese government with disdain because of its lack of authority
from the French and because of its inability to quell civil disorder in
South Vietnam. Saigon police clashed with Trotskyites, and in the rural
areas, fighting broke out between Viet Minh troops and those of Cao Dai
and Hoa Hao. Spreading violence rendered futile further attempts to
draw together the Vietnamese factions, and prompted the French to impor-
tune the British commander to permit them to step in to restore order.

On the morning of 23 September, French troops overthrew the Vietnamese
government after a tenure of only three weeks. The official British
account termed the French method of executing the coup d'etat "unfortunate"
in that they "absolutely ensured that countermeasures would be taken by
the /Vietnamese/...." Vietnamese retaliation was quick and violent:

over one hundred Westerners were slain in the first few days, and others
kidnapped; on 26 September, the U.S. commander of the 0.S.S, in Saigon

was killed. Thus, the first Indochina War began in Cochinchina in late
September, 1945, and American blood was shed in its opening hours.

At that juncture, the ICP in Cochinchina was in a particularly
vulnerable position. The ICP had permitted the Viet Minh to pose as an
arm of the Allies; and had supported cooperation with the British and
amnesty for the French. The Party had even undertaken, through the
Committee of the South, to repress the Trotskyites. But violence under-
mined its advocacy of political moderation, of maintaining public order,
.and of negotiations with the French. Further, the ICP in Saigon was
assured by French communists that they would receive no assistance from
Party brethren abroad. The French coup d'etat thrust conflict upon the
Vietnamese of Cochinchina.- The question before the communists was how
to respond; the ICP leadership determined that violence was the sole

B-) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

recourse, and that to maintain leadership of the nationalist movement
in South Vietnam they had to make the Viet Minh the most unbending foe
of compromise with the French.

The situation in all of Vietnam at the end of the war was confused--
neither the French, nor the Viet Minh, nor any other group exercised
clear authority. While the Viet Minh was far and away the single most
powerful Vietnamese organization, and while it claimed dominion over all
Vietnam, its authority was challenged in the North by the Chinese and in
the South by the British. The French position was patently more tenuous
than that of the Viet Minh until 9 October 1945. On that date, France
and the UK concluded an agreement whereby the British formally recognized
French civil administration in Indochina and ceded its occupation rights
to France south of the 16th parallel. This ceding of authority in the
South did not, as a practical matter, ensure French rule. With only
35,000 French soldiers in South Vietnam, the Viet Minh and other parties
were well able to contest the French.

Viet Minh authority in Annam and Tonkin was less ambiguous, but by
no means unchallenged. In the North, the salient political fact of life
for the Viet Minh was the presence of the Chinese Nationalist Army of
Occupation numbering 50,000 men. Through this presence, the Chinese were
able to force the Viet Minh to accommodate Chinese~Viet Nationalists
within the DRV and to defer to Chinese policy in other respects. The
resultant situation in North Vietnam in the autumn of 1945 is depicted
in the map on page B-41.

The Viet Minh had to go further still in accommodating the wishes
of the Chinese. In setting up the DRV government of 2 September 1945,
pro-Chinese, non-Viet Minh politicians were included, and the ICP took
only 6 of 16 cabinet posts. On 11 November 1945, the Viet Minh leader-
ship went even further, and formally dissolved the ICP in the interest
of avoiding "misunderstandings." Even this, however, was not sufficient.
Compelled by opposition demands, Ho agreed to schedule national elections,
for January of 1946. The results of these elections were arranged before-
hand with the major opposition parties, and the Assembly thus "elected"
met on 2 March 1946. This Assembly approved a new DRV government, with
the ICP holding only 2 of 12 cabinet posts. :

By then, France was ready to pose a stronger challenge. French
reinforcements had arrived in Indochina, so that Paris could contemplate
operations in North Vietnam as well as in Cochinchina. In early 19h6,
the Chinese turned over their occupation rights in the North to France.
Faced with increased French military power and Chinese withdrawal, and
denied succor from abroad, Ho decided that he had no recourse save to
negotiate with the French. On 6 March 1946, Ho signed an Accord with
the French providing for French re-entry into Vietnam for five years in
return for recognizing the DRV as a free state within the French union.

B=5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This Accord taxed Ho's popularity to the utmost, and it took all
Ho's prestige to prevent open rebellion. On 27 May 1946, Ho countered
these attacks by merging the Viet Minh into the Lien Viet, a larger, :
more embracing "national front." Amity within the Lien Viet, however,
lasted only as long as the Chinese remained in North Vietnam. When
they withdrew a few weeks later, in mid-June, the Viet Minh, supported
by French troops, attacked the Dong Minh Hoi and the VNQDD, as "enemies
of the peace," effectively suppressed organized opposition, and asserted
Viet Minh control throughout North Vietnam.

But even this ascendancy proved transitory. Ho Chi Minh, though
he tried hard, was unable to negotiate any durable modus vivendi with
the French in the-summer and fall of 1946. In the meantime, the DRV
and the Viet Minh were drawn more and more under the control of the
"Marxists" of the former ICP. For example, during the session of the
DRV National Assembly in November, nominal opposition members were
whittled down to 20 out of more than 300 seats, and a few "Marxists"
dominated the proceedings. Nonetheless, the DRV government maintained
at least a facade of coalition. A chart (pp. B51-55) of its leadership
during 1945-1949 illustrates that through 1949, ICP members remained in
the minority, and nominally oppositionist VNQDD and Dong Minh Hoi politi-
cians were consistently included.

Although the Cochinchina war continued throughout 1946, with the
Viet Minh assuming a leading role in resistance, war in North Vietnam
did not break out until December, 1946. A series of armed clashes in
November were followed by a large scale fighting in Hanoi in late December.
The DRV government took to the hills to assume the status of shadow state.
The Viet Minh transformed itself back into a semi-covert resistance organ-
ization and committed itself throughout the nation to the military defeat
of the French. During the opening year of the war, 1947, the Viet Minh
took steps to restore its image as a popular, patriotic, anti-foreign
movement, and again to play down the ICP role in its leadership. The
DRV government was reorganized and prominent communists excluded. As
the Viet Minh gathered strength over the years, however, these same
leaders reentered the DRV government.

In February 1951, addressing the Congress of the Vietnamese Communist
Party (Lao Dong), Ho Chi Minh stated that the Communist Party had formed
and led the Viet Minh, and founded and ruled the DRV. When the French
colonialists reappeared in South Vietnam and a Nationalist Chinese-
sponsored government seemed in prospect in North Vietnam, Ho averred,
the Party went underground, and entered into agreements with the French:

"Tenin said that even if a compromise with bandits was
advantageous to the revolution, he would do it...."

B-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But Ho's explanation notwithstanding, the Viet Minh was irrefutably
nationalist, popular, and patriotic. It was also the most prominent and
successful vehicle of Viet nationalism in the 1940's. Toa degree it was
always non-communist. Available evidence indicates, however, that from
its inception, Ho Chi Minh and his lieutenants of the Indochinese Com-
munist Party conceived its strategy, directed its operations, and channeled
its energies consistent with their own goals-~as they subsequently claimed.
Whether the non~communist elements of the Viet Minh might have become
dominant in different circumstances must be relegated to speculation.

It seems clear that, as matters developed, all of the non-communist
nationalist movements--reformist, theocratic, or revolutionary--were too
localized, too disunited, or too tainted with Japanese or Nationalist
Chinese associations to have competed successfully with the ICP for con-
trol of the Viet Minh. And none could compete effectively with the Viet
Minh in gaining a following among Vietnam's peasants.

Bot TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

We Bs iF
THE CHARACTER AND POWER OF THE VIET MINH
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Origins of the Viet Minh.......ss+.eee. cishe ial eyeteiee\esbis is sera ee rel ieee ee
a. Pre-World War II Vietnamese Political Movements.......ceccce«

(1) The Political Situation During the
L920."s and! U9S0%8y pe sees alga vive, ashe eh ptetoss aie pe te Seeeer ite ae

(2) The Vietnamese Nationalist Party.....-scoscceccece.

(3) The Primacy of the Indochinese
Communist POST Garayiet nalniabel aber abe (Gl arale ainiehs cater stealer acetone et tTe

b. World War II and the Viet Minh......-. Der oo REO er 6 Sua welch aoe al tee
(1) Formation of the Independence League, 1941........

(2) Component Parties and Prograit....seccccscccecseces

(3) Competitive Darhedecte ws dasaveae cease Sine coe

ba en Dorey MEME HOt 6 dass apt cmnn aes sao me xw eae

(pb). Collaborator Partics. ..ci0s sss act so sds Bec bie oe

Pe) CUPSteyssht 1076-00 ade ewe ees areca Bars

(4) Viet Minh Operations in Vietnam......... sSoata fenae te
(5), The Liberation of North Vietnam....cscsscccccscees

(6) The Liberation of South Vietnam....c.sscceccccoes

eeenren

ern eee

serene

eeeenar

eeeenee

eeeerene

eefeeee

eeeeen

eneene

ee eenee

B-11

B-20
B-22
B-22

B-23

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

At one point, Fall reports, the President offered General de Gaulle
Filipino advisers to help France establish a "more progressive policy
in Indochina" -- which offer the General received in "pensive silence."

Ultimately, U.S. policy was governed neither by the principles of
the Atlantic Charter, nor by the President's anti-colonialism, but by
the dictates of military strategy, and by British intransigence on the
colonial issue. The United States, concentrating its forces against
Japan, accepted British military primacy in Southeast Asia, and divided
Indochina at 16th parallel between the British and the Chinese for the
purposes of occupation. U.S. commanders serving with the British and
Chinese, while instructed to avoid ostensible alignment with the French,
were permitted to conduct operations in Indochina which did not detract
from the campaign- against Japan. Consistent with F.D.R.'s guidance, the
U.S. did provide modest aid to French-~and Viet Minh--resistance forces
in Vietnam after March, 1945, but refused to provide shipping to move
. Free French troops there. Pressed by both the British and the French
for clarification of U.S. intentions regarding the political status of
Indochina, F.D.R. maintained that "it is a matter for postwar."

The President's trusteeship concept foundered as early as March
1943, when the U.S. discovered that the British, concerned over possi-
ble prejudice to Commonwealth policy, proved to be unwilling to join
in any declaration on trusteeships, and indeed any statement endorsing
national independence which went beyond the Atlantic Charter's vague
"respect the right of all peoples to choose the form of government
under which they will live." So sensitive were the British on this
point that the Dumbarton Oaks Conference of 194), at which the blue-
print for the postwar international system was negotiated, skirted the
colonial issue, and avoided trusteeships altogether. At each key
decisional point at which the President could have influenced the
course of events toward trusteeship -= in relations with the U.K., in
casting the United Nations Charter, in instructions to allied com-
manders -- he declined to do so; hence, despite his lip service to
trusteeship and anti-colonialism, F.D.R. in fact assigned to Indochina
a status correlative to Burma, Malaya, Singapore and Indonesia: free
territory to be reconquered and returned to its former owners. Non-
intervention by the U.S. on behalf of the Vietnamese was tantamount
to acceptance of the French return. On April 3, 1945, with President
Roosevelt's approval, Secretary of State Stettinius issued a statement
that, as a result of the Yalta talks, the U.S. would look to trustee-
ship as a postwar arrangement only for "territories taken from the
enemy,” and for "territories as might voluntarily be placed under trust-
eeship." By context, and by the Secretary of State's subsequent inter-
pretation, Indochina fell into the latter category. ‘Trusteeship status
for Indochina became, then, a matter for French determination.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

is, (df THE CHARACTER AND POWER OF THE VIET MINH

1. Origins of the Viet Minh

a. Pre-World War II Vietnamese Political Movements

(1) The Political Situation During the 1920's and 1930's

In eighty years of French domination of Vietnam there
had been no increase in per-acre yield of rice, so that the comparative
fertility of Vietnam's fields were, in 1940, the lowest in the world. i/
Viet population increased at double the expansion in rice production from
cultivating new land. Thus, French contentions that their imperium had
uplifted the Vietnamese notwithstanding, there is no evidence that they
improved popular diet, or solved the problem of recurrent famine. In
fact, the rural peasants were in 19h0 socially disadvantaged in compari-
son with their ancestors, in that the pre-colonial mandarinal society with
its subsistence economy had better provided for their basic political,
economic and social needs. Moreover, the neomercantilism of France had,
in fact, given the Bangue d'Indochine a key role in colonial policy. ‘The
Banque was a virtual French monopoly, nearly as baleful an influence over
the Vietnamese as the communists depicted it; at least, with the colonial
administration, it defended the French economic position through blocking
Vietnamese social and political mobility. Vietnamese entered legitimate
domestic businesses under severe handicaps, and were all but foreclosed
from foreign commerce. Few descriptions of pre-World War II Vietnam by
non-French authors fail to portray a colonialism like that depicted by
Karl Marx. For example, the Austrian-American authority, Joseph Buttinger,
characterized the state of Viet society and politics in the late 1930's
as follows:

"Pauperization was the lot of most peasants and of all
tenants, not only in overpopulated Tongking and Annam, but also
in Cochinchina,, which was so much richer than the other four
Indochinese states that it contributed 40 per cent to the general
budget. The economic burdens of French rule, according to a
contemporary English writer, ‘were shouldered principally by the
rural population, and the fiscal demands, together with the in-
creasing birthrate, led to a progressive pavperization of the
countryside, a process illustrated by the fact that rural in-
debtedness in Cochinchina alone increased from 31 million pias-
ters in 1900 to 134 million piasters in 1930.'

"There is, however, no more devastating verdict on the
failure of the French to combat rural poverty than the dry state-
ment of another French authority on living conditions in Vietnan.
‘It is only in periods of intense agricultural labor,' wrote
E. Lerich in a study published in 1942, 'which means during

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

one-third of the year and particularly during the harvest, that
the people have enough to eat.’

"The peasant's painful efforts, wrote an exceedingly tame
Vietnamese nationalist during the 1920's, are not rewarded with
sufficient well-being, so he ‘dreams of more happiness, of more
justice.’ There can be no doubt that he did. But what the
moderate nationalists failed to see was that by 1930, a great
many peasants were ready to proceed from dream to action. They
would now have listened to any party whose leaders were ready
to make the troubles of the poor their chief political concern.
This, unfortunately, was grasped only by the communists. When
they proclaimed that the struggle for independence could have
meaning for the poor only if independence aimed at improving
their social condition, the communists had won the first round
in their fight for leadership of the nationalist camp." 2/

Communists were, however, not the only Vietnamese political movement
actively seeking to change the French colonial relationship. Three cate-
gories of political forces can be identified:

Principal Vietnamese Political Movements, 1920 - 19h0
with Dates of Activation) 3
Parties Advocating Reform of the French System

Constitutionalist Party (1923)

Vietnam People's Progressive Party (1923)
Democratic Party (1937)

Socialist Party (1936)

Theocratic Movements

Cao Daism (1920)
Hoa Hao-ism (1939) 17

Parties Advocating Revolution and National Independence

Vietnam Nationalist Party (1927)

Vietnam Revolutionary Party (1927) - disbanded 1930
New Vietnam Revolutionary Party (1928) - disbanded 1930
Indochinese Communist Party (1930)

Trotskyist Movement (1931)

Vietnam Restoration League (1931)

The reformist parties were strongest in Cochinchina. There the French
administered directly rather than through Vietnamese as in Annam or Tonkin,
and, apparently feeling more secure in their control, tolerated in the South
open Vietnamese political activism prohibited in central and north Vietnam.
Nonetheless, no reformist movements acquired a popular base, and a1] were
moribund at the start of World War II.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-10
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The theocratic movements were also Cochinchinese phenomena, but,
unlike the reformist parties, commanded wide popular support. Cao Daism
swiftly took hold in the late 20's and 30's, and became a genuine political
force among the peasants in Tay Ninh Province (northwest of Saigon) and
in the Mekong Delta. The Hoa Hao movement grew even more rapidly from
its inception in the late 30's among the peasants of the Delta southwest
of Saigon.

The revolutionary parties were, by contrast, concentrated chiefly
in the North, their more radical and conspiratorial complexion reflecting
both necessity -~ given the repressive policies of the French and the
mandarins through whom they ruled -- and foreign intellectual influences,
especially those emanating from China, and from the universities in Hanoi
and Hue, All the revolutionary parties were active among Vietnamese liv-
ing abroad. The Vietnamese Restoration League was chiefly based in Japan
(and eventually became the Japanese backed vehicle for Vietnamese entry
into the Greater Kast Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere). The remainder were
‘principally Chinese based, and strongly influenced by Sun Yat Sen's
philosophy, Chiang Kai Shek's Kuomintang, and Mao Tse Tung's Chinese Com-
munist Party. Of the group, only the Indochinese Communist Party and the
Vietnamese Nationalist Party achieved real political power, but not even

, these were successful in dislodging French control; a brief recounting of
their failures, however, reveals much concerning the political antecedents
of modern Vietnam.

(2) The Vietnamese Nationalist Party (VNQDD)

The Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang (VNQDD) was formed in 1927
chiefly out of dissatisfaction among young Vietnamese with movements,
such as the ineffectual Revolutionary Association and the early communist
organizations, which were dominated by men of mandarinal of alien intellec-
tual backgrounds. The VNQDD prided itself on identification with the
Vietnamese peasantry, and modeled itself after the Kuomintang: cellular
and covert, advocating Sun Yat Sen's program of "Democracy, Nationalism,
and Socialism." As the diagram (Figure 1) 4/ indicates, the history of
the Nationalist Party is one of fragmentation -- both from factional dis-
putes and from French counter-action -- and merger with other movements.
In a fashion appealing to a people who value historic lineage, the
Nationalist Party traced its origins to one of the few modern Vietnamese
national heroes, Phan Boi Chau; to a Viet movement in Yunnan under Fhan
Boi Chau's disciple, Le Phu Hiep; and to a Kuomintang-oriented Vietnamese
publishing house called the Annamese Library. The Nationalists initially
were & Tonkin party, but became allied with the Vietnam Revolutionary
Party of Annam (and, in a minor fashion, the same party in Cochinchina).
The relationship never amounted to much more than liaison, and the
Nationalists remained Tonkin-centered. There, however, they acquired
a@ Significant following, and succeeded in forming a number of cells among
Vietnamese serving in the French armed forces. In 1930 the Nationalist
Party leader, Nguyen Thai Hoc, ordered a mass uprising against the French.
On February 10, 1930, the insurrection began with a mutiny of troops at

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

HISTORY OF THE VIETNAM NATIONALIST PARTY
TOP SECRET - Sensitige—————

PHAN BO! CHAU
SUPPORTERS

a he” a ea LEAGUE OF
EUNEMESE LE gic HIEP OFPRESSED 1925
LYBRAR) SUPPORTERS : ORIENTAL
' PEOPLES
ee Sen th Sarg 57
| YURNAN CANTON
VIETNAM
NAT.LONALIST 7 FaaK
PARTY
REVOLUTIONARY | VIETNAM
: ETNAM ’ 1$28
SING VIETNAM REVOLUTIONARY
MILITARY LEAGUE PARTY
~ Broken up by - : im —_
police action VIETNAM Nhat
RR foe ean, Peli a epi ee NATLONALIST NATIONALIST 1926
ars ae REVOLUTIONARY
ne = pee Co

VIETNAM VIETNAM INDOCHINESE
KATIONALIST PARTY NATICNALIST PROVISIONAL
PARTY OVERNMENT

KANKIKG OVERSEAS BUREAU
be — —— — VIETNAM NATIONALIST PARTY Meee
5 ~
/
~

/ ~ t joe
/ ae ee
/ = I
, Fi Bi i)
eee = Soe i ee ee, Se r
GREaT VIETNAM GREAT VIETNAM ETNAM NATIONALIST ;
NATIONALIST PARTY DEMOCRATIC PARTY PARTY (China) 1980
2a ES. ee
z as VEE Tan pou)
oss Ses a
SSEAT VIETNAM f evatitionectn 1942
NATIGNALIST ASSOCIATION 1945
VIETNAM
REVOLUTIONARY
LEAGUE
Pie ree eee rooted | ae 2d ee 1946
Ween VIETNAM year VIETNAM '
i alate HATIGNALIST a UENO REVOLUTIONARY
NATIONALIST PARTY PEORIA LEAGUE
FARHY (tre-Ho cht Mink) EN Loroshnleh :

=

Fl . V7 1947

(tro-Bao Dad) DISSOLVED {pro-Sao Pai) : .
Figure 1 rug

: B-le : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Yen Bay, and spread throughout Tonkin. The French reaction was quick,
efficient and severe. Nguyen Thai Hoc was captured and executed, along
with hundreds of lesser Nationalists; others fled to China. By 1932,
Nationalist Party remnants within Vietnam had been hounded into activity,
and the Party thereafter centered on the exile community in China. By
1940, in a series of factional struggles, three main branches evolved:

& pro-Japanese faction called the Great Vietnam Democratic Party (Dai
Viet Dan Chinh); a faction re-established in Vietnam called the Great Viet-
nam Nationalist Party (Dai Viet Quoc Dan Dang); and a Kunming faction
under Vu Khong Kanh bearing the original VNQDD name. The latter group
survived the war, and became important in its aftermath.

(3) he Primacy of the Indochinese Communist Party

The disunity, vulnerability, and meanderings of the
Nationalist Party -- notwithstanding its relative effectiveness compared
with most other parties -- stands in contrast with the solidarity and
resiliency of the Indochinese Communist Party (ICP). The main unifying
factor of the communist movement was Ho Chi Minh, and the coterie of dedi-
cated revolutionaries, most of whom he personally recruited, trained, and
led. But important as was such leadership, doctrine an@ discipline also
figured in communist success. Ho (then known as Nguyen Ai Quoc) partici-
pated in the founding of the French Communist Party, and after training
in Moscow, formed the Vietnam Revolutionary Youth League in Canton, pri-
marily nationalist in announced aims (Figure 2).5/ In its journal in
1926, however, Ho wrote that: "Only a communist party can insure the
well-being of Annam," and he apparently began about that time training
cadres for covert operations. By 1929, some 250 Vietnamese had been
trained in Canton, and at least 200 had returned to Indochina to undertake
organizational work; as of that year, some 1000 reported commmists and
collaborators indicated that 10% were in Cochinchina, some 20% in Annam,
and the remainder in Tonkin. 6/ In 1929 communists sought fusion with
the New Vietnam Revolutionary Party, and attacked the Nationalist Party
(VN@DD) as a “bourgeois party." That same year, a faction of the Revolu-
tionary Youth League formed an Indochinese Communist Party (Dong Duong
Cong San Dang), the first to bear the title. In 1930 the Revolutionary
Youth League, some members of the socialist Nguyen An Ninh Association,
and the exiled Annam Communist Party joined with the latter faction into
first the Vietnam Communist Party, and then -- per Comintern wishes to
broaden the party to embrace Laos and Cambodia ~- a reorganized Indochinese
Communist Party, which was recognized by the Comintern.

In the Nationalist-precipitated violence of 1930, about 1000 ICP mem-
bers led 100,000 peasants in strikes, demonstrations, and open insurrec-
tion. In Ho's home province of Nghe An, peasant soviets were set ups
jJandlords were killed, and large estates broken up -- methods so violent,
so tainted with pillage and murder, that the Comintern objected that they
were not in consonance with "organized violence” of Marxist doctrine. Wii
Again, however, French counteraction was swift and telling. French police
destroyed overt apparatus of the ICP in Vietnam during 1930 ana 1931, and

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-13
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

DEYELGOPMENT OF COMMUNIST OR GANIZATIONS 18 INDOCHINA, 1921-3

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
PHTERCOLORIAL UNIGH |

(Faris) 1921
VIETKAVESE SECTION

a PS Ee

VEETHAM WHAMPOA VIETHAM ORIENTAL
RESTORATION MILITARY REVOLUTIONARY WORKERS 1925
(Phuc Fiet) ACADEMY "YOUTH LEAGUE SCHOOL
Canton.
ie VIETNAM 1926
RESTORATION
(Fung Fan)
z NEW VIETHAM
‘ A PARTY a
Renee SOUTH SEAS
; Since Fe aa COMMUNIST PARTY (927
BENE MULE ARY VIETNAMESE SECTION
PARTY
2 i
VIETHAM : NGUYEN
REVOLUTIONARY AN NIRS
YOUTH ASSOCIATION
LEAGUE gh %
»
NEW VIETNAM 1923
REVOLUTICNARY
PARTY
Wied cate seu
INCOCKINESE ; VIETNAM IRDOCHINESE
COMMUNIST REVOLUTIGKARY COMMUNIST 1929
PARTY :

ALLIANCE YOUTH LEAGUE

ANAM
COMMUNIST PARTY
; VIETH ATH
a aS. ee CONMUR TST SS ie eo 1930
PARTY :

IRECCH INESE

COMMUNIST 193¢-31

PARTY
(Recognized by Coninters}

Figure 2
B- 1 _'* MOP 'SECRET'- Sensitive
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

on their request, Ho Chi Minh was arrested by the British in Hong Kong.
Attempts at party reorganization in 1932 were met by renewed police re-
pression, and not until 1933 were communists again permitted political
activity of any sort. The party, however, did revive, establishing a
new foothold in more permissive Cochinchina, under Tran Van Giau

(Figure 3). 8/ ‘ran there formed the League Against Imperialism, a
front organization specifically non-violent in its program designed to
attract support from the political center and right. In 1935, following
the Comintern Seventh World Congress, the ICP centered itself on Saigon,
and launched an Indochinese Congress "Democratic Front," paralleling the
communists’ Popular Front movement in metropolitan France. Almost imme-
diately, however, Trotskyite elements, advocating “permanent revolution,"
split with the ICP leadership, and began to press an independent, more
revolutionary line.

The Trotskyites were divided within themselves into the "Struggle"
Group and the "October" Group, differing mainly in the degree to which
they countenanced cooperation with the ICP. In 1937 a Trotskyite candi-
date, Tu Thu Thau, together with an ICP leader, Nguyen Van Tao, was
elected to the Saigon Municipal Council. By 1939 Trotskyite elements
had drawn together into one party, and that year a Trotskyite slate won
80% of votes cast in a Cochinchinese election -- a severe defeat for the
ICP which led Nguyen Van Tao to set up another communist splinter party.

The divisions within the communist movement of Vietnam during the
1930's, as well as the ICP willingness to subordinate its doctrinal ab-
horrence of both the French and the bourgeoisie for short term goals,
are evident in the following report on "The Party's Line in the Period
of the Democratic Front (1936-1939)" submitted by Nguyen Ai Quoc (alias
of Ho Chi Minh) in July, 1939:

"1. For the time being, the Party cannot put forth too
high a demand (national independence, parliament, etc.). To
do so is to enter the Japanese fascists’ scheme. It should
only claim for democratic rights, freedom of organization, free- r
dom of assembly, freedom of press and freedom of speech, general
amnesty for all political detainees, and struggle for the legali-
zation of the Party.

"2, To reach this goal, the Party must strive to organize
a broad Democratic National Front. This Front does not embrace
only Indochinese people but also progressive French residing
in Indochina; not only toiling people but also the national
bourgeoisie.

"3, The Party must assume a wise, flexible attitude with
the bourgeoisie, strive to draw it into the Front, win over
the elements that can be won over and neutralize those which
can be neutralized. We must by all means avoid leaving then
outside the Front, lest they should fall into the hands of the
enemy of the revolution and increase the strength of the re-
actionaries.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-15
