re

_)
.

de

Dimenseeueg,

OO es

. 1 ee

pact

A

mses 4,

a!

A's

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

nee SS REGREE ee ee

> ASSISTANT SECRETARY oF DEFENSE

mil Sr SIGE ORES BEC: SEMA eased Aye) ane i”
*, oF " arpa Si H, ed
* ee Ly ; ; i
INTERN AT 1ONAL. SECURITY AFFAIRS * -
in ea refer to EASST/6. : Y
fo: The secretary of Defense as

ate
“com: The Asoictant Secretary of Defense. (ISA)

y. 2 - of *
eo spa aie

‘Problem; An aberuencs Military Costing Tean recently returned from a five
weeks mission’to Free Viet-Nam. The proposed letter to the Secretary of

tate swnmarizes the Team's findings and requests his Bae tENBECe in Cov
recti ng the serious logistic BE vaLsons

a 2 cy

"Discussion: os ‘Finance; Partially! as a result of the gestae Tean's efforts,
Estimates of annue). Defense Support and Direct Forces Support dollar require.
ments have been eles by ue million to $90 mijlion @ year.

y.! S
Penne 8 aay Oe. Tens of" mil14eae" of dollars of U. S. equipment’ end ‘U me
=e are now being lost Only prompt State-Defense action can correct the

_ deficiencies. . The eee reported: (a) "Ivo warehouses were recently
found to contain’ 120 tons of medical. supplies of which.no_one had prior ~
. knowledge."| (b) 1,000 vehicles and 14,000 major assemblies are sitting. -~
. in the rain and mua deteriorating rapidly. c) "...the capability of a
-.. pupply of forces in the field in the event hostilities should be resumed <-
“fn mid-1956 would be virtually non-existent." (dad) ™...the MAAG personne), ~
.-. have done their utmost to protect U.S. interests; there axe pune not =
~/-) enough individuals to go ecound." ; : :

‘3, Petsonnel. Requirements: : 150 to 200 Ame ee pkilled in military

“S- gupply and logistics are urgently needed in Viet-Naa. Authority, to edd thig
-~ number requires State D. epartment concurrence. oo : : ri

h, Collins-Ely Agreement: The Collins Bly Agreement of 1 Dec 195k,
provides that U.S. equipment in the hands ‘of the French in Free Vict- fe
+ 45 to be returned to U.S. or Vietnanese Guess when determined. by joint
U.S.-French review to be no longer needed. for the purposes for which ~
originally made available. “This Agreement is not: being implemented by the

French, with loss of assets to U.S. ana Joss ° or Vietnanese ei bc capabili-

Oo aralenenration: Tf Mr. Dulles can (a) mses it possiblé to sete in ee additions’
“Americans, (as. you requested in your letter to him dated 13 Dec 1955 « see ter
A) and (v) arrenge with the French for implementation of the ey ce

ment, POD can paccees with its plans es f£olve ad Bis iets

Re convendatton: “thet you sta the ‘ettochea otter.’

Oe ee a ee
"

SEGRE pues - cS ; SES geodef Coate Wor 9D-03

Concwerences: Wone."
