ey 4 ea. ers eS. eS Cee

roy

sem

G

beri!

of uf Fs Legess **5 ao ba an
a di PSO Tae ; t me 4 nla 3

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

een ey Roe
THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF ee) ae
“WASHINGTON 25, D.c. emwed ot
{ 11 February 1955 ~

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Subject: Concept and Plens for the Implementation,
if Necensery, of Article IV, 1, of the
Manila Pact.

* 2 in

1. This 1s in response to.a memorandum by th- Deputy Secre-

ary of Defense, dated 6 January 1955, subject as above , in
ee it was tequested that the Joint Chiefs of Sterf recommend
a concept and broad outline plans for the se ang of U.S.
nilitery power under the Manila Pact with a primary objective
being the deterrence of ", . . overt penvesai cn by China or
other Corimunist nations."

2. There ace three basic forms in which eggression in South-
capt Asia ean occurs

ti

a. Overt armed attack from outside of the area.
b. Overt armed attack from within “ie area of each of
the _ povereien states,

Ge ABErens sion other than armed, i.e., political warfare,
or subyel Gion. :

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that their views pre-
viously expressed in 2 memorandum For the Secretary of Defense,
dated 8 October 1954, nubjects: Military Consultation Unter the
Southeast Asia Colleetive Defense Treaty," in which the volnt
Chiefs of Staff stated that "U.S. commitments to Formosa, Javan
end Korea, which natlens have been exeluded from the beeaty,

make it imperative that the United States not be restricted hy
force commitments in the subjeet treaty area" remain valid,

~

=

4, In oréee to retain this freedom of action it 15 concidereca
tnas the United States should not enter into combined milltary
planning for the: defense of the treaty areca with the other
Monila Eee pyvers nor should details of Unitod States unilateral
aegvesfion

pianea Tov military ection in the event oF Corronis
in Southeast Asia be disclosed to the other powers.

Bypdayt awesccs | Say - Se ee oA
