pay ’
,

'

‘ a

prey

TT

i 1

rrr}

rr

coe

“Communist e2xression against the Treaty Area Shout Burma be eccen
“9

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ig!

- TOP SECRET’ : (211-98)

. b. That the provision of military support for repelli

&8 a new course of acbion and plenmaing studies propared.

'

(1) The net ca pability of
Viet Minh follo:ring attack on selected target

S
ch Oo
O
te
bE
a]
je

‘land and North Victnea, and ;

. (2) The net capability of the Viet Minh following attack
on seclected targets of North Vietnem, and. “

on (3) Thet the provision of military susport for the
defense of Pekisten be further devreloned to include the attack of
z=

selected encny targots using both conventional end nuclear weapons.

c. That other supporting courses of action, including

| blockede of Cosmunist coasts, aefénse of essential sea Jines of co:mmun~-

ication end defense of essential air lines of coimmunication, be developsd
jn correlation wiph the provision of military support for the defenss

‘of Thailand, Teos, Cankodiay, South Vietnam ond Pakistan and with attack
on ‘selected targets of the Chinese. maint. and and elsewhere as required

3.

Recommendation: That-the Militery A@visers enprove the
conclusions above and direct the Militery Staff Plannera to teke the
necossaery action, 2

: 1. Diseussion: In the case of signals a x cessed to tho French
Military Adviser, there has been certain difficulties of rovting, dus

to the use of various chennels.

2 Receownendation: It is recommended that the Militery Advisora
take note of the wish of the Fronch Delegate to have the correspondence
ecdressed to the French Military Advisera routed as far as po osaiblo.
through the Militery Liaison Group jn Bangkok. :

ah ie Procedures _ for r Developing faendas for Cor

$e ee ee oe a

BEERS 2. end o_Sub-

1. Discussions &
Qe Agenda 13 for Mi! aoanance Advisers and
have boen firmly Tsid-on, hav = clear-cut and
general. No such firm eystem prevailed for tho Ad
: b. The following sdditionel sigaificsat poluts are brought.
to tho attention of the Military Advisers.
, (1) Agendas Frequently do not designate, when thoveh |
expropriate, responsi bility for the preperation of position papsra.

sir 1033 7G tir ees

