Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201]

TOP SECRET

. S. must protect its position and
in the Far Hast by a new initiative in

e the situation must be stabilized as
event further losses’ tc Communism

xpansion and subversion, or (2) overt

The U

agression.

8. Security Treaty. Negotiate a Southeast Asia security
treaty with the UK, Australia, New Zealand, France, the
Philippines, Thailand and, as appropriate, other free South
and Southeast Asian countries willing to participate, which

would:

2. Commit each member to treat an armed attack
on the agreed area Cincludin ng Laos, cents and South
Vietnam) as dangerous to its own peace, safety and vita
interests, and to act promptly to meet the common danger
in accordance with its own constitutional processes.

s he Provide so far as possible a legal basis to
the President to order attack on Communist China in the
event it commits such armed aggression which endangers
the peace, safety and vit inte rests cf the United
States.

¢. Ensure that, in such event, other nat
would be obligated: in accordance with the treaty to
suppor’ such U. §. action.

gd. Not limit U. S. freedom to use nuclear weapons,
or involve a U. §. commitment for local defense or for’
stationing U. S. forces in Southeast Asia.

The U. &. wonid continue to provide limited military assis-
tance and training missions, wherever possible, to the states
of Southeast Asia in order to bolster their will to fight,

to stabilize legal governments, and to assist them in con-
PrerT Ens SUDV version.

9. Necien im che erent « of Local Subversion. If
requested by 2 legitimate local government which recuires
“assistance to Gefeat local Communist subversion or rebellion
not constituting armed attack, the U. S. snould view such a
situation so gravely that, in’ addition to giving all possible
covert and overt support within Executive Branch authority,

the President should at once fe are requesting Congressional
authority to take appropriate action, which might if necessary

Nsc 5429/2 ee te 736 TOP SECRET
