Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

MESSAGE

DEPARTMENT OF THE ‘ARMY
STAFF COMMUNICATIONS OFFICE

NR: UNNUMBERED PAGE 2

organization has undergone a change, the United States view
also seems to have hardened that the treaty should be aimed
specifically at Communism. In these circumstances it seems
that Australia might get the worst of both worlds. On the
one hand Australia would be criticized in Asia for joining
an organization which would be dominated by great non-Asian
powers and which would, be criticised as constituting a
provocation to the Chinese, while on the other hand Australia
would obtain no rpt no assurance that additional military
protection would be given to an area which is strategically
vital to Australia. It will be appreciated moreover that
such a treaty would involve the Australian Government in
considerable embarrassment domestically. The Australian
Government would be attacked for subscribing to a treaty
which seemed valueless, and there would be a danger that
present public support for an expanded Australian defence
effort would-be dissipated. The Prime Minister recently
impressed on Parlament that the present situation in Southeast
Asia called for an international arrangement in the region
under which all parties would be ready to undertake commitment.
Australia's willingness to undertake such commitments in
peacetime represents a real innovation in Australian policy.

"h, In some respects the effect of present American
thinking about SEATO is to provide little more than a commit-
ment to act in the event of Communist aggression, without any
effective understandings among the Allies as to what that
action should be.

"5, It is the Australian Government's earnest hope
that the United States Government will agree to the establish-
ment of effective military machiriery under the proposed
organiz:.tion and will themselves participate in planning
for the defence of the area. To this end Australia will press
for inclusion in the text of the treaty of a Slog as undertaking
that parties would 'concert their military planning’. The
Australian Government hopes that the United States Government
will be able to accept this.

"6. The Australian Government fully appreciates the
difficulties involved (partly for security reasons) in
detailed military planning among seven or eight nations.

But the Australian Government considers that close contacts
among, and joint military planning by, The United States,
United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand are essential. The
latest American position, as presently understood, could give
Australia less than the already existing Five Power Staff
Agency; and the future even of this organization seems in

DA IN 81950 (1 Sep 54)
ies 2 CMrrio ee kW a ge
Thy SENSHIVE
