ry

rt Ure CUP

7 PF

i

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

= ; : ae ol TA
s Pe
Oy

6. U.S. RELATIONS WITA PREGCH IN VESPTNAM, One of the
crucial poquivemcnts oOo: U.S. policy and Goerations in Vietnan
is te determine precisely hab French intentions toward the
country are. It is clear that the FPronch-.in Vietnam do not
soeak with a single voice. I have entire confidence in the
inteerity of General ELYy end have no dsubt that he believes
what he has said to me curing the course of our association
in Saigon. Horever, the presence in Hanoi of the Sainteny

mission, the conversation I had with Sainteny in Ely's presence,

and excellent analyses made by our imbassy in Paris, lead me

to believe that “enoeral Hly is not the sole representative in
Vietnam of the French Government. This view is reinforced by

a continuing and undisguised “renen desire to remove Prime
Minister Dien in favor of one of their own candidates. I believe
that the reach are prepering two wossible courses of action:

a. If free Vietnam. should be taken over by the
Communists, the “rencn wish to be prepared to mate a deal with

Ho Chi ifinh in order to continue trade ead cultural relations
with Ho under some for of “co-existen rce!

b. If, on the other hand, free Vietnam, largely
through U.S. aid and support of the. Manila Pact, can be saved
&as sn inderendent state, the French ‘still wish to retain their
special ecenomic and cultural stetus, cleim a large measure of
credit for such success, and thus, perhaps, held free Vietnam
in the #rench Union. ‘ihe frencn Government, however, is still
undecided as to the outcome, and so tecters back and forth
between these two policies. I feel that our government should :
have this mater out with the French Government once and for‘all,
Witn full and faitnfrul supnort from the Hrench, Diem has a fair
chance of success. Without such support, particularly if instead
there should be covert obstructionism from the French in the forn.
of support of rival leaders, perhacs with Bao Dai'ts connivence,
Diem's chances will be materially lessened,

7. PRIM@ MINISTER Dis. a. Diemts virtues lie in his.
widely 2 acenguTeecs €éG probity and nationalism. His disadvantages
as a head ox government arc his lack of executive experience,
his conspiratorial past which tends to make him suspicious of
those who do not openly support him, his naive trust in those
willing to flatter his ego, his lacx of “xnow how" in selling
himself to his people, nis na oo snbas or view, his tendency to
exaggerate his insiz s=ht into the problems of Vietnam, and his
groat stubbornness. Moreover Diem has surrounded himself with
members of his family whose defects tend to intensify rather
than offset his ovwn,.

EJ

ae
