Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ba ad ined re Cre E
it

i ENCITIVE

Ed

Ltr SecDef to SecState
JAN 31, 1956

Dear Mr. Secretary:

Since my letter to you of the 13th of December regarding
the Viet-Nam situation, the Interagency Costing Team, sent to
Seigon to study military finance and related matters, has
returned and submitted its report. The recommendations of
the Team will lead to substantial improvements in budgeting,
including savings of millions of dollars during the calendar
year 1956. Steps have already been initiated to realize
these savings.

The Team also studied the logistic situation in Free
Viet-Nam and has reported deficiencies which are of greatest
concern to me. Only by prompt action at highest departmental —
levels will it be possible jto correct the problems.

Since the recent heavy phasedowyn in French forces, or
adequate logistic capability in Free Viet-Nam no longer
exists. The Team reported that "...the capability of supply
of forces in the field in the event hostilities should be
resumed in mid-1956 would be virtually non-existent." From
the standpoint of preservation of U.S. assets, the situation
is also most unsatisfactory. Adequate control of MOAP
spares and supplies has, in large part, been lost.

We have concluded that not less than $100,000,000 worth of
MOAP materiel can be saved if prompt corrective action can be
taken. Such action includes the availability in Viet-Nam
in the immediate future of 150 to 200 Americans skilled in
supply management and logistics.

A further essential factor in achieving effective supply
eontrol is the implementation of the Collins-Ely Minute of
Understanding of 1 December 1954. This Agreement provides for
the return by the French of U.S. equipment no longer required
for the purposes for which originally made available. The
Agreement further states that decisions on what is to be
returned should be made jointly by French and U.S. repre-
sentatives. Nevertheless, the French are making these
decisions unilaterally; it appears that they are carefully
sorting out the useful, serviceable items for their own use,
and returning the excess and salvage. We know of no valid
reason why U.S. personnel should not be allowed to enter
French military storage areas to participate in these
determinations.

1046 SecDef Cont. No. $-086 |

Bt OS Fie Rone
rOsEcRen (|

Ber Eyed Sts

SENSTTIVE

