Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Refer to: I-12691/5 or
22 April 1955
Dear Walter:

iI refer to the current situation in South Vietnam and the
probable necessity for review of the basic policy in that area.

An analysis of the problems has been made by my staff in
the attached staff study. I think it is an excellent study and
I highly reeommend you and your staff read it.

While I realize these problems have no easy solution, to
me the-basic issues are quite clear. I believe there are three
major areas of weakness in South Vietnam as follows:

a. The need for a solution of the problem of how
we can achieve our ends in South Vietnam and yet live with the
French.

b. The need for a solution of how we can achieve
internal order with particular reference to the sects, the lack
of internal communications, and the lack of strength in the
central government. (urine my recent trip I conferred with
Diem at which time he stated that if his government could be-
come strong he felt the people would rally to it, and that at
present Ho Chi Minh offered the only strong rallying point to
the people of South Vietnam.)

c. The need for a solution of how we can achieve
a suitable government of South Vietnam, with particular reference
to its relationship to Bao Dai, the broadening of its base, and
the participation of capable people within the government.

(I feel that in the past we have made a mistake in building the
government wpon one man.)

In view of the probable nature of the problems to be
discussed with General Collins during his visit, I consider
that this information may be of value to you.

Sincerely yours,

(SIGNED)
H. Struve Hensel Prepd. by Col. Queenin
2,1! Rewrtn by Col. Silver!
Mr. Walter S. Robertson jep
Assistant Secretary for
Far Eastern Affairs Copy 3 of 5 Copies
Department of State
Vo Rigiy
rop secrer SAIS) TIVE
Page 1 of 1 Pages
Incl. - 1 (in dup) © #1&2-Robertson;3-R/C; 4-Col.Queenin; 5-2E860

923 CGSC_B67-40 CopyNr_l of 1 Copies
