ad
o

Cad
bi

eae |

cy or’

PF. a

=

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ; 2

“All. CONSEQUENCES OF A US FAILURE TO

INTERVENE AGAINST AN OPEN VIET
MINH ATTACK AFTER HAVING TAKEN
THE PRERARATORY STEPS ASSUMED IN
I] ABOVE :

5. The Communists would vigorously exploit
the opportunities in Asia created by the fail-

- ure of the US to Intervene in Vietnam. Al-

though Communist China and the Viet Minh

would probably not launch early overt aggres- ~

sion against other countries, Chinese Commu-
nist diplomacy would probably become openly
threatening, possibly supplemented by intim-

‘.idatory troop movements near the Chinese

Communist border with Burma and laos or
within Communisi-held Vietnam. Commu-
nist policy would also be furthered by greatly
increased support from overseas Chinese com-
munities.

6. The Chinese Communists would probably
apply strong pressure against those countries
whose detcrmination to resist Communist in-
roads had been most weakened. ‘They would
demand an accommodation to the Bloc going
beyond the benevolent neutralism that is the
current goal of Communist strategy in much
of the area. Where more forceful action ap-
peared necessary, Peiping would almost cer-

tainly encourage local Communist groups to
. resume and enlarge guerrilla operations and

would support those operations more directly
than in the recent past. In some cases units
of Chinese Communist troops, possibly of mi-
nority origin, might-be assigned to reinforce
local guerrilla units. Communist operations
against the offshore islands might be stepped
up, but a full-scale attack against Taiwan
would probably not be initiated. ~

7. The consequences of a US failure to inter-
vene to save Souih Vietnam would be most
serious in Asia. US prestige and influence
would be drastically lowered, and the Manila
Pact as an efiective instrument against Com-
munist aggression would almost certainly be
destroyed. Even immediate and forceful sub-
sequent US action elsewhere in Southeast Asia
might not persuade any state in the area that
further Communist pressure could be resisted.
These countries would be reluctant to accept

TOP

~”
fea}

(oe 2)

Em

US offers of assistance from fear that closer
alignment with the US would merely invite
the Communists to further acts of aggression
and that in such an event US assistance would
not be forthcoming. They would kecome in-
creasingly inclined to attempt to maintain
their independence through negotiated under-
standings with Peiping.

§. Both Lacs and Cambodia would probably
initially proclaim 2 neutralist position but
would shortly enter into cultural and eco-
nomic agreements with Communist China as
the first steps “toward political accommoda-
tion. Thai apprehensions for their own se-
curity would greatly increase. Suecessive
government changes might bring to power
& leadership amenable to an accommodation
with Communist China. Burma would prob-
ably not consider such Communist action as
a direct threat and would seek to remain neu-
irval, Should the Thai government reach an
-accommodation with the Communists, Burma
would become concerned and would probably
seek a closer alignment with India. The
‘British would be gravely concerned over the
security of Malaya and would almost certainly
press for the commitment of US forces to the
defense of Malaya. Although the Philippines,
South Korea, and Nationalist China would
remain allied with the US, they would have
grave doubts concerning the future. They
would almost certainly press the US for a
more concrete demonstration of its determina-
tion to defend them. In Japan, neutralist
sentiment would increase. Indonesia woulg
attempt to maintain a neutral orientation but
would be drawn toward an accommodation
with the Communist Bloc as Communist in-
fluence spread through mainland Southeast
Asia,

9. The reactions of the Western European
allies of the US would be mixed. On the
one hand, they would be concerned about the
implications of US withdrawal in the face of
an open Communist attack, and there would
probably be an increase in defeatist and ney.
tralist sentiment. On the other hand, we be.
lieve that these concerns would tend to be
ofiset by their relief that a crisis in the Fay
East had not led to a renewal of armed con.

CRET

.
