coy

ms] TS re cr cof

t

‘oan i

er"

f ‘ 4

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

We c)

U.S. position on the Use of lilitary Forces to
Suppress Subversive Activitics

Combined Commands for Forces of the SEACDT? Countries
Militery Advisers to the Council of the Manila Pact

The positions outlined in the above papers with the exception of that
pertaining to the initial mecting of the SHACK? Council Military
Advisers (TAB G), provided adequate guidance to the U.S. Delegation.
As @ question of tactics, and in order to offset pressures by the
Asian signatories for a NATO-type organization, the Defense Represen-
tative proposed to the Secretary of State, prior to the first close
session, that the U.S. take the initiative and recommend a meeting of
the Military Advisers during tne Bangkok Conference. ‘This proposal
was accepted by the Secretary of State.

During the second or conference phase, it became obvious that the
Asien nations signatory to the Treaty would strive for a U.S. commit-
ment of forces for the defense of the Treaty area. Again es a question

of tactics, and in order to provide the assurance that these countries
were sceking with respect to U.S. intentions regarding the defense of

2
the Treaty area against Communist eggression, the Defense Representative
proposed to the Secretary of State that he clearly ontline such U.S.
intentions and provide information as to U.S‘. forces cursently stationed
in the Far East as a deterrent to Communist aggression. The Secretary
of State accepted this proposal and in his remarks at the first closed

.session of the Conference on 23 February, stated the U.S. intentions

so specifically that the anticipated forcing tactics on the part of
the Asian nations in reletion to-this matter did not develop.

All of the Council members, with the exception of ir. Bonnet of
France accepted the Military Adviser's paper with minor, revisions.
However, the French Delegation took exception to certain terminology
used in outlining the functions and responsibilities of the Military
Advisers on the basis that this terminology was not easily translatable
into French. It subsequently became obvious that the question of
semantics was not the primary cause for concern on the part of the
French but that they were disturbed over what might be construed by the
French Government as a French delegation agreement to force comniticents
within the scope of the planning responsibilities of the [iilitary
Advisers. During the period between the morning end afternoon session,
the French and U.S. Delegations, on an ad hoe basis and with Defense
representatives of both countries participating, revised the language
of the Military Advisers’ paper in order to overcome French apprehension.
The reviced paper wos later accepted by all members of the Council and
the Military Advisers iimediately convened in a separate closed session,

v

~_————_]
