ro

“43 - Ss ea

ae

|

fa FS FS OS

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Coe Rae
“os ee a oe
THE JOINT CHIEFS “5 STAFF bared
WASHINGTON 25, D.C. Ss
! 9 May 1955 :
-
MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY Oi DEFENSE = if
7 OD |
Subject: Indochina (Vietnam). .
‘1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff submit herewith their views
rep irding the military aspects of the problem presented in 2
the attached excerpt from a telegram from Im. Dulles to the =
~~

Department of State. 2

‘2. The situation as depicted in the telegram from Mr.
Dulles appears to present the United States with a choice
between: :
a. Continuing to support the Diem Government in Vietnam --
‘which would result in the withdrawal of French forces from
that country; or

b. Withdrawing United States support from Vietnam --.

allowing the French to deal with the situation as they
deem fit,

3. The Joint Chiefs of.Staff consider that the question
as to whether the United States should or should not continue
to support the Diem Government, or any other particular
Vietnamese regime, is one for resolution at the governmental
level. Their ccnments relative to the alternatives -set forth
above are, therefore, limited to their military implications.

4, It is considered doubtful that the Vietnam National Army
(VIIA), in its present state of development and unassisted by
other forees, can continue to maintain internal security under
the conditions of near-civil war now prevailing in Vietnan,
There is even less likelihood that the VNA could offer more
than a token resistance to external ageression. Further, it
is open to question whether the VNA would be loyal to the Diem
Government under all cirewnstances. ‘The preserice and coopera-
tion of an outside military foree is therefore essential at.
this time if Vietnamese security and integrity are to be as
fae United States is debarred by the provisions of the Gan
Rereenont from providing such forces, and could therefore ¢
no assurances regarding the protection of JTives and property
of Freneh or any other foreign nationals, While the wltndrawal

te

sured,
Va
ive

©

)

. Pe ee
a | : : = yea

Copyis 7 Of 7 CORES Sasi = ; scepel Con. ee EN attire

. © . iliale, - Aes “—

Laxman Rs ete Poot UA EST As ile “ =F .

AWS Cait PGtz) = SC eo earl erg ‘tt thle S ge ne ae

o Re Ise 3 Feet tse eet i

OY aha po ' ree 1 : Paper Fe ray - -

ve

ea Pe
Fy Die Seah Te
wy

si
