ro

ce es

mame oD

-——

om roe

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TA O ENGE COUPRIBULION TO

AND PARTICTIPALION Ti THE EAUGKOX COuFEnEICS

Department of Defense contribution to and participation in the
Bangkok Conference consisted of two phases of activity. - the prelimi-
ary phase and the conference phase. :

During the preJiminary phese the Department of Defense provided
membership on the International Working Group which met in Washington
during the period 30 November 1954 - 7 February 1955. In addition to
representatives of the U.S. Departments of Defense and State, the
membership of the International Working Group consisted of the Ambas-
sedors of the seven other signetory countries who, in turn, were
supported by their political and military edvisers.

The primary function of the International Working Group was to
develop and give consideration to the problems which would be discus-
ged at the Bangkok Conference, and to agree upon an agenda to be sub-
mitted for the approval of the Council. ‘The report of the Working
Group in the form of a proposed agenda was completed on 7 February
end submitted to the Covneil for consideration at the first closed
session of the Council Conference, at Bangkok, on 23 February 1955.

_(@aB A)

Pek

During this period, the Department of Defense drafted, and obtained

agreement of the International Working Group to the position paper on

the organization of the Military Advisers to the Council Mombers which

was edopted by the Council at Bangkok. (TAB B)

Further, during this preliminary phase, the Department of Defens
prepared nine position papers for the U.S. Delegation on matters
considercd of primary Department of Defense interest. (TALS C-K).

These were as follows:

Security measures for the Manila Pact Military
» Advisers :

Further Status of the ANZUS Military Representatives

e

Possible discussion with the British end/or Australians

on the defense of the Kra Isthmus

U.S. Position on the Eotebligshment of a Combined
Staff .

Initial Meeting of the SEACH Military Advisers

Ingbligence Agreements in SEACDT

way

SECRET
