Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Fe f} ERD A ie aie

ae pee

Buy ey

.
&. Paragraph 2, Article itl, of the Draft Security
Treaty is addressed to Indirect agpuression, the most
likely and insitalious forma of Communist apferescion.
The treaty should specifically provide that any further
extensicn of Comrwnist couvrel through infiltration or
subversion, ov threugch any other indirses means, should
as in the case of overt aggression, be met by prompt and
appropriate counteraction, 2

h, It should be made clear in the preliminary
nesjotviatiens and in the provisions of the treaty itself
that no commitive:t by the United States to support the
raising, equipping, and maintenance of indigenous forces
and/or to deploy United States forces in such strengths
as to previde for an effective defense of all of the
national territory of each signatory is implied or
intended. ifilitary aid by the United Stated to the
Southeast Asian countries who are members of the pact
Should be limited to that necessary to permit the
countries concerned to raise, equip, and maintain
military forces as necessary to insure internal ste-
bility, to contribute toward a reasonably effective
oppasition to any attempted invasion, and to instill
national coniidence,

i. it shouid be made equally clear that the treaty
would net comnit the United States to a large-scale
progrem of economic aid to the signatory countries in
lieu cf military aid ‘since, in the final analysis, funds
for economic aid must come from the total amount of money
aveilable fox the national security programs of the United
States, ;

dl. The Joint Chiefs cof Staff concur in the view that,
-naving in inind the length of time required ror a treaty to
be negotiated and ratitied, an interim statement of intert
to conciude « treaty establishing a collective security
arrangement in whe Par kast should be issued jointly by those
eountrics wnich intend to .become founder menibers of such a
trecty. Tne draft statenent of intent furnished to the ¢ stint
Chiefs of Statf fer comment by the. memorandum by tac Assustant
Secretary of Defense (ISA) dated 2 August 1954, is considered —
to be satisfactory; Crom the military point of view. It is
sug sestcd, however, that Lt would be prudent to withhold an
formal declaration of intent until suestantial agrecrent 'nas
been reeched with the United Kingdom as to the principal
-provisions of a treaty. :

