ee Ey ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

.

7. iu the event of a split tetiwcen the U.S. and-French resultingin

eval of ol French political ead military: support to South Viet

waa, the vecum created by the withdrawal of the French Ex:editionary Corp
ynal forees pending the develolient of

FEC by, com- =

have to be filled hy other exte

mparabive strength in the Vietnamese ftny. Without replacing the

poracle forces, South Viet-Naa would be nilitarily impotent, end a ceroralization
or the Vietnarese Army and people could result... =
.* Pies bie Re . me an L os .
Jui connection with the ateve, eny thought of US. intervention under the

SSACD2 should be considered in the light of possible Wimltations of the ~~

a

NO Fs Ly are
~

~vention by U-S. ground forces. A legelistic

is by the Viet-lHinh and the ICC would consider

Suterpretetion of the accord
LY * - » as co "4 L = bed L
such U.S. intervention es a major violation. The U.S., while not 2 signatory

to the Geneva Accoxmis, pullicly declared it would not contravene its

provisions.
in South Viet-Kam probably cannot ve expected

fssist2
from fAnstralia, New Zealand, the U.K. or Pekistcn. Theiland or the Philippines

rovide sufficient troc3s to reinforce adequately the Vietnemese forces

to the extent reguircd. U7, under these cireunstunces, Viet-iinh resuler forces
were to be comulttea against SSACcDY forces, and no U.S. ground forces :

were euployed, the Vieb-Hinh vould te cepeble of defeating SEACE? forees
U

-O- Bir, and navel forces would ~

subsequent to the witustraval of the FEC.
hinder the Yiet-Minh BAVEREE Cue it ae unlike “s that they vould sigaificantiy See
reduce the Viet-Ninh censbility to overrun Viet-Tane ne <5 ; :

cf the Viev-inh in South Viet-ian -cenmcs

it Alp SS eo ee 370.42
The peranilitary operations

sovecsed ty those measures aupliceble in other countries, i.e. the

Pailispine supprossion of the KUSS. The HUXS never hed the degree of © |
4 . . ‘ . - -
popular sympathy and support which the Vict-linh currently enjoy.  - *
* . - . oe : .
. re . q : .
: Jou oy
- ofa Whe ou Pr ean ie Serataicd pha TEN aerate wes a) Scans
. ce = i . : Z ; eles ee
: : . ei Oh =
