ry Pes

A Pa ore

rie
F \

rane

mae

pny

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘ Vee terse
Pea (ees
. « Se Wort fas a
toca

; Seca Vy cio gf ”
OFFICE MEMORANDUM United States Government
TO? FE - Mr. Robertson, DATE: April 30, 1955
FROM: PSA - Kenneth T. Young, Jr.

SUBJECT: Report on Collins Visit and Viet-Nam Situation A

1. Collins arrived Thursday, April 21, and left early Friday morning,
April 29. He had lunch with the President-April 22, saw the Secretary for
the first time at a long luncheon meeting April 25. We also met with the -
Secretary Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. We spent all day Friday, April 22,
meeting with Collins with Defense and CIA represented. He reiterated even
more vigorously and firmly his view, strongly backed by Sturm, thet Diem
must be replaced and that a plan of action should go into effect immediately.
They both favored Quat. None of the questions or alternate considerations
expressed by any of us at that or any subsequent meetir zs changed Collins'
view. Monday morning, April 25, we had a working meeting with him at which
I proposed basic question, do we or do we not support some political change in
Saigon, and (b) a specific plan of change. The reports at thet time fron
Saigon showed Diem was steadily slipping. In the face of the edanant view of
Collins and Sturm most of us reluctantly accepted the need for a change, but
we all insisted that we stay with Diem at least for the first innings. Collins
and particularly Sturm, rejected our proposition in any shape or form. The
basic shift in our approach was taken at’ a long luncheon meeting with the
Secretary. Unfortunately neither Bob Hoey nor I were invited to attend.

Bill Sebald can fi11 you in.on this. The Secretary took the position we
would support Diem until and unless genuinely Vietnamese elements turned up
with another acceptable solution. Collins and. Sturm later told the working
group this was an impossible condition,

2. The rest of Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday we spent working up two
long and complicated telegrams to Paris and Saigon, At a full meeting with
the Secretary, Mr. Hoover and Allen Dulles late Tuesday afternoon they were -
approved. Collins fully endorsed these telegrams after he and Sturm had
eliminated our proposal to try again to keep Diem as head of a coalition
goverment. These telegrams envisaged a gradual and rather complicated
shift of our position in carefully worked out stages. As we suspected at
the time, they were immediately overtaken by events. None of us really
believed in them but we were faced with Collins' strong recommendations
and the fact that he had been to the White House the first day after his
arrival. In any event, this shift has never been carried out. Although the
telegrams were sent to Paris and Saigon, we have put ovt a.stop order holding
up action on them indefinitely. :

3. Wednesday, April 27, Diem changed the police. chiefs end Thursday
the Binh Xuyen began military action against the government. Ely end the
French have been‘ putting the full blame for this situation on Diem, as
they tried to do for the March 29-30 incident. Events have moved very

po aes:
30225 Re
