Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Fi 3 zl an Xs i| “ih i? ja :

Sy Ropes |

)

In the course of i ay on 7; thie ne the U.S. Delegation per-
suaded the Australian Delegation to accept a modification of its language
removing reference to "machinery" and injecting the concept of consultation
as the situation may require, as favored by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
this Department. The U.S. Delegation on its part, accepted the placing of
the amendment in Article V, and secured agreement of the Conference to
wording which in substance reflected the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Defense
views. Secretary Dulles, with my advice, succeeded in causing deletion of
reference to "periodic" or "regular" consultation as several delegations
at one stage proposed. The amendment in Article V as finally approved
reads: "The Council shall provide for consultation with regard to mili-
tary and any other planning as the situation obtaining in the treaty area
may from time to time require."

3- Article VII provides that other States may be invited to acceed
to the Treaty by unanimous agreement of the Parties. Although the agree-
ment of all the Parties to the inclusion of Nationalist China, Japan, or
Korea is presently unlikely, such a possibility is not precluded.

k, Similarly, Article VIII, in defining the "treaty area", provides
that the Parties by unanimous agreement can include other States in the
treaty area or otherwise change the treaty area. The “treaty area" is
defined as "the general area of Southeast Asia, including also the entire
territories of the Asian Parties, and the general area of the Southwest
Pacific not including the Pacific area north of 21 degrees 30 minutes
north latitude." This wording brings West Pakistan under protection of
the Treaty even though it is not in Southeast Asia. The word "general"
permits an eventual broadening of the treaty area. ‘

5- All participating States except the United States supported
exclusion of the word "Communist" from the Treaty. The U.S. draft orig-
inally referred to "Communist aggression” in the preamble and in Article
IV. The chief reason advanced by the other signatories for the deletion
was the desire of most of the Parties that the Treaty cover any kind of
aggression in the area. Pakistan, for example, wished that the Treaty
would apply to possible aggression by India. The Unites States position
was that the United States could not properly say that any aggression in
Southeast Asia would endanger its own peace and safety, and that it! could
accept the obligations of Article IV only in respect to Communist « zeres-
sion. For this reason the United States attached an "understanding" to
the Treaty in this sense. All other participants accepted the Treaty
with the U.S. “understanding”.

6. At French suggestion specific reference to Cambodia, Laos, and
Viet-Nam was removed from the text of the Treaty, but these States are
covered by the provisions of the Treaty in a separate Protocol (Tab B).

-The French felt that this method of extending the application of the
Treaty to the Associated States was less likely to,be construed as a
. violation of the spirit of the Geneva Agreements.

