Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
SENSU IVE ee

WHY THE UNITED STATES ISSUED A UNILATERAL DECLARATION
INSTEAD OF SIGNING THE 1954 ACCORDS ON INDOCHINA

Secretary of State Dulles was utterly unwilling to consider
signing accords on Indochina of the type concluded at Geneva in
1954. Signing of the Accords, therefore, was never an alternative
in his mind, to issuing a unilateral declaration. On the contrary,
the unilateral declaration was a substitute, suggested by the
desperate French leaders as the most that they could obtain from
the United States, for a partial or complete American withdrawal
from the Geneva proceedings and for disassociation from the Indo-
china settlement.

To understand the American position at the time of the Accords,
it is necessary to trace the evolution of our policy from the time,
in 1953, when Dulles reacted negatively to suggestions for negoti-
ations on the Indochina problem. Dulles told the French at that
time that negotiations with no other alternative usually ended
in capitulation. Then in 1954, after joining reluctantly in the
four-power decision to hold the Geneva talks on Indochina, he pressed
hard for action to strengthen the Western hand--above all, for
swift establishment of a coalition to meet the Communist threat in
Southeast Asia. Furthermore, the United States limited its role
in the Indochina talks to that of an "interested" nation, as distinct
from the role of a belligerent or of a principal in the negotiations,
and it determined to dissociate itself from any disadvantageous
solution. The United States battled British inclinations to accept
a solution involving the partition of Vietnam and, in the instruc-
tions to the American Delegate, Under Secretary Walter Bedell Smith,
said that it would approve no armistice or other agreement which
would have the effect of "subverting the existing lawful governments ..,
or of permanently impairing their territorial integrity or of
placing in jeopardy the forces of the French Union in Indochina."
Beyond this, when the Geneva conferees turned to the discussion of
control machinery for an Indochina settlement, Dulles rejected the
idea of American participation in a guarantee of the settlement
because, as he put it, this would commit the United States to
sustaining Communist domination of territory and thus would cut
across "our basic principles for dealing with the communist world".
(This was presumably a reference to the Republican goal of "liberating"
the captive nations of Eastern Europe.)

TOP SECRET SE NS qi VE
676
