Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

reat eT

7 Cali ae 1.3

5) 7”
ao

if! oak
he | if Toa >

iL

CS
ro
<—

rey

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

Washington 25, D.C.
kk August 1954

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Subject: U.S. Assumption of Training
Responsibilities in Indochina

1. It has been recommended by the Chief MAAG Indochina
that the United States assume responsibility for the train-
ing of the Vietnamese Army. There are indications that
both the Vietnamese and the Cambodian governments may
request that the United States assume responsibility for
training their forces as part of any U.S. effort to check
further expansion of Communist influence in Indochina.

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered this
question and recommend that before the United States
assumes responsibility for training the forces of any of
the Associated States certain preconditions which are
essential to the success ofthis effort be met. They
include the following:

a. From the military point of view it is absolutely
essential that there be a reasonably strong, stable
civil government in control. It is hopeless to expect
a U.S. military training mission to achieve success
unless the nation concerned is able effectively to
perform those governmental functions essential to the
successful raising and maintenance of armed forces,
to include the provision of adequate facilities,
drafting and processing of personnel, pay of troops,
etc. Unless the foregoing conditions prevail, a U.S.
training mission would lack the authority and govern-
mental support essential to the successful accomplish-
ment of its mission.

-b. The government of each of the Associated States
concerned should formally request that the United
States assume responsibility for training their forces
and providing the military equipment, financial assist-
ance, and political SOEs necessary to insure internal
stability. - :

e. Arrangements should be made with the French grant-

ing full independence to the Associated States and pro- {f° CTS ey
viding for the phased, orderly withdrawal of French oy pein shot ate at
71 ry Hues FIV
