m

=~

ey

“ed

ii |

sR

ote
|

i?

ca I am ae |

“ther cin, . “

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SEORET ; a 5; -+ (PI-95) -
£. Subversion: . -
(1) Tho report of the Militery Anti-Subversion Ad Eos
Committees, together with the regort of the Comittee to Caubat
Subye ersion, is a Pe: Jey covunsent vwaich estebdlishes the basi
work in the field of connber-cubversion within SEATO.

(2) These docvincuts reflest.the results of the Combine:
Civil and Military Meeting on Counter-Subversion, Both reports egres,
as do the Military Staff Plan: ners, that a unified civil end militery
effort azainst Coramnist subversion is essential, and that the Committees
to Combat Comamist Subversi. on, as set wo by tho Council, should be the

agency to inake the unified effort.

(3) 1 Proper coverage of all aspects | of covunter-snubvorsion
is to be achieved by each member country sending its appropriate speciol-

ists, whether civil, militery or both, to mes ting 23 of the Coumittoe to

Combat Communist Subversion, A :
(4) Recommendntions: It is recommended that: |

es . (a) 3 the Mslitory 4dvisors seceat the report of thy’

Militery hati-S ubversion Ad Hoe Copaat, ttee and approve tho recommendations

(b) The Military Advisers note the report of tho
Commitica to Combat cea t. Subvergioa end endorse the Comaitteo's
recommendation regarding responsibilities and coordination of civilisn
and millitery evth ord ce in counter subversion work in the sense there
should be one vnified committee to cowater Commiaist subversion reporting
to the Council Ne, and in the seass nonek anes with the
intoat of the mili vary report as it relates to the recommendations con=
cerning merger of ths tivo comnittees, that the organication of ane a
unified committee hag the effect of leaving to each menbor nation tho
right to determine its civilian and/or militar y representations L

(c) Fstins ed to those areas where subversive
aobtvat ties may directly affcc y plaral: 2g shovld be preparcd by
the Comuittee to Combat Comm: ist Suby jorsion aad tho Militery Advisors
should instruct the Secectariat, to invite the Council Representatives
to initiate such studies as soon as poosible.

i)
& or

os

(d) The Militery Advisers instruct the Scere
inoke known to the Council Represcntatives Yos ; xt :
ation of tho reports of the Combined Hecting a3 indicated in paragrenhe
4a, b, endc above. ‘

(e) Th

2% tho Hilitery Advisers note tho reservation
-made by the French Delegation in re Meadwing from subnitting spooifie
estimates on’ ths subyereiy ve thveant in LAOS, VIETHEN end CAIEODIA.

TOP SECRET "
