Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TRIOV ref
NSE rE E
“ee |

Ee loath
“Toward ae last stages of the war in Indochina, those who
opposed intervention . . . expouaded the principle that two conditions
were necessary to justify our intervention: First, that the local
government must exercise éffective control; and second, that the
lecal population must be friendly to the United States. In reality,
this principle is largely a paraphrase of the position developed in
the State Department's ‘China White Paper’ .. . to explain our
failure to prevent the loss of the mainland of China to the Communists.
Moreover, it must be pointed out that it is a very dangerous doctrine
that invites explanations for future failures and defeats. Its greatest
danger is that it overlooks a prime responsibility of leadership, i.e.,
to strive to create conditions favor dle for positive action."

6. Defeat Unnecessary: --Our defeat is unnecessary. There are large

indigenous material and human resources in the are& which can be developed
and harnessed in the event of hostilities with Red China. Twice we let
slip the "decisive strategic opportunity" of subtracting Communist China
from the Soviet orbit, and thus beginning the rollback of Communist power
in Korea and Indochina. When Chinese communist aggression starts again,
as it undoubtedly will, we must be prepared to strike back and seize that
strategic opportunity.

7. Free World Assets: Considered separately, the problems of Korea,
Formosa, Japan and the Philippines appear insoluble except through ultimate
defeat; for these countries are in the line of march for communist conquest.
On the other hand, considered as a regional area, linked to U.S. influence
and power, they have assets of great present value, and even greater
potential value. [General Van Fleet then analyzes the actual and potential
strengths of these countries, emphasizing the role they might play ina
united offensive with the U.S. against Communist Bhi ae]:

8. Failure of Leadership: Despite the real and potential free world
strength in Asia, we have continued to suffer one defeat after another.
Our failure in the Far East is one of leadership; it is a failure to
consolidate Free World resources of the Far East and make of those con-
solidated resources an instrument of Free World power and influence. We
have failed to create conditions for the development of a strong, friendly
role by Japan. We have failed to solve the Janenese-Korean problem. We
have failed to solve the Japan-Philippines reparations problem. Our
technical assistance and economic aid programs have been inadequate,

Our educational and exchange programs have been weak and inadequate,

Above all, we have failed to develop for ourselves a firm policy for the
Far East, to decide what sort of a position we wish to build there.

Under our present national security policies in the Far Hast, we are in

no position to solve the dilemna, save by compromise built on compromise.
Equally, we cannot redress the balance in Asia if we give Britain and France
a veto over our policies in the area. .

+

hae 195

the St ie a STAY L
