ES... Fey

4

| radian):

ia. es

-s

ner

fey ony
| i a

—,

ki

me] FS

5, FS] FS Ps

om

t "

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

i
7 >
Ce
«e

Jan 9 1955 .

MEMORANDUM FOR THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

SUBJECT: Reconsideration of U. S. Military Programs in Southeast Asia

1. In a recent cable (DA IN 105690) General J. Lawton Collins
indicated that Premier Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam does not have the
capacity to unify the divided factions in Vietnam and that unless action
is taken to achieve such unity the country will be lost to Communism,

.He further stated that if measures to strengthen the govermnent were une=
seceptable to’ the U. S., or were unsuccessful, the U. 8. should re-
evaluate its plans for assisting Southeast Asia. * In addition, it is
apparent that if the 1956 Vietnam elections are held, the Comnunists will
‘probably emerge victorious. The political decision with respect to
General Collins’ recommendation has not yet been made.

2.- In message No. 2585 dated 24 December 195): to the American
, Embassies in Paris and Saigon, the Secretary of State was more
optimistic and expressed the view that progress had been made in
South Vietnam during the past five months,

3. Referenced communications indicate a delicate and unstable
situation within South Vietnam, Under these circumstances, it is necessary
that the Department of Defense be prepared for any eventuality; hence it
is prudent that all the implications of possible courses of action be
examined, Accordingly, it is requested that the Joint Chiefs of Staff
submit their views and recommendations on the following points as well as
any other which they deem dppropriate. :

a. Assuming aid is cut off, the effect of this action upon
the ability of the armed forces and the Government of Vietnam to
maintain internal security in South Vietnam.

b. Assuming minimal aid is to be given, the nature and extent
of the military aid required, and the period for which it should be
granted.

e. Force levels for the FEC which would enable them, in

conjunction with available Vietnamese forces, to safeguard the
evacuation from Vietnam of U. S. equipment.

SecDef Cont. No.. TS-0786
