Py ey ey

ot Ee

aro

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

 ofiers from.the government. We believe that

a considerable number of the Binh Xuyen
may attempt to resume their life of piracy and
extortion. The.VNA should be able to reduce

the Binh Xuyen to the level of a local nui-—

sance. .

13. The Sects. We believe that for the im-
mediate future the Cao Dai military forces
under Generals The and Phuong will continue
actively to’ support Diem against the Binh
Xx en and Bao Dai. The Hoa Hao are un-
likely to play an important role in the im-
mediate situation, although the Ba Cut forces
may continue their terrorist operations.

14, The Viet Minh. The Viet Minh probably
fear that Diem’s continuation in office would
liniit the prospects of a peaceful unification
of. Vietnam under terms favorable to the Com-
munists. They will probably continue covert
efiorts in South Vietnam to keep the situa-
tion agitated. Tne Communists almost cer-
tainly will not invade South Vietnam in the
near future.
GENERAL OUTLOOK

15. In present circumstances, we do not be-
lieve that Diem could be persuaded voluntarily

to resign. If he were forced from office, many
of Diem’s followers would probably undertake
revolutionary opposition, including maquis
resistance, to the successor regime. Some
VNA elements in Saigon and in central Viet-
nam would probably join these elements in
resisting the new government.

16. Assuming that the US continues to sup-
port Diem, and that the French acquiesce, we
‘believe the situation will stabilize in Saigon
j} under Diem’s control. Diem’s talents as an
administrator. are unlikely to improve. His
success, achieved largely on his own initiative
and with his own resources, is likely to make
him more independent and less amenable to
* policy guidance. Diern’s government-will still
be confronted with manifold internal prob-
‘lems — e.g., integration of the sects, resettle-
ment of refugees, land reform, extension of
government authority in the provinces, and
. training of the army. Although Diem has
* imxnproved his position, we believe that it will
i still be extremely difficult, at best, for Diem
‘or any Vietnamese government to build suff-
cient strength to meet the long-range chal-
‘lenge of the Communists.

SECRET :
S58
