NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘ | SECRET

Vietnam were to fall under Communist
control. 9 « = © oe

6 We believe that if adequate outside

“assistance is made available, the Cam-

bodian Government’ will probably in-
crease its effectiveness and the effective-

f

ness of its internal security forces and will
be able to suppress Communist guerrilla
activity and to counter Communist polit-

ical activity. The situation in Cambodia -

would probably deteriorate, however, if a
Communist government should emerge in
Loas or South Vietnam.

DISCUSSION /

“THE CURRENT SITUATION

General

7. The signing of the agreements at Geneva
has ended large-scale warfare in Indochina
and has affirmed the independence of Laos
and Cambodia. It has, on the other hand,
accorded international recognition to Com-
munist military and political power in Indo-

. china and has given that power a defined .

geographic base. Finally, the agreements
have dealt a blow to the prestige of the
Western Powers and particularly of France.

North Vietnam”

8. The Viet Minh has emerged from Geneva
with international recognition “and with
greatly enhanced power arid prestige in Indo-
china. The Viet Minh Ieaders, while ad-

‘ mitting that their ultimate objectives may
‘have been: temporarily compromised “for the

sake of peace,” are acclaiming the agreements

' as denoting a major victory and ensuring the

- eventual reunification of all Vietnam under
~~ Communist aegis.

Ho Chi-Minh is generally
regarded as the man who liberated Tonkin
from 70 years of French rule. The Viet Minh
has initiated a program to absorb presently

-French-controlled areas in the Tonkin Delta.

Sovih Vietnam
9. In South Vietnam, the agreements and the
fact of the imposed partition have engendered

an atmosphere of frustration and disillusion-

ment, which has been compounded by wide-
spread uncertainty as to French and US in-
tentions. The present political leadership

eee appears to retain the passive support of the

more important nationalist organizations and
individuals. However, the government’s al-
ready weak administrative base has been
further dislocated, and it has only uncertain
assurances of continued outside military and
financial support. Mutual jealousies and a
lack of a single policy continue to divide Viet-
namese politicians. Moreover, certain pro-
French elements are seeking the overthrow
of the Diem government with the apparent
support of French colonial interests anxious

to retain their control.

10. The North Vietnam population is some-
what greater than the South Vietnam popu-
lation and, in any event, the loss of the Tonkin
Delta has deprived South Vietnam of the
most energetic and nationalist segment of the
population. Although South Vietnam has
the capahility for agricultural self-sufficiency,
the principal industrial establishments and
fuel and mineral resources are located in
North Vietnam.

11. Provided that the terms of the cease-
fire agreement are observed, the combined
French-Vietnamese forces in South Vietnam
now have the capability of maintaining in-
ternal security. |

Laos

12. The relatively stable internal situation in
Laos, which in the past has depended upon
French support, remains essentially un-
changed. The Laotian Army is poorly armed
and trained and, without the support of
French forces and advisers, does not have the
capability to maintain internal security.
Moreover, “Pathet Lao” Communists con-
tinue to have de facto control of two northern

SECRET

a We |
Oos

4
