Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

oe : 25 -“ sc 218th Meeting
a 22 October 195)

—,
Pose
4

Tim 4 (For Information)
INDOCHINA ie

1. This will be an oral report on the subject by the Chairman of the OCB,
Herbert Toover, Jr., or someone designated by him. It will probably include a
summary of the recent U.S.-French discussions on Indochina as well as of the current
situation there. ' ¢ ie

. The OCB, at its 6 October meeting, requested its special Working Group on
Easeiies to prepare a program of economic and military aid to the three Associated
States to include both direct aid and aid to be granted in coordination with the

‘French, these aid programs to be based on the tentative force goals developed by the

JCS. This program is now being developed. The JCS recommended force goals are
attached as TAB A; State eat thereon as TAB B.

Be AG its meeting of 13 October, the OCB agreed thet State and Defense, as a
matter of urgency, sheuld develop guidance on U.S. training of Free Vietnamese forces

‘for epproval by the Board at its meeting on 20 Cctober. Mr. Cutler has expressed
“considerable concern at OCB meetings over the failure on the part of the U.S. to get

a military training program urderway in Vietnam. The JCS, however, have been dubious
regarding this sort of U.S. military involvement in Indochina because of the unstable
political situation and the limitations on the size of the MAAG imposed by the Geneva
Agreement and recommended: against such training unless political considerations were
overriding (seé TABS C and D). At the OCB meeting of 20 Oetober, State said political

‘ considerations are, in ‘fact, overriding 2 and. the OCB is, we understand, directing in-

sediate commencement of U. S. mELStery EER in Vietnam. The OCB's drait recomnenda—
sions: are at TAB Be “> :

hk. This OCB action may have broken the log-jam of inactivity regarding

~. Vietnam which has gripped the U. S. Government since Geneva. However, there are

i

ima |

— ==

ss

many, other possible psychological and political action programs which may deserve

.a try in a real effort to keep free Indochina from being assimilated by the

Communists. Therefore, continued, streamlined efforts by the Departments end
Agencies concerned, given highest priority, seem RECeBSa Hy « z

REC OMIENDATTONS
5, It is recommended that you suggest that the Council:

‘a. Discuss whether the current U. S. approach to the problems of
Indochina is aes Soy: parunete to achieve our objectives there.

>.” ‘Reaffirm its belie? that the develepnent and implementation of!
“effective programs with regard to Indochina be given highest priority
attention within the Departments and Agencies concerned and that the _
‘present action machinery be streamlined to the extent possible. a Cae
