216.

217.

218.

219.

a - 920.

221.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

- OP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

The State Department's estimate of the political situa-
tion is thet Hinh holds a veto power over Diem; "jockey-
ing for power and struggle for cabinet positions is
resulting in paralyzing impasse"; French reference to
"another structure of government" implies a “hankering
to reestablish a political system" which might involve
direct colonial-type controls by France; and,. unless
Diem receivés U.S.-French support, his chances of
success appear slight. Paris TEDUL 11 NIACT, 21 Octo-

Der LON kiss conbaeatles sew ie ven tesa we sineretshg@adicvisesasese TOO
This message contains the policy of the U.S. Government

end instructions to the Ambassador and Chief of MAAG in

Saigon necessary to carry out the provisions of NSC 5429/2
pertaining to training of Vietnamese armed forces.

Draft Joint State-Defense Message, 21 October 1954........... 183

The OCB draft recommendations on training in Vietnam
_ outline the U.S. role in assisting the reorgenization

and training of the Vietnamese armed forces and

specifies the coordination required’ between the Am-

bassador and Chief, MAAG. The question of ultimate

size of the Vietnamese forces end U.S. support is left

for "later determination." WSC 218th Meeting, 22 Octo-

AO alent ome hd ed ns earn ot att -aitdyete BORE Mian osaSla, NOD

The Report of the Ven Fleet Mission to the Far East is

discussed with President Eisenhower. General Van Fleet's

views are “somewhat different from present policies."

As Van Fleet states the problem: "The problem before us

is the failure of U.S. leadership in the Far East....the

future will reveal other prices we must pay for the free

world defeat in Indochina." White House Memorandum for
General Bonesteel, 25 October 1954... sw uweccvcscesessscoesens ‘192

Diem is insisting on getting rid of General Hinh. |
Eisenhower's letter to Diem is being interpreted as
superseding Washington agreements, that Diem has "full

rein" withowt meeting the precondition of "forming a

strong and stable government.” The President's letter

can also be exploited by the Viet Minh and is causing

‘the French concern. State Memorandum of Conversation,

26 October 1954. ..... cess eeeceee Dee ote en ein LL sick SEO

Secretary Dulles forwards the main points of General a
Collins’ recormendations regarding force levels in

Vietnam. In summary, the points are: (1) it would

be disastrous if the French Expeditionary Corns (FEC)
were withdrawn premeturely; (2) the U.S. should continue

to subsidize the FEC; (3) the Vietnamese Army should be

. wav TOP SECRET - Sensitive,
OS
. 2
