Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TH OLA!
ate Wittens
u eye Ro ae 7S WE
Pr rs We) nd
OCAICTTIVE
ae ott 1 Di i Dee eB
CO bee ea ee

the threat of further Chinese Communist expansion in Asia.
It would provide the basis for action against indirect
ageression which is lacking in both Alternatives A and B,
while avoiding the more extreme measures, with their
greatly enhanced risks, contained in Alternative D. Within
the content of broader policies with respect to the world-
wide threat of Soviet Communism, the steady and consistent
application of the courses of action set forth in this
alternative hold promise of achieving results advantageous
to the security position of the Free World."

5. The comments of the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army on NSC 5429

follow:

"a. NSC 5429 addresses itself specifically to only the most
fundamental aspects of the problem in the Far East, namely:
the off-shore island chain; general political and economic
measures in the Far East; negotiation of a Southeast Asia
security treaty; action in the event of local subversion;
policy with respect to Indochina, Thailand, Indonesia and
Communist China. It is not a comprehensive review of the
entire problem.

*

"pb. Moreover, the problem confronting us in the Far East
cannot be stated, except in relation to and as an element in
a United States foreign policy of global scope.

"e. While I do not suggest just what such global policy
should be, it seems axiomatic to me that one principal
OBJECTIVE therein should be to split Communist China from
the Soviet Bloc. Quite aside from the great moral issue
involved in the deliberate precipitation of general war
the converse of this thesis is equally applicable. From
the purely military point of view we must not, by our own
act, deliberately provoke war against the combined power
of the Soviet Bloc and Communist China, since to do so
would be to choose a war against the most potentially
powerful enemy coalition with a strong probability of
losing the active support of some of our present Allies.
This situation would have the most dangerous possible mili-
tary consequences. We may well find ourselves in such a
war, but it should NOT be our choice without having FIRST,
taken every feasible step to increase our readiness to meet
an explosion into general war, and SECOND, having mapped out
and begun an approach to the OBJECTIVE stated above.
