Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘p0P SECRET | -  — (FN~95)

. = t =!
[ a) tho xenort of the Comavaiertiones Ad Hoe Sub-Committee has
been amondsd and approved by ths Stafr Plonners as a basis for future staff
[ action. =
ss (2) Tho veport emohasizes that's ef a definite command
r - _—s structure and oporational pleas has precluds mont of a. commuica-
. = Fa * - ®, = 4
| ficns plon. This report, as avsnded, provides s for establisning
basic commmicaticas tociniquas, and procedure: 3 f BATO natiens. It
ir fusthor provides for establishing miniima e nications facilitics in
{ aveas Wnora deficiencica now exist, and es’ sab thine basic actioas and
J ecco etee of Gata necossary to future preparation of commaications plan.
i. A al .
‘ It ghovld be noted, that even when all relevant actions requirsd in tho
report have been taken, the commmications procedures and “toehniques ia
the SEATO area will ha We only Yeached a primary stage and that progies-
givo ae velopron’t will bo necessary. .
oes he al (1) ‘Tho veport of tho Ps Syclological Yo arfexe Ad Hoc Sub-
2 e has been anonded and approved by the Staff Plannors.as a
vopring. c gocunsnt for use at staff level. (However, the Australian dele gation
wishes it to be recorded that, Jn thot view, the authantici ty of the docizents
c= attachsd to tho £d Hoe Sub-Cemmuttee veport as Anacx 1 and Annex 2 has not
& yee baon eatablighcd and should merely be vsed as an example of the typ2-of
policy wich the Fassien end Chinese Communists might be expected to adopt.)
a (2) It provides the necassary terms of veferonca for futura

. planing studies to support nilJitary courses of ection as ray b2 developsd
= vndor the acgis of the Military Advisors. Consideration has boon givoa 30
[ tho veport to providing nocossary exchange of training exesricnce.

=

(3) Tae Continuing action by the Militsry Advisers organiza

[ tion in providing basic data and exchenge of training exroricnes 1s Anportant

w to eventual formulation of Psychological Yarfare Bunpes Uias plans to the

military courses of action. ;

L (4) In ordor to clarify le responsibility of tha Military
Lévisers in tho fis] 5 ie

in 1a of Psychological Warfare, the resoxt sats out ths
following definitions

C

, (a) Paychologierl setion: ‘This is the plenned vse in
conditions chort of wat 2, of psychological measvres including profagonda,

[ inforzation aud othor related actions divested at vatsi endly, neutral

= and frlendly gsoups forthe pusposd of supporting tho accouplishnoat of

national eins and objectives.

ro

ie
