ee
fo

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201]

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF Qe = vk 2 et
* WASHINGTON 25, D.C. Se ey sil |
* tft iN. s ehiea et s

* wor LS “— *

12 August 1954

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE ~  ,
Subject: Message to the French Prime Minister

1. This memorandum is in response to the memorandum

. from:the Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA), dated 11

August 1554, which requested the comments and recommenda-
tions of the Joint Chiefs of Staff with respect to a
Department of State draft of a proposed message to the
Prime Minister of France regarding United States policy
toward Indochina.

2. In their memorandum to you dated 4 August 1954,
subject: "U.S. Assumption of Training Responsibilities
in Indochina", the Joint Chiefs of: Staff set forth certain
conditions which they considered. should be met before the
United States assumes responsibility for training the
forces of the Associated States. Particularly pertinent
to the consideration of the proposed message are two pre-
conditions which, in substance, prescribed: Bo

a. The existence of a reasonably strong, stable
Government capable of performing those functins
essential to the successful raising and maintenance of
its armed forces; and .

b. The granting by France of full independence to
the Associated States and arrangements for the eventual
phased withdrawal of Freneh forces, officials and
advisers from Indochina, in order to provide motivation
and a sound basis for the establishment of national
armed forces. :

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that neither of
the above conditions can be said to exist now. ‘The
tenure of the present government in Vietnam appears to
be in doubt and subject to final determination by the
French as to the eventual composition of that government.
Until this maiter has been definitely resolved, the
strength and stability of the Vietnam Government will
hardly ke such as to hold promise of providing the firm

—— oP 2 eemins cach
Csn7 aa uy eee . * “4 rei fae ne ivy bah ear re c
of Bapeses eel eee. 5 eh Til 5 hat Tent tsea. sie

— — Bs aetna at bes i ee |

‘ * 7 2 ae 5 * tite Lihat iva ia
A ee wi A EE ot en f a : Mast etd ee a Ce bg

# #

wail
.

VT 7
ih fe Ge"

i

nas cae
/

CPC Te?

bry; Me

a?
tle

é
LP?
