co c— = = ‘
{ | ‘ . | cata ee |

prrtanoe

cd
'

r= alk

i '

eae |

“3

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

i)
Ui

aM
1 3

GA
Ty
a)

r
fan

cae

¥

.Be In-any assessment of | the siteation ain tndookina, Lt seems obvious that

- the superiority o é Cyanine political lead ership in’ that area has not ‘been.

12 Communists ha ave always recognized the necessity for preening

ener er eHe In Indochina, he French opposit tion to the deg chan ue nationalist

aspi: tions of the Victoandes has aided csxilled, “indoctrinatiod Communist

personnel’ in carrying out their plans. On the other hand, the lack of a basis

nd’ tra sining Leadership cadres in the orcas they bave marked out for subversive

for v derstending be ween the APE EEROND people in Indochina and the drench has

been, one of the pRenery: reacons for the frce world's failure in Padbohina, Ve

c

have’ hest¥ated to face up to making decisions regarding sroposd ls for Indochina.

tecause we are not confident that we can defeat the Communist at their on game,

fhe methods we have tried to reach the minds of the actual and potential pro~

freedom leaders in Indochina have not been successful. We have not succeeded _

in making our objectives in Indochina appear desirable to the people there in

terms of their own interests, problems and ambitions. A new approach to leader~

ship training and cross fertilization between Western and Asiatic ideas in the

Indochina area is necessary. Because the 1956 elections set an absolute deadline

to our efforts we must seek for psychological programs that see thelr results

+ of
¥

in months rather than years. | :

he *In this connection, a psychological operations concent en titled

. . \
"Hilivant idberty: which has recently come to ny personal attention seems to
possess. . the ingredients we are groping ‘for. . “Militant Liberty" is a concept ~

vihich was successfully, tested in Philfppino battles against the "inks",

WLLitant Idberty™ notivates mei people to work toward 2 common foal of
individual freedom by presenting to them the principles of freedoms, clearly

stated, iu a manner. which can be wigovously propagated end Saithfully supperte

Tne -concep

=

ue

de

at of int Gitant Iaborty? provides a clear statement of freedom expresse

a
