Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
Washington, D. G. 20301

_ 22 September 195)

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Subject: Retention and Development of
Forces in Indochina

1. In résponse to a memorandum by the Deputy Secretary of
Defense, dated 10 September 1954, subject as above, the Joint
Chiefs of Staff submit the following views and recommendations.

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered the provisions
of the Geneva Armistice Agreement and the latest National Security
Council policies for the Southeast Asia area.

3. The restrictions imposed by the Geneva Armistice Agree-
ment on Cambodia are minor and can be overcome to a degree suffi-
cient to carry out generally the U.S. national policies in that
area, The restrictions on Laos are major and permit training,
assistance and supervision by French instructors only. In Vietnam
the cease fire agreement constitutes a major obstacle to the intro-
duction of adequate US MAAG personnel and of additional arms and
equipment.

4. Although the French have not submitted for U.S. study
any plans they may have for withdrawal of French forces from
Indochina, some informal and general information has been
obtained as to their present intentions. Based upon this
information and taking into account the estimated capabilities
of the three nations of the Associated States, the Joint Chiefs
of Staff recommend that those forces listed in the Appendix
hereto shorld be retained or developed in Viet Nam and Cambodia.
The estimated costs thereof, listed in the Appendix hereto
must be reexamined in view of the lack of data related to
condition and quantities of equipment and clothing, quantities
of ICC, ammunition and arms to be reissued by the French.

5. Under the terms of the Geneva Armistice Agreement the
training of Laotian armed forces may be conducted by French
personnel only. However military equipment can be furnished
in specified quantities for the defense of Laos through the
French.

