a
foe

i.

“nfo
|

—.

asi

ae aie

"Stion

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

’ TOP SECRET CORRECTED PAGE 3,
: 12/21/54 2 a.m.

ae eae 5891 i
_3- 2250, December 13, 7 p-m., from Saigon. (SECTION 2 OF 3).

(A) , Have Bao Dai’ name Quat to replace Diem as President of
Council. Quat is able, forceful and resourceful and though f
obstacles to his success exist, if given chance he might

succeed where Diem failed. Whether the varicus selfish

grovps in the country would give him that chance is question.

He .s northerner, has only slight political following and, as
indicated in PART I, faces considerable opposition. With

conplete confidence and support of Bao Dai, however, he might

suc eed; without it he would surely fail. ; .

(B) (1) Second alternative is to have Bao Dei return to Vietnam
under "state of emergency" conditions, assume Presidency of
Council and rally entire nation to unified action. What ts
needed here more than anything else is leader who cén fire
imagination and patriotism of pecple end instill in them
determination to fignt for freedom of Vietnam. Bao Dat

may be the last pos sible candidate for this task.

(2) I have been impressed “oe influence Rao Dai still
exercises over leaders Vietnat All leaders continue to
refer to him as "His Majesty" "Bae most regard him as the.
real source of authority Vietnam.

3) To overcome obstacles, dramatize return and establish
self as leader of Vietnam, Bao Dai could take steps such as:

(A) Turning over some of his holdings to government for
~distribution to peasants as step toward agrarian refcrm;

-(B) Form an "emergency" Cabinet ineluding | best available’

Vietnamese -- Quat, Diem, others;

(Cc) Announcing withdrawal French military forces by some
Specific date; a x
‘(D) Issuing temporary demccratic charter to guide government
during PROT ECHONS

(G) Convening. a representative niet:

(H) Calling for a constituent ‘asseubly:
~ abies

wea a4
ee

feats |p Burean of \
an ys ea te
FAR Les oe Ff

- =

6. Though course.

Leterd eee
RAW/VHD ; la pee perme Es

AGT ts 3 TOP ‘SECRET ipa “ as

Tage a, TS) itpereaee mes
