' 197.

198.

199.

~ 200.

201.

- 202.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

- TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Page
Regarding...the assumption by the U.S. of the responsi-
bility for training the Vietnamese Army, Secretary Wilson
forwards the JCS view as representing the Defense Depart-
ment position to Secretary Dulles. Secretary of Defense
Letter to Secretary of State, 12 August 1954......seccceecees (LT

The Ics condur in the view that a ee of intent

to conclude a treaty establishing a collective security
arrangement in the Far East should be issued by the

countries which intend to be treaty members. The JCS

list the provisions which the treaty should incorporate. :
JCS Memorandum for Secretary of Defense, 13 August 1954...... 719

Secretary Wilson expresses the Defense views on the draft
"Southeast Asia Collective Security Treaty" which include

the JCS position. In his view, the recent developments

in Geneva and Indochina increases the urgency for a

"comprehensive United States policy with respect to the

Far East region as a whole." Secretary of Defense Letter

to Secretary of State, 17 August 1954.....ccccceccccccsecsess [OD

Secretary Dulles replies to the JCS: 4 preconditions with
the assertion that “one of the most efficient means of
enabling the Vietnemese Government to become strong is to
assist it in reorganizing the National army and in train-
ing thet army." Even though Vietnam could not meet the
U.S. prerequisites, Dulles believes that strengthening the
army Was a prerequisite to political stability. Secretary
of State Memorandum to Secretary of Defense, 18 August

EAE 9: 8.0'e: are steed iw hich wide dibio in OTE ela SE RO Lae sla baa ee ee eaD, ae Riele 728
The U.S, policy with respect to Southeast Asia provides |
for negotiating a collective security treaty, considers
appropriate action in the event of local subversion, and

outlines political and covert action. NSC 5429/2, |

OO iar a ET ose eo acaiceh bean cane Mites wee Ceding ei ese iaate SOA

The President has approved the policy that henceforth
aid to Indochine would be direct rather than through

* the medium of the French Government. Further, State

203.

feels the Government should respond affirmatively to

Cambodia's request for assistance in training the Royal

Cembodian Army. Secretary of State Letter to Secretary

of Defense, 26 August LOG. scecercccecsevesonesceneedonsencce | 74.2
Australia welcomes establishment of SEATO and is pre-

pared to make an increased military contribution to-

the defense of the area. Australian Aide-Memoire,

"31 August 19D eee eeec eee eece tess eee eeeeeeseeeeeteeeeeeeeses 743

“ocd ii TOP SECES: - Sensiti: .

=
