aa

we |
i

co

oy

co

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a i z : Glassificaiion hi UMD ; ‘ <4
- - = of ~ .
a f a .

oe oe r F | a : : : . Soe a 2 a

B, Ovr tentative proposals on a new government are as follors:
1) Cabinet: The execubive authority ef full povers Wioh Do or Guat as

president and vice president, res spectively, composed of swall muclous of most

ahle naviqnalist leaders. Ii would be highly desirable if the cabinet itself

could inclvide some fron Diem's cabinet and some new faces. ih would Spee as -

.

an interim coalition government until a Soy elec He anton Assenbly is

constituted. The immediate tasks of the new calvingt een - (2) resolution of

se Ss pEch ian, (b) completion of reform of the armed forces nad pole eo, (c) satas =

s .
_*

fachory xesctiloment of present and fiture refugces, (a) energetic politic ak

E
program din provinces, (e ) more active international policy in Southeast Asia,

- : .s LJ ve
and (£) consultation with the Viet Minh on Geneva elections in 1956 and. .

preparations for elections and a, constituent assembly in Free Viet-Neam a

“ : ; 5
time. : ‘t :
7 * F . * ”
=
oy * : eet a7, aA. Sree
2) Consultative Council: An advisory body of 25-35 leading persenalitioas
‘
and erana Panrssensatives, including the sects. Diem should be persuaded iz :
possible 40 accent the chairmanship of this councs. Tes pinetyal function
would te to generate spivis of unity and couporaisien among the people end grouns
throushout Free Vietne. Ab-the request of the président, or the cabinet, it
would advise the president and cabinet on major pattars of state. Tt should
have no executive or aduinistrative funictions. 2 should cominus mnbil the "Sag
consbitution of a permanent structhire of government by a consti assemble.
3) Provisional National Assembly: This quas inLegislative body of elected
and appointed candidetes aiready envisaged and scheduled to te set up ‘
- We a ~
ena 1c, - iia taets Te es RS es
esa0Z | : Classification or ate ries Heese :
