on

ae |

gate |

as ee

Ea Fa

SS] esa FS ree Oe Ur

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

—s

2) From néarly every point = ee Wiree"
Vietnem appeared headed toward 4 sbsorption by the Viet Minh, ~
whether through a Fre nieh-nanaged accommodation pe the Cort
munists or through t
colonial system in Se
tained ageinst t
which, paradoxic
intention of usin

th Wieeron woich aa oo BEEN - sus-
+t inh only by the weight of arms

4

y, the French nad made clear they had no

Bes EVEEGSE OF CO} ENS Biss it Oe oe his Noe co of
to es the Preside nt said he Wes ordering me to Sai fe)
for a limited period to coordinate and direct U.S. activitie
in Victnam in support of U.S. policy objectives. To that
enc, he gave me broad Beta et to direct, utilize anc con-
trol all agencies of the U.S. Government in that country.

My immediate task was to attempt to check a rapidly deter-
loréting situation in VYietnem and to help Diem's ee
establish internal security and political stability throug
cut its territories. The emergency, rather than the long=
range, aspects of U.S. policy in Vietnam were designated the
pr incipal tesk of my mission, «= «

the fact that tne vational” Army wes the key to success or
failure in Vietnam. The Army was under the command of: an
avowed eneny of the Diem Government. So long as the Govern-
ment could not rely on the Army, it was powerless not only.
apainst thé General Staff but also against the sects, each.
with its private amy and special interests, and even more
importantly against the Viet Minh who stooG in a fair way

to win Vietnam south of the 17th parellel through subversion.
Accordingly, my initial efforts were directea coward preparing
recommendations on the National Army which had to be dealt
with before eny of the other urgent problems of Vietnam could
be solved. Fortunately, shortly after my arrival, Genersl
Hinh obeyea the orders Bao Dai had been prevailed upon to
issue, and left Vietnam for France, as I had urged nim to do.
Hinh's departure renoved some of the aspects-of crisis from
the Netionel Army progrem but did not rob-it of its import-
ence as the naticn's most urgent problem.

a6 SaVEN-POLNT F PROGRAM. a. I was soon impressed with

b. In accord with the French Commissioner General
Oanc Dr

Ely, I proceeded 1 theweatoar to draw up a seven-point prozrem
a 2ecion to which I pre opeae to devote the limited pericd
of my mission in Vietnam. I had consulted Ely in Getail as
this program weS being dréewn up, and had obteined his con-

>

currence end the cooperation of his steffi members who worked

.

cawense =?
