Co,

-

rm

Ss. FS Sars eS Ue. CES

a

mia one

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

be prepared to take, to which Vietnamese forces themselves
would-mairce a vitel cantribdution, A

.

(7) Significant prog ress has been made in attain-
ing National Army Su;nort of, and subordination to, the Viet-
namese Government followings the departure of General Hinh.
While it may be too early to say that the Netionsal Army is now
in ali senses the military erm of the goverment, I believe
thet this aspect of the progran is on the right path end with
p tient application will be “fully realized.

(8) She devloyment of the territorial force. of

the national Army to the »rovinces has already ore ihe

e jectives and methods of the National Security Action Prosran
have been explained to military and civil ‘authorities having
responsibilities throughout the country. This program too is
of long range character ané will take some months to execute.
A good start hss been made.

b. Strengthening and Broadening of Diem Government.

Little vrogress Has deen made toward strengtrening and broadening

the Dien Goverment. This feilure.is attributable to the fact

‘that more than half of the present ‘cabinet ministers represent

the sects and are opposed to accepting into the cabinet any

man who might threaten their position there or the place of their
respective sect in the society. Prime Minister Diem contends
that he wishes to broaden his Government but dares not do so
until the National Army has been rendered capable of neutralizing
the private’military forces of the sects. The failure of Diem

to accept Dr. Phan Huy Quet in the Government was a major
set-back, ‘there is still an urgent need for an effective
Minister of tne Interior, and the Ministries of Information

and Agricuiture particularly need strengthening. Considerable
improvenent has resulted from the appointment of Ho Thong Minh
@s Defense Minister and Diem's relinzuishment to him of authorit
to direct and control the Defense Ministry. The new Comaissionen
of liefugees, rnam Van Huyen, also reoresents an improvement.

I fear that no further progress on this front, however, will

be made for. some time to come.

c. Relocation of Refugees. This is likewise a long
range and conplex problem. it nas been under urgent study by
members of USCM and the appropriate ministries of the Govern-
ment, Some progress has deen made in developing plans to

absorb the hundreds of thousands of refugees into the pro ce
life of the nation, particularly in the field of agriculture

de Agratian Reform. President Dien intends to announce
in his Kew Year's message (dJamuary 2lt) an agrarian reform Drogram

Fk
