| a

ey PS ea Bs

a

Fr3

=

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

o= =

(3) Requirenents for United States economic aid
ere expected to increase from approximately $3 million in
FY 1955 to i350 miliion in Cy 1955, ond to 366 million in FY 1956,
or an approximate doubling from ¥¥ 1955 to FY 1956. The major
increase is in transportation and communications, with smaller
increases in egricvlture, education and sublic administration,
and rnublic health.

heny

2)

(i) As shown by the above figures, during 1955
aiid 1956, economic aid re"wiremsnts will increase and militar;
aid requirements will decrease, Enclosure "B" shows graphically
the magnitude of Vietnamese Goverrmment extraordinary exrenses,
the expected Vietnamese contribution, and the amount of United States
aia recommended for military and. non-military aid programs during

1955 and 1956.

& Bducation end Training in Fublic Administration.
ihe Vietnamese Goverment is about to sign a contract with
Michigan State College, under the sronsorship of FOA, which
will provide a much-needed school of public administration and
specialized training in police methods,

5. FROBLW: OF THE SECTS, The normal problems of a divided
country are enormously complicated by the existence in free

Vietnan of two religious sects (Cao Dai and Hoa Hao) and a

powerful band of "nationalistic" frec-booters (Binh Xuyen}.

Bach of ti:ese groups is rendered dangerous by its possession

of armed forces and its control of a considerable portion or

the national territory. The sects and the Binh Auyen, although
they have at various times played an anti-~French role, are vestiges
of bie colonial policy of divide and rule. While no reliable sta-
tistics are available, these sroups claim to embrace abovt ons-tenth
of the population of free Vietnam and to have forces variously
ered totalling 1.0/50,000. ‘he French have incorporated sone
thousands of these armed forces into their Hxpeditionary Corss

and have proviced the financial means for the verpetuation at

the sects as semi-indcovendent principalities. French subsidies:

to the sects, however, which have steadily diminished over

recent months, will, according to General Ely, be entirely sus-
pended as of canuary 31. This develooment, while dangerous in the
immediate future, is of long range advantage to the Vietnamese.
Govermment in thet it offers the opportunity, if properly exploited,
to end once and for all the acute threat of the sects to an orderly
central govermment. Lacing French support the sects will be °
obliged to turn to the national government. If the gsoverzment -
hendles then skillfully, they can be brought into line and shorn

of their power to creste serious trouble. However, if the govern-
ment does not proceed cautiously in this matter, tnere is a pos-
sibility thet“the sects, or fragments of them, may resort to

open banditry at a tine when the national government and arny ‘are
not prepared to meet this new menace.
