Ca: Cy FFF Fay

ea FS ee eS ee eee oes oe

imei |

COPY

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

There was no practical way of getting rid of him. Secretary wished to do
everything to get Diem to enlarge government. It might be possible to
change goverrment at the time of forthcoming elections but question remains
"who is better then Diem." If there is a better man US is ready to consider
him but re-submits no one has been suggested. Although Collins hed reached
agreement with Ely in early April to change Diem he now believes we must
support him,

Faure replied that he thought it best that he speak himself. He wished to
state that France is not in agreement with US views. In the past ve have
concealed this fact from each other but now it is time to speak frankly.
Diem is not a good solution. Joint efforts to prove he is have resulted .
in failure. France is convinced that Diem is leading to catastrophe. Diem
took advantage of Collins' absence to effect a “coup de force” which won
primary victory but which has not contributed to eny lasting solution.

His anti-French sentiments are extreme. France does not object to his being
anti-French if he is capable but being anti-French is not a sufficient
quality in itself. Faure will not continue with him for, one wey or
another, he will bring on a Viet Minh victory. He is surrounded by Vietnam
elements and there is not time to lose. Diem is not only incapable but mad
(fou). He ruined our chances for a possible solution just when it was in
the offing. France can no longer take risks with him. He could yield to
the revolutionary groups. Continuing with Diem would have three disastrous
results;

(1) It would bring on a Viet Minh victory,
(2) It would foeus the hostility of everyone on French, and

(3) It will begin on e France-US breach. Everyone believes that the US
is backing Diem and encouraging him in his anti-French sentiments even if
the French Govermmsent knews US is not.

Faure continued that much of France-US difficulty grows out of fact that we
have never admitted our true thoughts from beginning. Last September ve.
might have had an agreed solution if we had expressed our doubts but we did
not. Bao Dai is a "bad card" but by means of him something is possible but
with Diem failure is certain. We might have been able to save situation on
eve: of coup de force if we had had three-sided agreement (US, France,

Bao Dai) but again we failed. Bao Dai has faults but he can serve a useful
purpose and should be used for thet. He cannot be excluded as a possibility -
for bringing about a more productive solution but as long as Diem is there
the view is obstructed end no situation is possible. Ta resume, Faure said,
Diem is impossible and there is no chance for him to succeed or to improve
the situation. Another man might not be able to improve the situation either
and, in fact, there is no one specifically in mind but at least with

another man there is a chance.

DULLES

