Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ta pevelonm vi of the purpose and ennpability of the non-
Communist’ county cs of the Par last to act collectively and
effectively in Grposing the threat of aggressive Comnuinism,

"D. Eventual establishment of a comprehensive regional
security avrangemont among the non-Communist countries of the
Far Kast, with which the United States, the United Kingdom,
and possibly France, would be associated.

/

"oe, Reducbion of the power and influence of the USSR in the
‘Fat Nast, initially throvgn the containment and reduction of
the relative pover position of Communist China, and ultimately
the detachment of China from the area of Soviet Communist con-
trol." :

4, In pronosing courses of action for the accomplishment of
these objectives, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended that
the United States (2) be prepared to prevent further territorial
expansion by the Chinese Cormunists, (b) retain freedom of action
to apply counteraction, as appropriate, against the Source of

any aggression, and (c) foster a system of treaties which would

lead eventually to a comprehensive and cohesive security arrange-
ment in the Far East area, :
5. At the time these views were expressed, France was main-
taining 2 position of considerable military strength in Indo-
china, and the Associated States were counted among those |
countries which could make“a substential contribution to the
agperegate of non-Communist military strength in the general
area. As the result of the Geneva agreement, the military
position of France and the Associated States is considerably
altered, There % some evidence that France intends to with-
draw the bull of her ground forces from Indochina, leaving,
behind only a token force to conduct training of the armies
of the Associated States. It is now unlikely that the prc -
viously anticipated military potential of the Associated . tates
can be realized, Additionally, the Communists have now gained
a psychological and military victory of far-reaching effect,
have substantially auszmented their manpower, have acquire” im-
portant new food resources, and have exoanded the territo.y

‘under their military control. These altered conditions do

not change the basic objectives which our security interests
require thats we seek in the Far East, bub they do have a con-
siderable influence npon the measures required fov the achieve-
ment of those objectives. :

CO ac eee

e842 UP BEES

eo ue
