ae

rs £3

1

co

f=3

———

es es

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

5. Based on the above considerations, the Joint Chicfs of
Staff vrecorvmmend the follow ing @s a concept and broad outline
plen for the application of U.S. military power under the Manilla
Pact: : :

a. Continued development of combat effective Indigenous
forces, with their structure end training mutually coordinated
to develop local leadership and vrestige, and with improved
capabilities to ereate a cohesive fighting force through
integration of their operations with adjacent indigenous
forces and with support by operations of forces of other
Manila Pact menbers

b. Readiness to retaliate promptly with attacks by the
most effective combination of U.S. armed forces ageinct the
military power of the aggre sor.

c. Encouragement of other Iianila Pact countries to main-
tain forces in readiness to counter aggr
d. Discussion, in general terns, of unilateral military

plans by the Ililitary Representative es to the “Cour rcil to the
extent necessary to insure maxaintim participation and cocnora-
tion by other member nations but not to the extent that U.S.
strategic plans or the aveilability of U.S. forces for imple-
menting such plans might be revealed.

e. Periodic visits by U.S. forces into the area as denon-
strations of intent, ee for joint and conbined training .
exercises,

£. Availability of appropriate nechanism for the employ~
ment of U.S. forces in support of friendly indigenous forces
in the general area,

6, The concept of prompt retaliatory attacks does not enyi-
ase attacks on targets within the aggressor country other than
oe military targets involved in the direct suppots of the
aggressor action, IJf authorized, atomic weapons would be used,

aA ra eS ee

oy a

eo

even in a local: situation, if such use will bring the escrossion
to a swift and positive cesgation, and if, on a balance of politi-~
cal and military consideration, such use will best advance U.S, —
security interests. Under the alternative assumption that anthor-
ity to use atomic weapons cannot be assured, the above concept
would not require ees but this Sasumpbion vould not permit

the most effective employment of U.S. armed forces, and conse-
quently might require greater forees than the U.S. would be
justified in providing from the over-all point of view.
