Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~ fa
aa Oran z ern

Wis Keg nies & A

REPORT OF THE VAN FLEET MISSION TO THR FAR EAST
SUMMARY OF GENERAL AND POLICY OBSERVATIONS
Chapter 5 - United States Position in the Far East: An Appreciation

1. The Problem: “ The problem before us is the failure of U.S. leadership

in the Far Bast. In the light of enormous communist gains in Korea and

Indochina, and the generally deteriorating situation throughout the area,

the national security policies we have been following are pointing towards

ultimate defeat. We must exercise necéssary leadership and develop
opropriate policies for that role.

2. The Enemy's Design: So long as the Chinese Comgunist regime exists,
it will not abandon its goal of conquest, or dominance of East and South-

ast Asia. For the next several years, Communist China is a greater
menace to the Free World than the Soviet Union itself.

3. Implementation of the Design: Since the end of World War II, the
‘Chinese Communist regime has waged a relentless war against the free world,
‘specifically the United States. The conquest of China, Korea and Indochina
have been stages. Geneva is but a first installment. It appears certain
that Communist China will press on towards the objective of controlling

all of Southeast Asia. Her further aggressive aims have been publicly

' announced ("liberation" of Formosa -- Ho Chi Minh's intention to take

over all Vietnam). Commnist China regards the Korean armistice only

as a deferral of the ultimate aim of control of all Korea.

4, The Common Enemy: The common enemy in the Far East is Communist China,
aided and abetted by Soviet Russia. Communist China has pursued a middle
course -- pushing forward her progran- of conquest, but never to the point

of precipitating unlimited war with the U.S. We, by our actions and
inactions, have transformed a once weak communist régime into a world power,
Peace with freedom cannot be restored to Asia as long as the Chinese Communist
regime continues to exist. Unless we stop her now, the results will be
ecatostrophie and we will be forced to intervene eventually anyway to restore
the balance.

5. Implications of Free World Defeat: Further defeats could lead to a
chain reaction and loss of the whole area, including India, to the Com-
munist orbit -- or its neutralization. Communist control of Asia would
be an important step towards control of Europe.

"We must recognize that the defeat we... have suffered in
Indochina is merely a part of the price we are paying for weakness
in Korea -- for the Red Chinese victories in Korea that our self-
imposed limitations forced on our commanders, for an armistice that
relieved Red China of the strains of war... The future will reveal
other prices we. must pay for the free world defeat in Indochina,"

