4] Fa FS Pas Fs eS Ee Ur lL UL

————,

ee ea FS eS Or Ure Ur Oe

*

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

FROM: Saigon
TO: Secretary of State aD May 8, 1955

NO.: 5074, May 5, 9 p.m. (SECTION THREE OF FOUR)

-

NIACT 1
S’ fT DEPARTMENT 5074, REPEATED INFORMATION NIACT PARIS 1305. .

Ts French position. <

A. French position determined by two factors:

| : °
(1) Ely's responsibility for safety FHC and for French lives and property;
ane as signatory of Geneva Accords;

(2) French desire retain cultural and economic presence and to retain
Vietnam as part French Union.

| H
B. Friction between French and Vietnamese’ has reached serious proportions.
It springs from two major sources:

(1) Ely, to meet his responsibility for the safety of French lives and
property, has established a French controlled security zone which includes
large portion residential and business zone of Saigon proper. He has intro-
duced new French battalions to protect this zone. Presence these forces,
reported refusals to permit VNA units to move through French Zone, and
sanctuary provided to three Binh Zuyen posts located within security zone
are constant irritants to Vietnamese nationalists.

(2) Anti-Diem propeganda such as broadcast by Radio France-Asia and allega-
tions of French support of sects, particularly Binh Xuyen, which widely
credited by Vietnamese, have added oil to fire.

C. Ely and French pounet ties here have finally concluded Diem must go.
Increasing French bitterness toward Diem and their sensitivity to "anti-
colonialist" propaganda has to some extent been extended to US whom they
blame for not joining with them in pressing Diem to seek cease-fire. French
likewise tend blame US for recent bloodshed because we did not agree with
them in finding political solution to Seer maeneeh crisis some three weeks

ago.

D. Strong anti-French aspect of Revolutionary Committee has great appeal
to large segments of population which beneath surface has long nourished
hatred and contempt “for French.

coPyY , fit? Spe

