fay fy

ry

ery

aba |

| 1

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~

3. Therefore, he felt we should continue to do whatever was possible
to support the goveriment of Diem. Senator Mansfield sees no alterna
Prime Minister. While recognizing Diemts: weaknesses as an administrator
and manager, Senator Mansfield feels we ought to contime to ba

strongly encourage him to make Dr. Quat Minister of Defense inm

LF)
es ce)
iy

ee

9

Fj

Me

Pie urge Diem to delegate as much as possible of the da; -to-day operations
Bad i

the government to others. Senator Mansfield was o
Oh Collins! time limit of two to three weeks was
dynamite" because it was giving Diem such an awfully
show results or be replaced. ; ; -

p aying with hb Pooittical
short time in which to

h. With respect to Mr. Robertsonts point that the French would subject
the Secretary to great pressure on immediately finding a replacement for
Diem, Senator Mansfield took the strong position that this line of action

‘would only confound the already great difficulties in Vietnam. It would adi

much confusion, take time, and probeny increase the divisions within
Vietnam beyond what they are today. Senator Mansfield was certain the
refugees and many of the Catholic bishovs and church officials would oppose
the replacement of Diem. The Senator felt that Diem represented what small
hope there may be in building something in Vietnam. He was against
relinguishing even the small chance we have with Diem for some unknown

and untried combination. :

S. Senator Mansfield a agreed with General Collins! recommendation that
Embassy Paris urge Bao Dai to cease the long distance wirepulling from the
Riviera and to give Diem complete backing and initiative to run the govern=
ment without interference fron p20 Dai. Senator Mansfield strongly urged
that it was so important to get tais idea across to Bao Dai thet Ambassador
Dillon himself should make the epproach asswaing the publicity of such a
meeting could be kent to a minimum. The Senator also felt very strongly
that Bao Dai should not return to Vietnen,

6. In addition to the above, Senator Mansfield said that Dr. Quat
in his opinion was an able man who. could do much to help bring the ary
under control and into Loyal support of the governyent. He hoped Dien-
would appoint Guat right away. The Senator said that the remarkable
aspect of Diem was unlike most of the Vietnamese, he really was honest,
incormptible and a devoutly dedicated nationalist as well. However, the
Ssnator expressed the personal view that in politics one often has to make.
some compromises in order to get results, He thought that Diem should be
en ncouraged not only to delesate responsibilities to trusted and cepable
ministers, but should also give in to a certain amount of compromise. The
Senator suggested that Dr. Fishel would probably be the best person to work
out with Diem the problem of delegation and political 2 adjustments. It was
clear that the Senator had great confidence in Dr. Fishel. He hoped that the
Department and the Embassy would give the latter full leeway and since he
apoears to have the complete coniidence of Diem. On Mr. Robertsonts point

that

TOP SECRET Q

co

ct

ood
ee
“Ni
