x |

| i)

oo

_———-

{

cy FA SR eA eR ef

: es |

|

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

§. So far, Diem and his principal Vietnamese

National Army (VNA) leaders have appeared
desirous of maintaining good relations with
the French. Diem’s attitude toward Bao Dai
has been less clear and there have been in-
dications that he has been considering the
suggestions of the Council that Bao Dai be
deposed. He may be using ultranationalism

“to bring -pressure against Bao Dai and the

French. If he is thwarted in his objectives
by the French or by Bao Dai, he will become
more susceptible to pressures toward extreme
action.

6. Diem has rallied additional support during
the current military phase, and from this
position of strength, Diem will. almost cer-
tainly continue to gain adherents, including
defections from among the Binh Xuyen and
the sects.

1. The Vietnamese National Army. Aside
from the French Army, only the VNA present-
ly has the capability to enforce Bao Dai’s

- authority in Saigon or to back Diem in tic-

fiance of Bao Dai. There are some VNA ofs-

“cers who dislike Diem and who are concerned

by the developing rift between Diem and Bao
Dai. On the other hand, there is consider-
able pro-Diem, nationalist sentiment in the
army; Diem has gained additional support as
a result of clearing the Binh Xuyen from Sai-
gon; and most importantly, the VNA units in
the Saigon area appear to be loyal to Diem.

8. If Diem should move precipitously to de-
pose Bao Dai, or if Bao Dai attempted to oust
Diem, some elements of the army might re-
main loyal to Bao Dai and attempt to over-
throw Diem. We believe such efiorts would
be unsuccessful, however, even if General

Hinh had entered the country to rally support

for Bao Dai.

9. Bao Dai. As a result of Diem’s stand
against Bao Dai and because of the latter’s
involvement in what many Vietnamese na-
tionalists consider. to’ be a French-inspired
political mancuyer, Bao -Dai’s prestige has
been greatly reduced, whatever the outcome
of the present crisis. Bao Dai’s authority can
only be enforced at this juncture by the force
of French arms and any such action would

_at any time.

almost completely discredit him in Vietnam.
10. There appears to be considerable senti-
ment for the deposal of Bao Dai, and if Diem
gives his consent such action may be taken
For the present, Bao Dai appar-
ently feels that the tide is running with Diein,

_and is attempting to preserve the institution

‘

of the monarchy by accepting the continua-
tion of the Diem government. = i

11. fhe French Government. Tne French
will find it difficult to accept Diem’s success
which came despite their strong and well-
publicized oppssition. We believe that fear of
large-scale violence and of adverse domestic
and world reactions will cause the French
to refrain from overt action in Saigon to re-
strain the VNA or to remove Diem, unless the
situation should threaten serious loss of
French lives. However, the extent to which
the French permit the VNA freedom of action
and the nature of their dealings with the
Binh Xuyen and Bao Dai can still have an
influence on the cuicome of the immediate
situation. Furthermore, we believe that the
French will continue pressures for Diem’s re-
moval; some French elements in Vietnam are
likely to continue their covert assistance to
Diem’s enemies. Ii the French believe that
Diem will succeed in consolidating his posi-
tion, they may decide that they have no
choice except-to repair their position with
Diem as best they can while making plans
for accelerated withdrawal of their forces.

12. The Binh Xuyen. The military potentia)-
of the Binh Xuyen will depend on the extent
of support they receive, directly or indirectly,
from the French and the Hoa Hao. It appears
that the morale of the Binh Xuyen troops is
low, 2 number have already defected, and that

many of the troops may be susceptible to peace

?The Special Assistant, Intelligence, Department
of State, believes that the last sentence of this
paragraph undefstates the difficulty the French
would have in acconimodating to a strong, anti-
French government in South Victnam, ang
therefore believes the sentence should reaq: «yz
these efforts are unsuccessful and Diem anpeareg
to be consolidating his position, the French in
the end may decide that they have no choice
except to sicp up the withdrawal of their Torees
from Vietnam,”

SECRET
