Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

direction required for the raising and maintenance of
armed forces. Uniecss a reasonably stable government is
established, the United States training mission would
lack authority and sovernmental support essentlal to the
successful accomplishment of its mission,

4, While the French Government hes announced its
intenticn to grant indenendence to the Associated States,
4% has not announced a plan for the scheduled relinquishn-
ment: of Frenth authority or for the withdrawal]. of Frenen
officials from Indochina affairs. The residual vesponsti-
bility and authority, if any, to te retained by the French
Goverment, particularly with respect to the control to
be exercised over the aimed forces of the Associated States,
has not yet been made clear. If, in fact, the French were
to retain a degree of authority and direction in the
organization and training of the indigenous forces, the
United States training mission would be prevented froin
discharging its responsibilities’ completely independent
of French particinvation and control.

5. Tne Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that the pro-
posed message is not an unqualified commitment to furnish
military aid or to provide training assistance to the
Associated States, They are in‘accord with the stated
purpose of the message, to reassure both the French and
Associated States Governments of the United States in-
tention to assist in preventing an eventual Communist
take-over in Indochina. However, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff are of the opinion that the proposed message should
state in clearer tcrms:-that the final United States de-
Cision as to the extent’ of military aid and the assump-
tion of responsibility for training will be contingent
upon the establishment of the prereauisite conditions
discussed in paracraphs 2. 3, and 4 above. As presently
worded, the proposed message might convey to the French
that U.S. decisions with respect to these matters have
already been taken. without definite French commitments
as to. their intentions. Further, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff feel that the message should. be more specific with
regard to the United States desire that its representatives
deal directiy with the Governments of the Associated States
and that all United States inilitary material aid snould
eventually be given directly to the Associated States - -
ratner than through the French Government.

o. Tne Joint Chiefs of: Staff recommend that the
Substance of the foregoing views be transmitted to the
