ri

Ps Fe PR FS FS OULU COP

roy

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(2) As soon as current crisis is over, decisive effort must be made to
persuade or otherwise force Diem to reorganize his government and to
establish a cabinet competent to implement broad programs of reform
covered by the Collins-Ely seven-point program, plus a program for inte-
gration of sects into. normal life of Vietnam. —

(3) If, after reasonable further period of trial, Diem is uneble to con-
stitute a government capable of implementing these programs, US should join
with France and Bao Dai in assisting liberal Vietnamese nationalists to
establish a competent government.

B. I recognize that General Ely may irrevocably be opposed to supporting
any Diem goverment. If this should prove to be trucs, I would suggest we
urge Faure government to replace him, preferably with man of caliber of
Di vinat, Or perhaps Georges-Niact. At same time, it would probably be
necessary to replace General Jacquat (who has incurred violent animosity
of Vietnamese during Binh Xuyen affairs) with man like General Cogny.

C. Reference step (3) above, I recognize also that it may be politically
difficult to withdraw US support fron Diem even if trial proves is capable
of establishing an effective government. I still feel that even if Dien
manages suppress Binh Xuyen, this will not change his own basic incapacity
to manage the affairs of govermment. His ‘present successes may even make
it harder for us to persuade Diem to take competent men into government,
to decentralize authority to his ministers, and to establish sound pro-
cedures for the implementation of reform progrems. I am still convinced
Diem does not have knack of handling men nor the executive capacity truly
to unify the country and establish an effective government. If this should
become evident, we should either withdraw from Vietnam because our money-
will be wasted, or we should take such steps as can Oe aay be taken
+o secure an effective new Premier.

D. Pence all this I feel we must keep ovr eyes clearly on ovr main
Objective in Vietnam, i.e., to assist in saving this country from Communism.
No matter who heads the government here, free Vietnam will not be saved
unless sound political, economic and military programs are promptly and
effectively put into action. This will require wholehearted agreement

and coordination between Vietnamese, Americans and French. Difficult as
this may be to achieve, it is possible, in my judgment. If this tripartite
approach is not secure, we should withdraw from Vietnam. -

KIDDER

ClO Pr ¥

erie f cpa ay ys wy pass

Lis Sinn
