fr 3

"ae DO a eo Tis Bc

i

—

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

-3- ° Too Secret

on its advantages and to overcome the obstacles to its SUCCESS,
I have Girected the princival efforts of the United States in.
Vietnam, in cooveration with the French; toward aiding the
Vietnamese, to develop and execute a sentes of emergency prograns
covering the military establishment, agrarian reform, refugee
esettlement, fiscal management, and the establishment of a
netionar assembly. Some progress, of increasing momentum is
being made in all these fields, with corresponding incregse in
the stability of the Government. The least successful aspect
of my mission has been my failure thus fear to induce Diem to
broaden his Government by including other able, experienced
l.aders, such as Dr. Phan duy Quat, former Defense Minister.

. +3. Considering 211 factors, although the situation in
V etnaa is not bright, I believe that if Viem has firm U.S.
Support and guidance and active rench cooperation, or at least.
ecquiescence, his Government.has a reasonable prospect of success,
While the atmosphere in Saigon has improved demonstrably since
November, owing to the departure of General Hinh and the backing
which the United Stetes Government has given | to Diem, I have been
unable to determine the extent of improvement in the seas
and villages of free Vietnam, Thore the Viet Minh will mainta

a siguificant degree of control until the National Security
Action prosran is well advanced. Moreover, tne sects, althouga
displaying some uneesiness thet their days of political sand
finance al indencndence may be numbered, remain devoid of any
sense of national conscience and still have the cavacity to do
great harm. Likewise the prospect of national elections in

1956 hanys as a threat. over cs Vietnam. This threat may

ee

reach the stage of crisis by July 1955, the period when under 7+
the Geneva hecord the tuo odes ere to begin discussions leading
to elections. wWevertheless, in my judgment, there is at least

an even chance that Victnhm can be saved from Comiuunism if the
present srograms of its Government are SS implemented. =a

lh. a. Best available estimate of the costs for Cy 55 of
financing programs of military and non-military aid that I
recommend are:

CY
Military S 152.3 $ 130.9
Non-military bse | Bees
Total Costs $ 206.5 § 169.2
Less Vietnamese Contribution Bhse™ | 3.2
Remaining Requirement for _
U.S. Funds $172.3 g 155.0 .

|

b. In pra ctice, because of celays in making new

aeurt
i ui Nes ls 4
= on |
S67
