Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

: Beal
rs Ec ee we “OF SRORET
Te wee Classification A

o se - . aa = .
ye a . i . we. .

— ‘ : n ‘s : wey i ne
r leaves and now Prime Minister installed, to prevent clear inh Xuyen OTE victor ie

URGE over Diem which would rise to plague successor.

f “hem -: 3) If Rao Nai gives adaquate ausur: mens, eeree and ply sernia
iu i as . ; ;

z inmediavely help the Vietnamese work out the now sligaiont, urge Dien to serve
ro We
oS 2) 9 oe Bid ‘ aan ae
we iu a new capacity, if he will, and provide: full suppor’ for the now governinent
© If Diem refuses, the pregram should nevertholess be carried ond anyy sects
& aS © ot * ; ite

h\) While the Vietnamese ‘in Saigon should fare be he framers of

< ac fCovarnrent lings and Pls il) prob as the
anew goverrment, Collins and Bly will. pz De “have to oe Apracti.ce the

‘ { : : a :;
r This may result in stories reg avding ¢ a ney Collin seinly, GUS Sopa
£ . j : = CPon Be, a 8
= we should make oe atcenpt co keep-the Vie pbnaries? Jabel.

rar —

7) General Collins and Ely should inform Dicm phat as a result of his

inability to create a breadly based coalition government, and because of
Fi : : - sic:
iL eae neeersesiet ace “0 Rim, GRAD govarnments ae | no see a posisions to
. ; o s see
atiemos to prevent his re emoval a ‘om Office. Diemts patriotic qualities are: of
5 ea
7 great, povontial =atuc to Viotuan and ii is hepad he’ ‘si lenda his services to
r ee en a
i. any new EoOvern mere W: Aden mighs appointed.
6) Collins and Rly Logebher.s sreaking. for their governments may be able
er ; 7 By i
| a outlined sub-para 4 above ans
| Lo elicit rac: formula (oom Viotnamess nolitieal leaders behind the scenes.
4 If those leaders, including Diem if practicable, .adopt Sich Bee they
conld osk Pao D2i to courhersign it. If the Viotname Se consulted, cannot agree

ia

among themselves on a candidate,

ee
t

4

tix fame for Dao Dai tod lesignate

puetalsy
or

igs ..
arms end conditions,

Cal ’ . . ‘Bh .
r ers BoB wapetenntacig ct oe : a
hid re ae = : < . Fs a a rs é . ; ‘
f She s 4 OP SLOREY fe. Dee, BL SerDatey y) ba cok aba ge . i
ts eRe AAs Se Tamme Sills Eee ee aoa
dee . Class: fice Sat 2 SE att ie fr

then’ mly and Collins will, have to recommend ai

to form a new government under the ma proper

,
=
°
.
t
