Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Ci eral TIVE
SENSEI

Viet Nam: one, to strengthen the eoveuanare by means of a political
and economic nature and the other, to bolster that government by
strengthening the army which supports it.

The second precondition established by the Joint Chiefs is that
the Governments of the Associated States should formally request that
the U.S. assume responsibility for training their forces and providing
military equipment. As indicated above the Government of Laos has
made no such request and does not contemplate one. However, the
Government of Viet Nam, in a letter from Prime Minister Prince Buu Loo
to the American Charge d'Affaires dated June 28, 1954, did request
that MAAG Saigon participate in troop training and requested U.S.
assistance in providing adequate armament and in financing a proposed
expanded troup base. In the case of Cambodia, the Cambodian Minister
of National Defense, General Nhek Tioulong in a letter dated May 20,
1954, addressed to General John W. O'Donnel, Chief of MAAG Saigon,
stated that the Royal Khmer Government was anxious to complete plans
to set up in the minimum of time three divisions according to the
methods of accelerated instruction used in Korea, on condition that
the U.S. Government assured the Cambodian Government of indispensable
financial and materiel support.

The third precondition of the Joint Chiefs calls for arrangements
with the French guaranteeing full independence to the Associated
States and providing for the phased withdrawal of French forces,
French officials, and French advisors from Indochina in order to
provide motivation and a sound basis for the establishment of National
armed forces. ;

The case of Laos may be set aside since Laos has not requested
U.S. assistance and under the terms of its military agreement with
France is required to look to France for aid in training and other
purposes. Furthermore, under the terms of the cease-fire agreement '
Laos is estopped from introducing foreign military personnel other
than "a specified number of French military personnel required for the
training of the Laotian National Army.” |

In the case of Cambodia, de facto full independence already
exists. Likewise during 1953 and early 1954 command of the Royal
Khmer Army was handed over to thé King of Cambodia and French forces
have been entirely withdrawn from Cambodian soil. There is a minir‘m
of French advisors still attached to the Royal Khmer’ Army.

In the case of Viet Nam, practically the entire French Expenditionary

Corps still remains in that country. It would be militarily disastrous
to demand the withdrawal of French forces from Free Viet Nam before the

creation

Ay a act
fa / Sborir 7 ie 7 i

= P| Sed Lae gah,

i
