2h.

eho.

_2h3.

ahh.

aks.

ohé.

eG

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

General Collins submits a seven step recommendation which
centers on getting rid of Diem and reorganizing the govern-
ment structure. Collins 4448 to Dulles, 9 April 1955........ 894

Diem exists by reason of U.S. support despite French reluc-
tance. If the French view prevails, "removal of Dien...

may well be interpreted in Vietnam, and Asia as an example

of U.S. .péying lip service to nationalist cause, and then”
forsaking a true nationalist leader when ‘colonial interests'

put enough pressure on us." Dulles. 4438 to Saigon, 9 Apr 55.. 907

Bao Dai recommends that the U.S. agree with the French to

-ereate a "Supreme Council" or "Council of Elders" to govern

in place of Diem. The Binh Xuyen could have been used in

the common effort if "Diem had not bungled matters." Bao

Dai cannot rule for Diem by decree and considers Diem's
strength as a "mockery." Paris 4396 to Dulles, 9 Avr 55..... 910

Ely disagrees with the U.S. on maintaining Diem in office.

The worsening situation is attributed to Diem by the

French and "only by surgery, that is renoval of Diem,

can the country be saved." Ely feels that if Diem is

retained, he could not be the responsible French repre-

sentative or remain in.Saigon. Saigon 4661 to Dulles

(Excerpts) 19 Apr 55.....00. als aiaimentese tciee Rei ea iewe Mebaee She

Diem is seen as a barrier to forming an interim govern-

ment and the gap between him and other elements in the

society is becoming wider. The U.S., however, warns

Vietnamese leaders that if Diem is removed as a "sect

victory" it would be "difficult to obtain popular support

in the U.S. for continuation of U.S. aid." Saigon 4662

toy Dues, SO Rae G5 6.54.8 erslorsve oret emer ne Ninweacne Waimea s'sna wwlp eine eee

Diem announces to the U.S. his.willingness to accept a
coalition in the government but on his terms. This

“uncompromising attitude leads Collins to remark: "I see

no alternative to the early replacement of Diem.": Saigon
4663 to Duiles, 20 Apr Ng vou aera iacatala ais cersveraveletwieveigie\e eecelecsieie(e: a) asad 918

Conclusions. and recommendations are offered as a basis
for future Department of Defense positions on the sub-
ject of South Vietnam. Key recommendations made are;
to determine U.S. military action within the scope of
SEACDT to prevent the loss of Southeast Asia as a
result of the loss of South Vietnam, and to postpone —

indefinitely the elections proposed by Geneva Accords

for Vietnam. ISA Letter to State Department, 22 Apr 55...... 923

XLI TOP SECRET - Sens itive

€.
