Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

9. Halting the Shrinkage in the Free World: We are doomed to ultimate
defeat in the Far East if we continue to be precluded from taking strong
action, If the shrinkage of the*free world is to be halted, we must begin
the rollback of communist power. We must exert constant pressure against
China to undermine her position. In the event of Communist assault on
Formosa, we should take the offensive against China proper. Comminist
attack on the offshore islands would present us the opportunity of
destroying a large part of the Chinese Communist air strength, and furnish
the occasion for the start of the rollback which might profitably begin
with the recapture of Hainan. American opinion will support such a strong
rolicy in Asia. ;

Chapter 6. Observations of the Chief of Mission
"9. ‘This policy would have two aspects to be coneurrently followed:
1) defensively, the development of increasing strength and stability in
Bast Asia, (2) the maintenance of continuous pressures against the
Communist apparatus. A regional, multi-national organization, integrat-
ing the assets of the nations in question, will insure the phased de-
velopment of military, political and economic strengths. In particular,

"Under the conditions extant today, Formosa represents an asset
which transcends considerations of pure defense. It constitutes the
most important springboard for the projection of all manner of opera-
tions against the Chinese Communist mainland. It is the potential
rallying point for the totality of non-communist Chinese in Asia,
under a liberal political platform which could have a profound appeal
to the Chinese masses. It houses a vehemently anti-communist govern-
ment which could contribute significantly to a regional orgsnization
designed to solidify the free nations of Asia as a pre-requisite to
action calculated to undermine and weaken the Communist bloc."

Chapter 7 - Explanation of Approach to Survey

11. “Cursory examination revealed that there were no positive and con-
sistent United States policy statements . . . with respect to East Asia
and its component countries. Similarly lacking were clear and unmistakable
prime military missions for the forces of the several countries ...
Consequently, certain hypothetical policies were established in order to
secure a quantitative measure of the forces required for the support
thereof." The first envisages an intermediate policy designed to develop
increasing strength among the free nations of Asia while maintaining
pressures to undermine and weaken Asian communist regimes and being prepared
to exploit by offensive action the situations created by such pressures,
This policy, he states, is geared to the announced intentions of the
Administration, although not adequately reflected in current national
security policies. The second policy considers preventive war. The

third policy considers a distinctly defensive posture.

796
APART
% Has =}
beso ok er bs EI

