a

ey FA ew ra rs Oe

Pr

ory

ateaa
; Sup
has developed in Vietnam, thi

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

¢ ce oe ay) idee - ee “4

of the French Expeditionary Corps is ultimately to be desired, -

it is considered that a precipitate withdrawal now would be
likely to result In an increasingly unstable and precarious
situation. This sltuation would undoubtedly te exploited to
Communist advantage, with the provable eventuality; that South
Vietnam would be lost to communism.

5. In the face of the

3}

fe 63

anti-French sentiment which

e now seems little prospect
that France alone can provide either the leadership or the
resources required to establish a stable Vietnamese government.
Without United States moral and materiel support it cannot be
expected that the VA would develop into a cohesive military
force or maintain even its present limited effectiveness.
Without effective indigenous forces and witnout a Vietnam
government which cai conmand the loyalty and support of its
people, the French iExpeditionary Corps (FEC 1), judged by past
performances, would Ee incapable of preserving the Salen
and integrity of Vietnam, It can therefore be expected that,
following the pattern which led to the loss in the North,
South Vietnam would, in due course, Yall to the Communists.

NE
ai

6. For the foregoing reasons, the Joint Chicfs of Staff
consider that neither of the alternatives suggested represent
acceptable solutions to the problem of Vietnam at this tine, —
They feel it to be in the best interest of France as well as
of the United States that every reasonable effort be exerted to
preserve South Vietnam from communism. It 1s their opinion
that the present situation, involving armed resistance against
the established governmental authority and the dangers inherent
in the role assumed by the Revolutionary Committee, requires the
utmost in cooperation and energetic action by the Vietnamese,
United States, and French Governments toward the restoration
of internal order and governmental control in Vietnam. It is
considered that this should Yee the immediate joint
objective. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that Mr. Dulles
be advised that from the military Porat of view:

a. The government of Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem shows
the greatest promise of achieving the internal stability
ssential for the future security of Vietnam.

b. The United States could not guarantee the security of the
Freneh nationals should the French Expeditionary Cor S be
withdrawn. ;

ery PSST Ca
i hoe Ry pee ee
. eS

co
—~.
ie

3 « tat
ge thee 8 Ft
i ae Rae lease ee ae
