Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Aug 17 1954

Dear Mr. Secretary:

I refer to the Draft Southeast Asia Collective Security Treaty,
copies of which were made available to the Department of Defense by the
Department of State. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have expressed their
views on the draft submitted by the United States member of the Joint
US-UK Study Group on Indochina. The comments of the Department of
Defense are made in light of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and in consideration of a revised version of the draft Treaty contained
in SEAP U-2/1, dated 5 August 1954.

The Department of Defense considers that the revised draft Treaty
is generally satisfactory subject to the following comments:

a. In order to strengthen provisions of the Treaty which
permit protection to be extended to countries of the area not parti-
cipating in the Treaty, the word "general" before "area of Southeast
Asia and the Southwest Pacific" should be added in paragraph four -of
the preamble as well as in paragraph one of Article IV.

b. The Department of Defense believes that in further nego-
tiations, both preliminary and at the time of the meeting of the
Ministers, it should be made clear that no commitments by the United
States to support the raising, equipping, and maintenance of indi-_
genous forces and/or to deploy United States forces in such strengths
as to provide for an effective defense of all of the national terri-
tory of each signatory is implied or intended. Military aid by the
United States to the Southeast Asian countries who are members of
the pact would be limited to that necessary to permit the countries
concerned to raise, equip, and maintain military forces as necessary
to insure internal stability, to provide a reasonably effective
opposition to any attempted invasions, and to instill national confi-
dence. This is consistent with the views expressed at our meeting
on 24 July 1954, and in your message No. 589 to London dated ,

29 July 1954. :

ec. It.should equally be made clear that the treaty would ‘not
commit the United States to a large-scale program of economic aid
to the signatory countries in lieu of military aid since, in “he
‘final analysis, funds for economic aid must come from the total
amount of money available for the national security programs of
the United States.

*

SecDef Cont. No. TS-019h
