frig BE a,

aie:

— ees

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SkCRET ,

The Military Adviser to the host country, General Jira Vichitsonggram
presided but after opening the meeting proposed that he vacate the chair
in favor cf the Military Adviser of the United Kingdom delegation, Field
Marshol). Sir John Harding, the senior officer present. With the concur-,
rence of the other Military Advisers, Field lMarshall Herding accepted. °

As a matter of tactics it had been agreed within the U.S. D2legation
thet Admiral Stump would, in his opening remarks, demonstrate U.S.
sincerity in aiding in the determination of methods for the implementation
of the SEACD? by teking the initiative in arranging for an early conference
of the Military Adviser's Staff Plenners to be followed by an early
meeting of the Military Advisers. A copy of Admiral Stymup's opening
remarks is attached as TAB L.

During this initial meeting of the Military Advisers, csreement
was reached on the following matters: °

Dates and locations of the first meetings of the Military
Advisers and Steff Planners

Agenda for first meetings of Staff Planners and Military
Advisers —-

Responsibility for preparation of position papers
Procedural errangements
Communique

The Philippine Military Adviser during this initia] meeting pro-
posed that a military organization similar to thet of NATO be established
for coordination of military action within the Treaty Area. However,
the Philippine Military Adviser acceded to the unanimous request of
the other Military Advisers thet this matter be included on the agenda
as a matter appropriate for consideration by the Staff Planners at
their first meeting.

The second and final meeting of the Iflitary Advisers was held on
25 February and wad notable for the seme degree of unanimity which
existed at the first mecting. A record of decisions reached at this
meeting is ettached as TAB M.

Tn conclusion, it is considered that U.S. military objectives
were attained during the conference. Hsvever, it is further considered
thet there will be two major factors, with military implications, to
contend with in future meetings of the Military Advisers or Staff
Plenners. ‘They ere:

830

SECRET

r
