Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

a. Grant of complete political independ-
ence to the Indochina states, accompanied by

~' an attempt to organize strong political re-

gimes in those states. We believe that the
French might be persuaded to adopt this
policy by strong US-UK pressure, together
with economic and military assistance to
~ France and a guarantee of the defense of the
free areas of Indochina against further Com-
munist military attack,

b. Continuation of French Union ties with
the non-Communist Indochinese states, with
indirect French political controls and French
economic domination. We believe that French
policy may proceed along these lines if the
.French estimate that: (1) the Communists
will follow a conciliatory policy in Indochina;
(2) the non-Communist leadership will offer
very little difficulty; and (3) the US and UK
will not exert pressure toward a grant of full
independence to the Indochinese states.

ec. Some form of agreement with the Viet

Minh proyiding for expediting elections and ~

achieving. a unification of Vietnam. The
French might be inclined to follow this line if
the Viet Minh held out promises of the main-
tenance of French economic and cultural in-
terests, and of the continuance of some form
of association of the unified Vietriamese state
with France.

d. Withdrawal of all French military, a

ministrative, and economic support from In-,
dochina. We believe that this would occur
only in the event of a hopeless deterioration of
_ political, military, and economic conditions in
the area.

19. International policies. The political sur-
vival of the Indochirtese states is endangered
not only by the threat of external Communist
attack and internal Communist subversion,
but also by their own inherent inexperience,
immaturity, and weakness. We believe that
‘without outside support the MIndochinese
states cannot become strong enough to with-
stand Communist pressures. The course of
. developments in Indochina will be largely in-
fluenced by the attitudes and policies of other
powers. In general, we believe that in the
absence of firm support from the US, the non-

Communist states of Indochina cannot long
remain non-Communist. If they are given
opportunity, guidance, and material help in
building national states, they may be able to
attain viability. We believe that the energy
and resourcefulness necessary for this achieve-
ment will not arise spontaneously among the
non-Communist Indochinese but will have to
be sponsored and nurtured from without.

Outlook in Vietnam

20. Outlook in North Vietnam. Communist
activities in North Vietnam will be concen-
trated upon consolidation of Communist con-
trol, with their efforts in this respect probably
appearing moderate at the outset. The Viet
Minh will probably emphasize social and eco-
nomic reforms and the participation of all

political, economic, and religious groups in

state activity. At the same time, Viet Minh
cadres will establish themselves throughout
the Delta, will begin the process of neutraliz-
ing all effective opposition groups, will under-
take the usual Communist program of popular
indoctrination, and will prepare for the elec-
tion scheduled in July 1956. We believe the
Communists will be able to achieve the con-
solidation of North Vietnam with little diff-
culty.

' 21, We believe that the Viet Minh will con-

tinue to develop their armed forces. Although
the armistice provisions forbid the Viet Minh
from increasing their supply of arms, we be-
lieve they will covertly strengthen and possi-
bly expand their armed forces with Chinese
Communist aid. Viet Minh force3 will almost
certainly continue to receive training in
China.

22. Thus established firmly in North Vietnam,
the Viet Minh regime will probal , retain and
may increase its symbolic attraction as the
base of Vietnamese national independence.
Its methods of consolidating control will prob-
ably continue for some time to be moderate,
and, its internal program together with. its
military power, will be calculated to make
the regime attractivé to the remaining peoples
of Indochina. It is possible, however, that the
Viet Minh may find it desirable or necessary

SECRET

6S5
