im 3 FU

r

'
1

a

oo

ey Fe rs

=4

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

. by 2
GEN, Jd. LAYTON COLLINS :

al. POST- CERNE e, a

a. Oricin of the

z deen enh ot reenter iano,

Grists: The imnediate cause of th: srisis in Vietnam woich
reached en acute phese in the fall of 195) wes the Geneva
feeord. This agreement ended seven years of war by dividing
te country at the 17th perellel and awarded administration
o. Tonxin Ae northern Annem to a victorious Communist 2rmy
and regime. Uncer French leadership Vietnam had participated
in the war under conditions which tended to perpetuate the
é sential features of colonial rule. These conditions dis-
eburaged the growth of institutions which might have consti-
tnéted a4 bulwark ageinst the Vieb Minh in the South even after
the enemy hed orevailed militarily in the North. Vietnar
energed from the war with nominal independence, but this
XE popular evpeal than the anti-colonial slogans

he inh, Its so-called National Army at the moment
of defeat was neither aetaonel nor.an army. Its civil ad-
ministration was demoralized, Tts government lacked effective
oi n the prospect of national elections

eae

—

re Sern heaven
control and was faced with

(

in 1956 wiich could reunite the country under Communist con-
trol. However, this government, headed by Ngo Dinh Diem
since June 1954, was the first nationalist government of
Vietnam end with its moral force resolutely opposed the Viet
Miah, "’ re

. Diem end his Opposition. (1) Because of its

anti-Viet Minh end nationalist character, the Diem Government
wes unpopular with nearly the entire range of French official-
dom. Some French elements Hoped for én accommodation between
North end South which would permit the French to continue to
do business with the entire country. Others nourished the

illusion that @ quasi-colonial regime could be established
and perpetuated in Cocninchina. Under pressure from both
cides, the French Government through its representatives in
Paris, Washington and Saigon, made “repeated representations
to the US Government, wnich had publicly sta ted its support
of the Diem Government, to the effect that Diem had had h
chence, had failed, and should be replaced. The negative re
ply to ehese overtures wes based on the U.S. contention that
Diem, owing to circumstances beyond his control, had not had
a real chance,to prove himself; that to replace him without
removing the impediments to his success would only lead to
another failure; and that the men sugsested by the French to

+
o

oo
ai
193)

ithe — raat oat Sa a Pitas =
‘ wt? Steet 4a
ine spat OM eset
re lad
St ro bs
