r

210.

211.

2l1e.

213.

elk.

215.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

‘ OP 'SECRET - Sensitive

Page

The U.S. and France agree to support Diem in the estab-
lishment of a strong, anti-Communist nationalist govern-
ment. The five key elements recognized which can provide
a chance of success are: Bao Dai, General Hinh and the
National army, and the three sects. The Binh Xuyen sect,
which controls the police and is tied to Bao Dai, is to

. be isolated from Bao Dai and their strength minimized.

TOSEC 9, 30 September TORN. ona cc dhaevcnd ha cachs basdineas 765

Secretary Dulles feels that U.S. policy on the magnitude
of force levels and costs for Vietnam should be based on
NSC 5429/2-which provides for internal security forces
under SEATO: "....it is imperative that the United
States Gevernment prepare a firm position on the size

* of forces we consider a minimum level to assure the

internal security of Indochina.” Dulles Letter to
Wilson, 11 October FiSpe GA) arncr SOonU nae Jos aes Soon ac 768

Defense forwards Secretary Dulles letter (Document 204,

page 746 ) to JCS and requests the JCS to co their

previous estimates (Document 202, page 742) in light of

the more recent views of Dulles. - ISA Memorandum for JCS, ;
14 October LQG cece a sescecccencssncacscesesseenesccecccceres 770

The JCS, in reply to the Secretary of State's letter of

11 October (Document 210, page 765), persist in their

view that the U.S. should not participate in the train-

ing of Vietnamese forces. However, if “political con-
siderations are overriding," then the JCS agree to

assignment of a training mission to MAAG Saigon "with

safeguards against French interference...." JCS, Memo-

randum for Secretary of Defense, 19 October 1954.........06.. Tf1

Dulles reports on a conversation with Mendes-France on
the critical situation in Vietnam. The French position {

_ is that plans should be laid for another government

structure in the event of a Diem failure. ‘They stress
the importance of utilizing the “thread of legitimacy
deriving from Bao Dai...." Dulles requests the State
Department estimate on the political situation.

i DULTE ay 20 October LOG N Wise de duesdeses vaceeoes yo spantes ae “15

A new approach to leadership training and "cross-

fertilization between Western and Asiatic ideas" is
proposed in a psychological operations concept en- be
titled "Militent Liberty." The implement=tion of

"Militant Liberty" -- a concept which “motivetes indi-

genous people to work toward a common goal of indivi-

dual freedom" ~- is proposed on a test basis in Indo-
prop

china as a joint militery-CIA venture. Defense Memo

2x! TOP SECRET - Sensitive

[
