+)

PA} &

ace

4. Fs F454 FS. eS. a

path ny

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ; (Pi~95) .

40 Recommendations: The Staff Fae eee recommends;
a. That, at future SEATO Milits
conferences, a Public Relations Committee be
responsibility of supplying materiel ie Fa

apes and Steff Planners
steblished with the sole
li mass coimaunications mcdia.

Lae Thet the Military Advisers ins tenet their representatives
on the Public Relations Committee, prior to the mee bing, on the thenes
and’ policies which they consider should be emphasized in public relations
naterial. . . ce |

ce. That the Public Relations Cormittee should convene prior

to SEATO Military Advisers and Staff Plenners conferences to analyze past

performances and formulate a public relations policy for guidance during

the conference, (Note: The effectivencss of SELTO public relations

cannot be meas aes mati post-conference reports concerning public
relations are available in all countries.)

ad. That the members of the Public. Relat ions Committes should
have no other duties.

e. That the representative of the host nation on the Public
Relations should be the channel through which all publicity pertaining
to the conference is released locally, . “Ee
f, hat all Military Advisers shovld, as soon as possible

individually notify the Secretariat of their agreement that the Publ ite.
Relations Commlttes should meet in Melbourne on 121 January, 1956 an
agree to a comimnigus for issus prior to the Military Advisors! mooting
on 16th January, 1956,

IV. REQUIRFASUTS FOR FUTURE WORK:

A. Militery Advisers" Group:
1. The Militery Advisers' Group is due to moet in Melbourne on
16 January 1956. The Steff Planners suggest that ee hould consider the
following agenda:

a. Agerda Tten As Approval of the suzmary report of the
Military Steff Planners Conference at Pearl Herbor in November 1955.

bo. feenda Ttea_B: Consia eration of the United States péper
on the relationship “between the Militar wy Advisers! Group and the Council
Representatives. .

ec. . Agendas Tten Gs. Agreenent to the military Praerens
reports, to be sutaitted by the Secreteriat, for subaicsion to the SEATO
Couacil Representatives.

a. Agenda Iten D Other business, :

. 1031 wee
