NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

é

to adopt a strongly repressive domestic pro-

gram which would ‘prejudice its psychological
appeal and political prospects. Barring such
‘repressive Viet Minh policies, the unification
issue will continue to be exploited to Com-
munist advantage. throughout Vietnam.
Meanwhile, the Viet Minh regime will con-
..tinue to-strengthen the Communist under-
ground apparatus in South Vietnam, Laos,

- and Cambodia, aware that significant Com-
munist gains in any one of these countries will
strengthen the Communist movement in ‘the
others. It will s¢ek to develop strong overt
Communist political groups where possible
and will generally use all available means to-
wards the eventual unification of the country
under Communist control.

23. Outlook in South Vietnam. We believe
that the Viet Minh will seek to retain sizeable
military and political assets in South Vietnam.
.Although the agreements provide for the re-
jmoval to the north of all Viet Minh forces,
many of-the regular and irregular Viet Minh
4 soldiers now in the south are natives of the
area, and large numbers of them will probably
‘eache their arms and remain in South Viet-
ynam. In addition, Viet Minh administrative
_‘éadres have been in firm control of several
large areas in central and south Vietnam for
jseveral years. These cadres will probably re-
[main in place. French and Vietnamese efiorts
‘to deal with “stay-behind” military and ad-

ministrative units and personnel will be great-

‘ly hampered by armistice provisions guaran-
~ teeing the security of pre-armistice dissidents
from reprisals. sly. er

24. The severe problem of establishing and
maintaining security in South Vietnam will
probably be increased by certain provisions of
_..the Geneva agreements which prohibit the
~ import of arms and military equipment, ex-
cept as replacements, and the introduction of
additional foreign military personnel, the
establishment of new military bases, and mili-
tary alliances. These provisions limit the de-
‘velopment of a Vietnamese national army to
such numbers as may be equipped by stocks
evacuated from Tonkin, plus stocks now held
in Saigon. However, in the last analysis,

’ of Tonkin to Communist control.

Vietnamese security will be determined by the

.degree of French protection and assistance in
the development of a national army, the en-
ergy with which the Vietnamese themselves
attack the problem, and by the will of the non-
Communist powers to provide South Vietnam
with effective guarantecs.

. 25. In addition to the activities of stay-behind
military and administrative groups, the Viet

Minh will make a major effort to discredit
any South Vietnam administration, and to
exacerbate French-Vietnamese relations, and
appeal to the feeling for national unification
which will almost certainly continue strong
among the South Vietnamese population. The
Communist goal will be to cause the collapse
of any non-Communist efiorts to stabilize the
situation in South Vietnam, and thus to leave
North Vietnam the only visible foundation on
which to re-establish Vietnamese unity.
French and anti-Communist Vietnamese
efforts to counter the Viet Minh unity appeal
and Communist subversive activities will be
complicated at the outset by the strong re-
sentment of Vietnamese nationalists over the
partitioning of Vietnam and the abandoning
It may be
difficult to convince many Vietnamese troops,
political leaders, and administrative personnel
in Tonkin to go south, let alone to assist ac-
tively in the development of an effective ad-
ministration in South Vietnam.

26. Developments in South Vietnam will also
depend in large part on French courses of
action. Prospects for stability in South Viet-
nam would be considerably enhanced if the
‘French acted swiftly to insure Vietnam full
independence and to encourage strong nation-
alist leadership. If this were done, anti-French
nationalist activity might be lessened. With
French military.and economic assistance —
backed by US aid — the Vietnamese could pro-
ceed to develop gradually an effective security
force, local government organization, and a
long-range program for economic and social
reform. Nevertheless, it will be very difficult
for the French to furnish the decree of assist-
ance which will be required without at the
same time reviving anti-French feeling to the
point of endangering the whole effort.

SECRET

636
