Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Be - "OP SECRET
~2- 255, December 25, 8 p.m., from Saigon, CORRECTED COPY

States with respect to assumption of training responsibility or
f direct military aid and have indicated that my final recommenda-
tions will be dependent upon the progress actually. achieved by
his government during the remainder of my, stay here. I am in
full accord with position taken by Secretary outlined in
paragraph 8. Ve:

a . g.,-I thoroughly disagree with the suggestion made by Mendes
f : in paragraph 9 and;by-Eden in paragraph 11. As I view situation
i . there are only fouf acceptable solutions with respect to Bao Dat:
- either (a) he should return to Saigon and use his full authority
and influence to force sects and all other elements of country to
Support progressive program of Diem, or some other Premier if
Diem is replaced; or (b) he should personally assume active di-
rection of the government as Chief of State and Premier; or (c)
he should cease pulling eny strings from France or esserting any
influence, excépt as specifically requested by French and
Americans pending establishment of constitutional monarchy; or
(a) he should renounce his authority as Chief of State. I -
“ assume that these and perhaps other alternatives will be
‘examined thoroughly in Washington as indicated in Embassy
telegram 2477 and Department telegram 2599, repeated Saigon 386.

4. Quite frankly I was disturbed: over the attitude assumed by
Mendes as indicated in paragraphs 21 through 24. Inference in
zy paragraph 23 that Vietnamese Government had been breaking

Geneva agreements with respect to public utility services in
Haiphong is not factual to our best information. I told Ely
that I had issued positive instructions to our MAAG and USOiM
representatives in Haiphong to cooperate fully with French in
preventing violations of the Geneva Accord in Haiphong enclave.

ry

- _No single report of violations has been made to date. I wonder
da, whether Mendes' reference is possibly a removal of US financed
mining equipment which French commercial firms and Sainteny
¢- _Mission may be concerned with. Ely has promised to have more
a valuable and better conditioned equipment of this character
removed. However, Daridan only yesterday said there may be
os Some question as to whether this equipment could be interpreted
a "- under the Geneva Accord as pertaining to public utilities.
5. Statement in paragraph 24 by Mendes that Collins-Ely agree-
' ment reference military training would have to be studied
bu carefully from legal point of view again raises question
authority delegated Ely and extent to which he will be
¢ supported by Mendes government in agreements made as indicated
| °° by Mendes in last Washington conference. If our conduct of

training is to be hedged about with legal interpretations of
c - the character in paragraph 24, then I would recommend that we
; not assume this responsibility. As indicated in an earlier
ti) message, Ely had agreed with me that if necessary, strength of

= =

eC is 3 3 our MAAG
‘ 857 3 fo: Roe!
TOP SECRET an a sy Th
