a

—_
{

a>. a eR

ry es Ue CURD

cao I a a

ea UU: 6

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Cc
ae)
o>
ee
a
cpio |
4

In reply refer to T-16501/5 ~ | 16 December 1955

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF THE NAVY

SUBJECT: Southeast Asia Collective Defense poe (SEATO) Staff
Organization

Reference is made to the forthcoming meeting of the SEATO Council

to be held at Karachi, Pakistan, commencing 6 March 1956.

The Department of State has informed this office that pressure is
increasing, particularly from the Asian members of SEATO, for a permanent

'SEATO Council and Military Staff organization. At a recent meeting of
the Militery Staff Planners held at Pearl Harbor, TH (1-15 November),
“it was the conclusion of the U.S. representatives that the position of
_the U.S, relative to avoiding a commitment to the concept of a permanent
SEATO military staff organization was fast becoming untenable. - CINCPAC

reported this in his message to CNO, 230211Z November, when he stated
"Tt has been U.S. policy to oppose formation of a permanent SEATO staff

_ organization. ‘In this connection, formation of some sort of permanent

SEATO staff organization may be inevitable and U.S. eventually may find
it RECeE eer to yield on this point or find itself in no position to
refute 'paper tiger' charges. It may be more realistic to take the
initiative in this matter so as to be in a better pee» to influence
the size and shape of the end product,"

The attitude of the Asian countries signatory to the Treaty indi-
eates that they are losing faith in SRATO as a means for deterring Com-
munist expansion in Southeast Asia, In this connection, the Asian States
consider that the U.S. is not leading sufficient support to SEATO,
Further, the recent Russian visits to Southeast Asia and continuing
Chinese Communist activities in the area could result in the Asian
members of the Treaty leaning more to a neutralist position.

The Department of State is currently re-exanining the U.S. position
as pertains to a permanent staff organization for the SEATO Council and
has indicated that, due to the need for adding "substance" to SEATO,
consideration is being given to the desirability of a U.S. proposal
at the 6 March Council meeting, for the establishment of a permanent
SEATO Council staff.

SecDef Cont. No. S-578

S403
