Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

Washington 25, D. C.
22 September 1954

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Subject: U.S. Assumption of Training Responsibilities
in Indochina.

1. This memorandum is in response to the memorandum by the
Acting Secretary of Defense, dated 31 August 1954, which re-
quested the comments and recommendations of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff on the State Department views on establishing a MAAG
in Cambodia and a training mission in MAAG, Saigon. It also
responds to the memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary
of Defense (ISA) dated 15 September 1954 which transmitted
additional State Department views on Cambodia to be considered
in connection with the memorandum of 31 August 1954, and to
the memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
(ISA), subject: "Training for the National Police Force of
Vietnam," dated 21 September, 195}.

2. In their memorandum for you dated 4 August 1954, subject
as above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff set forth certain condi-
tions which they censidered should be met before the United
States assumes responsibility for training of the Armed Force
of the Associated States. In their memorandum for you, dated
12 August 1954, subject: "Message to the French Prime Minister"
the Joint Chiefs of Staff reiterated two of these preconditions
in their recommendations concerning the proposed message to the
Prime Minister of France. From a military point of view, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that all of the previously ex-
pressed preconditions are still valid and desire to point out
that conditions in South Vietnam fall short of meeting these
preconditions. In the light of Presidential approval of the
message to the Prime Minister of France and in light of Presi-
dential approval of Sections II, III, and IV of NSC 5429/2,
the Joint Chiefs of Staff offer no further objection in the
establishment of a MAAG in Cambodia. However, the Joint Chiefs
of Staff note with concern the unstable political situation
presently existing within the state of South Vietnam, and

(pe)

