r ey Foo | eT: Ree

ic. |

a ry

rs FT

ay A ey Pe py

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

7. im the event penecral wor should develov, U.S. forces wild
~ dep oye es Indicated in emergency war plans, and with the
ee effort Cecvoted to strategic areas considered more vital
on Sou theast Asia. Rowever should en aferession result in

volonged Localized conflict of limited objectives, additional

. Lorees cotild be deployed to the area if required. The
pplication of this additional U.S. military power, in conjunc-

n with the military pover of other_renber nations of the

nila Peet, would involve the movement, deployment, and support
f U.S, forees not within presently approved force levels, and
2 mobilization of the defense effort of the Manila Pact nations.
Li. order for the United States to mien one this additional effort,
the military budget and personnel ceilings would requive con-~
siderable increases,

| 8. The ahove considerations are based on currently planned
U.S. military capabilities end on the assumption that the United
States will not enter into specific agreements with other Manila
Pect covntries in regard to connitment or earmaariing of U.S.
forces for employment in the Southeast Asia erea or Vestern
Pacific. Such @ position will permit the United States, in

the event of further Communist aggression in Southeast Asia,
freedom of action in determining the type of U.S. forces to be
imployed and the method of their employment, and can be s
implemented as to retain the support of member nations of the
Menila Pact and other friendly or neutral countries in the
general area, It must be fully understood that the United
States cannot guarantee the territorial intepgrity ot any nenber
nation, but at most can help secure the independence of those
countries whose peoples desire i6 and who are willing to under-
take the BSE OMe sibilities of self-govermment..

9. The Joint Chiers of Staff consider that success in imple-
menting the above concept will be dependent on the resolution —
with which future U.S. decisions concerning the Tianila Fact are.
made and carried out, However, frequent pronouncements by high
goverment officials to insure better Sa understanding of
our objectives and necessary courses of action will materially
assist in obtaining success,

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

ak Carck wie tow nes

ARTHOR RADFORD
Chairmen,
Joint Chiefs of Starr,

