ae

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

.

With respect to the military aspects of tic Treaty, most of the par-
ticipating States, notably the Philippines and Thailand, urged provisions
thet would explicitly com:it the Treaty Farties to take military action in
event of aggression in the Treaty crea. The commitment of the United
States to such action, of course, wes the purpose of these urgings.

Much was said about the desirability of the NATO as opposed te th
allegedly weaker ANZUS formula, Most of the participating States argued
thit explicit commitments to take action were necessary if the Trenty was
to he ive the Caseee dsterrent effect on the Communists.

The United Statics was faced in this issue, J believe, with the dil-
omma of attempting to attain two objectives that were not completely com-
patible: on the ons hand thore was a desire to placo tho Communists on
notice as clearly as possible that further aggression in the arca would
moct with offective collective counter-action. Such unequivocal notifi-
cation would tend to enhance the psychological effect of tho Treaty on
the Free orld and the doterrunt offect on the Sommunists. Yet on the
other hand, in seite of the greater psychological effect that a strongly
wordcd Treaty might have, tho attainnent of this object*ve was nccessearily
limited by the extent to. which the Unitod Statos, in its own interest,
could undortake advance militery commitments under thu’ Troaty in restric-
tion of its freedom of action. A furthcor limitation was tho fact that
the United States can commit itself to taks militery action only in sccord-
ance with its Constitutional processes, Thus, opposed to the ee ctive of
maximum .psycholosicsl cffect was tho necossity that the United States re-
tain essential freedom of action, and evoid treaty commitments haat viurd
inconsistent with Constitutional requirements and therefore prejudicial
to support for ratification of the frecty by the Senate, ‘

Tho Treaty as it stands agreed is in effect a reconciliation of
these conflicting objectives. At the momont it sorves more & psycholog-
ical than a military purposes. The area is no better prepared than before
to cope with Commusist aggression. As time gocs on, however, tho Treaty
cin provide nucleus for coordinsted defense, ond may rally presently
uncommitted States to the non-Communist side.

+
6,
Py
re)

Military Aspscts of the Treaty

——

You may recall that following the work of the Joint U.S.-U.K. Study
Group which met from 7 to 17 July 1954 in Weshington to lay the groundwork
for the Treaty, the Dapartmont of State prepared a draft which served as
the basis for oe among the Unitcd Ststes and other intcrosted.

‘Governments. This draf es referred to-tha Joint pe efs of Staff. for

comment on 22 July 1964, The viows of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, sub-
mittod to you on 15 fugust 1954, fomnod the basis ie your letter of
17 sugust 1954 to the Sccretary of State. This letter, together wit
letter of 19 fugust 1954 from Acting Secretary Anderson to Mr. Robsri
Burpay on. the subject of military machiucry undcr the Treaty, contai
