Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Aug 18, 1954
SECRET

Dear Mr. Secretary:

I have received your letter of August 12, 1954, setting forth
the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on requests from the Govern-
ments of the Associated States of Indochina for United States
assistance in training the indigenous forces of these states. The
Joint Chiefs of Staff established four preconditions for United
States participation in such a training program and you add the
further consideration that an international interpretation of the
cease-fire agreement may in any event impose limitations on the
extent of military training, as well as end item assistance, that
could be undertaken by the United States in Indochina.

The first precondition of the Joint Chiefs is that there be a
reasonably strong, stable civil government in control of the Indo-
chinese states requesting United States assistance. This condition
applies to the Government of Cambodia which is strong, stable and
enjoys the whole-hearted loyalty of the population. A similar
situation likewise exists in Laos but there, because of the restric-
tive terms of the cease-fire agreement and likewise because the
Laotian Government has never made a request for U.S. training
assistance, the problem does not arise. In the case of Free Viet Nam,
the civil government, which has been under the presidency of
Mr. Ngo Dinh Diem for only slightly more than a month, is far from
strong or stable. However, we are currently perfecting measures
which may assist that Government rapidly to increase the effectiveness
of its administration. I should like to point out that one of the
most efficient means of enabling the Vietnamese Government to become
strong is to assist it in reorganizing the National Army and in
training that army. This is, of course, the familar hen-and-egg
argument as to which comes first but I would respectfully submit that
the U.S. cr ald profitably undertake two courses of action in Free

‘a Viet Nam:
The Honorable

Charles E. Wilson,
Secretary of Defense.

SECRET
