Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF TRAD aran
aay iT

Washington 25, D.C.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Subject: Review of U.S. Policy in the
Par East - NSC 5429

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff submit herewith their views
with respect to a draft statement of policy prepared by the
National Security Council Planning Board titled "Review of
U.S. Policy in the Far Bast" (NSC 5429), which is scheduled
for consideration by the National Security Council at its
meeting on 12 August 1954.

2. In their memorandum for you dated 9 April 1954, sub-
ject "U.S. Strategy for Developing a Position of Military
Strength in the Far East (NSO Action No. 1029-b)", the Joint
Chiefs of Staff recommended that the United States formulate
a comprehensive policy in which the Far Hast is viewed as a
strategic entity and which would provide definitive direction
for the development of a position of military strength in the
Far East. NSC 5429 lacks a statement of United States objec-
tives with respect to the area as a whole and broad courses
of action for the achievement of such objectives, and hence
does not constitute a comprehensive statement of policy as
envisaged by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

3. Accordingly, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that
NSC 5429 be returned to the Planning Board with appropriate
guidance for derivation and exposition of U.S. objectives in
the Far East and delineation of broad courses of action
directed toward their attainment.

.. Specific camments of the Chief of Naval Operations, the
Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force and the Commandant of the Marine
Corps on the material included in NSC 5429 follow:

"a. We concur in the view of the Defense, JCS, and
ODM Members of the Planning Board, contained in the foot-
note on page 3 of the draft, that U.S. policy with regard
to China should be considered and determined first, and
that the policy with regard to the peripheral areas
should be established in light of this determination.

~ 709
