2 Sy B= 2250, Deceuber 13, 7 p-m., from Saigon, CN 5865

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

* a ’ P + oo *

: TOP SECRET ref RHE ERY
CORABOURO PAGE 27>

(A) Since Luyen's retura from Paris, his open opposition to

Quat has undermined Diem's decision to appoint Quat Minister of
efense. On 11 December Diem informed Fishel as follows: -six of
seven cabinet memoers consulted by Diem have voiced strong oppost-
tion to Quet. Generals Phuong (Ceo Dei) and Soai (Hoa Hao) have
declared they will withdrew from government and threaten-open
rebellion if Quat appointed. EHecause of location Hoa Hao terri-
tor , Diem purporss to fear General Soai might cut off rice supply
of waigon-Cholon, block road and waterway traffic through coastal
areas and to Saigon, make war in Hoa Hao ereag against national
army which in present condition could not (repeat not) handle

siti ation. Diem fears also comparable action might be teken by
Cao, Dai forces, including possible moves egainst government in
Saigon and vicinity.

(B) Diem told Fishel that he had informed Phuong and Soai that
Americans wanted Quat as Defense Minister. The Generals replied,
"a responsible American should speak for the Americans". Hence
Diem asked Fishel to transmit these "facts" to me, saying if I
or "some other person" can convince’ Phuong and Soai not tnepedt
not) oppose actively the appointment, Diem will appoint Quat at
once. (A neat passing of the buck, we must admit). If sect

_keaders persist in their opposition, Diem says he would be

ia |

—
t !

ra

=
i

DYUOADAT OMY 6 Thie sanz much ha returned én ots S.wontral filec with natatian nf actinn tal-

inclined raise present Deputy Minh to Defense Minister and give
him full authority and responsibility over armed forces.

(C) I am quite convinced that Diem and brothers Luyen and Nhu are
afraid to turn over control of armed forces to Quat or any other
strong man. They may also fear Quat as petential Successor to
Diem and hence are doing everything they can to keep him out of

any post in government. With General Hinh fired and Generali Vy
replaced as Chief of Staff by spineless General Ty, Diem has fairly
effectively seized control of army. I doubt Diem would delegate
real authority to Mirh, but would retain meddling hand on details
to detriment O'Daniel's training misSion end effective development
of armed forces. : oe

(D) Through Colonel Lansdale's group and CAS, I am canvassing
attitude of Sect ie:rders and genuiness of their alleged threats.

Depending on Iansdale's findings, I will consider (1) proposing to

Ely a direct US-French approach to General Soai, who Quat has said
will bow to French pressure; (2) having Lensdale suggest to Soai
that with Quat in defense all rice for armed forces would be pur-
chased from Hoa Heo (this wes hint dropped some time ago by Quat
as meang of buying off Hoa Hao); (3) sending emissaries to Soai,
Huong and C20 Dai Pope (Pham Cong Tan) making clear that any
rebellion would lead to withdrawel all American aid and inéviteble
Victory for Ho Chi Minh who would certainly not (repeat not)
tolerate private empires of Hoa Hao or Cao Dai.

(E) I realize disadvantages of forcing Diem to accept "American:
812 CiGice” 4 %

to*
.

=!
er a
