itm Se

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

=

suthority over the: National irmy, I discussed the matter with

Otjaniel. oneral O'Daniel was very much opposed to the idea 4

of revlacin be Hinh ang ‘bo tois manner of doins it. He expressed

Binacit as preferring minh to Diem, should he have to make a

choice between the two men. a ; ; :
Following our conversation, and without indicating his in-

tentions to me, Gereral O'Daniel went to see Hinh and, as he put.

it, "sounded him out" on ais attituce toward Diem and on whether

or not he would consider visiting tne United States at-tanis time.

General O'Daniel returned to tell me that he was convinced of the

sincerity and patriotism of Hinh and of his willinsness to co-
operate lovully with the President. O'Daniel also said that Hinh
would not consider visiting the United States at this time. This
incident was reported in my cetecran :

Folloving his most recent two-hour conversation with Hi inh,
Daniel ‘immediately tried to get in touch with me to report. ne

~ te

was absent at a special church service, he gave an account of

se HS ‘

upon this assurance I destroyed the telegram. It is possible

his conversation with Hinh to Counselor Kidder. The following
dey, September 13, I showed to O'Daniel the draft of a telegram
which I nad preparéd-revorting this matter in detail to the De-
artment. O'Daniel insisted that he had-not heard my instructions
na
h
ir

uae ct oO"

at O'Daniel actually did not hear my instructions, as at the
re he may well have been imnersed in his own single-minded
thoushts. - General Traonell, who preceded General O'Daniel as

Chief of MAAG, remarked to ine at one time that the latter seldom ~
listened when he was told something, particularly if he had any.
scheme or idea of his own in mind.

ons with O'Daniel have been excellent vate

iiy re Leti. ans expect
them Be contintle to be. S0o+ O'Janiel paral ey. works” in friendly
the ienedi ake Coture ind eg in Sok GECaL ereeos me eling, but in

Sh)
Al

the longs run his impr tuous temperanicnt , which drives him to tak

action even in situations where action is inad ee Se will pro-
bably reassert itself. It is for this reason that I wish to be

on record in this matter.

Sincerely yours,

-Donald R. Heath ’

so SS SO A ew en gist
peat car a ® a) eS “ i Se t
ree i ae See Soot a4 fae 7
ae x, ii 3 6 ga Nin, " 5) ay Ht
4 “cae a Necpee Wares “SSS Of A ets 0

ey pees

ey
