Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

99 erenry

ad. It is the view of the Department of Defense that if the
Treaty is ultimately to result in the development of effective col-
lective strength to halt further Communist control in the general
area of Southeast Asia and the Southwest Pacific, those nations in
the area which are potentially capable of.making a substantial
military contribution, i.e., Japan, Korea, and possibly Nationalist
China, should eventually be permitted to subscribe to the Treaty if
they so desire. Accordingly, this point should be made clear to
the other signatories in the negotiations leading to the signing of
the Treaty.

The Department of Defense considers that it would be premature and
undesirable to. discuss, either at the meeting of Ministers or before, the
formation of an organization associating the military representatives of
the participating nations. The Council and the political machinery of
the Treaty should be established first. This could be followed by the
creation of military machinery necessary to make the Treaty effective..
In the view of this Department such military coordination should be
similar to the ANZUS arrangements.

It is recognized that it is not feasible to include in the Treaty
itself details relating to implementation of the provisions by the Parties,
However, the Department of Defense strongly urges that in the formulation
of implementing procedures by the Council, the United States take a posi-
tion in support of permitting concerted action by a lesser number than
the total of the signatory nations in the event that the political or
territorial integrity of any signatory is threatened by Communist aggres-
sion in any form. In addition, careful consideration should be given to
the practicability and desirability of providing voting machinery in the
Council which would preclude-the possibility that, at some time in the
future when the membership is expanded, a bloc of "neutrals" or a British
Commonwealth bloc could exercise a controlling voice.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff have expressed the opinion, with which I
fully concur, that the recent developments in Geneva and Indochina,
considered in conjunction with the general retrograde trend within the
Western Bloc, serve to increase the urgency of the need for a compro-
hensive United States policy with respect to the Far East region as a
whole. This is necessary in order to give direction, cohesiveness,
and greater effectiveness to the political and military actions which
must now be taken to prevent the loss of the remainder of Southeast
-Asia to Conmiunist.control. It is considered that until the United
States formulates and adopts such an over-all policy we shall be severely
handicapped in any negotiations for the establishment of a collective .

