mecca

Py
i

orem

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ae Bal
past oRuh he
Lé Col Kintner/fhs . - | ‘ ras ; : ce
Ss peices 195) aaa ; ae
re
-

HENORANDUN FOR THE DIREC! TOR, CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGKHCY

SUBJECT: Action in Indochina  -:. :

le Wo one is more aware. than you that the neutralist world, now weighing
the course of the future, WiLL eventually make.a choice petween Communisa and
freedom. The ultinate fate of the free portion of Indochina will become a.

critical element in that choice fox the vast millions living in the unéomnitted

‘pecions of Asia and the Middle East. The loss of the rest of Indochina in con-

sequence of the 196 elections or otherwise, would inevitably sway many of

4

‘s \- rad *
4hece millions to Qamunisn. Aside fron its polit ical aspects, this trend could

be nilitarily disas trous to the U.S. strategic position jn the Far rasy. If

another free ‘yorld debacle in Indochina naterlaliszes, as every intelligence.

estina ate predicts, the US. jacneenes abe ck in the Repiers Pacific could be

so - . . - ~

geopa aratoed. o i .

2.. .You ave, of. course, aware of the many current proposals for political,

Set

economhe y and military Propreny designed “a Seek the spread of Communist

*

‘influence to South. Piatnaee, The Chief of HAAG, tndochina a sked repeatedly

for a governmental depleton to cusble the U.S. to begin the training of native

arnies in South Vietnan and Cafibodia. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have hesitated
$6 concur in Cencral. O'Daniel's recomuondation Just as they hesitated to

recor send Dare GED aN AON fn the Indochina war while 1% was in progress because
the political situation has s0 (Sereriorated that the indigenous support, ress

quired to male any military efforts successful, seemed doubtful of attainment.

T understand, that decisions on certain economic prograns are being withheld for

a similar reason. : oe Baas
Le Pea eae O ze t S
SP maar
S ‘ag tigis )
SL ade.
