Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

” FE A ae
?

(a ney, A SEURE IS 4347 4

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE ; =
WASHINGTON 4 Pane? ACI lO ON

Sika rae Ps ee is assigned io

1924 AUG 13 Pit 3 57

jal ey

Pht’ AU OF ae a
ar Mr. Secretarys apn!

ae Y? PAR LASTERN AFFAIRS } nous
The Chief of MAAG, Indochina, hes recommended that the {U: rived i ee:
States assume responsibility for the training of the Vietnamege Army. i
As you know, representatives of the Gover nents of all three Associated ty
' States have, in their contacts with United States officials in Indoe= |
china, asked for United States assistance in training the indigenous Oo
forces of those Stetes. ; : les
a?)
OI

The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered this question and hare
recommended that, before the United States undsrtakes the training of
forces of eny of the Associated States, certain preconditions essential Le
to the success of such an effort be met. As stated by the Joint Chiefs . fA
of Staff, these preconditions include; ; irs

: “Prom the military point a) view it is absolutely essential that MN
there be' a reasonably strong, steble civil governnent in controle It H
is. hopeless to expect a 6.50 ae training mission to achieve vos

success unless the nation concerned is able effectively to perform

those governmental functions essential to the successful raising and :
maintenance of armed forces, to include the provision of adequate
fachLliti Les, drafting’ and processing of personnel, pay of troops, etce.
Unless the foregoing conditions prevail, a U.S. training mission would
lack the authority and governmental support essential to the successful
eccomplishuent of its mission,

The government of each of the Associated Stabes concerned chowld
formally request that the United States assume responsibility for

_training their forces and providing the military equipment, financial a
‘assistance, and political advice necessary to insure internal stabil Lye 6

fprrangenents shovld be made with the French granting full independence
to the Associated States and providing for the piesa, orderly withdrawal
of French forces, French officials, and French advisors from Indoch*na in
order to provide motivation and a sovnd basis for the establishment of _ i
national armed forces. Tho United States from the boginning should insist -- {
on dealing diractiy with ths governments of the respective Associated -

States, completely independent of Fronch ha ae or controle | =~
. “eos tis Pon ‘ 5 ! !
a = : = L aD =A * a = if? te a xi
“ ty 2 af” ,
¥ fees tee ot Th Ber og 2"
rere Fee we " = erty de 5 :
pte. Ee ahers ) ie ‘ (aie wee i eecDer Cort Bo. S- a ; 12 :
