ad

Ps
'

eA es eH es eee

,

el

pony

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

cae
Bi -

= en a
if Wott pea 4
reli Hata H

- ra Mie eS es

-2 -. -

rapidly since then. The national ermy has seemed to be winning, groups are
rallying to Diem, Bao Dai is getting set to fire Diem, and the French have
in effect withdraw their suppdrt from Diem. AIL reports from Saigon
indicate there is a revolutionary feeling developing egeinst Beo Dai and
the French. Some of this is instigated by the Diem group but some of it
may be spontaneous, As of this writing we may be faced with ea choice

|between Diem and Bao Dai. In view of the fighting, we have felt in State -

it was best to continue support for the govermment under Diem and see what

happens. But as this crisis develops we are being forced to take a more

and more unequivocal and strong stand for Diem.

hk, Senator Mansfield issued a long statement in support of Diem on
April 29. If Diem is forced out, Mansfield would have us stop all aid

_ to Viet-Nem except of a humanatarian nature. Senators Knowland and

Humphrey have also backed Diem. A large number of members of the House
Foreign Affairs Committee after hearing Collins have informed the Department
through Congresswoman Kelly that they would not favor the State Department

' withdrawing support from Diem. Collins met with the Far East Subcommittee

_ of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, seperately with Senator Mansfield

and with about a dozen of the House Committee. While he and Sturm felt these
legislators would give no trouble, Sturm informing us after seeing Senator
Mensfield that there was nothing to it, Bob Hoey and the rest of us here

were much less sanguine about legislative feeling. In fact there is going
to be real difficulties on the Hill if Diem is forced out by what appears
to be French-Bao Dai action,

5. During the past ten days the French have been quiet with us, but
working behind the scene. Kidder reports Ely as almost hysterical.
Bao Dai has been active, as he has submitted one plan to us and has also
taken another action publicly. Both of these are almost identical with
plans or ideas which French officials had submitted to us several weeks ago,
If there were any notion that Bao Dai acts independently of the French ang
Ely, that should now be dispelled. However, Prime Minister Faure has
indicated to Dillon that he does have no stonach for going off independently
of the US in Free Viet-Nam. They will follow our lead even though they dont+
like the idea, providing the situation is not so bad in Saigon that they haye
to move out French military and civilian personnel. We have asked for pretty
fundamental reassurances on basic French intentions in Viet-Nam, we got them
orally for whatever they may be worth. :

6. We are in a bewildering, fluid situation, I believe more strongly
than ever that we should stick with Diem now. Collins says he is a terribie
administrator and it will wreck Free Viet-Nam if we leave him in. That may .
be true but that is not the issue at present. If Diem can lead the nationalist
forces to a conclusive settlement, even to the point .of rendering Bao Dai
ineffective or annulled, we should continue to support him. The key questions
are:, =

Ne oe

h1OWT

eh
=% me a a
Lewis taco
