Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

THE CURRENT SAIGON

t CRISIS

é T
hie PROBLEM i

To assess the implications of recent 3 velopments in Saigon and to estimate the

probable actions of interested parties in t

@ current crisis.

s =

THE ESTIMATE

’

IMPLICATIONS OF CURREN
IN SAIGON
1. The success of Premier Diem in operations
against the Binh Xuyen, and in his stand
against Bao Dai, the French, and General Vy,
has created a new and potentially revolution-
ary situation in Victnam. While the situa-
tion in Vietnam is extremely fluid, Diem ap-
pears to hold the initiative in the phase that
is about to begin. In this phase, the inter-
ested pa ties — particularly the French and
Bao Dai— will have to adapt themselves to
a radically new political situation dominated
by Diem or by more extreme nationalist ele-
ments. If they do not adapt and if there are
any substantial efiorts by Bao Dai or the

T DEVELOPMENTS

.French to frustrate Diem’s government, the

chances of anti-French violence and the de-
posal of Bao Dai would be greatly increased.

2. Diem’s relations with the Revolutionary
Council which has been actively injecting it-
self into this situation have not yet been clari-
fied. This council, designated by a self-

‘appointed assembly, takes a more extreme po-

sition than Diem, particularly in regard to
the withdrawal of French forces and the im-
mediate deposal of Bao Dai. It is dominated
by Cao Dai generals Trinh Minh The and
Neuyen Thanh Phuong and by Hoa Hao Gen-
eral Ngo and includes a number of extreme
nationalist politicians. -General! Ely now
charges that the Council is Communist infil-
trated but so far has not produced evidence
to substantiate this charge. We have no sig-
nificant evidence to indicate that any of the

‘SECRET,
a

members of the Council are Communist. In
a proclamation the Council announced a
broad program couched in social revolution-
ary terms but including a denunciation of
“red colonialism” in North Vietnam. Its ac-
tivities have been denounced by the Commu-

nist radio in Hanoi as have those of Premier

Diem. =

PROBABLE COURSES OF ACTION OF
INTERESTED PARTIES

8. Premier Diem. The virtual expulsion of
the Binh Xuyen from Saigon-Cholon has in-
creased Diem’s prestige throughout Vietnam.
The confidence of Diem and his supporters in
their own strength, judgment, and popular
appeal has been considerably enhanced, In
this situation, Diem will almost certainly con-
tinue to resist any efforts to remove him from.
office.

4, His actions and those of his followers have
taken on an-increasingly nationalistic, anti-
French tone over the past few days and Diem
may now be convinced that a continuation of
this anti-French policy is essential to the
rallying of popular support. Nevertheless, he
has exercised a moderating influence on the
anti-French and anti-Bao Dai position of the
Revolutionary Council. However, if he be-
lieved the French were continuing their
efrorts to depose him, he would a almost cer-
tainly permit intensified anti-French manifes_
tations. Such a course would carry praye
dangers of anti-French violence, particularly
in Saigon.

rays
