Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

creation of a new National Army. However, as seen from this Department,
there would seem to be no insuperable objection to the U.S. undertaking
a training program for the Vietnamese National Army while at the same
time the French forces commence a gradual phasing out from that

theater.

As for the point you raised regarding the limitations of the
Geneva settlement, in the view of this Department there is a limitation
on the degree to which the Vietnamese armed forces can be increased.
However, in my opinion, there is no provision of the cease-fire
agreement regarding Viet Nam which would prevent the existing MAAG
Saigon from undertaking a training mission or which would impede
MAAG Saigon from rotating existing personnel to bring in number for
number new personnel especially versed in military training.

In the case of Cambodia there is no obstacle whatever to the
setting up of a U.S. training mission. The cease-fire agreement
affecting Cambodia provides in Chapter III Article 7 that the Royal
Government of Cambodia will not solicit foreign aid in war materiel,
personnel or instructors except for the purpose of effective defense
of the territory. This latter clause makes it entirely possible for
the Cambodian Government to request a foreign training mission and for
the U.S., if it so desires, to provide such a mission. In the opinion
of this Department, it would be most helpful to the furtherance of our
national policy in Indochina if the U.S. should reply affirmatively to
the letter of the Defense Minister cited above, and it is recommended
that the Joint Chiefs give their consent to the establishment of a
MAAG/Phnom Penh which would provide both training and logistical —
assistance to the Royal Khmer Army. The Department of State likewise
feels that sympathetic consideration should be given to the establish-
ment of a training mission‘in MAAG Saigon to assist in the development
of an effective Vietnamese National Army.

Sincerely yours,

/s/

John Foster Dulles

