Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

eo

ery.

~-* MOP SEORET

easy

: tage propaganda 3
& eneny, neutral, ay fon hen accuse £ ice "tho purpose peorting
L the accomplishment of national aims and objectives,
\ (5) Activities under the aegis of the Militery Advisers

r should be confined to the field of Psychological Varfere as defined
L above. Primary responsibility in the field of Psycholovical Action is

o :side the sphere of the Military Advisers, Jm order to ensure con-
Ee tinuity of planning end coordination of effort there should be ¢co-
i ordination between the committees set up by the Milttery Ce en

those set vp ee Council. Representatives ese should include ths
[ e& change of observers on an invitational asd

|

(6) Recomnendatio ons: It is recommended that the Mili~

tery Advisers:

ies under their Ss s should

[. (a) Agrea that activit gis
: Gofined in paragraph feb. above.

be confined to payclo low cal warfare as
ae Fe PC al at ~ (b) Instruct the Secretariat af edvise the Council
a yt y Reprcavbe lave of: the field in which the Military Advisers ara con”
fining theix tivities with respect to Ps sychological Worfare, end to
invite the ion to the need for coordination he
tory Advisers organization and the Covneil Representatives orgs
tion to onsure continuity of planning and effort in this field.

. - (1) The report has been approved by he Storr Plamasra
: as a working document for use at staff level.

ae

for develonment of

(2) It essentially provides basis on
@. 1 port planning studies of the

ly pr
SEATO Unconventional Wart i) oe to sup
Militery Advisers organization 2

a

ve
2tlo

(a) Pertinent aspects of Unconventional Varfars are

(b) There is an

Biated;
; weed cefinition of Unconventional
Worfeare;

. (c) Means of comoiling basic techniques and data ara
ensured; end mi es

ra FA
oo

(a) Exchange of training experience is provided for,

7

(3) The Characteristics of the SEATO erea hichlicht the
jamortenc e of ee reed ee Warfers plans and the bmortence of kocping
£ thot wor! Unconventional Verfwers studies continuously bsfors

i the matter o
k

= | the Military Advisers organivation.
