Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201]

‘97. On the basis of the evidence we have at

. ‘this early date, however, we believe that a_

‘favorable development of the situation in
South Vietnam is unlikely. Unless Mendes-
‘ France is able to overcome the force of French
traditional interests and emotions which have
| in the past governed the implementation of
| policy in Indochina, we do not believe there
: will be the dramatic transformation in French
i policy necessary to win the active loyalty and
{support of the local population for a South
Vietnam Government.) At the present time,
“it appears more likely that the situation will

+ deteriorate in South Vietnam and that the

“withdrawal from-Torkin will involve recrim-
inations, distrust, and possibly violence.
There will be delays in the development of
effective administration in the south; the
French military will probably be forced to re-
’ tain a large measure of control for reasons

of “security”; and efforts by French colonial -

interests to develop a puppet Cochin-China
state will persist. It is even possible that at
‘some point, during the next two years the
South Vietnam Government could be taken

over by elements that would seek unification ,
with the Viet Minh in the North even at the |

- expense of Communist domination. Even-if

SECRET

arrangement proved impossible, and the situ-
ation deteriorated to the point of hopeless-
ness, would the French withdraw completely
from the country.

Outlook in Laos

29. Providing the French maintain the 5,000
troops in.Laos which the Geneva agreements
permit them, and continue to develop the

’ Laotian forces, the Royal Laotian Government

should be able to improve its security forces
and, excluding the two northern provinces, to
deal. with isolated, small-scale Communist .
guerrilla actions. Also, providing the Lao-
tians continue to receive French and US tech-
nical and financial assistance, they probably
will be able to maintain an adequate govern-
ment administration. There is nothing in
the Geneva agreements to prevent Laos from
becoming a member of a defense arrangement
so long as no foreign troops other than speci-
fied French personnel are based in Laos.

30. However, if the French for any reason de-
cide not to maintain their troops nor to con-
tinue military training in Laos, it will be im-

_ possible for the non-Communist powers to
: ' provide effective aid to the Laotians without
[ "If the scheduled national elections are
| -held in July 1956, and if the Viet Minh
|

aching the Geneva agreement. At the
ie time, Laos will be faced with a growing

Goes not prejucice its political prcospects,nmunist threat, and the freedom of politi-

the Viet Minh will almost certainly win,"

28. In the interim, Viet Minh propaganda will
find ample opportunities to influence Viet-
-namese attitudes. Within a year, Viet Minh
| stay-behind units will probably be active polit-
‘ically, and possibly involved in open guerrilla
fighting. In these circumstances, the French
will probably be able to maintain their “pres-
ence” in South Vietnam through mid-1956,
but their influence will probably become in-
- creasingly restricted to major cities and the
perimeters of military installations and bases.
The French might be willing to resolve this
Situation by an arrangement with the Com-
munists which seemed to offer a chance of
saving some remnant of the French economic
and cultural position in Vietnam. Such an
arrangement might include an agreement to
hold early elections, even with the virtual cer-
tainty of Viet Minh victory. Only if such an

_SEC

action permitted members of the Pathet
Lao movement, strengthened by support from
the Viet Minh, may result in the overthrow
of the present government through subver-_
sion or elections. Finally, further successes
for the Viet Minh in Vietnam will have an
immediate adverse effect on the situation in
Laos. :

Outlook in Cambodia

31. We believe that the Communists, in with-
drawing organized units from Cambodia, will
leave behind organizers, guerrilla leaders, and
weapons. Initially, the Communists will
probably minimize guerrilla action in order to
concentrate on building their political poten-
tial in Cambodia. ;

32. Providing the withdrawal of the Commnu-
nists is substantially in accord with the acree-

ET
Si
