a

rm

fares

cy

m4 rs FS inn |

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - ; (PH-95)

~ (1) Bask: A review of the e report by the Ad ‘Hae Sub-.
7 Po 4

Committ tee on Threat re aE eLOn end the drawing wo of expropriate obser
vations and recommendations to the Military Ady ecrs concer paing it.
| (2) Position nepoe: None regvired,

(1) Task: A study of the blockade of the South Chine end
North Vietnen coasts in support of the military operations in defense of
So theast Asia ageinst an attack by Chinese Communist and Viet Minh forcas.

. a
|

(2) Position paver: To be prenared by the United States.
Qn pene prep y
Ce Agenda, Then Cs
(1) Tasks The developuent of the SEATO stratesie concept
Ps i

for the defense of Southeast Asia, including the defense ot Fast Pakistan
and of easential sea and air lines of conaunication, against en attack

by Chinese Communist and Viet Minh forces on the assur aption that the

SEATO nations would use nuclear freapons as required.. (To be based on the
findings under Agenda Item A of the Ad Hoc Sub-Conmittee on Threat
Evaluation.)

. ’

ition vavar: To bo prepared by the United Kingdon,

(1) Zask: The develomsent of a SEATO strategic concept
for the defense of Southeast Asia against an attack by Vict ee Fors 305
on the assumotion that SEATO nations would use nuclear weapons
jn North Vietnen as required, (To ba based on tho. findings wac

Yten B of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Threet Evaluation.)
(2) Position paver: To be prepared by Frence.
e. feenda Iten Ee Ee

(1) Task: The developnent of a SEATO strategic concep

for the dofensa of West Pakistan against an attack by Cosswnist ae

on the assumption that SEATO nations would use unelear weapons as reguired,

(To be based on the findings under Agenda Iten C of the Ad Hoe Sub-
Committee on Threat: ‘Bvaluation.) we '

(2) E Position Naver

an aan

v iP)

: To be produced by Pakistan.

ing measures and to Gotermiz
vol and protestion of Ais:

s
~~

é

i =5F 5, 4.
SEATO requirements for

TOP SESRET 1039

———e ee * wis!

—
