Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

nop secret SENSITIVE

-2-

As the Geneva Conference proceeded, however, Secretary Dulles
somewhat eased his opposition to a solution involving partition.
As early as June 9 he agreed with Smith that the deteriorating
military situation might lead to de facto partition, though he
wanted the United States to try to avoid being identified with
such a result. Later he told Foreign Secretary Eden that it would
be difficult for the United States to guarantee a Communist success
in north Vietnam or anywhere else but that it could perhaps acquiesce
in a settlement which it disliked but would not upset by force.
Accordingly, the United States and Britain informed France in a
joint message that they would "respect" an armistice agreement meeting
seven specified criteria, including the preservation of "at least
the southern half of Vietnam, and if possible an enclave in the
Delta".

Fearing that a settlement would be reached which did not meet
the seven criteria listed in the Anglo-American message, the United
States in July contemplated the alternatives of completely
withdrawing from the Conference or of participating in lower key
and with a lower level of representation (i.e., with Ambassador
U. Alexis Johnson as the top American Delegate instead of Under
Secretary Smith). Explaining the American position, Dulles told
Eden and Mendes-France that the United States could not be put in

‘the position of apparently approving the sale of Vietnam, Laos,
and Cambodia into Communist captivity in a settlement which would
be portrayed as a second Yalta. At the same time, he said, the
United States did not question France's right to exercise its own
judgment and did not wish to put itself in the position of seeming
to pass "moral judgment upon French action" or of disassociating
itself from the settlement "at a moment and under circumstances
which might be unnecessarily dramatic."

Mendes-France, however, fervently urged that Dulles or Smith
head the American Delegation even at the risk of having to disavow
the sett_ement. All he asked, he said, was that the United States make
@ unilateral statement that it would take action if the Communists
broke a settlement based on the seven points. Dulles felt that
such a statement would pose no problem. He agreed to a Franco-
American Position Paper, in which the British concurred, incorporating
the understanding that if a settlement were reached which the United ©
States coulé respect, then the United States would express its
poss cron "unilaterally or in association only with non-Communist
states". It was on the basis of the understandings in the Position
Paper that the United States issued its unilateral declaration on
July 21, 1954.

Attached hereto is an Annex which summarizes the six points
in the Franco-American Position Paper.

P/HP:ESCostrell:eln 4-14-65

617
