Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ays fa
suecessful in infiltrating remaining Hoa Hao groups --- chiefly Ba Cut's

organization. The latter's increasingly effective defensive tactics have
made recent VNA operations relatively costly.

In addition to the continuing presence of these guerrilla elements,
the Communists have presumably tried to penetrate all branches of the
government. The most frequent reports suggest heavy penetration of the
Inf rmation Ministry. The absence of reliable information does not disprove
some probable penetration of police and military services, particularly at
lower levels. The Communists have a surviving capability to disrupt govern-
mental operations, and perhaps to immobilize the regime, through a co-
orc nated campaign of terror and assassination -- a capability they have
thus far chosen not to exercise.

Political Problems

The March } election will, in all probability, produce a national
assembly that will overwhelmingly support Diem and approve the constitution
that a pro-Diem commission has prepared. The constitution will establish
a presidential system with separation of powers. Balloting will not in-
dicate accurately the extent of anti-Diem sentiment, for a number of
nationalist leaders, particularly refugees from the north, appear disinclined
to risk censure or repression by contesting the election as opposition
candidates.

r)

It will be essential, in the immediate future, that Diem have effective
control over the administration and the national assembly. He has the sup-
port of the National Revolutionary Movement (NRM), which has become, in
effect his political party. There is some question, nevertheless, whether
at present Diem is unnecessarily antagonizing elements which might add
strength to the future government. He remains almost pathologically
sensitive to criticism and potential opposition, with the result that the
regime is becoming increasingly autocratic despite his democratic principles,
In view of Diem's skill in dealing with dissident elements over the past
year, it will perhaps be wise to give him the benefit of the doubt during
the pre-election period.

Economic Conditions

There has been little recent change in the economic picture in South
Vietnam. Rice prices, which rose precipitously during the summer and fall
due largely to poor distribution, have now returned to normal. A major
program for resettlement in southwest Vietnam of up to 100,000 of the
vefugees from the north is now developing, with US and other foreign support,
Tf successful, it would simultaneously reduce the problems of 1) the
refugees, 2) increased agricultural production, and 3) internal security in

rural areas.

oe,
*\t

ws -
a
wees

<< SEREaney Cri

Ney es i a Se

1049
