Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 POST-GENEVA OUTLOOK IN

it Se Beery

INDOCHINA -

“

THE PROBLEM

* fo assess the probable outlook in Indochina in the light of the agreements reached

at the Geneva conference.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The signing of the agreements at Ge- < 4. Although it is possible that the French
; and Vietnamese, even with firm support

“neva has accorded international recogni-

tion to Communist military and political
power in Indochina and has given that
power a defined geographic base.

z. We believe that the Communists will
not give up their objective of securing
control of all Indochina but will, without
violating the armistice to the extent of
launching an armed invasion to the south
or west, pursue their objective by political,
psychological, and paramilitary means.

3. We believe the Communists will con-
solidate control over North Vietnam with
little difficulty. Present indications are
that the Viet Minh will pursue a moderate
political program, which together with its
strong military posture, will be calculated
to make that regime appeal to the nation-
alist feelings of the Vietnamese popula-
tion generally. It is possible, however,
that the Viet Minh may find it desirable
or necessary to adopt a strongly repressive
domestic program which would diminish
its. appeal in South Vietnam. In any
event, from its new territorial base, the
Viet Minh will intensify Communist ac-
tivities throughout Indochina.

|
\

from the US and other powers, may be

| able to establish a strong regime in South
Vietnam, we believe that the chences for

*
| this development are poor and, moreover,

: next year.

that the situation is more likely to con:
tinue to deteriorate progressively over the .
It is even possibie that, at
some time’during the next two years, the
South Vietnam Government could be
taken over by elements that would seek
unification with the North even at the:

expense of Communist domination. If’

' the scheduled national elections are held
j in July 1956, and if the Viet Minh does not:

4

. prejudice its political prospects: the Viet

. Minh will almost certainly win.

5. The ability of the Laotian Government
to retain control in Laos will denend upon
developments in South Vietnan. and upon
the receipt of French military and other
assistance. Even with such assistance,
however, Laos will be faced by a growing
Communist threat which might result in
the overthrow of the present government
through subversion or elections, and in
any case would be greatly intensified if all

“SECRET
