Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

™

CURRENT TRENDS IN SOUTH VIETNAM

ESTIMATE

1. Since assuming office Premier Diem has
’ been confronted with the usual problems of
inefiiciency, disunity, and corruption in Viet-
mamese politics and with the extraordinary
problems of a mass evacuation of the Northern
population and the hostility of many French
officials. Despite his qualities of honesty and
zeal, he has not yet demonstrated the neces-
sary ability to deal with practical problems of
politics and administration. Lacking an or-
ganized political machine and finding control
of the Army in the hands of an uncooperative
’ chief of staff, Diem’s freedom of action has
been severely circumscribed.

2. The French Government appears to have
no definite policy toward South Vietnam.
While the French Government has not openly
opposed the Diem Government, ‘France has
failed to support Diem and there is no evi-
dence that the French are prepared to carry
out a policy based on unreserved support for
Vietnamese independence and nationalism.
Accordingly, close cooperation between the
French and Vietnamese governments, essen-
tial for the survival of South Vietnam, has
. been lacking and French motives have become
more suspect.

3. Although little real progress has been made
under Diem’s administration in dealing with
pressing’ political, military, and social prob-
lems, he still retains considerable unorganized
popular support, particularly among Catholic
elements of South Vietnam. He has also
“made sorne progress in reaching agreement
with the powerful Cochin China sects.

4. At the moment the Diem Government is
threatened by the insubordination of General
Hinh, the politically ambitious Chief of Staff

whom Diem has discharged. It does not now
appear that the present struggle between

_Diem and Hinh will degenerate into civil

strife. In fact Diem now appears to be mak-
ing some headway in his efiorts to control or
exile Hinh, either of which would enhance his
prestige and remove an obstacle to the
strengthening of his government.

5. Bao Dai has remained in France and
apparently is refraining from direct partici-
pation in political afiairs in South Vietnam,

' His prestige among Vietnamese nationalists

hhas been considerably lessened by his apathy
toward the fate of his country. We believe
that if Bao Dai were now to return to Viet-
nam, he would almost certainly become a

. center of political intrigue and would further

complicate an already complex and confused
situation and weaken rather than strenethen
the ability of South Vietnam. to achieve politi-
cal stability.

6. Trends in South Vietnam since the end of
the Geneva Conference have enhanced the
prospects of an eventual extension of Com-
munist control over the area by means short
of large-scale military attacks. Although
Diem’s government will probably survive the
present crisis of Hinh’s insubordination, and
may achieve greater strength and popular
support, it will continue to be threatened by
Vietminh activity, and hampered by French
indecision. Diem appears to be the only fig- -
ure now on the political scene behind whom
genuine nationalist support can be mobilized.
However, his ability to create a governmen}
that could reverse the current trend in South —
Vietnam depends at a minimum on an early
and convincing demonstration by the French
of their wholehearted support.

SECRET

132
