a

“a
t a

sey es

: had been part ofthe eee sof 4 the Washington agreements.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

—

. TOP SHCRET

(-2-

Washington agreements, by which Ambassador Heath need no longer consider himself
bound. It was felt thet the President's letter hed given Diem full rein without
requiring of him as a ee eye condition that he should Mee eucaeed in

SS Se eh a ae eierseepcs

A further aspect of the President's letter which is giving the French
concei.. is the use which the Viet Minh could make of this step in relation to
the Armistice agreenent. The Ambassador said that the Viet Minh would doubtless
wish to exploit “this possibility, especially if the situation were to deteriorate
furthe . In addition to the French ixpeditionary Force now located in Southern
Viet Nam, there was the matter of the treops in Haiphong, which were not to be
evacuated until Mey 1955. All this added up to a-very delicate situation,
potentially dangerous and of uncertain prospects. Tre Ambassador said that in
ail good faith, end despite the best will in the world to make the Diem experiment
work, the outlook seemed to be deverlorating rapidly. He was also concerned
by whet seemed to him to be a lack of Franco-Americen coordination with regard
to the course of action to be taken in Indochina and said he hoped it would be
possible for us to consult each other again more closely, and bring our positions
together. . ,

The Secretary said that he was giving the situation in Indochina the
greatest attention, and he agreed that it was a difficult and delicate problem,
He pointed out that Diem needed all. the support that he could get from every
quarter and thet it was not enough to say that ons was going to support Dien
but that he hadn't much chance, The support must be positive and continuous
in order to be effective. The Secretary said thet he had had a talk with
Prenier Mendes-France in Paris on Indochina and that he would shortly be se endinz
him a message about the situation there,

At eet eee eR eee ae “
de eee

ee | Beas :
