ony *

te

too

posse

rly

7 es

i

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

{= x = “ ee - dete oe ee ee =

TOP SEC REL Tiot_to be re aa
: , at githout: prior cousers
~2-#2303, Decesber 16, 7 p.m., from Saigon oz Director 5/5

and wasted opportunities. a
3. Minh is @ good man, though young and inexperienced. O'Daniel
feels that if Diew delegates full authority to Minh, the latter
may be able to heal wounds of Diem-Hinh, Ty—fy, Phea Reng-Phan
Thiet affairs and bring stability and sanity to gover nment-2>ny
relationships .+ But eng highly Bile to me that Minh, or.
anyone. else under present conditions, can create a single, co-
hesive nationel army from the five separate forces now existing-~-
the Cao Daist, Hoa Hao, Binh xXuyen , national guard, and the
present naticnsl arny. With ant icipated oppcsition from the
Soe

iat vs
sects and scas from Diem himself, who is loathe to disband his
-own privete force (national guard), it will teke Ais cad leader-
ship from Diem and Minh thsn either hss shown to dat to re-

duce and amalsamate these forc eS «

4, What is true of the armed forces is likely to be true in
the resettlerent cf refugees end land reform, When I told Dien
recently that our FOA people vere having diffic aty in getting
down to” business with the Vietnam agriculture officials, Dien
reminded me that the Minister of agriculture is a Hoa Heo and
the Hoa Heo are fearful of the effect of land reform on their
extensive control of rice lands. Government officials hesitate
to place refugees on French-owned rice lards or in the French-
ewned rubber plantations. And so on, one excuse for inaction
after another.

5. Fect is thet of the fine program of reforms announced by -
Diem in September, no definite progress has been achieved in
converting words into deeds in any field.

6. I had hoped Dier would broasden and strengthen his cabinet
by addition of Quat and perhaps even Bay Vien. Latter ao
his lurid past, hes demors trated organizing ability end
recently Lladicsted desire to become "honorable" and + sooin
government. With | Quat in government, Quat might Bae! ous oe

gredually to get sects in line end through his practical political

ability heve injected sce flexibility ard drive, both of which
are now woefully lacking. At same time Quet might have acquired
greater staturs in public eye which wight later have rendered him
more' eligible for higher post if later fcurd necessary replace

=

ist
- Diem. Unfortunately, this was probably deduced by peo ner Tuyen
a

Sel
and Diem also. I feel sure that fear of Quat's ability is at
reot of sects ard Diem's opposition. . ;

4 a
7. After weighing ell available epitence I am os convinced *
that in face cf the pssitive threat cf Ho "Chi Mirh's regize, it
Will take decisive action end dramatic leadership from the viez-
namese themselves te save free Vietnam. Neither Frencn ner Azeri —
cans can suostitute for such’ action snd leadership. Apparently

ee: _ fhe only’
7 : Hct to be release@
aie ceet ag TOP SECRET wi thout Be OP con

*

Sen
