f f ] j f j t i i

elem

eS £2

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

. * f ais ; . Top Se eret t

effective veto power over sovernment action. Th
use to blocx reforms which might threaten their ere
military, economic and political status. They will ret

i retain
their power to threaten and harass the government until the
Nationél Army is strong enough to- neutralize their forces.

ie . ef the Vietnemese Armed
Forces Gc in VYietném the Government was terrorized
by = rebellious Chief of Staff, General ee Hinh's departure
end dismissal shortly thereafter cleared the way for steps to
rencer the Army subordinate to the ae Diem now has
a {air measure of control over the armed forces. The Army is
being deployed throushout the country to carry out a so-called
tational security Action" program designed to combat Viet Minh
infiltration’ and restore civil government throughout the coun-
try. The Army's degree of effectiveness in executing this pro-
grem will have a decisive bearing on the success or feilure of -
the Diem Government. It is too soon te predict whether or not
the Vek nal Security Action program will succeed but agreement
Cy 1ited States to assume training responsibility and te
eran. at ranciel aid to a reorgenized and revitalized national
should have significant stabilising effects.

+

Forces: When | arrive

~~

e) Economic Aspects of Free Vietnam: Free Vietnam
is capable.of maintaining a viable econony, at modest levels.
The territory is now self-sufficient in food and formerly pre—-
ducec a substantial rice export surplus. Rice and rudder are
traditionally the principe :1 sources of Vietnamese foreign ex-
change. AS sccurity J improves, export availability of these.
products stould increase, thus contributing toward “stabiliza-

tion of the economy. : :
f) Ability of Diem to Secure Broad Populer Support:
There is still a serious question in my mind as to whether Diem

will be eble to esteblish broad popular confidence in, end sup-
port for, his Government. However, he has enjoyed some recent
successes in his dealings with the sects. This and his reten-
tion of active U.S. supp sort have tended to ontense “his prestige.
However, Diem has much yet to learn about precticel politics
énd puolic relations. “While at times he conveys the impression
being well over his depth, recently he has evidenced greater
flexibility, in handling people and increased self-confidence
in dealing with his ministers end-public issues. On balenceé
I believe that Diem's integrity, strong nationalism, tenacity,
and spiritual quelities render him the best available Prime

Minister to lead Vietnam in its struggle ageinst Communism.

Ld

2. In order to assist the Diem Government to capitalize:

Top Secret

co
@)
op)
