e | ' ;

ot on
Ty }

_ SUBJECT: Indochina dun ©

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Mr. Roberts on and I went to see the Secretary this morning about

‘ beginning direct aid to Viet-Nam in January and moving ahead with MAAG

neg<« siations in Cambodia,
| .
1. The Secretary decided we should proceed as scheduled and "take
the plunge" on January 1. Mr. Robertson and I stated the pros and cons.
Mr. Robertson pointed out our prestige would be considerably more
committed in the three Associated States and our ability to disengage made
more difficult by this sep. On the other hand, I pointed out it would give
us more leverage, put our missions on a direct footing and carry out the-
understanding reached with the French and the three Associated States last

a an Sa - 2MI OURGL Lopy + OL 0 COp1Les
aig ee aaa aa
a oe December 29, 195) OE
1. F4 . ; oo
Soie Sek see i
. : —_ . a
= Sdrceu ps OA hes
~“SMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD ee sae 3 9 lh, aan co
PARTICIPANTS: The Secretary. . Estee SETARY oe ee i a0"
Mr. Robertson Ben Bree ae aa
Mr. Young i ii ap el gece

September, and October. I explained to the Secretary that Governor Stassen :

had set uo an operational mechanism which would keep our direct aid fluid.

developing circumstances. Mr. Robertson stressed that no amount of aid
would be announced at this time or conveyed to the governments concerned,
The Secretary ihdiceted his approval of this general line or approach. 24a

- and flexible so that it could be tapered up or down quickly depending on we

that the program would be subject to discontinuance at any time, as a present,

2. With respect to the JCS prerequisite on elimination of "the French

in Cambodia, the Secretary stated that it was much too legalistic and
unrealistic. It is the kind of thing that could get us into a great

deal of complication without sufficient compensating advantages. He felt
that this was the sort of problem which could be only handled in time and
by varicus methods. To attack it so directly would only create much more

of a problem.

Kenneth T. Young, Jr

}
Approved

Disaporoved

TOP SECRET

CZs y
jVE6S-E1/0

es 'G mea,

a

PIGET, oF ngs

Phat
lend

We

fap
aahecert ME wlialy

rene See Sperry vt
ae ae

i

Ly
5

~
+}

a hs ri
