Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

pose
j
€.
om
i

=) dangurge that men anywhere can wnderctand in a Short aD period of Linde

a

Eas Liberty" stimulates the Beeptse of countrics neavencd by Commanisia

—

to act to achLeve the objectives of freedom SEVER self-expression, proper

ee

” organization and progressive action. . Oe , m
pide toy confident es qualified 0 ‘render jadgnent have been dmoreased .
2 with the nerdt a and ‘value of the myi1itent Libert ty" approach. As t See ity the

es - goten vial success WLitont Taderty" could achieve ie Caochinw 1 50 great that
ca a : es os =: :
r our joint efforts should be devoted to getting it underway with least possibvle
dolay. I should like to suggest that Mr. Brggir, who is a consultant to the Joint
[ Subsidiary Plans Division of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, be made: available to
ra ‘brief you and menbers of your imnediate staff in the near a taEe > there is” ‘a
| tached herewith (fab A) a conprehensive paper sebting forth the concept. .
eA | «6B ‘The heart of any phen sp Sateen Militant Liberty" is the progressive -- 4
ees aining of groups of indigenous personnel in an underst fandine of the meaning

“ofa free. society to the individual and the individual's responsibilities in

.  ereating and naintaining ouch a society. if the concept of militant Libertyt
L were tested in Indochina, Andiigenous personne would have to be trained from
mi fs among tho military’ as well, as the edvildan elements of Vietnamese society. At

e a significant military training progran were instituted, the induction -

f (yasituwneteohargs eycle provides ready access to indigenous personne el who could
play an ingortant | role in a revitalization ae. vietnam both during thei period

of military service and subsequently after Aiey had returned to civilian life.

r For this reason, as well as to insure unity of effort, the implementation of
~ Militant Liberty” on a test ba Ae jn Indochina should, I believe, be accomplished
f ‘* ona joint Saas erp tth Dente: XI am inclosing an outline form (TAB 8) the dra "

f of « plan which can be further developed for jae by your asency an
