Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

THE JOINY CHIEFS OF STAFF bey
WASHINGTON 25,D.C..

ts

MeMORANDUM POR Tilt SNCRETARY OF DEFINS

Subject: Renors of Joint UK-US Study Group on

“fF
ue

Southeast Asia : Se ese

1. In response to your memorandum dated 22 July 1954, subject
as above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff submit herewith their views
in the lignt of the new situation created by the récent develop
ments in Indochina, concerning oh proposed negoviation of a
regional collective security treaty for the Far Hast. In addi-
tion to the report of the Joint UK. US Study Group on Southeast
Asia and the Draft Treaty submitted by the U.S. member of the
Study Group, consideration has been given to the documents oe
nished by. memorendums by the Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)
dated 22 July 1954 and 2 August 1954, both on the subject:
"Southanst isian Collective Defense Organization." - :
2s Reference is made ‘to the previously expres sed views of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff with respect to the Far East _vecion, és Bee
forth in their memorandum for you dated 9 April 1954, subject
"United States Straterzy for Developing a Position a: Military.
Strength in the Par East (NSC fetion Ho. 1029-b)." In thas
memorandum, the Joint Chiefs of Staff stressed the need for is
a comprehensive policy for the Far Hast which would view that
region as a strategic entity and which would provide definitive
direction for the devslonment of a position of military. strength
“a that region. Cosnizance was taken of the fact thac, in their
aggrezate, current policies addressed to individual countries or
segments of the weneral are2-make it-clear that the United States
from the standpoint of its security interests, attaches major
importance cto the War ba area and would be nprevared to react
with military force azainst an armed agsress Lon by the USSK or
Communist China in that. re Bion : :

t
5
tie

a ah

me

om F 3. The Joint Chiefs of Start expressed the oninion that our
Fer Eastern policy should be directed toward achieving the
following objectives:

CG .
Gopi: fat 7 tomtom ooch E

[ i Fe es “is Pea ce EL Ee
LL PN IE oe ay ae ip ae a ABT
