oy

ie

coe. aes

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET Pea es Ree ett

bo It was generally recognized thet the individ
shins between the respective Militery dvisers, Covncll Repr
Council Meabers and otm defense esteblishnents diffor iA the vo:
countries cad ere a maticer for nations] Cetermieiticn., It res
hy ee that there snovlé be a dsetersination as to the emae
ships betwoen Nilitery Advisers and the Council Represoutetin
U.S. Delegation submitted a dlagrammetic chart reflecting ie:
ships fron the viewpoint of the U.S, Militery Adviser. ‘This

ee)
ip
hereto as Appendix 10 tg Annex A, ‘

2. Recommendation: It is therefore recor: ended that the -

Military Atvisers consider this raj: abLongy! ip at tasir forthcouing
neotinr. . :
G. PLoasihle Threat to Prosty sve. bz 7 Gvovt Pasay Jercessiion Tavonsh

a Di AQ118 1393.0 on:

ee

a. Tho Pexistsan Delesetion raised the matter of the sorious
thir oh ‘ the entire Treaty area of overt Commmist aggression through -

b. The Staff Planners agreed that a detailed stucy of tha.
possible threat of Coumunist hs guression against the Treaty area gonerelly,
end Thailend and East Paliisten in partic wor E through Burma should be
prepared, together with a devexrnination of the military support necessary
to repel such a threat under conditions of mucleay varlares f 3

2. Recommendations: ie is recommended that the Militery Advisors
toke note of the forosoing proposed siudy in its relationshio wlth. othiy
Gefensive and surporting courses of act 1 ;

a a ee eS Vea ee

J. Statenent of Problen: To summariso th:

tha public relations fiela curing the s f:
El emors 3 and to BeeOs eee the manne ea
fe:

112. Int trodnen tions sytial purpose of this resort 1s to,
cerve as a basis for dizeussion . Nf gopre opiate authorities im G2eh ucaber
nation prior to the next Nilite: ny hay loons posting - ratause then that it
chould bo regarded asa comelupzive expressioa- of military opinion ca this

supjest, ; . ac 7
: 3. Goncluglons: Traro isn a reaiivenent for pro-planncc

clossiy coordinated public rolatiens progress for ali SeAro Military

favineza end Staff Planzsra con :

.
