—

-

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ate ‘

covering lLandlord-tenant relationshins,-. conditions of land

tenure, and an emergency vrosrau whereby refugees and

nilitary personnel demobilized as a result of the reduction

in the Armed Forces can be placed upon land abandoned by its

euners or not now inuse. ‘the progran will provide that ‘sfter

three years, if certain conditions ere met, the refugees can ob~

tain permanent pos Sion of the land on vhich they are placed,
e. Establishnent of a Nationel Assembly. Vietnamese

experts have aralitcd

ek a aS

raited, aud with the close cooperation of menbers
of theimbessy stafir, revised a decree estadlishing a national
assembuy. ‘this assembly will be provisi onal, will have some
elective character, end will have only limited powers. ‘this
assembly will prepare for the later establiSnment of a consti-
tuent assembly but will itself have no constituent powers.

This point is lmportant since to establish the permanent forn
of the goverment necessarily involves defining the role of the
present Chief of “tate Bao Dai. The inclination of the present
governuent is te throw over Sao Dai, but I feel that as long as
the national government is unable to cove witn the sects and
other splinter groups without his aid, it would be both vremature
ene dengerous to remove Bao Dai from his position as Chief of
State,

= *

£. Financial and Economie Measures to Strengthen the

isconomy. (1) Vietnam now has its own national bank and is _
independent of the previous quadripartite system. American
experts of the USOM and Enbessy staffs are working with Viet-
nemese Goverrmment officials to establish procedures acceptable
to the United states with regard to foreign exchange, imvort.
controls, and related matters. Much time has been Consumed
in explaining American requirements but the Vietnamese offi-
cials neve displeyed good ‘will and I believe tnat they will
meet our objectives in this regard.

(2) During Cy 1955, tax receipts of the national
government of Vietnam will be approximately #139 million, cf
which $116 million will have to be used: for ordinary civilian
expenditures of tne government. This surplus on the civilian
side of the budget, olus borrowing and other extraordinary .
receirts of the national government, will permit the Vietnamese
Goverrment to contribute approximately G66 million to the
extraordinary expenditures of the Government, including military,
refugees, and economic aid. The balance of necessary expenditures
of ayvroximately 3327 million will have to be met by United States
aid. For FY 1956 it is estimated that receipts will increase
and expenditures decline, so thet eid needed will decline to
approximately 3258 million.

Nee
