—

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

provinces adjoining the Communist-con-
trolled areas of Northern Vietnam. Further-
more, the Geneva agreements give members
of the “Pathet Lao” movement freedom of

" political action throughout Laos.

Cambodia

13. The internal Cambodian situation, ex-
cept for sharp political rivalries among lead-
ing Cambodians, is at present relatively staple.
Non-Communist dissidence appears to have
abated and the principal dissident leader, Son

: Ngoc Thanh, no. longer poses any real threat

to the government. The King retains wide-
spread popular support for having obtained a

large degree of effective independence from

the French and for having safeguarded Cam-
bodia’s integrity at Geneva. Although the
Communists are permitted freedom of politi-

' cal action in Cambodia, they have only a

minimum appeal. The Cambodian forces, al-
though somewhat weakened by the with-
drawal of French forces, have the capability
of dealing with current Communist sub-
versive action.

Il. OUTLOOK IN INDOCHINA

General Considerations

14. Tre Geneva agreements, although precise

and detailed concerning the time and place
of troop redeployments and related matters,

Moreover,
the agreements are vague with respect to
political matters. Details on the implemen-
tation of natioual elections are left for the
interested parties to determine. Except for
such influence as may be exerted by the pres-

- ence of supervisory teams from India, Canada,

and Poland, there is nc provision for forcing
the parties concerned to implement or adhere
to the agreements.

15. The course of future developments will be
determined less by the Geneva agreements

‘ . are imprecise about matters pertaining to ~
.future military aid and training..

- nist estimate that:

SECRET

Indochina, at a time when prolongation of the
conflict coyid have produced a steadily dete-
riorating situation in Indochina, was probably -
derived in substantial part from the Commu-

(a) an effort to win a

total military victory in Indochina might pre- |
cipitate US military intervention, and (b) the -
objective of gaining political control over all

Indochina could be achieved as a result of the

armistice agreement. The Communists also’
apparently believed that an attitude of “rea-
sonableness” and the acceptance of an armi-
stice in Indochina would contribute to the
realization of their objective to undermine
western efforts to develop an effective mili-
tary coalition. They probably consider,
therefore, that a deliberate resumption of
large-scale military operations from their zone
in the north would negate the political and
psychological advantages the Communists
have gained by negotiating a settlement and
could involve grave risk of expanded war.

17. In the light of these considefations, we
believe that the broad outlines of Communist
policy in Indochina will be to: (a) refrain
from deliberately taking major military action
to break the armistice agreement while seek-
ing to gain every advantage in the implemen-
tation of the agreements; (b) consolidate the
Communist political, military, and economic
position in North Vietnam; (c) conduct in-

tensive political warfare against non-Commu-
nist Indochinese governments and people;

(d) work for the ultimate removal of all West-
ern influence, particularly French and US,
from Indochina; and (e) emphasize and ex-
ploit issues in Indochina which will create
and intensify divisions among non-Commu-
nist countries. In sum, we believe that the
Communists will not give up their objective

“~of_securing control of all Indochina but will,

ij

than by the relative capabilities and actions

of the Communist and non-Communist en-'
tities in Indochina, and of interested outside

powers.

_ 16. Communisé policy. Communist willing-

ness to reach agreement for an armistice in

{

without. violating the armistice to the extent
of launching an armed invasion to the south
or west, pursue theiz objective by political,
psychological, and paramilitary means.

18. French policy. It is impossible at this
time to predict even the broad outlines of
French policy in Indochina. The following

+ appear to be the main alternatives:
