rrr?

|

—y
+

aoe | —-

es
i } ' ,

ry

roo
t

—~

=

Le

Fenny

ger |

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHORET | . > PH-95)-

(1) Havel - eee triking foree, including its support-

clements, “SY Hunter-Killor Group, Minesweeping force end
ous lift.

ing snd Logisti

¢c
neceses ey faxo hibio

(2) Ground ~ Up to & Divisions plus supporting forces.

(3) Aix ~ 2 to 3 Tactical Wings, 1 Tactical Recon mais ssence
Wing, 1 Troop Carrier Wing, Bomber force or long-range Lighter bombers as
available from bases outsides the theater of ope ans . =

.

- be I% chowld be noted that these forces ave those required
when tho cefenss of the three states is considered collectively end on
the assumption that nuclear weepoas will not be used?

AS¢ca

c. The forces depict as above, are in ad@ition to indi genous
foreos available,

4. Contlusloass:
a, Tho svecessful defenss of South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia
is wholly de Seah G on Os timely deployment of SEATO foreos into the
Theater, in addition to operations by the indigenous PORES

b. On tho assumption that nuclear weapons ers not used, the -
forces roguired for the cuecessf fenss of South Victnan, Laos end
Combodia ere vitlikely to ba ego: for the time being, in the numbers
jndicated end within the time by vnich they mist be deployed.

ec. It isa poosibls that ths use of nuclear weemeas world reduces
forca roguivremsnts to a point within ths capability of SRATO nations to
provida them, (HO%Ss Tho validity of this conclusion is dspendsat upon a
fucthor study of tha effects of nuclear weapons within tho erca under con-
sideration.)

5, Recorrsrdsvtionss It ia recommended that tho Militery Advigors:
: &, Hots tho conclusions in pavegraph 4 ebove. “

b. Approve thia study.

C,. Agenda Uther

.1. Problems To datornine tho oxteat.of the Military Support
necessary for tha dsfensa of THellend in tho cveat of overt Commenist

OLLLC SILO 6

2. Disoussion:” Tho conespt.of opsrations for ths Cefcense of . -.
Thailend requires that Thal euned Loress be eoploysda by D dey near the
frontier to deley the edvenceo of tas Conmunlat cone into thoir couatry.
As these foreas fell back, thoy wi bo roinforced ky S510 forces, end

TOP SECRET i021 ies ope k
