”

ST Fs a a

{ |

ae oe a

‘

\

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

replace Diem were unac ceptable for being either French puppets
or crypto-Viet Minh. =

ths

Communists end a lerge element of the French, included the
Chicf of the Vietnamese General Staff end the sectarian reli-
gious groups. These sects have long been more concerned with
maintaining their privite armies and domains than with working
for the common national sood. The seets finally joined the
Diem Government, to protect their own interests. ee,
General Hinh, the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, with

some tacit support from the sects, precipitated a prolonged
crisis by threatening for about two months to overthrow the
Government oy force. Although this officer was a French citi-~
gen and a lieutenant colonel in the French Air Force, no ef-
fective French pressuvre was brought to bear on him to desist
from threetening the Gevernment. Qn the contrary, it appeared
shat a Vietnamese Neguib (or Nasser) would not have been un-
welcome to the French if he had been able to estalish a mili-
tary dictatorship responsive to French direction. :

c. Sitmation as of November 1954. (1) As of the

date izy mission arrived in Bai, gon, ‘General Hinh, the Chief of
Staff, continued to threaten «the Government, even though he
had been ordered by the Chief of State to proceed to France.
The sects, although represented in the Government, were openly
working toward their own objectives, without thought of the
consequences of their ection upon the nation. The Viet Minh
were in eifective control of most of the rural areas and vil-
lages under nominsl euthority of the National Government.
Freach representatives were pressing for the early removal of
Miem and his replacement by one of their ovn stooces or else
ight
x

oy a Viet Minh syiapathizei who m reach some kind of under-
standing, perhaps tacit, with the Viet Minh. The latter

course, they felt, would facilitate the work of Salnteny , shen
nee cotisting in Hanoi with the Viet iinh to the end that ¥rench

businesses might continue to operate under normal" conditions

ae

ny

in Viet Minh territory. At the same time .the Government was

facec with es crushing problem of moving, Serine for end
relocating enti-Communist refugees from the ! North who now
number neerly one-half million and may in the end totél one
million. This undertaking, which could never have succeeded
without the devoted service of the French Army and tne American
Navy and the finsncial support of the U.S. Government, —
long tax the re UC of the netion, involving as it dos

one of the most ‘significant population mover ents of eee
times. cia

os oI
sore oe, fy

see aes “4

