rt.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FRR AZAs
Be Sys ta ty i

Pa
aR Wi iat

i

= ry

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

FROM: paris.

TO: Secretary of State

NO,  SECTO 8, May 8, 5 p.m. (SECTION TWO OF THREE)

PRIORITY

SiwT DEPARTMENT SECTO 8; REPEATED INFORMATION PRIORITY SAIGON 716.

: ~
what to do in face of present situation. He summarized present situation
as follows:

|
(1) There is a revolutionary movement under way in Vietnam,

(2) We believe that Diem has the best chance of anyone of staying on top

of revolution and keeping it within "tolerable" limits. Diem is only means

US sees to save South Vietnam and counteract revolution. US sees no one

else who can. Whatever US view has been in past, today US must support Diem
wholeheartedly. US must not permit Dieni to become another Karensky.

Regerding Bao Dai, Secretary said in his view he had irretrievably lost
capacity to be anything but titular head of government if even that position
could be saved for him and that this was solution Secretary vreferred until
election (of National Assembly). Bao Dai shovld support Diem and not take
away his power. Cao Dai and Hoa Hao could be used but no Binh Xuyen. Secre-
tary expressed opinion that with support two governments Diem could sit on
top of revolution. Diem is only force of moderation. FEC a certain stebiligz-
ing influence. US was giving funds to support Vietnamese Army and could not
see anyone else to give funds to but Diem for that purpose. Concluded by
stating that support of Diem was only way he could see to deal with common
problem pointing out that time was running against us and no successful results
could be achieved unless two countries worked together.

Meeting was then joined by British for whom Secretary resumed US position as
summarized above adding that in US view present revolution is not yet domi-
nated or influenced by Communists to any appreciable degree. He remarked
that prior associat*on with Comaunists was not in itself sufficient reason
to believe that man was a Communist now, citing that Bao Dai himself could
be considered a Commimist on this reasoning. Swpport of Diem did not indj-
cate US non-recognition of his weaknesses. US hed not taken part in his
original selection and head been and remained ready to support any other man
who might be presented by orderly process of law. He remarked that just before
outbreak of fighting US was prepared to consider alternatives but he was not
sure now that it would have been practical. Secretary remarked he vas tolq
last March by Collins thet we had already reached point of no return on Diem,

