ey. Fa

i

=

Posinteh!

et Fa PS

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

tomy ATARI, FT

DEPARTINENT OF STATE

Saigon

: FROM:
nOe Secretary of State
NO: 5074, May 5, 9 p.m. (SECTION FOUR OF FOUR)
NIACT

SENT DEPARTMENT 5074, REPZATED INFORMATION NIACT PARIS 1305

8. Conclusions:

~

A. It would appear to me that the essential steps in reconstitution of
joint American-French approach to situation in Vietnem should be as
follows:

(1) Diem government should be fully supported in bringing to a final and

quick solution its conflict with the Binh Xvyen.

(A) This will require on part of French, not only in Paris but more in-
portantly in Saigon, that genuine acsistance rather than passive self-
obstruction be offered to Vietnamese Government and armed forces.

(B) Specifically, General Bly should be directed tek

e active steps. to

persvade Binh Xuyen to withdraw their forces from three police posts

remaining within French security zone in Saigon, or if Binh Xuyen refuse,
then to permit VAewnote armed forces to reduce these posts with minimum of

casualties.

(Cc) All echelons of French bureaucracy, including armed forces, should be

instructed to desist from agitating against Diem government.

(D) Official pressure, both in Paris and Saigon, showld be brought upon

Radio France-Asia, a

on Diem government.

.

semi-governmental institution, to ceese its attecks

(E) Such steps as may be possible should be taken to persuade French
pressmen to cease their attacks, particularly in Saigon.

(F) French garrison in Saigon-Cholon should be reduced without delay.

ra 4 Pea ems rs

(G) There should be a public announcement by appropriate French euthorities
of their full support of Diem government in present conflict with Binh Xuyen.
possible to assist organization and training of essential logistical ser-
vices of Vietnamese armed forces so as to make them as independent as possible
of FEC. This is under way in accordance with my instructions to MAAG,

cory

