Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

the basic positions of this Department with respect to the Treaty, and
guided Department of Defense representatives on the U.S. Delegation to
the Manila Conference in discussions in the Hight Power Working Group and
in the Conference itself.

The following provisions of the Treaty are of special concern to the
Department of Defense: oe:

1. Article IV is the heart of the Treaty, and generally follows the
wording previously used in the Philippine, Korean, and ANZUS Treaties. It
provides that "Each Party recognizes that aggression by means of armed
attack in the treaty area against any of the Parties or against any State
or territory which the Parties by unanimous agreement may hereafter desig-
nate, would endanger its own peace and safety, and agrees that it will in
that event act to meet the common danger in accordance with its constitu-
tional processes." Secretary Dulles pointed out during the Conference
that the wording of the North Atlantic Treaty, which speaks of an attack
on one as an attack on all, nevertheless provides that the Parties will
act in accordance with their constitutional processes. He persuaded the
Conference that the final agreed wording of Article IV would be better
received by the Senate, would tend to minimize debate, and would facili-
tate ratification by the United States. :

The Article further provides that the Parties shall consult imme-
diately on measures of common defense if, in the opinion of any of the
Parties, any Party in the treaty area is threatened by other than armed
attack. This brings Communist aggression in the form of subversion and
coup d'etat within the purview of the Treaty. F

2. Article V establishes a Council to consider matters concerning
the implementation of the Treaty. During the sessions of the Working
Group it became evident that some countries would propose wording calling
for the establishment of military machinery, possibly along NATO lines.
Recalling the position of this Department that military participation
should be consultative along lines of the ANWS arrangement rather than
permanent and formal as in NATO, the Defense Representative in the Working
Group, Mr. C. A. Sullivan, in a message to Defense (SEATO No. 1, 2 Sep-
tember 1954) proposed that consideration be given to the inclusion of the
following wording after the first sentence of Article IV: "To this and
the Parties to the Treaty will consult with regard to military planing
as required by the situation in the area." Shortly thereafter the Aus-
tralian delegation proposed the following addition to Article V: "The
Council shall set up such subsidiary machinery as may be necessary t
achieve the military and other objectives of the Treaty." Since the
Australian proposal involved an open ended commitment, this Department
and the Joint Chiefs of Staff opposed it and accepted the wording suggested
by the Defense representative. The Department of State agreed, and
instructed the U.S. Delegation to support incorporation of this wording

_in Article IV (TOSEC 25, 3 September 1954).

