Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

6. The development of the proposed forces for Viet Nam and
Cambodia will require extensive and detailed training which
will extend over a period of 3 to 5 years. The French should
relinquish over-all command of the Armed Forces of Viet Nam
as rapidly as possible with complete removal of forces when
the Vietnamese are capable of exercising command of an effec-
tive force. The Vietnamese capability along these lines
should be developed by intensive training and by progressive
promotion of Vietnamese officers to posts in command of larger
units and to positions of increased responsibility.

7. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that prior to the
assumption of support of the forces of the state of South
Viet Nam, a definite agreement should be obtained from the
French Government with respect to the timing of their pro-
grammed phased withdrawal. The phasing out by the French
should be correlated with the ability of the Vietnamese to
take over this responsibility from the French, and at the
same time assume command.

8. Although introduction of military equipment into Viet
Nam above the levels existing at the time of signing the
Geneva Armistice Agreement is prohibited, it is estimated that
sufficient materiel is available in Viet Nam from that which
was previously delivered to Indochina for the French Union
Forces. The primary problem pertaining to materiel would be
to insure that the French, while executing their phased with-
drawal from Indochina, leave in Indochina the materiel and
equipment required, insofar’as available, for the use of the
Viet Nam Armed Forces. It should also be emphasized that
this materiel and equipment should be left in good operating
condition.

9. The supply of items such as pay, food, uniforms, and
POL, should be furnished by the Associated States to the
maximum extent of their capabilities. However, it is fully
recognized that, due to economic conditions in the associated
states, they would require extensive support concerning these
items. Such support as may be supplied by the United States
should be furnished out of Mutual Security funds administered
‘by Foreign Operations Administration.

10, Indochina is an important part of Southeast Asia and
merits limited U.S. support in implementation of national
policy in that area. The United States is supporting military
programs in this area, which possess a capability of producing
effective military forces. In view of the uncertain capabili-
ties of the French and Vietnamese to retrieve, retain, and

NSHTIVE

