Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

= meen Fn Se arg cee nner co ame hen Ram ae eae pe MTEC cmc tee he ee eee etitine em
Gr ae pa a Tin ee eee emer ee ote tata ete ate

Staff Planners — .

sare, He ane 1

From. The
10% fhe Military Adviser:

Rezovt of Confercmes, 1-16 Kovenber 1955, Pearl Hark bor, T.H.
Ref: (a) Bangkok Report of 6-8 July 1955 (TOP SECRET)

t | fs Ps
op
Lead
o
|

I. GIRWRAL: In eaceordance with tho provisions of refér ance (a), the
Staff Flaaners held thelr second coater ence at Pearl Harbor >» reH. Qurin
the poriod 1-16 Yovember 1955. In addition to examining their Soneda,
they attended to other matters raiscd at the meeting end also prepared
a conprchensive progecmme of future work of the Military J os fisera

Ov a= nication.

TX. EXPSUATLON OF PRE AGENDA: (ANNEX A).

: J. ze Tho fd Hoc Committee on Intelligence re- ck
: vi.euca mid ancndcd the intelligence assessments made in July 1955. Those
| emcenizents have boon eirculatcd by the Sesreteriat and have been incor }
oe porated ia the intelligence report waich the Hititery A dvisers are
recomended to approve under Agenda Iten I, . i

B, Agenda Virns BoC. MDs HOTZ: These kgenda Ttena wore
consolidated for tho purposes of this Playning Study)

* -
J. enone a3 Yo dotcrmine the extent of military support for the
defense of South Victnem, Iaos, and Camkodia in the event of overt
Communist uae cession,

sia

Re - Ding Guano: The coneept of operations requires that tho
indigenous forecs of three states resist Cormuunist aggression to the fuld

thre fs ; i

extent of their capabilities prior to ae after the introduction ef SEATO -
forces, tho initial oporations wlll ba to delay the advances of the
Corsmaist femiea late friendly aress. SEAT at be deployed to
the thoator of operations as corly as prac % vor = Btexrt of
agseossion end not: Inter thon 90 days jn’ ordo: =) oldineg, asx ae
absolute ninimim, the Saigon area, At a later pt ber offensiy
will bs mounted to deive the encay from ths three

; 2g

EGS ee ae

“3. Fores Reovirsneatss -

Pho force reauirenents for thi.a action will be on the erdoy

of: ae et paul is
= GOP SECRET . a . .
— “4 RO Copy --4----- of ~---/-~- copies

*

7
3
re
