rey

F434 Fr

oa

ea orc

prose —y

—_,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

¢. ‘The Department of Defense has not supplied any fixed assets

.

“north of the 17th parallel.

ad. Since the signing of the Geneva Agreement, all shipments
of materiel to Indochina have ceased except those items required to alle-
viate suffering, prevent disease, and assist in the evacuation from North
Vietnem.

e. The Department of Defense plans to initiate direct aid to
Vai-tnam and Cambodia on 1 January 1955. The details of the military plans
and MDA progrems to implement such plans are under active study and de-

’ velopment by appropriate agencies of the U.S. Governnient. There are no

pl ns to give military aid to Laos at this time because under the terms

oi the Geneva Agreement, no U.S. military advisors are admitted in the
country. The form of the aid for the two Associated States is to be cor-
centrated on training a force capable of maintaining internal security

and to eventually develop an army capable of fighting a delaying action in
case of invasion from the North. It is hoped that the French Expeditionary .
Corps will remain in the area until native troops can be trained to replace
them.

“f. Negotiations with the eench ‘are being conducted at this time
with the view of returning to U.S. custody all materiel no longer required
in Indochina.

g. When the Geneva Agreement was signed, there were 211,000 long
tons of MDAP materiel in French depots north of the 17th parallel. As of
20 November 1954, over 50% of this equipment had been evacuated. Fifteen-
hundred long tons per day is the target for evacuating the above materiel.
The daily averages of evacuation to date indicate that the French are more
than meeting this target and it is estimated that all depot stocks will be
evacuated from the North by 1 March 1956 and returned to depots in the South,
Equipment issued to the various military units is evacuated with the units.
The materiel in the South is being inventoried and upon completion, a deter-
mination will be made as to the equipment that is no longer required for
operations in Indochina. Materiel that is not required will be returned to
the custody of the U.S. for distribution to other areas. As an indication
of the thoroughness of the French evacuation of military equipment, all
pierced-steel planking used on airfield runways and taxiways have been
dismantled and shipped to the South.

Sincerely yours,

Signed: H. STRUVE HENSEL

2

oe

Honorable Alexander Wiley

Chairman

Committee on Foreign Relations

United States Senate ‘ 879

copy SECRET
