Lee eS a ee

a ra. es

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET

ae Deterring further Communist aggression, and -
preventing the occurrence of total war So far as
compatible with U, S, security,

b. Maintaining and davatonine in the free vorld.
the mutuality of interest and common purpose, the
confidence in the United States, and the will, strength
and stability, necessary to face the Soviet- Communist
threat and to provide constructive and attractive altern-
atives to Communism, which sustain the hope and confidence
of the free peoples, :

c. ‘In addition to a and b above, tak cing other
actions designed to foster changes in the character and
| policies of the Soviet--Communist bloc regimes:

(1) By influencing them and their peoples to-.
ward the choice of those alternative lines of action
which, while in their national interests, do. not
conflict with the security interests of the United
States,

4

Nese rales,

(2) By exploiting differences between such
regimes to disrupt the structure of ‘the soviet~
Communist bloc,

(3) By exploiting vulnerabilities within the !
bloc countries in ways consistent with this general ; ;

strategy.

d, Destroying or neutralizing the international
Communist apparatus in the free world,

. To carry out effectively tints general strategy will
require a flexible combination of military, political,
economic, psychological, and covert actions which enables the
full exe ercise of U. 5. jnitiative. These. actions must be so
coordinated as to reinforce one another, Programs for carry~
ing out this general strategy shouid be developed and con-
ducted as a matter of urgency, with special emphasis in the
period before the Soviets achieve nuclear parity.

8, Provided that it is resolutely pursued, this general ;
strategy offers the best hope of bring ging about at least a
prolonged period of armed truce, and Ultimately a peaceful re-~
solution of the ‘Soviet bloc- free world conflict and a peaceful:
and orderly world environment, Failure resolutely to pursue
this ae strategy could, within a relatively short span of
years, place the United States in great jeopardy.

r
i

(ae,
(op)

sc 5002/1 TOP SECRET
