po

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SESRST - : ao ees
. ; (E1-95)

It is vecomimdsa thet tho UuLitery favicon:
abo

a gi peat ns a. eee,
conclusions soachca in paragvaph 4 above.
nm, ' Tt was Salt ber 24 ae
(8 OTB: It was felt by tho rapresootatives of U ited Kincdon, Feanes
= as = Psa tenn] t sf . ; ce rata |
ae Zealand exd insivalia that in tho re : ase ont =
Be acs hess ee “ eae ee a) Seas a LN
th Loree Sequir mionts set out jn this-pap 2 bon evce-cst
fhoy proposes to examinog thon in rors det ; ey es
Lc wy More cet avy faviocra.
f

Eooting oe
E. Agonda Tt Tic Ge

1. Probleas To conduct a plaont

a. Se ee : ag steady os tho aorlel etiack of
selsctcd targsts on the Chixsee watnlend we oe Se
ae LY

Rae u : q North Victman as tho wajer a;
wid tery course of acticn In support of military opzrations in reseed ab
; zen . : = aU ak OF fe Ee £8
of overt aggression by Comnmist China against tho SEATO nations :
; 2S beth wwe WLU
2. Diisevsziions : a5,

GENTQ ato; Ce a intellisenecs surcvays, tho
i cD seks 2 soo az = fac a. Tt Ln a nove eee: 0 ore: ay or cons ils ee at 7 ste: y
pore, Comimnist China's air poss, coupled with hor ca port

&, Pascd woon accanted SEATO 5

ha

rez(yrcos provid O} tn3 ‘tuo og : yey, POU Ws pow.
SaaS eee ade t potont Foy satitots Ran
4h SBANO nitions, potent Fovces consti, buting a tron to

b fitate) QNarA anes
e gonarel consept of air a is ono of cuploying

pedondly wie a a ie

alr ee Liles: Ag opera rttons a .

tho outkres’t of var, This action 3 ag a primary Inzans of dofenss upon
A

ch frmodint 44 threat és Hebets oe ao ee ee .453 and

pr Vido the opportunity of offs ] ASO nationts ora er abiack ard to

of the air must ba held £ offectively employing SEATO forces. Coatrol

survive as effecti ico: fient oo by the SEATO nations if they are to _

capable of ne outralizine Be ng units. In eddition, friondly air must ba

it has boen found that or reducing the threat posod by eneny grovad forcos.

of reducing tho renee in view of the magnitude of the. task and tha urgency

required. If non~ tant 3 oe ride as well as non-atomi.c munitions will be
atomic weapons only’ are employeé, the forco requircmants

to jusplement this c« : =
io et ment this course of action will be PUPSEEI CS Yes :

Ser

i cose Because of tho importance of target selection in the
Usine 2} es of opsrations, a targeting study has been carviod out.
gee a information as a basis, an estimate of force moquiremonts

: en made and included in this paper. :

3. Gonelusions: It is concluded that = tho event of overt in
egeression by Communist China. : ;

- Qe The course of action which will ost effectively, and
with the least delay, in tims, reduce the threat to tho Treaty Arsay
ji attack by the SEATO aly forces upon solocted targets on the Chinese
feinlend and North Vietnam. via reduction vould probably be swrric Sent
to ensure thet the defense of the Treaty fhesa would bo practicable.

Ty
tn
th

&

TOP SECRET

a
C2
ND
Hi
