ae |

ea eS

a

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ae | USVI gd {4 re
‘ ; , pA ee

9 May 1955

| OES 1ORAT ‘DUN

SUBIC: : Possible French With@revel fron Vietraa

M. Faure's proposal to Hr. Dulles that the French withdraw
their forces from Vietnam may, if properly ployed , permit a real
reversal of the trend toward Com iunism in Souvheast Asia.

If the U. S. can and will ie @ deal with Diem, in which he
pledges to vrotect French civilians remaining after French troops
leave, in return for our assurances of increased aid and the rapid
and effective training of his ermy, we should be happy to see the
Yrench leave.

es

A move of this sort would clearly disengage us from the taint
of Colonialism derived from our support of the French and Bao Dai
which hes plagued us throughout Asia. It would put us clearly in

Ms

our traditional role of supporting the “independence and legitimate

ational asoirations" of peoples. Whe Pepeneess i008 or this through-
out Asia and the Moslem vorld will be sreat and beneficial, A clear
stand against French colonialism may greatly free our hands at some
later date with revard to French North Africa where an explosion like
Indo China seems inevitable.

French withdrayval will. als o effectively stoo the potential
dovuble- eeibice We have suspected of the Saintenay mission in Viet Minh,
where it appears the French have been insuring against the loss of
Free Neeser %o the Viet Minh by compromising with the Communists so
as to retain comnerciel and other ativantages after a takeover. At

me time it was rumored the French might even accept a Conzaunist
Indo China in the French Union,

Ah tacit assumption by the U. S. of the support of Free Viet Nan
might, of course, evennr y= mavolve us in e substantial commitment.
However, this is by no means certain, and there is a real likelihood
training, technical assistance and moderate aid will be ell thet is
required. We should not forget that we ere alrency counitted under
SEATO to defend Viet Nem against overt attack. The new situstion
would per mit, in psychological terms, the all-out use of "Militent
Liverty™ to help build Free Viet Nam resolve.

As & final coint to remember, the French declered at Geneva
that they would withdraw their forces at any time if reauesteR by the
Free Viet Nan Government. =

’

me Aas
row Zhe ay

compe Seger an 1

boas 22a Ss) Ds gard

