Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ro es " c oe i ra
‘ a . 3 LJ
- d Rs x 4

. 6. The Joint Chievi’s of Starf are of the opinion that the
recent developments in Geneva and Indochina, cousidered in
“conjunetion wita the genersl retrovrade trend within the

Western cee serve: to Lunprense the urvency of the need for
2 eo sive United Staves policy with: renanect to the Par
Mast reslou 2s a Wrols, an order we give diverction, cohesive-
ness, and greater efvectiveness to tne political and milit ary
actions whieh must now be taken to prevent the loss of the re-
mainder of Southeast Asi2 to Communist control. It is con-

4

sidered that until the United States formulates and adonts
such an over-@l] policz: we shall be severely handicapped in

ay nesotiaticns for the estenlishmens of a collective defense
ain ‘the gsenerel eres of Southeast Asie and the Southwest Pacific,
Before the provisions of an acceptable security treaty can be
finally drafted, it would appear necessary that certain basic

decisions be made with respect to how far the United States

is willing to £0, it concert with all or certain of the non-
Communist nations having interests in the Far Kast or, if neces-
sary, unilaterally, in opposing further Communist accretions in
the area under consideration,

7. Simita arly’, basie decisions would appear to be requisite to
the adoption of interim courses of action designed to cneck the
momentum ereated by recent Communist successes, and to provide :
for coordinated action pending the formalization of a collective °
security arrangement for the Far East region. :

8. Viewing; 3
this context, ¢
States was publ
a collective Se

Joint Chiefs of Staff recomize that the Wnited
vy committed to the grensoring and support of
ity arvenzement for Southeast Asia even vefore
the collanse of e FPrénch effort in Indochine, but they have
serious missivings coneernins the nilivary provisions of such a
pact Jest they np ly commitments waieh the United States would
not be able to meet. Failure to satisfy the expectations of the
signatories in the matter of military aid could, in tarn, result
in the alienution of friendly governments vather than the aequi $i
tion of new allies

he immediate problem of treaty negotiations tithin
he

a:
Ct

Ba
wv

bn
Ss

, —$. Suwgece to the SOHMeHeS set forta below, some of which are
made py wey of emphesis of points in the reports of the UK-US
Study Group, an ae Chiefs of Starf are in gencraa acreoment
With the position taken by the Uniled States side of the Croup,
The real evaluation of the praduct of the Study Group will, of
course, depend upon tne manier in which the differences in the
United States and United Kingdom positions are resolved,

war eee a ee cee

eT bale oe ay ae

. bee oe = i
tone ; TAC {

{ Pa) Mea diate 2 Wein ral
