We cs le ce

rs rey Ps

4

=

r

4

ry

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET se 3

Pathet Lao position in the northern prov-
inces. (Paras. 45-49)

“G. The Communists now have few assets
in Cambodia and will probably be unable
to develop a significant-internal threat in
that country until their position is great-
ly strengthened in Laos or South Viet-
nam.® In the meantime, the DRV will
prob. sly continue its efforts to promote

I. INTRODUCTION

11. Under the terms of the Geneva Accords,
and with the final withdrawal of French forces
frorn.the Haiphong area on 18 May 1955, a

» Communist regime known as the “Demo-
cratic Republic of Vietnam” (DRV) has as-

sumed full responsibility for the administra-
tion of the territory of Vietnam north cf the
17th Parallel, pending a political settlement
and the unification of the country.

12. The DRV, known also as the Viet Minh,
vas estublished at the end of the Second World
War when a coalition of Vietnamese of all
political leanings drew together under the
leadership of the veteran Communist, Ho Chi
Minh, and proclaimed Vietnamese independ-
ence. The DRV openly and frequently pro-
fessed its solidarity with the Sino-Soviet Bloc
after 1949. Since then any loss by the DRV of
its Vietnamese support has been offset by a
zonsiderable increase In organizational and
material strength and by the prestige of vic-
tories over French forces.

13. Although the recent assumption of re-
sponsibility over 13 million people and several
large cities has confronted the DRV with
major problems, these problems are not en-
tirely new or unrelated to previous DRV ex-
perience. During its years of resistance,
which was conducted until 1950 with little or
'For an estimate of probable developments in
Cambodia, see NIE 63.2-55, “Probable Develop-
ments in Cambodia Through July 1956,” to be
published in August 1955.

SECRET

DISCUSSION

no external assistance and under conditions

friendly relations and to secure Cambodian

neutrality. (Para. 50) :
10. We believe the DRV will be willing to

continue political and economic contacts

with the French. However, it ‘almost
certainly will be unwilling to make any
agreement which in fact would permit
the French to retain an economic and cul-
tural position in North Vietnam. (Paras.
51-56)

of severe physica! hardship and austerity, the
DRV leadership was able to weed out the weak
and timid, build an effective arrny, train a sub-
stantial number of experienced cadres and
local administators, and obtain considerable
experience in the techniques of political con-
trol. “Thus, when the DRY assumed control
of all North Vietnam in 1954, it possessed con-
siderable advantages over the Diem govern-
ment in terms of military strength and ex-
perience, organization and sense of unity and
purpose. .

14. While the immediate concern of the DRV
is to consolidate its control in the North and to
gain contro! of South Vietnam, its longer run
objectives almost certainly are to build a

strong Cornraunist state in all Vietnam and to.
assist in the extension of Communist control

throughout Southeast Asia.”

ll. INTERNAL SITUATION AND TRENDS

Siability and Effeciiveness of the Regime
15. The DRV is organized on the normal pat-
tern of all Communist “peoples democracies,”
Although the government of the DRV ostensi-
bly represents all elements in a “united front”
grouping (the Lien Viet), actual power resides
in the Communist party (the Lao Dong or
Workers Party). Out of a total population in
North Vietnam of some 13 million, the Lien
Viet is estimated to have approximately § mil-
lion members, including the Lao Done, which
