Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP

cS
we)
Pry
—

sy ae aL |

1h, Reduce the relative power of Communist China
in Asia even at the risk of, but without deliberately
provoking, war:

‘a. (1) React with force, if necessary and ad-
vantageous, to expansion and subversion recogniz-
able as such, supported and supplied by Communist
China.

'(2) React. with immediate, positive, armed
force against any belligerent move by Communist
China.

"b. Increase efforts to develop the political,
economic and military strength of non-Communist
Asian countries, including the progressive develop-
ment of the military strength of Japan, to the point
where she can provide for her own national defense
and, in time, contribute to the collective defense
of the Far East.

‘c, d, and e. Same as 13 c, d, and e.'

REASONS: (1) Alternatives A and B would provide

that the United States resort to armed action only in

the event that Communist China itself committed armed
aggression. Such a policy would be inadequate to cope
with indirect aggression which experience indicates will
be the most probable form of Chinese Communist aggression
in the general area of Southeast Asia in the near future.
It should be the objective of United States policy to
block the further expansion of Communist China regardless
of the methods by which such expansion is attempted.

(2) The proposed policy contained in Alternative D is
considered to be extreme. It could hardly be expected
that such a policy would receive the support of our major
Allies. If adopted, it would require that the United States,
in common prudence, now embark upon a major expansion of
military forces, and take such other steps as are necessary
to place tthe United States in a position to conduct large-
scale military actions in the Far Hast. In short, the pro-
posed policy is considered to be provocative and one which
inherently would greatly increase the risk of general war.

(3) The objective set forth in Alternative C, as amended
above, is consistent with previously expressed views of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. It states a definite goal and pro-
vides for a positive approach to the problem of reducing

mm
