Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

i as cae = ae Saeee ee
TOP SECRET Me eae pas
fs ~2- 2250, December 13,-7°p.u., from Sgigon {SECTION 2 OF 35) GN 5S9%
ea eae | Be

f : . ‘ r ; 200 a ol

[70 Possible alternatives to Diem Government: ae

a 1. As I see it, we have 3 possible courses of actiontn-Vistnan:

i xP : Vat cee A Bs Bureau of

‘o (A) Continue support of Diem Government. FAR EASTER AFFAIRS
Sieh (B) REQ 4 A1954

support establishmsnt of another government wnich-mayte-* .
(5 able to save situation i (i a oe 2
2. ye : awe " . \ Department of State,

‘OP (Cc) Gradually withdraw support from Vietnam.

2. (A). Difficulties and risk of support Diem have been covered
c in EMBTEL 2108 and FART I this message and other cables. Recent
} accomplishments have been minor considering magnitude of task
: ahead. Favorable developments include:
r ‘ oe : : ‘
(1) Diem made first anti-Communist appeal to people 16 November.

(2) Diem-Hinh feud has beer resolved, for present at least.

(3) Diem made trip to South Cochin China to observe work by
Arnay in its rehabilita.icn program.

(4) Phan Rang-Phan Thiet affair has been compromised.

(5) vy and Ty have taken their new offices.

cs
} }

~(6) 13 December Diem issued proclamation expressing confidence
tn the Army and calling on it to unite with people in the fight
against Communism.

f 1

(B) Realize abandonment of Diem would embarrass US in view our
public.support present government. However, if it oroves neces-
sary, believe such embarrassment would prove insignificant com-
pared to blow to anti-Communism in Asia and throughout world if -
US-supported free Vietnam were lost to Communism. I believe it

f would be better to take slight loss of prestige in near future
=. while: time to attempt other solution remains, rather than con-
: tinue support Diem snould failure appear relatively certain. We
f have not reached this point, though Ihave grave misgivings re
ts Diem's chances of success, : :
c 3, In view of possibility that Diem will fail to rally unified
I *" - support of army in fight against Communism, believe we should —
, Consider otner solutions. Two alternatives (neither of which
re is too promising, but each of which should be considered in
event of Diem's failure) are suggested:

oe aoe oe oS yee .
eo , a , bt pBls (A)

FeéRMANENT TOP SECRET

asi oN sl tL as in Oe Se A ee BP ec att Wh ih ay Nie eee | filac with natetian of actian tal
- ‘ Abs *n taken

F
a
