. ake.

2h9.

250.

251.

252.

253-

25k.

25.

-to martyrize himself." Paris 4746 to Dulles, 30 April

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

" OP SECRET - Sensitive
Page
In a debriefing, General Cohlins is firmly convinced that
it will be to the detriment of U.S. interests to continue

to support Diem. ISA Memorandum, 25 April 1955..ecscccsoeees 937

The U.S. tentatively proposes to maintain full support to
Diem until en alternative supported by Bao Dai is developed.

+ Dulles ‘"757 bo Saigon, 27 April. 1955.....sscedescdecevedecees FHL

The State Department is being forced to take a strong stand
for Diem. Senator Mansfield is a strong backer of Diem

and if Diem is forced out,there will be "real difficulties
on the Hill.” K.T. Young wenosandan for Robertson, 30 April
Ce ee ee
Bao Dai registers strong complaints against U.S. support of
Diem, U.S.. inaction which allowed the present civil strife,
end against U.S. failure to urge Diem to go to France.

Diem, in Bao Dai's opinion, is a "psychopath who wishes

gus

DODD oe eis suie sine awe swiss bodies sale a clue bce sain suiasovs sees ae 6s 0 eis es

It is predicted that the success of Diem against the Binh

Zuyen, Bao Dai, the French and General Vy has created a
potentially revolutionary situation in Vietnam and, given

U.S. support and French acquiescence, Diem is expected to
stabilize the situation in Saigon. SNIE 63.1-2/1-55,

BMY 105 a vceas cis con vere wie cones Coe eee cee eeeRGeesawecs ee

Tripartite. discussions again reveal basic disagreement. -

The French conclude: "Diem is a bad choice...without him

some solution might be possible but with him there is

none...What would you say if we [France] were to retire '
entirely from Indochina..." SECTO 8, 8 May 1955..cesesceeess 999

The French are increasingly bitter. toward Diem and con-
vinced he must go. Steps are suggested to reconstitute
a joint Frenco-American approach to the situation. |
Among these are steps to reduce the French garrison

in Saigon, réplace Ely, and form a course of action
after the crisis is over which persuades Diem to reor-

. .ganize his government or else get rid of him. Saigon

BOTs to: Dulles, 8 May LOsocccanccccsoccevercscotensevcaetecee GOL
The JCS reject both alternatives suggested by Dulles
as solutions to the Vietnam problem. The JCS recom-
mend thet Dulles be advised thet Diem shows the-most

promise for achieving internal stability, that the

U.S. cannot guarantee security of French nationals,

and that U.S. actions under SEATO could possibly re-

place FEC presence. JCS Memorandum for Secretary of

De Petes 00 BAG LO aw pecs vet nest ees trans se Re/e@aeousalewnn te |e ee

©

XLII TOP SECRET - Sensitive «
