Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

t
We recommend, therefore, that when NSC 5129 is prepared 7 ae
in final form, Section IV, COMMUNIST CHINA, be brought
forward and redesignated Section I. However, for con-
venient reference, we have addressed our comments to
the sections of the paper in their present order.

"bh. The following detailed comments are addressed
to the bracketed phrases and alternative courses of
action set forth in the draft statement of policy, as
well as to’ amendments and additions which are deemed
desirable. (Changes are indicated in the usual manner. )

"(1) Page 3, subparagraph 1 c and page 4, para-
graph 5. No preference is expressed with respect
to including or omitting the bracketed phraseology.

"(2) Page 5, subparagraph 7 a. Alternative A
is favored.

REASON: It is considered that the treaty
should provide for the prompt and positive
application of retaliatory measures against Com-
munist China if it is determined that Communist
China is a source of armed aggression, either
direct or indirect. Any more limited provision
would not Seneea an adequate response to the
aggression.

"(3) Page 6, paragraph 8. Alternative B is
considered preferable.

"(h) Page 7, subparagraph 9 f. Amend to read
as follows:

Le Continue to exploit opportunities to
further U.S.long-range objectives toward uniting
Vietnam under a democratic form of government. '

"(5) Page 7, subparagraph 9 g. Delete both alternatives.

REASON: In light of subparagraph 9 f, a further
statement on this subject is considered unnecessary.

"(6) Page 8, subparagraph 10 d. Stationing of token
forces in or around Thailand is not favored. Accordingly
it is recommended that Alternative B be rejected. While
there is no objection to Alternative A, the necessity for
its inclusion in a’ statement of policy with respect to

Thailand is not apparent, since the visits of United States

forces to friendly countries is a routine and well-estab-
lished custom.

"(7) Pages 9 through 11, paragraphs 12, 13, 14, and 15.
Among the four statements of alternative courses of action
with respect to Communist China adoption of Alternative C
(paragraph 14), amended to read as i ie is favored:

710 SENSHTIVE TOP SE or

es
m4

wes
