Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Other papers prepared by Systems Analysis during this period were
furnished to the ISA working group upon their request. Indeed, the subject
matter and thrust of these papers indicated fairly early the bias of the
people preparing them as well as the direction in which the reassessment of
U.S. strategy was moving, at least within the working group in ISA.

Papers were also furnished concerning pacification, costs and probable
results of alternative U.S. strategies in South Vietnam, the status of
RVNAF, problems of inflation, and data for analysis of strategies. The
main thrust of most of these papers was that "more of the same" in South
Vietnam would not achieve decisive results and, indeed, would not be satis-
factory. The paper on pacification indicated that:

Hamlet Evaluation System (HES) reports for CY 1967 indicate
that pacification progressed slowly during the first half of
1967, and lost ground in the second half. Most (60%) of the
1967 gain results from accounting type changes to the HES
system, not from pacification progress; hamlet additions and
deletions, and revised population estimates accounted for
half of the January-June inerease and all of the June-December
increase. In the area that really counts--VC-D-E hamlets
rising to A-B-C ratings--we actually suffered a net loss of
10,100 people between June and December 19067. 36/

Based’ on General Wheeler's statement in his report to the President,
that "to a large extent the VC now control the countryside," the paper con-
eluded that "the enemy's current offensive appears to have killed the program
onee and for all." 37/

In analyzing the status of RVNAF, the Systems Analysis paper concluded:

Highest priority must be given to getting RVNAF moving. In
the short run re-equipping the Vietnamese and helping them
regain their combat power insures that we can prevent unnecessary
loss should the enemy attack the cities or put pressure there
while hitting Khe Sanh. Further, present US force commitments
mean that only a recuperated RVNAF will permit release of US
units for other missions and accomplish any objectives in
pacification. Finally, restoration of security in the cities
in conjunction with the National Police is a major new mission
for RVNAF which requires forces.

What can we do? There are many indications that the man-
power situation is worse than reported. Every effort must be
made to determine how many deserters there are and to approach
them. Rounding up trained manpower delinquent in returning
from Tet will help. US advisors can pressure the JGS to up-
grade selected RF/PF into ARVNin addition to measures already
initiated by RVNAF.

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
