Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

involve risks which at present I regard as too high to
accept for this dubious prospect of successful results. 14/

The Secretary spent the day on the witness stand, answering
questions, rebutting charges, and debating the issues. His use of facts
and figures and reasoned arguments was one of his masterful performances,
but in the end he was not persuasive. The subcommittee issued a report
on 31 August which castigated the Administration's conduct of the bombing
campaign, deferred to the authority of the professional military judgments
it had heard, accepted virtually all the military criticisms of the program,
and advocated a switch-over to escalating “pressure” concepts.

The Secretary had emphasized the inability of the bombing
to accomplish much more, given the nature of U.S. objectives and of the
difficult challenged presented by the overall military situation. The
subcommittee disagreed:

That the air campaign has not achieved its objectives
to a greater extent cannot be attributed to inability or
impotence of airpower. It attests, rather, to the frag-
mentation of our air might by overly restrictive controls,
limitations, and the doctrine of 'gradualism' placed on
our aviation forces which prevented them from waging the
air campaign in the manner and according to the timetable
which was best calculated to achieve maximum results. 15/

The Secretary had said there was no evidence of any kind to indicate
that an accelerated campaign would have reduced casualties in the South;
‘the subcommittee reported that the overwhelming weight of the testimony
by military experts was to the contrary. The Secretary had minimized

the importance of the 57 recommended targets which had not yet been
approved, and implied that few if any important military targets remained
unstruck; CINCPAC and the Chiefs said the 57 included many "lucrative"
targets. The Secretary had discounted the value of closing Haiphong;

all of the military witnesses said that this was feasible and necessary
and would have a substantial impact on the war in the South. In all

of these matters the subcommittee did not believe that the Secretary's
position was valid and felt that the military view was sounder and should

prevail:

In our hearings we found a sharp d/fference of opinion
between the civilian authority and the top-level military
witnesses who appeared before the subcommittee over how
and when our airpower should be employed against North Viet-
nam. In that difference we believe we also found the roots
of the persistent deterioration of public confidence in
our airpower, because the plein facts as they unfolded in
the testimony demonstrated clearly that civilian authority
consistently overruled the unanimous recommendations of

98 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
