Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

afraid to make any concession that might weaken his grip: consequently
the U.S. needed to reassure him that he could count on our firm support
to him personally.

A strong statement of this point of view is contained in a
report submitted in January by Brig. General Edward Lansdale, then the
Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Special Operations. Lansdale
had become famous for his work in the Philippines advising on the suc-
cessful campaign against the Huk insurgents. In 1955 and 1956, he was
a key figure in installing and establishing Diem as President of South
Vietnam. As mentioned in the Introduction, Lansdale visited Vietnam in
early January. Here, from his report, are a few extracts on Diem and
how Lansdale felt he should be handled:

-.-We must support Ngo Dinh Diem until another strong
executive can replace him legally. President Diem feels that
Americans have attacked him almost as viciously as the Com-
munists, and he has withdrawn into a shell for self-protection.
We have to show him by deeds, not words alone, that we are his
friend. This will make our influence effective again.

»oelf the next American official to talk to President Diem
would have the good sense to see him as a human being who has
been through a lot of hell for years -- and not as an opponent
to be beaten to his knees -- we would start regaining our in-
fluence with him in a healthy way. Whatever else we might
think of him, he has been unselfish in devoting his life to his
country and has little in personal belongings to show for it.
If we don't like the heavy influence of Brother Nhu, then let's
move someone of ours in close. This someone, however, must be
able to look at problems with understanding, suggest better
solutions than does Nhu, earn a position of influence....

Ambassador Durbrow should be transferred in the immediate
future. He has been in the 'forest of tigers’ which is Viet-
nam for nearly four years now and I doubt that he himself
realizes how tired he has become or how close he is to the in-
dividual trees in this big woods. Correctly or not, the
recognized government of Vietnam does not look upon him as a
friend, believing he sympathized strongly with the coup
leaders of 11 November,

.-»-Ngo Dinh Diem is still the only Vietnamese with execu-
tive ability and the required determination to be an effective
President. I believe there will be another attempt to get rid
of him soon, unless the U.S. makes it clear that we are back-
ing him as the elected top man. If the 11 November coup had
been successful, I believe that a number of highly selfish and

a2: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
