a

of

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

administration was energetic and effective and where some modicum of
security had already been provided. 101/ USOM had severe recruiting
difficulties, too. Secretary Mcllamara discovered on his 12-13 May visit
to Saigon that it was about 25 per cent understrength and that approxi-~
mately half of this personel shortage was concentrated in the expanding
rural affairs staff. 102/

McNAMARA'S WILLINGN®SS TO APPROVE EXPANSION

Thus, the general attitude among the U.S. agencies in Saigon was to
go slowly, to avoid the danger, as it was frequently expressed, of "strewing
Americans all over the countryside." Secretary McNamara apparently had
other thoughts after his May visit in Saigon. The available record does
not reflect that he directed an expansion of the advisory effort ~~ but the
Joint Staff was almost immediately hard at work examining which of several
levels of increase would be most desirable. The available record leaves
little doubt that the Secretary of Defense wanted it made clear that he
would approve any reasonable proposals for personnel, materiel, or funds.
Those sections of NSAM 288 which dealt with recommendations for South
Vietnam had concentrated on programs which would assist GVN to mobilize
its resources. By May it was clear that the hoped-for actions had not
taken effect. The obvious conclusion -- given the importance which the
U.S. attached to success in South Vietnam -~ was that additional steps
must be taken to halt the deterioration in the countryside.

THE INTITAL PROPOSALS AND RESPONSES

The initial recorded exchange among the planners occurred when
COMUSMACV was asked on 22 May 1964 to provide an input to a JCS study then
in progress on "...encadrement of South Vietnamese Civil Guard and Self
Defense Corps with U.S. teams along lines of White Star teams in Laos,
with objective of making these units as effective as possible in Vietnamese
pacification plan." 103/ ‘The message made it clear that the JCS was
examining alternative levels of increased advisory effort (1,000, 2,000
and 3,000 personnel), not asking if the advisory effort should be increased.
The compressed time frame available for prior coordination on a recommended
course of action was also clear: COMUSMACV was asked to provide his com-
ments on the draft JCS proposal by the following day (23 May). "Regret
circumstances do not permit more time," the message stated. 10h/

The reply from Saigon, processed through CINCPAC, adhered to the
established MACV preference to undertake new departures only in a selective,
experimental way:

I do not think we should flood RVN with number of personnel
you mention. Think better solution is to do /this/ on selective
basis starting with critical districts and provinces and once we
get feel of problem expand to remainder of RVN as experience
dictates. 105/

hy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
