Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

broader war. The most risky actions are mining of the
ports, bombing of cities (or possibly dams), and landings
in North Vietnam.

‘10. Requirements of a program designed to "persuade"
(not interdict). A bombing program focused on the objective

of "persuasion would have these characteristics:

a. Emphasize the threat. The program should be
structured to capitalize on fear of the future. At a given
time, "pressure" on the DRV depends not upon the current
level of bombing but rather upon the credible threat of
future destruction (or other painful consequence, such as an
unwanted increased Chinese role) which can be avoided by
agreeing to negotiate or agreeing to some settlement in
negotiations. Further, it is likely that North Vietnam would
be more influenced by a threatened resumption of a given level
of destruction -- the "hot-cold" treatment -- than by a threat
to maintain the same level of destruction; getting "irregu-
larity" into our pattern is important.

b. Minimize the loss of DRV "face." The program
should be designed to make it politically easy for the DRV
to enter negotiations and to make concessions during negoti-
ations. It is politically easier for North Vietnam to accept
negotiations and/or to make concessions at a time when bombing
of their territory is not currently taking place. Thus we
shall have to contemplate a succession of Pauses.

e. Maintain a "military" cover. To avoid the
allegation that we are practicing “pure blackmail," the
targets should be military targets and the declaratory policy
should not be that our objective is to squeeze the DRV to
the talking table, but should be that our objective is only
to destroy military targets.

Thus, for purposes of the objective or promoting a settle-
ment, three guidelines emerge: (1) Do not practice "strategic"
bombing; (2) do not abandon the program; and (3) carry out
strikes oily as frequently as is required to keep alive fear
of the future. Because DRV "face" plays a role and because
we can never tell at what time in the future the DRV might
be willing to talk settlement, a program with fairly long
gaps between truly painful strikes at "military" targets
would be optimum; it would balance the need to maintain the
threat with the need to be in an extended pause when the

DRV mood changed. Unfortunately, so long as full VC victory

39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
