Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
PART IT

GVN RELATIONS IN THe KY-THINU PERTOD

JURE 1965 - FALL 1967

Chapter I - The Ky Government's Barly Months; The Coup

to the Embrace at Honolulu, February 196

1. The Ky Government's Inheritance 1/

Nguyen Cao Ky, Commander of the Vietnamese Air Force, joined with
other "Young Turks" of the Vietnamese Armed Forces to overthrow the
civilian government of Prime Minister Queat on June 12, 1965. Attempts
at civilian government had limped along since October, 1964, following
riots in August-September that had forced the generals to withdraw
Khanh's military-dictatorial constitution and to promise civilian rule.
That entire period had been marked by riots, coups, and attempted coups.
By June, when Quet and the civilian President Suu found themselves in an
impasse, Ambassador Taylor easily acquiesced in the return to direct
military rule.

Pacification kept lagging, and the dark military picture forced the
U.S. to decide in June to pour U.S. troops into the country as fast as
they could, be deployed. The pattern of GVIi civil and military ineffec~
tiveness had led the U.S. Government to resolve to do it ourselves, and
to abandon any hope of forcing or inducing GYN to do the job without us.
All concerned knew: that the Young Turks now in open control of GVN had
repeatedly defied Ambessador Taylor and had gotten away with it. Attempts
at top-level leverage on GVN had produced a virtual diplomatic rupture
for a few days at the end of 196). end the beginning of 1965, and the U.S.
was in no mood to try it again.

2, The Ky Government and the U.S, Start Their Dealings, June-July 1965

With Vietnem's return to overt military government, the political
plocs with their private armies, perhaps exhausted, bided their time.
Communication improved between the U.S, and GVN to a state of cool
correctness, gradually revealing lower-level GVN's intention to go on
coasting as it always had and higher-level GVN's intention to serve its
own interests.

The day after the coup, COMUSMACV cabled CINCPAC in alarm about the
military picture, requesting authority to send U.S. troops on offensive
missions. He recalled that ARVIN had lost five infantry battalions on
the battlefield in the last three weeks, and he stated that the only
possible U.S. response was the aggressive employment of U.S, troops
together with the Vietnamese general reserve forces.

uu TOP SECRET - Sensitive
