Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Gi

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

We consider defoliation of the southern portion of the DMZ
as a possible means to prevent enemy infiltration through that
area...In the event defoliation of the IMZ is not acceptable,
MACV staff has drawn up an alternate plan which would call for
defoliation of a large area just south of DMZ running east from
Laos border to fringe of coastal lowlands. Target would be
sufficiently south to insure against accidental spread into
DMZ itself. I see no serious political objections. 29

On September 7th, the JCS sent to CINCPAC, with an information copy
to COMUSMACV, a proposal which had resulted from a Jason summer study on
an air supported anti-infiltration barrier. 30/

This study suggested that an air supported barrier system specifi-
cally designed against the North Vietnamese infiltration system through
Laos, based on further development of components that in the main were
available, might be obtainable in about a year after the decision to go
ahead. The barrier would have two somewhat different parts, one designed
for foot traffic and one against vehicles. The proposed location for
the foot traffic barrier was the region along the southern edge of the
DMZ to the Laotian border, then north to Tchepone, and then to the
vicinity of Muong Sen. The location for the anti-vehicle part of the
system was further to the west where the road network was more open to
traffic.

The anti-troop infiltration system (which would also
function against supply porters) would operate as follows.
There would be a constantly renewed minefield of non-
sterilizing Gravel (and possibly button bomblets) distri-
buted in patterns covering interconnected valleys and slopes
over the entire barrier region...There would also be 4
pattern of acoustic detectors to locate mine explosions
indicating an attempted penetration. The minefield is in-
tended to deny opening of alternate routes for troop infil-
trators and should be emplaced first. On the trails cur-
rently being used from which mines may -- we tentatively
assume -- be cleared without great difficulty, a more dense
pattern of sensors would be designed to locate groups of
infiltrators. Air strikes using Gravel and SADEYES would
then be called against these targets. The sensor patterns
would be monitored 24 hours a day by patrol aircraft. The
struck area would be reseeded with new mines.

The anti-vehicle system would consist of acoustic detec-
tors distributed every mile or so along all truckable roads
in the interdicted area, monitored 24 hours a day by patrol
aireraft with veetored strike aircraft using SADEYE to
respond to signals that trucks or truck convoys are moving. 31/

65 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
