Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

BE. The Mission Assessment as CORDS Begins

The situation that CORDS and Ambassador Kemer inherited was ‘not a
very promising one. Despite all the lip service and all the "top
priorities" assigned RD by the Americans in the preceding 18 months,
progress in the field was not only not satisfactory, it was, according
to many observers, nonexistent. The question of whether we were inching
forward, standing still, or moving backward always seemed to the Mission
and Washington to be of great importance, and therefore much effort was
spent trying to analyze our "progress."

A strong case can be made for the proposition that we have spent
too much time looking for progress in a program in which measurements
are irrelevant, inaccurate, and misleading. But, nonetheless, the
Mission did try to measure itself, and in May of 1967, as OCO turned
into CORDS, produced the following assessment of RD for the first quarter

of 1967.

"In truth, there has been little overall progress in RD
activities, and the same must be said for the painful process
of building a meaningful dialogue between the government and
the people. A number of factors have been reported from
Region III to account for this unheppy situation, but they
might well apply to the rest of the country:

"a, The RD program for 1967 involved many new and
different concepts, command arrangements, edministrative and
procedural functions and allocation of resources. Only
recently have the majority of provincial officials involved
become aware of the program.

"b. Many Ap Doi Moi (Real New Life Hamlets), through
guidance from MORD, were located in fringe security areas. In
most of these cases a great deal of military and junsle clear-
ing operations were necessary. These take time, and, as a
result, the deployment of the RD teams often were delayed.

"ce, The hobbling effect of ineffectual officials
has retarded the program.

"d. The people have had to develop new working re-
lationships with the RD workers,* the ARVN, and the RF/Pr.
-During this process, there has been a 'wait and see’ attitude.
¥ “florkers” was another one of the special words the U.S. began using
"instead of accurate translations of the Vietnamese. This one was
also Lodge's idea, as a more understandable word than "cadre" to
deseribe the members of the 59-man teams.

135 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
