{sd

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

constitute the primary means for the U.S. to turn the tide of the war
had been overtaken by the President's decision to send in substantial
U.S. ground forces for combat in SVN. With Shis decision the main
hope had shifted from inflicting pain in the North to proving, in the
South, that NVN could not win a military victory there. ROLLING
THUNDER was counted as useful and necessary, but in the prevailing
view it was a supplement and not a substitute for efforts within SVN.
From the first, strike requirements in SVN had first call on U.S. air
assets in Southeast Asia.

Nonetheless, ROLLING THUNDER was a comparatively risky and
politically sensitive component of U.S, strategy, and national author-
ities kept it under strict and careful policy control. The strikes
were carried out only by fighter-bombers, in low-altitude precision-
bombing modes, and populated areas were scrupulously avoided. Final
target determinations were made in Washington, with due attention to
the nature of the target, its geographical location, the weight of
attack, the risk of collateral damage, and the like. Armed reconnais-
sance was authorized against targets of opportunity not individually
picked in Washington, but Washington did define the types of targets
which could be hit, set a sortie ceiling on the number of such missions,
and prescribed the areas within which they could be flown.

National authorities also closely regulated the rate of
escalation by discouraging the preparation of extended campaign plans
which might permit any great latitude in the field. They accepted
pombing proposals only in weekly target packages. Each target package,
moreover, had to pass through a chain of approvals which included senior
levels of OSD, the Department of State, and the White House, up to and
including the principals themselves.

Within this framework of action the ROLLING THUNDER program
had been permitted to grow in intensity. By mid-1965 the number of
strikes against targets in the JCS master list of major targets had
increased from one or two per week to ten or twelve per week. The geo-
graphic coverage of the strikes had been extended in stages, first across
the 19th parallel, from there to the cOth, and then up to 20°30' North.
The assortment of targets had been widened, from military barracks,
ammunition depots, and radar sites at first, to bridges, airfields,
naval bases, radio facilities, railroad yards, oil storage sites, and
even power plants. The targets authorized for strike by armed recon-
naissance aircraft were also expanded from vehicles, locomotives, and
railroad cars to ferries, lighters, barges, road repair equipment, and
wbivouac and maintenance areas; and aircraft on these missions were
authorized to interdict LOCs by cratering, restriking, and seeding
chokepoints as necessary. The number of attack sorties -- strike and
flak suppression -~ had risen to more than 500 per week, and the total
sorties flown to about 900 per week, four or five times what they had

been at the outset.

.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
