Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

these forces might be equipped in ways to show our determination. In
the end, it wes agreed to raise this issue with Ambassador Taylor, at
the Principals next meeting. Significantly, the value of ground forces
as a bargaining counter apparently was not discussed, thus providing

one more indication of the Principals reticence to deal with the issue
of negotiations. (It is interesting to note in this respect that
William Bundy's memorandum, formally summarizing the points of consensus
and disagreement, does not deal with the early negotiating problem --
despite its being a specific agenda item which he had suggested as
Chairman of the Working Group.) 120/

The only basic issue between the options on which the Principals
did not arrive at a consensus was the question of the relative risks of
major conflict entailed by Options B and C. General Wheeler stated that
there was less risk of a major conflict before achieving success under
Option B than under Option C. Secretary McNamara believed the opposite
to be true. Secretary Rusk argued that if "B" were selected, there
would be no chance to apply the JCS variant of "C," whereas under the
Working Group's "C," this would still be left available. He observed
that entry into the JCS variant of "C" would feel something like the
Cuban issile risis. McNamara then suggested a four-week program of
actions following the general pattern of Option C. Mr. McCone stated
that they sounded "fine," but that in his opinion the "negotiating mooa"
interfered with their potential effects. He agreed to attempt a paper
to deal more directly with the relation of risk to likely success, as
between the two options. In the end, the only conclusion that could be
drawn was that there was not complete agreement that "B" ran a higher
risk of major conflict than "Cc," as alleged by the Working Group. 121/

During the meeting of 2 November there was no clear decision
as to which option was favored by the Principals. It seems likely that
"A" was favored by Ball. Wheeler clearly favored "B," and he may have
had support from MeCone, although this is far from clear. On the basis
of either their participation in the Working Group or from statements of
preference made at the meeting, it is clear that "C" was favored by
McNamara, Mcllaughton, Rusk, and the Bundy brothers. However McGeorge
Bundy and McNamara apparently preferred a "firm C," whereas the other
three wanted a more restrained, incremental approach. 122/

c. Policy Views from Saigon. The same group of Principals
that met on the 2lith re-assembled on 27 November for their first meet-
ing with Ambassador Taylor. Present also was Michael Forrestal who had
gone to Saigon to help prepare Taylor for the forthcoming strategy meet-
ings and to apprise him of the Working Group efforts. 123/ Taylor led
off with a prepared briefing on the current state of affairs within
South Vietnam,

Ambassador Taylor's estimate of the situation in South Vietnem
was rather bleek. Confirming many of the assessments made weeks earlier

he TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
