Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

III. B. 1. GVN STATUS AND NEGOTIATING POSITION AT GENEVA

1. GVN is Independent Before Geneva

a. Status of GVN Changes

The sovereign independence of Vietnam was a constant source
of irritation and contention between France and the U.S. From the con-
clusion of World War II until the Geneva Conference, Washington continu-
ally urged Paris to follow the nationalist winds and establish an _
independent State of Vietnam. Coupled with pressures from Vietnamese
nationalists, France did move in this direction -- albeit as slowly as
possible.

In June, 1948, Bao Dai was persuaded to become political
leader of a “State of Vietnam,” incorporating Cochin China, Tonkin, and
Annam, which would be “independent...within the French Union." A treaty
to this effect, the Elysee Agreements, was drawn up and approved by both
sides in March, 1949, but was delayed in ratification by the French Assem-
bly until 29 January 1950. There were a number of qualifications on the
meaning of "independence" in the French Union, including complete free-
dom of movement of French military forces throughout the countries of
the Union and legal immunity for French enterprises on the territory of
other Union nations. On 3 July 1953, the French were pressured into
announcing plans to negotiate and redefine Franco-Vietnamese political
relations. ‘But it was not until March, 1954, that these negotiations be-
gan, producing on 28 April a joint declaration recognizing what it called
"total independence" for Vietnam. Buttinger calls this "a shabby inde-
pendence." The country became fully sovereign on 3 June 195}.

It is important to remember that French procrastination,
among other reasons, on setting the demands for full Vietnamese indepen-
dence led to hesitancy on the part of the U.S. to intervene militarily
in support of the French. With all, the status of the Bao Dai government
did begin to change prior to the conclusion of the Geneva Conference ==
too late to figure in Franco-American deliberations about "united action,”
but soon enough to make Vietnam an independent state Retore the Confer-
ence agreed to a settlement of the war.

b. Talks Lead Toward GVN Independence

Between July, 1953,and April,1954, French and Vietnamese repre-
sentatives had. a series of talks on ways to complete the independence of
Vietnam promised in France's 3 July 1953 declaration. On 8 March 1954,
the final round of talks began in Paris, and at a meeting on 28 April,
agreement was reached by @ Franco-Vietnamese political committee on the
text of separate treaties of independence and association, with the latter
(consisting of seven articles) to be spelled out in subsequent conventions.
Premier Laniel and Vice President Nguyen Trung Vinh signed a common declara-
tion that same day which specified that the treaties would come into force

B-5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
