Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Department had launched an ill-fated effort to have U.S. Army civil
affairs officers introduced in the provinces to assure competent,
corruption-free civil administration in the combat zones. 157/ Ambassa-
dor Taylor's stout opposition had killed the proposal, but the Secretary
continued to push for stronger U.S, action with the GVN. After his
July visit to Saigon he sent a memorandum to the President urging the
U.S. to lay down terms for its continuing assistance before the intro-
duction of more U.S. forces. He suggested that we exercise leverage
through our control of rice policy and gain a "veto on major GVN
commanders, statements about invading NVN, and so on." 158,

Again in November, McNamara recorded his impatience with the GVN
and his belief that we should give a larger and more active role to our
advisors at the province and district level. 159/ But the overall U.S.
approach to the GVN in 1965 was dominated by our felt need for any kind
of governmental stability which would provide a base from which to
conduct the war. Proposals for taking a tough line were widely regarded
as rugs that if pulled out from under the GVN would bring it crashing
down, rether than as levers thet might bring effective change.

U.S. PROPOSALS FOR GVN EXECUTION: AN EXAMPLE

With leverage-oriented arrangements effectively ruled out, U.S,
advisors in South Vietnam were left with the alternatives of advising
their counterparts only on how best to conduct a decided course or of
expanding their advice to embrace what ought to be undertaken. ‘The
tendency was to follow the latter course, to urge wpon GVN plans and
programs American in concept and design for execution by the South Viet-
namese. The Chieu Hoi ("Open Arms" for VC who return voluntarily to
GVN control) program was one example of this tendency. The Hop Tac
("cooperation," in Vietnamese) program, to clear and hold the immediate
area around Saigon, is another. Hop Tac's significance with respect
to U.S. advisory activities resides in the fact that it was the most
concerted attempt to apply the "oil blot" concept to rural pacification
since the demise of the Strategic Hamlet Program. Its failure can be
attributed in large measure to GVN lack of interest in and support for
what was widely regarded as an "American" program.

The idea of a special combined US/GVN effort to secure the critical
area, ringing Saigon was first advanced by Ambassador Lodge in July 1961,
at the Honolulu Conference. His concern with the problem went back to
late 1963 when the re-appraisals of the war following Diem's overthrow
revealed a dangerous deterioration in the ITI Corps area. A special
USOM report on Long An Province had particularly troubled the Ambassador.
In July 1964, as he was returning from his first tour in Vietnam, he
proposed a special effort in eight provinces (Tay Ninh, Binh Duong, Hau
Nghia, Long An, Dinh Tuong, Go Cong, Vinh Long, and Quang Ngis), all but
one of which was near Saigon. ‘The proposal was picked up by Ambassador
Taylor and the program set in motion during the summer of 1964. The

66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
