5

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

28. President Kennedy's Annual Message to the Congress on the State of
the Union, January 14, 1953, Public Papers of the Presidents
Kennedy, 1963, p. 16:

* * *

"Second, what of the developing end non-aligned nations? They were,
I believe, shocked by the Soviets sudden and secret attempt to transform
Cuba into a nuclear striking base -- and by Communist China's arrogant
invasion of India. =

"They have been reassured by our prompt assistance to India, by our
support.through the United Nations of the Congo's unification, by our
patient search for disarmament, and by the improvement in our treatment
of citizens and visitors, whose skin does not happen to be white. And
as the older colonialism recedes, and the neo-colonialism of the Communist
powers stands out more starkly than ever, they realize more clearly that
the issue in the world struggle is not communism versus capitalism, but
coercion versus a free choice.

"They realize that the longing for independence is the same the world
over, whether it is the independence of West Berlin or Viet-Nam. They
realize thet such independence runs athwart all Communist ambitions, but
is in keeping with our own -- and that our approach to their needs is
resilient and resourceful, while the Communists rely on ancient doctrines
and old dogmas.

"Nevertheless, it is hard for any nation to focus on an external or
subversive threat to its independence when its energies are drained in
daily combat with the forces of poverty and despair. It makes little
sense for us to assail in speeches and resolutions the horrors of com-
munism, to spend $50 billion a year to prevent its military advance --
and then to begrudge spending, largely on Americen products, less than
one-tenth of that amount to help other nations strengthen their indepen-
dence and cure the social chaos in which communism has always thrived."

29. President Kennedy's News Conference, March 6, 1963, Public Papers

of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1963, Dp. 243:

x * ¥ : .

"Q: Mr. President, the Mansfield committee, sent at your suggestion
to the Far East and Europe, has recommended a thorough security reassess-
ment in the Far East and a clemp down, if not a reduction in our aid to
that part’ of the world. Would you have any comment on this, sir?

"THE PRESIDENT. I don't see how we are going to be able, wnless we
are going to pull out of Southeast Asia and turn it over to the Communists,
how we are going to be able to reduce very much our economic programs and
military programs in South Viet-Nam, in Cambodia, in Thailand.

C-27
