Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Me U.S. role in South Vietnam, then, is first, to answer the call
of the South Vietnamese, 2 member nation of our free-world family, to help
them save their country for themselves; second, to help prevent the strate-
gic danger which would exist if communism absorbed Southeast Asia's people
and resources; and third, to prove in the Vietnamese test case that the
free-world can cope with communist 'wars of liberation’ as we have coped
successfully with communist aggression at other levels."

+ +

h, “U.S. Calls for Frontier Patrol to Help Prevent Border Incidents Betwee
Cambodia and Vietnam,” Statement by Adlai Stevenson to Security Council,
21 May 196}, Department of State Bulletin, 8 June 196], Dp. 908: *
“* * x

"First, the United States had no, repeat no, national military objective
anywhere in Southeast Asia. United States policy for Southeast Asia is very
simple. It is the restoration of peace so that the peoples of that area
can go about their own independent business in whatever associations they
may freely choose for themselves without interference from the outside.

"I trust my words have been clear enough on this point.

"Second, the United States Government is currently involved in the
affairs of the Republic of Vietnam for one reason and one reason only:
because the Republic of Vietnam requested the help of the United States and
of other governments to defend itself against armed attack fomented, equipped,
and directed from the outside.

"This is not the first time that the United States Government has come
to the aid of peoples prepared to fight for their freedom and independence
against armed aggression sponsored from outside their borders. Nor will
it be the last time unless the lesson is learned once and for all by all
aggressors that armed aggression does not pay -- that it no longer works --
that it will not be tolerated. :

"The record of the past two decades makes it clear that a nation with
the will for self-preservation can outlast and defeat overt or clandestine
aggression -- even when that internal aggression is heavily supported from
the outside, and even after significant early successes by the aggressors.
I would remind the members that in 1947, after the aggressors had gained
control of most of the country, many people felt that the cause of the Govern-
ment of Greece was hopelessly lost. But as long as the people of Greece
were prepared to fight for the life of their own country, the United States
was not prepared to stand by while Greece was overrun.

"This principle does not change with the geographical setting. Aggression

is aggression; organized violence is organized violence. Only the scale and
the scenery change; the point is the same in Vietnam today as it was in Greece

D-8
