Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Lodge arrived around the middle of August to replace Taylor. Having
avoided the confrontations with GV of the type that Taylor had, he came
with a residue of good will. Because he was considered responsible for
Dien's overthrow, the Buddhists were pleased, and the militant Catholics
dubious. In thet connection, State thought it prudent to direct the ~
Embassy to assure GVW that neither Lodge nor Lensdale, whom he was bring-
ing with him, was going to try to make changes in GVIi. 20/ On August 26,
Ky told Lodge that he thought U.S. forces should "hold strategic points".
so that the Vietnemese could concentrate on pacification operations.

. That is, he wanted the United States to take over the main force war. He
also said he thought the Chu Hoi program was a waste of money. 21/

In early August, Ky established a Ministry of Rural Construction (MRC)
end @ Central Rural Construction Council (CRCC). These absorbed functions
and personnel from predecessor groups and other ministries for the
annowiced purpose of providing centralized direction to the pacification
effort. Nguyen Tat Ung was made Minister of Rural Construction while the
Council was chaired by Generel Co, Minister of War and Defense. Timing
and circumstances give no evidence of a strong U.S. hand at work. The
U.S. Embassy viewed the new organization as the result of political man-
euvering, but also hoped the change would promote inter-ministerial
cooperation. The move signalled renewed emphasis of pacificatien by both
GVN and the mission. In late August, Ambassador Lodge announced the
appointment of retired General Lansdale as chairman of the U.S. Mission
liaison group to the GVM! CRCC.

There followed a period of shuffling and reorganization during which -
Ung was killed in a plane crash. Two weeks later Prime Minister Ky
announced that General Thang would succeed to the Ministry. The appoint-
ment was for six months only, and Thang retained his position on the JGS.
At the seme time, General Co was elevated to Deputy Prime Minister for War
and Reconstruction in a realignment that made six ministries including
Rural Reconstruction subordinate to him. 22

On August 28, General Thi told Lodge he thought he could do a better
job running the government than Ky was doing. He spoke at some length on
Ky's political weaknesses, with particuler emphasis on his lack of support
in I Corps, where Thi was strong. As was his usual practice, Lodge politely
prushed aside this approach. (Later Thi proved harder and harder to control
until his dismissal in March.) 23/

In mid-September, Lodge went on an inspection trip to Da Nang and
Qui Nhon. On his return he waxed eloquent about the benefits of the U.S.
presence:

All reports indicated that the American troops are having
@ very beneficial effect on VN troops, giving them greater
confidence and courage. I am always mindful of the possibility
that the American presence will induce the VN to slump back and
"Let George do it." But here seems to be no sign of this.

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
