Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Williams. During 1959 Diem had attempted to form a number of special
"commando" units from his regular forces, and the MAAG had opposed him

on the grounds that these would deplete his conventional strength. In
May, MAAG was authorized to place advisers dow to battalion level. In
June, 1960, additional U.S. Army special forces arrived in Vietnam, and
during the summer a number of Ranger battalions, with the express mission
of counter-guerrilla operations, were activated. In September, General
Williams was replaced by General McGarr who, consistent with the directives
of the JCS, promptly began to press the training of RVNAF to produce the
"“anti-guerrilla guerrilla." General McGarr's desire for an RVNAF capable
of meeting and defeating the Viet Cong at their own game was evident in
the CIP when it was forwarded to Washington, in January, 1961, just before
John F. Kennedy took office.

The CIP had been well coordinated within the U.S. mission in Vietnam,
but only partially with the Vietnamese. The plan, as forwarded, incor-
porated one major point of difference between the Embassy and MAAG. General
McGarr desired to increase the RVNAF force level by some 20,000 troops,
while Ambassador Durbrow maintained reservations concerning the necessity
or the wisdom of additional forces. The Ambassador's position rested on
the premise that Diem wanted the force level increase, and that the United
States should not provide funds for that purpose until Diem was patently
prepared to take those unpalatable political measures the Ambassador had
proposed aimed at liberalizing the GVN. The Ambassador held out little
hope that either the political or even military portions of the CIP could
be successfully accomplished without some such leverage: "Consideration
should, therefore, be given to what actions we are prepared to take to
encourage, or if necessary to force, acceptance of all essential elements
of the plan." In the staff reviews of the CIP in Washington, the divergence
between State and Defense noted above came once more to the fore. ‘Those
(chiefly within DOD) who considered the VC threat as most important, and
who therefore regarded military measures against this threat as most urgent,
advocated approval and any other measures which would induce Diem'’s accep-
tance of the CIP, and his cooperation with MAAG. They were impatient with
Ambassador Durbrow's proposed "pressure tactics" since they saw in them
the possibility of GVN delay on vital military matters, and the prospect
of little profit other than minor concessions from Diem in political areas
they deemed peripheral or trivial in countering the VC. Tipping the scales
toward what might be called the Diem/MAAG/DOD priorities was the coincident
and increasing need to "reassure" Diem of U.S. support for the GVN and for
him personally. The fall of President Syngman Rhee of Korea in April,
the abortive November 1960 coup d'etat in Saigon, Ambassador Durbrow's
persistent overtures for reform, and above all, uncertainties over U.5.
support for the Royal Laotian Government. This requirement to reassure
Diem was plainly at cross purposes with the use of pressure tactics.

Ten days after President Kennedy came to office, he authorized a
$41 million increase in aid for Vietnam to underwrite the RVNAF force

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
