Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

If a consensus was reached within the Administration in favor of mili-
tary pressures against the North, it certainly reflected no commonly held
rationale for such action. Generally speaking the military (MACV, CINCPAC,
JCS) favored a strong campaign against the North to interdict the infiltra-
tion routes, to destroy the overall capacity of the North to support the
insurgency, and to destroy the DRV's will to continue support of the Viet
Cong. The State Department (with the exception of George Ball) and the
civilian advisors to Secretary MciJamara favored a gradually mounting series
of pressures that would place the North in a slow squeeze and act as both
carrot and stick to settling the war on our terms. As would be expected,
State was also concerned with the international political implications of
such steps. Bombing the North would demonstrate our resolve, not only to
the South Vietnamese but also to the other Southeast Asian countries and
to China, whose containment was one of the important justifications of the
entire American involvement. Walt Rostow, the Chairman of State's Policy
Planning Council, took a slightly different view, .emphasizing the importance
of pressures as a clear signal to the North and to China of U.S. determina-
tion and resolve and its willingness to engage the tremendous power at its
disposal in support of the 1954 and 1962 Geneva agreements. Ambassador
Taylor supported strikes against the North as a means of reducing infil-
tration and as a way of bolstering South Vietnamese morale.

As is readily apparent, there was no dearth of reasons for striking
North. Indeed, one almost has the impression that there were more reasons
than were required. But in the end, the decision to go ahead with the
strikes seems to have resulted as much from the lack of alternative pro-
posals as from any compelling logic advanced in their favor. By January,
for example, William Bundy, while still supporting the pressures, could
only offer the following in their favor:

"on balance we believe that such action would have some faint
hope of really improving the Vietnamese situation, and, above all,
would put us in a much stronger position to hold the next line of
defense, namely Thailand." /And it would put us in a better posi-
tion in our Asian ee we would have appeared to Asians
to have done a lot more about it."

It is interesting to note that during the deliberations of September
one of the preconditions to such strikes had been generally acknowledged
as a unity of domestic American opinion in support of such Presidentially
authorized action. During the November debates, this is no longer an
important factor. Indeed, it is openly conceded that such action is likely
to evoke opposition in both domestic and international public opinion.
Another interestingaspect of this policy debate was that the question of
Constitutional authority for open acts of war against a sovereign nation
was never seriously raised.

Phase I of the newly approved program went into effect in mid-December.

The BARREL ROLL “armed reece" by U.S. aircraft in the Laotian panhandle
began on a limited scale on December 14. It had been foreseen that the

vi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
