Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and seriously on MACV efforts to maintain RVNAF strengths. Minister of
Rural Construction was Major General Thang who also was Director of Opera-
tions, JGS. He looked to MACV for advice and assistance on the whole
spectrum of pacification problems.

On December 15 in a memorandum to Major General Lansdale, the Am-
bassador said,

I consider the GVN effort in this domain (apart from
the military clearing phase) to be primarily civilian...
Conseauently, on the American side it is preferable that
the two civilian agencies, USAID and CAS, be the operating
support agencies. 32/

The GVN military plan in support of the 1966 Rural Construction plen
was given in the JGS Directive AB 140 of December 15, 1965, which had been
developed in coordination with MACV and the Ministry of Rural Construction.
In November onward, portions of the 1966 GV defense budget prepared in
accordance with U.S. guidelines were received by MACV. 33/

At the time of the Christmas truce, President Johnson launched a peace
offensive, including a suspension of bonibing in North Vietnam that lasted
37 days. The moves were carefully cleared with CYN and with its Ambassa-
dor in Washington, and caused no significant problems. Lodge's appraisal
was that the "offensive" achieved all its aims, at no significant cost.
However, trouble flared up over a plan to release 20 i/VA prisoners across
the DMZ; General Thi was not consulted, and said he wouldnot permit it (in ©
his Corps). Things were smoothed over amicably by Tet. 34/

One troublesome area was GVN's hawkishness over such issues as border
incidents. Ky kept pressing for action against Cambodian sanctuaries;
the U.S. stood firm on the rule of self-defense in emergencies only, which
could mean shooting across the border but not maneuvering troops across
it. Ky wanted to encourage a Khmer Serai expedition, which would cause
a flare-up with the Cambodian Government; State directed Lodge to keep
him on a tight leash, 35/

Coup rumors started to circulete around the first of the year; Lodge
remarked that just before Tet was a normal season for that. On December 29
Ky told Lodge of an alleged assassination plot directed at Ky, Co, the
Buddhist leader Thich Tam Chau, and Lodge. On January 15, VNAF took to
the air in nervous reaction to some supposedly suspicious troop movements;
Lodge reported more rumors on January 19, and took the opportunity to spell
out his position:

If..-corridor coup...caused directorate members to fall out,
consequences could be disastrous...A peaceful reshuffle within
directorate is a continuing possibility. I would deplore it.

We take all rumors and reports of government change very seri-
ously and never miss an opportunity to make clear U.S. support
for, and the need for, governmental stability. 36/

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
