Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

He envisioned a sustained series of offensives against enemy base
areas and main forces thereby destroying the VC/NVA combat potential,
and threatening his supply systems, which he described as "the Achilles
Heel of the VC/VA." Westmoreland provided a solution to the build-up
problem at the end of the NVN-Laos funnel, but again no real solution
for stopping the flow:

"...The enemy is dependent on the buildup of weapons,
equipment, food and medical supplies which are located in his
base areas. Destruction of established enemy base areas
denies him the opportunity to rest, retrain, recuperate and
resupply easily. Thorough, meticulous search in areas in
which our forces are operating is a key to the successful
accomplishment of this important task. If we can neutralize
the enemy base areas and prevent replenishment of the mater-
jal captured or destroyed, we will have taken a long stride
toward ultimate victory...." 10/

Westmoreland also stated what was to become a growing concern among
Americans at all echelons:

",..1t is essential that the effectiveness of RVNAF be
improved. Concurrently, the image of the military forces of
South Vietnam in the eyes of the world and especially in the
United States must reflect the contribution which has been
and is being made to the overall effort in SVN. Much of the
press reporting on this subject is unfair and indicates a
lack of understanding of the RVNAF contribution. This, in
turn, has a deleterious effect on RVNAF morale and effective-
ness. RVNAF must be made to realize that there are military
tasks as well as non-military tasks associated with RD. Every
influence must be used to get RVNAF to cease conducting an
intermittent war and instead to maintain continuous pressure
on enemy forces. We must insure that maximum use is made of
RVN forces in all our planned major offensives and that they
are given tasks which are important and which will contribute
to their continued growth potential. We then must insure that
full credit is given to their accomplishments in each of these
operations." 11/

COMUSMACV's “command guidance" from which this is quoted, must be
taken in context; ringing proclamations like these are directed to the
troops. They are the things command histories are made of, but they
seldom provide an undistorted picture of tactical or strategic reality.

The 1967 MACV Campaign Plan had focused upon the areas outlined
in the COMUSMACV message, but it contained less bandwagon psychology
and more careful evaluation of enemy capabilities and strategy. ‘The
Campaign Plan had been broadly based upon Westmoreland's assessment

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
