Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Those areas that do represent advances (such as road openings
Or repairs or construction, breaking up of main line VC units,
etc.) have all been the result of umilateral US actions. It
was perhaps naively thought that these US accomplishments

would stand as an inspiring example to the GVN and would prompt
them to not only continue their efforts but, further, to expand
and intensify the fight. However, during 1967 in Bien Hoa
Province, this has not been the case. The GVN at all levels has
grown weaker, become more corrupt and, today, displays even
less vitality and will than it did one year ago...

Advisory Leverage: This subject has been an extremely
sensitive am cmtroversial issue in both GVN and US circles,
However, as painful as it must be to address, the harsh truth
is that given a showdown situation or an intolerable diver-
gence between GVN and US methods, the US advisor will lose.
CORDS, Bien Hoa has gone to extraordinary lengths in reporting
on both corrupt and incompetent officials and practices. The
reason for these efforts has been to illustrate clearly to
higher US authorities, the enormity of the problems facing
the advisor on the province/District level. CORDS Bien Hoa,
as perhaps all other echelons of US advisors, is ultimately
powerless to rectify or even significantly alter the GVN
intentions and performance. The Vietnamese in the street is
firmly convinced that the US totally dominates the GVN and
dictates exactly what course shall be followed. However, the
bitter and tragic truth is that the US has been kept at such
@ distance from GVN circles and power that in joint councils
or plans our views may be heard, some portions of our logic
may be endorsed but with confrontations or matters that repre-
sent any truly revolutionary departure from existing GVN
practices etc, we are light weights and presently do not possess
the leverage or power to carry the day.

ARVN Performance: There are presently two ARVN battalions
(3/43 and 2/48) who are directly assigned to support RD in Bien
Hoa. With the exception of the Ist Bn, 48th Regt which served
in the Phu Hoi Campaign area earlier in the year, ARVN per-
formance has been less than satisfactory. The units have demon-
strated the same age-old ills that have collectively led to our
present commitment of US forces...

GVN Officials Interests: The primary interest of GVN
officials in Bien Hoa Province is money. The lucrative US
presence with all the various service trades that cater to the
soldier, have created a virtual gold mine of wealth which is
directly or indirectly syphoned off and pocketed by the officials.
Thus, revolutionary development with all the ultimate implica-
tions of broadening the governing base of this society, is viewed

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
