Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Iso

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

significant change in Chinese or North Vietnamese attitudes had been
expected in any circumstances, continuing the war under more adverse
conditions in South Vietnam would hardly worsen them. Bundy ended his
paper with an analysis of the impact of a U.S. failure in South Vietnam
on the rest of non-communist Asia, even if the failure resulted from a
political collapse in Saigon.

5. Vis-a-vis the threatened nations of Asia, we must
ask ourselves whether failure in Viet-Nam because of clearly
visible political difficulties not under our control would be
any less serious than failure by-ewr-ews-eheiee /Tined out in
MeNaughton/ without this factor. The question comes down, as
it always has, to whether there is any tenable line of defense
in Southeast Asia if Viet-Nam falls. Here we must recognize
that the anti-Communist regime in Indonesia has been a tremen-
dous "break" for us, both for in /McNaughton/ removing the
possibility of a Communist pincer movement, which appeared
iyrestetibie almost certain /MeNeughton/ a year ago, and
in /MeNaughton/opening up the possibility that over a period
of some years Indonesia may become a constructive force. But
for the next year or two any chance of holding the rest of
Southeast Asia hinges on the same factors assessed @ year
ago, whether Thailand and Laos in the first instance and
Malaysia, Singapore, and Burma close behind, would--in the
face of a US failure for any reason in Viet-Nam~-have any
significant remaining will to resist the Chinese Commanist
pressures that would probably then be applied. Taking the
case of Thailand as the next key point, it must be our present
conelusion that--even if sophisticated leaders understood the
Vietnamese [McNaughton/ political weaknesses and our inability
to control them--to the mass of the Thai people the failure
would remain a US failure and a proof that Communism from the
north was the decisive force in the area. Faced with this
reaction, we must still conclude that Thailand simply could
not-be held in these circumstances, and that the rest of South-
east Asia would probably follow in due course. In other words,
the strategic stakes in Southeast Asia are fundamentally
unchanged by the possible political nature of the causes for
failure in Viet-Nam. The same is almost certainly true of the
“Shockwaves that would arise against other free nations--Korea,
Taiwan, Japan, and the Philippines--in the wider area of East
Asia. Perhaps these shockwaves can be countered, but they
would not /McNaughton/ be mitigated by the fact that the failure
arose from internal political Sic] eauses rather than any US
major error or omission." 114.

103 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
