Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

briefers about conditions in the Delta and seemed skeptical of the
official optimism, although he was equally disinclined to accept
undocumented negative judgments.

The conference ended inconclusively with respect to the military
problem. It did, however, underscore U.S. support for the new regime
and focus U.S. official concern on the urgency and gravity of the
economic problem confronting the new government. An uninformative
press release after the conference took note of U.S. support for the
new government in facing the difficult political and economic problems
in South Vietnam, and pointedly reiterated the plan to withdraw 1,000
U.S. troops by the end of the year with 300 to leave on Deceniber 3. 53/

lodge flew to Washington the following day and conferred with
President Johnson, Based on that meeting and the report of the dis-
cussions et Honolulu, a National Security Action Memorandum was drafted
to give guidance and direction to ovr efforts to improve the conduct of
the war under the new South Vietmamese leadership. 5h/ It described
the purpose of the American involvement in Vietnam as, "to assist the
people and Government of that country to win their contest against the
externally directed end supperted Communist conspiracy." 55/ It defined
contribution to that purpose as the test of all U.S. actions in Vietnam.
It reiterated the objectives of withdrawing 1,000 U.S. troops by the end
of 1963 and ending the insurgency in I, IZ, and III Corps by the end of
1964, and in the Delta by the end of 1965. U.S, support for the new
regime was confirmed and all U.S. efforts were directed to assist it
to consolidate itself and expand its popular support. In view of the
series of press stories during November about the disagreements between
Harkins and Lodge, the President requested "full unity of support for
established US policy" both in Saigon and in Washington. 56/ NSAM 273
directed the concentration of U.S, and Vietnamese military, political,
economic and social efforts to improve the counterinsurgency campaign
in the Mekong Delta. It further directed that economic and military aid
to the new regime should be maintained at the same levels as during
Diem's rule, And in conclusion, plans were requested for clandestine
operations by the GVN against the North and also for operations up to
50 kilometers into Laos; and, as a justification for such measures, State
was directed to develop a strong, documented case “to demonstrate to the
world the degre to which the Viet Cong is controlled, sustained and sup-
plied from Henoi, through Laos and other channels." 57/

As a policy document, KSAM 273 was to be extremely short lived. In
the jargon of the bureaucracy, it was simply overtaken by events. The
gravity of the military situation in South Vietnam was only hinted at
in NSAM 273 and in the discussions in Honolulu. Its full dimensions
would rapidly come to light in the remaining weeks of 1963 and force
high level reappraisals by year's end. But probably more important, the
deterioration of the Vietnamese position in the countryside and the rapid

67 TOP SECRET . Sensitive
