Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to some extent meet Department's requirement in
this regard although it is far less than national
elections or preparations for National Constitu-
ent Assembly." 26/

The GVN protest note to the French of 17 July asserted
that a cease-fire without disarmament was incompatible with a plebiscite.
They held further that the regroupment of the armed forces of the bellig-
erents into separate north-south zones compromised in advance the freedom
of any future elections. Moreover, in the GVN view, elections could be con-
sidered only after internal security and peace had been re-established,
thereby excluding a set time-frame. 27/ In short, the GVN argued strongly
against any scheduled post-settlement national election, and warned that
a plebiscite to determine a government for a unified Vietnam could hardly
be envisaged with the northern zone controlled by communist armed forces.

f. GVN Rejects Draft of Final Declaration

On 18 July, GVN, in a conference session, Foreign Minister
Tran Van Do spoke out against the draft Final Declaration of the Confer-
ence which had been circulated among the delegations. He said that Viet-
nam could not associate itself with the declaration, and pointed in
particular to the conditions for a cease-fire, which stipulated a division
of the country, and to Vietnam's lack of an opportunity to present its
own proposals. Tran Van Do requested the right to offer Vietnam's own ~
draft declaration at another plenary session. 28

g. GVN Presents Counter-Proposals ©

The next day, 19 July, the Vietnamese delegation offered its

* proposals, an elaboration of the ideas contained in the note to the French

delegation. The proposal warned that the French, Soviet, and Viet Minh
drafts all spoke of a provisional partition, whereas the inevitable result
would in fact be "to produce in Vietnam the same effects as in Germany,
Austria, and Korea." The proposal went on: "It would not bring the peace
which is sought for, deeply wounding the national sentiment of the Vietnamese
people; it would provoke trouble throughout the country, trouble which would
not fail to threaten a peace so dearly acquired." The delegation then re-
newed its plan for a cease-fire in small regroupment zones; the disarming

of irregular troops and, after a fixed period, of all Viet Minh troops;

the withdrawal of foreign troops similtaneous with disarmament of the Viet
Minh; and. UN control of the cease-fire, the regroupment, the disarmament

and withdrawal, the elections which would follow the restoration of order,
and. national administration. 29/

Tran Van Do's proposal did not receive consideration at the
final plenary session of the Geneva Conference on 21 July. 30/ The dele-
gation head. protested this as well as the “hasty conclusion of the Armis~-
tice Agreement by the French and Viet Minh High Commanders only..."
Furthermore, Tran Van Do protested the abandonment of national territory

B-13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
