Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

Great Britain did likewise. 15/ Jt is also fact that France speedily
divested itself of responsibilities for "civil administration” in South
Vietnam. In February, 1956, the GVN requested France to withdraw its
military forces, and on April 26, 1956, the French military command in
Vietnam, the signatory of the Geneva Agreement, was dissolved. France,
torn by domestic political turbulence in which past disappointments and
continued frustrations in Vietnam figured prominently, and tested anew
in Algeria, abandoned its position in Southeast Asia. 16/ No doubt,

an increasingly acerbic relation between its representatives and those
of the United States in South Vietnam hastened its departure, where
American policy clashed with French over the arming and training of a
national army for the GVN, over French military assistance for the
religious sects, over French economic policy on repatriating investments,
and over general French opposition to Diem. 17/ But more fundamentally,
France felt itself shouldered aside in South Vietnam by the United States
over:

(1) Policy toward the DRV. The French averred initially
that Ho was a potential Tito, and that they could through an accommo-
dation with him preserve their economic and cultural interests in Vietnam--
in their view, a "co-existence experiment” of world wide significance in
the Cold War. 18/ As of December, 1954, they were determined to carry
out the Geneva elections. Eventually, however, they were obliged to
choose between the U.S. and the DRV, so firmly did the U.S. foreclose
any adjustment to the DRV's objectives. 19/

(2) Policy toward Diem. France opposed Diem not solely
because he was a vocally Francophobe Annamite, but because he threatened
directly their position in Vietnam. His nationalism, his strictures
against "feudalists," his notions of moral regeneration all conjoined
in an enmity against the French nearly as heated as that he harbored
against the communists -- but to greater effect, for it was far easier
for him to muster his countrymen's opinion against the French than against
the Viet Minh. By the spring of 1955, the Diem-France controversy acquired
military dimensions when French supported sect forces took up arms against
the GVN. At that time, while the U.S. construed its policy as aiding
"Free Vietnam," the French saw Diem as playing Kerensky's role in Vietnam,
with the People's Revolutionary Committee as the Bolsheviks, and Ho, the
Viet Minh Lenin, waiting off stage. 20/

(3) Militery Policy. By the end of 1954, the French were
persuaded that SEATO could never offer security for their citizens and
other interests in Vietnam, and had despaired of receiving U.S. military
aid for a French Expeditionary Corps of sufficient size to meet the
threat. 21/ U.S. insistence that it should train RVNAF increased their
insecurity. Within the combined U.S.-French headquarters in Saigon there-
after, officers of both nations worked side by side launching counter-
vailing intrigues among the Vietnamese, and among each other. 22/ The
relationship became intolerable with French involvement in support of
sect forces in open rebellion against U.S. assisted GVN forces.
