Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

fighter squadrons with one additional base; and the full
mobile riverine force. The order of magnitude estimate is
201,250 spaces in addition to the 1967 ceiling of 470,366
for a total of 671,616.

(A) In I Corps, the situation,is the most
critical with respect to existing and potential force
ratios. As a minimum, a division plus a regiment is
required for Quang Tri Province as a containment force.
The latter has been justified previously in another plan.
Employment of this force in the containment role would
release the units now engaged there for expansion of the
DaNang, Hue-Phu Bai and Chu Lai TAOR's as well as increase
security and control along the corps northern coastal areas.
One of the most critical areas in RVN today is Quang Ngai
Province even if a major operation were conducted in this
area during 1967, the relief would be no more than temporary.
’A force is needed in the province to maintain continuous
pressure on the enemy to eliminate his forces and numerous
base areas, and to remove his control over the large popu-
Jation and food reserves. The sustained employment of 4
division of 10 battalions is mandatory in Quang Ngai Prov-
ince if desired results are to be realized. Employment
of this force would provide security for the vital coastal
areas, facilitate opening and securing Route 1 and the
railroad and, perhaps equally important, relieve pressure
on northern Binh Dinh Province.

(B) In IT Corps, the task is two fold:
destroy the enemy main and guerrilla forces in the coastal
areas; and contain the infiltration of NVA forces from
Cambodia and Laos. Continual expansion both north and
south of the present capital coastal TARO's opening and
securing Route 1 and the railroad, securing Route 20 from
Dalat south to the III Corps boundary, destruction of
enemy forces in Pleiku and Kontum Provinces, and contain-
ment of the enemy forces in the Canbodian and Laotian
sanctuaries are all tasks to be accomplished given the
Jarge area in II Corps and the continuous enemy threat,
an optimum force augmentation of four separate brigades
is required to execute effectively an exploitation of our
successes. An infentry brigade is needed in northern Binh
Dinh Province to expand security along the coastal area
and to facilitate operations in Quang Ngai Province to the
north. A mechanized brigade in the western highlands will
assist in offensive and containment operations in the
Pleiku-Kontum area. An infantry brigade in the region of
Ban Me Thout is needed to conduct operations against enemy
forces and bases there and to add security to this portion

64 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
