Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Summarizing its findings and conclusions, the SEACABIN
report began with a general assessment of the role of the bombing
in the war:

Role of Bombardment. There are major difficulties
and uncertainties in a precise assessment of the bombing
program on NVN. These include inadequate data on logistic
flow patterns, limited information on imports into NVN,
season effects of weather, and the limitations of recon-
naissance. But it is clear that the air and naval campaigns
against NVN are making it difficult and costly for the
DRV to continue effective support of the VC. Our opera-
tions have inflicted heavy damage on equipment and facilities,
inhibited resupply, compounded distribution problems, and
limited the DRV's capability to undertake sustained large-
scale military operations in SVN. The economic situation
in NVN is becoming increasingly difficult for the enemy.
However, as a result of extensive diversion of manpower and
receipt of large-scale military and economic assistance from
communist countries, the DRV has retained the capability
to support military operations in SVN at current levels. A
cessation of the bombing program would make it possible for
the DRV to regenerate its military and economic posture and
substantially increase the flow of personnel and supplies
from NVN to svN. 49/

Implications of a.bombing halt were dealt with in terms of advantages
+o the DRV and risks to the U.S. In the former category, the SEACABIN
Study Group concluded as follows:

D. IMPLICATIONS OF A CESSATION OF BOMBARDMENT

6. For DRV: Potential Gains

a. Potential DRV Responses, Following a cessa-
tion of bombardment in return for its acceptance of the

President's offer, the DRV could choose among one of

three potential alternative courses of action: (1) to
pursue an immediate-pay-off, short-term strategy of advan-
tage; (2) to enter discussions with no intention of set-
tling, while pursuing either its present strategy, or a
revised political/military strategy of gaining a long-term
advantage in SVN; and (3) to negotiate meaningfully within
the United States. Under all courses, the immediate action
of the DRV would be to reconstitute its LOC, stockpile

near its borders, and begin general reapirs of its war

’ damage.

116 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
