Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

may become necessary for U.S. government to begin consideration
alternative courses of action and leaders in order achieve our

— h = ——
objective." (Ibid., p. 3, underlining added)

In its reply (Deptel 581 to Saigon, 7 Oct 60), the State
Department concurred on the necessity of an approach to Diem on moves
to increase his popular support. Among other comments, it was suggested
that Durbrow state that after thorough study it was his ".. . care-
fully considered view GVN will face increasingly difficult internal
political situation unless dramatic moves made to reverse present
deteriorating trends. mall or gradual moves not repeat not adequate."
On the question of Nhu and Tuyen, "since this important demarche would
be most unpalatable," careful handling was stressed.
a - Agree main point should be that whether rumors true
or false we are convinced that if they ignored, regime likely
lose support it needs in struggle against Communists and that
in all governments, such decisions have to be made .. . con-
vineed decision regarding Nhu and Tuyen would remove major cause
of resentment against regime. It would, we believe, increase
Support of Diem within the GVN and among the educated classes.

Support these groups is as necessary as support of peasants... "
(Deptel 581 to Saigon, 7 Oct 60, underlining added)
Among other suggestions, the Department proposed that
Diem fix and announce a date on which villages would be asked to elect
at least some of their own officials. In connection with Diem's program

of agrovilles, the Department raised problems that were to recur
repeatedly in the context of the later program in strategic hamlets.

"Suggest inform Diem we agree agroville program good way
meet security problem but are concerned re execution. Urge he
announce corvee labor on agrovilles and elsewhere be paid and
agroville families receive some aid (possibly rice) during period
readjustment (could be less than in High Plateau since Delta
peasants still produce rice their own fields.) If he asks how
such measures to be paid for, concur suggested reply re higher
taxes and deficit financing. Devaluation should also be
emphasized. Diem might announce heavier taxes on rich for
benefit peasants and agroville program. You might inquire
whether training program for Vietnamese administrators and
technicians should be increased to provide personnel needed
for agrovilles and other insecure areas. Also might inquire re
status information teams assigned to explain to peasants why

they should leave homes and tombs ancestors to go to agrovilles.'
(Ibid., underlining added )

(From these implied criticisms of the execution of the agroville con-
cept, it could be -- correctly -- inferred that many of the defects

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
