Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Soviet sources that decision we had taken was precisely what
was called for but none had been in position to predict re-
action. Our purpose in reaching this significant decision

was to attemot to ascertain if a way could be found to peace-
ful solution of current crisis in Southeest Asia. We had
hoped we would be able to deliver oral communication convey-
ing this decision to DRV authorities and T had attempted to

do so today through DRV Ambassador. Unfortunately Ambassador
let it be known that he did not wish to receive me personally
and when his embassy was informed that the message I sought

to deliver was of extreme importance, it was suggested that

we transmit the message through the Soviet Government in its
capacity as Geneva Co-Chairman. It was because of these cir-
cumstances that I had found it necessary to disturb

Mr. Firyubin tonight. I pointed out thet although DRV
Ambassador had refused to receive me, embassy had succeeded

in delivering a copy of oral communication to employee of

DRV embassy earlier this evening (2015 Local) who agreed to
bring it to attention of Ambassador (communication as set

forth in DEPTEL 3103 then translated in full for Firyubin

with sole interruption being Firyubin's inguiry if cessation
attacks applied only to those from air - which I confirmed. )
After receiving confirmetion from me that communication was

of oral nature, Firyubin said he viewed communication as based
on old erroneous conception on which US has proceeded, @ con-
ception which precludes US recognizing that the South Viet-
namese people are fighting for their freedom and are struggling
against aggression and control by Saigon puppets. Furthermore
it indicated to Firyubin that we continued to view the picture
incorrectly when we referred again to the struggle in South
Vietnem as being organized and directed by the DRV. The
absurdity of this view, he said, is obvious and naturally the
Soviet Government cannot agree with it as it has made clear

in numerous statements. Firyubin could only view the communi-
cation as repetition of the threat against the DRV -- now a
threat of renewed and expanded aggression. This was the only
way he could interpret the reference to the risk that a sus-
pension of attacks involved. Obviously we are suffering from
a gross misunderstanding if we think that such aggression will
go unpunished, without response. The only constructive approach
to a peaceful settlement of the situation in South Vietnem was
to end the aggression, recall troops from Souta Vietnam and give
the Vietnamese veople the right to choose their own form of
Government -- a choice which can be made freely only if the
so-called specialists should be withdrawn and their opportunity
of exercising influence on the Vietnemese thus removed. Firyubin
said that he well acquainted with the countries end peoples of
Southeast Asia; he therefore was aware and could understand the
‘feelings caused by our actions there as well as the reaction in
meny other parts of the worid.

118 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
