Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

10%

opportunities open to them in any given situation. Mao Tse-tung has de-
scribed this alternation of tactics and instruments as 'talk/fight;
talk/fight,' and it describes the technique very well. This sudden
alternation between talking and fighting is designed also to induce a
maximum amount of confusion, instability, and trouble in the free world.
One of the latest examples of their use of this tactic occurred last
October in the Chinese, Communist attack along the Indian border, followed
by their withdrawal beginning a month later. uy

"The immediate goal of the Communists is, of course, to capture the ~
in-between nations, those smaller and weaker nations which today are
struggling against odds to remain independent. If the Comnunists can
capture such free nations, turning them against the United States and
making them feel that it is the U.S. which poses the danger or forms an
obstacle to their goals, then the Communists could win without using
military power. Moreover, the Communists have waged an unremitting attack
on the foundations of our way of life, just as they are a threat to free-
dom elsewhere in the world. Although they argue over differences in em-
phasis as to how the Commmist world should carry out its attacks on free
men, their common goal is plain enough: to further the destruction of the
values all free men cherish.

"In Asia the greatest danger to independent nations comes from Com-
munist Chine, with its 700 million people forced into the service of an
ageressive Communist Party. We can't ignore that problem, and we don't
ignore it. Communist China lies in direct contact with, or very close to,
a whole series of free nations ranged in an arc from Afghanistan, India,
Pakistan, and Nepal in South Asia; through Burma, Malaya, Thailand, Cam-
bodia, Laos, and Viet-Nam in Southeast Asia; and on up through the Republic
of China, on its island base of Taiwan, to Japan and Korea. Indonesia, the
Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand are also alive to the threat posed
by the Communist Chinese. i

"All these free nations must deal with the facts of Communist China
and its ambitions. No matter what response each has made, be it non-
alinement or alliance with friendly nations, they all are aware that the
aim of the Chinese Communists is to gain predominant control in Asia and
eventually to secure the establishment of Communist regimes throughout the
world. The reaction of each nation is determined by its own material
circumstances and, sometimes more importantly, by its own national psychol-

ogy. :

"The United States is determined that communism shall not take over
Asia.

"For this reason we do not recognize Communist Chine and seek in all
possible ways to limit the ability of Communist China to implement its
threat to obtain hegemony in the Far East. We recognize the Republic of
China as the legal government of China and support is position in the
United Nations. We are aware that the economic and social progress on

c-3h
