Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

proposal to reduce provisional ground force levels for Southeast
Asian defense concluded that the issue remained "open." It was crit-
ical of that particular study because of its methodology and assump-
tions. later, however, Mr.-McNamara supported the JCS in their
disapproval of the MACV request for allocaticn of additional ground
force units for base security purposes. 1438/

State views. Various documents make it clear that there were
several different points of view prevalent within the State Department
during the period in question. Reflected here are those channeled
through the Secretary of State or communicated to the Department of
Defense, usually through the Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs.
With few exceptions, the courses of action followed by the Administration
were those advocated by State. Its proposal for B-57 training for the
VNAF was apparently overruled on the basis of JCS recommendations, but
otherwise its support for measures to further strengthen the GVN and for
pressuring actions other than overt military attacks throughout 196)
prevailed. 149/ Its support for the acknowledgement of GVN maritime
operations failed to materialize only because of objections on the part
of the GVN itself. 150/

State Department views on the other issues, likewise, were
reflected in U.S. policy positions. Reprisals for VC acts that could
be matched with fitting responses were favored in principle but were not
necessarily to be carried out in all instances. Escalation through such
responses Was seen as useful for purposes of assisting GVN morale, but
State did not believe that steps should be taken to bring about such
Situations just yet. It did, however, acknowledge that deliberate
provocations might be useful in the future. Negotiation of a Vietnam
solution through an international conference was viewed as inevitable,
but it should be permitted only after hurting North Vietnam and convincing
South Vietnam of U.S. resolve to achieve its objectives. Moreover,
Secretary Rusk, Assistant Secretary Bundy and Counselor Rostow were each
known to view avoidance of a commitment of U.S. ground forces to Southeast
Asia as an important element in policy. 353/

CIA views. With the exception of Mr. MeCone's opinions rendered
in the September strategy meeting, available CIA documents provide no
policy recommendations. However, they do contain assessments bearing
directly on the policy issues discussed previously -- particularly with
respect to enemy reactions to the measures contemplated. For example,
intelligence estimates indicated little likelihood that intensified
maritime operations would result in retaliation against GVN naval bases.
Similarly, they predicted few serious conseqiences in response to U.S.
limited tit-for-tat reprisal strikes. Rather, the CIA believed that
‘communist responses would be limited to defensive measures, increased
propaganda, and additional logistical assistance from China. In the
event our reprisal actions were "heavier and sustained," the DRV was
expected first to attempt to dissuade the United States through inter-
national political moves, apparent concessions, and efforts to underline
communist solidarity and determination. They would probably also curb
the VC from making new provocative attacks "and might direct them to
reduce temporarily the tempo and-size of their attacks." 152

hy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
