Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

troops on a proportional basis. Thanat pointed out that when the Thai
government asked for 2,500 volunteers in Vietnam, 50,000 had come for-
ward, but the King pointed out the problem was not men willing to fight,
but training and weapons. The President said that we could help with
training and equipment. The problem was to get a distribution of the
200,000 which was fair and equitable. The President then asked Mr.
Rostow on the basis of population how might the extra 200,000 be dis-
tributed? Rostow had replied that it came out to something like 125,000
and 75,000, with Thailand required to put up about 20,000 as its share.
The King then cited three problems: the quality of recruits, to which
the President had said we also had to draw on and train men of lower IQ
and physical quality than we might wish; the training and equipment of
additional troops and the improved equipment of the forces left behind
in Thailand. The King elaborated at some length on the psychological
and political problems posed by the latter element, saying it was very
hard for the military to accept sending troops abroad well equipped when
they themselves were lacking in modern equipment. After discussing the
specific equipment, the President telephoned Secretary McNamara and
informed him of the King's response to which McNamara said that it would
not be worth our while to train and equip a few thousand more Thais for
Vietnam but if Thailand could furnish 10,000 he could guarantee their
training and equipment. 7/

On 20 July, the Joint Chiefs of Staff responded to the request
from the Secretary of Defense for the detailed troop list providing
the specified forces for COMUSMACV within the ceiling of 525,000. Sig-
nificantly in this JCSM, the Joint Chiefs of Staff did not concur in
the inclusion of the elements of the 9th MAB and the non-deployed
tactical fighter squadrons in the Republic of Vietnam ceiling. They
argued that the 9th MAB was already included for PACOM under Program 4
and that it had never been included as part of the MACV force structure
and was not added in the RVN spaces in MACV's package 5 alternative
foree structure. They wanted to maintain a string on it since the
brigade was ticketed for the PACOM Reserve and subject to employment in
other areas depending upon the criticality of the contingency. The
Chiefs wanted the 9th MAB when ashore in RVN to be carried as a temporary
augmentation as was being done under Program 4, Similarly, they wanted
the Tactical Fighter Squadrons to be maintained in a "ready to deploy
status" outside of RVN, included in the RVN ceiling only if and when
they deployed in-country. They also expressed doubt as to whether MACV
could recruit suitable civilian personnel in the competitive market on
@ civilian direct-hire basis to replace 8,100 military spaces. They
believed "that the forces included in the attached troop list will
contribute significantly to the prosecution of the war, but are less
than those recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in JCSM 218-67, dated
20 April 1967, Subject: Force Requirements -- Southeast Asia, FY 1968.
The views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as set forth in JCSM 288-67 which
also provided an assessment of U.S. worldwide military posture are still

211 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
