4

BS

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"President Monroe, in his famous message to Congress, denounced
the expansionist and despotic system of Czarist Russia and its allies.
But he said that it would nevertheless be our policy 'to consider the
government de facto as the legitimate government for us.’ That has
indeed been the general United States policy, and I believe that it is
a sound general policy. However, where it does not serve our interests,
we are free to vary from it.

"In relation to Communist China, we are forced to take account of
the fact that the Chinese Communist regime has been consistently and
viciously hostile to the United States.

"A typical Chinese Communist pamphlet reads: 'We Must Hate America,
pecause She is the Chinese People's Implacable Enemy.' 'We Must Despise
America because it is a Corrupt Imperialist Nation, the World Center of
Reaction and Decadency.' 'We Must Look down upon America because She is
a Paper Tiger and Entirely Vulnerable to Defeat.'

"By print, by radio, by drama, by pictures, with all the propaganda
skills which communism has devised, such themes are propagated by the
Red rulers. They vent their hatred by barbarous acts, such as seizures
and imprisonments of Americans.

"Those responsible for United States policy must ask and answer
‘Will it help our country if, by recognition, we give increased prestige
and influence to a regime that actively attacks our vital interests?'

I can find only the answer: 'No.'"

eG

5. Address by Alfred le Sesne Jenkins, Officer in Charge, Chinese

Political Affairs, before the American Academy of Political and
Social Science, Philadelphia, Pa., Present United States Policy

Toward China, April 2, 1954, Department of Stete Bulletin,
April 26, 1954, p. 624:

"In recent years we have often heard it said that more heat than
light has been cast on the China question. I am not surprised at the
heat, nor do I object to it, provided there is also sufficient light.
The fate of one-fourth of the world's population is not a matter which
.ean be taken lightly, and the addition of China's vast material and
manpower resources to the Soviet bloc is a matter involving not only the
security interests of the United States but those of the entire free
world. I do not‘see how one can help feeling strongly about these
matters. We need not apologize that our thinking about China is charged
with feeling. National policies are an expression of national interests
concerning which there is naturally mich feeling, and our policies are
an expression both of what we are and of what we want. We are a nation
of free peoples. We want to remain free to pursue in peace our proper
national destiny, and we want the same freedom and rights for others.

B-9
