Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

who will in turn go about creating a basically civilian
counter-terrorist organization on the ‘precinct' level, or
equivalent thereof...Its prime purpose will be, notably with
police help, to create security for the local government and
free it fron all intimidation by going through the precinct
with a fine-toothed comb...Once the local government feels
safer, it should move energetically to promote public safety
for the people; the people should then rally more to the
government; and this should create an upward spiral as
regards security organization...USOM and USIA will support
these local 'precinct' organizations, will actually work
through them, and will seek to make it attractive to be one
of those who builds such a counter-terrorism precinct organiza-
tion.,.The military should take special precautions in their
operations not to injure in any way the non-combatants. It
must also behave itself so well that the people like the
Army..." 20/

2) Lodge's Ten Point Program for Success:

"In each city precinct and each rural hamlet immedi-
ately adjacent to a thoroughly pacified city (i.e., the
smallest unit from a public safety standpoint) the following
program should be undertaken in the following order:

"1. Saturate the minds of the people with some socially
conscious and attractive ideology, which is susceptible of
being carried out.

"2, Organize the people politically with a hamlet chief
and committee whose actions would be backed by the police or
the military using police-type tactics. This committee should
have representatives of the political, military, economic and
social organizations and should have an executive who directs.

"3, With the help of the police or military, conduct a
census.

"), Issue identification cards.
"S, Issue permits for the movement of goeds and people.
"6, When necessary, hold a curfew.

"7, Thanks to all these methods, go through each hamlet
with a fine-tooth comb to apprehend the terrorists.

"8. At the first quiet moment, bring in agricultural
experts, school teachers, etc.

che TOP SECRET - Sensitive
