i

69.

70.

TL.

Te.

73.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

problem to suggest." George C. Marshall, Secretary

of State, 431 to Paris, 3 February IOhTS,  « Fit Pech rbatey olen

Tae U.S, is concerned that the Western democratic
system is on the defensive in emerging nations and
Southern Asia is in a critical phase. The key to
the U.S. position is an awareness that in respect
to the position of Western democratic powers in
Southern Asia, the United States is in the same
boat as the French, British and the Dutch. "We
cannot conceive setbacks to the long range inter-
ests of France which would not also be setbacks of
our own." The U.S, is ready to be helpful in any
way, however, non-intervertion is still the U.S.

policy. Marshall 1737 to Peris, 13 May 1ON7. 20. .6ccceees os

The State Department is concerned that a rumored,
dry season French offensive would have repercussions
in @ Congress which will be called on for extensive
financial aid to Western Europe in light of France's
economic, financial, and food pons veer Mershall

3433 to Paris, 11 September 1917.. Varehiie aie aie aleve WA selves si

M. Bollaert, French High Commissioner in Indochina,
delivers publicly the most important declaration

of French policy since before hostilities broke out.
The French ask for ea Vietnamese "representative
government" to accept French terms, and exclude
dealing with Ho Chi Minh except as a last resort,
and then only foxy his surrender. The U.S. sees
this policy resulting from a strengthened France
(and a proportional unwillingness to make con-
cessions) as & "retreat" from the March 6 accords.
O'Sullivan letter to Marshall, 12 September 1947........

The French deny any planned dry season military
offensive. Ca ha a to Marshall, 12 ee stl

DUT vse v4 win eiaie win 8 cies 05 sareceis ates arieiwinerey stan ee ie Ta ailetal ats enetNele

France considers Bolliaert's policy speech as a
step forward on two points: formal abandonment
of Indochine federation idea, and acceptance cr
the principle of union of the three KYs without
a referenda. Canney 3753 to Marshall, 1: Sep-

tember TOUT s+ oe ee s ee ey

The am pe view French policy as making the posi-
tion of U.S. and Chins difficult and do not see

& edecenehit goverment without participats ion of
Ho Chi Mink. ‘The "Chinese people” would not re-
ferd a Bao Dai monarchy favorably. Though his

xii

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
