Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

infiltration markedly increased during 1964 and continues to
increase.” ... "The key to the situation remains the cessation

of infiltration from North Vietnam and the clear indication,

that it is prepared to cease aggression against its neighbors.’ 40/

Another major new departure of the 7-8 February strikes was
that they were intended to be at least a first step in more directly and
actively associating the US with the South Vietnamese in "their" war.
Thus while the retaliation was precipitated by the Pleiku incident, it
was considered essential to justify it in broader terms -- not merely
as a response to a single outrage committed against Americans, but as
a response to a series of outrages, committed against South Vietnamese
as well as Americans.

Thus, the White House press release and, even more explicitly,
the McNamara press briefing of February 7 41/ spoke of three VC attacks,
all "ordered and directed by the Hanoi regime," but only one of these
was the Pleiku-Camp Holloway raid against U.S. installation. The two
others cited in justification of the reprisal were attacks on Viet-
nemese villages in which, it was carefully pointed out, no American
casualties were sustained.

This effort to link the reprisal to VC offenses against both
parties was reinforced by having the reprisal strikes conducted by both
South Vietnamese and US forces. McNamara's statement heavily stressed
the fact that "elements of the U.S. and South Vietnamese Air Forces
were directed to launch joint retaliatory attacks..."

By demonstrating that the US was prepared to join with tne
South Vietnamese in military reprisals against North Vietnam for actions
committed against either or both parties in the South, the strikes tended
to weaken the policy line, assiduously adhered to up to that time, that
the war was essentially = Vietnamese war. with US involvement confined to
advice and support. Once the US began participating in such military
reprisals on a regular basis, it would unavoidably begin to appear as
more of a co-belligerent, along with South Vietnam, against the VC and
their sponsors in North Vietnam.

The practical significance.of this point is obvious. As long
as the U.S. maintained the policy line that it was not really directly
engaged in the war, it had to deny its forces many proposed military
actions in Southeast Asia, and had to impose on itself severe political
constraints in its military operations. The abandonment of this policy
line as a result of reprisal actions like FLAMING DART would open the
_way to a much wider range of politically acceptable US military options
in Vietnan.

The 7-S February strikes, however, were only a limited and

tentative first step, and far from an irrevocable commitment to the
broader course of action they foreshadowed. The governing concept

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
