Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a few. The MRF has been significantly successful in depriving
the enemy of freedom and initiative in the population and
resources rich Delta areas. The heliconter has established
itself as perhaps the single most important tool in our
arsenal -- and we will welcome more. To air support in both
RVN and NVN (Army, Navy, Marine and Air Force) goes much of
the credit for our accomplishments." 1/

The enemy's TET offensive, which began with the attack on the U.S.
Embassy in Saigon on 31 January 1968, although it had been predicted, 2/
took the U.S. command and the U.S. public by surprise, and its strength,
length, and intensity prolonged this shock. As the attacks continued,
the Secretary of Defense, on 9 February, requested the Joint Chiefs of
Staff to furnish plans which would provide for emergency reinforcement
of COMUSMACY.

After extensive backchannel communication with General Westmoreland,
the JCS forwarded these plans on 12 February. 3/ The Joint Chiefs’
assessment of the current Vietnam situation differed markedly from
COMUSMACV's year-end assessment submitted only 17 days earlier:

"a, The VC/NVA forces have launched large-scale offensive
operations throughout South Vietnam.

"pb. As of 11 February 1968, Headquarters, MACV, reports that
attacks have taken place on 34 provincial towns, 64 district
towns, and all of the autonomous cities.

"e, The enemy has expressed his intention to continue offensive
operations and to destroy the Government of Vietnam and its Armed
Forces.

"4. The first phase of his offensive has failed in that he
does not have adequate control over any population center to
install his Revolutionary Committees which he hoped to form
into a coalition with the NLF.

"ea, He has lost between 30 and 40 thousand killed and captured,
and we have seized over seven thousand weapons.

"f, Reports indicate that he has committed the bulk of his
VC main force and local force elements down to platoon level
throughout the country, with the exception of six to eight
battalions in the general area of Saigon.

">. Thus far, he has committed only 20 to 25 percent of his
North Vietnamese forces. These were employed as gap fillers
where VC strength was apparently not adequate to carry out his
initial thrust on the cities and towns. Since November, he has

2 ‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive
