Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

taken to dramatize the situation in Iaos. We could encourage
Souvanna to take the case to the UN where Lacs and Souvanna

have strong appeal. Concurrently, but we believe less effec-
tive in practice, Souvanna could press the British and Soviets

to take action or even to reconvene the Geneva Conference of 1962.

Third, we could attempt similar action for Cambodia. This
might be through the Australians, to get Sihanouk to take his
ease also to the UN. Even if he made some accusations against
us in the process, he would be likely at the present time to
highlight his internal Chinese-backed threat, and the net result
eould be useful.

A further possibility would be to seek to enlist India more
deeply in the Cambodian situation. This is worth trying, but
the Indians are a weak reed for action or for effective diplo-
matic dramatization.

Fourth, we could consider getting the Thai to dramatize
their situation more than they have done. This takes careful
thought, since they do not wish to alarm their own people. 75/

Other possibilities discussed were the enlisting and engaging of other
Asian nations in the search for peace in Vietnam and the Soviet Union in an
effort to find peace in Southeast Asia.

In Tab F appeared a discussion of military action against North Viet-
nam. This tab contained two contrary views concerning the bombing campaign
against NVN, and is discussed in detail in another Task Force paper. This
is the first place that any written discussion of the bombing campaign ;
against the North appears in any of the papers of the Working Group. it is
interesting to note, in the light of subsequent developments, that neither
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff nor the Secretary of Defense made
mention of @ partial or complete bombing suspension of the North at this
time. They differed only on the extent to which the bombing campaign
against North Viet Nam should be intensified. 76/

Tabs G and H, the final Tabs, considered the public affairs problems
in dealing with increased U.S. troop commitments to SVN and to the calling
up of reserve forces. In dealing with public opinion and with Congress,
these Appendices concluded that from a public affairs viewpoint:

Beyond the basic points of establishing that the war is in
the national interest, that there is a plan to end it satis-
factorily and that we can identify the resources needed to
carry out that plan, we must prove:

1. That General Westmoreland needs the additional troops
being sent him.

62 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
