—————

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was abandoned Lansdale's proposals for a select, committed advisory
group had been reshaped by interdepartmental committee. Instead of
"old Vietnam hands" in key spots, the discussion turned to the use of
existing organizations and mich larger numbers of advisors:

Augment the MAAG with two US training commands
(comprised of approximately 1600 instructors each) to
enable the MAAG to establish in the "high plateau"
region of South Vietnam two divisional field training
areas to accelerate the U.S, training program for the
entire GVN army....

Deploy, as soon as possible, a Special Forces Group
(approximately 400 U.S, military personnel) to Nha Trang
in order to accelerate GVN Special Forces training. 4'7/

Under this proposal the size of MAAG Vietnam would be increased from
685 to 2285, not including the Special Forces or training commands
mentioned above or the 100 man increase already proposed to advise the
20,000 men which were to be added to RVNAF. 48

After the shift to thinking in terms of existing military organiza- '
tions (or, alternatively, of individuals drawn as it were by "requisitions
in normal chennels) and the understandable--if not imevitable--demise of
the Gilpatric-Lansdale proposal for supra-departmental direction, U.S.
thinking about possible steps in Vietnam remained firmly within conventional
channels. There were subsequent attempts to reintroduce an alternative
advisory scheme and an organizational framework compatible with it but
these appear to have not been seriously considered.

President Kennedy did not permit the Gilpatric Task Force recommenda-
tions to commit him to action. Rather, he used them in an attempt to
demonstrate the U.S. commitment to Vietnam. The proof of this contention
is in NSAM 52, which records the President's decisions. Only about 1)
personnel were to be assigned, for instance, in U.S. Army civic action
mobile training teams to assist ARVN with health, welfare, and public
works projects. Although it was decided to deploy the Special Forces
group of 400 men to Tourane /Da Neng/, this was in support of a CIA-
directed effort which could be kept largely covert. Increased aerial
surveillance assistance required only 6 U.S, personnel. The establish-
ment of a Combat Development and Test Center in RVN required only 4
additional U.S. personnel. 49/ The point is not how much was done but,
in retrospect, how firmly the probable lines of future actions had been
drawn as a result of what it had been agreed not to do.

21 TOP SECRRT - Sensitive
