Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

of our country is still meeting with difficulties and

hardships, but we are confident that the Vietnamese people .
will certainly triumph in the complete liberation of our

country from the US-Diem clique's dictatorial yoke just as

they had gloriously succeeded in their valiant struggle in the
past. The American imperialists and their lackeys, who are
being opposed and isolated, surely will not be able to avoid the
ignominious defeat of those who go counter to the march of
history." 191/

Ho Chi Minh's May Day speech of 1959 opened with an encomium from the
Soviet Union, China, and other socialist powers who were promoting the
movement for national liberation in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
According to the Hanoi Radio report, Ho pointed out "that the earnest
desire of the Vietnamese people from North to South is peace and
national reunification. On orders from the U.S. imperialists the
South Vietnamese authorities are sabotaging the implementation of the
Geneva Accords and strangling all democratic freedom of the southern
people." Ho concluded on the note that:

"Under the leadership of the Viet-lNam Lao Dong Party
and the government, all our people will further strengthen
solidarity and unity of mind with other countries in the
socialist camp, headed by the great Soviet Union. .

and/ strengthen solidarity within the national united
front . . . By so doing the north of our country will
steadily advance toward socialism as a strong basis
toward victory in the struggle for national reunification."

On 4 May 1959, the official DRV newspaper declared that:

"The glorious South Vietnamese people surely will
not remain with folded arms before the continuous and
cruel repressive acts of the U.ยง.-Diem clique. The
Vietnamese people have many times compelled their enemies to
pay for their bloody crimes. The U.S.-Diem clique has by its
own will contracted a big debt of blood toward. the Vietnamese
people, and have dug their own graves."

The foregoing were issued while the Lao Dong Party
conducted the Fifteenth Plenum (Enlarged Session) of its Central
Committee in Hanoi. The session featured speeches on foreign and
domestic programs, but it is fairly certain that a Plenum of the Iao
Dong Central Comnittee is not a debating society nor a parliament --
decisions were not reached there, they were presented.

On 13 May 1959, Hanoi broadcast in English the com-

munique of the lao Dong Party Central Committee; on the Plenum, a
bellicose tone was unmistakable:

57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
