et

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to step up the pressure both in the North, i.e., increase the tempo of
ROLLING THUNDER, and in the South, i.e., move ahead with Phase II de-
ployments. However, a pause in bombing would be inserted prior to the
increased pressure. The arguments for the pause were four: (1) It
would offer the DRV and VC a chance to move toward a solution if they
should be so inclined...(2) It would demonstrate to domestic and inter-
national critics that our efforts to settle the war are genuine. (3)
It would probably tend to reduce the dangers of escalation after we
resumed the bombing...And (4) it would set the stage for another pause
perhaps in late 1966, which might produce a settlement. The conclusion
to this draft,which was discussed with the President on 7 November, was
the warning that "none of these actions assures success...the odds are
even that despite our effort, we will be faced in early 1967 with stag-
nation at a higher level and with a need to decide whether to deploy
Phase III forces, probably in Laos as well as in South Vietnam.”

While the pros and cons of a pause or a cease-fire were being
debated in a series of drafts and memoranda which were prepared and
circulated between Defense and State, the situation in Vietnam was under-~
going a change.

2. NVA Infiltration Increases

By November 1965, the infiltration of units from North Vietnam
had begun to increase. By 17 November, six confirmed, two probable, and
one possible, PAVN regiments had been identified in South Vietnam. The
Viet Cong regimental-size units had increased from five in July of 1965
to twelve. The total strength of the PAVN/VC army was estimated at
2/7 PAVN infantry battalions and a total of 110 PAVN/VC battalions. The
accepted strength was 63,500 in combat units, and 17,000 in combat sup-
port units, with 53,600 in the militia. ‘The vc/PAVN build-up rate was
estimated to be 15 battalions per quarter during 1967.

The implications of the build-up were made abundantly clear by the
bloody fighting in the Ia Drang Valley in mid-November. 31/

in mid-October, the Viet Cong attack on Plei Me Special Forces Camp
in Pleiku Province, had triggered a month-long cattpaign by both RVN and
U.S. forces. Operation STLVER BAYONET, conducted by the lst Cavalry
Division was designed to provide security and artillery support to RVN
forces around Plei Me. On 27 October, the lst Brigade of the lst Cavalry
Division, was given a search and destroy mission between Plei Me and the
Cambodian border. By 1 November, the brigade, having contacted a large
enemy force, began to pursue vo/NVA forces west of the Plei Me camp,
moving along the South Vietnamese/Cambodian border. Then, on 14 November,
after the 3rd Brigade of the lst Cavalry Division had relieved the 1st
Brigade in the vicinity of Plei Me and Pleiku, the most significant phase
of SILVER BAYONET began. Airmobile search and destroy operations were
initiated which resulted in very heavy and intense contacts within the

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
