Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But they did compel the South Vietnamese and their allies
4o move certain forces from the countryside, into the cities.

They caused widespread disruption and suffering. Their
attacks, and the battles that followed, made refugees of
half a million human beings.

The Communists may renew their attack any day.

They are, it appears, trying to make 1968 the year of
decision in South Vietnam -~ the year that brings, if not final
victory or defeat, at least a turning point in the struggle.

This much is clear;

If they do mount another round of heavy attacks, they will
not succeed in destroying the fighting power of South Vietnam
and its allies.

But tragically, this is also clear: many men -=- on both
sides of the struggle -- will be lost. A nation that has
already suffered 20 years of warfare will suffer once again.
Armies on both sides will take new casualties. And the war will

go on.
There is no need for this to be so.

In dramatically announcing the partial suspension of the bombing of
North Vietnam as a new initiative designed to lead to peace talks,
President Johnson did not voice any of the doubts of the State Department
cable of the previous night that this initiative was not expected to
be fruitful. Indeed, the central theme of this portion of the speech
was that our unilateral action was designed to lead to early talks.

The President even designated the United States representatives for

such talks.

There is no need to delay the talks that could bring an end
to this long and this bloody war.

Tonight, I renew the offer I made last August -- to stop
the bombardment of North Vietnam. We ask that talks begin
promptly, that they be serious talks on the substance of peace.
We assume that during those talks Hanoi will not take
advantage of our restraint.

We are prepared to move immediately toward peace through
negotiations.

ul TOP SECRET - Sensitive
