Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET? - Sensitive

Nolting took issue with Mendenhall's appraisal, noting that
Mendenhall had been pessimistic ebout prospects in Vietnam for several
years, But John Mecklin, the USIS director, corroborated Mendenhall's
view, and pushed it even further, saying that the U.S. should apply
.direct pressure, such as suspension of non-military aid, to bring about
@ change of government, In Mecklin's words:

This would unayoidebly be dengerous, There was no way
to be sure how events would develop. It was possible, for
exemple, that the Vietnamese forces might fragment into
warring factions, or that the new government would be so
incompetent and/or unstable that the effort against the
Viet Cong would collapse, The US should therefore resolve
now to introduce American combat forces if necessary to
present a Communist triumph midst the debris of the Diem
regime, 87/

Mecklin appreciated the potential for instability inherent in any army
successor regime that Krulak and Mendenhall had not seen. But he,
nevertheless, concluded that we should proceed to bring about a change
of government, accept the consequences, and contemplate the introduction
of U.S. combat troops to staye off a Viet Cong victory.

The meeting went on to hear Rufus Phillips! dour report on the
Situation in the Delta, and his doubts about the validity of Krulak's
optimistic outlook on the military situation, 88/ Phillips argued that
this was primarily a political contest for the allegiance of people, not
a military war, and that the Diem regime was losing it. The Strategic
Hamlet Program was a shambles in the field, especially in the Delta,

The meeting ended on this note and no decisions were made.

One course of action being given increasing consideration in these
meetings, as well as in Saigon and on Capitol Hill, was a suspension of
non-military aid to Diem, After the erroneous VOA announcement of aid
suspension on August 26, Lodge had been authorized on August 29, as
already noted, to suspend aid at his discretion if it would facilitate
the coup. Lodge had been reluctant to do so, The question had been
raised again in a joint State/ATD cable to Lodge on September 3 which
listed the items currently wp for approval or renewal. 89/ Lodge was
informed that all approval for non-military aid would be temporarily
held up but that no suspension was to be announced, since such a policy
decision was still pending. Lodge took advantage of this by having the
mission, and especially USOM, reply to all GVN inquiries about the
status of the aid renewals or approvals that President Diem would have
to talk to Lodge about it. Meanwhile, the U.S. Senate began to put
pressure on the Administration to do something about Diem. Hilsman was
badgered by the Senate Subcommittee on the Far East, and there were
threats of further cuts in the AID bill if something wasn't done,
Senator Church informed the Administration he intended to introduce soon
a resolution condemning Diem's repressions against the Buddhists and
calling for an end of aid to South Vietnam unless they were abandoned.

27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
