Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to be--deferred. Meantime we had to do first things first--we had
to bolster the Khanh regime, and since this could only be done by
endowing it with some of our own sense of purpose and determination
for the cause that was in the first instance theirs, not ours, we
would prepare to do the things Khanh indicated were necessary to
give him courage. ,

6. increasing U.S. Involvement and Growing GVN Instability

The changing of the guard in the U.S. mission in Saigon at the
half year point, when Ambassador Lodge returned to the U.S. to par-
ticipate in election year politics, symbolized the growing impor-
tance attached by the U.S, to its Southeast Asia commitment. ‘The
combination of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs as Ambassador,
backed up by a Deputy Ambassador in the person of U. Alexis Johnson,
a former Under Secretary of State who had been U.S, Ambassador to
Thailand and was well known in SEA, made a prestigious and impressive
team. Moreover, in sending the new Ambassador, the President endowed
him with unusual powers,

Dear Ambassador Taylor: As you take charge of the
American effort in South Vietnam, I want you to have this
formal expression not only of my confidence, but of my
desire that you have and exercise full responsibility for
the effort of the United States government in South Viet-
nam. In general terms this authority is parallel to that
set forth in President Kennedy's letter of May 29, 1961,
to all American Ambassadors; specifically, I wish it clearly
understood that this overall responsibility includes the
whole military effort in South Vietnam and authorizes the
degree of command and control that you consider appropriate.

I recognize that in the conduct of the day-to-day busi-
ness of the military assistance command, Vietnam, you will
wish to work out arrangements which do not burden you or
impede the exercise of your overall direction.

At your convenience I should be glad to know of the
arrangements which you propose for meeting the terms of
this instruction, so that appropriate supporting action
can be taken in the Defense Department and elsewhere as
necessary.

This letter rescinds all conflicting instructions to US
officers in Vietnam.

Sincerely,

Iyndon B, Johnson

8
: : TOP SECRET —- Sensitive
