Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Lodge), Sir Robert Thompson (whose Malayan experiences had led him to
emphasize the police), Colonel Bohannon (who began as a Lansdale deputy,
but whose views took a different line), the Marines (with their pacifi-
_eation efforts and CAP's near Da Nang), the CIA (which produced, with
Lodge's strong svpport, the PAT's-turned RD cadre), USIA and AID (with
their small but growing field programs), the Army (which entered the
game late but elicited from Lodge on visits to the U.S. 25th Infantry
Division and then the lst Infantry Division, some of his longest and
most glowing accounts of pacification in action. 19/)

These groups and individuals fought about details, sometimes
debating minor points like medieval monks but also disagreeing on
rather basic points -- such as whether the object was to gain the
population's support or to control them by force. (A popular Marine
saying, which tried to bridge the gap, went: "Get the people by the
palls, and their hearts and minds will follow.") But each group found
something that appealed to Lodge, and each in turn gained encouragement
from him. The slow change in mood also affected Washington.

In dealing with his role in the re-emphasis of pacification, we
must distinguish between Lodge's influence on our overall, or grand,
strategy -- on which he was ultimately to have considerable impact --
and his influence on the operational details of the policy. The latter
did not interest him on a continuing basis, and it is thus easy to under-
estimate his influence. There was, for example, a tendency in Saigon
during his Ambassadorship to minimize his importance, since each agency
could ignore him when he told them to do something and usually get away
with it. But this popular view overlooked Lodge's impact in encourag-
ing all sorts of people to emerge from parts of the USG with renewed
hope for pacification. It overlooked the impact of his cables and state-
ments, which added up to a massive endorsement of pacification. In his
NODIS weeklies to the President, for example, pacification receives more
attention than any other subject.

Alone, Lodge could have done little, if anything, to move the USG
around. But his influence seems clear, more so in retrospect than at
the time: at a time when frustrations were growing, he was emphasizing
a different rhetoric and strategy.

The best way to show his emphasis is simply to quote from the
cables and memoranda of the period. Each one shows Lodge, either
directly or indirectly, putting forth his general beliefs -- sometimes
contradictory. They form an important part of the background to
Honolulu, where vacification was to get its biggest push to that date:

1. Lodge at the end of his first tour in Vietnam, defining
pacification in his paper proposing Hop Tac:

"The first priority after the military have cleared an
area is to bring about the selection of an ablé man for that area,

10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

is
