Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

during the coming weeks and months. He has not responded af-
firmatively to this suggestion apparently because his own
thoughts are not yet in order. ,

"The mission has been very busy since my return with all
agencies reviewing their programs to see that they are aligned
with the recent decisions taken in Washington. USOM Director
Killen has discussed the 41 point non-military program with Quat
who has expressed particular interest in such projects as rural
electrification, agricultural development, water supply and
school construction. The Acting CAS Chief, Mr. Jorgensen, is
giving priority attention to the 12 outline projects which
Mr. McCone tabled during our Washington discussions and will
soon have specific proposals for the Mission Council.”

and the following excerpts from COMUSMACV's Monthly Evaluations for March
and April 1965:

"March, 1965: Events in March were encouraging...RVNAF
ground operations were highlighted by renewed operational effort
e+eVC activity was considerably below the norm of the preceding
six months and indications were that the enemy was engaged in the
re-supply and re-positioning of units possibly in preparation for
a new offensive, probably in the II Corps area...In summary, March
has given rise to some cautious optimism. The current government
appears to be taking control of the situation and, if the present
State of popular morale can be sustained and strengthened, the
GVN, with continued U.S. support, should be able to counter future
vc offenses successfully.

"April, 1965: Friendly forces retained the initiative during
April and a review of events reinforces the feeling of optimism
generated last month...In summary, current trends are highly en-
couraging and the GVN may have actually turned the tide at long
last. However, there are some disquieting factors which indicate
a need to avoid overconfidence. A test of these trends should be
forthcoming in the next few months if the VC launch their expected
counter-offensive and the period may well be one of the most im-
portant of the war." /Emphasis added/

In view of the fact that nothing had basically changed in the South,
it seems inconceivable that anyone was really fooled by the dramatic drop
in enemy-initiated activity. Most official observers were hardheaded and
realistic following the landing of the two Marine BLT's in March.
COMUSMACV certainly was in the long and detailed Commander's Estimate of
the Situation which he completed on 26 March and which will be analyzed
at length later in this paper. In summary, General Westmoreland said in

hh. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
