Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

11. Economic Policy and The Port, Third Quarter, 1966

Although in political affairs there was no significant friction be-
tween USG and GVN in the Third Quarter, GVN's accumulation of dollar
balances and its inaction on economic matters caused growing impatience -in
USOM and in Washington,

In late July, 1966, Komer and Ambassador Lodge laid the basis for
the US position, including a suggestion that from now on USOM should make
sure it has the means to monitor and enforce GVN compliance with its
commitments.

Komer said:

Devaluation, port takeover, CIP expansion, RD reorganization
if all skillfully meshed -- could yet have early impact on:
VN public and do mich in these critical weeks to refurbish ~
GVN image at home and abroad.

So far, however, GVN has failed to move aggressively enough
with supplies in country to curb rice and port speculation;
has been unwilling to try to develop wage restraint policy
in private sector, has dithered on promulgating and carrying
out promised regulations re Warehouse removals; has gone
about moving expanded CIP goods up country on business as -
usual basis; has shuffled about on RD reorganization, and
Thang's or Ky's famous report to the nation. 61/

Lodge proposed specific means to monitor GVN, and wished to urge the GVN to
fund Revolutionary Development with counterpart piasters, so that USG could
assure that the funding was adequate. Komer agreed with these proposals.
Porter further proposed:

We intend using budget review process and counterpart
releases on leverage on GVN CY 67 programs and to seek
GVN acceptance of both overall ceiling and commitment to
essential revolutionary development programs before we
agree to support any part of the budget.

Note degree our effectiveness dependent on credibility
our leverage by GVN, which may not be great. 62/

But Porter opposed a complete takeover of the Saigon port, proposed by
Komer. 63

33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
