26 Sep -
2 Oct 63

2 Oct 63

5 Oct 63

11 Oct 63

22 Oct 63

1 Sov 63

20 Nov 63

22 Nov 63

23 Nev €3

26 Nov 63

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

Secfef ‘CICS Mission
to South Vietnam

Mc)amara-Taylor Brief-
ing for the President,
and later, the ‘sc

Meiiamsra-Taylor met
with President and
SC

NSAM 263,

State Department
NR Memo RFE-90

Diem Government
Overthrown

All-agency Conference
on Vietnam, Honolulu

President Kennedy
Assassinated

SecDef Memorandim
for the President

NSAM 273

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Positive detailed evidence presented In numerous briefings indi-
cated conditions were good and would improve. Hence, the Secre-
tary ordered acceleration of the planned U.S. force phase-out.,

Concluded the militery campaign has made great progress and con-
tinues to progress, but warned that further Diem-Nhu repression
could change the “present favorable military trends.”

The President approved the military recommendations made by the
Secretary and Chairman:

-- that MACY and Diem review changes necessary to complete
the military campaign in I, II, and III Corps by the end
of 1961, dn IV Corps by 1965:

-- that a training program be established to enable RVNAF
to take over military functions from the US by the end
of 1965 when the bulk of US personnel could be with-
drawn:

-- that DOM informally announce plans to withdraw 1,000
men by the end of 1963.

ho further reductions in US strength would be made until re-
quirements of the 1064 campaign were clear.

Approved the mil‘tary recommendations contained in the Mchamara-
Taylor Report; directed no formal announcement be made of
implementation of plans to withdraw 1,000 men by the end of
1963.

Assessed trends since ‘uly 1963 as evidence of an unfavorable
shift in military balance. (This was one of the first indica-
tions that all was not as rosy as MACY et al hed led McNemare
and Taylor to believe.)

The feared political chaos, civil war and collapse of the war
did not materialize immediately; US Gevernment was uncertain
@s to what the new circumstances meant, Generel Minh headed
the junta responsible for the coup.

Ambassador Lodge assessed prospects as hopeful; recommended

US continue the policy of eventual military withdrawal from
SVi- said announced 1,000-man withdrawal was having selutory
effects. MACV agreed. In this light, officials agreed that
the Accelerated Plan (speed-up of force withdrawal by six
months directed by Mciameara in October) should be meintained.
Mchamara wanted MAP spending held close to OSD's $175.5 million
celling (because of acceleration, a FY 64 MAP of $157.7 million
looked possible).

One result: US Government policies in general were maintained
for the sake of continuity, to allow the new administration
time to settle and adjust. This tendency to reinforce exist-
ing policies arbitrarily, just to keep them going, extended
the phase-out, withdrawal and MAP concepts -- probably for too
long.

Calling GVS political stablilty vital to the war ond ealling
attention to GV financiel straits, the Secretary caid the
US must be prepared to incrense aid to Saigon. Funding well
above current MAP plana was envisaged.

President Johnson approved recommendations to continue current
policy toward Vietnam put forward at the 20 November Honolulu
meeting: reaffirmed US objectives on withdraval.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

d
