Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

In March of 1956, as France prepared to accede to the GVN request for
withdrawal of its remaining military forees, Foreign Minister Pineau,

in a Paris speech, took the U.K. and the U.S. to task for disrupting
Western unity. 23/ While Pineau selected U.S. support of French-hating
Diem for particular rancor, he did so in the context of decrying France's
isolation in dealing with nationalist rebels in North Africa -- and thus
generally indicted two powers who had threatened the French empire since
the U.K. intervened in Syria in 1941, and President Roosevelt assured the
Sultan of Morocco that his sympathies lay witn the colonial peoples strug-
gling for independence. 24/

Ultimately, France nad to place preservation of its European
position ahead of empire, and, hence, cooperation with the U.S. before
Opposition in Indochina. France's vacating Vietnam in 1956 eased U.S.
problems there over the short run, and smoothed Diem's path. But the
DRV's hope for a national plebescite were thereby dashed. On January 1,
1955, as the waning of France's power in Vietnam became apparent, Pham
Van Dong, DRV Premier, declared that as far as Hanoi was concerned: "...
it was with you, the French, that we signed the Geneva Agreements, and it
is up to you to see that they are respected." Some thirteen months later
the Foreign Minister of France stated that: 25/

"We are not entirely masters of the situation. The
Geneva Accords on the one hand and the pressure of our allies
on the other creates a very complex juridical situation....
The position in principle is clear: France is the guarantor
of the Geneva Accords...But we do not have the means alone
of making them respected."

But the GVN remained adamantly opposed to elections, and neither the
U.S. nor any other western power was disposed to support France's ful-
fillment of its responsibility to the DRV.

3. Diem Refuses Consultation, 1955

Communist expectations that the Diem government would fall
victim to the voracious political forces of South Vietnam were unfulfilled.
Diem narrowly escaped such a fate, but with American support -- albeit °
wavering, and accompanied by advice he often ignored -- Diem within a
year of the Geneva Conference succeeded in defeating the most powerful of
his antagonists, the armed sects, and in removing from power Francophile
elements within his government, including his disloyal military chiefs.

He spoke from comparatively firm political ground when, on July 16, 1955,
before the date set for consulting with the DRV on the plebescite, he
announced in a radio broadcast that: 26/

"We did not sign the Geneva Agreements.

"We are not bound in any way by these Agreements, signed
against the will of the Vietnamese people....We shall not miss

) TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
