LJ)

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

OP SECRET - Sensitive

On May 24, both the Ambassador and COMUSMACV sent lengthy messages
to their seniors discussing the matter of combined military command.
Ambassador Taylor referenced both the JCS and MACV proposals and said,

"TJ must say we are far from ready to propose to GVN anything like a plan
for a more formal combined command authority...If USG intends to take
the position that U.S. command of GVN forces is a prerequisite to the
introduction of more U.S, combat troops, that fact would constitute an
additional strong reason for recommending ageinst bringing in the re-
inforcements." 29/

COMUSMACV also voiced strong opposition to the Washington proposal
for combined command. He recalled recent discussion of the subject with
General Minh who seemed agreeable at first but then moved perceptibly away
from anything suggestive of a combined headquarters. Press reports of the
views of General Thieu and Air Marshall Ky, as well as the recent Saigon
Post column, were referenced to substantiate that there was no prospect
of such a combined staff evolving. Instead, a U.S. Army brigadier general
steff. "The positioning and accrediting of Brig. General Collins is as
far as we can go." 30/

There appears to have been no strong objection by the Joint Chiefs
of Staff. In JCSM 516-65 they reviewed the course of events and recommended
augmentation of MACV by seven billets (1 Brigadier General, 3 officers,
and 3 enlisted) to provide "the requisite staff assistance on combined and
operational planning matters associated with the coordinated operations
of U.S. RVN, and third country forces in Vietnam."

A joint State/Defense message to Saigon on May 27 deferred any
approach to GVN on combined command until it was politically feasible
and directed that no planning discussion be undertaken with RVNAF without
Ambassador Taylor's approval. 31/

There were two major battles in late May and early June, Ba Gia
and Dong Zoai. Although U.S. troops were available to assist in both
instances they were not committed end in both cases RVNAI were defeated,

General Westmoreland continued to press Washington for greater
freedom of discretion in the use of U.S. ground forces with RVNAF. A
June 12 message recalled the three stages envisioned in his May 8 discussion
of combined command. So far, in view of statements in Washington
py the Secretary of State and by the White House, movement from stage 2 to
3 had been deferred, but it sounded as though some measure of joint planning
was in progress.

' "The fact is we have moved some distance down the
road toward active commitment of U.S. combat forces and
have done so hand-in-hand with our Vietnamese ally. They
and we recognize that the time has come when such support
is essential to the survival. of any government of South
Vietnam and the integrity of RVMAF." 32/

i 7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
