Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

to join in a crusade to mify the North and the South, nor to overthrow
Ho Chi Minh. Our objective was to be limited to inducing Hanoi to cease
its subversive efforts in the South. Pursuent of this philosophy, the
Mission draft proposed a program roughly comparable to that suggested by
Washington. The specific difference was the emphasis in the Mission
draft on the need for a stable base in South Vietnam before beginning
overt pressures on the North; and, to effect this, the policy of a

guid. pro guo ~- getting Khenh to clean up his house and make some progress
in pacification as the price of ovr commitment to pressures against the
North. 120/

During the fast moving events of the third week of August, the
President decided to bring Ambassador Taylor back to Washington for
consultation early in Septenber. In a joint State-Defense message on
20 August, Taylor was advised of questions that officiels in various
departments would want to ask during his forthcoming visit. The visit -
was first scheduled for the end of the month, but along with the draft
policy paper of mid-month, the original plans were overtaken by
political events (turmoi1) in Vietnam, end the meeting was postponed
about two weeks, from late August to mid-September. It is worth noting,
nevertheless, that among the items still prominent in the intended
discussions with taylor, at the time of the first notice of the meeting,
were the status of pacification programs--HOP TAC especially--Corps,
division end provincial plans; the joint US/GVN committees; the newly
established operations center; the role of Popular Forces and of Regional
Forces; and the RVNAF police and local security plans. Pacification was
the first item, and detailed interest was indicated. 121/

Sheplen calls the week from 16 Avgust--wnen Khanh publicly
announced the new charter--to 23 August critical, because of Khanh's
. failure to establish a broadly based civilian government under the author-
ity of the new charter. He had been warned by many Vietnemese that the
pressures of civilian and religious demands for a voice in the government
were building up, but nothing was done and major demonstrations began
again on 21 August. 122/

This account will not detail the political events that occurred
from 21 August on. However, to keep our American concern with programs
in Vietnam in context it is necessary to keep in mind the general sequence
of political events during the turmoil of the next several weeks. On 21
August the first serious student demonstration following the proclamation
of the 16 August charter occurred. Khanh met with the students, but did
not satisfy their demands. The same day Thich Tam Chau, President of the
Buddhist Institute for Secular Affairs, demanded that Khanh take action
against the-Diemist Can Lao Party, whom the Buddhists alleged to be
their oppressors. Both Buddhists and. Viet Cong began to infiltrate the
fringes of the student demonstrations about this time. A confused, many-
sided contest developed with Catholics, Viet Cong and Buddhists seeking
to manipulate or exploit the student demonstrations. On 23 August the
Buddhists in Hue formed a new Movement for the Salvation of Buddhism in
Danger (similar to the organization egainst Diem). Bonbs were set off

93 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
