Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

American aid given directly to your Government can serve to assist
Viet-Nam in its present hour of trial, provided that your Government
is prepared to give assurances as to the standards of performance it
would be able to maintain in the event such aid were supplied.

"The purpose of this offer is to assist the Government of Viet-Nem
in developing and maintaining a strong, viable state, capable of resist-
ing attempted subversion or aggression through military means."

x

18. Address by President Eisenhower before the American Society of

Newsvaver Editors, April 21, 1956, Public Papers of the Presidents
1956, p. 417 and Dp. 123; .

ote 13h

"Phe ideas of freedom are at work, even where they are officially
rejected. As we know, Lenin and his successors, true to Communist
doctrine, based the Soviet State on the denial of these ideas. Yet the
new Soviet rulers who took over three years ago have had to reckon with
the force of these ideas, both at home and abroad.

"The situation the new regime inherited from the dead Stalin
apparently caused it to reappraise many of his mistakes.

"Having lived under his one-man rule, they have espoused the con-
cept of ‘collective’ dictatorship. But dictatorship it still remains.
They have denounced Stalin for some of the more flagrant excesses of
his brutal rule. But the individual citizen still lacks the most
elementary safeguards of a free society. The desire for a better life
is still being sacrificed to the insatiable demands of the state.

"Tn foreign affairs, the new regime has seemingly moderated the
policy of violence and hostility which has caused the free nations to
band together to defend their independence and liberties. For the
present, at least, it relies more on political and economic means to
spread its influence abroad. In the last year, it has embarked upon a
campaign of lending and trade egreements directed especially toward
the newly-developing countries.

"Tt is still too early to assess in any final way whether the
Soviet regime wishes to provide a real basis for stable and enduring
relations."

oo

"For example, why was there such a sudden change in the Soviet
policy? Their basic aim is to conquer the world, through world revolu-
. tion if possible, but in any way. Anyone that has read any of their
books knows that their doctrine is lies, deceit, subversion, war if
necessary, but in any way: conquer the world. And that has not changed.

B-27
