Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

And the larger purpose of our involvement has always
been to help the nations of Southeast Asia become inde-
pendent and stand alone, self-sustaining as members of a
great world communitsy.

-- At peace with themselves, and at peace with all
others.

With such an Asia, our country -- and the world --
will be far more secure than it is tonight.

I believe that a peaceful Asia is far nearer to
reality, because of what America has done in Vietnam.
I believe that the men who endure the dangers of battle
-- fighting there for us tonight -- are helping the
entire world avoid far greater conflicts, far wider wars,
far more destruction, than this one.

I pray that it will not be rejected by the leaders
of North Vietnam. I pray that they will accept it as a
means by which the sacrifices of their own people may be
ended. And I ask your help and your support, my fellow
citizens, for this effort to reach across the battlefield
toward an early peace.

Finally, the President addressed himself in a highly personal manner
+o the issue that had seemed uppermost in his mind throughout the preceding
month of deliberation, reassessment and reappraisal of our Vietnam policy -- -
the issue of domestic unity.

Yet, I believe that we must always be mindful of this one
thing, whatever the trials and the tests ahead. The ultimate
strength of our country and our cause will lie not in powerful
weapons or infinite resources or boundless wealth, but will
lie in the unity of our people.

This, I believe very deeply.

Throughout my entire public career I have followed the
personel puilosophy that I am a free man, an American, a public
servant and a member of my Party, in that order always and only.

For 37 years in the service of our nation, first as a
Congressman, as a Senator and as Vice President and now as
your President, I have put the unity of the people first.
T have put it ahead of any devisive partisanship.

.

83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
