Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. That he does not need further additional troops at
this time.

3. That the Strategic Reserve does need reconstitution
at this time.

h. That the possible need of General Westmoreland for
possible future reinforcement is sufficiently important
to merit the callup.

5. That there is not a bottomless pit.

6. That the nation still has the resources for the ghetto
fight. 77/

Thus, the memorandum forwarded to the President by the Secretary of
Defense in response to the Presidential request for an "A to Z% reassessment"
of our Vietnam policy again represented a compromise. In this case, it
was @ compromise brought about by differences between the Assistant Secre-
tary of Defense for International Security Affairs and his staff, and the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and his officers. Initially, ISA had
prepared a draft Presidential memorandum which had indeed reassessed U.S.
strategy in SVN, found it faulty, and recommended a new strategy of protecting
the "demographic frontier" with basically the U.S. forces presently in-
country. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff found "fatal flaws " in
this strategy, could not accept the implied criticism of past strategy in
the ISA proposal, did not think that the Defense Department civilians should
be involved in issuing specific guidance to the military field commander,
and supported this field commander in his request for the forces required
to allow him to “regain the initiative.” The compromise reached, of course,
was that a decision on new strategic guidance should be deferred pending a
complete political/military reassessment of the U.S, strategy and objectives >
in Vietnam in the context of our worldwide commitments.

The recommendation for additional forces was also a compromise and
was based, as had past decisions of this nature, on what could be done by
the forces in-being without disrupting the nation. However, there were addi-
tional reasons adduced for not meeting all of COMUSMACV's requirements for
forces. The situation in SVN was not clear. The ability of the Government
and of the Army of South Vietnam to survive and to improve were in serious
question. The ability of the U.S, to attain its objectives in SVN by mili-
tary force of whatever size was not clear. Weighing heavily upon the minds
of the senior officials who prepared and approved the 4 March memorandum to
the President was, indeed, what difference in the war, what progress toward
wictory such 2 puildup as requested by MACV would make. These leaders were,
finally, prepared to go a long way down the road in meeting COMUSMACV's
request. They recommended to the President that the first increment of
this request be met. They also recommended a partial mobilization so as
to be prepared to meet additional requirements if and when it was demon-
strated that these forces were necessary and would make a strategic difference.

63 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
