Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

| &4. TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Both Sorenson and Hilsman claim this was really a ruse by the President,
who hed no intention of going ahead with combat troops but did not choose
to argue the point with his advisors.

Schlesinger, apparently writing from diary notes, says the President
talked to him about the combat troops recommendations at the time, describ-
ing the proposed first increment as like an alcoholic's first drink:

The Taylor-Rostow report was a careful and thoughtful
document, and the President read it with interest. He was
impressed by its description of the situation as serious but
not hopeless and attracted by the idea of stiffening the Diem
regime through an infusion of American advisers. He did not,
however, like the proposal of a direct American military
commitment. "They want a force of American troops," he told
me early in November. "They say it's necessary in order to
restore confidence and maintain morale. But it will be just
like Berlin. The troops will march in; the bands will play;
the crowds will cheer; and in four days everyone will have
forgotten. Then we will be told we have to send in more troops.
It's like teking a drink. The effect wears off, and you have :
to take another.” The war in Vietnam, he added, could be won
only so long as it was their war. -If it were ever converted
into a white man's war, we would lose as the French had lost
a decade earlier. 19/

Whether, in fact, Kennedy had such a firm position in mind at the
time cannot be surmised, though, from the official record itself. It is
easy to believe that he did, for as Sorenson points out, Kinnedy had
strong views on the difficulties of foreign troops putting down an insur-
gency dating from his bleak, but correct, appraisals of French prospects
in Vietnam as early as 1951, and again in Algeria in the late 1950's.
And he was hardly alone in such sentiments, as shown in columns of the
period by Reston and Lippman, and in a private communication from
Galbraith to be quoted shortly.

But, Kennedy did not need to have such a firm position in mind to
make the decisions he did. There was a case to be made for deferring
the combat troops decision even if the President accepted the view that
U.S. troops commitments were almost certainly needed in Vietmam and that
putting them in sooner would be better than waiting. There was, in par-
ticular, the arguments in the Rusk/McNamara memorandum thet putting combat
troops into Vietnam just then would upset the Laos negotiations, and the
unstated but cbvious argument that the U.S. perhaps ought to hold back on
the combat troop commitment to gain leverage on Diem.

General Taylor's advice, as shown in the record, gave a different ground
for delaying. Taylor argued that the ground troop commitment was essenti-
ally for its psychological, not military, impact. Taylor's judgment was that it

13) ;
: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
