Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

d. MAAG recommended that the present unnecessary
duplication of the high level personnel in Corps and
Military Region Headquarters be eliminated or corrected... .

" . . . As explained previously, this concept envisions the
organization and detailing of specialized ARVN units as ‘anti-
guerrilla guerrillas' employing improved guerrilla tactics
against the VC guerrilla. They could well dress in guerrilla
type clothing and would take the field in their assigned areas
within the divisional zones for a period of one to six months,
operating in the swamps, mountains and jungles as does their
quarry - the guerrilla. These hunter-killer teams must be
strongly disciplined, well indoctrinated, highly motivated,
and imbued with the spirit of the offensive - and they must
be offensively trained and led. They must have the will and
determination to close with and destroy the VC. :

"Our objective must be to find, fix, fight and finish the
enemy! No half measures will do. Time is our most precious
commodity and the urgency of the situation requires that we use
every second gainfully. This leaves no place for complacency
on your part - or a business-as-usual attitude. MAAG cannot
afford the luxury of an eight hour day or a five day week -
neither can RVNAF. History will not wait."

General McGarr's impress was on the Counterinsurgency Plan (CIP),
which reached Washington in January 1961, just before John F. Kennedy
took office. 2

b. Content of the CIP

The CIP consisted of a basic directive and three
annexes dealing with RVNAF force increases, concept of operations, and
logistics, respectively. It incorporated one major point of difference
between Ambassador Durbrow and General McGarr -- the RVNAF force
increases (Despatch 276):

Ambassador Durbrow:

I maintain reservations concerning the proposal to increase
the force level up to 20,000 additional RVNAF troops, purely to
meet the threat in Viet-Nam and still believe more calculated
risks should be taken by using more of the forces in being to
meet the immediate and serious guerrilla terrorist threat.

I recognize, however, that additional well-trained forces in
being in this area are probably now justified from purely U.S.
interest point of view in order to meet growing bloc threat SEA
represented by Soviet airlift in Laos.

86 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
