Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Next is health and education, Mr. Gardner. We don't want
to talk about it; we want to do something about it. 'The
President pledges he will dispatch teams of experts.' Well, we
better do something besides dispatching. They should get out
there. We are going to train health personnel. How many? You
don't want to be like the fellow who was playing poker and when
he made a big bet they called him and said ‘what have you got?'
He said, 'aces' and they asked ‘how many’ and he said ‘one
aces’...

"Next is refugees. That is just as hot as a pistol in my
country. You don't want me to raise a white flag and surrender
so we have to do something about that...

"Growing military effectiveness: we have not gone in because
we don't want to overshadow this meeting here with bombs, with
mortars, with hand grenades, with 'Masher' movements. I don't
know who names your operations, but 'Masher.’' I get kind of
mashed myself. But we haven't gone into the details of growing
military effectiveness for two or three reasons. One, we want
to be able to honestly and truthfully say that this has not been
a military build-up conference of the world here in Honolulu.

We have been talking about building a society following the out-
lines’ of the Prime Minister's speech yesterday.

"Second, this is not the place, with 100 people sitting
around, to build a military effectiveness.

"Third, I. want to put it off as long as I can, having to
make these crucial decisions. I enjoy this agony...I don't
want to come out of this meeting that we have come up here and
added on X divisions and Y battalions or Z regiments or D
dollars, because one good story about how many billions are
going to be spent can bring us more inflation that we are
talking about in Vietnam. We want to work those out in the
quietness of the Cabinet Room after you have made your recom-
mendations, General Wheeler, Admiral Sharp, when you come to
us..."10/ /fmphasis Added

_ he President's remarks candidly indicated the type of pressure and
the expectations that he had for the effort. :

But beyond the high-level interest so clearly demonstrated publicly
for the first time at Honolulu, what was accomplished? As mentioned
earlier, Honolulu's importance lay in two things: (1) the public support
shown for the "other war"; and (2) the sections of the Declaration which
committed the GVN to the electoral process. If nothing else was accom-
plished at Honolulu, that made the conference. worthwhile. Thus, it is
perhaps petty to criticize the details of the conference. But they do

ke TOP SECRET - Sensitive
