Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"bolstering the capability of all free countries in the area to resist
communist encroachment." This required cooperating with the sovereign
governments of these countries and being careful not to erode their
authority or contribute to their instability. h6/ Thus, instead of cross-
border ground probes or low-level reconnaissance missions, which might
prove politically embarrassing to the shaky regime of Laotian Premier
Souvanna Phouma, the State-ISA view favored extending the mission of
Laotian ground reconnaissance teams, which had been sponsored covertly by
the CIA with the Premier's support. 47/ Moreover, this approach to policy
included the view that, within the scope of broad regional policy goals,
solutions to problems in individual countries should be tailored to the
unique political context of each country. Insofar as Laos was concerned,
this meant not only being sensitive to Souvanna Phowna's political status,
but also adhering to the letter and spirit of the 1962 Geneva Accords, on
which it was conceded the structure of a stable political future must be

- erected. In the State-ISA view, the only alternative to this approach
would be an eventual large-scale deployment of U.S. ground forces to drive
out the Pathet Lao/NVA forces. 48/

The meaning of these different overall policy conceptions for the
planning processes of April and early May 1964 was that the U.S. Government
was faced with a dilemma -- whether to take remedial military actions which
might ease the short-term problems in South Vietnam or whether to dramatize
our commitment to all of Southeast Asia with the long-term solution in mind.
The dilemma was particularly complex because elements of one alternative
were needed to enable progress toward the other. Specifically, three
accomplishments were considered vital to our long-term objectives in South-
east Asia: (1) to convince Hanoi, whose direction of the insurgencies was
certain, of our resolve to prevent the success of its aggressive policies;
(2) to maintain the cooperation of Souvanna Phouma and the Laotian neu-
tralist political structure (which also required the support of the Geneva
members) and thereby preserve the framework of the 1962 Geneva Accords; and
(3) to build a stable, effective political authority in South Vietnam.
Vital to the third accomplishment was our major short-term objective -- of
permanently reversing the trends in the guerrilla war in South Vietnam.
These, in turn, were believed to be sustained in their currently deterio-
rating direction by the infiltration of men and supplies from North Vietnam.
The possibility was recognized that determining the extent of this infil-
tration and eliminating it, if necessary, might be a decisive element in a
solution of the short-term problem.

However, the short-term solution involved potential threats to the
long-term policy elements: the most effective measures for obtaining the
necessary intelligence involved actions likely to alienate Souvanna and
damage the political structure in Laos. Yet, some of this same kind of
intelligence would be important in convincing the Premier of the need to
permit low-level reconnaissance flights and other kinds of operations.
On the other hand, the impact of the infiltration on the war in South
Vietnam was far from certain. For example, Ambassador Unger reported in
December that the recent use of the Laotian corridor was not extensive

13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
