Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"The first is that the peace and security of Southeast Asia are,
as the Congress has put it, ‘vital’ to our own national interest.

"That conclusion was first reached by President Truman before the
attack on Korea, after thorough analysis in the highest councils of the
Government. The question was reexamined after the Korean war began and
again in the early months of President Eisenhower's administration.

The conclusion was always essentially the same: that we had a vital
national interest in the peace and security of Southeast Asia. That
conclusion was based on such factors as the population of the area--
more than 200 million--its natural resources, and its strategic location
athwart the gateway between the Pacific and Indian Oceans, with the
Indian subcontinent on one flank and Australia and New Zealand on the
other. The loss of Southeast Asia to a hostile power or powers would
be a weighty shift of the balance of power to the disadvantage of the
free world and would affect adversely the world situation as a whole.

"That fundamental conclusion led the United States to join with
others in signing the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, which
the United States Senate approved with only one dissenting vote. Article
IV of that treaty says that ‘Each party recognizes that aggression by
means of armed attack in the treaty area...would endanger its own peace
and safety’ and, in that event, would ‘act to meet the common danger.'

By a protocol signed and approved with the treaty, the protection was
extended to the non-Communist states of former French Indochina:

"So we are fighting in Viet-Nam:

-~because the peace and security of Southeast Asia are vital
to our national interest;

--because we made a solemn commitment 'to act to meet the
common danger' if South Viet-Nam were subjected to ‘aggression by means
of armed attack';

--because if those who would be our enemies should come to
think that the defensive commitments of the United States--to more than
hO allies--are just bluffs, we would be on the slippery slope to general
war;

--because Asian Communist leaders have proclaimed the struggle
in Viet-Nam to be a critical test of a special technique for achieving
Communist domination of the world: through whay they, in their upside-
down language, call ‘wars of national liberation.’

"We are in Viet-Nam because we believe that the people of South Viet-
am should have a chance to determine their own government and their own
future by their own choice and not through force imposed by Hanoi. The
idea of self-determination is fundamental to a nation which was founded

*

D-133.
