Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

142: .
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But these warnings were directed to an unexpectedly strong Viet Cong
showing during the period of buildup of ARVN, and more still to deterring
the likelihood of a Communist resumption of their offensive in Laos, or
of an overt invasion of South Vietnam. The Vietnam eontingencies, in
particular, were not viewed as likely... But the possibility of bombing
the North was viewed otherwise. The clearest statements are in General
Taylor's letter of transmittal:

While we feel that the program recommended represents those
measures which should be taken in our present knowledge of the
Situation in Southeast Asia, I would not suggest that it is the
final word. Future needs beyond this program will depend upon
the kind of settlement we obtain in Laos and the manner in
which Hanoi decides to adjust its conduct to that settlement.
If the Hanoi decision is to continue the irregular war declared
on South Vietnam in 1959 with continued infiltration and covert
Support of guerrilla bands in the territory of our ally, we will
then have to decide whether to accept as legitimate the con-
tinued guidance, training, and support of a guerrilla war across
an international boundary, while the attacked react only inside
their borders. Can we admit the establishment of the common
law that the party attacked and his friends are denied the right
to strike the source of aggression, after the fact of external
aggression is clearly established? It is.our view that our
government should undertake with the Vietnamese the measures
outlined herein, but should then consider and face the broader
question beyond.

We cannot refrain from expressing, having seen the situa-
tion on the ground, our common sense of outrage at the burden
which this Kind of aggression imposes on a new country, only
seven years old, with a difficult historical heritage to over-
come, confronting the inevitable problems of political, social,
and economic transition to modernization. It is easy and cheap
to destroy such a country whereas it is difficult undisturbed
to build a nation coming out of a complex past without carrying
the burden of a guerrilla war.

We were similarly struck in Thailand with the injustice
of subjecting this promising nation in transition to the heavy
military burdens it faces in fulfilling its role in SEATO
security planning along with the guerrilla challenge beginning
to form up on its northeast frontier.

It is my judgment and that of my colleages that the United
States must decide how it will cope with Krushchev's "wars of
liberation” which are really para-wars of guerrilla aggression.
