Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. A revision of the bombing effort in North Vietnam so
that a maximum effort is exerted against the LOC's in Route
Packages 1, 2, and 3 with bombing north of the 20th parallel
limited to a level designed to cover only the most significant
military targets and prevent the redistribution southward of
air defenses, e.g. 5% of the attack sorties.

This reprogramming of our bombing efforts would devote
primary emphasis on the infiltration routes south of the
20th parallel in the panhandle area of North Vietnam just to
the north of the DMZ. It includes all of the areas now within
Route Packages 1, 2 and 3. This program recognizes that our
bombing emphasis should be designed to prevent military men
and materiel from moving out of North Vietnam and into the
South, rather than attempting to prevent materiel from
entering North Vietnam.- Occasional attack sorties north
of this area would be employed to keep enemy air defenses
and damage repair crews from relocating and to permit attack
aginst the most important fixed targets. The effort against
this part of North Vietnam through which all land infiltration
passes would be intensive and sustained. Yet it provides
Hanoi with a clear message that for political reasons we are
willing to adjust our military tactics to accommodate a construc-
tive move toward peace. A distinct benefit of this decision
would be the lower plane loss rates which are realized in the
southern areas of North Vietnam. (In 1967 the joint loss rate
per thousand sorties in Route Packages 1, 2 and 3 was 1.36,
while it was 5.73 in the more heavily defended Route Package 6
in which Hanoi and Haiphong are located.)

h, A complete cessation of all bombing in North Vietnam.

It would be politically untenable to initiate a complete
cessation of the bombing of North Vietnam at a time when our
forces in the northern provinces of South Vietnam are seriously
threatened by large forces of North Vietnamese regulars, unless
we were confident that these attacks would cease. Nevertheless,
we must recognize that our intelligence analysts have advised
that in spite of our significant bombing effort over the last
2-1/2 years, Hanoi retains the capability and the will to support
the present or an increased level of hostilities in South Vietnam.
On the other hand, they inform us that:

"If, however, the U.S. ceased the bombing of North
Vietnam in the near future, Hanoi would probably respond

186 1° TOP SECRET - Sensitive
