Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

an intensive interdiction campaign would commence against the roads

and railroads from China. Concurrently, another series of attacks
would be mounted against the eight major operational airfields. 8/
These recommendations met with predictably cool response and on 26 July
1967 the Deputy Secretary of Defense, in a memorandum to the Chairman
of the JCS, stated that "a final decision on the proposals contained in
the memorandum will be rendered in connection with the determination of
overall future courses of action in Vietnam which should be completed
in the near future." 9/

On the same date, 20 May, the Joint Chiefs of Staff submitted their
World-wide Posture Paper. The most significant recommendation in it was
@ proposél that a selective call-up for the Reserves be made so that
the U.S. could more effectively fulfill world-wide commitments. In it
the Joint Chiefs of Staff stated that the nation must be able to (1)
send large U.S. forces to any of the several trouble spots, such as
Korea, and Berlin; they also noted that we could not respond fast enough
with sufficient forces to meet most of these contingencies. They also
wrote that we must meet CINCPAC's FY 68 force requests, and to do so
would require an addition of 2-1/3 division forces or the now familiar
"minimum essential requirements" stated by General Westmoreland in his
original 18 March request. The Chiefs also believed that we had to
"regain the Southeast Asia initiative and exploit our military advantage."
They stated that they believed present air restrictions crippled our
war effort and that limitations should be reduced on targets as well as
the rules of engagement, and that more forces, primarily air, evidently,
should be sent. Moreover, they believed that we should reinforce as
fast as possible, to prevent the enemy from adjusting to the increases
in pressure, as he had been able to do thus far.

Of seven alternate U.S. force postures they reviewed, the JCS
considered only two to be "adequate." The alternative they endorsed
provided the following increases to the approved forces: 4-1/3 active
army divisions; one navy attack carrier; two carrier air-wings; two
battleships; two gun cruisers; as well as 570 UE Air Force tactical
fighters, 72 UE Reconnaissance Aircraft and 80 UE C130's. They did not
propose any new permanent additions to the United States Marine Corps.
In their estimation the proposed force structure would be adequate to
meet the FY 68 CINCPAC "minimum essential force requirements" for SEA
without changing current rotation policies. It would also provide
forces to reinforce NATO as well as respond to other major contingencies
including MACV's tentative FY 1969 add-on requirement for 2-1/3 divisions
and 90 tactical fighters. (This was, of course, the "optimum" force
which the 18 March COMUSMACV request had contained.) The JCS proposed
to extend terms of service, and to call up Reserves to provide this
capability quicker. The Reserves they proposed to call would be two

166 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
