Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

additional request from General Westmoreland bearing on the effort
against North Vietnam. The enemy buildup in the DMZ area had become
serious and to counter it an increasing number of B-52 strikes were
being employed. Eventually this confrontation at the DMZ would involve
the heavy artillery exchanges of the fall of 1967 and culminate in

the protracted seige of Khe Sanh. For the moment, however, Westmoreland
was seeking as a part of his DMZ reinforcement an augmentation in the
monthly B-52 sortie authorization. His request was outlined by the Chiefs
in a memo to Mr. Nitze on September 28. They indicated a capability to
raise the serties to 900 per month immediately and were studying the
problem of raising them to 1200 as requested by Westy. The use of

2,000 1b. bombs was feasible and the Chiefs recommended it depending on
their availability. 30/ McNamara gave his OK to the increase in a memo
to the President on October 4, but indicated that the increase to 1200
per month could not be achieved before January or February 1968. Saf

Undaunted by repeated rebuffs, the Chiefs, under the
temporary leadership of Army Chief of Staff, General Harold K. Johnson
(General Wheeler had been stricken by a mild heart attack in early
September and was away from his desk for a little over a month), eon-
tinued to press for lifting the Hanoi restrictions and for permission
to attack Phuc Yen. On October 4 they gave Mcllamara a package of papers
on the current target list complete with draft execute messages lifting
the Hanoi ban and authorizing Phuc Yen, both of which they recommended. 32/
Two days later a specific request to hit the Hanoi power plant was for-
warded, noting the DIA estimate that the power plant was back to 75% of its
original capacity. 33/ On October 7, CINCPAC sent the JCS a monthly sum-
mary of the ROLLING THUNDER program in September and used the opportunity
once again to complain about the detrimental effects of maintaining the
Hanoi restriction. Adverse weather because of the northeast Monsoon had
severely curtailed the number of sorties flown to 8,540 compared with
11,634 in August. This had permitted a considerable amount of damage-
recovery in North Vietnam. The maintenance of the Hanoi sanctuary only
compounded the problem for the U.S. "This combination of circumstances
provides the enemy the opportunity to repair rail lines, reconstruct
downed bridges, and accommodate to much of the initial efforts to main-

-tain pressure against the vital LOC network.” 34/ In Admiral Sharp's
view, countering these recovery efforts was of the first priority.

The following day he sent the Chiefs another message specifi-
cally requestirg that the rescinded approval for strikes against Phuc Yen
airfield be reinstated. Increased MIG activity against our jets over North
Vietnam was cited as requiring the destruction of this last remaining major
airfield. The crux of his argument, however, was the necessity of. such
a strike to the maintenance of pilot morale — a rationale entirely exempt
from statistical analysis in OSD. He stated the case as follows:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
104
