Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Secretary McNamara envisioned that the employment of U.S. forces
would be as follows:

-»-Use of forces. The forces will be used however they
ean be brought to bear most effectively. ‘The US/third-country
ground forces will operate in coordination with South Viet-
namese forces. They will defend their own bases; they will
assist in providing security in neighboring areas; they will
augment Vietnamese forces, assuring retention of key logistic
areas and population centers. Also, in the initial phase they
will maintain a small reserve-reaction force, conducting nui-
Sance raids and spoiling attacks, and opening and securing
selected lines of communication; as in-country ground strength
increases to a level permitting extended US and third-country
offensive action, the forces will be available for more active
combat missions when the Vietnamese Government and General
Westmoreland agree that such active missions are needed. The
strategy for winning this stage of the war will be to take the
offensive -- to take and hold the initiative. The concept of
tactical operations will be to exploit the offensive, with the
objects of putting the vc/DRV battalion forces out of operation
and of destroying their morale. The South Vietnamese, US and
third-country forces, by aggressive exploitation of superior
military forces, are to gain and hold the initiative -- keeping
the enemy at a disadvantage, maintaining a tempo such as to
deny them time to recuperate or regain their balance, and
pressing the fight against vo/DRV main force units in South
Vietnam to run them to ground and destroy them. The operations
should combine to compel the VC/DRV to fight at a higher and
more sustained intensity with resulting higher logistical con-
sumption and, at the same time, to limit his capability to
resupply forces in combat at that scale by attacking his L0c.
The concept assumes vigorous prosecution of the air and sea
anti-infiltration campaign and includes increased use of air
in-country, including B-52s, night and day to harass VC in
their havens. Following destruction of the VC main force units,
the South Vietnamese must reinstitute the Program of Rural
Reconstruction as an antidote to the continuing VC campaign of
terror and subversion. 16/

He evaluated the probable results in the following manner:

++ eEvaluation. ARVN overall is not capable of successfully
resisting the VC initiatives without more active assistance
fron more US/third-country ground forces than those thus far
ccumitted. Without further outside help, the ARVN is faced with
successive tactical reverses, loss of key communication and
population centers particularly in the highlands, piecemeal
destruction of ARVN units, attrition of RVNAF will to Tight,

cee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
