Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

4 “TOP SECRET - Sensitive

increase in the number of strike sorties against North Vietnam from
the existing 2,500 per month to 4,000 "or more," still “avoiding
striking population and industrial targets not closely related to
the DRV's supply of war material to the VC."

The urgency which infused McNamara's recommendations stemmed
from his estimate that "the situation in South Vietnam is worse than
a year ago (when it was worse than a year before that)." The VC had
launched a drive “to dismember the nation and maul the army"; since
1 June the GVN had been forced to abandon six district capitals and
had only retaken one. Transport and communications lines throughout
the country were being cut, isolating the towns and cities and causing
sharp deterioration of the already shaky domestic economy. Air Marshal
Ky presided over a government of generals which had little prospect of
being able to unite or energize the country. In such a situation, U.S.
air and ground actions thus far had put to rest Vietnamese fears that
they might be abandoned, but they had not decisively affected the course
of the war. Therefore, McNamara recommended escalation. His specific
recommendations, he noted, were concurred in by General Wheeler and
Ambassador-designate Lodge, who accompanied him on his trip to Vietnam,
and by Ambassador Taylor, Ambassador Johnson, Admiral Sharp, and
General Westmoreland, with whom he conferred there. The rationale for :
his decisions was supplied by the CIA, whose assessment he quoted with
approval in concluding the 1 July version of his memorandum. It stated:

Over the longer term we doubt if the Communists are
likely to change their basic strategy in Vietnam (i.e.,
aggressive and steadily mounting insurgency) unless and
until two conditions prevail: (1) they are forced to accept
@ situation in the war in the South which offers them no
prospect of an early victory and no grounds for hope that
they can simply outlast the US and (2) North Vietnam itself
is under continuing and increasingly damaging punitive
attack. So long as the Communists think they scent the
possibility of an early victory (which is probably now the
case), we believe that they will persevere and accept
extremely severe damage to the North. Conversely, if North
Vietnam itself is not hurting, Hanoi's doctrinaire leaders
will probably be ready to carry on the Southern struggle
almost indefinitely. If, however, both of the conditions
outlined above should be brought to pass, we believe Hanoi
probably would, at least for a period of time, alter its
basic strategy and course of action in South Vietnam.

McNamara's memorandum of 20 July did not include this quota-
tion, although many of these points were made elsewhere in the paper.
Instead; 4% concluded with an optimistic forecast:

32 i : TOP SECRET - Sensitive

—————
