Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET: - Sensitive

little prospect for en effective GVN despite an acknowledged slowing of
"adverse political trends." In their view the political situation was
“extremely fragile,” with the Saigon administration "plagued by con-
fusion, apathy and poor morale” and the new leadership hampered by the
older factionslism. The security situetion in the countryside was
assessed as having continued to deteriorate, with "Viet Cong control
...spreading over areas heretofore controlled by the goverment."
Although indicating “better than even” chances that the GVN could "hang
. on for the near future and thus afford a platform upon which... /to/
prosecute the war and attempt to turn the tide," the panel painted 4
grim picture of its prospects. 31/ This assessment was probably
instrumental in prompting Assistant Secretary McNaughton's eryptic
observation that "Progress inside SVN is important, bub it is ulikely
despite our best ideesand efforts." Besides, he observed, if it came
at all it would take "at least several months." In his view, the efforts
of the Working Group, could in some measure compensate for this slow
progress inside South Vietnam:

"Action ageinst North Vietnam is to some extent a sub-
stitute for strengthening the government in South Vietnem.
That is, a less active VC (on orders from DRV) can be
handled by a less efficient GYN (which we expect to have) ." 32/

b. Views of DRV Susceptibility. The extent to which "action
against North Vietnam" might affect that mabion's support of the con-
flicts in South Vietnem and Laos was a matter on which members of the
Working Group did not fully agree. The intelligence panel members
tended toward a pessimistic view. They pointed out that "the basic
elements of Communist strength in South Vietnem remain indigenous,”
and that "even if severely damaged” the DRV could continue to support
the insurrection at a lessened level. Therefore, they stressed that
the U.S. ability to compel a halt to the DRV support depended on erod-
ing Hanoi's will and persuading the DRV:

that the price of mounting the insurrection in the South
at a high level would be too great and that it would be
preferable to reduce its aid...and direct at least a
temporary reduction of V.C. activity.

As the panel members saw it, this respite would then provide an oppor-
tunity to stebilize end improve the GVN. But, in their words, "Even

so, lasting success would depend upon & substantial improvement in the
energy ond effectiveness of the RVN government and pacification machin-

ery." 33/

However, the intelligence panel did not concede very strong
chances for breaking the will of Hanoi. They thought it quite likely
that the DRV was willing to suffer damage "in the course of a test of
wills with the United States over the course of events in South Vietnam."
To support this view, they cited Hanoi's belief that international

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
