Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET =- Sensitive

ce. Study politically cheaper methods. Conduct a
study to see whether most of the benefits of the inter-
diction campaign can be achieved by a Laos-SVN barrier or
by a bombing program which is limited to the Laos-SVN
porder areas of North Vietnam, to Laos and/or to South
Vietnam (and, if so, transition the interdiction program
in that direction). The objective here is to find a way
to maintain a ceiling on potential communist military
activity in the South with the least political cost and
with the least interference with North Vietnam willingness
to negotiate.

McNaughton prepared a second memorandum complementing and
partially modifying the one on bombing. It concerned the context for
the decision. Opening with a paragraph which warned, "We...have in
Vietnam the ingredients of an enormous miscalculation," it sketched the
dark outlines of the Vietnamese scene:

..ethe ARVN is tired, passive and accommodation-
prone....The PAVN/VC are effectively matching our deploy-
ments....The bombing of the North...may or may not be
able effectively to interdict infiltration (partly
because the PAVN/VC can simply refuse to do battle if
supplies are short)....Pacification is stalled despite
efforts and hopes. The GVN political infrastructure
is moribund and weaker than the VC infrastructure among
most of the rural population....South Vietnam is near
the edge of serious inflation and economic chaos. 51/

: The situation might alter for the better, McNaughton con-
ceded. “Attrition -- save Chinese intervention -- may push the DRV
‘against the stops' by the end of 1966." Recent RAND motivation and
morale studies showed VC spirit flagging and their grip on the peasantry
growing looser. "The Ky government is coming along, not delivering its
promised 'revolution' but making progress slowly and gaining experience
and stature each week." Though McNaughton termed it "doubtful that
a meaningful ceiling can be put on infiltration,” he said "there is
no doubt that the cost of infiltration can...be made very high and
that the flow of supplies can be reduced substantially below what it
would otherwise be." Possibly bombing, combined with other pressures,
could bring the DRV to consider terms after "a period of months, not
of days or even weeks."

The central point of McNaughton's memorandum, following
from its opening warning, was that the United States, too, should consider
coming to terms. He wrote:

ia TOP SECRET - Sensitive
