Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

masses became more deep seeded and many individuals who formerly
supported the enemy now opposed them. The masses, that is to say,
the peasants, now realized that it was impossible to live under such
conditions and that it was necessary to rise up in drastic struggle.
Faced with the fact that the enemy was using guns, assassinations
and imprisonment to oppose the people in their political struggle,
many voices among the masses appealed to the Party to establish a
program of armed resistance against the enemy. Within the Party, on
the one hand, the members were saturated with the responsibility to
lead the revolution to a successful overthrow of the enemy, but on
the other hand, the majority of the party members and cadres felt
that it was necessary to immediately launch an armed struggle in order
to preserve the movement and protect the forces. In several areas
the party members on their own initiative had organized armed strug-
gle against the enemy.

"Since the end of 1958, particularly after the Phu Loi Massacre,”
the situation truly ripened for an armed movement against the enemy.
‘But the leadership of the Nam Bo Regional Committee” at that time
still hesitated for many reasons, but the principal reason was the
fear of violating the party line....

"Up to 1959, in South Vietnam, the Americans-Diemists had fully
constructed a large army, equipped with modern weapons, along with a
large and well armed administrative, police and security apparatus.
During the years in which the masses were only using political struggle,
the Americans-Diemists used the military, security and administrative
apparatus to launch various. campaigns to terrorize, mop up and oppress
the movement, no different from during the period of warfare. Because
they were determined to crush the revolution and control the people
at every moment, they could not avoid using every type of repression.

"In opposing such an enemy, simple political struggle was not possi-
ble. It was necessary to use additional armed struggle, but not merely
low level armed struggle, such as only armed propaganda, which was used
to support the political struggle. The enemy would not allow us any
peace, and in the face of the enemy operations and destructive pursuit,
the armed propaganda teams, even if they wished to avoid losses, would
never be able to engage the enemy in warfare and would never be able to
become an actual revolutionary army. This is an essential fact of the
movement and the actual movement in South Vietnam illustrates this fact.
Therefore, at the end of 1959, when we launched an additional armed
struggle in coordination with the political struggle against the enemy,
it immediately took the form in South Vietnam of revolutionary warfare,
a long range revolutionary warfare. Therefore, according to some
opinions at the beginning of 1959, we only used heavy armed propaganda
and later developed "regional guerrillas...."

* The alleged food-poisoning of "six thousand former resistance fighters and
fighters for peace and national reunification" at the political re-
education center at Phu Loi, 33 km. north of Saigon, December 1, 1958; Cf.,
New Facts Phu Loi Mass Murder in South Vietnam (1959: Hanoi, Foreign ~~
Languages Publishing House).

** The regional headquarters for Cochinchina. ;
53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
