Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SUMMARY

The first half of 1964 saw the unfolding of an intensive debate and
planning effort within the Johnson Administration concerning the desira-
bility, limitations, and risks of mounting major military pressures
against North Vietnam. Actual U.S. involvement in SEA increased only
slightly during this period.

The single notable element of actual increased U.S. involvement
during this period was a program of covert GVN operations, designed to
impose "progressively escalating pressure" upon the North, and initiated
on @ small and essentially ineffective scale in February. The active
U.S. role in the few covert operations that were carried out was limited
essentially to planning, equipping, and training of the GVN forces in-
volved, but U.S. responsibility for the launching and conduct of these
activities was unequivocal and carried with it an implicit symbolic and
psychological intensification of the U.S. commitment. A firebreak had
been crossed,;andy the U.S. had embarked on a program that was recognized
as holding little promise of achieving its stated objectives, at least
in its early stages. Thus, a demand for more was stimulated and an
expectation of more was aroused.

The demands came -~ mostly from U.S. officials in Saigon and
Washington and mostly because of the felt need to do something about a
deteriorating situation in SVN -- to increase the intensity of the covert
operations and to change from covert to overt action. The Khanh govern-
ment, it should be noted, opposed these demands on the grounds that it
would expose the vulnerable GVN to greater pressures from the enemy.

With each successive "crisis" -- recognition of insufficient intelligence
on the nature and scope of the infiltration (December through May),
realization of dramatic communist gains in SVN (February), threats of
major communist advances in Laos (late May) -- the demands were redoubled
and intensified. The basic assumption underlying these demands was that ~
the DRV, faced with the credible prospect of losing its industrial and
economic base through direct attack, would halt its support of the in-
surgencies in Lacs and South Vietnam.

Beginning in early February, a series of valuable studies and
planning exercises were undertaken, with participation of all national
security agencies, to examine the whole panoply of problems -- objectives,
options, effects, costs, and risks -- of mounting overt coercive pressures
against the North. The planning effort served to develop consensus on
some issues, including the recognition that pinitive action in the North
would be, at best, complementary to successful counterinsurgency in the
South. It also surfaced significant differences among the participants
in the planning effort and in the broader debate that ensued, in their
respective approaches to "pressure planning" as well as in the substan-
tive content of their recommendations. Thus, the JCS viewed the planning
task as preparation of an action program for near-term implementation, and

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

>
