“3b.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

EVOLUTION OF THE WAR
KENNEDY PROGRAM AND COMMITMENTS: 1961

IV.B.1. CHAPTER I

I. INTRODUCTION

In the summer of 1959, it was hard to find an American official
worried about Vietnam. This was not because things were going well.
They were not. A National Intelligence Estimate published in August por-
trayed Diem as unpopular, his economy as developing less rapidly than its
rival in the North, and his government under pressure from guerrillas
encouraged and in part supported from the North. Nevertheless, the NIE
suggested no crisis then or for the foreseeable future. What the NIE
called "harassment" (i.e., support for the VC) from the North would con-
tinue, but overt invasion seemed most unlikely. Neither communist nor
anti-communist enemies within South Vietnam were seen as an immediate threat,
Diem would remain as President, said the NIE, "formany years.” In sum, the
NIE saw the situation in Vietnam as unhappy, but not unstable. That was to
be about as close to good news as we would hear fron South Vietnam for a
long time. 1/

From then on, the classified record through the end of 1961 shows
a succession of bleak appraisals of the regime's support in the cities,
and among the military, almost always accompanied by increasingly bleak
estimates of increased VC strength and activity in the countryside. A dis-
patch from our Embassy in Saigon in March, 1960, described the situation in
grave terms, but ended on the hopeful note that as of January Diem was
recognizing his problems and promising to do something about them. 2/ In
August, an NIE analysis reported a “marked deterioration since January." 3/
In November, a military coup barely failed to overthrow Diem.

In January, 1961 an old counterinsurgency hand, General Edward
Lansdale, went to Vietnam to look things over for the Secretary of Defense.
He returned with a report that "the Viet Cong hope to win back Vietnam
south of the 17th parallel this year, if at all possible, and are much fur-
ther along towards accomplishing this goal than I had realized from reading
the reports received in Washington." }/

Nevertheless, the situation was never seen as nearly So grave as
these reports, read years later, might suggest. We will see that at least
up until the fall of 1961, while appraisals of the situation sometimes
suggested imminent crisis, the recommendations made to the President (by the
authors of these frightening appraisals) always implied a less pessimistic
view.

The top levels of the Kennedy Administration dealt only intermit-
tently with the problem of Vietnam during 1961. There was a flurry of

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
