Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

time and energies of the Principles in early June. On June 5, the
four-day Arab-Israeli War erupted to dominate all other problems during
that week. The intensive diplomatic activity at the UN by the U.S.

would heavily engage the President's attention and eventually lead to

the Summit meeting with Soviet Premier Kosygin in Glassboro, N.J. later

in the month. In the actual war in Vietnam, the one-day truce on

Buddha's birthday, May 23rd, had produced such gross enemy violations

that some intensification of the conflict ensued afterwards. Never-
theless in late May, Admiral Sharp was informed of the reimposition

of the 10-mile prohibited zone around Hanoi. His response was predictable:

We have repeatedly sought to obtain authority for a
systematic air campaign directed against carefully selected
targets whose destruction and constant disruption would
steadily increase the pressure on Hanoi. It seems unfor-
tunate that just when the pressure is increasing by virtue
of such an air campaign, and the weather is optimum over
northern NVN, we must back off. 155/

On June 11, however, the Kep airfield was struck for the first time
with ten MiGs reportedly destroyed or damaged. Prior to that, on

June 2, an unfortunate case of bad aiming had resulted in a Soviet ship,
the Turkestan, being struck by cannon fire from a U.S. plane trying to
silence a North Vietnamese AAA battery. The Soviets lodged a vigorous
protest with the U.S., but we initially denied the allegation only to
acknowledge the accident later (on June 20 to be exact just three days
before the Glassboro meeting and presumably to improve its atmosphere).

In Washington, in addition to the time consuming Middle
Fast crisis, Administration officials were still far from consensus on
the question of whether to add another major increment to U.S. ground
forces in South Vietnam and to call up the reserves to reconstitute
depleted forces at home and elsewhere. Indeed, as we shall see, it
appears that the troop question went unresolved longer than the air
strategy problem. The issues must have been discussed in a general
review of the Vietnam question at a meeting at State on June 8 in
Katzenbach's office, but no record of the discussion was preserved. A
two-page outline of positions entitled "Disagreements" and preserved
in MeNaughton's files does, however, give a very good idea of where
the principle Presidential advisers stood on the major issues at that

point:
DISAGREEMENTS

1. Westmoreland-McNamara on whether Course A would
end the war sooner.

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
