Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

- Phe winding up of the Indochina war is a necessary
condition to enable France to check both these trends and
reassume a more confident and positive role on the continent.

le. The lack of success so far in Indochina is traceable
largely to French, failure:

a. by timely grants of sovereignty and impressive
military success, to win a sufficient native support to
permit more rapid development of larger and more effective
native armies, and to frustrate nationalist appeal of the
Viet Minh. :

b. to plan and execute aggressive military operations.

5. The present French government is the first in seven
years which seems prepared to do what needs to be done to wind
fup the war in Indochina. Its plans offer the United States at
| last an opportunity to attack the major Indochinese and
Metropolitan French problems as a whole. The French Premier
has assured our representatives that his government is anxious
to continue the struggle and to press on to Win, but he can
carry through his program against political opposition only if
he offers a "package" solution, not only of Indochina but of
the related French weakness in Europe and at home. For this
purpose the new government has developed the following program:

a. Military Initiative. A new commander, General
Navarre, has taken over in Indochina and is determined to
-assume the offensive, The initial operations under his
command testify to this resolve. He has revised the plan
originally presented in outline to us by M. Letourneau in
Mareh 1953 for breaking the back of Viet Minh resistance
during the campaign season of 1954-55. His plans include
an increase in the native arnics by approximately the
following figures: 59,600 in 1953; 76,000 in 1954, and
20,000 in 1955 for a total of 331,650 by January 1956.
At his request, the French governnent is prepared, despite
popular opposition, to send nine more regular infantry
battalions plus ancillary units from France, if the rest
of. the program is agreed on. The Navarre operational
plans drawn up on Indochina were approved by Lt. Gen.
Otbaniel, USA, in his report on ais recent mission.

TOP SECRET

126.
