Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

on the same team, and that they were receiving conflicting or over-
lapping instructions from a variety of sources in Saigon and Washington.

Still, while General Taylor was Ambassador, reorganization was
not something to be pushed seriously by Washington. With Lodge back
in charge, it was.a different story. As a matter of fact, so serious
were Lodge's managerial deficiencies that even during his first tour,
when the U.S. Mission was less than 20,000 men, and the entire
civilian component under 1,000, there was talk of reorganization. In
a personal message to Lodge on May 26, 1964, the President made the
following prophetic statement:

"T have received from [Mixe7 Forrestal a direct account
of your belief that there is need for change and improve-
ment in the civilian side of the country team. We have
reached a similar conclusion here, and indeed we believe it
is essential for you to have a top-ranking officer who is
wholly acceptable to you as chief of staff for country team
operations. My own impression is that this should be either
a newly appointed civilian of wide governmental experience
and high standing, or General Westmoreland....”

This message became irrelevant when Lodge suddenly resigned in June
of 1964 to assist Governor Scranton's bid for the Republican nomination,
put it shows that the President, Lodge, and apparently other people in
Washington had deep concern with the structure of the Mission at this

early date.

By sending Taylor and Alexis Johnson -- then the State Department's
highest-ranking Foreign Service Officer -- to Saigon in July of 196},
the President in effect put off any Washington-initiated reorganiza-
tions for the length of Taylor's tour, since no one in Washington could
tell the former Chairman of the JCS how to run a mission.

Taylor organized the Mission Council -- not a new invention, but a
formalization of the country team into a body which met once a week,
with agendas, minutes, and records of decisions. Taylor was particularly
concerned that the Mission Council should have a “satisfactory meshing
with...counterpart activities on the GV side." 35/ And while he was
Ambassador the U.S. made a determined effort to make the system work
without reorganization. In a letter to Elbridge Durbrow, who was once
American Ambassador in Saigon himself, Alexis Johnson described the

system:

"Max and I dropped the title 'Country Team' and set up
what we called the 'Mission Council' on a formalized basis.
In addition to Max and myself, the members were General
Westmoreland, Barry Zorthian as JUSPAO (Joint United States
Public Affairs Office -- this covered both MACV and Embassy

21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
