i 7

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

what would be involved and the benefits to be expected. This was due in
jJarge part to the fact that it was a decision made almost offhandedly in
the shadow of a larger issue, the deployment of U.S. combat forces to RVN.
When it was decided not to send the combat forces it was a foregone con-
clusion that more advisors would be sent. This was consistent with the
U.S. desire in late 1961 to demonstrate its commitment to South Vietnam
and apparently compatible with the oft-expressed belief that only the
South Vietnamese could bring their struggle to a satisfactory conclusion.

But the decision to expand the advisory effort attempted, at the
same time, to finesse the question of leverage. GVN was informed that the
U.S. expected certain reform measures to be adopted in exchange for increased
U.S. assistance. It received no clear signals about withholding U.S. help
if these actions were not taken. The U.S, had, in fact, made no decisions
along this line; it had avoided addressing the issue because of conflicting
desires to act forcefully, yet to avoid Americanizing the war. Thus, the
U.S. did not know what it would do if GVN feiled to respond as it was hoped
that it would. In this sense the U.S, advisors became potential pawns in
a leverage game of uncertain intensity with no set rules. This de facto
position was in continuous potential conflict with the expressed hope that
a greater U.S. presence would lead -~ by example, persuasion, and mutual
interest -- to increased effectiveness both within ARVN and in the political
administration of the provinces governed by U.S.~advised ARVN officers,

Not only did the Kennedy Administration decide to enter in General
Taylor's "limited partnership" without a careful examination of the
relationships being established, it also apparently did not state or
debate precisely what benefits were expected as a result of an increased
advisory effort. There was, it appears, a generalized and unchallenged
assumption that more Americans in more places addressing Vietnamese training
and operations could not but have an overall beneficial effect. The avail-
able record reflects no explicit discussion of expected benefits. While
oral discussions must have addressed this point at some time, it seems most
likely that policymakers agreed tacitly on three overlapping categories
of expectations -~ each susceptible to varying interpretations and degrees
of relative importance and emphasis -- which were neither clearly stated
nor critically examined.

The first, and most obvious, was the expectation that an increased
U.S. military presence with tactical units and at training centers would
lead to improved technical-tactical competence within ARVN. The assumption
which underlay this expectation was that the teaching of basic military
skills was probably a sufficient (rather than merely necessary) condition
to enable ARVN to begin to operate more effectively -- and more energetically
and aggressively. Earlier experience in Greece and Korea would have seemed
to validate this expectation within reasonable limits.

Second, U.S. policymakers probably expected the increased military
advisory effort to result in a more effective informational "network." .

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
