Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a. Reexamination on a week-by-week basis of the desir-
ability of further deployments as the situation develops;

b. Improved political performance by the GVN and
increased contribution in effective military action by the
ARVN;

ec. The results of a study in depth, to be initiated
immediately, of possible new political and strategic guidance
for the conduct of US operations in South Vietnam, and of our
Vietnamese policy in the context of our world-wide politico-
military strategy...

5. No new peace initiative on Vietnam. Re-statement of our terms
for peace and certain limited diplomatic actions to dramatize Laos
and to focus attention on the total threat to Southeast Asia....

6. A general decision on bombing policy, not excluding future
change, but adequate to form a basis for discussion with the Congress
on this key aspect. Here your advisers are divided:

@. General Wheeler and others would advocate a substantial -
extension of targets and authority in and near Hanoi and Haiphong,
mining of Haiphong, and naval gunfire up to a Chinese Buffer
Zone;

b. Others would advocate a seasonal step-up through the
spring, but without these added elements. 66/

In proposing this course of action, the Secretary of Defense indicated
that he recognized that there were many negative factors and certain
difficulties. Nevertheless, he indicated the belief that this course of
action, at least in its essential outline, was urgently required to meet
the immediate situation in Vietnam, as well as wider possible contingencies
there and elsewhere.

Eight tabs to the draft memorandum elaborated upon the reasoning
which led to the recommendations contained therein. TAB A reviewed the
justification for immediately sending additional forces to Vietnam.
‘The situation in SVN was analyzed as follows:

Hanoi has made a basic change in its strategy and scale of
operations. Perhaps because they thought they were losing as the
war and pacification were going, Hanoi is pressing hard for

i decisive results over the next few months. They are committing
a high proportion of their assets, although it appears likely that
they would retain poth the capability and will to keep up the
pressure next year if this effort does not succeed. There is hope
that, if this year's effort could be thwarted, Hanoi and Viet Cong
morale would be sufficiently affeoted to open up possibilities of
peace, ‘but this cannot be assessed as likely.

53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
