Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

patrol boat bases were also hit, but no attempt was made to destroy base
facilities, and the entire operation was a unilateral U.S. action.

Publicly, the Tonkin strikes had been depicted as a “positive
reply” -- one which was “limited but fitting" -- to an unprovoked attack
on US vessels operating within their rights on the high seas. The
“one-shot” nature of the strikes was stressed, and it was explicitly
stated that, provided there were no further enemy attacks, the US con-
sidered the incident closed. Together with declarations that the US
strikes were not intended to expand or escalate the guerrilla war in
Southeast Asia, this tended to make the strikes appear as an isolated
action, bearing only incidental relationship to the war itself. The war
continued to be officially pictured as one being fought by the South
Vietnamese, with the US in a strictly limited supporting role. It is true
that stiff warnings were sent to Hanoi through discrete diplomatic
channels (ICC Commissioner Seaborne's August visit), stressing that US
patience Was wearing thin and that the DRV could exvect to suffer the
consequences if it persisted in its aggressive course, but U.S. public
statements made it clear that the strikés were not intended to change
the basic ground rules of the conflict at that time. The strikes were
intended primarily to demonstrate that North Vietnam could not flagrantly
attack U.S. forces with impunity; but nothing was said publicly to imply
that the North could not continue its activities in the South without
fear that its own territory would be placed in jeopardy.

By contrast with the Tonkin strikes, the February 1965 raids,
while also initiated as reprisals, were intended to be exvlicitly linked
with the "larger pattern of aggression" by North Vietnam, and were
designed to signal a change in the ground rules of the conflict in the
South. By retaliating against North Vietnam for a VC incident in the
South, the US consciously made its first open break with self-imposed
ground rules which had permitted the North to direct and support the war
in the South, but which had precluded direct US countermeasures against
the North's territory. The strikes thus were to serve clear notice upon
all concerned that the US would not abide by such rules in the future.

But the change in ground rules also posed serious public infor-
mation and stage managing problems for the President. Until the February
raids, and especially throughout the election campaign of 1964, the case
had regularly been made that the insurrection in the South was essentially
a home-grown affair and largely self-supporting; now the argument had to
be turned around and public opinion persuaded that there really wouldn't
be much difficulty cleaning uo the South if infiltrators from the North
would just go home and "leave their neighbors alone.”

In the White House press release immediately following the re-
prisal, therefore, major emphasis was placed on Hanoi's role in the South;

-..these attacks were only made possible by the continuing
infiltration of personnel and equipment from North Vietnam, This

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
