Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

earned their confidence and respect. He was clearly viewed as a moderating
element who could be counted on (as Chou put it) to influence the U.S.
away from rash actions such as might subvert the Conference. Eden's
conduct, therefore, served as a barometer to the Communists of the pros-
pects for Western agreement to a settlement. When the British agreed to
participate in five-power military staff talks in Washington (3-9 June),
and when Eden and Churchill flew to Washington in late June for talks
with Dulles and Eisenhower, the communists may have believed that the
U.K. was undergoing some kind of reassessment of its attitude toward U.S.
proposals for a Southeast Asia coalition. The implicit warning of U.K.
participation in a "united action" approach which it had previously
rebuffed, whether or not the actual intention of the British leaders,
could not have been missed in Moscow and Peking.

2. U.S. Pushes for a Regional Pact

#. Communists Appear Intransigent

By mid-June there seemed to be little reason to expect that
the Geneva Conference, even if it reconvened in July, would see any
significant breakthroughs from the communist side. Inasmuch as the
French had decided, under a new government committed to a settlement by
20 July, to continue their "underground" military discussions with the
Viet Minh, U.S. diplomatic efforts concentrated on pushing the British
to agree to a treaty system for Southeast Asia that would, in effect,
guarantee the security of those areas left in non-communist hands fol-
lowing a settlement. On 14 June, Dulles observed that events at Geneva
apparently had "been such as to satisfy the British insistence that they
did not want to discuss collective action until either Geneva was over
or at least the results of Geneva were known." Dulles assumed that ‘the
departure of Eden was "evidence that there was no adequate reason for
further delaying collective talks on Southeast Asia defense." h/

b. French Increasingly Interested in Partition

While plans were being laid to press ahead with a regional
coalition, important developments occurred at the Conference. Partition,
which the communist side had introduced in late May as a compromise
formula, was being given serious attention by the French. Informed of
this by Smith, Dulles reiterated the view that the U.S, could not possibly
associate itself with a sell-out of the Delta any more than we could be
expected (as Jean Chauvel had urged) to "sell" partition to the non-
communist Vietnamese. 5

-¢@. Two New Factors Enhance Partition
Two qualifications to the partition concept cropped up in

the same period. A five-power military staff conference in Washington
(U.S., U.K., France, Australia, and New Zealand) had ended 9 June with

A-3) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
