Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

bombing would strengthen Hanoi's will. He quoted Consul General Rice
of Hong Kong when he said that there was very little chance that by
bombing we could reach the critical level of pain in North Vietnam
and that "below that level pain only increases the will to fight." 31/
Robert Thompson had also been quoted as saying, when he was here in
late April, that our bombing, particularly in the Red River Basin area
was "unifying North Vietnam." The old argument that bombing in the
northern area was necessary to maintain the morale of the South Viet-
namese or American fighting men was discounted. Although General
Westmoreland had fully supported attacks against targets in the Hanoi/
Haiphong areas and had said during his visit here in late April that
he was "frankly dismayed at even the thought of stopping the bombing
program," his basic requirements had continued to be requests for
attacks on what he called the extended battle zone near the DMZ. 32/

McNaughton's closing paragraphs in this memorandum indicate that
he was not only interested in trying to develop a better fit between
bombing operations in the North and ground operations in the South, but
that he was also clearing the way for getting Hanoi to change its posi-
tion on negotiations. He noted that to optimize the chances of a
favorable Hanoi reaction to an American restriction of the bombing the
scenario should be:

...t0 inform the Soviets quietly (on May 15) that
within a few (5) days the policy would be implemented,
stating no time limits and making no promise not to
return to the Red River basin to attack targets which
dJater acquired military importance, and then...to make
an unhuckstered shift as predicted on May 20. We would
expect Moscow to pass the May 15 information on to Hanoi,
perhaps (but probably not) urging Hanoi’ to seize the
opportunity to de-escalate the war by talks or otherwise.
Hanoi, not having been asked a question by us and having
no ultimatum-like time limit, might be in a better posture
to react favorably than has been the case in the past.
Nevertheless, no favorable response from Hanoi should be
expected, and the change in policy is not based on any

such expectation. 33/

This policy, he recommended, should then publicly be handled by
explaining (1) thet, as always, we had said the war must be won in the
south; (2) that we had never believed that the bombing of the war would
produce a settlement by breaking Hanoi's will or by shutting off the
flow of supplies; (3) that the north must pay the price for its infil-
tration; and (4) that since the major military targets in the north
had been destroyed we were now concentrating on the narrow neck through
which supplies must flow, sincerely believing that concentrated effort
there as compared with dispersed effort throughout NVN would increase

138 TOP SECRET - Sénsitive
