Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

do not convince you, read Hanoi's own pronouncements over the years, the
eyewitness accounts of the tons of weapons found just in recent months,
the personal interrogation of a typical infiltrated Viet Cong by Seymour
Topping in Sunday's New York Times, or the recent accounts by the French-
man, George Chafiard, who concluded that the so-called National Liberation
Front was a classic example of the type of Communist organization used to
take over another coufitry. :

"In short, North Viet-Nam has been from the start, quite proudly
and unashsmedly, what President Johnson has called the heartbeat of the
Viet Cong. As in Greece, the Viet Cong have won control of major areas
of the country, playing in part on propaganda and the undoubted weak-
nesses of Diem and his successors, but relying basically on massive intimi-
dation of civilians. Over the years, the rate of civilian casualties--
deliberate action casualties, killed, wounded and kidnaped-~has been about
4O a day in South Viet-lNem; civilien officials have been particular targets,
with the obvious aim of crippling the government structure."

* «
\

"T come now to the choice of methods. Till 1961 President Eisenhower
and President Kennedy limited our help to a massive economic effort and to
the supply of military equipment under the terms of the Geneva accords.
When, after 2 years of intensified effort from the North, the situation
had become serious in lete 1961, President Kennedy made the decision to
send thousands of our military men for advisory and other roles short of
the commitment of combat units. President Johnson intensified this effort
in every possible way and only in February of this year took the further
decision, urged by the South Vietnamese themselves, to do what would have
been justified all along--and had never been excluded--engage in highly
selective and measured military bombing of the North itself, still coupled
with every possible effort to assist in the South in the struggle which
only the South Vietnamese can win there."

<< ) 9e

‘
33. Address by President Johnson in Chicago, Illinois on June 3, 1965,
The Peace of Mankind,“ Department of State Bulletin, June 21, 1965,
D- iis ts

ck. %

"In the 1930's we made our fate not by what we did but what we -
Americans failed to do. We propelled ourselves and all mankind toward
tragedy, not by decisiveness but by vacillation, not by determination
and resolution but by hesitancy and irresolution, not by action but by
inaction.

~D-48 . .
