Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Nonetheless, these authors point out that if the U.S. found it advan-
tageous to set aside its repugnance to Tito's communism in the interest
of stemming Russian expansion in Europe, it should have been willing
to accommodate Ho Chi Minh's communism for similar ends in Asia. This
eritique generally ends with the accusation that the U.S. purpose in
Southeast Asia is simply and solely to stop communism. (Tab 1)

An examination of Ho Chi Minh's political development through 1950
may provide a basis to narrow the range of speculation concerning Ho
and U.S. policy. From such a review, it is evident that the man who in
1945 became President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam was a mature,
extraordinarily dedicated revolutionary who had undergone severe hard-
ships serving the cause of Vietnam's freedom from France. Fifty-five
years of age in 1945, he had been a communist for twenty-five years --
one of the founding members of the French Communist Party -- and a Con-
intern agent in Asia for fifteen years before World War II. He was
originally of Nghe-An, a province traditionally a spawning ground of
revolutionists; of a father imprisoned by the French for nationalist
activism; and of a Hue school known for radical nationalism among its
students. Exiled fron Vietnam from 1910 to 19}0, imprisoned in Hong.
Kong and in China, deprived of home, family, fame, fortune and companion-
ship outside the Comintern's conspiratorial circles, he apparently devoted
himself selflessly all those years to revolution in Vietnam. Ruth Fischer,
a well-known German former communist who knew Ho during this period, has
written, "It was Ho Chi Minh's nationalism which impressed us European
Communists born and bred in a rather grey kind of abstract internationalism."

For Ho, now back in Asia, World War II opened new avenues to the
attainment of his life-long goals. France discredited itself in Vietnam
through Vichy's collaboration with the Japanese, and then in 1945 was
toppled from power altogether by Japanese arms. In the meantime, Ho had
built the Viet Minh into the only Vietnam-wide political organization
capable of effective resistance to either the Japanese or the French.

Ho was the only Vietnamese wartime leader with a national following, and
he assured himself wider fealty among the Vietnamese people when in
August-September, 1945, he overthrew the Japanese, obtained the abdica-
tion of Bao Dai, established the DRV, and staged receptions for in-coming
allied occupation forces --in which the DRV acted as the incumbent Viet~-
namese government. For a few weeks in September 1945, Vietnam was -- for
the first and only time in its modern history -- free of foreign domin-
ation, and united from north to south under Ho Chi Minh.

Ho Sa the focus of the nationalist fervor evoked by these and
subsequent events. leaders of the rival Vietnamese Nationalist Party
(VN@DD) and the Revolutionary league (Dong Minh Hoi), although admitted
to the DRV government, commanded no grass-roots organizations, and since
they were closely associated with the Chinese Nationalists, shared in

c-2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
