ACTIONS

i. Rexoye restrictions on eir campaign sgeinst
eli militerily eizgnificest tergets In NvH

(HOLLIS teumueR).

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

é. Mine NVM deep eater ports.

3. Mine dnlend veterveys end estuerfes in EVN

north of 20° By.

h, Soctend neval curfate operations (SEA DRAGOH).

5- Use US SAMs (TALOS) from anipa sesicst

conbe* eircraft.

6. Increase efs tnterdtetion tn Leos and slong

EVI borders.

J. Zifvinete operations! restrictions of 3-526
with regard to Lacs.

8. “Depatd operators is

ve)

» Enpars ‘operaiiens ss

3. Expect aid recrie
(motaer (¢))-

Taos (PRATRIZ FIRE).

Sasbodla.

nya Gover prograss

a APPEL

SUSLRY OF ACTIONS WITKIN PRESENT GUIDELINES WHICH Cot

SPECIFIC ACTIONS

Eliminete Haiphong and Honol prohibited areas.

Reduce Hanol and Hefphong restricted areas to .
the city proper.

Heduce CPA Buffer Zone to 10 miles.

Conduct unrestricted attacks ngeinst 160, rai2
dines, rouds up to five miles from Crk border.
Authorize CINGPAC strike and restrike preresetive
for wil tergots outside of redefined restricted

arees.

Permit JCS to authorize strikes sgainst tergets in
the recefined restricted sreas on a case-by-case
besis (to include Hsiphong port).

Establish, replenish as required, mine Tieids in
a&pproscnes exd hearvors et Estphong, Hon Gai enc
Cam Foe. Publish warning notice to mariners.
Aajust/extend nine fields es necessary to

-prevent bypass!ng.

Mine mouths of nevigable NV rivers. Mine navigsble
inland watervays torougaout NVN to within 5 2t of
CPR border {euthority currently limited to those
south of 20° 4}.

Conéuct ofTensive nuvel surfece force operations
egaicst (Wi ilitery/logistic wetercraft end
egeinst suitebl+e tarsets fc EVN ashore north of
20° N latitude to the redefined buffer zone

_ (SEA DRAGON operations now limited to south of 20° x).

Use sea-beced £4¢ missiles against NVN aireraf: Scth
over weter end in, airspace over IVI.

SelecSive bombing of Lactian vetervars traff'tec (SEXCNS).
Fsteblish special sacuretios bexbing interdtetien air-
strike toces in Taos, e.g., northwest of DMZ, Nape

end Mu Gie Pesses.

Gverfligat of Lacs, by day and ntgnt, by B-S2s an route
to or from targets in Vietnam or Lacs.

Deylight bombing ettacks on Lacs. ~

Elictuate requirement for cover strikes in SV ecen
beabing tergete in Lacs.

Incresse sutnorized sles of exploitation force.

Sxpand current DASZ=R BOONE recencalasance progra=
by extending to" areas of operations for the f:tt
Leng. of she SVti/Cextodia border; autaorize ca
of selicoptars; resove Dicttattens on curcer of
siseisrs.)

Aeatsorice SAIS SOCKS férces to eccudiiet Listte?
sabotsre/Gestriction activicy} suttorize saiitsy tf
facticel alrecrtkes cm ienasy targets near the border,

Undérwoks actions to isirwass tee eretibility of &
Sirrent nostensl rastatance sove=ent in AVR.

Inerasaé inteliicence colluction and covert Shrsetoal
dsgtruction oitestone.

TOP SECRET - Sensiti

Sean Tt ADDED PROSE of THE ENEMY

ALVARINGES.
—<—_—<_=*
Greater destruction of AVl wer-cupporting

facilittes.

Increased dectruction of efr defenzes
tneluding etrfieids.

Feduce logiewie stipport-of Nyu/VC.

More efficient use of evaileble forces.

Fevorable ispact on reductcg friendly
cesualties, particuleriy in critical .
I Corps/MZ erea.

ferwite tively reaction egeinet targets

cf opportunity.

Fedice dmport of wer-eupporting =tteriels-

Tuterdict inte-nel wetervey LOts. :
lestrcy vutertomie logistic cratt end block channels.
Fequire grest iVH sweeping effort.

Reduce FOL end other cargo distribution.

Tnterdict ccescal water truffic.
Reduce use of cand i¢t: by tarsecing gunfire.

Ineress4 dertrustion of ecesy sir forces...
Inhtelt eneoy cir operetiona.

Tnereased tnterdietton ef EOCe and reduction of
supplies te LVA/VC.

Greater sperationsl efficiency and qvicker ‘reactica
Sine for 3-52e. '

Tarunt sencturie:.
iotresces efficiency of interdletion.
tedice susplier to NVA; Ve.

supplier to Nva/To.
intelitgesnce.
o:Sere use of Cactsdte az seiietiary for TIC

viene TS witets equet=;.

wives Sivert révocrees oo isvercas secon ity.

© sanctuaries.

RISHS/ IMPACT

Charges of excateticn.

Inerepeed use of CPA cirfields for storare or
training, but not for ecrbet missions.

Inereesed CPA AAA end Engineer support in
Wh.

Soviet Union sey esnee] existing negotiations
with the US end inttteate propesancs carpeign.
Possible Sovlet actions to incrcuse teralons
in other perte of the vorlé but major cos-
froutsticas would te unlikely. TR woulé
etrengthen defensive posture are cey inercese
mititery etd tc NVR; wnlixely te intttete
offecoive wir or surface ections.

- No specific nt litery reaction free comuntsta.
Some ineressed propageand: egeinst JS action.

Possible navel and air reaction by XVW in
northern vaters. S

CPE or Soviets signt provide additional petrol
craft,

HVE air acd surface etteck possible.
USSR or CPR eight provide Vi with coast
defense =! sstles. -

.

lic irzetiate reaction other then propacande.
No Lacs reaction.

Possible political reactions.

Souvacns vould provesiy not chject if? he could
Geay the actions and gvold pabltett;.

Fessitie increased NVA forces and activities
in tees.

Cankotts would provest expacetes of speratiocs
te Cachodien soll and sight seek te defend
ite terzttcry.

Adversa youltical veasticn.

.
=!

Nvaweul* accuse tua Dsised Steses oF e<tes- tthe
SO Gricg atost toacfel* of Gevernzent of DVN.
