Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

agent provocateur until more was known about what he had said and
done while in British custody.

"Finally, Ho made contact and early in 1934 the Communist
apparatus smuggled him back to Moscow, where he had been preceded
by a fairly large group of Vietnamese trainees studying in many
fields, from engineering to plain agitprop (agitation and propa-
ganda). He naturally turned to the latter.

"Ho first attended the Institute for National and Colonial
Questions in Moscow, and then the famous 'graduate school' for
senior Communist leaders, the Lenin School. Moscow, in 1935-38,
also provided an education of a far different sort: the Stalin
purges. It would be interesting to know what Ho's feelings were
as he saw some of his best friends accused, convicted, and executed
for crimes which they patently had not committed. What is remarka-
ble is that Ho, as a well-known member of the Comintern group,
was not purged right along with them, for hundreds of thousands
of people of lesser distinction than he became victims of Stalin's
mania." 12

The record of Ho's travels in the period of 1933-1939 is otherwise obscure}
the communist movement in Vietnam was led by Tran Van Giau and others dur-
ing those years.

Ho emerged from his retreats in 1939, a difficult year. Ho, as a
disciplined communist had to follow the Party's tactical guidance, which
was intended to safeguard the Soviet Union as the base of the international
movement, even when this brought him into temporary conflict with his long
term gaale for Vietnam. Of the period just preceding World War II, Fall
has written:

",.Ho probably was then unconditionally loyal to Stalin,
and Stalin knew it. This became particularly clear when Nazism
began to loom as a threat and the Communist parties decided in
1936 to apply the policy of di eu fronts' with the Western
democracies.

"This policy was a bitter pill for the colonial Communist
governments such as that of Indochina, for it meant giving up
advocacy of outright independence in favor of a policy of coopera-
tion with the French colonial regime. But Ho, returning to Com-
munist bases in Northwest China in 1937, gritted his teeth and
rammed this line down the throat of his reluctant following in
its most minute vagaries, and his report on the results, addressed
to the Comintent in 1939, demonstrated his success.

"It was probably Ho's lowest point. He had to forswear
publicly all he had stood for, had to cooperate with the French,
the people he hated most, and had to sell out the Trotskyist

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
C-37 eat
