ey

Ln)

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Cong insurgency and the Pathet Lao and might be obliged to carry

the war to the North if DRV-assisted pressures against South Vietnam
continued. He further cautioned that U.S. stakes in resisting a

North Vietnamese victory were high, since the United States saw the
conflict in Southeast Asia as part of a geneval confrontation with
guerrilla subversion in other parts of the world, and that “in the

event of escalation the greatest devastation would of course result

for the DRVN itself." 8/ ‘

Also underway were efforts directed toward educating the American
public regarding our national interests in Southeast Asia and the
extent of the U.S. commitment there. In reporting to the President,
Administration officials who participated in the Honolulu Conference
stressed the need for a domestic information effort to "get at the
basic doubts" of the importance of the U.S. stake in Southeast Asia.
The program was to be focused both on key members of the Congress and
on the public. 9/ Thereafter, work was begun under State Department
guidance to assemble information in answer to some of the prevalent
public questions on the U.S. involvement. Of special concern was a
recent Gallup poll showing only 37 percent of the public to have some
interest in our Southeast Asian policies. Administration officials
viewed this group as consisting primarily of either those desiring our
withdrawal or those urging our striking at North Vietnam. A general
program was proposed with the avowed aims of eroding public support for
these polar positions and solidifying a large “center” behind the thrust
of current Administration policies. These aims were to be accomplished
by directing public comment into discussions of the precise alternatives
available to the United States, greater exposure to which it was believed
would alienate both "hawk" and "dove" supporters. 10/ less than a
week after this proposal was submitted, the White House published a
NSAM, naming its proponent, Robert Manning, as coordinator of all public
information activities for Southeast Asia and directing all agencies to
cooperate in furthering the Administration's information objectives. 11/
One of the principal foci of the subsequent information program was
the compilation of a public pamphlet of questions raised by critics of
Administration policy together with answers furnished and coordinated by
several interested Government agencies.

Unknown to more than a limited number of Government officials were
a variety of covert military or quasi-military operations being con-
ducted at the expense of North Vietnam. U.S. naval forces had undertaken
intermittent patrol operations in the Gulf of Tonkin designed to acquire
visual, electronic and photographic intelligence on infiltration activi-
ties and coastal navigation from North Vietram to the South. To carry
out these missions, destroyers were assigned to tracks between fixed
points and according to stipulated schedules. Designated DE SOTO Patrols,
the first such operation of 1964 occurred during the period 28 February-
10 March. On this patrol the U.S.S. Craig was authorized to approach
to within 4 n.m. of the North Vietnamese mainland, 15 n.m. of the Chinese
mainland and 12 n.m. of Chinese-held islands. Wo incidents were reported

e TOP SECRET - Sensitive
