Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The situation in the Hop Tac area will not collapse if
Hop Tac is not revitalized now. With the available forces, and
particularly with the impending arrival of the lst Infantry ~
Division to take up a position across the southern are of Zone D,
Saigon itself is not going to be threatened any more than it
presently is. The threat -- which is substantial -- comes from
the enemy within, and the solution does not lie within the re-
sponsibility of the Hop Tac Council: it is a problem for the
Saigon police and intelligence communities. This threat, serious
as it is, is not directly affected by the presence of the Viet
Cong's 506th battelion 20 miles away in Hau Nghia, nor by Zone D.
The two problems can be dealt with separately, and solution of
the internal security problems of Saigon are not contingent on
the success of clearing Hau Nghia and Long An." 12/

In an effort to reconcile these opposing views about Hop Tac, Lodge
told the September 15 Mission Council that “the original reasons for the
emphasis placed on the erea surrounding Saigon...were still valid, pri-
marily because of the heavy density of population. Lodge noted, however,
lack of a clear commitment to Hop Tac on the part of the GVN, possibly
due to the fact that the Vietnamese consider the program an American
scheme. The view was also expressed that the trouble may also lie in
uS/GVYN differences over some fundamental concepts in Hop Tac. Finally,
Ambassador Lodge said it was essential that all interested American
agencies be agreed on concepts and tactics before an approach to the GVN
could be made." 13/ After this meeting, no significant action was taken,
and the matter lapsed. :

The importance of Hop Tac is still difficult to assess; it is in-
cluded here primarily because of its role as the one major pacification
program that was tried during the 1964-1965 period when pacification
was not receiving its present top-level emphasis. Whether or not it
averted a seige of Saigon, as General Westmoreland claimed, is a seman-
tic question: what constitutes a seige in a guerrilla war? Saigon, of
course, never was under seige in the classic sense of the word, but it
is hard to conceive of it ever being literally cut off as Dien Bien Phu
or Makefing were -- this would not be a logical objective to the Viet
Cong, who wanted to put pressure on the capitel but knew they couldn't
seal it off (nor would have wanted to, since they got supplies from it).

What is important is that the failures of Hop Tac were never ade-
quately reported and analyzed prior to embarking on other pacification
efforts. Thus, a% one point General Westmoreland told each of his Senior
Corps Advisors to start a Hop Tac in his area -- a strange request sirice
Hop Tac was designed to pull together a multiplicity of commands not
duplicated in any other area. Each Corps naturally responded by pro-
ducing plans which concentrated their pacification assets around the
Corps headquarters -- Da Nang, and Can Tho or, in the case of II Corps,

6 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
