Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"With American enthusiasm, the United States may wish
to speed the pace of pacification, but there will be serious
obstacles. Most of the sadder but wiser veterans of previous
programs in Vietnam seem convinced that pressure from
Washington for higher and more seductive statistical goals
is a major danger. They counsel 'slowly but surely.'

"As an example, the South Vietnamese Government is
trying to turn 23,000 rural-affairs workers, most of them
originally trained only in armed propaganda work, into
more rounded rural-construction workers.

"It then plans to recruit and train 19,000 more workers,
for a total of 42,000. In the opinion of some officials,
it will be very difficult even to reach this goal, and
any great expansion carries a risk of substituting numbers
for real training.

"The present pacification plan is considered imagina-
tive and sound by experts with long experience in Vietnam,
but it is considered certain that the plan could be improved
at Honolulu.

"Experience has shown that the crucial matter in
Vietnam is always execution rather than planning. The
scarcest resources in the country are manpower and leader-
ship.

"Tt is generally agreed that it would not be enough,
say, for the United States to offer help in improving
agriculture in the South Vietnamese countryside. The
Americans must also consider, it is felt, whether their
suggested plan is one that the South Vietnamese understand
and actually -- rather than merely politely -- approve, and
whether the badly strained South Vietnamese administration
can execute the plan.

"American experts in Saigon also assert that the highly
ideological Vietcong movement cannot be offset merely by
offers of a "better life' for the peasants.

"The Vietcong have a loyal, dedicated and highly dis-
eiplined underground political structure that operates in
the heart of Saigon itself and in thousands of hamlets.

So far the peasants have shown little inclination to inform
on this structure and to help the Government activity.

"This is the central problem of the South Vietnamese

war..." 48/
Charles Mohr

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
