Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On February 17, the UK Ambassador to Washington, Lord Harlech, in- .
formed Secretary Rusk that the Soviet Foreign Office had approached the
British with the suggestion that the UK-USSR Co-Chairmanship of the
1954 Geneva Conference might be reactivated in connection with the
current Vietnam crisis. Secretary Rusk described the possibilities of _
such a gambit in a message 68/ to Ambassador Taylor as follows:

British apparently expect that next Soviet step might
be to propose a joint statement by two Co-Chairmen on bomb-
ings in North Viet-Nam as reported to Co-Chairmen by regime
in Hanoi. Interest of Soviet Government in co-chairmanship,
though not yet confirmed, might also reflect some relief for
Moscow regarding dilemma in which they may find themselves
in dealing with Hanoi, Peiping and Southeast Asia issues. It
may prove desirable for us to provide to UK and USSR full
statement of facts as we see them, US purposes in Southeast
Asia and our concept of necessary solution...We would stop
short of ourselves proposing formal systematic negotiations
but assumption of 1954 co-chairmanship by two governments
would imply that they might themselves explore with in-
terested governments possibilities of solution, which we
could encourage or otherwise as we see fit. If message is
made to two Co-Chairmen, which would be made public, it may
mean that better procedure would be to present full documen-
tation on North Viet-Namese aggression to [U.N Secretary
General/ in writing for circulation to members rather than
make oral presentation in meeting of Security Council which
might require Soviets to act as defense counsel for Hanoi.

"Obviously, this has bearing on timing of next strike.
Hope to be in touch with you within next several hours on
our further reflection on this problem. Do not believe a
Thursday [February 187 strike therefore feasible because of
this time factor and because these possibilities have not been
explored here at highest level. >

With encouragement from Rusk, the British Foreign Office showed itself
eager to pick up the Soviet hint. London proposed to make a formal ap-
proach to the Soviet Government, through UK Ambassador Trevelyan in Moscow.
Specifically, they wished to instruct the Ambassador to propose to the
Soviet Government that the Co-Chairmen of the 1954 Geneva Conference re-
quest the Governments which were members of that Conference and those
represented on the International Control Commission "to furnish the
Co-Chairmen without delay with a statement of their views on the situa-
tion in Viet-Nam and, in particular, on the circumstances in which they
eonsider that a peaceful settlement could be reached.

In a further discussion with Lord Harlech on February 19, 69/ Secre-
tary Rusk agreed to the proposed British action and.Ambassador Trevelyan
was duly instructed to approach the Soviet Foreign Office in Moscow on
February 20.

5h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
