Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the point that U.S. military assistance would be profitable, and after
seeing the futility of organizing united action, Dulles withdrew the
option (Tab 2).

As the negotiations at the conference progressed, Washington shifted
its weight away from intervention through united action and. instead con-
centrated on unifying the West into a regional military pact and creating
a united diplomatic front at the conference to obtain the best possible
settlement for the West. The implied threat of U.S. intervention, how-
ever, was allowed to remain. Throughout July of 1954, then, united action
took on a futuristic bent -- as a Free World Regional Defense Organization
(ultimately to become SEATO) to secure Iaos, Cambodia, and a "retained
Vietnam" -- after the conference completed its work. Diplomatically, the
U.S. took the initiative in forming a seven-point negotiating position
with the British, a position which was, in large part, ultimately accepted
by France. Except for a provision admitting the inescapability of a
partitioned Vietnam, the seven-point program was a maximum western position.
Yet, even as we urged our desires on France, we made clear that we would
not be able to sign, guarantee, or associate ourselves with any accord.
The U.S. role was to be passive and formal and firmly against co-signing
any document with the communists. In effect, the U.S. delegation attempted
to forward its ideas on a proper settlement to the "active negotiators"
representing western interests. The U.S. would do nothing to impair its
future flexibility with respect to Indochina. As matters turned out at
the conference, the final terms of the settlement came close to meeting
seven Anglo-American conditions (Tab 3).

DISCUSSION

III. A. Tab 1 - U.S. Pre-conference Maneuvers - January-April 1954
2 - U.S. and French on United Action, May-Mid June 195)

3 - U.S. Negotiating Position During the Conference

A-2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
