Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"oe, Procurement and other supply actions be taken now to
overcome shortages existing in certain critical items of materiel
and equipment such as munitions, helicopters, and other combat
aircraft."

Thus, for perhaps the first time in the history of American involve-
ment in Vietnam, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended against deploying
the additional forces requested by the field commander, in the absence
of other steps to reconstitute the strategic reserve. At long last, the
resources were beginning to be drawn too thin, the assets became unavail-
able, the support base too small.

Notwithstanding the recommendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the
Secretary of Defense almost immediately approved the deployment of one
brigade of the 82nd Airborne Division and one Marine regimental landing
team to South Vietnam. <A total strength of almost 10,500 was assumed
and publicly announced. - These deployments were directed by the JCS on
13 February. Airlift of the brigade from the 82nd Airborne Division, at
a strength of approximately four thousand, was to begin on 14 February
and the brigade was to close in-country not later than 26 February 1968. 4/
After coordination with CINCSTRIKE and USCONARC, the strength of this
unit was fixed at 3,702. 5/

The Marine Corps Regiment was to close in SVN not later than 26
February also. The Regiment (reinforced) less one battalion, was to be
deployed by air from California at a strength of about 3,600. One bat-
talion (reinforced) which was then embarked, was to be deployed by surface
at a strength of about 1,600. 6/

In view of the wide variation of strength associated with a Marine
Corps Regiment (reinforced), CINCPAC was directed to advise all concerned
of the identity, composition and strength of the force selected for
deployment. 7/ CINCPAC nominated the 27th Marine Regiment, which included
5247 Marine and 327 Navy personnel. Additionally, he included the deploy-
ment of a logistic support element of 389 personnel from Okinawa to reduce
the impact on the already heavily committed logistic units in I CTZ. In
addition, CINCPAC took the precautionary step of identifying, for follow-
on deployment, a sea-tail of reinforcing units totalling 1,400 personnel.
This element, scheduled to follow in April 1968, would provide the regiment
the necessary self-sustaining combat power in the event early replacement
was not provided. 8/ Thus, the total number of troops deployed or alerted
for the follow-on sea-tail numbered 11,065. 9/

The Joint Chiefs of Staff reacted almost immediately to the national
decision to deploy these forces without a concomitant reserve callup.
On 13 February 1968 they forwarded to the Secretary of Defense their
recommendations for actions‘which should be taken relative to callup of
reserves, obtaining legislation and instituting procurement actions to
provide support for these forces and to sustain their deployment. 10/

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
