Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A public controversy on the subject was touched off by an
article filed in Saigon on 15 August 1963 by David Halberstam of
the New York Times. ‘The Halberstam article said that the RVN
military situation in the Delta had deteriorated seriously over the
past year, and was getting increasingly worse. ‘The VC had been
increasing greatly in number, were in possession of more and better
arms and had larger stores of them, and their boldness to operate
in large units -- up to 600 or even 1,000 men -- had become marked.
The VC weapon losses were down, and the GVN weapon losses were up.
U.S. military men and civilian officials in the field, according
to this article, were reported to be very apprehensive of the effect
of all this upon the Strategic Hamlet Program, and the whole future
of GVN control in the Delta was in doubt. But, it was hinted strongly,
higher echelon authorities were unwilling to perceive the dangers.
"Some long-time observers are comparing official American optimism
about the Delta to the French optimism that preceded France's route
from Indochina in 1954. They warn of “high-level self-deception."

The officiel refutation of the Halberstan article, prepared

for the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chief's
by SACSA, categorically denied everything. Based upon what it termed
“the most reliable and accurate data available from both classified
and unclassified sources" the snalysis showed, in the language of
its summery, that "the military situation is improving throughout

the Republic of Vietnem, not as rapidly in the Mekong Delta as in
the North, but improving markedly none the less. The picture is
recisely the opposite of the one painted by Mr. Halberstam."15/ In the
bodyof the refutation, 13 of the principle charges in the Halberstam
article were analyzed, one~by-one, and battered by an array of
percentages, statistics presented both tabularly and in graphs, and
all of the numbers were very impressive and persuasive if taken at
face value. They showed, for instance, that the VC armed attacks and
VC initiated incidents (not armed), in mid-summer 1963 were below the
1962 average, that the average net weekly loss of GVN weapons to the
ve had fallen from 62 in 1961 to 12 in 1962 to only 6 of 1963, and
that the rate of both company-sized and battalion-sized VN attacks
had fallen markedly, in 1963 from the 1962 level.

Generalizations about how the different groups, agencies, and
echelons sided on the issue of the Vietnam situation tend to over-
simplify because however they are made, there are exceptions. Most
of the senior officers in-field in the direct line of operational
responsibility tended to accept the more optimistic interpretation.
Examples in this category would include CINCPAC (Admiral Felt),
COMUSMACV (General Harkins), Ambassador Nolting (who was soon to be
replaced, however, by Ambassador Lodge, who tended to be less
optimistic), and CIA Station Chief Richardson. Nolting and Richardson
had been charged to develop ‘a close and friendly relationship with
Diem, and this involved necessarily a special sort of sympathy for
his outlook. The lives of most senior officers charged with operating
responsibility have been pointed to giving leadership in situations

, : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
10
