Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

D. Franco-American Impasse Over Diem

Resolution of military problems within the U.S. Government
and between the U.S. and France was a fairly major accomplishment.
Political differences were not similarly resolved. To support or not
to support Ngo Dinh Diem was the issue over which France and America
split.

1. Paris: Diem Is I11-Suited for Rule

As noted above, France acquiesced in the retention of Diem
as Prime Minister in deference to U.S. insistence and French concern for
U.S. financial assistance for the FEC during the September Washington
conference. In mid-November, Mendes-France reaffirmed the 29 September
agreement but said an alternative form of government had to be considered
unless Diem implemented an energetic program within the next two months.
By December, when Mendes-France, Dulles and Eden met in Paris, the |
French Premier made it clear he thought the time had come for a change.
Iwo ways to accomplish change were suggested. Bao Dai could name a
Viceroy and give him full authority to use the powers of Chief of State
to unify the warring political factions. Tran Van Huu, Nguyen Van ‘Tam
or Dr. Phan Huy Quat were possible candidates for this job. 80/ or,
Bao Dai himself could return to Saigon and form a government with Huu as
Premier, Tam as Interior Minister, Quat in Defense. 81/

; France wanted Diem out of power for several reasons. U.S.
policymakers did not seem to fully appreciate how galling Diem's Franco-
phobia must have been, nor did the U.S. seem to understand -- or allow for --
the divisive effect Diem's militant anti-communist stance had within the
French Government. little consideration was given to charges that the
U.S. was undermining France by portraying itself as the only friend of
Vietnamese nationalism. But the U.S. could appreciate the validity of
French arguments that Diem had not been and perhaps would not be able to
unify and stabilize South Vietnam.

2. Collins: Diem Cannot Lead South Vietnam

General Collins had been skeptical about Diem from the outset;
by December he was convinced an alternative to his government should be
urgently considered. Diem's refusal to name Dr. Quat as Defense Minister
triggered Collins' recommendation. Both Collins and Colonel Lansdale had
urged Diem to accept Quat, agreeing Quat alone was strong enough to unify
the Vietnamese armed forces behind the Saigon government. On December 13,
Collins suggested five reasons for Diem's adverse decision:

(1) unwillingness to delegate control of Vietnam armed forces
to any strong man; (2) fear of Quat as potential successor;

(3) opposition of sects (who also feared a strong man in the
defense post); (4) influence of brothers Iuyen and Nhu (anxious
to neutralize the power of any potential successor); (5) desire
to retain Minh (acting defense minister; loyal to Diem) in
government. 82

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
