Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Cc. Time Runs Out

The decision to turn pacification over to MACV, with an integrated
civil-military chain of command, was announced in Saigon on May 11, 1967,
by Ambassador Elisworth Bunker. In his announcement, Bunker said that
the decision was entirely his.

But Bunker had been in Vietnam as Ambassador for less than two weeks,
and he was therefore clearly acting under strong guidance, if not orders,
from Washington. The decision to give MACV responsibility had actually
stemmed from the clear and unmistakable fact that the President now con-
sidered such a reorganization highly desirable.

Tt is not clear when the President decided this in his own mind.
The documents do not shed any light on this point, and, indeed, they
simply fail to discuss the pros and cons of the decision in the early
months of 1967, when the subject was a hot one in Washington and Saigon.
This all suggests thet whatever consideration of the issue was going on
was confined strictly to private sessions between principals, and that
the staff work previously done on a highly restricted basis was no longer
considered necessary by the principals.

Tt has been suggested that the President had been strongly in favor
of the move for months before he finally gave the go-ahead signal, and
that he was held back by the strong opposition from Lodge and Porter,
from Katzenbach, from the agencies in Washington -- and by the fact that
4t would appear to be a further "militarization" of the effort. This may
well be the case; certainly nothing in the record disproves this possibility.
But since there is no way that this study can answer the question, it must
be left undecided.

Whenever the President made his decision in his own mind, he chose
the Guam meeting as the place to discuss with a group of concerned
officials outside his own personal staff. In a private meeting on
March 20, or 21, 1967, with senior officials from Washington and Saigon,
the President indicated that he felt the time had come to turn pacifica-
tion over to MACV. The President enjoined those in the room at that
meeting not to discuss the decision with anyone until it was announced,
and he did not inform the GVN.

At the end of the Guam meeting, the President gent Komer back to
Saigon with Westmoreland and Lodge, and Komer spent a week there, work-
ing out preliminary details of the reorganization. By this time Komer
knew that he was to become Deputy to General Westmoreland, although many
details remained to be ironed out.

When Komer returned to Washington, with the preliminary plans, a

period followed during which no further action on the reorganization was
taken. In all, nearly two months went by from the President's statement

127
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
