Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in terms of direct combat action to expand the areas under
US/GVN control but also to support the GVN in its rural re-
construction program and to assist that government in the
ereation of new military units and the rehabilitation of its
depleted units as rapidly as possible. A psychological
climate must be created that will foster RVN rural recon-
struction progress. 21/

The strategic concept envisioned that during...

+--the build-up phase US-Third Country and GVN forces should
strengthen military and civilian control in present areas of
the RVN...As the foree build-up is achieved, a principal
offensive effort within the RVN of US-Third Country forces
should be to participate with the RVNAF in search and destroy
operations while assisting the RVNAF in clearing and securing
operations in support of the rural reconstruction effort. 22/

The document went on to explain that:

Friendly control of population and resources is essential
to success in countering guerrilla warfare. In this regard,
the RVN areas of major military significance are: the Saigon
area and the Mekong Delta; the coastal plain; and the central
highlands. It is imperative that the US/GVN have the support
of the people and the control of resources in those areas.
Elimination of the Viet Cong from these areas must be vig-
orously undertaken in order to provide adequate security for
the people. Of particular importance is the need for friendly
control of the main food-producing areas in order that the GV
may gain control of rice, feed the people under its control,
enable exports of rice to bolster the economy, and cause the
Viet Cong to import or to fight for food. A paramount require-
ment under this concept is the building and maintaining of a
series of secure bases and secure supporting LOCs at key
localities along the sea coast, and elsewhere as necessary,
from which offensive operations can be launched and sustained,
with the subsequent enlargement and expansion of the secure
areas. 23

Assistant Secretary McNaughton, in a memorandwn for Secretary
McNamara, gave the following evaluation of the JCS plan. "The concept
includes certain generalized courses of action about which there would
be little or no dispute and a number of other courses that are clearly
controversial and raise far-reaching policy issues (e.g., blockade and
mining of DRV, U.S. build-up in Thailand, intensified RT)." He recon-
mended that since "an overall approval...is not required at this time...
the concept proposed not be specifically approved.” ak/ Acting along
these lines, Secretary McNamara agreed "that recommendations for future
operations in SEA should be formulated," but went no further. 25/

; is) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
