Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Their deliberations produced this verdict for the chief
executive:

Continued escalation of the war -- intensified bombing
of North Vietnam and increased American troop strength in
the South -- would do no good. Forget about seeking a
battlefield solution to the problem and instead intensify
efforts to seek a political solution at the negotiating
table.

The manner in which Mr. Johnson sought the advice of the
nine men before arriving at the conclusion to de-escalate the
war announced in his now famous March 31 speech, has been
pieced together from conversations with reliable sources who
asked to remain anonymous.

The nine men, Republicans and Democrats with extensive
experience in formulating foreign policy, were among those
frequently consulted by Mr. Johnson from time to time during
the war. At each consultation prior to March they had been
overwhelmingly in favor of prosecuting the war vigorously
with more men and material, with intensified bombing of
North Vietnam, with increased efforts to create a viable
government in the South.

As recently as last December they had expressed this
view to the President. The only dissenter among them --
one who had been a dissenter from the beginning -- was former
Undersecretary of State George Ball.

March 18th Meeting

The men who have come to be known to a small circle in
the government as the President's "senior informal advisory
group" convened in the White House early on the evening of
March 18th.

Present in addition to Ball were: Arthur Dean, a
Republican New York lawyer who was a Korean War negotiator
during the Eisenhower administration; Dean Acheson, former
President Truman's Secretary of State; Gen. Matthew B.
Ridgeway, the retired commander of United Nations troops in
Korea; Gen. Maxwell Taylor, former Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff; Cyrus Vance, former Deputy Defense Secretary
and a key troubleshooter for the Johnson Administration;
McGeorge Bundy, Ford Foundation President who had been special
assistant for National security affairs to Mr. Johnson and
former President Kennedy; former Treasury Secretary C. Douglas
Dillon and Gen. Omar Bradley, a leading supporter of the
President's war policies.

191 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
