Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the heaviest attacks of the 1967 air war on North Vietnam (128 missions
flown by approximately 450 aircraft). Not only was there a feeling that

the war would be longer and more intense, but the public was becoming
increasingly aware of its costs. In mid-March the House Appropriations
Committee approved a $12 billion supplemental appropriations bill and a week
later the Senate overwhelmingly approved a $20.8 billion military procure-
ment program. . The ease with which the appropriations bills were being
passed was not truly indicative of the mood of Congress which was becoming
increasingly divided about the war. The Stennis Subcommittee (Preparedness)
was carrying the military's fight for more troops. In late March Stennis
charged that "American commanders in Vietnam are not getting all the troops
they want and the bombing of the north is overly restricted." 65/ The
Pentagon reply to this was that "there had been no reduction in any program
of troop deployments previously approved by the Department of Defense." &/
Senator Symington was publicly urging wider air raids of North Vietnam to
include attack of the MIG airfields. By late March, Stennis' charges were
coming in drum-fire fashion focusing on charges that future troop deployments
to Vietnam would fall below approved levels; that urgent military appeals
for the bombing of more meaningful targets in North Vietnam were being
arbitrarily denied and that the Pentagon was responsible for a gross shortage
of ships in Vietnam. Prior to General Westmoreland's return to the U.S. in
late April, General Abrams had been named as his Deputy Commander and it
appears that indeed, despite Westmoreland's promises of victory, it would

be a long war. For early that week the infiltration/casualty figures for
the first quarter of 1967 were released, and they indicated that despite
huge Red losses of nearly 25,000 men in the first 12 weeks of that year,
nearly 4,000 more than that amount had infiltrated during the same period
and were now active in enemy units in the South. 67

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
100
