Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive =

B. Ambassador Lodge and the "True Believers”

Many senior American officials have paid varying degrees of lip
service to the pacification effort since 1962 -- a fact which makes it
extremely hard to determine who really pushed pacification and who
didn't. But about Ambassador Lodge, there can be little question. He
had repeatedly called pacification "the heart of the matter," and his
unfailing belief in the importance of the effort can be clearly shown
in his public and private statements and his cables.

His emphasis on pacification resumed the day he returned to Saigon
in August 1965, when in his arrival statement he said that the United
States supported the "true revolution" of the Vietnamese people. His
continual emphasis on the effort seems to have had a definite impact on
the mood in Washington and in the Mission, and played a role in the events
Jeading up to the Honolulu Conference in February 1966 -- where pacifica-
tion was given (or so it seemed to Americans and Vietnamese alike in
Vietnam) the President's blessing.

It is true that Ambassador Taylor also felt that pacification was
jmportant and that it would deserve high emphasis; his push on Hop Tac
clearly demonstrates this fact. But because Maxwell Taylor saw that it
was his responsibility as Ambassador to reconcile competing requirements
for limited resources, and develop a single overall strategy for the
effort, he never let pacification consume too many resources prematurely.
Lodge, on the other hand, did not see himself as an administrator or
manager of the U.S. Mission, but as the President's personal representa-
tive and advisor in Saigon. Thus, he felt no qualms about advocating a
certain course of action -- in this case, pacification. There is no
record of Ambassador Lodge worrying about the way his latest proposals
would affect the balance of the whole effort. He simply did not see him-
self as responsible for the actions of the operating agencies which
represented AID, USIA, and the CIA, let alone DOD, in Vietnam * -- not
even after receiving a strong letter of authority from President Johnson
in July of 1965: 15/

"As you take charge of the American effort in South
Vietnam, I want you to have this expression of my confidence,
and a reaffirmation of my desire that as Ambassador you exer-
cise full responsibility for the work of the United States

* See for example, Lodge's NODIS to the President, February 1, 1966, in
which he said; ."...I have learned of Zorthian's wire to Marks, which,
of course, he has the right to send, since I hold that Zorthian, like
U.S. agency chiefs here, has and should have an open channel to his
agency. It is a statement of Zorthian's opinion which, of course, was
sent without my approval or direction..." 16/ (The subject was apparently
a suggestion that Lodge address the United Nations General Assembly in
New York, although Lodge’s cable cited does not explicitly state what
Zorthian's cable said.)

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
