Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

—_,

Executive Secretariat Files, Lot 57 D-649 a a oo,

Department of State Policy Statement on Indochina, September 27, 1946

os
.

SECRET

4A. OBJECTIVES

The immediate objective of US policy in Indochina is to assist in a solution
of the present impasse which will be mutually satisfactory to the French and
the Vietnamese peoples, which will result in the termination of the present
hostilities, and which will be within the framework of US security.

Our long-term objectives are: (1) to eliminate so far as possible Communist
influence in Indochina and to see installed a self-governing nationalist state
which will be friendly to the US and which, conimensurate with the capacity
of the peoples invol.ed, will be patterned upon our conception of a democratic
state as opposed to the totalitarian state which would evolve inevitably from
Communist domination; (2) to foster the association of the peoples of Indo-
china with the western powers, particularly with France with whose customs,
language and laws they are familiar, to the end that those peoples will prefer
freely to cooperate with the western powers culturally, economically and politi-
cally; (3) to raise the standard of living so that the peoples of Indochina will be
less receptive to totalitarian influences and will have an incentive to work
productively and thus contribute to a better balanced world economy; and
(4) to prevent undue Chinese penetration and subsequent influence in Indo-
china so that the peoples of Indochina will not be hampered in their natural
developments by the pressure of an alien people and alien interests.

B. POLICY ISSUES

To attain our immediate objective, we should continue to press the French
to accommodate the basic aspirations of the Vietnamese: (1) unity of Cochin-
china, Annam, and Tonkin, (2) complete internal autonomy, and (8) the right
to choose freely regarding participation in the French Union. We have recog-
nized French sovereignty over Indochina but have maintained that such recog-
nition does not imply any commitment on our part to assist France to exert its
authority over the Indochinese peoples. Since V-J day, the majority people of
the area, the Vietnamese, have stubbornly resisted the reestablishment of French
authority, a struggle in which we have tried to maintain insofar as possible a
position of non-support of either party.

While the nationalist movement in Vietnam (Cochinchina, Annam, and Ton-
kin) is strong, and though the great majority of the Vietnamese are not funda-
mentally Communist, the most active element in the resistance of the local
peoples to the French has been a Communist group headed by Ho Chi Minh.
