Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

If we cannot save South Vietnam, the NSAM continued in a classic
statement of the "domino theory,'' all of Southeast Asia will probably
fall and all of the Western Pacific and South Asian nations will come
under increased pressure.

There were at this time several steps which the U.S. could have
taken to increase its assistance to the GVN. Carrying the war to
Hanoi was one; introducing U.S. combat forces was another. Neither
appealed much, however, in terms of helping the South Vietnamese to

win their war. Both were anathema in the midst of Presidential elec~
tion year politics. Bombing was discussed and plans laid, but no
action taken. Troop commitments were not even discussed -- at least

in the written record of proposals and decisions. Rather, a number of
palliative measures to help the GVN economy and RVNAF were adopted and
the advisory effort was expanded.

The 1964 expansion of the advisory effort consisted of the beefing~
up of the battalion advisory teams and the establishment of district
(sub-sector) teams. Thus, a new dimension of American presence was
added and the density of U.S. advisors in operational units was increased,
There is nothing in the available record to suggest either a challenge to
the old, unstated assumption that more U.S. advisors would lead to in-
creased performance or any change in the assumed expectations of UeS.
policymakers had changed. The determination remained to advise rather
than to command, to develop Vietnamese leadership rather than to supplant
it, and to induce the GVN to take the steps necessary to pacify its own
dissident elements.

ADVISORS TEMPORARILY FORGOTTEN
The expansion to district level placed U.S. military advisors
throughout almost the entire RVNAF hierarchy (from JGS to battalion,
with enough men at the lower level to advise companies on a "when
needed!'! basis) and the political hierarchy as well (sector/province
and sub~sector/district). U.S. advisors were not present in large
numbers with the old Civil Guard and Self-Defense Corps ~~ now re-
labelled the Regional Forces and Popular Forces under province and
district control respectively =~ but they advised the military men in
political positions who controlled these paramilitary forces.

Still the situation continued to deteriorate. Political insta~
bility within the GVN had by 1965 become a perennial rather than a
transitory problem. The U.S. had initiated a continuing series of
military air war measures to dissuade North Vietnam from support of
the war in the South. The results were obviously inadequate; they may
even have been opposite to those expected. Then ARVN suffered a series
of disastrous defeats late in the spring of 1965 which led knowledgeable
observers to fear an imminent GVN collapse. U.S. combat units -- a few
of which were already in-country with restrictive missions -- began to
be deployed to South Vietnam in earnest.

vi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
