Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

was "the right thing to do." Senator Long and Congressman Ford indicated
on a IV program that they didn't feel that such operations were "a par-
ticularly dangerous course" for the nation to follow and that they were
the kind of actions that could help protect our forces in South Vietnam.
Senator Morse criticized the bombings as part of the Administration's
"foreign policy of concealment in Southeast Asia." On the 19th, in the
Senate, he repeated his blasts, charging that the air strikes ignored

the 1962 Geneva Accords and violated the nation's belief in "substituting
the rule of law for the jungle law of military might." Broadening his
attack he warned that “there is no hope of avoiding a massive war in
Asia" if the U.S. policy toward Southeast Asia were to continue without
change. 22h/

b. Policy Assessments. ‘The intensifying public debate and the
events and forces which precipitated it brought about an equally search-
ing reassessment of policy within the Administration. While there is
little evidence in the available materials that shows any serious ques-
tioning of former policy decisions emong the Principals, questioning did
oceur within the agencies which they represented. It is clear that some
of the judgments and alternative approaches were discussed with these NSC
members, and presumbably, some found their way into discussions with the
President.

One very significant and probably influential viewpoint was
registered by the Saigon Embassy. In a message (TAB E) described as
the reflections of Alexis Johnson and Ambassador Taylor on which
General Westmoreland concurred, the thrust of the advice seemed to be
to move into Phase Iwo, almost in spite of the political outcome in
Saigon. After listing four possible “solutions” to the then-unsettled
GV erisis, Taylor identified either a military takeover coupled with
Huong's resignation or a successor civilian government dominated by the
military as equally the worst possible outcomes. (It is important to
note here that, depending on how one interprets the structure of the
January 27th regime, one or the other of these was in fact the case at
the beginning of the air strikes in February, 1965.) In the event of
such an outcome, Taylor argued that the United States could either
"carry on about as we are now" or "seek to disengage from the present
intimacy of relationship with the GV" while continuing "to accept re-
sponsibility for /its/ air and maritime defense...against the DRV." In
the case of disengagement, he argued, the United States could offset the
danger of South Vietnamese leaders being panicked into making a deal
with the NLF "if we were engaged in reprisal attacks or had initiated
Phase II operations against DRY." The message then summarized the three
different conditions under which the Mission officials thought Phase Two
operations could be undertaken:

"A. In association with the GVY after the latter has proved
itself as a reasonably stable government able to control
its armed forces. :

ie TOP SECRET - Sensitive
