Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(4) Centralize all rural development efforts in non-RD hamlets
under one coordinated control in some manner as is now done in
the Ministry of Revolutionary Development for RD hamlets.

(5) Construct an adequate number of processing and detention
centers in provinces and permanent prisons on islands on priority
basis together with passing of laws that it is a crime to be a
VC civilian cadre.

(6) Pay higher salaries to selected GVN officials, including the
military, particularly those officials able to control corruption
or in a position to be tempted by corruption.

(7) Reaffirm National Reconciliation and Chieu Hoi programs.
(8) Grant villages the power to enforce land rental laws.

(9) Adopt the whole of the "operation Take-off" pacification
program prepared by MACCORDS.

(10) Establish joint council procedures over expenditure of
counterpart piasters by reinstituting sign-off by US advisory
at province level.

(11) Revitalize the veteran's program.

(12) Increase receipts from domestic taxes and tariffs, and
revise monetary policies. 103/

17. The leverage Study

On August 31 State transmitted a study by Hans Heymann and Col. Volney
Warner on the subject of leverage. It reviewed the rationale for leverage
and considered a whole array of possible techniques:

«+. In anticipating the US/GVN relationship in the post-election
period, it is generally agreed that the US should find ways to
exercise leverage with the Vietnamese government which are more
commensurate in degree with the importance of the US effort to
South Vietnam's survival and which reflect the climate of grow-
ing restiveness in the US... In its impatienceto get results
and make progress, the US has increasingly resorted to uni-
dateral programs and action with inadequate consultation with
the Vietnamese. On the other hand, the indiscriminate and
careless exercise of US leverage could undermine the self-
respect of the Vietnamese government in its own eyes and in the
eyes of the South Vietnamese people.

es To be effective, US leverage mist be exercised in the context
of a relationship of mitual respect and confidence, and in ways

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
