Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

so much so that the word 'revolution' sometimes seems to have
no real meaning. Yet in fact there is plainly a deep and
strong yearning among the young and the unprivileged fora-
new and better social order. This is what the Buddhist

leaders are grcping toward; this is what the students and
young Turk generals are seeking. This yearning does not find
an adequete resfonse in American policy as Vietnamese see it.
This is one cause of latent anti-American feeling. We only
perceived this problem toward the end of our visit. We think
it needs urgent further attention. We make no present recom-
mendations. We do believe that over the long pull our military
and political firmness must be matched by our political and eco-
nomic support for the hopes that are embodied to Vietnamese in
the word 'revolution.'

Bundy harbored no illusions concerning the enemy's ability and
determination:

The prospect in Vietnam is grim. The energy and persis-
tence of the Viet Cong are astonishing. They can appear
anywhere -- and at almost any time. They have accepted extra-
ordinary losses and they come back for more. They show skill
in their sneak attacks and ferocity when cornered. Yet the
weary country does not want them to win.

There are a host of things the Vietnamese need to do :
better and areas in which we need to help them. The place
where we can help most is in the clarity and firmness of our
own commitment to whet is in fact as well as in rhetoric a
common cause. ‘

Finally, Bundy exvlained the central rationale of his recommen-
dations;

There is one grave weakness in our posture in Vietnam
which is within our own power to fix -- and that is a wide-
spread belief that we do not have the will and force and
patience an determination to take the necessary action and
stay the course.

This is the overriding reason for our present recommen-
dation of @ policy of sustained reprisal. Once such 4 policy
is put in force, we shall be able to speak in Vietnam on many
topics and in many ways, with growing force and effectiveness.

) One final word. At its very best the struggle in Vietnam

will be long. It seems to us important that this fundamental
fact be made clear and our understanding of it be made clear

34 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
