Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

14

Suggestion that our patrol was in some way connected with certain
reconnaissance and bombardment activities of South Vietnamese pa-
trol craft against North Vietnamese.

I informed members of this committee of these activities of the
South Vietnamese in an informal meeting on August 3, 1964, after the
attack on the Maddow. The subject was again raised in lesser detail in
“my testimony before this committee on August 6, 1964, I pointed out

that these raids were a lesitimate attempt by the South Vietnamese to
counter and retaliate against the systematic infiltration of their coun-
try by sea which had been carried out by North Vietnam for the previ-
ous two and a half years. I described the scope of that infiltration;
that is, 140 known incidents between July and December 1961, an esti-
mated 1,400 infiltrators having been landed in South Vietnam duwving
thaé time. : "t :

_ With respect to the legitimacy of those South Vietnamese operations,
you, Mr. Chairman, stated during the Tonkin Gulf floor debates:

The boats thet may have struck at the enastal areas of North Vietnam may
have been supplied by us. We have been helping South Vietnam arm itself. I do
not know about the specific boats. * Te Pao lane ath

I personaily think this is 2 perfectly legitimate and proper way to defend
a from the kind of aggression South Vietnam has been subjected to for

Senator Morse, at the hearing on August 6, specifically raised the
question of a connection between our patrol and the South Vietnamese
bombardment of two North Vietnamese islands which had occurred
some two and a half days prior to the attack on Maddow, and I re-
sponded that there was no connection. The two operations were sep-
arate and distinct. I informed you that our destroyers took no part
whatsoever in the South Vietnamese operation. They did not conyoy,
Support, or back up the South Vietnamese boats in any way. As I
stated during the hearings: 1

i ae Fas 1 reported to you earler this week, we understand that the South
Vietnamese sea force carried out patrol action around these islands and actually
shelled the points they feit were associated with this infiltration.

Our ships had absolutely no knowledge of it, were not connected with it; in no
Sense of the word can be considered to have backstopped the effort.

That statement remains entirely accurate. I can confirm today that
neither the ship commanders nor the embarked task group commander
had any know edge of the South Vietnamese action against the two
islands or of: any other specific South Vietnamese operations against
the North, Higher naval commands were made aware of the opera-
tions by Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam,
In order to avoid mutual interferenge or confusion between our patrols
and those operations. nes

DIRECTIONS TO U.S. DESTROYERS

Throughout the patrol conducted first by the Jf/addow alone and
later by the Maddow and the Turner J oy, the U.S. destroyers were
directed to remain in waters which would keep them from becoming
operationally involved with the South Vietnamese activity. The re-
strictions this imposed on the patrol were such that, at one time, con-
sideration was given to its abandonment. The task group commander
knew only that certain South Vietnamese naval operations were
periodically carried on in the area. He had no detailed knowledge

