Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

.

B. Hisenhower Administration

1. President Eisenhower's Remarks at Governors’ Conference, August 4

1953, Public Papers of the Presidents, 1953, p. 540:

% * ¥

"I could go on enumerating every kind of problem that comes before
us daily. Let us take, though, for example, one simple problem in the
foreign field. You have seen the war in Indochina described variously
as an outgrowth of French colonialism and its French refusal to treat
indigenous populations decently. You find it again described as a war
between the communists and the other elements in southeast Asia. But
you have a confused idea of where it is located -- Laos, or Cambodia,
or Siam, or any of the other countries that are involved. You don't
know, really, why we are so concerned with the far-off southeast corner
of Asia.

"Why is it? Now, first of all, the lest great population remaining
in Asia that has not become dominated by the Kremlin, of course, is the
sub-continent of India, including the Pakistan government. Here are
350 million people still free. Now let us assume that we lose Indochina.
If Indochina goes, several things happen right away. The Malayan penin-
sula, the last little bit of the end hanging on down there, would be
scarcely defensible -- and tin and tungsten that we so greatly value from
that area would cease coming. But all India would be outflanked. Burma
would certainly, in its weakened condition, be no defense. Now, India is
surrounded on that side by the Communist empire. Iran on its left is in
@ weakened condition. I believe I read in the paper this morning that
Mossadegh's move toward getting rid of his parliament has been supported
and’ of course he was in that move supported by the Tudeh, which is the
Comminist Party of Iran. All of that weakening position around there is
very ominous for the United States, because finally if we lost all that,
how would the free world hold the rich empire of Indonesia? So you see,
somewnere along the line, this must be blocked. It must be blocked now.
That is what the French are doing.

"So, when the United States votes $400 million to help that war,
we are not voting for a giveaway program. We are voting for the cheapest
way that we can to prevent the occurrence of something that would be of
the most terrible significance for the United States of America -- our
security, our power and ebility to get certain things we need from the
riches of the Indonesian territory, and from southeast Asia.”

Ee NGS

2, Joint Franco-American Communique, Additional United States Aid for

France and Indochina, September 30, 1: Department of State

Bulletin, October 12, 1953, p. 486:

B-4
