»)

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C. Today, with the US/FW forces available, large
scale sustained operations can be mounted within any
_ geographical area of SVN. However, with the enemy's
increasing buildup capability he has been able to
increase his combat strength in SVN to 131,200, approxi-
mately 7 combat divisions. It is estimated that he will
have a combat strength of 147,300 consisting of 181 Inf
Bns and 63 Combat Spt Bns, or approximately 10 Combat
Divisions, in country during the second quarter of CY 67.
By maximizing his training capability in NVN, the input
could be substantially increased. If the enemy adopts
this course of action, further selected increases in
US/EW strength in SVN may be required over requested
1967 force levels.

D. The CY 66 US/FW force increases will allow
tactical commanders to step up their search and destroy
and other offensive operations both in size and frequency.
This increase is necessary to turn the tide of the enemy
buildup. The estimated enemy attrition made possible by
this force increase would hold the enemy buildup to
approximately 147,300 combat strength as stated above.

If the US/FW forces continue attrition of the enemy at

the same increasing rate during the next 12 month period

as accomplished during Jan-Jul 66, the enemy combat strength
should start to decline during the second quarter CY 67.
However, if the enemy accelerates buildup in SVN to his
maximum capability, his strength probably will not start

to decline until some time in CY 68. The enemy continues

to show every inclination to continue his military efforts.

E. On the basis of the foregoing, it can be seen that
a large scale forced deferral of troop increases at this
time, while the enemy continues to build up, would be a
most imprudent course of action that could jeopardize
seriously....

toe we a

2. Part C, Ref A discusses the dangers of inflation and
refers to the RAND reports on Viet Cong prisoners. It is recog-
nized thet the political danger of inflation is a continuing
threat to the GVN and that we must use all available resources
to insure the economy is not faced with a "wildcat" rise in
prices. However, we must not at this time impose a restriction
that possibly would hamstring our military effort.

3- RAND reports are difficult to assess. The time lag in
publication and the conclusions drewn from the studies will vary.

11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘
