Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011!

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and a personal friend of Bao Dai -- (Dr. Dan later was the opposition
leader of the Diem era). Dr. Dan reported a touching conversation with
Bao Dai's mother in which she described her son at a loss to know whom
to trust, and heartsick at the atmosphere of hostility which surrounded
him. 10/ Yet Dr. Dan resigned as Bao Dai's Minister of Information
over the Elysee Agreement, and, though he remained close to the Emperor,
would not reassume public office for him. Bao Dai himself furnished an
- apt description of his political philosophy which may explain why he
failed to capture the hearts of either beleaguered farmers or serious
political leaders -- neither of whom could stomach “nibbling” when
revolution was required. Said Bao Dai:

"To practice politics is like playing a game, and
I have always considered life a game." 11/

e. The Pau Negotiations, 1950

Yet Bao Dai did work at pressing the French. French officials
in fact complained to an American writer that Bao Dai spent too much of his
time on such pursuits:

"He has concentrated too much on getting what he can
from us instead of building up his support among the
people of the country...History will judge if he did
right in putting so much stress on that..." 12/

From late June, 1950, until the end of November, Bao Dai stayed close to
the series of conferences in Pau, France, designed to arrange the transfer
to the Vietnamese of the services of immigration, communications, foreign
trade, customs, and finances. The issue of the finance service was a
particularly thorny one, involving as it did lucrative foreign exchange
controls. While the French did eventually grant significant concessions
to the Vietnamese, Laotians, and Cambodians in each area discussed, they
preserved "rights of observation" and "intervention" in matters that
"concerned the French Union as a whole." Indeed, the French assured
themselves full access to government information, license to participate
in all government decisions, and little reduction in economic benefits. 13/

Some French commentators viewed Pau as an unmitigated disaster
and the assurance of an early French demise in Indochina. As one writer
put it:

"By accepting the eventual restriction of trade within
the French Union, by losing all effective authority over
the issuance of money, by renouncing control over foreign
trade, by permitting a system of controlled prices for ex~
ports and imports, we have given the Associated States all
the power they need if they wish to assure the ruin of our
enterprises and compel their withdrawal without in any way
molesting our compatriots." 14/

A-9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
