Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of US civilian and military advisors. ARVN, relieved of
many of its combat and defense responsibilities elsewhere,
is theoretically able to commit more forces to pacification
as well as search-and-destroy missions, directed against the
Viet Cong mainforce. The paramilitary forces retain their
normal village-hamlet defense and pacification responsibili-
ties." 36/

The author then turned to the problems in South Vietnam which he
saw as the direct or indirect result of our strategic emphasis:

"There is no clear delineation of the conventional and
unconventional wars either along territorial or population
lines. US combat forces have been increasingly committed
in search-and-destroy operations even outside the highlands
area, as far south as Long An and Hau Nghia provinces around
Saigon and as far east as the coastal regions of Binh Dinh
province. US marines around Danang, in attempting to secure
and expand their defense perimeter, have attempted to engage
in pacification operations, as have the Korean forces in
Corps II. On balance, however, US combat forces remain
essentially oriented toward conventional warfare, making
adjustments (which are at times ingenious) as needed for the
unusual physical settings in which their efforts take place.

"ARVN meanwhile is also fighting essentially conventional
war whether in sparsely settled areas or in populated ones
such as the Mekong delta. Its commitment to pacification is
negligible, and it continues to regard its mission essentially
in conventional military terms. Even in areas where ARVN is
engaged in pacification, the fairly low level of ARVN casualties
shows that its commanders still remain unwilling to commit their
troops in a manner best suited to finding the Viet Cong, and
for periods of time sufficient to establish a realistic base
of security from which pacification can begin. The principal
if not the only security force in most pacification areas con-
tinues to be the under-manned and inadequately trained para-
military forces, which of a11 Vietnamese forces are now
suffering the greatest number of killed-in-action casualties
over the past year. :

"The claims of top US and GVN military officials notwith-
standing, the waging of a conventional war has overriding
priority, perhaps as much as 9 to 1, according to the personal
judgments of some US advisors. Saturation bombing by artillery
and airstrikes, for example, is an accepted tactic, and there
is probably no province where this tactic has not been widely
employed...." 37/

15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
