Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

With only a few exceptions, recent reports suggest
a continued willingness on the part of the populace to
abide by Hanoi's policy on the war. Evidence of étermination
to persist in support of the war effort continues to be as
plentiful in these reports as in the past. The current
popular mood might best be characterized, in fact, as one
of resolute stoicism with a considerable reservoir of
endurance still. untapped. 3t/ :

Even the extensive physical damage the bombing had done
to North Vietnam could not be regarded as meaningfully reducing Hanoi's
capacity to sustain the war:

Through the end of April 1967 the US air campaign
against North Vietnam--Rolling Thunder--had significantly
eroded the capacities of North Vietnam's limited indus-
trial and military base. These losses, however, have not
meaningfully degraded North Vietnam's material ability to
continue the war in South Vietnam. 98/

Certain target systems had suffered more than others, particularly trans-
portation and electric power, but throughput capacity for materiel had
not been signficantly decreased. One of the fundamental reasons was

the remarkable ability the North Vietnamese had demonstrated to recuperate
quickly from the strikes:

North Vietnam's ability to recuperate from the air
attacks has been of a high order. The major exception
has been the electric power industry.

Ce ie tue A

The recuperability problem is not significant for the
other target systems. The destroyed petroleum storage
system has been replaced by an effective system of dispersed
storage and distribution. The damaged military targets
systems--particularly barracks and storage depots--have
simply been abandoned, and supplies and troops dispersed
throughout the country. The inventories of transport
and military equipment have been replaced by large infusions
of militery and economic aid from the USSR and Communist
China. Damage to bridges and lines of communications is

‘ frequently repaired within a matter of days, if not hours,
or the effects are countered by an elaborate system of
multiple bypasses or pre-positioned spans. 99/

he TOP SECRET - Sensitive
