Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

when the US had 175,000 men in Vietnam, I reported that

“the odds are even that, even with the recommended deploy-
ments, we will be faced in early 1967 with a military
standoff at a much higher level..." In October 1966, when
our deployments had reached 325,000, I pointed out that that
was substantially the case and that "I see no reasonable

way to bring the war to an end soon." That remains true
today. With respect to Question 3, this is because the

enemy has us "stalemated" and has the capability to tailor
his actions to his supplies and manpower and, by hit-and-

run terror, to make government and pacification very difficult
in large parts of the country almost without regard to the size
of US forces there; and, with respect to Question 4, because
the enemy can and almost certainly will maintain the military
"stalemate" by matching our added deployments as necessary.
(General Westmoreland has made the point that "this war is
action and counteraction; any time we take an action, we

can expect a reaction." He added," It is likely the enemy
will react by adding troops.") Ih any event, there is no
suggestion that the added deployments will end the war in
less than two years and no assurance that they will end it

in three, or five, years.

Question 5 (regarding irresistible pressures to expand

the war) is the toughest one.

The addition of the 200,000 men, involving as it does
a call-up of Reserves and an addition of 500,000 to the
military strength, would, as mentioned above, almost certainly
set off bitter Congressional debate and irresistible domestic
pressures for stronger action outside South Vietnam. Cries
would go up -- much louder than they already have -- to "take
the wraps off the men in the field." The actions would
include more intense bombing -- not only around-the-clock
bombing of targets already authorized, but also bombing of
strategic targets such as locks and dikes, and mining of
the harbors against Soviet and other ships. Associated actions
impelled by the situation would be major ground actions in
laos, Cambodia, and probably in North Vietnam -- first as a
pincer operation north of the DMZ and then at a point such
as Vinh. The use of tactical nuclear and area-denial radi-
ological-bacteriological-chemical weapons would probably
be suggested at some point if the Chinese entered the war
in Vietnam or Korea or if US losses were running high while
conventionel efforts were not producing desired results.

154 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
