Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Saigon, 5h/ conveyed his own views concerning a future reprisal program
to Washington. Not surprisingly, (since they had exchanged ideas ex-
tensively in Saigon) Taylor's concept closely paralleled Bundy's in many
of its features. But in at least one significant respect it diverged
-sharply. Whereas Bundy's main objective was to influence the course of
the struggle in the South (providing a boost to GVN morale and cohesion,
affording an opportunity for increased American influence upon and bar-~
gaining power with the GVN, and exerting a depressing effect upon VC
cadres), Taylor's principal aim was "to bring increasing pressure on the
DRV to cease its intervention."

The areas Of agreement between Taylor and Bundy were considerable.
Like Bundy, he recommended "a measured, controlled sequence of actions
against the DRV taken in reprisal for DRV-inspired actions in South
Vietnam... ...carried out jointly with the GVN and ... directed solely
against DRV military targets and infiltration routes..." The reprisals
could be "initiated on the basis of a general catalogue or package of
VC outrages, no one particularly grave itself..." and could be varied
"with the general level of VC outrages in SVN.or, if we so desired,
progressively raised.... Thus it would be tantamount to the so-called
Phase II escalation, but justified on the basis of retaliation." Like
Bundy, he believed "that we should limit us/GVN publicity to the bare
minimum..." and he also cautioned that "we should attempt to avoid in
the present situation a general letdown in morale and spirit which
followed our action in the Tonkin Gulf."

But Taylor's concept was much more directly aimed at bringing pres-
sures to bear against the DRV, to give them "serious doubts as to their
chances for ultimste success" and to cause them to cease their aggression
and to accede to a rigorously enforced 1954/1962 Geneva-type settlement. 55/
It was this focus on the North, rather than a rededication of the GVN to
the struggle in the South, that Taylor considered to be the real benefit
of a reprisal policy. Integrating the Vietnamese in a program against
the DRV, he believed, would have an exhilarating effect which, if exploited
early "couli lead tc a greater sense of purpose and direction both in the
govermment und the military and awaken new hope for eventual victory on
the part of the Vietnamese people." :

In a subsequent cable, 56/ Taylor spelled out his "graduated reprisal"
concept in a more orderly fashion:

‘In review of the rationale for concept of graduated repris-
als we are of the opinion that, in order of importance, it should
have the following objectives:

(a) The will of Hanoi leaders;

(b) GVN morale; and

(c) Physical damage to installations having some bearing on
the DRV ability to support VC.

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
