Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Viet-Nam. While continuing reorganization and training
along U.S. lines the Vietnamese Armed Forces...are still con-
ducting operations against fragments of dissident sects arid
Viet Cong guerrillas. These military operations have succeeded
in practically eliminating the Binh Xuyen and Cao Dai forces.
The Hoa Hao, operating along the Vietnamese-Cambodian border,

-even though small, still give the Vietnamese some embarrassment
and required the employment of a small portion of the Vietnamese
Army against their operations. The over-all success against
these anti-government forces has facilitated the release of the
majority of the Vietnamese units from pacification missions,
thus increasing emphasis on unit training and the concomitant
increased effectiveness of the armed forces. In addition, the
activation of two corps headquarters within the army was com-
pleted last month and has resulted in a more satisfactory
command structure which will materially increase the combat
efficiency of the army.

In 1959 U.S. policy papers began to emphasize that GVN pre-
occupation with internal security interfered with its ability to prosecute
other desired programs, and particularly that economic development lagged
what was "politically necessary" to “compete” with the DRV. The fol-
lowing is from the OCB Progress Report of January 7, 1959:

"A. SUMMARY EVALUATION

"32. Developments related particularly to a U.S. course
of action to assist Free Viet-lNam to develop a strong, stable
and constitutional government which would work toward the
weakening of the communists in both North and South Viet-Nam.
President Diem remained firmly in control despite some political
dissatisfaction with his government....The communists and dissi-
dents continued their campaign of assassinations, especially of
officials in rural areas and carried out attacks aimed at dis-
rupting Viet-Nam's economic progress. Although the government
gave increasing attention to development of the economy, such
development continued to be inhibited by almost pre-emptive
military requirements which utilized a substantial portion of
Viet-Nam's total resources, including U.S. aid....

"B. MAJOR OPERATING PROBLEMS FACING THE UNITED STATES

"33. Diem's Internal Political Position. Diem increased
his travels throughout the country for the purpose of popular-
izing his regime. Increasing accomplishments of the government
in the economic and social fields should also have beneficial
political results. Nevertheless, the failure of the government
to fully rally certain elements of the middle class, the intel-
lectuals and former officials to its support, the frustration
and restlessness of some of the present officials, and some

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
