Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

already made and, more importantly, the great potential for
additional progress. I also describe military problem areas.
These, as you know, are many; but all are susceptible to
solution assuming that political stability can be achieved,
and that armed forces, particularly the Army, remains intact
and unified in its purpose. Under the present circumstances,
however, the continued solidarity of the armed forces is in
doubt. As all else depends on holding the armed forces
together, I address this matter first.

bi

The Key Military Issue.

"2, It seems to me there are certain conditions which
must be met in order to preserve the structure and effec-
tiveness of the RVNAF:

A. The officers of the RVNAI must be protected
against purge, solely by reason of religious or political
affiliation. The Commander in Chief, the officers of the
Joint General Staff and commanders down the line, must be
given some assurance that their careers and reputations will
not be sacrificed, for political expediency to the ambitions
or interests of political or religious blocs,

B. ‘The Officers' Corps must be assured that its
members will not be punished or expelled from the armed forces
if they faithfully execute the orders of constituted authority
in connection with the maintenance of law and order. ‘They
must be assured that their superiors will not accede to the
arbitrary demands of pressure groups whose interest it is
to destroy the discipline of the armed forces and to render
ineffective the forces of law and order. ;

"3. If I interpret correctly the events of the past
two weeks, neither of these minimum conditions have been
met. To the contrary, actions best calculated to destroy
the morale, the unity, the pride and confidence of the
armed forces haye transpired in s manner which leads me to
believe that a relative free hand has been given to those
who aim to destroy the armed forces. The demands of the
Buddhists for the resignation of the Commander in Chief,
the Chief of Staff, Commander of II Corps, the Prefect of
Saigon and the Director of National Police, to name a few,
appear to be blows directed at the heart of the security
forces which stand between the Viet Cong and victory.

I cannot believe that it is in the interests of the Nation
to accede to these demands. To the contrary, I am persuaded
that acceptance is a formula for political and military
disaster. While aware that the insurgency cannot be over-
come by military means alone, I am equally aware that with-
out a strong military foundation no program will ever achieve

yh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
