Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ SENSITIVE

established as national policy in 1956, reaffirmed again in 1958, these
guidelines: 37/

"Assist Free Viet Nam to develop a strong, stable and
constitutional government to enable Free Viet Nam to assert
an increasingly attractive contrast to conditions in the
present Communist zone....Work toward the weakening of the
Communists in North and South Viet Nam in order to bring
about the eventual peaceful reunification of a free and
independent Viet Nam under anti-Communist leadership....
Support the position of the Government of Free Viet Nam
that all Viet Nam elections may take place only after it
is satisfied that genuinely free elections can be held
throughout both zones of Viet Nam....Treat the Viet Minh
as not constituting a legitimate government, and discourage
other non-Communist states from developing or maintaining
relations with the Viet Minh regime...."

And the Democratic Republic of Vietnam became increasingly vocal in its
calls for "struggle" to end partition. In April, 1956, as the plebes-
cite deadline neared, Ho Chi Minh declared. ominously that: 38

"While recognizing that in certain countries the road
to socialism may be a peaceful one, we should be aware of
this fact: In countries where the machinery of state, the
armed forces, and the police of the bourgeois class are
still strong, the proletarian class still has to prepare
for armed struggle.

"While recognizing the possibility of reunifying Viet-
nam by peaceful means, we should always remember that our
people's principal enemies are the American imperialists and
their agents who still occupy half our country and are pre-
paring for war....”

In 1956, however, Ho Chi Minh and the DRV faced mounting internal diffi-
culties, and were not yet in a position to translate the partition of
Vietnam into casus belli.

C. Refugees: Disruption of Vietnam's Society

1. Provisions for Regroupment

Article 1) of the "Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities
in Vietnam," which provided for separate political administrations north
and south of the 17th parallel, also stated that: 39/

"1h(d) From the date of entry into force of the

present agreement until the movement of troops is completed,
any civilians residing in a district controlled by one

8 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
