Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

efforts more, and diminish his projected power more than
would be the case under presently approved force-deploy-
ment levels. This, the argument goes, will more readily
create an environment in South Vietnam in which our pacifi-
eation efforts can take root and thrive; at the same time --
because of our progress in the South and because of the
Jarge enemy losses -- it will more rapidly produce a state
of mind in Hanoi conducive to ending the war on reasonable
terms.

Estimates by the proponents vary as to how long the
job will take without, and with, the additional forces.
General Westmoreland has said that without the additions
the war could go on five years. He has said that with
100,000 more men, the war could go on for three years and
that with 200,000 more men it could go on for two. These
estimates are after taking account of his view that the
introduction of a non-professional force, such as that which
would result from fulfilling the requirement by calling
Reserves, would cause some degradation of morale, leader-
ship and effectiveness.

Questions to be Answered

Addressing the force additions alone: We should expect no
serious objections based on internal South Vietnamese reasons
(the 44-pillion piastre inflationary impact can probably be
handled, and anti-Americanism is not likely to increase signifi-
cantly); nor are dangerous reactions likely to come from the
USSR, East Europe, or from the non-Communist nations of the
world. The questions that must be answered are:

--(1) Will the move to call up 200,000 Reserves,
to extend enlistments, and to enlarge the uniformed strength
by 500,000 (300,000 beyond the Reserves), combined with the
increased US larger initiative, polarize opinion to the
extent that the "doves" in the US will get out of hand --
massive refusals to serve, or to fight, or to cooperate,
or worse?

--(2) Can we achieve the same military effect by
making more efficient use of presently approved US man-
power (¢€.g., by removing them from the Delta, by stopping
their being used for pacification work in I Corps, by
transferring some combat and logistics jobs to Vietnamese
or additional third-country personnel)?

152 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
