Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Diem's authoritarianism, which increasingly involved
manhunts, political reeducation camps, and the 'regroupment'
of population, caused spreading discontent and then armed
resistance on the countryside. It is not easy to disentangle
the events of these murky years; but few scholars believe
that the growing resistance was at the start organized or
directed by Hanoi. Indeed, there is some indication that
the Communists at first hung back... it was not until
September, 1960 that the Communist Party of North Vietnam
bestowed its formal blessing and called for the liberation
of the south from American imperialism." *

Events in Vietnam in the years 1954 to 1960 were indeed murky.
The Diem government controlled the press tightly, and discouraged
realism in reports from its provincial bureaucracy. Even official
U.S. estimates were handicapped by reliance upon GVN sources for inputs
from the grass roots of Vietnamese society, the rural villages, since
the U.S. advisory effort was then largely confined to top levels of
the GVN and its armed forces. But enough evidence has now accumulated
to establish that peasant resentment against Diem was extensive and
well founded. Moreover, it is clear that dislike of the Diem govern-
ment was coupled with resentment toward Americans. For many Vietnamese
peasants, the War of Resistance against French-Bao Dai rule never
ended; France was merely replaced by the U.S., and Bao Dai's mantle
was transferred to Ngo Dinh Diem. The Viet Cong's opprobrious
catchword "My-Diem" (American-Diem) thus recaptured the nationalist
mystique of the First Indochina War, and combined the natural xenophobia
of the rural Vietnamese with their mounting dislike of Diem. But Viet
Cong slogans aside, in the eyes of many Vietnamese of no particular
political persuasion, the United States was reprehensible as 4 moderniz-
ing force in a thoroughly traditional society, as the provider of arms
and money for a detested government, and as an alien, disruptive
influence upon hopes they held for the Geneva Settlement. As far as
attitudes toward Diem were concerned, the prevalence of his picture
throughout Vietnam virtually assured his being accepted as the sponsor
of the frequently corrupt and cruel local officials of the GVN, and the
perpetrator of unpopular GVN programs, especially the population reloca-
tion schemes, and the "Communist Denunciat-iion Campaign." Altogether,
Diem promised the farmers much, delivered little, and raised not only
their expectations, but their fears.

It should be recognized, however, that whatever his people thought
of him, Ngo Dinh Diem really did accomplish miracles, just as his
American boosters said he did. He took power in 1954 amid political
chaos, and within ten months surmounted attempted coups d'etat from
within his army and rebellions by disparate irregulars. He consolidated
his regime while providing creditably for an influx of nearly one million

1 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
