Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"He would have the benefit, in that situation, of having
been under civilian control and his relationship to RD would
already be evident, making the change to military control less
abrupt and less susceptible to criticism." 6/

Secretary McNamara's memorandum -- sent the day before Katzenbach's --
was of greater importance, and stands out as one of the most far-reaching
and thoughtful documents in the files. While this study concentrates on
pacification, it is necessary to view Mcliamara's remarks about pacifica-
tion in this memorandum within the context of the entire paper.

He said that the military situation had gone "somewhat better" than
he had anticipated a year earlier, and that "we have by and large blunted
the communist military initiative." But he found little cause for hope
that the overall situation would turn dramatically in our favor within the’
next two years. "I see no reasonable way to bring the war to an end soon,"
he said, and described the enemy strategy as one of "keeping us busy and.
waiting us out (a strategy of attriting our national will)."

"Pacification is a basic disappointment. We have good
grounds to be pleased by the recent elections, by Ky's 16
months in power, and by the faint signs of development of
national political institutions and of a legitimate civil
government. But none of this has translated itself into
political achievements at Province level or below. Paci-
fication has, if anything, gone backward..."

Thus, the Secretary found us "no better, and if anything worse off -- from
the point of view of the important war (for the complicity of the people)."

He did not think at that time that major increases in U.S. force levels
or bombing programs would make a big difference in the short run, Rather,
he suggested a series of actions designed to emphasize to Hanoi that we
were setting definite limits on the cost in men and money of the war, while
settling down for the long haul -- “a posture that makes trying to ‘wait
us out' less attractive." His strategy was "five-pronged.”

First, he suggested that we stabilize U.S. force levels in Vietnam,
"barring a dramatic change in the war." The limit he proposed was the
170,000 total then under consideration. (CINCPAC had requested 570,000
by end 1967). This limit would "put us in a position where negotiations
would be more likely to be productive, but if they were not we could pur-
sue the all-important pacification task with proper attention and resources
and without the spectre of apparently endless escalation of U.S. deploy- —

-ments.”

Second, he recommended a barrier near the DMZ and "across the trails
of Laos.”

Third, he suggested that we "stabilize the Rolling Thunder program
against the North." He thus recommended against the increase in the level

99 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
