Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

At the same time an overlooked aspect of the earlier extension of
US control of the port was being bounced back and forth. MACV clearance
of AID financed project and procured commodities was estimated to have
made AID liable for one billion piasters for port clearance costs pre-
viously financed by GVN. Nobody was quite certain how to approach GVN
on the matter or how the US should vay the bill within existing dollar
and piaster ceilings. 61/
11; Minor But Prickly Problems, January - March 1967

The clearance costs problem was an example of several minor matters
-which arose between the govermments, problems that were often difficult
to handle because prestige and sovereignty were involved. GVN National
Bank Governor Hanh and the Embassy tangled over GVN issuance of instruc-
tions to commercial banks operating facilities for US military forces. 62/

The Embassy became concerned because American civilians, tried and
punished in GVN courts on the basis of American-supplied evidence, were
subjected to extortion. The ticklish part of the problem was how to
investigate the practice without jeopardizing those in the midst of buy-
ing their way out. 63/ Soon there were ill-considered remarks to the
press by Brigadier General Loan who said that GVN had sole jurisdiction
over civiliens. 64/ State instructed Saigon to keep mum on the subject. 65/
Finally, in March it was publicly announced that the United States would
exercise court martial jurisdiction over civiliens but "only rarely, in
exceptional cases." The US did not question, as a matter of law, the
existence of a basis for court martial jurisdiction over civilians and
indicated that our policy would be to handle the problem of civilians
in other ways. The statement was careful to reaffirm US respect for GVN
sovereignty, so as to avoid the issue of a formal status of forces agree-
ment. 66/

Whether GVN could levy requirements for reports and payments upon
US contract airlines caused bantam-like stances on each side. 67/ GVN
demanded that contract flights pay landing charges. Porter replied that
was improper and offered GVN notification of flights as a sop. Ky's
retort was a demand for copies of contracts and schedules, restrictions
on in-country flights and limitation of loads to personnel’ and equipment
strictly military. We rejected those terms and the military nature of
the problem probably saved a contract flight from becoming the "example"
later in January when one plane-load of Pan American passengers baked in
tropical heat for several hours while GVN refused them permission to
disembark at Tan Son Nhut.

fe

Premier Ky's implied intention in February to accept an invitation
to speak in the United States produced an apprehensive reaction from
Washington. Ambassador Lodge cautioned, "We have twice headed him off
and to object a third time might create strain." 68/ Eventually Ky was
able to publicly postpone his visit on the grounds that his presence
was needed to insure a free and fair election.

"2 48 ' TOP SECRET - Sensitive
