Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Power Plants were damaged, the Hanoi Thermal Power Plant
has been supplying 3,000 kilowatts of power to Haiphong
over this direct transmission line; this quantity is suffi-
ecient to meet about 10 per cent of Haiphonge's electric
power requirements. 59a/

Exactly how reassuring this line of argument was to the
President is impossible to say. In any case, the long-awaited attack
on the Hanoi power facility was finally given the operational go-ahead
on May 16, and on May 19 the strike took place. When it did the cries
of civilian casualties were again heard long and loud from Hanoi. But
the Hanoi power plant was the last major target of the U.S. “spring
offensive" against North Vietnam's nascent industrial sector. The CIA
on May 26 produced a highly favorable report on the effectiveness of
the campaign against the DRV's electric power capacity. In summary it
stated:

Air strikes through 25 May 1967 against 14 of the 20
JCS-targeted electric power facilities in North Vietnam
have put out of operation about 165,000 kilowatts (kw) of
power generating capacity or 87 percent of the national
total. North Vietnam is now left with less than 24,000 kw
of central power generating capacity.

Both Hanoi and Haiphong are now without a central
. power supply and must rely on diesel-generating equipment
as a power source. The reported reserve power system in
Hanoi consisting of five underground diesel stations has
an estimated power generating capacity of only 5,000 kw, or
less than ten percent of Hanoi's normal needs. 60/

The last phases of this attack on the North's electric power generating
system in May 1967 were being carried out against a backdrop of very high
level deliberations in Washington on the future course of U.S. strategy

in the war. They both influenced and were in turn influenced by the

eourse of that debate, which is the subject of the next section of this
paper. The fact that this major assault on the modern sector of the

North Vietnamese economy while highly successful in pure target-destruction
terms, had failed to alter Hanoi's determined pursuit of the war would
bear heavily on the consideration by the Principles of new directions for

American policy.

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
