1919

1920

1921

1922

1923

192)

1925

1926

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(A Vietnamese sailor, Ton Duc Thang, mutinied with another
communist to turn over a French ship to Russia. Thang was
imprisoned at Poulo Condore and today is Ho's Vice President
in North Vietnam.) Ho prepared a 8-point program of colonial
grievances to present to the Versailles Peace Conference,

but his offerings were rejected.

Attended Baku Conference (First Conference of the Peoples

of the Far East) on first visit to USSR. On return to France,
Ho attended 18th National Congress of the Socialist Party as
an Indochinese Delegate in December. There he opted for the
Third International over the Second, because of the former's
position against colonialism, and thus became a founding mem-
ber of the French Communist Party (PCF).

Organized "Union Intercoloniale"-- started as a "front" to
attract members to the Party from colonial territories --
which published periodical La Paria; edited Viet Nam Hon
(Soul of Vietnam) which was smuggled to Indochina.

Attended first Comintern-sponsored conclave (Conference of
the Workers of the Far East) devoted to communist organization
of the Far East in Moscow.

Left France in June to attend several congresses of Kresintern
(Peasants International) in Moscow as a PCF delegate in October.
Lived in USSR for 18 months as colonial representative on
Kresintern permanent directing committee.

In Moscow Ho attended Eastern Workers' University and served
on Kresintern.

Assigned to Soviet consulate at Canton under Michael Borodin
as "Chinese translator" -- a cover for organizing Indochina,
Communist Party into communist groups. Launched Vietnam
Revolutionary Youth League (Viet Nam Cach Menh Thanh Nien
Hoi), a training school for Indochinese students and emigres,
in June. Ho published a brochure Le Proces de la Colonisation
Francaise which was carried into Vietnam and bacame the student
"nationalist" bible. Also in June, Ho is alleged to have
betrayed Phan Boi Chau, a prominent Vietnamese nationalist
leader, progenitor of the Vietnamese Nationalist Party (VNQDD) ,
to the French security police. Ho's intent said to be desire
for martyr to produce a surge of patriotic sentiment for revo-
lution in Annam -- which it did.

Translated Marxist terminology into Sino-Annamite. Stated

that “only a communist party can insure the well-being of Annam."
Selected members of Ho's youth organization were enrolled in
Whampoa, Military Academy, where Chinese nationalists and com-
INMunists were trained as future leaders for Kuomintang.

c-49 . aw
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
