Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C. Recognition of Crisis, 1960

1. Country Team Assessment, March, 1960

By January 1960 communist terrorism and guerrilla action
moved in U.S. estimates from the status of a long run threat to the
viability of the Diem regime to crisis status as the GVN's “numb ex one
problem." In a long "Special Report on Internal Security Situation in
Vietnam" (Incl 1 to Despatch #278 from Saigon, 7 March 1960), the U.S.
Mission in Saigon submitted an appreciation of the problem which high-
lighted so many characteristics of the difficulties confronting Diem -
and U.S. policy that were to prove critical in subsequent years that it
deserves extensive quotation and precis:

Internal security had once again become the primary problem
of the GVN as a result of: (1) “intensification of Viet Cong guerrilla
and terrorist activities"; (2) "weaknesses apparent in the GVN security
forces"; and (3) "the growth of apathy and considerable dissatisfaction
among the rural populace." "The situation has grown progressively more
disturbing since shortly after the National Assembly elections at the
end of August 1959, despite the fact that President Diem was claiming,
to the end of December, that internal security was continuing to. improve.

a. "Viet Cong Activity"

Government operations had intensified during the spring
of 1955 when it increased its forces engaged in internal security opera-
tions, added precautions taken by the GVN during the period prior to
and inmediately following the August 30 National Assembly elections further
suppressed VC activity. The upswing in VC operations first showed up in a
sharp increase in assassinations and kidnappings in the last half of
September. Where the total for assassinations in 1958 had been 193, there
were 119 assassinations in the last four months of 1959 (for a yearly
total of 233); in January 1960, there were to be 96 civilians killed
and in February, 122. Meanwhile, significant Viet Cong attacks on GVN
military forces also began in September, revealing characteristics on
both the Viet Cong and GVN sides that were to become dishearteningly
familiar in the next five years:

"The post-election intensification of VC attacks began with
the completely successful engagement of two ARVN companies on
September 26. The poor performance of ARVN during this operation
exposed a number of weaknesses which have been commented upon by
many CAS and MAAG sources in the Vietnamese Government. MAAG's
evaluation of the factors contributing to ARVN's failure include
security leaks, inadequate planning, lack of aggressive leadership,
failure to communicate information to other participating units and
the failure of supporting units to press forward to engage the VC
(they were close enough to hear the sound of gunfire at the time).
Another factor of importance illustrated in this ambush was the

43 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
