Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

C-0-P-¥

SECRET

Ministers. The Joint Chiefs of Staff would reaffirm their
yiews and recommendations expressed above, as well as in the
remainder of their memorandum of 5 April 1950, and recommend
further that they be reflected in the basic draft position
paper.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff would make further specific
comments on the basic draft position paper as follows:

a. The Seventh unnumbered paragraph under the heading
Background should be revised along the following lines:

The "missing component" in the picture consists
of three factors, namely, political, military, and
economic. The first two are at present the most im-
portant and should be emphasized. In the military
field the greatest defect has probably been the lack
of coordination between the French and the indigenous
forces, coupled with immediate deficiencies in various
items of equipment and material and with uncertain
morale on the part of the Indochinese and the French.
Very early, and continuing assistance is needed by the
Indochinese and the French forces in order to meet
their present needs. Such assistance must consist in
general of additional equipment within reason
(unavailable to the French fron other sources) and of
appropriate military advice.

b. The second unnumbered paragraph under the heading
Discussion should be revised along the following lines:

The success of the military program depends upon
the support given by the French, Vietnamese, Laotians,
and Cambodians to the coordinated operations plans pre-
pared in Indochina, and, to a lesser extent, upon the
receipt of specific items of military material from the
United States. In view of the larger aspects of the
struggle against world communism, judicious political
concessions in Indochina by the French, and timely and
adequate, but controlled, aid on the part of the United
States will eventually pay dividends to both.

ec. Under Recommendations, the paragraph headed Discussions

with the French should be revised to:

(1) Incorporate in Recommendation 2) a provision that

the arrangements for United States military aid be made
in Indochina as a result of conversations there between

United States, French, Vietnamese, Laotian, and Cambodian

military representatives; and

SECRET ©

“yt
326
