sé.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

II. THE APRIL 26 REPORT

The available Gilpatric file consists mostly of drafts of the report
and memos from Lansdale. It contains a memorandum dated April 13, in
which Lansdale advised Gilpatric of a meeting with Rostow, at which Rostow
showed Lansdale a copy of a memorandum to Kennedy recommending a fresh
erack at the Vietnam situation. Here is Rostow's memorandum:

April 12, 1961
MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT
FROM: WWR

Now that the Viet-Nam election is over, I believe we must
turn to gearing up the whole Viet-Nam operation. Among the pos~
Sible lines of action that might be considered at an early high
level meeting are the following:

1. The appointment of a full time first-rate back-stop man
in Washington. McNamara, as well as your staff, believes this to
be essential.

2. The briefing of our new Ambassador, Fritz Nolting, includ-
ing sufficient talk with yourself so that he fully understands the
priority you attach to the Viet-Nam problem.

3. A possible visit to Viet-Nam in the near future by the
Vice President.

4, A possible visit to the United States of Mr. Thuan,
acting Defense Minister, and one of the few men around Diem with
operational capacity and vigor.

5. The sending to Viet-Nam of a research and development and
military hardware team which would explore with General McGarr
which of the various techniques and gadgets now available or being
explored might be relevant and useful in the Viet-Nam operation.

6. The raising of the MAAG ceiling, which involves some
diplomacy, unless we can find an alternative way of introducing
into the Viet-Nam operation a substantial number of Special
Forces types.

{. The question of replacing the present ICA Chief in Viet-
Nam, who, by all accounts, has expended his capital. We need a
vigorous man who can work well with the military, since some of
the rural development problems relate closely to guerrilla opera-
tions.

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
