—

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

time went on, the air war would be shoved aside somewhat by considera-
tions of force augmentation in the south -- the principle concern after
the massive Viet Cong attack. Bombing as an issue would more and more
be considered in relation to the possibility of negotiations and the
improvement of the U.S. diplomatic position. The failure of the bombing
+o interdict infiltration and break Hanoi's will meant that it could be
militarily justified for the future only as a punitive measure. Never-
theless, many in the Pentagon would continue to advocate its expansion.
As events moved forward this punitive value would gradually seem less and
less important to the President compared with the potential of a bombing
suspension (even partial) for producing serious peace negotiations and/or
appeasing public opinion. For the moment, however, the Tet assault appeared
only as a massive repudiation of U.S. peace overtures, hardly something
to warrent a reduction in our side of the conflict.

On Sunday, February lh, Secretaries Rusk and McNamara.
appeared jointly on a special one-hour program of “Meet the Press" to
answer questions primarily about the Tet offensive. When asked about
the meaning of these new attacks for the diplomatic effort and the role
of the bombing, Rusk replied as follows:

MR. SPIVAK. Secretary Rusk, may I ask you a question?
SECRETARY RUSK. Yes.

MR. SPIVAK. ‘The President the other day askedthis
question, he said, what would the North Vietnamese be doing
if we stopped the bombing and let them alone? Now there is
some confusion about what we want them to do. What is it
we want them to do today if we stop the bombing?

SECRETARY RUSK. Well, many, many months ago the Presi-

dent said almost anything as a step toward peace. Now I
think it is important to understand the political signifi-
cance of the events of the last 3 or 4 days in South Viet-
nam. President Johnson said some weeks ago that we are
exploring the difference between the statement of their
Foreign Minister about entering into discussions and his

own San Antonio formula.

Now we have been in the process of exploring the
problems that arise when you put those two statements
side by side. Hanoi knows that. They know that these
explorations are going on because they were a party to
them. Secondly, we have exercised some restraint in
our bombing in North Vietnam during this period of explor-
ation, particularly in the immediate vicinity of Hanoi
and Haiphong. Again, Hanoi knows this. They also knew
that the Tet cease-fire period was coming up.

146 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
