ral DF

226

23.

eh.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Department of Defense accepts the French proposal to
send a U. S. military mission to Indochina. State 5655
to Paris, 18 May LS cee ROO OLY RICCO ACOSO ORE oS

The U. S. is prepared to support a French request to NATO

to permit diversion of French Air Force manpower to Indo-
china in view of the fact that “the near collapse of the
maintenance and pilot capabilities of the French Air Force
in Indochina is close at hand." State 5693 to Paris,

Viet CIS) Dletm's eatin! urea ts! apecatole-cele a)elel=/a\o0s)-a/ateinlminye'e'narciete e/a /atele’e is] e0san7s

The U. S. backs down on its intent to have Thailand submit
the "Laos invasion" case to the Security Council. "French
attitude regarding Thai appeal has been emphatic almost to
the point of hysteria." Dulles 2297 to Bangkok, 1 June

SAS pte Rey oa YO ee eR a seals

The Intelligence Advisory Committee concludes that Commu-
nist China will not invade Indochina even though hostili-
ties conclude in Korea. The French situation, however, is
expected to continue to deteriorate while the Viet Minh
prestige increases. National Intelligence Estimate,
NIE-91, 4 June 1953........ wlaveietelesa sletels eielsl ele aleleleie’elle ave alain slater eiels

The Joint Chiefs of Staff propose "Terms of Reference” for
the O'Daniel Military Mission to Indochina. JCS Memoran-
dum for Secretary of Defense, 10 dune 1953...esesecccencvcnes

The O'Daniel mission arrives in Saigon to pursue discus-
sions with General Henri Navarre on the manner in which

U. S. aid may best contribute to the French war effort.

puave Press Relesae 329, 20 Dune TOSS. vasa oslsew els vais os ne sce

General O'Daniel recommends to the JCS that a capability

for. small industry in Indochina be established, that an
increase in artillery units be approved for Indochina, and
that the U. S. "think in terms of the "Navarre Concept’ in
association with the war in Indochina." O'Daniel Report

to) JCS, UN Guy 1953. sas cece ses ee spieiele seis

The U. S. expresses gratification at announced French
political plans and indicates that the Nevarre Plan “had
impréssed us favorably." Stress is placed on having other
alternatives available if negotiations were to start, e.g.,
the Naverre Plan. Assurance is given the French that
Communist China will not’ intervene in Indochina. US-France
Bilateral Talks, 15 July 1953....ss00<- oe ves enecceseacieine ress

Page

ko

he

45

99

69

97

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
