Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

SENATOR THURMOND:....This morning you testified about
the large quantities of goods that were brought in during
the cessation of bombing, and in view of your experience
and your knowledge, and the statements you made this
morning, I presume that you would not favor cessation
of bombing where American lives would be jeopardized?

MR. CLIFFORD: I would not favor the cessation of
bombing under present circumstances. I would express
the fervent hope that we could stop the bombing if we
had some kind of reciprocal word from North Vietnam that
they wanted to sit down and, in good faith, negotiate.

I would say only that as I go into this task, the
deepest desire that I have is to bring hostilities in
Vietnam to a conclusion under those circumstances that
permit us to have a dignified and honorable result that
in turn will obtain for the South Vietnamese that goal
which we have made such sacrifices to attain.

SENATOR THURMOND: When you spoke of negotiating,
in which case you would be willing to have a cessation
of bombing, I presume you would contemplate that they
would stop their military activities, too, in return
for a cessation of bombing.

MR. CLIFFORD: No, that is not what I said.

I do not expect them to stop their military activi-
ties. I would expect to follow the language of the
President when he said that if they would agree to
start negotiations promptly and not take advantage of the
pause in the bombing.

SENATOR THURMOND: What do you mean by taking
advantage if they continue their military activities?

MR, CLIFFORD: Their military activity will continue
in South Vietnam, I assume, until there is a cease fire
agreed upon. I assume that they will continue to trans-
port the normal amount of goods, munitions, and men,
+o South Vietnam. I assume that we will continue to
maintain our forces and support our forces during that
period. So what I am suggesting, in the language of
the President is, that he would insist that they not
take advantage of the suspension of the bombing. 1,

143 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
