Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Gulf of Tonkin ineidents were followed promptly by Khanh's Constitution,
which backfired against him and against us, weakening rather than strength-
ering GVN.

Taylor's bill of particulars against GVN in December was followed
immediately by attacks on GVN by the Buddhists, and then shortly by the
military, bringing down the government. Taylor's stern lecture to the
Young Turks at this time met only with their defiance. They agreed to
a@ compromise solution to the crisis when Taylor held up the GVN Defense
Budget, and then reversed themselves after he released it. The first
Fleming Dart raids, opening the deliberate U.S. bombing campaign against
the North, were followed shortly by another coup attempt.

There was no disagreement among Washington, the Embassy, and MACV
that U.S, commitments should be used to improve GVN's morale and performance.
In contrast, however, they often disagreed about putting pressure on GVN.
In January, 1964, State showed far more interest than did Lodge in using the
ATID negotiations to press GVN for more effort; in the upshot we gave them
an AID increase with no strings attached. This disagreement continued for
several months. McNamara leaned consistently toward giving GVN whatever
it needed: only later did he begin to mention increasing our influence.
But McNamara and JCS did prod Lodge into asking GVN why they were not
progressing well. In May, 1964, Sullivan proposed direct entry of U.S.
personnel into the Vietnamese chain of command; his idea was watered down
considerably in the State Department, and disappeared at the Honolulu Con-
ference because of opposition by Lodge and Westmoreland. Other proposals
agreed to at the conference, relating to new actions and improved programs
by GVN, interested State far more than they did the Embassy and MACY, as
revealed in the follow-up. Pa
By and large the same contrasts prevailed when Taylor was the Ambassador,
although in December he was far more willing to press GVN than Lodge ever
was. Even then, at the peak of the crisis, Taylor expressly rejected sanctions.
MACV generally rejected sanctions also, and seemed less willing to apply
leverage in day-to-day matters than were U.S, civilians in the field. MACV
studies on GVN ineffectiveness usually proposed more studies and never pro-
posed pressure on GVN.

If U.S. force commitments and the record of GVN non-performance reflect
the failure of leverage, what does the record tell us about how leverage
could be made to work? Regrettably, the record tells us nothing about that;
it merely shows thet everything we tried went wrong. As noted, attempts at-
leverage or pressure on GVN were seldom thought through and studied carefully.
One searches in vain for studies, memorands, or widespread discussion of
alternative techniques for leverage and of what our experience shows about
how they might work. Pressures against the North, whose results have dis-
appointed us, were & model of planning, foresight, and detailed consideration,
compared to the subject of pressures on GVN. Yet GVN's failure was the
heart of our policy problem throughout the period, as many feel it still is.

iv . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
