Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

our success on the battlefield, our chances of leaving behind
an effective functioning national government when we at last
withdraw will be sharply diminished.

In the United States, the effects would be equally unfortunate.

We will have to mobilize reserves, increase our budget
by billions, and see U.S. casualties climb to 1,300-1,400
per month. Our balance of payments will be worsened con-
siderably, and we will need a larger tax increase--justified
as a war tax, or wage and price controls....

It will be difficult to convince critics that we are not
simply destroying South Viet Nam in order to "save" it and
that we genuinely want peace talks. This growing disaffection
accompanied, as it certainly will be, by increased defiance
of the draft and growing unrest in the cities because of the
belief that we are neglecting domestic problems, runs great
risks of provoking a domestic crisis of unprecedented pro-
portions. 51

Thus, if our current strategy, even with increased troops, could not
promise an early end to the conflict, what alternatives were available
to the United States? No U.S. ground strategy and no level of U.S. forces,
alone, could by themselves accomplish our objective in South Viet Nam,
the draft memorandum stated.

We can obtain our objective only if the GVN begins to
take the steps necessary to gain the confidence of the people
and to provide effective leadership for the diverse groups
in the population. ARVN must also be turned into an effective
fighting force. If we fail in these objectives, a military
victory over the NVN/VC main forces, followed by a U.S. with-
drawal, would only pave the way for an NLF takeover.

Our military presence in South Viet Nam should be designed
toby the time during which ARVN and the GVN can develop effec-
tive capability. In order to do this, we must deny the enemy
access to the populated areas of the country and prevent hin -
from achieving his objectives of controlling the population and
destroying the GVN.

The memorandum concluded that MACV should be told that his mission
was to provide security to populated areas and to deny the enemy access to
the population; that he should not attempt to attrite the enemy or to
drive him out of the country. MACV should be asked to recommend an appro-
priate strategy and to determine his force requirements to carry out this
objective with the minimum possible casualties.

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
