Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

4h, In a step-by-step manner how do these assets
function in rooting out the infrastructure?

5+ What guidelines have you developed to measure
success in rooting out the infrastructure? How
can you tell how well you are doing?

Despite the prospect that these questions might prove very embar-
rassing to those giving the briefing, Enthoven felt that they were
extremely important and they must be answered or pacification might
not ever succeed. Of course, he did not include the crucial question,
this being whether or not U.S. forces should be or even could be
profitably engaged in pacification. The answer to that question, what-
ever it may be, could have a significant impact upon how U.S. decision-
makers viewed any future increases in U.S. forces justified by the
pacification requirement.

Probably the most important paper which the Secretary of Defense
took with him as he departed for Saigon on 5 July was a study prepared
by the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis, Alain
Enthoven, entitled "Current Estimate of Additional Deployment Capability."
In it, Systems Analysis had updated their original estimate of what the
Army could provide and was now convinced that approximately 3-2/3 division
equivalents could be provided to MACV by 31 December, 1968 without
changing tour policy, calling Reserves, or deploying NATO STRAF units.
Although development of this force would require drawing upon critical
‘skills and equipment from NATO STRAF, thus reducing their readiness, the
capability plan still satisfied the key requirement of not sheltering
the mobilization "pane" while still furnishing the 2-2/3 nominal division
force. The 2-2/3 force consisted of (1) the 198th Brigade, which had
already been approved for PRACTICE NINE; (2) the 9th Marine Amphibious
Brigade, partially approved and standing offshore, (3) the ARCOV Rifle
Company packets for use in making up the 33 additional rifle companies
(an earlier approval from the Secretary of the Army had been denied
because of the absence of trade-off slots for the 5,500 odd men in
this group); 50/ (4) the 10lst Airborne Division minus one unit which
had already been deployed; (5) the llth Infantry Brigade and a new
Infantry Division. Systems Analysis evaluated the augmentation of
33 additional companies as being worth one Division to which they
would add the 2-2/3 that were named units, thereby making up the 3-2/3
Division equivalents. The Table which accompanied this study is shown
below.

195 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
