Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(os

Among the McNaughton additions to the Fisher draft were
several suggested action memos including one to the Chiefs asking for
military comment on the proposal. Available documents do not reveal
whether McNamara sent the memo nor indicate what his own reaction to
the proposal was. He did, however, contact the Chiefs in some way
for their reaction to the proposal because on March 24 the Chiefs sent a
message to CINCPAC requesting field comment on the barrier concept. 33/
After having in turn queried his subordinates, CINCPAC replied on April 7
that construction and defense of such a barrier would require 7-8 U.S.
divisions and might take up to three and one half to four years to become
fully operational. 3h/ It would require a substantial diversion of
available combat and construction resources and would place a heavy strain
on the logistics support system in Southeast Asia, all in a static defense
effort which would deny us the military advantages of flexibility in
employment of forces. Not surprisingly, after this exaggerated catalog
of problems, CINCPAC recommended against such a barrier as an inefficient
use of resources with small likelihood of achieving U.S. objectives in
Vietnam. These not unexpected objections notwithstanding, the Army (pre-
sumably at McNamara's direction) had begun an R&D program in March to
design, develop, test and deliver within six to nine months for opera-
tional evaluation a set of anti-personnel route and trail interdiction

devices. 35/

At approximately the same time an apparently unrelated offer
was made by four distinguished scientific advisors to the Government to
form a summer working group to study technical aspects of the war in
Vietnam. It is possible that the idea for such a study really originated
in the Pentagon, although the earliest documents indicate that the four
scholars (Dr. George Kistiakowsky - Harvard; Dr. Karl Kaysen - Harvard;
Dr. Jerome Wiesner - MIT; and Dr. Jerrold Zacharias - MIT) made the
first initiative with Adam Yarmolinsky, then working for McNaughton. 36/
In any case, McNamara liked the idea and sent Zacharias a letter on April 16
formally requesting that he and the others arrange the summer study on
"technical possibilities in relation to our military operations in
Vietnam." 37/ On April 26 he advised John McNaughton, who was to oversee
the project, that the scientists’ group should examine the feasibility of
"a 'fence' across the infiltration trails, warning systems, reconnaissance
(especially night) methods, night vision devices, defoliation techniques,
and area-denial weapons." 38/ In this way the barrier concept was offi-
cially brought to the attention of the study group.

During the remainder of the spring, while McNamara and the

other Principals were preoccupied with the POL decision, the summer study
" group was organized and the administrative mechanics worked out for providing

148 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
