Y

: a :
. Sa oo Fe ” . : 5-" Pais

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

U. S. Political Efforts

The United States has been the rnain foreign political mentor for
Free Vietnarn since it became an independent nation. Of course other
nations have had their influence. But we were the ones who have spoken
. with authority, who have held the purse-strings, who trained and advised
the government personnel, and to whom most Vietnamese in political
life have looked for guidance. It is only human to want to find someone

else to blame for what has gone wrong. But, we won't be able to start © ~

.. doing effective political:work until we admit that our own actions carry
responsibilities with them. There are plenty of Aaron Burr's, a few
Alexander Hamilton's and practically no George Washington's, Tom
Jefferson's or Tom Paine's in Saigon today. . . largely as a result
of our U.S, political influence, This certainly is not the U.S, policy
we had hoped to dmnElcInent,

: ‘Avnbansador Durbrow seemed genitinely surprised when I told
him that the Can Lao Party in Vietnam was originally promoted by
the U.S, State Department and was largely the brain-child of a highly-

‘respected, senior U,S, Foreign Service professional, Several weeks

; after this action was undertaken originally, I learned of it and warned

that the benefits were extremely short-term and that great lasting

, harm could result by a favored party forcing older parties to go under-

"| ground. However, the decision had been made, the Can Lao party had

' been started, and we had to start working from that reality. We cannot

' go back to living in the past and must keep moving ahead, but that

. doesn't mean that we have to pay forever for our mistakes,

However, the real point is that we don't seem to have very long
memories or enough solid feeling of responsibility for out acts. Many
U.S, Foreign Service officials leap into attacks on the Can Lao Party.

J agree with their reasons, Any thinking American would. ButI sure
would feel better about it if they could nly remember the consequences
of their own actions for a few short years - and learn from that memory,
{I cannot truly sy mpa ‘thize. with Americans who help. promote a fascistic
| state and then get angry when it doesn't act like a democracy.

So, what should we do about it? I have a concrete recommenda-
tion. We need an American in Saigon who can work with real skill,

- with great sensitivity to Vietnamese feelings, and with a fine sense of
the dangerous limits of Vietnamese national security in a time of
emergency. This unusual American should be given the task of Sg

i>

a
