Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. Recommended actions. In such an unpromising state of affairs, what

should we do We must continue to press the enemy militarily; we must make
demonstrable progress in pacification; at the same time, we must add a new
ingredient forced on us by the facts. Specifically, we must improve our positic

=

by getting ourselves into a military posture that we credibly would maintain

.

+ ee Tae See ; se Weitere “hive
indefinitely -- a posture that makes trying to "wait us out" less sttractive,

I recomend a five-pronged course of action to achieve those ends.

a. Stabilize US force levels in Vietnem. It is my judgment that,
barring a dramatic change in the war, we should limit the increase in US forces
in SVN in 1967 to 70,000 men and we should level off at the total of 470,000
which such en increase would provide.g/ It is my view that this is enougt.

_to punish the enemy at the large-unit operations level and to keep the enemy's
main forces from interrupting pacification. I believe also that even many more
than 470,000 would not kill the enemy off in such numbers as to break their
morale so long as they think they can wait us out. It is possible that such

@ 40 percent increase over our present level of 325,000 will break the enemy's
morale in the short term; but if it does not, we must, I believe, be prepared

for and have underway a long-term program oremised on more than breaking the
morale of main foree units. A stabilized US force level would be pert of such
ions would be

a long-term program. It would put us in a position where negotiat
more likely to be-productive, but if they were not we could pursue

i y 2 the ali- i
important pacification task witn prover attention and resources and without the
spectre of apparently endless escalation of US deployments.

10,000 to 20,000 ~~ should be devo!
an infiltration barrier. Suc a
would run from the sea, across the neck of South Vietnam (choking off the ney
infiltratim routes *hrough the DMZ) and across the trails in Laos, This
interdiction system (at an approximate cost of $1 billion) would comprise <o
the east a ground barrier of fences, wire, sensors, artillery, aircraft and
wuobile troops; and to the west ~~ mainly in Leos ~~ an interdiction zone
covered by air-leid mines and bombing attacks pin-pointed by air-laid acoustic
sensors.

b. Inst2l] a barrier, A
V

a

d to the construction and maintenance of
e near the i7th parallel -~

~

The barrier may not be fully effective at first, but I believe that it
can be made effective in time and that even the threat of its becoming -effective
can substantially change to our advantage the character of the war. It would
hinder enemy efforts, would permit more efficient use of the limited number of
friendly troops, and would be persuasive evidence both that our sole aim is to
protect the South from the North and that we intend to see the job through.

e/ Admiral Sharp hes recommendsd a 12/31/67 strength of 570,000. However, I
believe both he end General Westmoreland recognize that the danzer of
inflation will probebly force an end 1967 deployment limit of ebout 470,000.

83 “TOP SECRET - Sensitive
