Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

added that Australia and New Zealand also had colonial posses-
sions that they would be unwilling to remove from their super-
visory jurisdiction." 17/

U.S. inability to work out a common policy with the U.K. also pre-
eluded meaningful discussion, let alone agreement, on the colonial issue
at the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations in 1944. 18/ Through March, 1945,
the issue was further occluded by debates within the U.S. Government
over the postwar status of Pacific islands captured from the Japanese:
in general, the War and Navy Departments advocated their retention under.
U.S. control as military bases, while State and other departments ad-
vocated an international trusteeship.

(3) Decision on Indochina Left to France

Secretary of State Stettinius, with the approval of
President Roosevelt, issued a statement on April 3, 1945, declaring
that, as a result of international discussions at Yalta on the concept
of trusteeship, the United States felt that the postwar trusteeship
structure:

"...should be designed to permit the placing under it of
the territories mandated after the last war, and such terri-
tories taken from the enemy in this war as might be agreed
upon at a later date, and also such, other territories as aN
be voluntarily be placed under trusteeship." 19/

Indochina thus seemed relegated to French volition.

Nonetheless, as of President Roosevelt's death on April 12, 1945,
U.S. policy toward the colonial possessions of its allies, and toward
Indochina in particular, was in disarray;

-- The British remained apprehensive that there might. be a con-
tinued U.S. search for 4 weusteceins formula which might impinge on the
Commonwealth.

-- The French were restive over continued U.S. refusal to pro-
vide strategic transport for their forces, resentful over the paucity
of U.S. support for French forces in Indochina, and deeply suspicious
that the United States -- possibly in concert with the Chinese -- intended
to block their regaining control of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

b. Truman and the Occupation of Indochina, 1945

Within a month of President Truman's entry into office, the
French raised the subject of Indochina at the United Nations Conference
at San Francisco. Secretary of State Stettinius reported the following
conversation to Washington:

",..Indo-China came up in a recent conversation I had with
Bidault and Bonnet. The latter remarked that although the French

A-20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
