Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Based on the results of ROLIING THUNDER to date and on
the nature of the logistic target system, CIA said, concentrating the
bombing in soutaern NVN would undoubtedly increase the costs of main-
taining the LOCs and degrade their capacity "somewhat further," but
could not be expected to reduce the flow of men and materiel below
present levels. This was because of the excess capacity of the road
network and NVN's impressive ability to maintain and improve it. It
cited the example of the traffic fron NVN through Mu Gia pass into
laos. During the 1965-1966 dry season, truck traffic on the route
averaged 28 trucks or about 85 tons of supplies a day, a level of traffic
which used it to less than 20 percent of its then theoretical capacity
of 450 tons a day, and, since the route had been improved, less than
10 percent of its present capacity of 740 tons a day. The rest of the
road network had also been expanded in spite of the bombing. Some 340
miles of alternative routes were built in southern NVN during 1966 and
more than 400 miles of new roads were constructed in Laos. Even if the
bombing could reduce road capacities by 50 percent, the capacity remaining
would still be at least five times greater than required to move supplies
at the current rate. In summary:

«..the excess capacity on the road networks in Route
Packages I, II, and III provides such a deep cushion that
it is almost certain that no interdiction program can
neutralize the logistics target system to the extent neces-
sary to reduce the flow of men and supplies to South Vietnam
pelow their present levels. 140/

As to concentrating the bombing north instead of south of
20°, neither the open or the closed port variants "could obstruct or
reduce North Vietnam's import of military or war-supporting materials
sufficiently to degrade its ability to carry on the war." NVN now had
the capacity to import about 14,000 tons of goods a day over its main
rail, road, and inland water routes; and it currently imported about
5,300 tons a day. An optimum interdiction program against all means
of land and water transportation could "at most" reduce transport capacity
+o about 3,900 tons a day, or about 25 percent below present levels.
However, if NVN eliminated all but essential military and economic goods,
‘it would need only about 3000 tons a day, a volume of traffic which could
still be handled comfortably. 1)1/

The CIA also went into some detail on Soviet and Chinese
responses to bombing north versus south of 20°. ‘The Chinese would
attribute any cutback to a lack of will in the face of rising domestic
and international criticism and would continue to egg NVN on. ‘The Soviets
would construe it in this light, also, but would be relieved that the
U.S. had broken the cycle of escalation, and if the U.S. accompanied the
cutback with political initiatives toward negotiations might even press
Hanoi to respond. As to Hanoi, :

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
