Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

degree than before the crucial role of economic and social, as well
as military action..." 65/

This statement helped to solidify the Khanh regime by giving it
explicit assurance of continuing U.S. support. It did not fully take
care of our dismay over the surprise that the Khanh coup had been,
and our fear that such a coup might be repeated. In addition to
making it clear that we fully supported the incumbent regime, therefore AL
it seemed necessary that we should discourage attempted: coups, or,
getting wind of them, head them off before they passed the point of
no return. On 18 March, W. H. Sullivan of State sent out a message
to Saigon as follows:

Point 2.../of NSAM 288/ stipulated that U.S,
government agencies should make clear our full
Support for Khanh government and our opposition
to any further coups. While it is recognized that
our chances of detecting coup plotting are far
from fool-proof...all elements /of/ U.S. mission
in Vietnam should be alerted against coup contin-
fencies.

Mission should establish appropriate procedure
which will assure that all rumors of coup plotting
which come to attention /of/ any U.S. government
personnel in Vietnam will be brought to attention
of Ambassador without delay. This is not, repeat
not, a responsibility solely for intelligence
elements [ot the/ U.S. mission.

The program embodied in NSAM 288 was by no means judged adequate
by all concerned. One major dissent had been registered by the JCS,
who tended to view the problem primarily in its military dimensions,
and who believed that the source of VC strength in the North must be
neutralized. In a memorandum dated 1 March 1964, the CJCS had pro-
vided the Secretary of Defense with comments on the SecDef's draft
memo to the President (NSAM 288). ‘The general view of the JCS was
that the program being recommended by the Secretary of Defense was
inadequate militarily, and that much more eggressive policies, mainly
against NV, but also egainst the Cambodian sanctuaries of VC forces,
were necessary.

a. The JCS do not believe that the recommended
program in itself will be sufficient to turn the tide
against the Viet Cong in SVN without positive action
being taken egainst the Hanoi government at an early
date. They have in mind the conduct of the kind of
progrem designed to bring about cessation of DRV
support for operations in SVN and Laos outlined in
JCSM-174-64, subject "Vietnam," dated 2 March 1964.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5h
