Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

III. C. 1. DRV NEGOTIATING POSITION

1.. The DRV is Determined to Press a Very Hard Line
a. The DRV Recognizes Its Own Strong Position

The victory at Dien Bien Phu cost the DRV 21,000 men. Ho
realized he had paid dearly for this psychologically crippling stroke
against the French, and he was determined to make the most of his advan-
tage at Geneva. The effect of Dien Bien Phu on the Western delegations
at the conference was evident not only in the initial shock, but also in the
continued sensitivity to military developments in Indochina. Thus, of
primary importance to the DRV negotiating position was the goal of making
political capital from battlefield supremacy. Closely allied with this
sense of military invincibility was the Viet Minh belief that France was
in political turmoil and, therefore, psychologically weak.

b. The DRV Attitude is Defiant

To the DRV, the victories of their troops and the impending
collapse of France in Indochina were quite clear. Less clear was the
possibility that the U.S., either unilaterally or in some form of united :
action might intervene. The DRV gambled, however, on the French struggling
on alone. In the opening phase of the conference, the Viet Minh released
a communication that indicated there was no need to hasten the conclusion
of the war:

"We still remember the Korean lesson which taught us that
one could negotiate and fight at the same time..." 1/

This attitude of mild defiance was intended not only for consumption in
the West but also for the communist countries. The DRV was resisting
early pressures of the USSR and the PRC who feared U.S. intervention and

a wider war to move quickly to a solution. Instead, the DRV moved rapidly
to increase its own forces in the Tonkin Delta, 2/ to compress the
French forces there to a smaller territory, and they apparently instructed
their delegation to continue pressing a hard line on political concessions.
The goal was to delay a settlement until they bettered the military posi-
tion even further. The DRV was determined to gain every inch that the
French could be forced to concede.

ec. The DRV Outlines Its Proposals

The initial Viet Minh gambit came at the second plenary
session of the Conference on 10 May. 3/ Pham Van Dong stated that the
DRV was the "stronger" force in "more than three-fourths of the country.”
He went on to describe the successful administration of this territory by
his government, which he said "represents the will of the entire Vietnamese
nation..." The opposition, characterized as "the government of the tempo-

c-} TOP SECRET - Sensitive
