Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date; 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of bombing and the broader target systems that the JCS was then requesting.
Again, his reason was to "remove the prospect of ever-escalating bombing
as a factor complicating our political posture and distracting from the
main job of pacification in South Vietnam.”

Fourth, he said, we should "pursue a vigorous pacification program."

"The large-unit operations war, which we know best how to
fight and where we have had our successes, is largely irrele-
vant to pacification as long as we do not lose it. By and
large, the people in rural areas believe that the GVN when
it comes will not stay but that the VC will; that coopera-
tion with the GVN will be punished by the VC; that the GVN
is really indifferent to the people's welfare; that the low-
level GVN are tools of the local rich; and that the GVN is
ridden with corruption.

"Suecess in pacification depends on the interrelated
functions of providing physical security, destroying the
VC apparatus, motivating the people to cooperate, and estab-
lishing responsive local government. An obviously necessary
but not sufficient requirement for success of the RD cadre
and police is vigorously conducted and adequately prolonged
clearing operations by military troops who will 'stay' in
the area, who behave themselves decently and who show re-
spect for the people.

"This elemental requirement of pacification has been
missing. In almost no contested area designated for paci-
fication in recent years have ARVN forces actually ‘cleared
and stayed’ to a point where cadre teams, if available, could
have stayed overnight in hamlets and survived, let alone
accomplish their mission...

"Now that the threat of a communist main-force mili-
tary victory has been thwarted by our emergency efforis,
“we must allocate far more attention and a portion of the
regular military forces (at least half of ARVN and perhaps
a portion of the U.S. forces) to the task of providing an
active and permanent security system behind which the RD
teams and police can operate and behind which the political
struggle with the VC infrastructure can take place.

"The U.S. cannot do this pacification security job for
the Vietnamese. All we can do is ‘massage the heart.’ For
one reason, it is known that we do not intend to stay; if
our efforts worked at all, it would merely postpone the
eventual confrontation of the VC and GVN infrastructures.
The GVN must do the job, and I am convinced that drastic
reform is needed if the GVN is going to be able to do it.

100 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
