Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Thus, public reaction to this option would be extremely negative, and
would become increasingly so as the deployment numbers, the financial
costs, and the life-disrupting actions increase.

The next two options, Mr. Goulding indicated, should be considered
together since, from a public affairs standpoint, the decision to deploy
additional troops of any significant number must be accompanied by some
"new" move. The two options discussed were deployment plus expanded
pombing of the North, and increased mobilization plus a bombing pause.

The first course, Goulding concluded,would elicit more support in
the country than does the present course.

This course would clearly bring aboard more hawks and
further isolate the doves. It would also make the war much
easier to accept by the middle-of~the-roaders. It would
help unite the country. Some fence sitters, however, would
be added to those who already view the war as an unforgiveable
sin. I think the campus and "liberal" reaction would sur-
pass anything we have seen.

The other option envisioned continuing to fight as we are in the
south, strengthening General Westmoreland with part or all of his request,
and coupling these moves with a visible "peace" campaign based upon a
cessation of the bombing in the North. This course, Goulding concluded:

--.would alienate those who take the hardest line.
We would be adding much to our cost, both by the extra
deployment and the military price paid for the pause,
without receiving any immediate or concrete results. If
the Communists took advantage of the bombing halt, the
hawks and many of the military would react strongly....
The doves, of course, would enthusiastically endorse the
pause and would immediately begin pleading and praying
that it be continued long enough to explore every possible
and conceivable corridor....Additionally, the doves would
deplore the extra deployments. ‘They would complein that
the pause was not unlimited or unconditional. They would
argue that the deployments plus the failure to be "uncon-
ditional" detracted from the effort. This two-pronged
approach -- strengthen but seck negotiation -- would give
new confidence to the middle-of-the-roaders. They would:
appleud thé government for doing "something" different,
for seeking a way out of the quagmire. They would be
more patient than the hawks to give the pause a chance,
and less disturbed than the doves at the mobilization.
For them, it could be a way out -- and even a "could be":
is better than the frustration they now feel....The deploy/
pause option would be more favorably received by the nation
than the deploy/escalate North, since it would, in the public
mind, offer more hope of ana eventual solution to the war.

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
