Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The two Parties shall ensure that the zones assigned to
them do not adhere to any military alliance and are not used for
the resumption of hostilities or to further an aggressive policy." 35/

France -- one of the "Parties" to the armistice -- was thus not in a posi-
tion to admit the GVN to SEATO. However, nothing in the Geneva Accords
appeared to exclude all three countries from being extended protection

under such a pact without member status. 36/ This was pointed out by the
French delegation:

"At French suggestion specific reference to Cambodia, Laos,
and Vietnam was removed from the text of the Treaty, but these
States are covered by the provisions of the Treaty in a separate
protocol...The French felt that this method of extending the
application of the Treaty to the Associated States was less
likely to be construed as a violation of the spirit of the Geneva
Agreements." 37/

At the conclusion of the Manila Conference, Admiral Davis
wrote:

"I believe the Manila Conference accomplished the objec-
tive expected of it from the United States point of view. In
my judgment our Defense representation in the U.S. Delegation
succeeded in its efforts to insure that the Treaty is consistent
in its military implications with the positions taken by the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and by this Department." 38/

The U.S. had, in effect, made a public statement of its intent to counter
further communist moves in SEA, but left vague the specifics of its response.
The pact, as intended, was fundamentally "consultative." There was to be

no unified command, no bases, and no contribution of forces to a standing
group; the U.S. accepted these lacks, and stressed the psychological gains
of merely bringing a treaty into existence, pointing out that SEATO opened
the way to a stronger and more all-encompassing defense of Southeast Asia
than had theretofore been possible.

A-22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
