Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

were undermining the U.S. war effort.
Diem seems unimpressed, but does ask
Taylor for his appraisal, as a mili-
tary man, of the progress of the war.

30 Sep 1963 McNamara, Taylor Tho stresses to the two visitors the
and Lodge meet gravity of the political deterioration
Vict President Tho and the negative effect it was having

on war. He questions the success of
the strategic hamlet program. Later
that day, the McNemara-Taylor party
leaves South Vietnam for Honolulu.

2 Oct 1963 SecDef Memo for the After a day in Honolulu to prepare
President: Report of a report, McNamara and Taylor return
the McNamara-Taylor to Washington and present their find-
mission ’ ings and recommendations to a morning

NSC meeting. Their long report repre-
sents a compromise between the mili-
tary and the civilian views. It confirms
the progress of the war, but warns of
the dangers inherent in the current
political turmoil and recommends pres-
sures against Diem to bring changes.
Militarily, it calls for greater GVN
effort, especially in the Delta and
in clear and hold operations, and a
consolidation of the strategic hamlet
program. It proposes the announcement
of the plans to withdraw 1,000 American
troops by year's end. To put political
pressure on Diem to institute the re-
forms we want, it recommends a selec-
tive aid suspension, an end of support
for the special forces responsible fcr
the pagoda raids, and a continuation
of Lodge's aloofness from the regime.
It recommends against a coup, but
qualifies this by suggesting that an
alternative leadership be identified
and cultivated. The recommendations
are promptly approved by the President.

White House A statement following the meeting is

press release released as recommended by McNamara
and Taylor that reiterates the U.S.
commitment to the struggle against
the VC, announces the 1,000 man troop

xxi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
