Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

in South Vietnam. Could you tell us, sir, what the situation is there?
How deeply are we involved in what seems to be a growing war and what are
the rights of the people to know what our forces are doing?

"THE PRESIDENT: There is a war going on in South Vietnam, and I think
that last week there were over 500 killings, and assassinations and bomb-
ings and the casualties are high. As I said last week, it is a subterran-
ean war, a guerrilla war of increasing ferocity. The United States, since
the end of the Geneva Accord, setting up the South Vietnamese government
as an independent government, has been assisting Vietnam economically to
maintain its independence, viability and also sent training groups out
there, which have been expanded in recent weeks, as the attacks on the
government and the people of South Vietnam have increased.

"We are out there on training and on transportation, and we are assist-
ing in every way we properly can the people of South Vietnam, who with the
greatest courage and under danger are attempting to maintain their freedom.

"Now, this is an area where there is a good deal of danger and it is a
matter of information. We don't want to have information which is of
assistance to the enemy and it is a matter which I think will have to be
worked out with the government of Vietnam which bears the primary respon-
sibility.”

18. President Kennedy's News Conference, February 14, 1962, Public Papers
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1962, D. 136:
"Tnvolvement in Vietnam

"Q. Mr. President, the Republican National Committee publication has
said that you have been less than candid with the American people as to
how deeply we are involved in Vietnam. Could you throw any more light on
that?

"THE PRESIDENT: Yes, as you know, the United States for more than a
decade has been assisting the government, the people of Vietnam, to meain-
tain their independence. Way back on Dec. 23, 1950, we signed a military
assistance agreement with France and with Indo-China which at that time
included Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. We also signed in December of 1951
an agreement directly with Vietnam,

"Now in 1954, the Geneva agreements were signed, and while we did not
Sign those agreements, nevertheless Under Secretary Bedel Smith stated that
he would view any renewal of aggression in Vielmam in violation of the
aforesaid agreements with grave concern, and as seriously threatening
international peace and security. At the time that the SEATO Pact was
signed in 1954, Sept. 8, Vietnam was not a signatory, it was a protocol
state, and, therefore, this pact which was approved by the Senate with
only, I think, two against it, under Article kh, stated that the United States

 C-16
