Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Moreover, the wider implications for our commitments elsewhere
appeared no less valid than they had ever been. Viet-Nam still con-
stituted a major, perhaps even a decisive, test case of whether the
Communist strategy of ‘wars of national liberation’ or ‘people's wars'
could be met and countered even in the extraordinarily difficult circun-
stances of South Viet-Nam. Then as now, it has been, I think, rightly
judged that a success for Hanoi in South Viet-Nam could only encourage
the use of this technique by Hanoi, and over time by the Communist Chinese,
and might well have the effect of drawing the Soviets into competition
with Peking and Hanoi and away from the otherwise promising trends that
have developed in Soviet policy in the past 10 years.

"Finally, it was judged from the outset that stronger action by us
in Viet-Nam would not operate to bring the Soviet Union and Communist
China closer together and that the possibility of major Chinese Communist
intervention could be kept to a minimum so long as we made it clear at
all times, both by word and deed, that our objective was confined solely
to freeing South Viet-Nam from external interference and that we did not
threaten Communist China but rather looked to the ultimate hope of what
the Manila Declaration, of last fall, called ‘reconciliation and peace
throughout Asia.'"

i 36 ae

"INDEPENDENCE OF SOUTHEAST ASIA

"Other factors enter in, as I have tried to summarize, and despite
their variations from time to time remain of major general importance.
But it is primarily from the standpoint of Southeast Asia that I would
like to close my remarks today. How do the bets I have described look
today?

"Southeast Asia surely matters more than ever. A region which may
have held as few as 30 million inhabitants in 1800--and which is car-
ried under the heading of 'peripheral areas' in some textbooks on East
Asia--now holds more than 250 million people, more than Latin America
and almost as much as the population of Western Europe. The resources of
¢his area are large, and its people, while not yet capable of the kind
of dramatic progress we have seen in the northern parts of Asia, have
great talent, intelligence, and industry. Its geographical location, while
it should not be in the path of great-power collisions, is crucial for
trade routes and in other respects.

"From the suandpoint of our own security and the kind of world in
which we wish to live, I believe we must continue to be deeply concerned
to do what we can to keep Southeast Asia from falling under external
domination and aggression that would contribute to such domination....

"The second part of our bet is that the independence of South Viet-
Nam critically affects Southeast Asia. South Viet-Nam and its 15 million

D-119
