Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

the planning stage, and the Vietnamese government is
handicapped by incompetent cabinet ministers and the

lack of competent administrators. While Bao Dai refuses —
to assume active direction of the affairs of state, he
remains hostile toward new leadership and democratic
activities."

"Of more basic importance in the failure of Vietnamese
to rally to the Vietnamese government following the French
grant of independence within the French Union in 1949 have
been the following:

a. Many Vietnamese doubt the ability of French
Union forces to defeat the Viet Minh and prefer to remain
apart from the struggle.

b. The French Government had not dared to promise
complete national independence at some future date, as
demanded by the Vietnamese, because of the fear that the
French national assembly would then refuse to support a
war in a 'lost' portion of the French Union.

e. The Vietnamese, despite many evolutionary Ebeps
toward complete independence since 1949, are generally
inclined to believe that the French intend to retain effective
control over the affairs of Vietnam.

d. The nationalist appeal and military prestige of the
Viet Minh remains strong among significant numbers of the
Vietnamese."

2. Geneva, 1954

The Geneva Agreements of 1954 brought to an end nine
years of open warfare between the French and the Viet Minh. In 1950,
the conflict had been transformed from a purely colonial into a
quasi-civil war, in which the Viet Minh found themselves pitted
against a non-communist Vietnamese state with nominal independence,
enjoying significant U.S. support. Nonetheless, the conflict was
settled by the original protagonists: France and the DRV. As of
the summer of 1954, U.S. assessments anticipated that a continuing
French presence in Indochina would offset the Viet Minh menace in
North Vietnam. The U.S. expected its own “political action" --
e.g., forming SEATO -- further to buttress "free Vietnam." Initially,
at least, the U.S. looked on Diem as an unknown quantity with uncertain
chances of succeeding against two sorts of challenges: the political
turbulence within South Vietnam on the one hand, and on the other
organized, communist-led remnants of the Viet Minh apparatus operating
in concert with the DRV. In the years through 1960, estimates of the
relative urgency of these two challenges varied. U.S. intelligence
estimates rarely expressed confidence that Diem could overcome both

4 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
