Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

lations sympathizing with Viet Minh who would be left south
of demarcation line proposed by French. He said this ques-
tion would be easier for him if he could get some general
political assurances regarding eventual status these people.
Chauvel said Dong indicated that with such assurances he
might be able to accept Dong Hoi line." 19/

f. The DRV is Disappointed on Elections

In Pham Van Dong's 10 May plan, a take-over of all Vietnam
by the DRV was almost certain. "Foreign" troops would be withdrawn
and elections would take place as soon as possible. "Local government”
would fill in during the interval. Supervision of the elections them-
selves would be by locally composed commissions. The French and the
GVN vehemently opposed both immediate elections and elections unsuper-
vised by some kind of international commission. There was no movement
in this impasse until 16 July when Molotov opened new possibilities by
suggesting that a decision on elections be left up to the GVN and DRV
after a military settlement was made. The Chinese were willing to concede
that elections might not take place for two or three years, Even under
these pressures, there was no progress until very near the time set by
the French for termination of Geneva talks. On 19 July, at an extra-
ordinary meeting attended by Molotov, Eden, Mendes-France, Chou En-lai,
and Pham Van Dong agreement was reached on postponing elections for two
years. 20/ This, of course, represented a severe setback for the ambi-
tions of the DRV.

g. The DRV Does Not Achieve Its Goals at Geneva

The DRV, by the end of the conference, had moved a long way
from its initial position on every important consideration. The cease-
fire was considered ahead of the political decisions. The country was
partitioned, giving the GVN about half the total territory, which was
probably much more than it deserved on the basis of France-GVN military
strength. Elections were put off for two years instead of being held
immediately, and control of the elections was to be international rather
than local. The Pathet Lao and Free Khmer movements were not represented
at the convention, and the DRV had drawn its Viet Minh troops out of Laos
and Cambodia. Bernard Fall's comment that the DRV was forced "to accept
conditions far less favorable than the military situation warranted" 21/
is reinforced by a detailed analysis of the French military position in
the Tonkin Delta by Lacouture and Devillers in La fin d'une guerre, in
which the French situation is described as on the verge of collapse. 22/
The DRV, according to Kahin and Lewis, probably expected, however, that
the concessions they had made were only temporary:

",..in evacuating its military units from the South, the
Viet Minh was not being called upon to abandon its struggle
for power, but only to transfer the competition from the mili-
tary to the political plane. And whether in a military or an
exclusively political contest, the Viet Minh confidently expected
victory." 23/

c-12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
