Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of target emphasis occurred, stressing interdiction of the DRV's
lines of communication (LOC's) -- the visible manifestations of
North Vietnamese aggression. The JCS had called the SecDef's
attention to this infiltration target complex as early as mid-
February, and an integrated counter-infiltration attack plan
against LOC targets south of the 20th parallel began to be
developed by CINCPAC, culminating at the end of March in the
submission of the JCS 12-week bombing program. This program

was built around the "LOC-cut" concept developed by the Pacific
Command and was strongly endorsed by General Westmoreland and
Ambassador Taylor. The JCS recommended that only the first phase
‘(third through fifth weeks) of the 12-week program be adopted, as
they had not reached agreement on the later phases. The JCS sub-
mission, however, was not accepted as a program, although it
strongly influenced the new interdiction-oriented focus of the
attacks that were to follow. But neither the SecDef nor the
President was willing to approve a multi-week program in advance.
They preferred to retain continual personal control over attack
concepts and individual target selection and to communicate their
decisions through weekly guidance provided by the SecDef's ROLLING
THUNDER planning messages.

April 1 Reassessment. By the end of March, in Saigon's view,
the situation in South Vietnam appeared to have rebounded somewhat.
Morale seemed to have been boosted, at least temporarily, by the air
strikes, and Vietnamese forces had not recently suffered any major
defeats. Washington, on the other hand, continued to regard the
situation as "bad and deteriorating," and could see no signs of "give"
on the part of Hanoi. None of the several diplomatic initiatives
that had been launched looked promising, and VC terrorism continued
unabated, with the March 29 bombing of the US embassy in Saigon
being by far the boldest provocation.

Ambassador Taylor returned to Washington to participate ina
Presidential policy review on April 1 and 2, in which a wide range
of possible military and non-military actions in South and North
Vietnam were examined. The discussions, however, did not deal
principally with the air war, but focused mainly on the prospect
of major deployments of US and Third Country combat forces to South
Vietnam. As a result of the discussions, the far-reaching decision
was made, at least conceptually, to permit US troops to engage in
offensive ground operations against Asian insurgents. With respect
to future air pressures policy, the actions adopted amounted to
little more than a continuation of "roughly the present slowly

ascending tempo of ROLLING THUNDER operations," directed mainly

at the LOC targets that were then beginning to be struck. The
‘Director of Central Intelligence John McCone demurred, arguing

that a change in the US ground force role in the South’also demanded
comparably more forceful action against the North. He felt that

the ground force decision was correct only "if our air strikes
against the North are sufficiently heavy and damaging really to
hurt the North Vietnamese." ‘

vi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
