Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

1. Introduction: The U.S. and the French Colonial War

Because the early phase (1946-1949) of the Indochina war was an
overt attempt by the French to reassert authority and control over their
Indochinesé colonies, the United States, although aware that European
Recovery Program (ERP) funds were indirectly used to finance the war,
refused to support that war directly. However, American actions taken
to assure a neutral position -- refusal to sell armaments to the French
for use in Indochina; refusal to transport troops, arms, or ammunition
"to or from Netherlands East Indies or French Indochina" 1/ -- accompa-
nied by public and private statements of anti-colonialist sentiments, did
constitute, at least in French eyes, a policy hostile to the French interest
in Indochina. 2] Therefore, early in 1947, the Department of State
attempted to reassure the French Government, and to make U.S. policies and
actions more palatable to them:

"...In spite any misunderstanding which might have arisen
in minds French in regard to our position concerning Indochina
they must appreciate that we have fully recognized France's
sovereign position in that area and we do not wish to have it
appear that we are in any way endeavoring undermine that posi-
tion, and French should know it is our desire to be helpful
and we stand ready assist any appropriate way we can to find
solution for Indochinese problem. At same time we cannot shut
our eyes to fact that there are two sides this problem and that
our reports indicate both a lack French understanding of other
side (more in Saigon than in Paris) and continued existence
dangerously outmoded colonial outlook and methods in area...." _3/

Neither direct nor indirect assistance to the French effort in
Indochina was deemed "appropriate," however, until the French took con-
erete steps to grant autonomy to Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam. The U.S.
was prepared to support the "Bao Dai solution" for Vietnam when and if
Bao Dai acquired genuine independence. The U.S. warned France against
settling for a "native government /headed by Bao Dai/ which _by failing
to develop appeal among Vietnamese might become virtually ree) uppet
government, separated from [the] people and existing only by ey eee
ence /of/ French military forces."

In March, 1949, in the so-called Elysee Agreement, France con-
tracted with Bao Dai to grant "independence within the French Union" to
Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos. I. Despite U.S. urgings, the Elysee Agree-
ment remained a potentially empty and ill-defined French promise for eleven
months. In that period, the Nationalist forces of Chiang Kai-shek were
driven from the China mainland, and in November, Mao's legions arrived at
the Indochina border. In January, 1950, Ho Chi Minh declared that his was
the "only legal government of the Vietnamese people" and indicated his
willingness to cooperate with any nation willing to recognize it on the
basis of "equality and mutual respect of national sovereignty and territory."6/

1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
