Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

- TOP SECRET - Sensitive

6. Remove self-imposed restrictions on the conduct of air
strikes against North Vietnam which have severely reduced their
effectiveness and made it impossible to approach the goal of 4
missions per week. Restrictions which should be lifted are;

a. Requirement that a US strike be conducted concurrently
with a VNAF strike.

b. Requirement that US aircraft strike the primary target
only.

ec. Ban on use of classified munitions.

d. Narrow geographical limitations imposed on target
selection.

e. Requirement to obtain specific approval from Washing-
ton before striking alternate targets when required by adverse
weather conditions or other local conditions. 96/

After reviewing these recommendations, the President approved most of

General Johnson's program. In regard to the air strikes against the North,
the President authorized important new actions, as subsequently described
by the JCS: 97/

ROLL
form

Action (paras 5 & 6): The scope and tempo of air strikes
against NVN is being increased in current plans. Depots, LOCs,
and air defense ground environment facilities will be stressed
in operations in the near future. The requirement for concur-
rent US-VNAF strikes has been removed. Only prime targets will
be designated as primary or alternates for US aircraft, thus
lifting restriction in 6b above. Greater timing flexibility will
be provided for weather and other delays. Tactical reconnaissance
has been authorized at medium level for targets south of the 20th
parallel to support the expanded program. Specific recommendations
on para 6c, quoted above, are requested. Restrictions in 6d and e,
quoted above, have been lifted in ROLLING THUNDER SEVEN and will
so remain in subsequent programs. " }

The Presidential decision marked a major turning point in the
ING THUNDER operation. Air action against the North was being trans-
ed from a sporadic, halting effort into a regular and determined

program.

the
char

The March 15 Presidential guidelines were clearly reflected in
instructions that Washington sent to Saigon describing the new
acter of ROLLING THUNDER to begin with RT VII on March 19. The in-

structions contain at least six novel features:

TL TOP SECRET - Sensitive
