Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

military advisors were controlled through a military chain of command
and all civilian advisors were controlled (at least in theory) through
an Office of Civil Operations (0C0). The creation of CORDS was hailed
as a victory for the "single manager" concept even though some very
substantial U.S. programs were defined as outside the pacification
program and, hence, beyond CORDS' competence.

RE/PF ADVISORS

U.S. advice to the South Vietnamese. It did nothing to change the re-
lationship between advisor and advised. U.S. expectations continued in
the well-worn furrows in which they had travelled from the beginning:
better information, more U.S. influence over Vietnamese plans and actions,

. and improved GVN (including RVNAF) performance were the hoped for products
of the advisory effort.

|
)
|
|
)
| The creation of CORDS affected only the organizational context of
|
|

This pattern was repeated in 1967 when an increase of over 2,000
military advisors was proposed by MACV to assist the Regional and Popular
| Forces ~~ whose security missions were almost exclusively devoted to

support of the pacification program. The RF and PF were, at that time,
the only RVNAF components without a sizeable U.S. advisory complement.
. When the question of improving their effectiveness was addressed the
old assumption that more U.S. advisors would equate to improved effec~
. tiveness again went unchallenged.

The question debated was whether this new dimension of the U.S.
advisory effort should be structured to give continuing advice to RF
companies and PF platoons or should be constituted on a mobile training
basis. The decision was to form mobile teams for both tactical and
logistical support training. Advisors were detached from their parent
U.S. combat units and detailed to these duties pending the manpower
accounting change which would transfer these individuals to MACV
advisory control and replace them in U.S. units with newly deployed
fillers.

SE aT

AVOIDED ISSUES

This was the situation when the VC/NVA launched a massive series
of attacks against urban population centers and surrounding pacifica~
tion program forces during the 1968 lunar new year (Tet) offensive.
In the confused aftermath of this radical change in VC/NVA strategy
the U.S. announced in Washington its intention to give renewed attention
to modernizing RVNAF so that a larger share of the war effort could be
turned back to the Vietnamese. This policy decision, following as it
did an unprecedented six-year period of U.S. attempts to wage counter-
insurgent war by proxy, constituted an adequate reason to reexamine the
experience of the past and to explore more fully some difficult questions
which have been consistently avoided in the desire to assist South Vietnam.

f . : viii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
