Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

sion, with special consideration to advantages derivable "from making
it an overt Vietnamese program with participation by U.S. as required
to obtain adequate results." 57/

The language and the tone of this message suggest that, however
pessimistic may have been the appraisals of the situation, there was no
disposition to recognize any doubt that the struggle could be won
or that we would undertake whatever measures were necessary to win
it. Previously unprecedented escalatory measures of a military
nature were beginning to be studied tentatively as a response to the
bad news that kept coming. Most of these were to be rejected, for
the time being, except for moves to convey to NVN that an exchange
of air blows between NVN and SVN was a possibility. This, it was
hoped, might exploit NVN fears that if they persisted aiding the VC
they faced the loss of their industrial establishment. The
inferential significance of our considerations at this time seems
to have been that we were already comnitted, by the momentum of our
past actions, to a course which forbade turning back, however
reluctant we might be about taking any forward step.

A schedule for the trip was set up extending from the planned
arrival on 8 March 196}. through 12 March. In the course of five days
of briefings, conferences, and field trips, most of the details of
& program, to implement policies already evidently largely agreed
upon, were decided upon in the light of views and information elicited
from our own and GVN officials. In the final meeting with General
Khanh and his GVN associates, most of the programs for Vietnam which
were later to be recommended to the President by Secretary McNamara
were discussed. The exchange of views at that time was made a matter
of record by & memcon, a summary of which was transmitted the next
day by Ambassador Lodge.

General Khanh...proposed National Service
Act for SVN. Khanh said his government prepared
embark upon program to mobilize all human and
material resources to fight VC. As envisaged by
General Khanh proposed National Service Act would
have two major components: military service and
civil defense...

Military service comprised of: RVNAF...
(actual strength: 227,000; planned: 251,683);
Civil Guard (actual: 90,032; planned: 119,636).
SDC & Hamlet Militia...(actual: 257,960; planned:
422,874). Civil Defense comprised of Civil
Service Corps, Cadre Corps, National Youth, and
Political -Administration Corps...

Civil Defense component included Civil
Administration Corps for workin countryside.
Khanh emphasized that in civil defense sector all
civilians would be included...this segment also
included civie action teams for hamlets and villages.

43 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
