Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This message was extremely important, for in it COMUSMACV
spelled out the concept of keeping U.S. forces away from the people.
The search and destroy strategy for U.S. and Third Country forces
which continues to this day and the primary focus of RVNAF on paci-
fication both stem from that concept. In addition, Westmoreland made
a big pitch in this cable for a free hand to maneuver the troops
around inside the country. That is the prerogative of a major field
commander -- there is good indication that at this stage Westmoreland
saw himself in that light rather than as advisor and assister to the
Vietnamese armed forces.

Ambassador Taylor returned to Vietnam from Washington shortly
after the battle at Dong Xoai, just as the new Thieu-Ky government was _
being installed. His first report confirmed the seriousness of the
military situation as reported by General Westmoreland and also pointed
up the very tenuous hold the new government hed on the country. 133/
This report apparently helped to remove the last obstacles to consider-
ation of all of the forces mentioned in Westmoreland's request of 7 June.
On 22 June, the Chairman of the JCS cabled Westmoreland and CINCPAC to
inform them that the ante had gone up from 35 to 44 battalions, count-
ing all forces planned and programmed and including the 173rd. West-
moreland was asked if 44 battalions would be enough to convince the
vc/DRV that they could not win. 134 General Westmoreland replied
that there was no evidence the VC/DRV would alter their plans regardless
of what the U.S. did in the next six months. The 44 battalion force
should, however, establish a favorable balance of power by the end of
the year. If the U.S. was to seize the initiative from the enemy, then
further forces would be required into 1966 and beyond. 135/

On the 26th of June, as has already been noted, General West-
moreland was given the authority to commit U.S. forces to battle in
support of RVNAF “in any situation...when, in COMUSMACV's judgment,
their use is necessary to strengthen the relative position of GVN
forces." 136/ This was about as close to a free hand in managing the
forces as General Westmoreland was likely to get. The enclave strategy
was finished, and the debate from then on centered on how much force
and to what end. There were some attempts to snatch the chestnuts from
the fire, however.

Westmoreland's opposition, while far from presenting a united
front, had its day in court during late June and early July 1965. The
Embassy in Saigon, while recognizing the seriousness of the situation
in South Vietnam, was less than sanguine about the prospects for success
if large numbers of foreign troops were brought in. Deputy Ambassador
U. Alexis Johnson told Assistant Secretary of Defense McNaughton on
25 June that the U.S. should not bring in more troops. The situation,
according to Johnson, was in many ways no more serious than the previous

104 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
