Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

evidence that the entire population of Nghe An .had remained ignorant of
its right to move to the South in 1954-1955, and called upon the ICC to
reinstate Article 14(d). 39/ Vietnam Press, Diem's official press

agency, on 9 November hie quoted Cong Nhan, a Saigon daily as follows:

"In the North, the fall of the illegitimate regime is
near....As soon as the people's hatred of the Communist dicta-
torship is sufficiently mature for it to succeed in overthrowing
it, then general elections which are really free will take place
in the whole of Vietnam, and will peacefully bring about the
reunification of the country.

"If he refuses to have recourse to force in order to
liberate the North, while yet realizing the dearest aspira-
tions of the people, the supreme head of the Republic of
Vietnam does so solely in order to avoid bloodshed and
undesirable fratricidal strife." 4o/

ec. Reconciliation and Repression, 1957-1959

From the DRV viewpoint the Nghe-An uprising, whatever
its dimensions, coincided fortuitously with the Suez and Hungarian crises.
The GVN simply could not muster sufficient evidence to compete for head-
lines, and U.S. attention was on Europe. In any event, Ho and his regime
undertook a series of conciliatory gestures which sapped popular resent-
ment, and occluded the situation abroad. Conciliatory gestures were
quickly extended to Catholics. Radio Hanoi, which in July 1955, had
broadcast a Lao Dong proclamation rejecting the existence of deities
consistent with the "scientific principles of the doctrine of Marx and
Lenin," on 22 November 1956 announced that:

",..in the agrarian reform, we have committed errors,
including errors in the observance of freedom of religion.
The people in general, and the Catholic citizens in particular,
want these errors corrected. These are legitimate demands." 4a /

At the same time the government allocated about 48 million dong (about
$15,000) for repair of Catholic churches and a seminary. 42/ On 15-16
December 1956, the DRV convened the National Committee of the Catholic
Union, which issued a declaration criticizing the government for having
violated the laws on religious freedom, pointing out that:

",..the errors committed during the agrarian reform have
violated the policy of religious liberty of the Lao Dong Party
and of the Government and have infringed on the religious
rights of the faithful...." 43/

Ho Chi Minh personally received a delegation from the Committee of the
Catholic Union to express his regret over the “errors” that had been com-
mitted, and Nhan Dan, the Lao Dong paper, published a series of articles
on the same subject.

14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
