Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. Victory over the Sects

Diem's forces then ranged out after the other armed factions.
Tran Van Soai of the Hoa Hao surrendered, and was given asylum. Another
Hoa Hao leader, Ba Cut -- who had cut off a finger to remind himself to
fight the French, and had sworn not to cut his hair until Vietnam was
reunited -- was captured while negotiating surrender in return for a com-~
mission as lieutenant general in the ARVN. 47/ Other leaders were bribed,
and the remainder fled or rallied to the GVN. By the end of 1955, Diem
appeared to have dealt finally with the challenge of the sects.

It was this apparent success which enabled Diem to survive
successfully pressures from an even more powerful set of opponents: those
among his Western allies who were determined to replace him. The dimen-
sions of his victory in Vietnam were just becoming evident when in May,
1955, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization convened. There promptly
developed a sharp division of view between the French and the Americans. 48/
Bao Dai made known his opposition to Diem, and the French threatened to
pull out of Vietnam unless Diem were removed. From Paris, Secretary Dulles
reported that the French held that: 49/

",..Time something to be done to avoid civil war. France
warned that armed conflict -- first civil war, then guerrilla
warfare, then terrorism -- would result if we failed to take ac-
tion...New Revolutionary Committee...is strongly under Viet Minh
influence...There is violent campaign against French and French
Expeditionary Corps. Viet Minh agents make good use of it and
certain Americans do not seem sufficiently aware of this. French
Govt does not wish to have its army act as platform for Viet Minh
propaganda. Army will not be maintained in Vietnam at any cost...
Continuing with Diem would have three disastrous results:

(1)...Viet Minh victory
(2)...focus hostility of everyone on the French, and
(3)...begin a Franco-U.S. breach..."

The French then proposed to the U.S, that the French Expeditionary Corps
be withdrawn, and asked if the U.S. were willing to guarantee French
civilians, and the refugees. From Washington, the following instructions
to Dulles were returned promptly: 50/

"President's only comment on Vietnam section of (your tele-
gram) was to reiterate position that U.S. could not afford to
have forces committed in such undesirable areas as Vietnam.
This, of course, is JCS view in past. Am asking Defense and
JCS views..."

Asked, the JCS took the position that the question was fundamentally beyond
their purview, that neither the ARVN nor the French Expeditionary Corps seemed
capable of preserving the integrity of South Vietnam against determined

Viet Minh onslaught, and that being debarred from furnishing military forces
by the Geneva Agreement, the U.S. was in no position to protect French

19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
