Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The recommendation was based on an explicit assumption "that a decision
to use force if necessary, backed by resolute and extensive deployment,
and. conveyed by every possible means to our adversaries, gives the best
present chance of avoiding the actual use of such force." Reflecting the
influence of the national intelligence boards’ rationale concerning "U.S.
preparatory and low-scale action," the ExCom also stated the belief that
"selective and carefully prepared military action against North Vietnem
will not trigger acts of terror and military operations by the Viet Cong
which would engulf the Khanh regime." 85/ What the ExCom meant by "se-
lective and carefully prepared military actions" is suggested by its re-
quest, on the same day, for JCS views on the feasibility of telegraphing
intended action through military deployments. 86/

Despite its abandonment of the paced scenario approach, the ExCom
proposed that many of the actions incorporated in the scenario be under-
taken. Although proposing a particular order for these actions, the com-
mittee suggested that the sequence may need to be modified in reaction to
specific developments, especially in view of different choices available
to the enemy. In addition to the Presidential decision, the recommended
actions included: (1) communication of our resolve and limited objectives
to Hanoi through the Canadian intermediary; (2) conducting a high-level
Southeast Asian strategy conference in Honolulu; (3) diplomatic initiatives
at the UN to present the case for DRV aggression; (4) formal and bilateral
consultation with SEATO allies, including the question of obtaining allied.
force commitments; (5) seeking a Congressional Resolution in support of
U.S, resistance to communist aggression in Southeast Asia; (6) periodic *
force deployments toward the region; and (7) an initial strike against
North Vietnam, "designed to have more deterrent than destructive impact"
and accompanied by an active diplomatic offensive to restore peace in the
area, -- including agreement to a Geneva Conference. Further, the ExCom
recommended that in the execution of these actions, all functional and
geographic elements "should be treated as parts of a single problem: the
protection of /all1/ Southeast Asia from further communist encroachment." 87/

If all of the decisions and actions contained in the draft memoran-
dum were in fact recommended to the President, all of them were not approved.
immediately. It is doubtful that the President made the decision to use
force if necessary, since some advisers were still urging the same kind
of decision on him in the weeks to follow. The plan to convey 4 message
to Hanoi by Canadian chamels was carried out on June 18, but it may have
been decided on already before the meeting, given the earlier negotiations
with Ottawa. 88/ ‘The President did approve the calling of a conference
in Honolulu "to review for /his/ final approval a series of plans for effec-
tive action" in Southeast Asia. 89/ U.S. policy toward Southeast Asia
was explained by Ambassador Stevenson in a major UN speech on 21 May.
He did not address the Security Council on this subject again until 6 August,
after the Tonkin Gulf episode. It is doubtful if less publicized state-
ments at the UN contained the "hitherto secret evidence" suggested in the
ExCom sessions as "proving Hanoi's responsibility" before the world diplo-
mats. 90/ It is likely that questions of consulting with SEATO allies,

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
