Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

whose anti-French feeling ran deep, who had not in the past and would
not now accept anything less than complete freedom from France. And
Diem had American backing. Dulles believed "the kind of thing he

stands for" is the "necessary ingredient of success" and called the

Diem government the "nucleus for future efforts." 15/ Accommodation
with the Viet Minh was anathema to both Diem and the U.S. Although
American policy spoke of taking steps to prevent the complete absorption
of the DRV into the Soviet bloc, those steps amounted to nothing more
than maintenance of a U.S. consulate in Hanoi. 16/ Dulles in particular
could not see Ho Chi Minh as Asia's Tito and refused to deal with hin,
thereby crushing Mendes-France's hope that Vietnam could become an
experiment in peaceful coexistence. aus The U.S. was equally determined
to prevent the quick withdrawal of the French Expeditionary Corps from
Vietnam. It was believed:

in the last analysis, Vietnamese security will be determined
by the degree of French protection and assistance in the
development of a national army,

plus Vietnamese energies and-the will of other powers to guarantee
Vietnamese security. 18/

Thus, United States policy required France to grant full
Vietnamese independence quickly and to support a strong indigenous
political regime, to maintain French military presence but reduce
military, economic and political controls. Basic guidance determined
at National Security Council meetings on August 8 and 12 became
NSC 5429/2, issued on August 20.

3- U.S. Objectives in Vietnam: Political, Economic, Military

The American formula for government in free Vietnam rested
on three legs. Independence was first and more important. France must
treat South Vietnam as an independent sovereign nation and the U.S.
would deal with it on that basis. Full independence was the only way
to win nationalist support away from the Viet Minh, and nationalist
support was thought to be essential to successful government in South
Vietnam. Secondly, the U.S. would urge Ngo Dinh Diem to establish
a government of national union representative of dominant elements
on the political scene. After bringing some stability to the nation,

a Constituent Assembly would be called and a constitution drafted to
herald the legal dethroning of Emperor Bao Dai and inauguration of
democracy. 19/ Finally, the formula demanded firm French and U-S.
support for Diem. Despite his rigidity, his penchant for a one-man
show and his inability to communicate or deal with people, Diem was a
nationalist untainted by past association with either Viet Minh or
French. This quality, plus full independence, plus Franco-American

5 - OP SECRET - Sensitive
