Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

2. As the basis for realization of its objectives, the United
@ stele shovld pursue a policy toward Asia containing the following
cowspo® ents:

a, The United States should make known its sympathy with
the efforts of Asian leaders to form regional associations of
non-Communist states of the various Asian areas, and if in due
course associations eventuate, the United States should be pre-
pared, if invited, to assist such associations to fulfill their
purposes under conditions which would be to our interest. The
following principles should guide our actions in this respect:

(1) Any association formed must be the result of a
genuine desire on the part of the participating nations
to cooperate for mutual benefit in solving the political,
economic, social and cultural problems of the area.

é (2) The United States must not take such an active

| part in the early stages of the formation of such an associa-~

| tion that it will be subject to the charge of using the
Asiatic nations to further United States ambitions.

(3) The association, if it is to be a constructive
force, must operate on the basis of mutuel aid and self-
help in all fields so that a true partnership may exist
based on equal rights and equal obligations.

(4) United States participation in any stage of the
development of such an association should be with ea view
to accomplishing our basic objectives in Asia and to as-
suring that any association formed will be in accord with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations dealing
with regional arrangements.

b. The United States should act to develop and strengthen
the security of the area from Communist external aggression or
internal subversion. These steps should take into account any
benefits to the. security of Asia which may flow from the de-
velopment of one or more regional groupings. The United States
on its own initiative should now:

(1) Improve the United States position with respect
to Japen, the Ryukyus end the Philippines.

(2) Scrutinize closely the development of threats
from Communist aggression, direct or indirect, and be pre-
pared to. help within our means to meet such threats by
providing political, economic, and military assistance
and advice where cleerly needed to supplement the resist-
ence. of the other governments in and out of the area
which are more directly concerned.

267

So 48/2 J , Py) TOP SECRET
