oS

ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

15

of their type or of where or when they would be conducted. Indeed,
his lack of knowledge was such that he mistakenly identified the
South Vietnamese craft returning from their operation of July 31
as Soviet P-G class boats. . 4

‘In point of fact, our patrols and the shore bombardments by South
Vietnamese forces were separated in both time and space. W hen South
Vietnamese PTE’s bombarded the islands of Hon Nieu and Tfon Me
on the night of July 30-31, the J/addow had not.even commenced her
patrol, and was at least 130 miles to the southeast of the nearest of
those islands. At the time of the attack-on the Maddox on August
2 the South Vietnamese boats had been back at their base in Da Nang
‘or alinost 53 hours.

I learned subsequent to my testimony of August 6, 1964, that an-
other South Vietnamese bombardment took place on the night of
August 3-4. At the time of that action, the Maddow and Turner Joy
were at least 70 miles to the northeast. The North Vietnamese at-
tack on Maddox and Turner Joy on the night of August + oceurred
some 22 hours later. Some al,

I think it important, too, in dealing with this issue, to recall that
the President had announced publicly on August 8 that our patrol
would continue and consist of two destroyers. It 1s, difficult to Be
lieve, in the face of that announcement, and its obvious purpose o-
asserting our right to freedom of the seas, that even the North Viet-
namese could connect the patrol of the a/addox and Turner Joy
with a South Vietnamese action taking place some 19 miles away.

WAS THERE A SECOND ATTACK?

Now, thirdly, was there indeed a second attack? ;

I know of no claim that the attack on Jfaddo# on August 2 did not
occur. As for the second attack, the incident occurred on 2 very dark,
moonless, overcast night. As would be expected under these conclitions,
some uncertainty existed, and to this day exists, about some of the
precise details of the attack. But there should be no uncertainty about
the fact that an attack took place. The evidence pertaining to the
incident is reviewed in the following paragraphs. “mae
_ On the evening of August 4, 1964, Task Group 72.1. consisting of
USS. Maddow and USS. Turner Joy, with COMDESDIYV 192 ein-
barked in Maddow and acting as CTG 72.1, was proceeding on an
easterly course in the Gulf of Tonkin at a speed of 20 knots. At about
7:40 p.m., Tonkin Gulf time’ the task group commander, Capt. AAR
Herrick, USN, observed on the surface search radar at least five con-
tacts, which he evaluated as probable torpedo boats, located about 55
miles to the northeast of the two ships. At 7:46 p.m., Maddox and
Turner Joy changed course to 130 and increased speed to 28 knots to

_ avoid what the task group commander hed evaluated asa trap.

Shortly after 9 p.in., both ships’ radars held contacts approximately
14 miles to the east. These contacts were on course 160, speed 50 IOS.
At chat time the two U.S. ships were approxumatey 60 miles from the
North Vietnamese coast.

At about 9:39 p.m., both Maddow and Turner Joy opened fire on the’

approaching craft when it was evident from their maneuvers that they

1To convert local Tonkin Gulf time to e.d.t. subtract 12 hours.

ae ee et ee a ec ee ne
