Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Assist Free Vietnam to develop a strong, stable,
and constitutional government to enable Free Vietnam to
assert an increasingly attractive contrast to conditions in
the present Communist zone... [and] work toward the
weakening of the Communists in North and South Vietnam
in order to bring about the eventual peaceful reunifica-
tion of a free and independent Vietnam under anti-
Communist leadership."

In 1958 (in NSC 5809) this policy, with its "roll-back" overtones, was
reiterated, although revisions were proposed indicating an awareness of the
necessity to adapt the army of Vietnam for anti-guerrilla warfare.
Operations Coordinating Board Progress Reports on the implementation

of the policies laid out in NSC 5612 and 5809 revealed awareness that
Vietnam was under internal attack, and that "in spite of substantial

U.S. assistance, economic development, though progressing, is below

that which is politically desirable."

While classified policy papers through 1959 thus dealt with risks,
public statements of U.S. officials did not refer to the jeopardy. To
the contrary, the picture presented the public and Congress by Ambassador
Durbrow, General Williams, and other Administration spokesmen was of
continuing progress, virtually miraculous improvement, year-in and
year-out. Diem was depicted as a strong and capable leader, firmly
in command of his own house, leading his people into modern nationhood
at a remarkable pace. As late as the summer of 1959, Ambassador Durbrow
and General Williams assured the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
that Vietnam's internal security was in no serious danger, and that
Vietnam was in a better position to cope with invasion from the North
than it had ever been. In the fall of 1959, in fact, General Williams
expressed the opinion that by 1961 GVN defense budgets could be reduced,
and in the spring of 1960, he wrote to Senator Mansfield that American
military advisors could begin a phased withdrawal from MAAG, Vietnam
the following year.

Whatever adverse judgment may be deserved by such statements or by
the quality of U.S. assistance to Vietnam on behalf of its internal
security, the American aid program cannot be faulted for failing to
provide Diem funds in plenty. The U.S. aid program -- economic and
military -- for South Vietnam was among the largest in the world.
From Fy 1946 through FY 1961, Vietnam was the third ranking non-NATO
recipient of aid, and the seventh worldwide. In FY 1961, the last
program of President Eisenhower's Administration, South Vietnam was
the fifth ranking recipient overall. MAAG, Vietnam, was the only
military aid mission anywhere in the world commanded by a lieutenant
general, and the economic aid mission there was by 1958 the largest
anywhere.

Security was the focus of U.S. aid; although military grants
comprised only 25% of the total program in the years 1955 through 1961,

34 TOP SECRET - Sensitive -
