Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

be undertaken outside the SEATO framework. As Secretary Rusk pointed out,
"Souvanna Phouma might well call on individual SEATO nations for help, but
was less likely to call on SEATO as an organization." Besides, the French
and Pakistani were expected to be obstructive and the Philippines Govern-
ment was regarded as presenting a constant threat of untimely leaks. Con-
sensus was reached that the starting point for our bilateral consultations
should be Thailand, since that government's confidence in the sincerity
of the U.S. commitment seemed particularly needful of being shored up.

At the meeting, Ambassador Martin echoed. the themes which he had reported
earlier in cables -- that the Thais were not convinced that we meant to stop
the course in Southeast Asia and probably would not participate in or per-
mit allied troop build-ups in their country without firmer assurances than
had. been given in the past. 103/

Another preliminary step discussed by the conferees was the desira-
bility of obtaining a Congressional resolution prior to wider U.S. action
in Southeast Asia. Ambassador Lodge questioned the need for it if we were
to confine our actions to "tit-for-tat" air attacks against North Vietnam.
However, Secretaries McNamara and Rusk and CIA Director McCone all argued
in favor of the resolution. In support, McNamara pointed to the need to ~
guarantee South Vietnam's defense against retaliatory air attacks and against
more drastic reactions by North Vietnam and Communist China. He “added that
it might be necessary, as the action unfolded...to deploy as many @S seven
divisions." Rusk noted that some of the military requirements might involve
the calling up of reserves, always a touchy Congressional issue: He also
stated that public opinion on our Southeast Asian policy was badly divided
in the United States at the moment and that, therefore, the President needed.
an affirmation of support. 10)/

Next, the discussion turned to present estimates of communist reaction
to attacks on North Vietnam:

"General Taylor summarized the present Washington
view, to the effect that there would certainly be stepped-
up Viet Cong activity in South Vietnam, Communist Chinese
air might be sent to North Vietnam, Hanoi itself might
send some ground forces south (though probably only on
a limited scale), and there was the final possibility
that the Communist Chinese would respond with signifi-
cant military action. As to the last, he made clear
that he did not visualize a 'yellow horde’ of Chinese
pouring into Southeast Asia, and that air interdiction
could have a significant effect in reducing the number
of forces the Comaunist Chinese could send down and
support...In any case, he said that the military judg-
ment was that seven ground divisions would be needed
if the Communist Chinese employed their full capabili-
ties in the dry scason, and five divisions even in the
wet season. The needed five-seven divisions could come
in part from the Thai and others, but a major share would
have to be borne by the U.S.

31
