Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnamese Compliance More in Form Than in Substance

The Vietnamese, nevertheless, showed a ready willingness to declare
new policies, sign decrees, and engage in joint studies at our request.
But as noted, that scarcely means that we got what we wanted on such matters.
Ky was always willing to issue decrees purporting to clear up the port
problem, and to make public declarations against corruption. On economic
policy, Ky and Hanh gave us one agreement after another promising to control
inflation and to run down their dollar balances. The relations of their
military with MACV showed the same pattern,

The Vietnamese military, on whom the U.S. counted most heavily, con-
tinued as in earlier periods to have far more enthusiasm for external adven-
tures than they did for getting on with the job of effective government and
pacification. They promised much on this latter score, but delivered little.
Knowing that we had no one else to turn to, they continued their old habits:
and often openly did what they pleased about important matters, such as the
airlift of troops to Danang in May, 1966. ,

Examples of superficial compliance are almost too numerous to mention.
The Honolulu Conference of February 1966, produced over sixty agreed points
between the two governments on all areas of mutual interest; getting any
follow-up proved to be like pulling teeth, and then the follow-up we got
was nothing more as a rule than more promises. Likewise, at the Manila
Conference much the same thing happened, where GVN agreed to programs for
social revolution, economic progress, and so on. However, at our insistence
they did go ahead with the constitution and elections, and they shifted half
of ARVN into pacification. How much substantive improvement these moves
will produce still. remains to be seen.

GVN taste for foreign adventure showed up in small, irritating ways.
In July 1965, Thi planned unauthorized operations in the DMZ, but we stopped
him. In 1967, we discovered that GVN had brought in Chinese Nationalists
disguised es Nungs, to engage in operations in Laos; also, they sent a group
to put an airfield on an island 170 miles south of Hainan, apparently with-
out consulting MACV.

Conclusion

Increasingly throughout 1967, GVN legitimacy and performance became a
domestic political issue in the U.S. as well as a source of concern for
policy-makers. No matter what issue was raised, the central importance of
the GVN remained. If we wanted to pacify more, we had to turn to the Viet-
namese themselves. If we desired to push for a negotiated settlement, we
hed to seriously weigh the possibilities of SVN collapse. In the last
analysis, it was and is a war which only GVN legitimacy and effectiveness

. can win.

A. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
vii st eae ete tear raat

\ .
