Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for the defense of Japan. The only alternative is that this
venture into Indochina ‘has a close relation to the South Sea
area and its value for offense against that area." *

In a press statement of 2 August 1941, Acting Secretary of State
Welles deplored Japan's "expansionist aims" and impuned Vichy:

"Under these circumstances, this Government is impelled
to question whether the French Government at Vichy in fact
proposes to maintain its declared policy to preserve for
the French people the territories both at home and abroad
which have long been under French sovereignty.

"This Government, mindful of its traditional friend-
ship for France, has deeply sympathized with the desire of
the French people to maintain their territories and to
preserve them intact. In its relations with the French
Government at Vichy and with the local French authorities
in French territories, the United States will be governed
by the manifest effectiveness with which those authorities
endeavor to protect these territories from domination and
control by those powers which are seeking to extend their
rule by force and conquest, or by the threat thereof."

On the eve of Pearl Harbor, as part of the U.S. attempt to obtain
Japanese consent to a non-aggression pact, the U.S. again proposed neutrali-
zation of Indochina in return for Japanese withdrawal. The events of
7 December 1941 put the question of the future of Indochina in the wholly
different context of U.S. strategy for fighting World War II.

a. Roosevelt's Trusteeship Concept
U.S. policy toward Indochina during World War II was ambivalent.
On the one hand, the U.S. appeared to support Free French claims to all

of France's overseas dominions. The U.S. early in the war repeatedly ex-
pressed or implied to the French an intention to restore to France its

* Memorandum by Cecil W. Gray, Assistant to the Secretary of State,
July 24, 1942.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A-12
