Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The second indicated that even in the worst case, the United States would
retain some leverage to affect the outcome. They argued that "the extent
to which individual countries would move away from the U.S. towards the
communists would be significantly affected by the substance and manner
of U.S. policy in the period following the loss of laos and South Vietnam."
The largely moderating tone of this estimate of the degree to
which U.S, vital interests were in jeopardy in Southeast Asia tended to
be reinforced by the views of the President's highest-level advisers on
military matters. On his way to the Honolulu Conference, CJCS Taylor had
forwarded. without detailed comment the JCS recommendation for courses of
action in Southeast Asia. 120/ On 5 June, after his return, he submitted
highly critical comments, together with his preferred alternative to the
JCS proposal, to Secretary McNamara. 121/ Five days later, the Secretary
communicated his approval of General Taylor's views and no doubt conveyed
the flavor, if not the details, of them to the White House. 122/

The nature of these views shared by the President's two top mili-
tary advisers indicates a rejection of the concept of trying to force the
DRV to reverse its policies by striking North Vietnam with punishing blows.
The JCS had stated the view that only by initiating military actions de-
signed to destroy the DRV's will and capabilities could we reasonably ex-
pect to compel it to terminate its support of the insurgencies in South
Vietnam and Laos. But they had expressed their support of certain recommended.
limited actions as "an initial measure" directed toward causing the DRV
"to decide to terminate their subversive support." 123/ General Taylor
argued that these two alternatives were not "an accurate or complete expres-
sion of our choices." He suggested three patterns from which the United
States "may choose to initiate the attack on North Vietnam," in descend-
ing order or weight:

"a. A massive air attack on all significant mili-

tary targets in North Vietnam for the purpose of destroy-
ing them and thereby making the enemy incapable of continuing
to assist the Viet Cong and the Pathet Lao.

b. A lesser attack on some significant part of the
military target system in North Vietnam for the dual pur-
pose of convincing the enemy that it is to his interest
to desist from aiding the Viet Cong and the Pathet Lao,
and, if possible, of obtaining his cooperation in calling
off the insurgents in South Vietnam and Laos.

e. Demonstrative strikes against limited military
targets to show U.S, readiness and intent to pass to al-
ternatives b or a above. These demonstrative strikes

would have the same dual purpose as in alternative b.”

Stating & personal preference for the second, he noted the probability
that “political considerations will incline our responsible civilian offi-
cials to opt for /the third/ alternative." ‘Therefore, his recommendation

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
