Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

followed by an effective program to give the villeges protection
and security be established in Saigon.

7. It is likewise extremely importent that program
directives be issued at an early stage by the central govern-
nent to lower echelons for proper implementation of all aspects
of the program for giving villagers protection.

8. We also urge early revitalization of the amnesty
program.

9. We are encouraged by the exploratory talks which
the Vietnamese Government has held with Cambodian Govern-
ment officials for improving relations between the two coun-
tries. We hope that both Governments can proceed to actual
negotiations for the settlement of their bilateral problems.

10. We accept with pleasure General Minh's invitation
to set up an American brain-trust to work with his government
and we are prepared to furnish any ‘personnel needed for this -/
purpose.

11. General Minh can also be sure that he has the com-
plete support of the United States Government as the leader
of Viet-Nam. We believe he can magnetically rally the Viet-
namese people if he will really try to do so. He should be
told leadership is am essential political ingredient of
victory such as was the case with Magsaysay in the Philippines." 13/

In this overall context the U.S. had already moved discreetly
toward greater involvement in Vietnamese administration at lower levels.
Tate in 1963, the USG and GVN agreed on a "Decentralization of Action"
package. Using AID de facto control of ATID commodities to the province
jevel (even though they passed to Vietnamese ownership at the dock), U.S.
advisers could assure that no AID commodities came out to the province with-
out their consent. They could and did extend this control to cover releases
of these commodities from province warehouses. U.S, officials controlled
the distribution of ATID commodities because they controlled all Saigon
warehouses set aside for these commodities, even though the warehouses,
like the commodities, belonged to the Vietnamese. 14/

Among the many problems that were to keep recurring was that of
freedom of the press. Following an initial honeymoon period after the
coup, trouble broke out between GVN and the U.S. press corps. This reached
a climax with the temporary barring of the New York Times from Vietnamese
distribution channels when it ran a story reporting dissension among the
Vietnamese Generals. 15/ In general, Lodge sided with GVN on this issue,
as shown in his reported views at the November, 1963, Honolulu Conference:

"The U.S. press should be induced to leave the new
government alone. They have exerted great influence on

hs TOP SECRET - Sensitive
