Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

Vv. D. JUSTIFICATION OF THE WAR -- PUBLIC STATEMENTS

16.

LT.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

JOHNSON ADMINISTRATION
1965

P CONTENTS

Secretary Rusk again suggests one does not need the domino

theory to predict Communist threat; Peiping proclamations

and actions provide ample evidence of expansionist doctrine;
relates validity of NATO commitment to U.S. response to

aggressive acts to a SEATO protocol state... .eseesscessseseses DH25

President Johnson emphasizes again U.S. presence in response
to request from SVN to help meet aggression and its relation
to U.S. security DECC PGs bat ale! £-0ib:470 layn orn in raleiayerave wey ejiniscevalaletalererer stead D-25

William Bundy relates actions in Korea to VN; spells out

action initiated in 1954 by President Eisenhower and the

support provided by Congress in terms of SEATO ratification

and budget approvals. He cites effect of the outcome of VN
struggle on neighboring states and on the prestige and power

of the Communist movement's new strategy, wars of liberation. D-26

William Bundy cites the U.S.'s intent to permit nations to

develop freely the potential consequences to neighboring

countries if SVN should fall under Communist control and the
importance of demonstrating that “wars of liberation" are not

to be tolerated as paramount among U.S. concerns.......see0e+ D-27

Secretary Rusk states the legal basis of U.S. bombing to be
“self defense of SVN and the commitments of U.S. with respect
to the security and self-defense Of SVN."..cccceecssccceceees D-28

Ambassador Stevenson cites record of aggression in SVN in
communication to Se es oa acd .8)d.b Ries Oba SS ee Ah aa ee bree Ge leece letetie D-28

Secretary Rusk refers to lessons of World War II and SEATO

pact as important reasons for meeting aggression in SVN before

it spreads FUCHS oes ces -oceein's 2 apes bie ee ce 0.0 Ween 550 Sais wee cc etn
Department of State statement cites Constitutional authority

of President to meet obligation under SEATO in response to
AGETESSION in SVN. ceecscececeveevcccvecsevsevsssecssecseseeses D~ 30

‘  -p-22
