Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

seemed to believe that political restraints imposed upon our military
leaders were the chief cause of so little concrete progress. This
belief and the potential untapped political support it revealed, was to
be a powerful lever in the hands of the JCS as they pressed for force
inereases during Program 5. 6/

Manpower, though, was becoming the crucial issue -- its political
ramifications were enormous, and politicians were prone to best detect
them. Senator Ted Kennedy delivered a major speech on the draft to the
National Press Club, urging reform. On the same day, Senator Mike
Mansfield reintroduced his resolution calling for a "substantial reduc-
tion" in the number of American troops in Europe. Wa Men, money and
political will were the crux issues of the domestic debate; by the end
of January all three had highlighted the news. The troop issue out-
standing between the JCS and McNamare, had been wrung out in public,
$73.1 billion had been asked for defense and on 23 January, The Arrogance
of Power was published. 8/

2. Vietnam Strategy: ‘Attention Rivets on the Borders and Sanctuaries

We have already described how MACV attention shifted to the borders
and sanctuaries in late 1966. By January and February of the next year
(1967), COMUSMACV and CINCPAC were riveted upon these crucial areas where
major enemy units were being found and fought.

COMUSMACV assumed that @ new phase of the struggle was beginning,
one which demanded that we reexamine our military strategy. To take
advantage of the existing opportunities which he detected, he decided
to mount a "general offensive" designed to:

"A. Maintain the momentum of the offensive on a seven-
day-a-week, around-the-clock basis.

"B. Decimate enemy forces, destroy his base areas and
disrupt the VC infrastructure.

"C. Interdict enemy land and water lines of comminica-
tion, denying him the opportunity to resupply and reinforce
his units and bases in South Vietnam.

"D. Open, secure and use land and water lines of communica-
tion.

"mR. Convince the enemy, through the vigor of our offen-
sives and accompanying psychological operations, that he faces -
defeat.

"Fr, Support political and economic progress in SVN...." 9/

oh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
