Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

time), Ambassador Lodge forwarded a report of USOM provincial repre-
sentative Young on the situation in Long An province as of 6 December.
Part of that report was as follows:

(1) The only progress made in Long An province dur-
ing the month of November, 1963 has been by the
Communist Viet Cong. The past thirty days have
produced a day-by-day elimination of US/Vietnamese
sponsored strategic hamlets and the marked increase
in Viet Cong influence, militery operations,
physical control of the countryside and Communist
controlled combat hamlets.

(2) At the end of September, 1963 province officials
stated that 219 strategic hamlets were completed
and met the 6 criteria. Effective 30 November 1963
this figure has been reduced to about 45 on the
best estimates of MAAG, USOM and new province
chief, Major Dao, Twenty-seven hamlets were
attacked in November compared with a figure of 77
for June. This would appear to be an improvement.
However, the explanation is a simple one: so many
strategic hamlets have been rendered ineffective
by the Viet Cong that only 27 were worth attacking
this month...

(4) The reason for this unhappy situation is the failure
of the government of Vietnam to support and protect
the hamlets. The concept of the strategic hamlet
called for a self-defense corps capable of holding
off enemy attack for a brief period until regular
forces (ARVN, Civil Guard, or SDC) could came to
the rescue. In hamlet after hamlet this assist-
ance never came, or in most cases, arrived the fol-
lowing morning during daylight hours...

(5) Two explanations are presented for the lack of assist-
ance; (a) there are not sufficient troops to protect
key installations and district headquarters and at
the same time go to the assistance of the hamlet. (b)
Both official orders and policy prohibit the movement
of troops after dark to go to the assistance of
hamlets or isolated military posts...

(9) The strategic hamlet program in this province can be
made workable and very effective against the Viet
Cong. But help must come immediately in the form of

; additional troops and new concepts of operation, not

in the same reheated French tactics of 195), beefed
up with more helicopters and tanks, The hamlets must
be defended if this province is not to fall under
complete control of the Viet Cong in the next few

morths,...
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

16
