Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

least in principle. RLG would have to be associated with these
negotiations at some point.

It is evident from these and similar tough settlement terms and
‘cessation "demanis" that were being discussed »etween Saigon and Washing-
ton at that time that there was a real expectation that the kinds of
reprisal pressures contemplated would inflict such pain or threat of pain
upon the DRV that it would be compelled to order a stand-down of Viet
Cong violence and accept conditions that, from their point of view, were
tantamount to surrender. Such a view is even more clearly implicit in
the comments and proposals on reprisal programs emanating from the U.S.
military leadership.

C. CINCPAC's "Graduated Pressures" Philosophy

Admiral Sharp, commenting on Ambassador Taylor's reprisal and
negotiating concepts, called attention to the need to make the reprisal
program a very forceful one, if the DRV was to be persuaded to accede to
a cessation on US terms:

While it may be politically desirable to speak publicly in
terms of a "graduated reprisal” program, I would hope that we
are thinking, and will act, in terms of a "graduated pressures"
philosophy which has more of a connotation of steady, relentless
movement toward our objective of convincing Hanoi and Peiping of
the prohibitive cost of them of their program of subversion,
insurgency and aggression in SEAsia.

If a firm decision is made to embark upon a graduated
pressures program, the recommendation contained in [feylor's
Feb 11 message/ to undertake discussions with the RVN refer-
ence joint US/GV" military actions is most necessary. Failure
to develop firm arrangements concerning roles and responsibili-
ties could result in over reliance on the U.S. contribution
to the war effort, and perhaps GVN resorting to rash military
actions from which we would have to bail them out.

There is no question of the desirability of concurrently
educating the GVN, as also proposed in Refb, toward formula-
tion of war objectives, demands and negotiating procedures to
be employed against the DRV. I believe that sueh an educational
process, combined with a graduated military pressures program
will further contribute to GVN stability.

We must be certain that we ere dealing from e posture of
strength before we sit down at the bargaining table. Success-
ful direct increasing military pressures against NVN must be
complemented by a reversal of the trend toward VC success
within RVN. We must also exhibit complete confidence in our

Ce TOP SECRET - Sensitive
