Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

crucial variable; that there was no indication that the North Viet-
namese had lost stomach for the war; nor did the NVA lack the capability
to reinforce et a much higher level than we had anticipated.

As Program 5 broke almost as if programmed, General H. K. Johnson
announced in his visit to Saigon that there was "a smell of success
in every major area of the war." Ina Senate Preparedness Subcommittee
report given by Senator Stennis he repeated their incessant demand
that we have a sharp intensification of the air war over North Vietnam
in an attempt to stem the infiltration. General Cao Van Bien, Chief of
Staff of the South Vietnamese Armed Forces said he was convinced, how-
ever, that bombing of North Vietnam would never adequately control
infiltration. That "we have to solve the problem of Laos and Cambodia
and the sanctuaries or the war might last 30 years.”

The program which emerged and was ratified in this environment, of
public debate and concern, was essentially the result of the circular
path traced far back to the optimum request of Program 4. Its origins
and its limits can be traced to one primary factor -- that of mobilization.
When the President and the Secretary of Defense, as well as other
Congressional leaders and politically attuned decision makers in the
government began to search for the illusive point at which the costs of
Vietnam would become inordinate, they always settled upon the mobiliza-
tion line, the point at which Reserves and large units would have to be
called up to support a war which was becoming increasingly distasteful
and intolerable to the American public. Domestic resource constraints
with all of their political and social repercussions, not strategic or
tactical military considerations in Vietnam, were to dictate American
war policy from that time on. .

{.. Follow-Ons

Hardly had the ink dried on approval of Program 5 deployments, when
pressures began to build for the acceleration of these deployments to
Vietnam. On 6 September 1967, the Acting Chairman informed the Joint
Chiefs of Staff that he had been queried as to what could be done to
speed up or accelerate Program 5 deployments. Although ostensibly the
reason for accelerated deployments was to meet the threat in the DMZ
and I CTZ, the Acting Chairman indicated he had been specifically asked
to look at:

a. What could be done prior to Christmas.

b. What could be done prior to March 12, the date of the
New Hampshire primary election.

The Chiefs were to look into the subject on an urgent basis and to
provide their views to the Acting Chairman by 9 September 1967. 75/

215 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
