Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

8. Settling the question of the extra funds for Diem.

9. The tactics of persuading Diem to move more rapidly to
broaden the base of his government, as well as to decrease its
centralization and improve its efficiency.

Against the background of decisions we should urgently take
on these matters, you may wish to prepare a letter to Diem which
would not only congratulate him, reaffirm our support, and
specify new initiatives we are prepared to take, but would make
clear to him the urgency you attach to a more effective political
and morale setting for his military operation, now that the
elections are successfully behind him.

Neither this memo, nor other available papers, give us a basis for
judging how far the stress on the importance of Vietnam was already in-
fluenced by developments in Laos, and how much it reflects a separable
interest in taking on the challenge of "wars of liberation." Both were
undoubtedly important. But this Rostow memo turned out to be pretty close
to an agenda for the initial Task Force report. It seems very safe to
assume that the "full-time, first-rate, back-stop man in Washington”
Rostow had in mind was Lansdale, (Gilpatric himself obviously could not
be expected to spend full-time on Vietnam.) Presumably the President's
request for the Gilpatric report was intended as either a method of easing
Lansdale into that role, or at least of trying him out in it.

Following the description of the Rostow memo, Gilpatric's file con-
tains several carbon copies of a long paper, unsigned but certainly by
Lansdale, which among other things recommends that the President set up a
Task Force for Vietnam which would lay out a detailed program of action
and gO On to supervise the implementation of that program. The date on
the paper is April 19, but a draft must have been prepared some days
earlier, probably about the time of Lansdale's discussion with Rostow on
the 13th, since the available copies recommended that the Task Force sub-
mit its report to the President by April 21. The paper explicitly foresaw
a major role for General Lansdale both in the Task Force, and thereafter
in supervising the implementation of the report.

This Task Force was apparently intended to supersede what the paper
refers to as "one of the customary working groups in Washington" which
was "being called together next week by John Steeves, Acting Assistant
Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs."

In view of all this, it is not surprising to find that the first
phase of the Task Force effort appears, from the record, to have been
very much a Gilpatric-Lansdale show. The first meeting of the group
(which included State and CIA representatives) was apparently held
April 24, four days after Gilpatric was told to go ahead. A draft report

eh
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
