Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET =- Sensitive

An important facet of the second phase was to attain "stra-
tegic mobility" in order to counter the tactical mobility of RVN
and FW forces. The object of a "strategic mobility" was to mass
a large number of maneuver battalions in several widely-scattered
areas. These maneuver battalions would tie large numbers of
Allied forces to static defense roles, and permit the nvA/vC to
attack specific positions at times of their own choosing. The
buildup in the number of battalions, and particularly the infil-
tration of larger NVA units, would be done covertly with the
object of initiating the larger-sized attacks by surprise. The
version of "strategic mobility" implemented by Gen Vo Neuyen Giap
was a "defensive/offensive" strategy which had the following ob-
jectives;

1) to develop strong multi-division forces in dispersed areas
that were secure and accessible to supplies; 2) to entice FW
forces into prepared enemy positions so that the entrenched
communist forces could inflict heavy casualties on them; and

3) to continue country-wide guerrilla action to tie down Allied
forces, destroy sma11 units, and extend control.

The NVN and VC emphasized in guidance put out to their people
that the war would be won in the highlands of MR5, an area that
the enemy envisioned as a "killing zone." The mountainous and
Jungled terrain favored VC operations in that the highlands were
closer to the NVA buildup areas near the DMZ and to the secure
base areas in Laos and Cambodia. These factors made the highlands
a much more favorable battle area for the NVA/VC than for the FW
forces. The enemy would also be able to place sizeable forces on
the entrance routes to the heavily populated coastal areas. In
order to use the highlands as the killing zone in the war for RVN,
the enemy hoped first to establish an "equilibrium of forces" in
the highlands, and then to launch an offensive in one or more
districts. The enemy had thus hoped in 1966 to launch ever-larger
attacks in the highlands, to concentrate his troops and firepower,
and, with improved comnand and comtrol, to attack and hold im-
portant objectives.

During the same enemy time-frame that the highlands were
being exploited as the killing zone, the enemy had other plans
for the Delta area and for Saigon. The Delta was to be the
support area and as such was to continue to provide manpower and
fill logistic requirements for the other operational regions,
particularly MR5. Insofar as possible, it was planned that the
Delta should move also toward the second phase of larger-unit
"strategic mobility." ‘The Delta, being the seat of the old revol-
utionary political organization, was to be the originating point
of new political organizations sent out-to support the offensive

20° TOP SECRET - Sensitive
