Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

To accomplish this 100,000 man expansion [evove the strength
recommended in the CIP, which was 20,000 above the existing
strength/ of our military forces, which is perfectly feasible
from & manpower viewpoint, will require 4 great intensification
of our training programs in order to produce, in the minimum of
time, those qualified combat leaders and technical specialists
needed to fill the new units end to provide to them the technical
and logistical support required to insure their complete effec-
tiveness. For this purpose a considerable expansion of the
United States Military Advisory Group is an essential require-
ment. Such an expansion, in the form of selected elements of
the American Armed Forces to establish training centers for
the Vietnamese Armed Forces, would serve the dual purpose of
providing an expression of the United States’ determination
to halt the tide of communist aggression and of preparing
our forces in the minimun of time. 54/

The response to this letter is not part of the available record. No ;
doubt the initial reaction was one of surprise. ‘The U,S. was not accus~
tomed to GVN initiatives; it seldom sought them. "We have not become
accustomed to being asked for our own views on our needs," Diem remarked
in his letter to Kennedy. 55/ But Diem's proposal did certainly strike
one appealing chord: the joint benefits of training coupled to demonstrated
commitment through the deployment of existing troop units. As the situ-
ation in South Vietnam continued to deteriorate throughout the summer and
early fall the issue of U.S. military advice continued to be addressed

in terms of U.S. units. These could, of course, do even more than had
been suggested by President Diem: they could fight as units. Diem's
generally consistent position, however, continued to be that he would
accept U.S. combat forces, but only to train GVN forces. He had said

as much to Vice President Johnson:

General McGarr, who was also present at this discussion
[between Johnson and Dien/ reported that while President Diem
would not want U.S. combat forces for the purpose of fighting
Communists in South Vietnam, he would accept deployment of U.S.
combat forces as trainers for the Vietnamese forces at any time. 56/

GVN_ ASKS FOR ADDITIONAL U.S. ASSISTANCE

By October the situation within South Vietnam had become sufficiently
grim for President Diem to reverse his earlier sentiments and to ask for
a bilateral defense treaty with the U.S, 57) His new willingness, coupled
with the deteriorating situation, kicked off a new series of proposals
within the U.S, Government. Walt Rostow proposed that the U.S. place an
internationalized force of about 25,000 men into RVN to perform a border
sealing mission. The JCS responded with a counter proposal emphasizing Leos
and calling for the deployment of a sizeable (initially 20,000) U.S.
contingent to the centrdl highlands. 58/ Another proposal blended elements

23 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
