Fee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

persuaded GVN to cooperate fully with the IMF team, then on its way, to
work out an anti-inflationary and balance-of-payments program. 48/

The IMF team worked through late May end at the end of the month
agreed with GVN on a program with the following main points:

(1) he exchange rate for imports, including tariff, would be
increased fron 60 to 118 piasters to the dollar except for rice, which
would be brought in at 80. Purchases of piasters by U.S. troops and
civilians, and other "invisibles," would have the 118 rate in both
directions.

(2) A new tax on beverages would raise about 1.5 billion
Piasters in revenue.

(3) The GYN would sell gold to jewelers to push the price down
closer into line with black market dollar exchange rate.

(4) The GVN would raise wages and salaries of its employees by
20% inmediately, with a further 10% to follow in six months
if necessary.

The GYN asked the USG for assurance on the following points:

(1) The GVN/IMF plen would substitute for the fiscal and customs
reforms promised at Honolulu.

(2) The USG would liberalize the Commodity Imports Program to
cover all importers’ requests.

(3) The USG would buy all its piasters for official programs
at the exchange rete of 80 (versus the previous 35).

(4) All appropriated Commodity Import Funds not used up would
be applied to economic development projects in Vietnam. 4g/

The USG raised no problem about points (1) and (3) of the GVN
requests, but for obvious reasons could give only vague and non-conmittal
assurances on the amount of AID that Congress would authorize and reprogram.
However, it made other concessions to increase total economic aid. 50/

The two governments reached prompt agreement on these points, and the
piaster was devalued as proposed on June 18, along with the associated
fiscal reforms. The GVN's promise to hold down its dollar holdings (given
at Honolulu) remained "binding," although the generous AID package of the
previous July was now raising GVN's dollar balances at a rate of about
$100 million per year. 51/

These decisions overrode a proposal from OSD (Systems Analysis)

to get tough with GVN and to get deeper and more enforceable reforms.
The DASD (Economics) predicted that the GVN would fail to carry out any

28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
