Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

indicating that conditions were good and prospects improving. In fact,
in the course of these reassurances, the Secretary of Defense decided to
order a speed up of the planned program for release of U.S. forces. In
guidance furnished at the time, he directed that the projected schedules
for force reduction provided for in the currently approved Model M Plan
version of the CPSVN be accelerated by approximately six months. Accord-
ingly, necessary planning revisions were undertaken immediately on a
priority basis.

in contrast to the generally favorable military situation, however,
there were grave misgivings about the political state of affairs. Earlier,
a draft text of a proposed letter from the President of the United States
to President Dien of the RVN had been forwarded by cable to the Secretary
of Defense and the Ambassador, with a request for their reaction and com-
ments. President Kennedy himself thought the letter too extreme, and
would reluctantly resort to it only if the situation was found so serious
that such direct US Presidential pressure was necessary. The text of the
proposed letter was characterized by harsh, blunt candor. In effect it
laid down an ultimatum: unless the GVN changed the repressive policies,
methods, and actions practiced by some individual officials and gained for
itself a broad base of popular political support, the United States might
have to consider disassociating itself from the Dien Government, and fur-
ther US support of Vietnam might become impossible. The Secretary of
Defense and the Ambassador promptly responded with a strong recommendation
against trdnsmitting the proposed letter. Both agreed that the situation
was indeed very, serious, but that it was not likely to be influenced by
such a letter to Diem.*

The proposed Presidential letter was not sent. Instead, many of
the points were conveyed in conversations with Dien,** and, just before
the departure of the McNemara-Taylor Mission from Vietnam, another letter
to President Diem was composed and sent in its place. The new version
was not only much softer in tone and more circumspect but went out over
the signature of General Taylor as Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff. The
letter was dated 1 October 1963, but was delivered on 2 October, with the
approval of the Secretary of Defense and with the concurrence of the US
Ambassador to Vietnam (Lodge).

In this letter the CJCS offered his personal, professional comments
on the military situation, in response to Diem's earlier expressed
interest in receiving then. After acknowledging the encouraging mili-
tary progress over the preceding two years, the CJCS stated, "It was not
until the recent political disturbances beginning in May and continuing
through August and beyond that I personally had any doubt as to the
ultimate success of our campaign against the Viet Cong." He then added:

* Nsg State ¥76 to Saigon, 2) Sep 63, TOP SECRET EYES ONLY for AMBASSADOR
LODGE and SECRETARY MeNAMARA; MSG Saigon 593 to State, 24 Sep 63,
TOP SECRET EYES ONLY for PRESIDEN? FROM McNAMARA.

*x* Mirgram, Saigon A-2hh to State, 3 Oct 63, Subj: "McNemara-Taylor Mission
Memo of Conversation with President Diem, Sep 29, 1963," SECRET.

19 TOP SECRET .- Sensitive
