Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The strategic hamlet program has not succeeded, Under
present conditions, given the scarcity of GVN forces
and deeply entrenched Viet Cong shadow government,

it can not be expected to... 19

Whether or not the full seriousness of the situation in the.
Delta was appreciated at the time of the McNamara-Taylor mission in
September 1963, it is entirely clear that the Delta was recognized
as a high priority problem. The recommendations set forth in their
joint Report to the President of 2 October called for "the training
and arming of hamlet militia at an accelerated rate, especially in
the Delta" and for "a consolidation of the Strategic Hamlet Program,
especially in the Delta, and action to insure thatin the future’ strategic
hamlets are not built until they can be protected and until civic
action programs can be introduced." And in the appraisal of overall
progress, the judgments were rendered that

The Delta remains the toughest area of all, and
now requires top priority in both GVN and U.S.
efforts. Approximately 40 percent of the people
live there; the area is rich and has traditionally
resisted central authority; it is the center of
Viet Cong strength --over one-third of the "“hard-
core" are found there; and the maritime nature of
the terrain renders it much the most difficult
region to pacify. 19,

During the Honolulu meeting of 20 November when Gen. Harkins
presented a summary of the situation in 13 critical provinces, 7
were in the Delta. Secretary McNamara in a detailed discussion on
that occasion of the situation on these provinces suggested that
there were three things to be done in the Delta: (1) to get the
Chieu Hoi program moving; (2) to get the fertilizer program going
in order to increase the output of rice, and (3) most important, to
improve the security of strategic hanlets by arming and training and
increasing the numbers of the militia. It is recorded that at this’
point General Taylor made a suggestion that perhaps we needed joint
U.S.-Vietnamese province teams to attack problems at the province
. level because the problems were in fact different in each province,
This latter seems worth noting in view of the emphasis that was to
be placed, some months later, upon getting more Americans into 4
supervisory or advisory capacity in the provincial areas.

When General Harkins presented his review of the military situa-
tion at this meeting, he indicated that weapon losses were quite high,
particularly in November when the government forces lost nearly 3
weapons to every one captured from the VC. The losses were incurred
largely by the Civil Guard, the Self-Defense Corps and the hamlet
militia, It was also indicated at the meeting that the greatest
single difficulty of a pacification program was in the problem of
security in the hamlets, Nevertheless, the explanation that the
difficulties of November resulted solely from the coup and (would
therefore not continue) made it seem unnecessary to change the
assumptions that over-all progress in the counter-insurgency effort
justified programming a phase-out of the major portion of the U.S.

ih TOP SECRET - Sensitive
