Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ROLLING THUNDER 15 as outlined in JCS 1736 has been approved.
It is to be executed uoon receipt of appropriate execution orders.

Press guidance for the period during which bombing operations
are suspended will be furnished in a separate message.

Acting on these instructions, Taylor saw Quat in Saigon on the
morning of May 12, and reported back as follows: 127/

Along with Alex Johnson, I called this morning to convey
to Quat the information contained in Department's instructions.
I told him thet his views with regard to linking the pause with
Buddha's birthday had been accepted and that this element had
been removed from the plen. I explained that the pause begins
tomorrow (Saigon time) and will continue for several days. As
he did not raise any question with regard to the precise dura-
tion, I did not elaborate. He liked the military justification

- for the pause as explained in REFTEL and undertook to remain
within this language in dealing with his generals. I assured
him that General Westmoreland would do the same in his militery
contacts.

We explained to Guat how the message was being conveyed to
the USSR and Hanoi. He had no comment except to express doubt
that any detectable change in DRV conduct will take place dur-
ing the suspension of attacks.

As for comment to the press, he repeated his intention to
ward off queries by references to "Operational Requirements.

While securing Quet's support has been somewhat easier than
I had anticipated, I am sure that he and his colleagues will
become uneasy very quickly if this pause runs beyond the four
to five days" which Quet has indicated to be acceptable from his
point of view. I would hope thet our purposes can have been

fulfilled within the five day period.

With regard to paraegravh 2 /of Department's instructions/,
Johnson and I feel that it is ummecessary and probably undesir~
able to approach Archbisho> Binh or the Ijuncio at this time.

We will wateh closely the local reaction to the suspension and
convey the message to the Catholic leadership, if necessary, at
a timely moment.

Much additional ettention was lavished by Weshington upon maintain-
ing near-absolute secrecy, preserving ea plausible front vis-a-vis the
press, and other aspects of stage management. On May 12, tue operation
was given the codeword MAYFLOWER, and all communications on it were
thenceforth to be slugged with that indicator. Besides Taylor and
Johnson, the only American Ambassadors informed of the political purpose

113 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
