Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to the civil side of support for pacification. Whether the coordinator-
in-chief emerged as a persuader or a director it was clear that his
charge had to embrace both military and civil advisors. (In this respect
"civil" is more accurate than "civilian", for a sizeable number of the
civil advisory duties had devolved upon active duty military officers
who were "loaned" to other agencies for this purpose.

It is not surprising that MACV viewed itself as preeminent in this
area. It was, as General Westmoreland rightly claimed, the only U.S,
organization advising the GVN at all levels and -- in one way or another --
in all functions. It was to MACV thet General Thang, the Minister of
Rural. Construction (read "pacification") looked for advice and assist-
ance. 164/ It is equally unsurprising that Ambassador Lodge was of a
different persuasion, as he explained clearly in a memo setting forth his
views to General Iansdale in December 1965:

I consider the government of Vietnam's effort in this
domain (apart from the military clearing phase) to be primarily
civilian, economic, social and political in nature and in its
aims. Consequently, on the American side, it is preferable
that the two civilian agencies most directly concerned, i.e.,
USATD and CAS, be the operating support agencies upon whom you
should rely for the implementation of the necessary programs
as they develop. Other sections of the Mission, including MACV,
JUSPAO...should consider themselves associated with...USAID and
CAS, but not as agencies directly responsible for operations.

The foregoing is intended to insure that the number of
persons and agencies contacting the GVN and particularly the
Ministry of Rural Construction, on the subject of pacification
and development is reduced, and in fact is limited to yourself
or your representative, plus the representatives of the two
operating agencies, USAID and CAS. 165/

Operational and coordinative responsibilities remained on this particu-
lar wicket throughout most of 1966 while Washington fumed over the slow
pace of pacification. These months saw the development of sufficient frus-
tration in Washington to permit the growth and final acceptance of the
proposal that a11 U.S. advice for pacification be placed under MACV. An
account of this development is treated more fully in another document in
this series end will only be summarized here.”

President Johnson's Washington coordinator for pacification, Robert W.
Komer, set forth in August 1966 three alternative organizational approaches:

* Task Force Paper, Evolution of the War: Reemphasis on Pacification, 1965-

1967.

73 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
