Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On the other hand, a much more sobering assessment was conteined
in General Westmoreland's Commander's Estimate of the Situation in
South Vietnam, dated 26 March 1965, which bluntly asserted that RVNAF
would not be able to build up their strength rapidly and effectively
enough to blunt the coming VC summer offensive or to seize the initia-
tive from them. The document also estimated that the program of air
activity egainst the North, while it might ultimately succeed in caus-
ing the DRV to cease its support of the war, would not in the short run
have any major effect on the situation in the South.

The view from Washington was even less hopeful. Assistant Secretary
of Defense John McNaughton stmmed up the situation in the following words:

106/

The situation in general is bad and deteriorating. The
vc have the initiative. Defeatism is gaining among the rural
population, somewhat in the cities, and even among the soldiers
-- especially those with relatives in rural areas. The Hop Tac
area around Saigon is making little progress; the Delta stays
bad; the country has been severed in the north. GVN control
is shrinking to enclaves, some burdened with refugees. In
Saigon we have a remission: Quat is giving hope on the civilian
Side, the Buddhists have calmed, and the split generals are in
uneasy equilibrium.

A more complete and balanced’ overview was prepared by McGeorge Bundy
in a memorandum outlining "Key Elements for Discussion” for an April 1
meeting with the President;

Morale has improved in South Vietnam. The government has
not really settled down, but seems: to be hopeful both in its
capacity and in its sense of political forces. The armed
forces continue in reasonably good shape, though top leader-
ship is not really effective and the ratio of armed forces to
the VC build-up is not good enough.

The situation in many areas of the countryside continues
to go in favor of the VC, although there is now a temporary
lull. The threat is particularly serious in the central
provinces, and the VC forces may be regrouoing for major
efforts there in the near future. .

Hanoi has shown no signs of give, and Peiping hes stiffened
its position within the last week. We still believe that attacks
near Hanoi might substantially raise the odds of Peiping coming
in with air. Meanwhile, we expect Hanoi to continue and step
up its infiltration both by land through Laos and by sea. There
are clear indications of different viewpoints in Hanoi, Peiping,
and Moscow (and even in the so-called Liberation Front), and

82 3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
