Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

go all out at all levels in SVN if we are to win. We are
faced with a full blown and difficult war and our govern-°
ment has committed a huge amount of combat power to this
eonflict, yet we are still a long way awey from achieving
our objectives. If we are to reach an acceptable military
decision in Vietnam, we must not permit our operational
tactics to reflect the reticence which currently character-
izes some bodies of public and official opinion. Our ground
forces must take the field on long term, sustained combat
operations. We must be prepared to accept heavier casualties
in our initial operations and not permit our hesitance to
take greater losses to inhibit our tactical aggressiveness.
If greater hardships are accepted now we will, in the long
run, achieve a military success sooner and at less overall
cost in lives and money....

"In summary, it is my opinion that the MACV campaign
plan for 1967 is adequate to meet the anticipated enemy
threat. However, within the plan's overall concept four
aspects of offensive action must be emphasized. First,
we must relentlessly attack and destroy enemy base areas
in SVN. Secondly, we mist evoid pinning down sizeable forces
against his border-sanctuary areas. Rather, we should deal
with forays by his major forces into SVN at times and loca-
tions of our choosing. Thirdly, we must press forward with
an aggressive effort to destroy the guerrilla and his under-
ground: government am support of -revilutionary development.
Finally, ‘we mist avoid devoting too great a measure of our
effort to anti-infiltration at the expense. of more important
operations. We should continue and, if possible, expand
our air and naval interdiction of his infiltration system." .23/

3. Vietnam Strategy: On the Ground

On the ground, large unit operations increased during January to
341, but the number having “significant results" decreased for the third
consecutive month (from 24 to 19). Total enemy killed reached a new
monthiy high of 5,954, contributing to a total loss figure of 10,440,
also a wartime high. 2h/ Major military operations in January did
not yet clearly reflect the thinking Westmoreland had revealed in his
early January assessments and strategic prognosis; evidently MACV was
still in the planning stage preparing for the major operations of February
and March on the borders and in the sanctuaries. Furthermore, the magni-
_ tude of the threat in the DMZ-I CTZ that was to prompt the massive dis-
location of troops to the North under TF OREGON in April was not yet
clear, and operations were moving slow motion.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
33
