a portion of whatever 5

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

«

udgetary assis tence ig hereafter pro-
ly it to equipping the National Army

fa

vided the French and apnl
contingents.

(ob) . iM
20,000 ind me
is fron 331,5)
before the rece
is made up lar

50 is addition of about.

se in total troop strength

e figures were presented

} fonkin. The 20,000 increase

ely of the net addition of 18 battalions to the
Vietnam Army. Hauipment for this increase is over and above
requests made to the Melby—Erskine Misston. Equipment for these.
18 battalions is ‘ah included in the 1951 budget. It has not
been programmed by the French. Apparently, the French do not
give the formation of these battalions a very high priority.
U.§. representatives emphasized to the French that equipment for
the National Armies oe cone from the equiptent requested of
the Melby—Erskine Mission. The U.S. representatives also em-
phasized that, Cee eee to U.S. military assistance, the
first concern was to equip French Union Forces to meet the
immediate threat, but that the French could readjust the dis-
tribution of this equipment in such a way as to provide sons
materiel for the National Army contingents.

jor dit:
eonot

it
Q
a
Le]
<
4 oO
cs
| ol
oO

©

i
1

jt

(c) French Ministers fully agree on formation of National
Armies. They asked U.S. finance pay and maintenance, which
U.S. representatives did not accept.

(a) The
distribution
and the National A 1 :
collaboration with v ,S. auth piveus 4 in Saigon, i.€,, Genersl
Brink. The State Department has included this point in a
draft aide-memoire to the French Government to eliminate any
possibility of misunderstanding.

hy a

(e) The French Ministers stated that no reduction in
the Indochina budget was possible, that France is giving
highest priority to equipnent for Indochinz, and that no
evacustion of Tonkin is contemplated at the present time,
but that any eventual evacuation will be taken only efter
consult vation with the U.S. and the U.x.

(f) Defense Minister Moch asked for 2 squadron of B-26's

.Which French authorities had requested of the Helby-Erskine

Mission. Secretary Marshall informed Moch that 20, B-26's and
5 spares would be made available out of the U.S. pipeline to
Korea. Delivery date is anticipated as early Decenber, with
some of the planes arriving in Indochina in November. The
question of whether or not the French have the personnel and
naintenance facilities for these planss was not raised with
the French representatives.

aot | rel ie | ACL |
