»

ny

0 Le

I

\

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ywopry L
Rat UBLIC Oe Viste /ai
3 ' ah a eos es
f HANOT, _ October a2, 1945, *
The Minister of foreicn Affairs
tao tle SeChwrary OF “SPT EP ARN di

ant
* =

WAGLIUG LOU, Ds

dence,

The
stage,

Situation in south Viebnam has reached its critical

and chlls for inmvinte luterference on the part of

tie United Nations. I wish by the present letter to bring Ps
your wxcellency sone more light on the case of Vietnam wii oh

hos cone
linelight.

for the iofst tbree weeks into the international

first of all, I beg to forward to your Government a
few docunentory date, aon, Whieh our Declaration of indepen-~

iF

tie Imperial Rescript of wx-iinperor BAO DAL on the

eacasion of his nbdicaticn, bie declaration of our Govern«
went conecrn ing iy ries é2ne) Of es 0) rei ATL poli by ant 4a note def ininre
our pos 7

i

Lion towards tle south Viebnam incident,

AS those docunents will show your sxecllency, the Viot-

Nanes

pe

‘ople has knovn during the last fow years an evolubion

which naturally briiss the Vietnamese nation to its present
Situation. After 60 years of ireneh oppression and unsucces-
buouch obstinate Viotnannse resistance, we at last saw
France defeated in wurope, then her betrayal of the Allies
successively on behalt of Germany and of Janan. Thousl the
odds wer
leaving
in tne
against the Japanese. eanvhile , the Atlantic Charter w “he 8
concluded, defining tue war ims of the allies and laying the

sful

V

eat taat tine against the Allies, the Vietnamese,
aside all differcnees in political opinion, ,unibed
Leotmink Leégue ana sterted on a ruthless Dist

So ~ . rtp
Foundation of peace-work, The noble principles of international

justice ana equality of status laid down in that charter
strensly aynealed to tne Vietnamese Anda contributed in making
of the Vietminh resistence in the war zone a nation-wide
anti-Japnanese woveuent wuich found @ powerful echo in the
democratic aspirations of the people. The Atlantic RASnveR
was looked upon es tic foundation of future Vietnam, <A

nablion-buildins pro La aim Was was advefted which was later found in
with San Francisco Cusrter and which has been rully

keeping

earrio

1d out these last years: continuous Light asainst the

Japanese
on August 19th, voluntery abuication of Mk~ainperor BaONeT,
esbablishwent of the Democratic spublic of Vietnam, assist-
ance given le the allies Vations in the disarnaient of the

dé par:

she

fe!

=

bringing about fue recovery of national independence

anpointient of a provisional Government whose nission

was to carry out tne atlantic Se#av6en Bnd San iranciseo Char-

‘ters suv have them carrica out by otuer nations.

As _& matter_of Pact, tae poze vee e oh of the atlantic

and Gan l're
4Alisam ana All forms of eolon TaD “oppress ‘ion. This” Wels UN=
fortunotely contrary to Uile intereste of sone vrenchnen, ana

raneciseo 0 Charts Me Lali tue 2 eradication of imper-

c-80 wrance

ae

.
