Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

of Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, on whom rests the
primary responsibility for the restoration of
security and stability.

"United States economic aid will be granted
in accordance with separate bilateral agreements
between each of the Associated States and the
United States of America. The approval of these
agreements will be subject to legal conventions
existing between the .Associated States and France.
Initial economic aid operations, however, may
begin prior to the conclusion of these agreements.

"The United States Government is of the
Opinion that it would be desirable for the three
governments and the French High Commissioner to
reach agreement among themselves for the coordina-
tion of those matters relating to the aid program
that are of common interest. The American economic
mission will maintein contact with the three Asso-
_¢iated States, with the French High Commissioner
‘in Indocnina and, if desired, with any body which
:may be’ sct up by the Associated States and France
in connection with the aid program.

"Mr. Robert Blum has been appointed Chief of
the United States special econcmic mission to
Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam.

"Identical letters are being addressed today
-to the governments of Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam and
“the President of the French Union,"

The letter of intent refers only to economic
aid wnich will be based on the recommendations of
‘the Griffin mission which recently made a survey
‘trip to Southeast Asia and carried on consulta-
tions with the leaders and technicians of Indochina.

Secretary of State Dean Acheson announced the
policy of United States aid to Indochina at Paris
on May 8 when he released this statement following
an exchange of views with Foreign Minister Schuman
of France:

"The Foreign Minister and I have just had en
exchange Of views on the situation in Indochina and
are in general agreement both as to the urgency
of the situation in that area and as to the

ee)
fad
Go
