Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

TI. The Decision
A. COMUSMACV's Request

On 22 February 1965, after a visit to Da Nang by General
Throckmorton, then Deputy COMUSMACY, General Westmoreland cabled CINCPAC
requesting two Marine BLT's to peates in protecting the base against Viet
Cong raids, sabotage, and mortar attacks. 3/ As a result of his visit,
General Hienclnor sor told General Westmoreland that he questioned the
eapability of the Vietnamese to protect the base and recommended the
deployment of the entire 9th Marine Expeditionary Brigade, h/ General
Westmoreland concurred with the security evaluation but requested only
two of the three BLT's organic to the 9th MEB with the third BLT to be
held offshore as a reserve. 5/

B. ‘The Ambassador's Opinion

Ambassador Taylor sent to the State Department on the same day
the following cable:

"The ref cable requests CINCPAC, MAY and Ambassador's
views as to requirement for force deployments to this area
in view of security situation of SVN. General Westmoreland
I agree that there is no need to consider deployments to SVN
at this time except possibly for protection of airfield at
Da Nang.

"As I analyze the pros and cons of placing any consider-
able number of Marines in Da Nang area beyond those presently
assigned, I develop grave reservations as to wisdom and
necessity of so doing. Such action would be step in reversing
long standing policy of avoiding commitment of ground combat
forces in SVN. Once this policy is breached, it will be very
difficult to hold line. If Da Nang needs better protection,
so do Bien Hoa, Ton Son Nhut, Nha Trang and other key base
areas. Once it becomes evident that we are willing assume
such new responsibilities, one may be sure that GVN will seek
to unload other ground force tasks upon us. Increased numbers .
of ground forces in SVN will increase points of friction with
local population and create conflicts with RVNAF over command
relationships, These disadvantages can be accepted only if
there is clear and unchallenged need which can be satisfied
only by US ground forces. Turning to possible uses for addi-
tional Marines in Da Nang area, I can see several which are
worth examining. First, they could be used to reinforce
protection of Da Nang airbase against Bien Hoa-type of attack
by fire or against combined VC fire and zround attack.

"More ambitious mission would be readiness to engage in
mobile operations against VC in Da Nang area to keep VC units
at distance from base and make positive contribution to pacifi-
cation of area. Such US forces would concurrently be available
to join in conventional defense of area if DRV army moved
southward in resumption of formal hostilities.

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
