Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(Nor do we have an obligation to pour in effort out
of proportion to the effort contributed by the people of
South Vietnam or in the face of coups, corruption, apathy
or other indications of Saigon failure to cooperate effec-
tively with us.)

We are committed to stopping or off setting the effect
of North Vietnam's application of force in the South, which
denies the people of the South the ability to determine
their own future. Even here, however, the line is hard to
draw.. Propaganda and political advice by Hanoi (or by
Washington) is presumably not barred; nor is economic aid
or economic advisors. Less clear is the rule to apply to
military advisors and war materiel supplied to the contesting
factions.

The importance of nailing down and understanding the
implications of our limited objectives cannot be over-
emphasized. It relates intimately to strategy against the
North, to troop requirements and missions in the South,
to handling of the Saigon government, to settlement terms,
and to US domestic and international opinion as to the
justification and the success of our efforts on behalf of
Vietnam. 108/

This articulation of American purposes and commitments in
Vietnam pointedly rejected the high blown formulations of U.S. objectives
in NSAM 288 ("an independent non-communist South Vietnam," "defeat the
Viet Cong," ete.), and came forcefully to grips with the old dilemma, of
the U.S, involvement dating from the Kennedy era: only limited means
to achieve excessive ends. Indeed, in the following section of specific
recommendations, the DPM urged the President to, "Issue a NSAM nailing
down US policy as deseribed herein." 109/ The emphasis in this scaled-
down set of goals, clearly reflecting the frustrations of failure, was
South Vietnamese self-determination. The DPM even went so far as to
suggest that, "the South will be in position /sic/, albeit imperfect,
to start the business of producing a full-spectrum government in South
Vietnam." 110 What this amounted to was a recommendation that we
accept a compromise outcome. Let there be no mistake these were radical
positions for @ senior U.S. policy official within the Johnson Adminis-
tration to take. They would bring the bitte: condemnation of the Chiefs
and were scarcely designed to flatter the President on the success of his
‘efforts to date. That they represented a more realistic mating of U.S.
strategic objectives and capabilities is another matter.

The scenario for the unfolding. of the recommendations in
the DPM went like this:

51 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
