Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The.
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

would really stop advancing. Aside from American intervention, a cease-
fire was the only hope of the larger, but less effective, pro-Western
forces led by Phoumi. Certainly hopes were higher by the 8th than they
were a week earlier, but this might not be saying much, The documentary
record is ambiguous. The final draft of the letter Vice President
Johnson would deliver to Diem was dated May 8, and in this letter Kennedy
did not go much beyond the proposals in the April 27 version of the task
force report. There was no mention of U.S. troop commitments, nor of a
bilateral treaty. Even on the question of a further increase (beyond
170,000) in the RVNAF, Kennedy promised Diem only that this will be "con-
sidered carefully with you, if developments should so warrant." 2h/

But the same day, Gilpatric sent a memo to the JCS asking their views
on U.S. troops in Vietnam:

. In preparation for the possible commitment of U.S.
forces to Vietnam, it is desired that you give further
review and study of the military advisability of such
action, as well as to the size and composition of such
U.S. forces. Your views, which I hope could include
some expression from CINCPAC, would be valuable for
consideration prior to the NSC meeting this week (cur-
rently scheduled for Friday, May 12). 25/

This in turn was based on a statement in the May 6 Task Force draft,
which said that such a study was being carried out, with particular con-
sideration being given to deploying to South Vietnam

-..two U.S. battle groups (with necessary command
and logistics units), plus an engineer (construction-
combat) battalion. These units would be located in the
‘high plateau' region, remote from the major population
center of Saigon-Cholon, under the command of the Chief,
MAAG. To help accelerate the training of the G.V.N.
army, they would establish two divisional field train-
ing areas. The engineer battalion would undertake con-
struction of roads, air-landing strips and other
facilities essential to the logistical support of the
U.S. and Vietnamese forces there.

The purpose of these forces (again, from the May 6 draft) would be
to

o«.frovide maximum psychological impact in deter-
rence of further Communist aggression from North Vietnam,
China, or the Soviet Union, while rallying the morale of
the Vietnamese and encouraging the support of SEATO and
neutral nations for Vietnam's defense;

hy
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
