Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

COPY

eA

SOUTHEAST ASIA RESOLUTION —

.

Whereas naval units of the Communist regime in Vietnam, in violation of
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of international
law, have deliberately and repeatedly attatked United States naval
vessels lawfully present in international waters, and have thereby created
a-serious threat to international peace; and ;

Whereas these attacks are part of a deliberate and systematic campaign
of aggression that the Communist regime in North Vietnam has been waging
against its neighbors and the nations joined with them in the collective
defense of their freedom; and .

Whereas the United States is assisting the peoples of southeast Asia to
protect their freedom and has no territorial, military or political
ambitions in that area, but desires only that these peoples should be
left in peace to work out their own destinies in their own way: Now,
therefore, be it

Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States
of America in Congress assembled, That the Congress approve end support
the determination of the President, as Commander in Chief, to teke all
necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the
United States and to prevent further aggression.

‘

Sec. 2, The United States regards as vital to its national interest and
to world peace the maintenance of international peace and security in
southeast Asia, Consonant with the Constitution of the United States and
the Charter of the United Nations and in accordance with it obligations
under the Southeast Asia Collective Defense freaty, the United States is,
therefore, prepared, as the President determines, to taxe all necessary
steps, including the use of armed force, to assist any member or protocol
state of *ce Soutzcast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance
in defense. of its freedon. _ put

Sec. 3. This resolution shall expire when the President shall determine
that the peace and security of the area is reasonably assured by
international conditions created by action of the United Nations or
otherwise, except’ that it may be terminated earlier by concurrent
resolution of the Congress. ;

————

a/ Text of Public Law 88-08 /U.J. Res. 1115 7, 78 Stat. 384, approved
Aug. 10, 1964, =
