Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

For Hanoi, the U.S. public declaratory policy during most of
1964 must have been a major source of confusion. Presidential statements
alternated between hawk-like cries and dove-like coos. Thus, in February
1964, in a University of California speech, the President issued the
thinly veiled threat that "those engaged in external direction and supply
would do well to be reminded and to remember that this type of aggression
is a deeply dangerous game.” But for the rest of the year and particularly
during the election campaign, the President was saying, emphatically and
repeatedly, that he did not intend to lead the United States into a wider
war in Vietnam. He ridiculed the pugnacious chauvinism of Barry Goldwater
and contrasted it with his own restraint. "There are those that say 1
ought to go north and drop bombs, to try to wipe out the supply lines, and
they think that would escalate the war," he said in a speech on September ooe
"But we don't want to get involved in a nation with seven hundred million
people and get tied down in a land war in Asia."

But if there was reason for confusion in Hanoi's reading of the
public declaratory signals, there was no shortage of opportunities for
transmitting more unequivocal signals through quiet diplomatic channels.

The clearest explanations of U.S. policy, and warnings of U.S. intent,

were communicated to Hanoi on June 18, 1964, by the Canadian Tnternational
Control Commissioner Seaborn. In a long meeting with Premier Pham Van Dong,
Seaborn presented a carefully prepared statement of U.S. views and intentions
to the North Vietnamese Premier, clearly warning him of the destructive con-
sequences for the DRV of a continuation of its present course. Pham Van
Dong fully understood the seriousness and import of the warning conveyed

by Seaborn. But in this, as in a subsequent meeting with Seaborn on August 15,
Pham Van Dong showed himself utterly unintimidated and calmly resolved to
pursue the course upon which the DRV was embarked to what he confidently
expected would be its successful conclusion.

On balance, while U.S. words and actions were not always in con-
sonance, while public and private declarations were much in conflict, and
while U.S. reactions fluctuated between the unexpectedly forceful and the
mystifyingly hesitant, the action-signals were sufficiently numerous and
the warnings sufficiently explicit to have given Hanoi a fair awareness that
the U.S. was likely to respond to the deteriorating situation by intensifying
the conflict. How far this intensification would go, neither Hanoi nor the
U.S. could have foreseen.

D. Ominous Developments in Saigon
The first of the new military pressures against the North--

BARREL ROLL air strikes in Laos--authorized in the 1 December decision,
went into effect on 14 December. The hoped-for improvement in GVN stability,
however, did not materialize. To the contrary, on 20 December the erratic
SVN Premier Lt. Gen. Nguyen Khanh abruptly dissolved the High National
Council which the U.S. Mission had been supporting as a device for encour-
aging a transition from military to civilian rule. As a result, U.S.-GVN
relations were placed under extreme strain including, among other things,
an open personal rift between General Khanh and Ambassador Taylor.

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
