Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Eleven of the 18 signers had been cabinet members under Diem or Bao Dai;
4 had been in other high government positions, and others represented
religious groups. Their manifesto lauded Diem for the progress that he
had made in the aftermath of Geneva, but pointed out that his repressions
in recent years had "provoked the discouragement and resentment of the
people." They noted that "the size of the territory has shrunk, but the
number of civil servants has increased and still the work doesn't get
done"; they applauded the fact that "the French Expeditionary Corps has
left the country and a Republican Army has been constituted, thanks to
American aid," but deplored the fact that the Diem influence “divides
the men of one and the same unit, sows distrust between friends of the
same rank, and uses as a criterion for promotion fidelity to the party
in blind submission ‘to its leaders"; they described, despairingly,

"a rich and fertile country enjoying food surpluses" where "at the present
time many people are out of work, have no roof over their heads, and no
money.” They went on to "beseech the government to urgently modify its
policies." While the Caravelle Manifesto thoroughly frightened Diem,
coming, as it did, three days after Syngman Rhee was overthrown in Korea,
it prompted him only to further measures to quell the loyal opposition.
By the fall of 1960, the intellectual elite of South Vietnam was
politically mute; labor unions were impotent; loyal opposition in the
form of organized parties did not exist. In brief, Diem's policies
virtually assured that political challenges to him would have to be
extra-legal. Ultimately, these emerged from the traditional sources of
power in South Vietnam -- the armed forces, the religious sects, and .the
armed peasantry.

Through 1960, the only serious threats to Diem from inside the GVN
were attempted military coups d'etat. In his first 10 months in office,
Diem had identified loyalty in his top army commanders as a sine qua non
for his survival. Thereafter he took a personal interest in the position-
ing and promoting of officers, and even in matters of military strategy
and tactics. Many of Vietnam's soldiers found Diem's attentions a means
to political power, wealth, and social prominence. Many others, however,
resented those who rose by favoritism, and objected to Diem's inter-
ference in military matters. In November 1960, a serious coup attempt
was supported by three elite paratroop battalions in Saigon, but other-
wise failed to attract support. In the wake of the coup, mass arrests
took place in which the Caravelle Group, among others, were jailed.

In February 1962, two Vietnamese air force planes bombed the presidential
palace in an unsuccessful assassination attempt on Diem and the Nhus.
Again, there was little apparent willingness among military officers

for concerted action against Diem. But the abortive attempts of 1960

and 1962 had the effect of dramatizing the choices open to those military
officers who recognized the insolvency of Diem's political and military
policies.

Diem's handling of his military impinged in two ways on his rural
policy. Diem involved himself with the equipping of his military forces,

20 TOP SECRET =- Sensitive
