Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Option C, as stated by Ball, rested on the assumption
that "the South Vietnamese people will not be able to put together a
government capable of maintaining an adequat? civil and militery effort
or -- if anything resembling actual independence is ever achieved --
running the country." On this premise, he concluded, much as in earlier
memoranda, "we should concentrate our attention on cutting our losses."
Specifically, he recommended official declarations that United States
support depended on a representative government which desired American
aid and which demonstrated its ability to create "the necessary unity of
action to assure the effective prosecution of the war and the peace."
Seizing upon the next political crisis in South Vietnam, the United States
should, said Ball, "halt the deployment of additional forces, reduce the
level of air attacks on the North, and maintain ground activity at the
minimum level required to prevent the substantial improvement of the
Viet Cong position.”

Ball described two alternative outcomes from Option C.
One was that the South Vietnamese might unify and "face reality," the
other, far more likely in Ball's estimation, was that South Vietnam would
fragment still further, "leading to a situation in which a settlement
would be reached that contemplated our departure." He closed:

Let us face the fact that there are no really attrac-
tive options open to us. To continue to fight the war with
the present murky political base is, in my judgment, both
dangerous and futile. It can lead only to increasing com-
mitments, heavier losses, and mounting risks of dangerous
escalation.

In McNaughton's files are pencil notes which may relate
either to his own missing memorandum or to a conversation that took place
among some of the officials concerned. Despite its cryptic nature, it is
worth reproducing in its entirety, in part because it gives a clue to
thoughts passing at this time through McNemara's mind:

Do we press VNese or do they move themselves/ ?/

What the point of probes if (w/oul/d be counterpro-
ductive otherwise

Ball

1. Wo more US forces unless better govt

Lee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
