Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

tween the Chinese communities in Southeast Asia and the Pei-
ping regime, to neutralize the pro-communist support among ©
these communities, and to endeavor to direct the political
power and economic wealth of the Chinese communitie’s toward
the \support of the countries which they are resident.

aap eS

it of great importance to Indonesia ane Australia and New
Zealand in the event Indochina and Thailand fall to the
communists. Although the defense and internal security of
Singapore and Malaya are British responsibilities, the Pe-
ninsula cannot be defended against an invasion from the

north without outside support. Accordingly, the United States
should coordinate its operational planning with the United
Kingdom with respect to Malaya and adjacent areas.

.

d. The Alignment PES Indonesia! s strategic
importance as an Sitecentent. non-communist nation are assets
to the security of the United States in the Pacific. Con-
sequently, the policies and actions of the United States must
be directed to strengthening and maintaining the non-communist
political orientation of the government and to promoting
economic health and development. At present the Indonesian
Government is pursuing a policy of political neutrality. The

- United Stetes must endeavor to influence Indonesia toward
greater participation in measures which promote the security
of the area and toward solidarity with the free world. Among
the factors which affect United States aid to Indonesia are
(1) the results to be achieved in terms of United States na-
tional interests, (2) the attitude of the Indonesian govern-
ment, (3) the needs of Indonesia, and (4) the ability to use
aid profitably. The United States should give particular
attention to the problem of technical assistance, in view of
the serious lack of leadership and trained personnel in the
Country.

ho. With Heapect to Southeast Asia, the United States should:
a. Continue its present support programs to strengthen

the will and ability to resist communist encroachment, to

render communist military operations as costly as possible,

and to gain time for the United States and its allies to build

up the defense cof the off-shore chain.

b. Continue programs of information and educational ex-
change in the countries of Southeast Asid.. ub

NSC 48/5. . +p TOP SECRET

Lik
