7

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"We dare not fail to see the insidious nature of this new and deeper
struggle. We dare not fail to grasp the new concepts, the new tools, the
new sense of urgency we will need to combat it -- whether in Cuba or South
Viet-Nam. And we dare not fail to realize that this struggle is taking
place every day, without fanfare, in thousands of villages and markets --
day and night -- and in classrooms all over the globe.

“The message of Cuba, of Laos, of the rising din of Communist voices
in Asia and Latin America -- these messages are all the same. The com-
placent, the self-indulgent, the soft societies are about to be swept away
with the Gebris of history. Only the strong, only the industrious, only
the determined, only the courageous, only the visionary who determine the
real nature of our struggle can possibly survive.

"No greater task faces this country or this administration. No other
challenge is more deserving of our every effort and energy. Too long we
have fixed our eyes on traditional military needs, on armies prepared to
cross borders, on missiles poised for flight. Now it should be clear that
this is no longer enough -- that our security may be lost piece by piece,
country by country, without the firing of a single missile or the crossing
of a single border.

“We intend to profit from this lesson. We intend to re-examine and
re-orient our forces of all kinds -- our tactics and our institutions here
in this community. We intend to intensify our efforts for a struggle in
many ways more difficult then war, where disappointment will often accom-

pany us.
"For I am convinced that we in this country and in the free world possess

the necessary resource, and the skill, and the added strength that comes
from 4 belief in the freedom of man. And I am equally convinced that history

will record the fact that this bitter struggle reached its climax in the late

1950's and the early 1960's. Let me then make clear as the President of the
United States that I am determined upon our system's survival and success,
regardless of the cost and regardless of the peril!”

8. President Kennedy's Address, in Chicago to Democratic Party Dinner
April 28, 191, Public Papers of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1961, D: 3h0;
ee & [

"We live in a hazardous and dangerous time. I do not think it's possible
to overstate it. We live in a world which has changed tremendously in our
lifetime -- history only will secure a full perspective on that change. But
here is Africa, which was held by Western European powers for several
centuries, now independent -- which holds within its countries masses of
people, many of them illiterate, who live on average incomes of 50 or 60
or 75 dollars 2 year, who want a change, who now are the masters of their
own house but who lack the means of building a viable economy, who are im-
pressed by the example of the Soviet Union and the Chinese, who -- not

C-9
