|

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

its members with briefings and classified material. The contract, it

was determined,would be let to the Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA)
for the study to be done through its JASON Division (ad hoc high-level
studies using primarily non-IDA scholars). ‘The group of 47 scientists
(eventually to grow to 67 with the addition of 20 IDA personnel), repre-
senting the cream of the scholarly community in technical fields, finally
met in Wellesley on June 13 for ten days of briefings by high-level
officials from the Pentagon, CIA, State and the White House on all facets
of the war. Thereafter they broke into four sub-groups to study different
aspects of the problem from a technical (not a political) point of view.
Their work proceeded through July and August and coincided with MclNamara's
disillusionment over the results of the POL strikes.

2. The JASON Summer Study Reports

At the end of August the Jason Summer Study, as it had come
to be known, submitted four reports: (1) The Effects of US Bombing in
North Vietnam; (2) vc/NVA Logistics and Manpower; (3) An Air Supported
Anti-Infiltration Barrier; and (4) Summary of Results, Conclusions and
Recommendations. The documents were regarded as particularly sensitive and
were extremely closely held with General Wheeler and Mr. Rostow receiving
the only copies outside OSD. The reason is easy to understand. The Jason
Summer Study reached the conclusion that the bombing of North Vietnam was
ineffective and therefore recommended that the barrier concept be imple-
mented as an alternative means of checking infiltration.

" Several factors combined to give these conclusions and recom-
mendations a powerful and perhaps decisive influence in McNamara's mind at
the beginning of September 1966. First, they were recommendations from
@ group of America's most distinguished scientists, men who had helped the
Government produce many of its most advanced technical weapons systems
since the Second World War, and men who were not identified with the vocal
academic criticism of the Administration's Vietnam policy. Secondly, the
reports arrived at a time when McNemara, having witnessed the failure of
the POL attacks to produce decisive results, was harboring doubts of his
own about. the effectiveness of the bombing, and at a time when alternative
approaches were welcome. Third, the Study Group did not mince words or
fudge its conclusions, but stated them bluntly and forcefully. For all
these reasons, then, the reports are significant. Moreover, as we shall
see, they apparently had a dramatic impact on the Secretary of Defense
and provided much of the direction for futur? policy. For these reasons,
then, the reports are significant. Moreover, as we shall see, they
apparently had @ dramatic impact on the Secretary of Defense and provided
much of the direction for future policy. For these reasons important
sections of them are reproduced at some length below.

1h9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
