Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(87

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

pecause the facilities were not of vitel importance. For
somewhat similar reasons, it made no major effort to restore
military facilities, but merely abandoned barracks and dis-
persed materiel usually stored in depots.

The major essential restoration consisted of measures
to keep traffic moving, to keep the railroad yards opera-
ting, to maintain communications, and to replace transport
equipment and equipment for radar and SAM sites. ho/

A little further on the report examined the political effects of the
bombing on Hanoi's will to continue the war, the morale of the popu-
lation, and the support of its allies.

The bombing through 1965 apparently had not had a major
effect in shaping Hanoi's decision on whether or not to
continue the war in Vietnam. The regime probably continued
to base such decisions mainly on the course of the fighting
in the South and appeared willing to suffer even stepped-up
bombing so long as prospects of winning the South appeared
to be reasonably good.

Evidence regarding the effect of the bombing on the
morale of the North Vietnamese people suggests that the
results were mixed. The bombing clearly strengthened
popular support of the regime by engendering patriotic
and nationalistic enthusiasm to resist the attacks. On the
other hand, those more directly involved in the bombing
underwent personal harships and anxieties caused by the
raids. Because the air strikes were directed away from
urban areas, morale was probably damaged less by the direct
bombing than by its indirect effects, such as evacuation
of the urban population and the splitting of families.

Hanoi's political relations with its allies were in
some respects strengthened by the bombing. The attacks had
the effect of encouraging greater material and political
support from the Soviet Union than might otherwise have
been the case. While the Soviet aid complicated Hanoi's
relationship with Peking, it reduced North Vietnam's
dependence on China and thereby gave Hanoi more room for
maneuver on its own behalf. 41

This report's concluding chapter was entitled
"Observations" and contained some of the most lucid and
penetrating analysis of air war produced to that date, or
this! It began by reviewing the original objectives the
. pombing was initiated to achieve:

153 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
