———

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

SUMMARY

A formal planning and budgetary process for the phased withdrawal
of U.S. forces from Vietnam was begun amid the euphoria and optimism of
July 1962, and was ended in the pessimism of March 1964. Initially, the
specific objectives were: (1) to draw down U.S. military personnel then
engaged in advisory, training, and support efforts from a FY 64 peak of
12,000 to a FY 68 bottoming out of 1,500 (just HQ, MAAG); and (2) to re~
duce MAP from a FY 64 peak of $180 million to a FY 69 base of $40.8 million.
South Vietnamese forces were to be trained to perform all the functions then
being carried out by U.S. personnel. What the U.S.G. was actually trying
to accomplish during this period can be deseribed in either or both of
two ways: (1) a real desire ana attempt to extricate the U.S. from direct
military involvement in the war and to make it a war which the GVN would
have to learn to win, and (2) straight-forward contingency planning and
the use of a political-managerial. technique to slow down pressures for
greater U.S. inputs. A blend of the wish embodied in the first explana-
tion and the hard-headedness of the second seems plausible.

Needless to say, the phase-out never came to pass. The Diem coup
with the resulting political instability and deterioration of the militery
situation soon were to lead U.S. decision-makers to set aside this planning
process. An ostensible cut~back of 1000 men did take place in December
1963, but this was essentially an accounting exercise -- and the U.S.
force level prior to the reduction had already reached 16,732 in October
1963. By December 1964, U.S. strength had risen to 23,000 and further
deployments were on the way.

What, then, did the whole phased-withdrawal exercise accomplish?
It may have impeded demands for more imen and money, but this is doubtful.
If the optimistic reports on the situation in SVN were to be believed,
and they apparently were, little more would have been requested. It may
have frightened the GVN, but it did not induce Diem or his successors to
reform the political apparatus or make RVNAF fight harder. It may have
contributed, however, to public charges about the Administration's credi-
bility and over-optimism about the end of the conflict. Despite the care-
fully worded White House announcement of the phase-out policy on October 2,
1963, tentative Johnson Administration judgments came to be regarded by
the public as firm predictions. While this announcement made clear that
the U.S. effort would continue "until the insurgency has been suppressed
or until the national security forces of the GVN are capable of suppressing
it," the public tended to focus on the prognosis which followed -- "Secretary
McNemara, and General Taylor reported their judgment that the major part
of the U.S. military task can be completed by the end of 1965...." In

oe es TOP SECRET - Sensitive
