Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B. The DRV's Domestic Objectives

Ho Chi Minh was always a revolutionary. Whether he was first
and foremost a nationalist, or a potential Tito, or the last of ‘the
Stalinists--and arguments can be advanced for each theory--as head of
state he subscribed to internal programs for the DRV which were com-
munist in concept and Maoist in execution. In repeated statements on
the goals of the regime, he and the rest of the Lao Dong leadership
made it plain that they were determined to revise radically North Vietnam's
land-holding system, and reconstruct its traditional society along egali-
tarian and collectivist lines. Further, they were determined that North
Vietnam would become agriculturally self-sufficient, and industrialized
to the degree its natural resources would permit. Im fact, the moderniza-
tion they envisaged for North Vietnam surpassed in degree and urgency any
of the My-Diem undertakings in South Vietnam. Yet the latter aroused
the peasant's apprehensions, and eventually their hostility. What of
Ho Chi Minh's internal security? From the record of DRV policy from
1950 to 1960, it is clear that, while "progress towards socialism” in
both the agrarian and industrial realms was always one principal State/
Party objective, a well-disciplined society thoroughly submissive to
Party leadership was another, and frequently overriding goal.

id. Societal Discipline

By no means can it be said that at any time prior to Geneva,
Ho and the Lao Dong Party held complete sway in rural North Vietnam.
Aside from French supported counter-movements, the Viet Minh leaders had
to contend with peasant reluctance to support them, and even outright
rejection of their policy. Almost as soon as the DRV "legalized" the
Iao Dong Party in 1951, the Party launched a series of land reform schemes
which contravened even the popularity Ho et al enjoyed as heroes of the
Resistance. Moreover, tensions developed early between the Viet Minh and
the Catholics as a group--less apparently over political issues than over
traditional Catholic fear of Tonkinese persecution in the absence of
French protectors. The Catholics of Tonkin had developed a political
and military independence like that of the Cao Dai and Hoa Hao in Cochin-
china, and resisted the Viet Minh as vigorously as the latter resisted
the Saigon regimes. In both land reform and relations with the Catholics,
the Party and the DRV encountered stiff opposition.

a. Rural Opposition, 1954-1956

Prior to 1954, the Lao Dong Party experimented in Viet
Minh liberated areas of Tonkin with a Maoist-style Land Reform Campaign. 20/
Other than the war, Land Reform was the foremost undertaking of the Lao =;
Dong Party after 1951. In essence, the Land Reform Campaign committed the
party to an assault on the traditional rural social hierarchy, and to redis-
tribution of land and wealth. Beginning with punitive taxes, the Campaign
matured terror, arrests, and public condemnation, trials, and executions.
Within the DRV hierarchy, the proponent of Land Reform was Truong Chinh

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
