Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

and women of all ages and ways of life, detained without trial

in a concentration camp as an act of reprisal, were victims

of a wholesale food-poisoning which resulted in more than a

thousand dead on the very first day. The survivors were

hurriedly taken to other camps or left dying behind the Phu

Loi barbed wire...."
The Phu Loi Massacre became one of the cases which underwrote Hanoi's
appeal to the world in 1959 and 1960 to end:

"....this regime of terror and massacre set up by

Ngo Dinh Diem in the south of our country at the behest of
the U.S. imperialists. It is the duty of all honest people
to extinguish this hotbed of war....According to available
data which cannot be complete from July, 1954, date of the
signing of the Geneva Agreements, to February, 1959, 180,843
former resistance members were arrested, 50,000 others were
subjectéd to a regime of forced labour in the so-called
‘Agricultural colonies.' The Phu Loi camp is part of this
network of sorrow and affliction which Ngo Dinh Diem, the
henchman of the American imperialists, hopes to quench the
aspirations for freedom, independence and national unity of
our people..../footnote The famous declaration of Diem,
during his visit to Washington in 1957: 'The United States'
frontier extends as far as the 17th parallel in Vietnam. '" 121/

At the forefront of the "movement of protest" were Southerners in North
Vietnam, who could write or speak with special poignancy about the event.
Thus, the regroupees became a strategic propaganda as well as personnel
resource for the DRV.

2. The Fatherland Front. Policy on the regroupees, and
orchestration of propaganda relating to reunification with South Vietnam,
was apparently reserved to the top echelon of the Iao Dong Party. There
is some evidence of the existence as early as 1957 of a branch of the
Lao Dong Party Central Committee called the "Reunification Department, "
which had purview over all matters relating to regroupees; the Depart-
ment or Commission was surfaced at the Third Party Congress, September,
1960. 122/ A prisoner taken in 1964, a regroupee from Binh Dinh Province,
indicated that he worked for this Department for some years prior to
infiltrating in 1963, with duties of supervising civilian cadres. He
described the Department's having a personnel management system, with
formal records and reports, education programs for cadres and their
children; he also stated that the Committee decided which regroupees
would be ordered South. 123/ The head of the Reunification Department of
the Lao Dong Party possibly since 1957, and at least since 1960, was
Nguyen Van Vinh, an NVA Major General, a Deputy Chief of Staff of the
NVA, a Vice Minister of Defense and a member of the Party Central Committee.

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
