Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

only to help them achieve military victory but also to prevent
@ political reversal of that victory...As the Vietnamese see
pacification, its core is not merely ‘helping the people to.a
better life,’ the aspect on which many American speakers
dwelled, it is rather the destruction of the clandestine VC
political structure and the creation of an ironlike system

of government political control over the population...

"But the two governments have never been closer than
they are in the aftermath of Honolulu, and the atmosphere
of good feeling seems genuine..."

NEWS ANALYSIS: Roscoe Drummond, February 14 (from Washington):

" ,.The decisions taken at Honolulu by President
Johnson and Premier Ky go to the heart of winning. They
were primarily social, economic, and political decisions.
They come at a malleable and perhaps decisive turn in the

war..."

NEWS ANALYSIS: Tom Wicker in The New York Times, February 13
(from Saigon):

"Vice President Humphrey...has left Saigon reverber-
ating with what he said was the "single message' he had
come to deliver. The message was that the war in Vietnam
was a war to bring social justice and economic and political
progress to the Vietnamese people...Humphrey said at a
news conference here: 'Social and economic revolution
does not belong to the VC. Non-communist forces are the
ones forwarding the revolution.'

"The emphasis on social reform could also quiet
eritics who contend that Washington has concentrated too
much on the military problem and not enough on civic
action to win the loyalty of the Vietnamese people..."

NEWS ANALYSIS: Charles Mohr, The New York Times, February 13
(from Saigon):

"By giving enormous emphasis and publicity to it,
an impression was left that pacification is something new.
In a sense, there was some truth in this. The men run- ~
ning the program, both Vietnamese and American, are new.
And the 1966 plan itself is a new one in many respects.

"Pacification is vitally important to success in the
guerrilla war in South Vietnem. Without it, purely military

success becomes empty even if all the battles are 'won’."

F 50 ! TOP SECRET - Sensitive
