Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

3. As a result, the GVN, despite increasing US
assistance in men and materiel, has been relatively inef-
fectual in meeting the Communist military and subversive ~
threat at the rice-roots level. Pacification has thus far
failed to give the peasant sufficient confidence in the
GVN's ability to maintain security, the first prerequisite
in pacification, or, in longer run, to redress basic econ-
omie, political, and social inequities." 35/

The current strategic concept was viewed as a reaction to our basic
assumption that the military and political situation in South Vietnam in
the spring and early summer of 1965 was irretrievably lost unless the U.S.
committed substantial combat forces and unless Hanoi was forced to cease
its support of the Viet Cong. From this beginning emerged a current
strategy which...

",,divides the Vietnam conflict into two wars: (1) a
conventional war against the main Communist forces in the
northern provinces of South Vietnam and against their logistic
resources in North Vietnam and (2) an unconventional war or
counterinsurgency effort against Communist control of the
peasant in the southern provinces. The two wars are intended
to be mutually supporting and pursued simultaneously, with
relative equal priority.

"The conventional war is an effort to obtain quick mili-

tary results by purely military means. It seeks to reduce or

- terminate the infiltration of men and supplies into South
Vietnam by continuing air strikes over North Vietnam and Laos,
and to destroy regular North Vietnamese Army and Viet Cong
units and their logistic bases in the sparsely settled areas.
In this war, the primary role is played by US combat forces
deployed largely in the highlands area of Corps I and II
where the bulk of North Vietnamese forces are committed, and
where the enemy appears willing to engage in large formations.
Major battles can occur without the danger of large civilian
casualties. In support of their activities, the US forces
maintain direct control of their own logistic, communications,
and intelligence resources. In short, the highlands and the
defense perimeters around certain strategic installations in
effect constitute a US theater of operations.

"The unconventional war or counterinsurgency effort con-
tinues to give priority to political-militeary pacification of
the populated areas in the Mekong delta and coastal lowlands.
It is thus a continuation of the long-term effort to give the
population security and to win its support of the government
by measures responsive to popular needs. These war areas
remain under GVN control, despite the presence of. thousands

1h TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
