Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Trends as he saw them would continue up (even sifting out the.
imponderables). The only explanation for under-achievement militarily,
in pacification, and political development, would be "something unfore-
seeable" (not specified). We would be on the high-side of the curve,
as he termed it, with the key issue one of “whether the U.S. appears
prepared to stick it out as long as necessary or to be tiring of the
war."

He closed by drawing the lessons imbedded in his analysis:

",..My prognosis of what is more likely than not to
happen in Vietnam is reasonable only if we and the GVN mount
a maximum effort in 1967-68 to make it so. The key is better
orchestration and management of our Vietnam effort--both in
Washington and Saigon. To me, the most important ingredient
of such an outcome is less another 200,000 troops, or stepped-up
bonbing, or a $2 billion civil aid program--than it is more
effective use of the assets we already have.

"A. The war will be 'won' (if we can use that term) in
the South. Now that we are successfully countering NVA
infiltration and the enemy's semi-conventional strategy, what
needs to be added is increasing erosion of southern VC strength
(it has probably already peaked out).

"Be Assuming the above is broadly valid, the key to
success in the South is an effective pacification program,
plus a stepped-up defection program and successful evolution
toward a more dynamic, representative and thus more attractive
GVN. These efforts will reinforce each other in convincing
the Southern VC and Hanoi that they are losing.

"C. Our most important under-utilized asset is the RVNAF.
Getting greater efficiency out of the 700,000 men we're already

supporting and financing is the cheapest and soundest way to
get results in pacification.

"D. By themselves, none of our Vietnam programs offer
high confidence of a successful outcome (forcing the enemy
either to fade away or to negotiate). Cumulatively, however,
they can produce enough of a bandwagon psychology among the
southerners to lead to such results by end-1907 or sometime
in 1968. At any rate, do we have a better option?” 18

Komer's primary misgivings related to the ability of GVN to exploit
military successes and to convert them into meaningful steps forward in
the nation-building program. Creating and sustaining viable political
institutions in a revolutionary environment has never been easy, and

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
