Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

going to the non-communists. In its discussion of Diem's political
problems, this estimate followed closely the analysis of the Mission
report of six months earlier. The problems were seen as not only
continuing, but intensifying:

"Discontent with the Diem government has been prevalent
for some time among intellectuals and elite circles and, toa
lesser extent, in labor and urban business groups. Criticism
by these elements focuses on Ngo family rule, especially the
roles of the President'’s brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, and Madame Nhu;
the pervasive influence of the Can lao, the semi-clandestine
apparatus of the regime; Diem's virtual one-man rule; and the
growing evidence of corruption in high places. In late April,
18 prominent Vietnamese publicly petitioned Diem to ‘liberalize
the regime, expand democracy, grant minimum civil rights, (and)
recognize the opposition in order to let the people speak without
fear.’ This unprecedented public attack on Diem by a non-Communist
group may embolden other urban elements to become more vocal.

"A new and even more important element in the political
situation is the growing criticism of Diem's leadership within
government circles, including the official bureaucracy and
military; this criticism has become more intense than at any time .
since 1956. Since the early part of this year, Vice President
Tho, other members of the cabinet, and middle echelon officials
have made known their serious concern over Diem's handling of
the internal security problem and have privately criticized the
power and influence exerted by Nhu and his entourage. In addition,
there is considerable uneasiness concerning the operations and
activities of the Can Igo organization.

"Although most of the Vietnamese peasants are politically
apathetic, they also have their grievances against the government.
These include the ineptitude and arrogance of many local and
provincial officials, the lack of effective protection from Viet
Cong demands in many parts of the country, the harshness with
which many peasants have been forced to contribute their labor
to government programs, and the unsettling economic and social
effects of the agroville (government-sponsored settlements)
program. As a consequence, Diem's government is lacking in
ar support among the people in the countryside." (Ibid.,
pp. 1-2

hough the estimate confirmed that Diem had become con-
cerned over the deteriorating internal security situation, he appeared
still to underestimate the non-communist political threat:

" , . « He still tends to discount the amount of discontent
both in the countryside and among urban elements. Although he has

hg TOP SECRET - Sensitive
