Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201]

TOP SECRET - Sensitive.

As a political realist, Ho must have been impressed that the
DRV was as unlikely to rise in priority over France in U.S, foreign
policy, as Vietnam was to assert claims on Soviet support over Russian
preoccupation with Europe. In 1946 he put his plight in these terms:
"We apparently stand quite alone; we shall have to depend on ourselves ."37/
After 197, events conspired to alter Ho's isolation, for while prospects
for U.S. support dimmed, and in 1950, vanished, Mao Tse Tung -- in whose
service Ho had spent eight years -- was moving from triumph to triumph,
and by late 1949, was in a position to render direct assistance to Ho
across his northern border. 38/ Faced with an increasingly serious
military threat, Ho gravitated quickly toward the Bloc. From Viet Minh
jungle hideouts came blasts at the U.S. "Marshallization of the world,"
taking note that the Russians opposed "Marshallization."™ 39/ In 1949,
after the U.S. had publicly welcomed the formation of Bao Dai's "new and
unified state of Viet Nam," Ho sent delegates to a Peking conference
where Liu Shao-Chi, in the keynote speech, declared that only the Commu-
nist Party could lead a "national liberation movement." 40/ Ho and Mao
exchanged messages of amity, and neutralist Tito was taken under attack
by the Viet Minh radio. In January, 1950, in response to Ho's declara-
tion that the DRV was Vietnam's only legitimate government, Mao tendered
formal recognition, and Stalin's followed immediately thereafter. ka/
The die was cast: U.S. Secretary of State Dean Acheson declared in
February, 1950, that these recognitions “should remove any illusion as
to the nationalist character of Ho Chi Minh's aims and reveals Ho in his
true colors as the mortal enemy of native independence in Indochina." he/
Ho responded in August, 1950, to the first shipments of U.S. aid to
French forces in Vietnam in the following sharp language,

"Since the beginning of the war the Americans have tried
to help the French bandits. But now they have advanced one
more step to direct intervention in Viet Nam. Thus we have
now one principal opponent -- the French bandits -- and one
more opponent -- the American interventionists....

"On our side, a few years of resistance have brought our
country the greatest success in the history of Viet Nem --
recognition of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam as an equal
in the world democratic family by the two biggest countries
in the world -- the Soviet Union and democratic China -- and
by the new democratic countries. That means that we are
definitely on the democratic side and belong to the anti-
imperialist bloc of 800 million people.” 43/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
C-L7
