Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Iv. A. 5.

Tab 4.

U.S. PERCEPTIONS OF THE INSURGENCY, 1954-1960

A. U.S. Intelligence, 1954-1959

In electing to support Ngo Dinh Diem in 1954 and 1955,

and to assume responsibilities from France for providing economic
and military assistance to South Vietnam in the years thereafter,
the United States deliberately set out to establish in South Vietnam
a political environment markedly different from that which Franch
had fostered in the period 1945-54. In 1960, however, there were
still similarities to the French period, and these were perhaps more
fundamental than were differences.

1. Pre-Geneva, 1950-1954.

The pattern that was to confront the U.S. throughout the
1950's was noted in a National Intelligence Estimate of 29 December
1950 (NIE-5), which began: "The French position in Indochina is
eritically in danger by the Viet Minh, a communist movement that has
exploited native nationalism." Under the circumstances prevailing,
"there is only a slight chance that the French can maintain their
military position long enough to build up an independent Vietnamese
government and an effective national army which might win the support
of non-communist nationalists, and, in conjunction with French forces,
contain the Viet Minh." Despite French efforts to weaken the political,
nationalistic base of the Viet Minh by supporting "a semi-autonomous
pro-French government under native leadership, . - +» concessions to
nationalistic sentiment leading to full sovereignty for the Bao Dai
government have been forthcoming so slowly and with such seeming
reluctance on the part of the French, that the Bao Dai government

has not in fact won a strong nationalistic following in any quarter.
As a result the French so far have been unable to undermine the
political strength of the Viet Minh."

Meanwhile, however, the Estimate noted that military
pressure from the Viet Minh, assisted by the Chinese Communists,
could eject the French from Tonkin, and ultimately from all of
Vietnam; without a strengthening of the French military position,
defeat seemed inevitable, even if the French and the Bao Dai government
should begin to transform the political situation. A political muta-
tion was essential to victory, and had to be timely were a military
defeat to be averted. The NIE concluded that if Chinese Communist aid

1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
