Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

President to call a complete halt to the air war later in the spring
when prospects for peace looked better and when the threat to Khe
Sanh had been eliminated. 51/ Walt Rostow, the President's personal
advisor on national security matters, apparently resisted all sug-
gestions for a restriction of the bombing, preferring to keep the
pressure on the North Vietnamese for a response to the San Antonio
formula. These various opinions represented the principal advice

the President was receiving from his staff within the Administration.
Other advice from outside, both invited and uninvited, also played a
part in the final decision.

2. The New Hampshire Primary

In the days immediately following the early March delibera-
tions, the President, toiling over the most difficult decision of his
eareer, was faced with another problem of great magnitude -- how to
handle the public reaction to Tet and the dwindling public support for
his war policies. From this point of view probably the most difficult
week of the Johnson Presidency began on March 10 when the New York
Times broke the story of General Westmoreland's 206,000 man troop request
in banner headlines. 52/ The story was a collaborative effort by
four reporters of national reputation and had the kind of detail to give
it the ring of authenticity to the reading public. In fact, it was very
close to the truth in its account of the proposal from MACV and the
debate going on within the Administration. The story was promptly
picked up by other newspapers and by day's end had reached from one end
of the country to the other. The President was reportedly furious at
this leak which amounted to a flagrant and dangerous compromise of
security. Later in the month an investigation was conducted to cut down
on the possibility of such leaks in the future.

The following day, March 11, Secretary Rusk went before
Fulbright's Senate Foreign Relations Committee for the first time in
two years for nationally televised hearings on U.S. war policy. In
sessions that lasted late that Monday and continued on Tuesday, the
Secretary was subjected to sharp questioning by virtually every member.
While he confirmed the fact of an "A to Z" policy review within the
Administration, he found himself repeatedly forced to answer questions
obliquely or not at all to avoid compromising the President. These
trying two days of testimony by Secretary Ruck was completed only hours
before the results from the New Hampshire primary began to come in.
to the shock and consternation of official Washington, the President
had defeated his upstart challenger, Eugene McCarthy, who had based
his campaign on a halt in the bombing and an end to the war, by only
the slenderest of margins. (In fact, when the write-in vote was finally
tabulated later that week, McCarthy had actually obtained a slight
plurality over the President in the popular vote.) The reaction across

185: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
