Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

GVN promise of a shift to more energy and effectiveness; then when such
energy and effectiveness actually became visible, the USG promised, the
USG would begin bombing North Vietnam.

The program included the following areas in which progress would

aid pacification and would measure the GVN's effectiveness:

To leave

1. and 2. Increasing RVNAF, paramilitary, and police to and
above existing authorized strengths.

3. Better performance by civilian and military officials.

4, Speeding up budgetary procedures and spending in the
provinces.

Strengthening the province chiefs.
Strengthening police powers.

More vigor in Hop Tac.

ao - A ww

After a delay, "review cases of political prisoners ‘
from previous regimes." 55/

no doubt about what it wanted, the program said:

"Better performance in the prosecution of the war against
the Viet Cong needs to be accompanied by actions to convince
the people of the interest of their government in their well-
being. Better performance in itself is perhaps the most con-
vincing evidence but can be supplemented by such actions as
frequent visits by officials and ranking military officers
to the provinces for personal orientation and "trouble shoot-
ing." The available information media offer a channel of
communication with the people which could be strengthened
and more efficiently employed. The physical appearance of
the cities, particularly of Saigon, shows a let-down in civic
pride which, if corrected, would convey a message of govern-
mental effectiveness to their inhabitants. Similarly, in
the country an expanded rural development program could
carry the government's presence into every reasonably secure
village and hamlet.

"If governmental performance and popular appeal are
significantly improved, there will be little difficulty in
establishing confidence in the government. However, this
confidence should be expressed, not merely implied. It is
particularly important that the military leaders continue
to express public confidence in the government and the firm
intention to uphold it. While not giving an impression of
submitting to pressure, the government might explore honorable

*

53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
