Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of II Corps now manned with limited ARVN forces, and
finally, a mechanized brigade is needed in Binh Thuan
Province to neutralize the enemy forces and bases in

the southern coastal area, and to open and secure high-
way 1 and the national railroad to the III Corps boundary.

(C) In III Corps, operations to destroy
vc/NVvA main forces and bases in the northwestern & central
parts of the corps area and to intensify the campaign against
the enemy's infrastructure are being conducted. These
operations are to be completed by intensive efforts to open
and secure the principal land and water LOC’s throughout the
Corps Zone. However, deployment of the US 9th Div to IV
Corps will create a gap in the forces availeble in III Corps
to operate against seen significant base areas in Phuoc Tuy, (ly
Binh Tuy, and Long Ihenh Provinces. These areas constitute
the home base of the still formidable 5th VC Division. This
unit must be destroyed, its bases neutralized and Route 1
and the national railroad opened and secured. Other critical
locales that will require considerable effort are War Zone
D and Phuoe Long area in which the VC 7th Division is
believed to be located. With the forces operating currently
in III Corps, substantial progress can be made, but to
exploit effectively our successes an addition of one div-
ision, preferably air mobile is required. By basing this
division in Bien Hoa Province just north of the RSSZ, it
would be in position to conduct operations against the 5th
Div, and War Zone D, as well as to reinforce the-US 9th
Div in Delta operations as required.

(D) In IV Corps, with deployment of the US
Oth Div to the Corps area and with increasing success of
ARVN operations there, the situation will be greatly improved.
Primary emphasis will be given to destroying VC main and
guerrilla units and their bases, to intensifying operations
to extend GVN control, to stopping the flow of food stuffs
and materials to the enemy through Cambodia, and to assisting
in the flow of goods to GVN outlets in Saigon. In addition
emphasis will be accorded the opening and securing of princi-
pal water and land LOC's which are the key to all operations
in the Delta. It is noteworthy on this score, that effec-
tiveness of forces available is hampered severely by an
inadequate mobile riverine force. In IV Corps, the essential
requirement is to flesh out the mobile riverine force with
three APB's (Barracks Ships) one ARL (repair ship), and two
RAS (river assault squadrons).

(4) The Minimum Essential Force necessary to
exploit success of the current offensive and to retain

65 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
