Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"4, There cannot be any alliance with or any concession
to the Trotskyite group. We must do everything possible to
lay bare their faces as henchmen of the fascists and annihilate
them politically.

"5. To increase and consolidate its forces, to widen its
influence, and to work effectively, the Indochinese Democratic
Front must keep close contact with the French Popular Front
because the latter also struggles for freedom, democracy, and
can give us great help.

"6. The Party cannot demand that the Front recognizes its
leadership. It must instead show itself as the organ which
makes the greatest sacrifices, the most active and loyal organ.
It is only through daily struggle and work that the masses of
the people acknowledge the correct policies and leading capacity
of the Party and that it can win the leading position.

"7, To be able to carry out this task, the Party must un-
compromisingly fight sectarianism and narrow-mindedness and
organize systematic study of Marxism-Leninism in order to raise
the cultural and political level of the Party members and help
the non-Party cadres raise their level. We must maintain close
contact with the French Communist Party.

"8. The Central Executive Committee must supervise the
Party press to avoid technical and political mistakes. (Bases
in publishing comrade R's biography, the Lao-Dong revealed his
address and his origin, ete. It also published without comment
his \" of saying that Trotskyism is a product of boastfulness,
etc.)."

In August, 1939, however, the Hitler-Stalin alliance was contracted, and
the following month all varieties of communists, both domestic and colonial,
were declared anathema by the French. In Vietnam, communist organizations
were once more thoroughly destroyed by police action, the Trotskyites
suffering particularly. 10/ Once the covert segments of the ICP survived.

That the ICP endured the French purges of 1930 - 1932 and 1939 - 19h0
testifies to its strength, for the same attacks emasculated the VN@DD and
all other revolutionary Vietnamese political parties. At the outset of
World War II, the ICP enjoyed a virtual monopoly on organized Vietnamese
nationalism, & position attributable to (1) ruthlessness of the French
in eliminating competition; (2) superior communist discipline, training,
and hence, survivability; (3) inherently better communist strategy and
tactics for balking the French colonial administration and mobilizing popu-
lar opinions; and (4) French tolerance of "popular front" communists gener-
ated by the ascendancy of the Left in metropolitan France during the mid-
30's. The French, by denying political expression to moderate Vietnamese
nationalists, polarized native political sentiments, and invited popular
support of the more vehement and radical solutions proffered by the ICP.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-17
