Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

6. Lodge Favors Decentralized Leverage

Embassy officials, meanwhile, continued to press for the restoration
of the leverage that was lost with the dropping of the troika sign-off in
June, 1965. There is no indication that the issue of sign-off came up at
Honolulu, very likely because of disagreement on it between State and
Saigon. But in April, Ambassador Lodge went on the record in favor of
the sign-off system, and against civil encadrement in the Ministries.

Experience and study have made it apparent that the United
States has not the influence which it should have in Viet
Nam and also that /we/ could be organized so as to be rela-
tively much more immune from some of the worst effects of
changes of government in Saigon.

I refer to influence in the provinces, and lower units of
government, and not to our influence at the top of the
Government in Saigon, which is just about as good as it
can be. The GVN in Saigon sometimes disagrees, often
agrees, and is rarely able to get much done...

An error was made in giving up our right to withhold funds
from USAID projects until we have conducted a successful
bargain with the Vietnamese in which they agreed to carry
out certain things which we wanted... 39/

There are two ways of not solving this problem of contact:
(a) One is for a US agency head with big administrative
responsibilities to pop over to the ministry to argue
briefly and intensely, American-fashion, with the Minister
-~ & system which is almost guaranteed not to produce re-
sults. (b) Nor do I believe the problem is solved by
putting American offices in the Vietnamese. Ministries.
This was the French practice, and it too does not prevent
bureaucratic paralysis...

We should always be on the lookout for Americans who have
the sympathy with and the knack of getting along with these
people, and we might find some good material among the
young men who are in the provinces. ‘A

Another idea is to bring about a situation where we are
really economic partners of the GVN and not merely the
people who pay for the CIP Program without effective
participation in the use of the piaster proceeds of that
progrem. At present we have very little say in the dis-
position of such piaster funds. Somewhere along the line
we gave up this very important leverage. In fact, we are
now trying to recover joint euthority over those funds, but

.

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
