Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

These urgings reached a crescendo on 1 November 1964 when, just
three days prior to the U.S. Presidential elections, the VC executed a
- daring and dramatic mortar attack on the U.S. air base at Bien Hoa, killing
five Americans, wounding 76, and damaging or destroying 27 of the 30 B-57's
that had been deployed to South Vietnam to serve notice upon Hanoi that
the United States had.readily at hand the capacity to deliver a crushing
air attack on the North. The attack was the most spectacular anti-American
incident to date and was viewed by the JCS as warranting a severe punitive
response. Their recommendation, accordingly, went far beyond a mere
reprisal action. It called for an initial 2h-36 hour period of air strikes
in Laos and low-level air reconnaissance south of the 19th parallel in North
Vietnam, designed to provide a cover for the introduction of U.S. security
forces to protect key U.S, installations, and for the evacuation of U.S,
dependents from Saigon. This would be followed, in the next three days,
by @ B-52 strike against Phue Yen, the principal airfield near Hanoi, and
by strikes against other airfields and major POL facilities in the Hanoi/
Haiphong area; and subsequently by armed reconnaissance against infiltration
routes in Laos, air strikes against infiltration routes and targets in North
Vietnam, and progressive PACOM and SAC strikes against remaining military
and industrial targets in the 94 Target List. 3/

That the JCS recommendations were not accepted is hardly sur-
prising, considering the magnitude and radical nature of the proposed
actions and the fact that these actions would have had to be initiated on
the eve of the election by a President who in his campaign had plainly
made manifest his disinclination to lead the United States into a wider
war in Vietnam, repeatedly employing the slogan "we are not going North."
In any event, as subsequent developments indicate, the President was not
ready to approve a program of air strikes against North Vietnam, at least
until the available alternatives could be carefully and thoroughly re-
examined.

Such a re-examination was initiated immediately following the
election, under the aegis of a NSC interagency working group chaired by
Assistant Secretary of State Williem Bundy. After a month of intensive
study of various options, ranging from an intensification of existing
programs to the initiation of large-scale hostilities against North Vietnam,
the working group recommended 2 graduated program of controlled military
pressures designed to signal U.S. determination, to boost morale in the
South and to increase the costs and strains upon the North. A basic aim
of the program was to build a stronger bargaining position, to restore an

"equilibrium" in the balance of forces, looking toward a negotiated settle-
ment.

The recommended program was in two phases: Phase I, which was to
last about 30 days 5 consisted of little more than an intensification of
earlier "signals" to Hanoi that it should cease supporting the insurgency
in the South or face progressively higher costs and penalties. Thus the
program upped several of the military pressures already being applied, and
added armed aerial reconnaissance missions against infiltration routes and
facilities in Laos; it also provided for possible individual reprisals for

h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
