Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Lid ded Consulate
Hanoi, French Indochina
September 12, 1947

Recd CONFIDENTIAL
Oct 7, 1947

ACTION SUBJECT: Speech of Emile Bollaert on September 10 on French Policy
PE-ene in Indochina

INFO

OCD-enc

DCR

EUR-enc THE HONORABLE

SPA

Ori THE SECRETARY OF STATE
WAR

NAVY WASHINGTON, D.C.
CIG

POL SIR:

I hav2> the honor to refer to my telegram number 286 of
September 11, 8 a.m. and to report further on the speech delivered by
EM(t# BOLLAERT, High Commissioner of France for Indo China. There are
enclosed five copies of the speech as published by "L'Entente” in a
supplement to its regular daily edition.

The site selected by Mr. Bolleert was HADONG, a provincial capital
which lies 10 miles southeast of Hanoi, and which was, for a time, head-
quarters of the Viet Nam Government after its flight from Hanoi in
December, 1946. Hadong apparently was chosen as the place for the speech
that M. Bolleart might make reference to "this razed city of Tonkin, in
ruins still haunted by memories of terror". Robert Sherrod of "Time"
had previously desentbed. it as "probably the most thoroughly war-wrecked
city in the world."

The speech itself was delivered at about 5 p.m. in a public square.
Around M. Bolleert, when he spoke, were gathered the several hundred
civilians (white and Vietnamese) and the many military officers who had
been invited. Some 1,500 Vietnamese, largely peasant women and children,
were kept behind ropes set up toform a square in the center of which was
the rostrum that the Vietnamese guerrillas had tried to burn the evening

previous.

This speech represents the most important declaration of French
policy that has been made in the last year. M. Bollaert, it will be re-
called, was originally named High Commissioner for Indo China, replacing
Admiral THIERRY D'ARGENLIATI in March. He arrived in Indo China early in
April, and subsequently returned to Paris in June.

He was in Saigon again. in late July and shortly thereafter revealed
to the press that he intended to deliver a major policy decleration in

LMAMEINER TEAL

cory SY LEAS ea
e :
14
