Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV.C Evolution of the War (26 Vols.) 
Direct Action: The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968 
(16 Vols.) 
4. Marine Combat Units Go to DaNang, March 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
r 
! 
l 
f 
f 
I 
r· 
r 
r 
;- . ~ 
f ; 
.' r 
r 
~ 
r 
! 
r-
t 
\ 
~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
_ IY.C • . 4 • . 
EVormrON OF THE EAR 
l-tIillTIIE CO~·mAT mnTS GO TO DA l'IAim 
MARCH 1965 
Se 
Do 
C,j...... ._. .K-..: __ . ______ _ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
MA...R.lNE Cm-mAT UNITS GO TO DA NAll'G -- MARCH 1965 
SUMMARY 
On March 8, 1965, t ,TO United States Marine Corps Battalion Landing 
Teams arrived at Da Hang with the Mission to help secure the air base 
and associated installations. 
What was the rationale behind the decision 
to put the first U.S. ground combat units into Vietnam? 
Was this a 
conscious prelude to U.S. assumption of a ground combat role in the 
Vietnam war? 
On February 22, 1965, CONUSMACV, General \'Jestmoreland, recommended 
the landing and the mission. 
The United States at the time was already 
conducting Fl81ning Dart airstrikes against the DRV. 
Since Da Fang i.Yas 
supporting those strikes in addition to concomitant air activity within 
SVlT , there was concern in many quarters that Da Nang might suffer the 
same fate as had Bien Hoa the previous November. 
Ambassador Taylor 
supported He stmore l and 's request for the Marines, but with serious reser-
vations. 
He saw this deployment as the removal of the last barrier to 
U. S. assu..mption of the ground ,-rar. 
In addition, he argued that 
tl~O Marine 
BLTs ,wuld not be able to guarantee base security and that '\Thite-faced!! 
troops 1,.;ould be unable to assimilate and "Tould have great difficulty 
identifying the enemy. ~ There is no documentary evidence to indicate 
that any of the other decision-making principals shared Ambassador Taylo~'s 
reservations. 
Approval to send the Marines, contingent on GvrJ concurrence, came 
on February 26, 1965, and, except for an abortive attempt by the Defense 
Department to substitute AImy airborne troops for the Marines at the 
last minute, all progressed smoothly through the landing of the Marines 
and the preparation of their defensive positions. 
Estimates of the political/military situation in SVN in early 1965, 
both from the official view-point and from other observers, "Tere uni-
versally gloomy. 
No one foresaw ultimate US/GVN victory "ri thout reversal 
of the then-current trend. 
The GVN was seen to be "Tell on its .. yay to 
complete collapse. 
The most optimistic estimate vTaS that the VC would 
take over "Ti thin a year. 
Prior to the request for Marines, the principal advisors to the 
President had, fDr some time, been de~ at ing possible U.S. courses of 
actio'n in SVN. 
The possible use of ground forces for security and as 
deterrent or reaction forces against possible DRV/CPR ground action in 
SEA \Vas included in these discuss ions, aJld indeed both CIECPAC and 
COz.,fLJSVlACV had prepared detailed contingency plans in expectation of a 
decision to so employ groll..l1d forces. 
HO~'leve r, no plan to engage U.S. 
ground forces in offensive action against the Viet Cong had been con-
sidered. 
From the documentary recDrd, it appears that the U.S. offensive 
i 
TOP SECHET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
role 1-TaS to be limited to airpower. 
On February 7,1965, for example, 
McGeorge Bundy sent to the President a memorandum which outlined the 
policy of gradua.ted reprisal airstrikes against the DRV. 
There is no 
reference in that memorandum to the use of ground troops i n SVN, despite 
the fact that H "ras a major document outlinir.g vlhat i"as to become U.S. 
strategy • 
. vThile it appears as though all the principals in the decision-
making process, inc luding Ambassador Taylor and CINCPAC, chose to vie1-r 
the Narine deployment as an isolated phenomenon rather than as part of 
a sequence, there is evidence to indicate that COHUSMACV sai" it as the 
first step presaging a U.S . ground force build-up in SEA. 
A fair pro-
portion of the newspa.per ,,{riters at the time i'Tere equally prescient. 
Regardless of Hhat "Tas said or believed at the time the Marines 
were landed, it was obvious to them from the outset that they had 
neither the capability nor the flexibility to adequately secure the 
airbase at Da Nang, and they believed that the restrictions placed on 
them 1-Tere ill-considered. 
~/ Back in August 1964, when he \Vas less well-acquainted with the 
Vietnamese 'war and the proclivities of the side \Ve vrere supporting, 
Ambassador Taylor 1-ras more readily inclined to recommend prudent 
actions involving the deployment of U. S. ground forces to Vietnam. 
He is on record in Embtel 465 of 18 August 196L~, as being in favor 
of trtaking such visible measures a.s introd.ucing U. S. HA,\VK units to 
Da Nang and Saigon, [anrJ:.7 l anding a Marine Force at Da Nang for 
defense of the airfield and beefing up MACV t s support base .... tI 
There is no agonizing over "white-faced" soldiers and their diffi-
culties in Embtel 465. 
The cable contains the discussion of hro 
specific courses of action, l abeled appropriately A and B, aimed at 
increasing the pressure on North Vietnam through the use of American 
air and naval pOi-rer primarily. 
Course of Action A presumed that the 
government of General Ng'_wen Khanh iwuld respond to the input of 
increased ft~eric~n aSSistance, get itself organized and make enough 
military progress to "free Saigon from the VC threat i·[hich presently 
rings it and assure that sufficient Gvl~ ground forces will be avail~ 
able to provide. a reasonable measure of defense against any DRV 
ground reaction ,{hich may develop in the execution of our program 
and thus avoid the possible requirement for a major U.S. ground 
force commitrrent ." Course of Action B was based upon the inability 
of Khanh government to overcome its difficulties or make any sig-
nificantmilitary progress in the South . 
Course of Action B pre-
sumed that the U. S. iwuld go ahead vTi th its program to increase 
pressure on the DRV nohTithstanding; "however, it increases the 
likelihood of U.S. involvement in ground action, since ~hanh will 
ii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
have almost no available ground forces vrhich can be released £'rom pacifi-
cation employment to mobile resistance of DRV attacks." 
In anticipation of having to proceed with Course of Action B, Taylor 
recommended "raising the level of precautionary military readiness" by 
deploying forces as described above . 
He did not address the involvement 
of-U.S. ground forces in the war against the insurgents in the South, 
but rather was concerned with the possibility of provoked DRV aggression 
from the North, and the necessity to counter it if it occurred. 
, 
iii 
TOp· SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DECISION STUDY: 
IvIARINE COMJ3."tT UNITS GO TO DA NANG: 
MARCH 1965 
Tabl e of Contents and 0~~l ine 
survJvLARY • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . .... . . . . . • . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 
i 
CHRONOLOGY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. vi 
I. 
Th"TRODUCT ION. . . . . • . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 
1 
Two USMC BLT ' s l and at Da Nang on 8 March 1965 with 
t he mission to secure the Da Nang Air Base and 
assoc i ated installations . 
II. 
TF...E DEC ISION. . . . . • . . . . . . . • . . • . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . 
2 
A. 
ca,ruSMAcv' s Request .... . .. . ........ . ..................... 
2 
1. After a visit to Da Nang, General Throckmorton 
r ecommends U. S. troops for its protection . 
2 . 
General Hestmoreland requests through CIJ'.ICPAC 
the landing of a MEB ( -) at Da Nang. 
B. 
The .A.JQbassador ' s Opinion ................................. 
2 
1. 
Ambassador Taylor reluctantly supports the l andi ng 
of one Marine BLT at Da Nang for security . 
2. 
Tayl or raises serious objections to furt her U.S. 
troop commitment and predicts t he opening of the 
f l oodgates. 
C. 
CINCPAC ' s Support . . .... . .................•.............. ~ 
4 
1. 
Admi ral Sharp urges earl iest poss ibl e depl oyment 
of t he Marines . 
2. 
Sharp addresses some of the Ambassador 's objecti ons 
to U. S. troop commitment but does not mention t he 
floodgate predi ction . 
D. 
Cont ingent Approval..... . ... . . . .... . . . . . . . . • . . • . . . . . . . • . . 
5 
1. The Ambassador is advised that the Marines will 
l and if the GVN approves . 
2. 
Tayl or discusses his approach t o the GVN l eaders 
and then secures their' approval. 
, 
iy 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECPillT - Sensitive 
E. 
Elevent~ Hour Change . . ...............•...•...........•.• 6 
1. Assistant Secretary of Defense 1·1cHaughton pro-
poses that the 173rd Ai:'coorne Brigade from 
Okinal·ra be deployed to Do. l'hng instead of t he 
Marines . 
2. 
Objections to that idea are i ITllIledi ately advanced 
by NACV, t he Embassy, and by CINCPAC. 
F. 
Finc::,l AJ2J2roval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . 
8 
1. 
The Dep~rtDent of Defense t ells the press about 
the Narine l andings as the JCS order t hem ashore . 
2. 
'A day later Secr0tary of State Rusk elaborates on 
the Narines I mission over natiomride radio and TV. 
III. 
Tl{E SITtJATIOH ...............•.......•....•............ : ...... 10 
A. 
Do. Nang Local ...................•.......•............... 10 
VC reported capabilities describe something like 
a state of sei ge in the Da Nang environs . 
B. 
GVN Instability ..........•.................•...........• 10 
The GVN. i n earl y 1965 i s r apidly deteriorating. 
I 
C. 
Enemy Capabilities .•...................................• 11 
The VC are poised in early 1965 to launch a con-
certed campai gn designed to cut , SVN in t·VTO . 
D. 
Contemporary Accounts-. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •. 12 
Nel.;smen and other \·rri ters see early 1965 as a 
time of dramatic decision. 
IV. 
THE DEC IS ION PROCESS ............... ! • • .• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •• 14 
A. 
Proposals f or Actions Before the National Security 
Cou..?lcil 'i'Torking Group, Late 196Lf •••••••• : ••••••••••••••• 14 
1. 
Ground forces are mentioned as collaterals for 
s(.curi ty of bases supporting aL: acti vi ty a..Tld 
as deterr ents . 
2. 
No proposal seriously· posits U.S. ground combat 
action agai~st the Viet Cong. 
v 
TOP SEClli:T -
S:::nsitiv~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B. 
Yee Focus of the Joint Chiefs of Ste.ff ................. 15 
1. 
Tee 'Cl:iefs gear up to propose ground troop 
depl oyrc.ents . 
2. 
Chief of Staff of the Army Johnson returns 
from Saigon r eady to support ground force 
deploynents 
c . Attitudes I·Test of Cor-:uS................................ 17 
1. 
CINCPAC and COMJSI,lACV prepare for the i mpl e-
mentation of contingency plans requiring ground 
troops in Southeast Asia . 
2. 
CINCPAC continues to r ely on airpm'rer to stem 
the tide. 
3. 
Both the Ambassador and General 'i'lestEiorela...nd 
viel'r the l,rarine de:plojTClents as a beginning idth 
the forner very pessimistic about the outC0L12 . 
V. 
EXPECTATIONS . • . . . • . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . • . . • • • . • 
19 
vlhile the Anbassador and General \·lestmorela,."'1d 
both e::"''Pect the r.iarines to presage further U. S. 
troop commitment and CIHCPAC continues -to align 
contingency :plans'iThile emphasizing airpo·tTer , it 
seems that everyone involved in vTashington, \dth 
the possible exce:ption of the Army Chief of Staff, 
sees the 1·1ari nes as a one-time shot to meet a 
specif ic and limited need . 
VI. 
.A_T\fALYS IS ........... ...... . I. . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . 
20 
The la...11.ding of the t"ro lIl8.rine BLT's at Da Nang 
is compatible ,·rith a variety of r ationales , some 
of wh ich were offered at the time. 
-
VII. 
FOOTT"-OTES .•.......•...........•..•••.•..... '. . • • . . . • • . . . • . . • 
22 
vi 
TOP SECRET -
Ser,si t ive 
DATE 
18 Aug 64 
1 Oct 64 
3 Nov 64 
13 Nov 64 
23 Nov 64 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVElIJT OR 
DOCm;JENI' 
EMBTEL 465 
SNIE 
William Bundy 
Memorandum for 
the NSC Horking 
Group 
Draft Memorandum 
JCSM 982-64 
DESCRIPTION 
In a discussion of proposed U.S. air and 
naval action to LDcrease pressure on 
North Vi anam, Taylor told State that as 
a hedge against the failure of the GVN 
to do its part, the U.S. "should raise 
the level of precautionary military 
readiness (if not already done) by tak-
ing such visible measures as introduc-
ing U.S. Hawk units to Da Nang and 
Saigon, Jan~ landing a Marine force 
at Da Nang for defense of the airfield 
and beefing up }IJACV I S support base •.•• " 
The National Intelligence Board expected 
the political situation in South Vietnam 
to continue to decay, the war effort 
gradually peter out and the Vietcong 
to seek a neutralist coalition vlhich 
they could easily dominate. 
T'110 latent 
strengths of the GVN were cited: 
the 
. endurance of the people and the ability 
of'administrators to carry out routine 
tasks without guidance from Saigon. 
vii 
Convening a new group on Southeast Asia, 
Bundy mentioned three courses of action 
open to the U.S. in Vietnam -- none of 
which involved the use of U.S. ground 
troops except in response to overt 
CHICOM/DRV attacks as called for by 
CllJCPAC OPLANS 32-64 and 39-65. 
IHlliam Bundy said he did "not envisage 
the introduction of substantial ground 
forces into South Vietnam or Thailand 
in conjunction with these initial 
actions" -- the three courses of action 
·then under study. 
The use of U. S. 
ground troops for base security was 
not mentioned although sending a multi-
lateral force to northern SVN was sug-
gested. 
This first JCS proposal for sending 
U.S. ground troops to ~ietna~ suggested 
Marines go to Da Nang, other gro~~d 
troops to Tan Son Nhut Airbase for 
se~urity and deterrence . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
30 Nov 64 
1 Dec 64 
1 Jan 65 
Jan and Feb 
1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR 
DOCUME&JT 
"Alternatives to 
A.ir Actions on 
North Vietnam" 
Presidential 
Decision 
OPLAN 32-64 
MAGV Monthly 
Evaluation 
Reports; CIA 
Situation 
Reports 
viii 
DESCRIPTION 
(State Dept) 
A proposal to use ground 
troops tlin support of diplomacy": 
deploy them to prove U.S. resolve, then 
launch a major diplomatic offensive. 
This paper was considered by the NSC 
Working Group, but went no further. 
President Johnson approved the recom-
mendation of Ambassador Taylor and NSC 
principals to implement the Working 
Group's "Course of Action A"; 
after 
about a month and after GVN progress in 
certain areas, Course C -- a program 
Ilprincipally of progressively more 
serious air strikes" against fNN would 
be initiated. Again, ground troop 
commitment was not discussed. 
The tlalerttl or first phase of the plan 
·in effect. 
(MACV Command History shows 
pl~nning had begun for the dispatch of 
U.S. ground troops into South Vietnam in 
connection with this and other contin-
gency plans.) 
General Westmoreland said recently 
initiated "Flaming Dart" air campaign 
against the North was beneficial for 
morale in ' South Vietnam. 
He called G~~ 
social and political institutions 
"remarkably intact" despite the "disin-
tegrating blows" of political upheaval. 
(Huong's government fell in January; 
Premier Quat's regime was shaky.) 
But 
enemy gains continued. 
The Viet Cong 
. struck Pleiku and other bases in early 
February; 12 battalions (6000 men ) had ' 
reportedly moved into the I Corps. 
Westmorel~~d hoped air attacks in North 
and South Vietnam "Tould be enough to 
reverse the trend. 
CIA assessments were more pessimistic. 
In February Binh Dinh Province was said 
to be just about lost to the enemy. 
Intelligence indicated the Viet' Cong 
might try to take Kontum Province and 
sP.li t the GVN through II Corps ' during 
the rainy season . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
7 Feb 65 
7 Feb 65 
. 11 Feb 65 
18 Feb 65 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR 
DOCUMEl'-IT 
McGeorge Bundy 
1-1-=morandum for 
the President 
McNamara Nelvs 
Conference 
JCSM 100-65 
S"UE 
ix 
DESCRIPTION 
Bundy felt the GVN would collapse by 
1966 witlout substantially more U.S. 
help and action. 
To avert collapse 
and to counter latent anti-Americanism 
and the grm'ling feeling among Viet-
namese that U.S. was going to quit, 
Bundy recommended a policy of gradu-
ated, continuing air strikes against 
North Vietnam. 
He did not mention a 
base security problem; he did not 
suggest deployment of U.S. ground 
troops -- then or in the future. 
(This document 
and the absence of 
others -- supports the interpretation 
that the forthcoming Marine deployment 
to Da Nang was intended as a one-shot 
response to a particularly serious 
security problem, not as the first in 
'a planned series of U.S. troop com-
mitments . ) 
The Secretary announced elements of a 
USMC R~~K missile battalion would be 
deployed to Da Nang to improve security 
against air attack. 
A proposal for the first eight weeks of 
military action against North Vietnam. 
As expected, air strikes Ivere paramount 
but the JCS recommended collateral de-
ployment of a Marine Expeditionary 
Brigade ( ~ffiB ) to Da Nang and an Army 
,brigade to Thailand -- not for counter-
insurgency duties but to deter overt 
DRV/CHICOM retaliation to the air 
.strikes, to improve U.S. ability to 
respond if retaliatory attacks were 
launched. 
A nev! infredient in the still critical 
situation in South Vietnam was to be 
the inauguration of the Rolling ThQDder 
air campaign. 
This evaluation showed 
Viet Cong attacks against U.S. pases 
would probably. continue at about their 
present level of intensity despite in-
creased air action against North Vietnam. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
22 Feb 65 
22 Feb 65 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
EVE:r-.nr OR 
DOCUMENT 
M 
.. A.CV Msg to 
C':NCPAC 
220743Z 
EMBTEL 2699 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
x 
DESCRIPTION 
General Throckmorton, Deputy COMUSMACV, 
visited D~ Nang, called the situation 
grave, and doubted ARVN's ability to 
provide adequate security. 
Throckmorton 
recommended that the entire 9th l-1EB be 
sent to Da Nang, but General yJestmoreland 
cut this to two Battalion Landing Teams 
(BLTs) with a third to be held off-shore 
in reserve. 
The troops were to assist 
GVN forces in guarding Da Nang against 
enemy ground attacks. 
Ambassador Taylor voiced several strong 
reservations to the idea of sending 
Marines to Da Nang: 
It reversed a long-standing policy of 
avoiding commitment of ground combat 
forces in SVN. 
Taylor was sure the 
GVN would "seek to unload other ground 
force tasks upon us"; 
he vIaS sure 
this deployment would invite requests 
for more troops to meet additional and 
ultimately defensive offensive require-
ments. 
Tyro BLTs ,vould not release significa...nt 
numbers of ARVN for mobile operations 
against the Viet Cong; the Marines 
would simply be performing static 
defense tasks inadequately done by 
ARVN in the past. 
Anticipating that using U.S. troops 
for active operations would grmv more 
attractive, Taylor w'arned against it. 
The "white-faced" soldier cannot be 
assimilated by the population, he 
cannot distinguish between friendly 
and unfriendly Vietnamese; the Marines 
are net armed, trained or equipped for 
jungle guerrilla warfare . 
Taylor 
prophesied that the U.S. 
~- like France 
-- would fail to adapt to such condition • 
• 
Two BLTs could help but could not make 
Da Nang secure. 
The entire }:LEB might 
significantly improve things, but no 
force could prevent surprise mortar 
attacks, a favorite VC tactic. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
22 Feb 65 
24 Feb 65 
24 Feb 65 
26 Feb 65 
28 Feb 65 
e . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVE~"T OR 
DOCUMENT 
MACV Message 
to JCS 
CINCPAC Message 
to JCS 
JCSM 130-65 
DEPl'EL 1840 
IMBl'EL 2789 
DESCRIPTION 
However, because Westmoreland was so 
concerned about Da Nang's safety and 
because 'laylor felt security vms a 
legitimate mission for U. S. troops. 
although he objected to it, the Am-
bassador "\-Tould support MACV' s recom-
mendation for one BLT. 
He suggested 
GVN approval be sought prior to the 
Marine deployment. 
Claimed the Marine deployment to Da Nang 
would free four Regional Force companies, 
one tank platoon and another RF battalion 
then being formed for active anti-VC 
operations. 
(The March MACV Evaluation 
Report shm<Ted only hTO RF companies had 
been released.) 
Recommended immediate deployment of two 
BLTS; recommended one squadron of F-4s 
be sent to Da Nang for close air support 
'of the troops and IIfor other missions 
along ><Tith the primary mission. II 
The 
tone was urgent: 
deploy nOvT IIbefore the 
tragedyll of a Viet Cong attack. 
CINCPAC disagreed ,with Taylor; called 
attention to the Marine Corps' dis-
tinguished record in counterinsurgency 
operations; claimed U.S. presence would 
free ARVN for mobile patrol operations 
and make Da Nang a tougher target for 
enemy forces. 
Forwarded and supported CINCPAC's recom-
mendations. 
,Approved the deployment; said the Marines 
were on their way and instructed Taylor 
to secure GVN approval. 
xi 
Taylor al,reed to seek GVN concurrence -GO 
the deployment -- and planne~ an approach 
designed to stress U.S. reluctance to 
deploy any men even temporarily, empha-
size the limited mission of the Marines 
and discourage GVN hopes for further 
commitments . 
Taylor would open by 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
1 Mar 65 
2 Mar 65 
2 Mar 65 
3 Mar 65 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR 
DOCUI>1ENT 
CJCS Letter to 
SecDef (fonlard-
ing JSOP-70) 
DOD Tel 6166 
EMBTEL 1954 
CDJCPAC Message 
to JCS 030230Z 
DESCRIPI'Imi 
discussing the severe security problem 
at Do, Nang and DSG concern about it. 
Although he vlished more G\l}\T battalions 
could be sent there, Taylor would say 
he knew ARV:;:Y troops ~qere chronically 
short in I Corys and he knev; any rede-
ployment Iwuld inpose prohibitive costs 
to security in other areas. 
Thus, he 
would say "the USG has been driven to 
consider a solution "ivhich we have 
ahrays rejecte5. in the past: the intro-
duction of D.S. ground combat forces to 
reinforce the deI~ense of Da Nang until 
GVN forces become available for the 
purpose. n 
General Hheeler said the JCS were address-
ing Southeast Asia force levels separately 
because that ,,,as a "specific problem area" 
.requiring a "near term and long term 
... solution . II 
This suggests the JCS prob-
ably had been considering deployment of 
U.S. troops to Vietnam -- perhaps for 
active operations -- before the Marine 
deployment to Da Nang. 
xii 
ASD(ISA) Hci:aughton cabled Taylor that the 
173d Airborne Brigade (then on Okina','ra) 
would be deployed to Da Nang i nstead of 
the Marines. 
(This last minute change 
may have been l·fr. MCl'Taughton r s attempt to 
emphasize the limited, temporary nature 
of the U.S. troop deployment and to reduce 
the conspicuousness of the U.S. presence .. 
Airborne troops carry less equipment and 
look less formidable than the l-1arines. 'plus 
they have no history of peace-keeping 
intervention in foreign wars.) 
Taylor and 'Westmoreland -- v7ho argued that 
the lviarines were more self-sustaining than 
the airburne -- objected to the proposed 
substitution of Army airborne for Marine 
troops. 
CINCPAC strongly object ed to 'Mr. McNaughton' : 
proposal. It, 'denied him the only airborne 
assault force in the theater and, more 
~OP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
3 Har 65 
3 Mar 65 
4 I·far 65 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVIDJ1' OR 
DOCill,fENT 
DEPTEL 1876 
EMBTELs 2014 
and 3112 
JCSf-i 100-65 
DESCRIPTION 
importantly, completely upset his con-
tingency ~lens for combat operations in 
Southeast Asia. 
CINCPAC said thc.t since 
1959 "Then o PLAN - 32 'was approved, the 
Marines had been 
scheduled for deploy-
ment to Da Nang; seven CINCPAC and SEATO 
contingency plans plus many supporting 
plans r ested on this. All the prepara-
tions had been made for the landing of 
the BLTs -- and some forces \Vere alree,dy 
embarked. 
CINCPAC concluded : 
"The 
situation in Southeast Asia has nm-r 
reached a poi nt ,'There the soundness of 
our contingency planning may be about 
to be tested." 
Some 1300 t'le,rines 'Here 
then in Da Nang; tasking of new forces 
had been completed; logistics, corr~uni­
cations, command arrangements had been 
set . It vTould be "imprudent to shift 
_'forces in a major sector and to force 
changes in U.S. contingency posture for 
other parts of Southeast Asia. II 
(The 
McNaughton proposal was killed.) 
State requested Taylor's views on the 
possible use of an international force 
in Vietnam. 
Taylor first reported the viev!s of the 
Australian envoy to the GVlii on 8, multi-
late:cal force -- v ie',Ts which Taylor 
supported . It would heighten Vietnamese 
xenophobia ; it might cause the GVN to . 
'I shuck off gre ater responsibility onto 
the USG." 
In his second message Taylqr 
said he had no idea ',That the GVl{ attitud.e 
. tOvrard a MLF might be, said many problems 
\'Tere involved ',Thich had yet to be faced. 
(The ~lliF was just a concept at the time 
-- but Taylor readily looked beyond im-
mediate t'ictical needs to the long-term 
ramifications of such a move just as he 
had. in evaluating the proposal to deploy 
Narines to Da Nang.) 
The proposal for an eight-.:reek air strike 
program (and possible deplo;lment of some 
grpund troops) Ivas resubmitted to the 
xiii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
5 Mar 65 
6 Mar 65 
6 Mar 65 
7 Mar 65 
11 Mar 65 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR 
DOCill-1ENT 
CI~CPAC Eyes Only 
Message to 'Ivheeler 
OSD(PA) News 
Release 
JCS Message to 
CINCPAC 
Statement by 
Secretary of State 
to National TV 
Audience 
"Estimate of the 
Situation in SVN" 
Saigon Airgram to 
State 
DESCRIPl'I0::'T 
Secretary. Again , the use of U.S. troops 
for active anti- insurgent operations was 
not mentioned . 
This said the 9th ~ffiB was needed as soon 
as possible for base security, to boost 
the GVN 'war against the Viet Cong, to 
provide insurance in case the GVN vJaS 
unable to resist collapse in the critical 
Da Nang area I'There so much viaS already 
committed. 
CII~CPAC said the "single most 
importa.l1t thing He can do quickly to im-
prove the security situation in South 
Vietnam is to make full use of our air 
pOHer. I I 
Announced hvo USMC Battalion Landing Teams 
- - 3500 men -- '{Tere being deployed to 
Vietnam on a limited mission : to provide 
'base security and relieve GVN forces for 
pacification and offensive operations 
against the Viet Congo 
Ordered the BLTs to commence landing. 
Secretary Rusk said the Marines vTould 
shoot back if shot 'at , but their mission 
vJaS to put a tight security ring around 
Da Nang -- not to kill Vi et Congo 
The Mission COQl1cil reported insurgency 
would grOyi Ql1less " ••• J'Il'"VN support is, ' 
checked, GVN military and paramilitary 
resources increased, pacifi cation goa~s 
and concepts refi ned, administrative " 
efficiency improved and an adequate 
political-psychological base created .••• 
Only U. S. resources can provide the 
pressures on ~Im necessary to check 
Hanoi's support although some measure 
of GVN armed forces participation will 
be required for psychologi cal reasons; 
the other measures and urograms required 
.. 
to stem the tide ••. are largely internal 
to SVN but eve:n here success "rill require 
a marked increase in U. S. support and 
participation . " 
xiv 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
DATE 
14 Mar 65 
20 Har 65 
.. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR 
DOCilllENT 
General Harold 
J ::>hnson ' s "Report 
on Trip to South 
Vietnam" 
JCSM 204-65 
, 
DESCRIPTION 
General Johnson, in SVN from 5-12 March, 
was as DLpressed by the gravity of the 
situation -- parti cularly in I Corps --
as were Saigon officials. 
He submitted 
several proposals -- including deploy-
ment of additional U. S. ground troops 
-- for attaining U. S. objectives (per-
suade NVN to abandon support and direction 
of the insurgency, defeat the insurgents, 
create a stable GVN) . 
He said more U.S. 
action was necessary because '\ihat the 
situation requires may exceed l\That the 
Vietne.mese can be expected to do ." 
To r elease ~~VN for offensive action , 
General Johnson proposed sending a U.S. 
division either to the Bien Hoa/Tan Son 
Nhut area plus some coastal enclaves or 
to Kontum , Pleiku and Darlac Provinces 
in the highlands . 
Both General Johnson 
and NI . McNamara preferred the second 
alternative -- but McNamara found neither 
efficient in terms of ARVN released per 
. U.S. i nput and he also favored a ROK 
division rather than U.S. troops. 
General Jon~son recommended the SEATO 
Treaty be i nvoked and a four -division 
MLF be deployed across the DMZ "from 
the South China Sea to the Mekong River" 
to cou.nter infiltration .. 
Finall y he said to evaluate MACV 's re-
quests properl y a poli cy decision "must 
be made . nOVl to determine "That the 
Vietnamese should be expected to do for 
themselves and hOl'l much more the U.S. 
must contribute directly to the security 
of South Vietnam." 
Mr. McNa.mara noted 
in the margin: "Policy is: anything that 
'tlill strengthen the position of the GVlf 
>\Till be sent .•.. " 
The JCS proposed that V. S. troops be 
deployed to South Vietnam for active 
operations against the Viet Congo 
xv 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
27 Mar 65 
6 Apr 65 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR 
DOCUMENT 
MACV Message 
t) CINCPAC 
NSAM 328 
DESCRIPI'ION 
Westmoreland submitted his estimate of 
the situa~ion and his request for U.S. 
troops for offensive action against the 
Viet Congo 
Preparation of both estimate 
and troop input recommendation had begun 
on 13 March (five days after the Marines 
arrived; one day after General Johnson 
completed his trip). 
President JO~Dson approved General 
Johnson ' s specific proposals for more 
U.S. action. ' This meant more U. S. i n-
volvement in terms of money, shi ps , 
aircraft, materiel and advisors, but 
deploJ'1Ilent of ground combat units of 
division size vTas not approved at this 
time (2 additional Marine BLTs were 
approved) . 
xvi 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I. 
Introduction 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
MARINE COMBAT UNITS GO TO DA NANG -- MARCH 1965 
At approximately nine oiclock on the morning of e March 1965, the 
United States Marine Corps' Battalion Landing Team 3/9 splashed ashore 
at Da Nang on the mainland of Southeast Asia. 
Although there were 
already over 20,000 American servicemen in Vietnam, this was the first 
time that U.S. ground combat units had been committed to action. 
The 
mission assigned 3/9 and its companion battalion 1/3 (which landed by 
air later the same day) vTas "to occupy and defend critical terrain 
features in order to secure the airfield and, as directed, communica-
tions facilities, U.S . supporting installations, port facilities, 
landing beaches and other U.S. installations against attack. 
The U.S. 
Marine Force will not, repeat ,viII not, engage in day to day actions 
against the Viet Cong.
1I Y 
The overall responsibility for the security 
of that base complex was to remain within the purview of the ARVN Com-
mander of the I Corps Tactical Zone, General Nguyen Chanh Thi. It was 
hoped that vrith the provision of reinforcements for Da Nang security, 
General Thi would be able to release some of his own troops from that 
mission to undertake offensive action against the Viet Congo ~ In 
light of subsequent events, it would be facile to conclude that the 
modest input of some 3,500 Marines at this juncture presaged the massive 
buildup of U. S. fighting pOl>ler in Vietnam which brought American military 
strength in country to over 180,000 by the end of 1965. 
Except for 
CO~illS~L~CV who did see it as a first step and welcomed it and Ambassador 
Taylor who saw it as an un,velcome first step, official Washington re-
garded the deployment as a one shot affair to meet a specific situation. 
1 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
II. 
The Decision 
A. 
COMUSMACV1s Request 
On 22 February 1965, after a visit to Da Nang by General 
Throckmorton, then Deputy COMUSMACV, General Westmoreland cabled CINCPAC 
.requesting two Marine BLTI s to assist in protecting the base against Viet 
Cong raids, sabutage, and mortar attacks. 3/ As a result of his visit, 
General Throckmorton told General \iestmoreland that he questioned the 
capability of the Vietnamese to protect the base and recommended the 
deployment of the entire 9th Marine Expeditionary Brigade. 4/ General 
Westmoreland concurred with the security evaluation but requested only 
two of the three BLT1s organic to the 9th MEB with the third BLT to be 
held offshore as a reserve. 2/ 
B. 
The Ambassador1s Opinion 
Ambassador Taylor sent to the State Department on the same day 
the following cable: 
liThe ref cable requests CINCPAC, MACV and Ambassador1s 
views as to requirement for force deployments to this area 
in view of security situation of SVN. 
General Westmoreland 
I agree that there is no need to consider deployments to SVN 
at this time except possibly for protection of airfield at 
Da Nang. 
liAs I analyze the pros and cons of plaCing any consider-
able number of Marines in Da Nang area beyond those presently 
assigned, I develop grave reservations as to 'Hisdom and 
necessity of so doing. 
Such action would be step in reversing 
' long standing policy of avoidir:-g cOInmi tment of ground combat 
forces in SVN. 
Once this policy is breached, it will be very 
difficult to hold line. If Da Nang needs better protection, 
so do Bien Roa, Ton Son Nhut, Nha Trang and other key base 
areas. 
Once it becomes evident that T,ve are willing assume 
such new responsibilities, one may be sure that GVN will seek 
to unload other ground force tasks upon us. 
Increased numbers 
of ground forces in SVN will increase points of friction with 
local population and create conflicts with RVNAF over command 
relationships. 
These disadvantages can be accepted only if 
there is clear and unchallenged need "l-rhi'ch can be satis:tied 
only by US ground forces. 
Turning to possible uses for addi-
tional Marines in Da Nang area, I can see several which are 
worth examining. 
First, they could be used to reinforce 
protection of Da Nang airbase against Bien Roa-type of attack 
by fire or against combined VC fire and ground attack. 
IIMore ambitious mission T,vould be readiness to engage in 
mobile operations against VC in Da Nang area to keep VC units 
at distance from base and mak.e posi ti ve contribution to pacifi-
cation of area. 
Such US forces T,vould concurrently be available 
to join in conventional defense of area if DRV army moved 
southlvard in resumption of formal ,hostilities. 
2 
TOP SECP~T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"In defense of the Da Nang airbase against surprise 
attack by fire, it "'\olOuld be necessary for Marines to be in 
place on ground in considerable strength. 
(HACV has estimated 
that about six battalions "'\olould be necessary to keep 8lmm mor-
tar fire off large airfield.) 
Even if whole HEB were deployed, 
they could not provide complete assurance that surprise mortar 
fire by small groups attacking at night would be kept off field. 
Protection of field against VC ground attack would be consider-
ably simpler and would require fewer Marines. It is hard to 
imagine an attack on field by more than VC regiment and even 
an attack in those numbers would be extremely risky in face of 
superior friendly air and ground fire. 
To meet such an attack, 
battalion of Marines supported by local ARVN forces should be 
sufficient. 
On other hand, as indicated above, effective 
perimeter defense again&t mortar fire would require at least 
whole brigade of Marines. 
"It has been suggested that an ancillary benefit to 
deployment of additional Marines to Da Nang would be freeing 
of ARVN units for use elsewhere in mobile operations. 
While 
some ARVN troops of order of battalion might be so relieved, 
number would not be sufficient to constitute strong argument 
for bringing in Marines. 
Generally speaking, Marines would 
be performing task which has not been done adequately in 
past •. 
"The use of Marines in mobile counter-VC operations has 
the attraction of giving them an offensive mission and one of 
far ' greater appeal than that of mere static defense. 
However, 
it vlOuld raise many serious pro"!:>lems '''hich in past have appeared 
sufficiently formidable to lead to rejection of use ' of US ground 
troops in a counter-guerrilla role. If.hite-faced soldier armed, 
equipped and trained as he is not suitable guerrilla fighter for 
Asian forests and jungles. 
French tried to adapt their forces 
to this mission and failed; I doubt that US forces could do much 
better. Furthermore, we would have vastly complicating factor 
of not running war and hence problem of arranging satisfactory 
command relationships with our Vietnamese allies .• Finally, 
there would be ever present question of hor.-r foreign soldier 
would distinguish bet"'\oTeen a VC and friendly Vietnamese farmer. 
WhBn I vie,v this array of difficulties, I am convinced that "'\ore 
should adhere to our past policy of keeping our ground forces 
out of direct counterinsurgency role. 
Vllf there were any great likelihood of DRV forces crossing 
the Demilitarized Zone in conventional attack, there would be' 
no question of need for strong US Ground force to assist ARVN 
in defense of coastal plain. 
However, this situation would not 
arise suddenly and we should have ample tL~e to make our 
deployments before situation got out of hand. ' 
3 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"In view of foregoing considerations, I conclude that 
only mission vrorth considering now for additional Marines 
in Da NaIlg area is to contribute to defense of base against 
mortar fire and ground attack. 
However, to defend against· 
fire would require at least full brigade and I do not be-
lieve threat and possible consequences of mortar attack are 
so great as to warrant pinning down so valuable force in 
static defensive mission. 
However, in vi~H of General 
Westmoreland's understandable concern for safety of this 
important base, I ,,[ould be willing to recommend placing in 
Da Nang Marine battalion landing team. 
Such force would 
strengthen defense of base and, at same time, '\-Tould be 
manageable force from point of vie .. , of accommodating it on 
base and absorbing it into Da Nang community. 
Such force 
with those Marines already present should remove any sub-
stantial danger of VC ground attack and in conjunction 
with available ARVN forces provide an acceptable level of 
security against attack by fire. 
"If Washington decision is to introduce additional 
Marines into tiietnam, it shoulg, of course, be made con-
tingent upon getting concurrence of GVN. 
It would be 
useful and, I believe, not difficult to get GVN to initiate 
request for additional forces to which USG could then 
accede. 
Taylor. It §j 
C. 
CINCPAC's Suppor~ 
CINCPAC cabled the JCS on 24 February and recownended immediate 
deployment of two Marine BLT's, one over the beach and one by air and 
surface. 
He advised, in addition, that a squadron of Marine F4's be 
deployed to Da Nang simultaneously. 
Those aircraft would be for close 
air support of the defenders and could be used "for other missions 
along with primary mission. • • • All CINCPAC contingency plans for 
SEA provide for employment of Marine aircraft :from Da Nang." 
The tone 
of CINCPAC' s cable liaS urgent. 
He encouraged deployment now "before 
the tragedy," and he added that were the base to be attacked before 
the BLT's were put ashore, the landing force afloat would be unable, 
because of the time required to get forces to the scene, to influence 
the outcome. 
One of the references cited in this lengthy CINCPAC cable 
was the Ambassadorrs message of 22 February. 
In addressing that 
reference, CINCPAC disagreed openly with Ambassador Taylor and cited 
the Mariners Trdistinguished record," saying: 
TrIn ref F the Ambassador discusses the pros and cons 
of deploying the MEB to Da Nang. 
The Ambassador co:mrn.ents 
on the difficulty of providing complete assurance of 
security from surprise mortar fire even with the whole of 
MEB. 
This is true and consequently, what we are obliged to ' 
do here is to reduce within the limits of our ~apability 
the hazards to our people. 
I believe that the vulnerability 
4 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
of the U.S. investment in Da Nang is as apparent to the 
VC/DRV as it is to us. 
With a strong mobile force in the 
area providing a tight defense of the airfield complex and 
good security of U.S. outlying installations, I believe that 
two ancillary benefits will emerge. 
First, the RVNAF will . 
be encourag'2d to use the forces thus freed for patrol and 
security operations, and second, the VC/DRV will be obliged 
to regard Da Nang as a tougher target. 
Finally, the 
Ambassador rejects the usefulness of U.S. ground elements 
in a counter-guerrilla war because of our color, armament, 
equipment and training. 
This stands athwart past performance 
in this function. 
The Marines have a distinguished record in 
counter-guerrilla warfare.!! II 
. 
The JCS forwarded to the Secretary of Defense the substance of CINCPAC's 
recommendations in JC~I-130-65. ~/ 
D. 
Contingent Approval 
On 26 February the State Department cabled Ambassador Taylor that 
the Marines were on the way, and that he 'I-laS to secure approval from the 
Governillent of Vietnam for their deployment to Da Nang. 9/ 
Ambassador 
Taylor cabled the State Department in reply on 28 February and said: 
!!Arter discussion of Ref A with Johnson and Throckmorton 
(Westmoreland was temporarily unavailable), we have decided 
. to proceed as following. 
!!I shall seek an appointment with Quat at first oppor-
tuni ty (probably tomorrow March 1) and raise the matter of 
our concern (but not alarm) over the security of the Da Nang 
airfield and environs along following lines. It is' the most 
important military installation in the country which is 
indispensable in air defense and in support of air and sea 
operations against the DRV. 
It must be at or near the top 
of the target list which the VC/DRV wish to destroy. 
I 
visited Da Nang on February 27 for the first time in several 
months and am deeply impressed with the increasing magnitude 
of the security problem as are General Westmoreland and his 
principal military colleagues. 
!!Except for the chronic shortage of GVN forces in I 
.Corps, we would be inclined to urge GVN to allocate several 
addi tional battalions to the Da Nang area. 
But we know that 
such forces could not be made available except as prohibitive 
cost to the security of other areas in ~VN. For these 
reasons, we are driven to consider a solution which we have 
ahTays rejected in the past, the introduction of US ground 
combat forces to reinforce the defense of Da Nang until GVN 
forces become available for the purpose. 
In spite of many 
5 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
cogent reasons against this solution. 
General Westmoreland 
and I are now reluct~Dtly prepared to recommend it to 
Washington if the PM so desires and requests. 
trQuat may agree at once but is likely to want to take 
time to disl'!uss the matter with Thieu and Ninh . 
Even if he 
should acquiesce, I would suggest another meeting on the sub-
ject with Quat, Thieu, llinh and Thi at which Westmoreland and 
I would emphasize the limited mission of the Narines and their 
non-involvement in pacification. 
"If all goes well and concurrence is received, there should 
be no problem about a press release. 
We would envision this 
to be a short, joint GVN/US statement issued at once to the 
effect that, at the request of GVN, the USG is landing two 
battalions of Narines to strengthen the security of the Da Nang 
area until such time as they can be relieved by GVN forces. 
The 
first: BLT could then land at once and the se'cond on call from MACV. 
"I strongly urge a deferment of decision on landing in 
remainder of MEB until the first two BLT's are ashore and in 
place. 
By that time we '\oTill have around 7300 u. S. military 
personnel in the Da Nang area and I doubt ability to absorb 
or usefully employ the rest of the MEB . 
He can tell better 
after the two BLT' s are shaken down. 
Taylor." 10/ 
In a subsequent meeting with GVN officials, Ambassador Taylor secured 
their approval for the deployment. 
Generals Thieu and "Little" Minh ex-
pressed their concern about the possible reaction of the populace in the 
Da Nang area and asked that the Marines be "brought ashore in the most 
inconspicuous way feaSible." 11/ 
E. 
Eleventh Hour Change 
One final obstacle to the Marine deployment was raised when Assistant 
Secretary of Defense McNaughton cabled the Ambassador in Saigon on 2 March 
stating that the 173rd Airborne Brigade, then stationed on Okinawa, would 
be substituted for the Marines. 12/ 
Other than exchange of cables, there 
is no documentary evidence in the files to indicate what might have been 
the rationale behind the belated attempt to deploy the 173rd Airborne to 
Da N~Dg in place of the Marines. 
One can only surmise the reasons behind 
such a move, but certain characteristics of the two forces may provide a 
clue. 
The Marines present prima facie a more formidable appearance upon 
arrival on the scene. 
They have organic a complement of heavy weapons, 
amphibious vehicles, and various other items of weighty hardware, in- , 
cluding tanks, in contrast to the smaller and lighter airborne. 
Together 
with their accompanying armada of ships, the Narines might be seen as a 
more perm~Dent force than the airborne. 
This, coupled with the common 
knowledge that the Marines have a long history of interventions in foreign 
countries for purposes of peacekeeping and stability, might have influenced 
someone in the decision apparatus to consider using'the airborne in their 
6 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
stead as a positive signal that the Da Nang deployment was to be of short 
duration. If this was indeed the case , it suggests that there were still 
high-ranking people in Washington who were hoping to make the deployment 
of U.S. troops temporary and limited. 
. 
General l'Ies"cmoreland objected to the proposed change on the grounds 
that the Marines were more self-sustaining and the Ambassador agreed with 
him. 1]/ 
CINCPAC, in objecting to the proposed change , sent the following 
telegram to the JCS: 
"The action outlined in Ref A, which would place the 
173rd Airborne Brigade, a two-battalion brigade, at Da Nang', 
embodies several features which are undesirable. 
A light and 
flexible airborne force would be committed to a fixed task 
depriving CINCPAC of his air mobile reserve. It is the only 
airborne assault force in the theater. 
A comprehensive array 
of plans and logistic preparations which affect many of our 
forces, and the forces of other countries, would be under-
mined. 
The action would employ units which are less adequately 
constituted for the purpose. 
"Since the origination of OPL.A.N 32 in 1959, the Marines 
have been scheduled for deployment to Da Nang . 
Seven CINCPAC 
and SEATO contingency plans and a myriad of supporting plans at 
lower echelons reflect this same deployment. 
As a result, there 
has been extensive planning, reconnaissance, and logistics 
preparation over the years. 
The CG, 9th ~ffiB is presently in 
Da Nang finalizing the details of landing the MEB forces in 
such a way as to cause minimum impact on the civilian populace. 
The forces are present and ready to land, some now embarked, 
with plans for execution complete. 
The deployment has been 
thoroughly explored by Amb Taylor with Prime Minister Quat and 
the method in >"hich the Marines would be introduced was mutually 
agreed upon as pointed out in Ref B. 
ITAnother practical consideration is the fact that 1300 
Marines are already at Da Nang . 
The Marines have been there in 
varying numbers for more than two years and thus have long since 
established the logistics and administrative base for future 
Marine deployments. 
They have a long standing and effective 
local relationship with the populace and the RVNAF. 
Then, there 
is the matter of adaptability for the task. 
Da Nang is on the 
sea coast. 
Each Marine BLT has its own amphibian vehicles, 
which are adaptable to continuing seaborne supply . 
Each one has 
a trained shore party to insure the the f~ow of material across 
the beach in an area where port facilities are marginal . 
They 
embody amphibious bulk fuel systems which serve as a cardinal ' 
stand-by in case of interruption of commercial fuel supply . 
Their communications equipment and procedures are compatible 
with the hawks, helicopters and other Marine formations now 
7 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
in Da Nang and their organic heavy engineer equipment will 
be effective in developing the defensive 'Ivorks needed for 
accomplishing the task. 
The Marine MEB includes tanks and 
artillery. 
The airborne, battalions, on the other hand, 
being desig:1ed for a different task, are deficient in each 
of these important particulars -- in varying degrees -- and 
are thus less desirable for the assignment. 
liThe situation in Southeast Asia has nm, reached a point 
where the soundness of our contingency planning may be about 
to be tested. 
The tasking has been completed. 
Logistic 
arrangements and lines of communication are establishing and 
operating. 
Command arrangements have been made and agreed 
upon and plans for landing and disposition of forces ashore 
have been made and these forces are ready to execute them. 
It therefore seems imprudent, at this time, to shift forces 
in a major sector and to force changes in contingency 
posture for other parts of Southeast Asia. ffinphasis addeg 
IIWhatever force is landed, its strength should be 'ade -
quate for the job. 
The airborne force, if selected, would 
require substantial and diverse augmentation to achieve the 
desired combat capability. 
IIIf the final decision is to deploy and [Si~.l Army Brigade 
instead of the MEB to Da Nang, then I ,TOuld recommend a one 
Brigade Task Force of the 25th Infantry Division. 
This would 
provide a ground combat capability reasonably similar to the 
ground elements of the MEB . 
The command and control elements 
and the initial light infantry elements of this task force 
could be airlifted to provide some early security at Da Na..ng. 
Achievement of a more adequate capability similar to the MEB 
would require air and sealift from Hawaii and CONUS augmenta-
tion of some support units for the task force. 
The'DAFFD should 
not be used since it is an essential element of other contin-
gency plans. 
III recommend that the MEB be landed at .Da Nang as pre-
viously planned. II 14/ 
F. 
Final Approval 
The objections were sustained, and on 6 March 1965 the Pentagon 
issued the follo '\oring news release: 
liTHO U. S. MARINE BATT}\LIONS TO BE DEPLOYED IN VIET NAM. 
After consultation between the governments of South Vietnam and 
the United States, the United States Goverp_1I!ent has agreed to 
the request of the Government of Vietnam to station two United 
States Marine Corps Battalions in the Da Nang 'area to strengthen 
the general security of the Da Nang Air Base complex. 
8 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
liThe limited mission of the Marines will be to 
relieve Government of South Vietnam forces now engaged 
in security duties for action in the pacification pro-
gram and in offensive roles against Communist guerrilla. 
forces." .l2J 
On the same day the Joint Chiefs of Staff ordered CINCPAC to commence 
the landing of the BLT r s, Wand on 7 March Secretary of State Rusk 
told a national television and radio audience that the Marines would 
shoot back if shot at, but their mission was to put a tight security 
ring around Da Nang Air Base, thus freeing South Vietnamese forces for 
combat. l1/ 
9 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
III. The Situation 
A. 
Da Na'1.g Local 
Prior to the landing of the Marines, Da Nang had yet to be attacked 
by the VC, but t~le official estimates of enemy intentions and capabili-
ties in the I Corps area were none too encouraging. 
There were reported 
to be 12 battalions numbering some 6,000 men within striking distance of 
th~ base, and on the night of 7 March the town of Mieu Kong, three miles 
south of the airfield, had been probed by a VC unit of unknown size. 18/ 
General Throckmorton's estimate of ARVN lack ·of capability to preventViet 
Cong depredations against the sizeable and expensive stocks of U.S.equip-
ment on the base was colored, no doubt, by recent Viet Cong attacks at 
Pleiku and Qui Nhon and by the raid on Bien Hoa airfield on 1 November 
1964. 
In all of these attacks, the GVN security forces had not been able 
to prevent a determined Viet Cong attempt to penetrate the defenses around 
important installations. 
Moreover, it was apparent that U.S. personnel 
in South Vietnam were vulnerable. 
With the beginning of the Flaming Dart 
air strikes against North Vietnam in early February 1965, communist retalia-
tion against the bases which supported those strikes became a distinct 
probability. 
In order to cope with possible communist reprisal air attacks 
on Da Nang, elements of a Marine HAliK Missile Battalion were ordered to 
that base on 7 February. 19/ 
HOI.rever, communist air attacks were less 
probable and offered higher risk than a ground attack by Viet Congforces 
in country, . and Da Nang, which was heavily supporting air activity over 
North and South Vietnam, was a lucrative target. If, as General Westmore-
land reported in his February '1965 Monthly Evaluation, the air strikes in 
North and South Vietnam were having a beneficial effect on morale in the 
GVN, then it vas highly likely that the Viet Cong \oTould at least make an 
effort to stop or slow down the frequency of the raids. 20/ 
B. 
GVN Instability 
Both the CIA and MACV were sober and somber in their estimates of 
the political situation in South Vietnam in . early 1965. 21/ 
The fall of 
the Huong government in January and the confused events of 16-21 February 
which culminated in General Khanh' s departure from Vietnam made any 
predictions .difficult at best. 
The CIA thought Quat's government was 
shaky, 22/ 
and the Chairman of the' Joint Chiefs of Staff in a message 
to General Westmoreland conveyed his fears that despite U.S. actions 
against North Vietnam, the GVN might collapse. 
General \\Testmoreland' s . 
reply to the Chairman stated in part: 
"History may well record that the real significance of 
1964 was net major VC advance and corresIJnding GVN retro-
gression but rather that South Vietnam's social and politica~ 
institutions remained remarkably intact under the powerful 
disintegrating blOllS to which subjected -- most of them not 
of VC making ... Nonetheless, we do have the very real 
asset of a resilient people and this gives hope that there 
is more time available than we might think; time in which, 
if properly exploited, the needed national leadership could 
evolve ... " 23/ 
10 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
CINCPAC added a telling note to General Westmoreland's connnents 
when he said we needed the 9th MEB for insurance should the GVN be un-
able to resist collapse in the critical area of Da Nang where so much 
was already cOIlllllitted. 24/ 
C. 
Enemy C8.pabilities 
Despite some encouraging signs in January 1965, the official assess-
ments of the military situation emanating from Saigon were bleak. 
The 
GVN armed forces had suffered a major defeat at Binh Gia, Phuoc Tuy 
Province, in late December-early January. 
There, the Viet Cong, fight-
ing for the first time with coordinated units of regimental Size, had 
stood off the best that ARVN could offer and held their ground. 
To 
many observers, including General Westmoreland, Binh Gia Signaled the 
long-expected beginning of Phase III of the insurgency. 
The Viet Cong 
were confident enough to abandon their hit-and-run guerrilla tactics 
and engage the GVN armed forces in conventional ground combat. 
Although the rate of Viet Cong activity in January '\oTaS the 1m-Test 
in 11 months, it was surmised that they Here merely regrouping and 
planning their next steps. 
Sure enough, during the month of February 
the VC reappeared in force and carried out a series of successful raids 
and attacks, including those on the U.S. installations in Pleiku and Qui 
Nhon. 
The CIA in its February Sitrep was prompted to declare that the 
critical province of Binh Dinh in the II Corps area was just about lost 
to the VietCong. 25/ 
:Sinh Dinh is a key province for a number of 
reasons. 
High\-ray 1, the major north-south road artery connecting the 
I Corps with Saigon, runs the length of Binh Dinh. 
Of equal importance 
is Highway 19 which runs west from Q;u.i Nhon through An Khe to the city 
of Pleiku. 
Qui Nho'n, a coastal city at the eastern end of High'\oTay 19, 
offers one of the few viable port alternatives to Saigon and is a major 
logistical base for resupply to the upland bases and camps. 
Loss of 
control of HighHay 19 dictates that friendly forces in the highlands 
be resupplied entirely by air -- a staggering prospect. 
Finally, the 
large population in Binh Dinh, numbering some 800,000, offers great 
prospects for manpower and sustenance to the side able to control the 
province. 26/ 
• 
Intelligence estimates began stating that the coming rainy season 
would be accompanied by a major Viet Cong attempt to cut the country 
in half in the II Corps. It was quite possible that the VC would 
attempt during such a campaign to seize complete control of one of the 
highland provinces, most probably Kontum, and would then proceed to set 
up a NLF government therein. 
The political and psychological effect 
of such a move might, some observers feared, s)und the death knell for 
the GVN. 
General Westmoreland, in his February Monthly Evaluation added 
plaintively that he hoped the air activity in North and South Vietnam 
would help reverse the trend. 27/ 
. 
l 
In October of 1964, the National Intelligence Board in Washington 
had published a grave picture of the situation in South Vietnam. 
In 
11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
summary, they said that the political situation would continue to decay 
with a gradual petering out of the war effort. 
Coup after coup, intrac-
table Buddhists, Hontagnard revolt, and strikes were all evidence of 
the lack of leadership, and no charismatic leader was in sight. 
The 
Viet Cong were u~lL~ely to make an overt bid to seize power as things 
were going their way, and they were looking for a neutralist coalition 
which they could easily dominate. 
The endurance of the people and the 
ability of the administration to carryon routine duties without any 
guidance from Saigon were cited as latent strengths as was the fact 
that no identifiable povTer group had yet called for an end to the fight -
ing or had sought accommodation with the Viet Congo ~ 
The events of the next few months added no new ingredients to this 
gloomy picture until the decision to initiate Rolling Thunder. 
In esti-
mating probable communist reactions to the l atter, the National Intelli-
gence Board stated ''l-re accordingly believe that the DRV Ivc reaction to 
a fe"iv more air attacks like those of early February would probably be 
t o continue their pressures in the South more or less on the scale of 
recent weeks... It is possible that they WOuld, for a .. leek or t .. TO, 
refrain from direct attacks on U.S. installations, but we cannot esti-
mate that such restraint is probable." 291 
MacGeorge Bundy in his Memorandum to the President dated 7 February 
1965 estimated that without additional U. S. action , the GVN would collapse 
with:Ln thene:Art year. 
He saw l atent anti-_Americanism near the surface 
in South Vietnam and detected amongst the Vietnamese the attitude that 
the U.S. was going to quit. 
Bundy recommended the initiation of a policy 
of gradual and continuing repris al, but he did not even mention the 
question of U.S. installation security nor did he mention the possibility 
of committing U.S. ground forces. ]2/ 
D. 
Contemporary Accounts 
contemporary accounts of the situation in South Vietnam from the 
non-official vie\vpoint are unanimous in their recognition of the continu-
ing decay in the political and'military capacity of the GVN to resist. 
The prospect for success if the U.S. did not change its approach to the 
war was nil. The Viet Cong were clearly winning. 
To writers like Halber-
stam and Mecklin, the choice for the U. S. boiled dmm to two alternatives; 
either get out or commit land forces to stem the tide. ~ Neither of 
these writers was likely to vie'\v the arrival of the lvfarines as anything 
else but indication of a decision to take the second course . 
Shaplen 
treated the landing of the Marines as an isolated incident, but he did 
not accept the rationale that they were in Vietnam for strictly defen-
sive reasons. 
In commenting on the subsequent arrival of more Marines 
and the concomitant expansion of their mission to include offensive 
patrol Ivork, he says: 
" . •• and sooner or later} it was surmised, they 
would tangle directly with the Viet Cong; in f act, it was obvious from 
the outset that in an emergency they .. Tould be airlifted to other areas 
away from their base . " J5J 
12 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A glance at some of the commentary of early March 1965 in newspapers 
and periodicals gives clear indication that the landing of the t wo Marine 
BLT's ,'laS seen as an event of major significance. 
Analysis of the import 
of the event varies, as would be expected, from writer to writer, but 
almost without exception they read more into the deployment than was made 
explicit by the brief Defense Department press release. By-lines from 
Saigon, where reporters had ready access to "reliable sources" in the U.S. 
Mission, give clear indication that there had been a major shift in atti-
tude as regards the use of U.S. ground forces in Asia. 
Ted Sell, a Los 
Angeles Times staff writer , wrote on 10 March 1965. 
"The landing of the 
two infantry battalions is in its own way a far more significant act than 
were earlier attacks by U.S. airplanes, even though those attacks were 
directed against a country -- North Vietnam -- ostensibly not taking part 
in the direct war." 
Speaking after the Marines were ordered in, one high 
official said of the no-ground-troops-in-Asia shibboleth, "Sure, it's 
undesirable. 
But that doesn't mean we won't do it." 33/ 
It is especially 
significant that among the writers attempting to gauge the extent of U.S. 
resolve in the Vietnamese situation, the deployment of ground forces was 
somehow seen as a much more positive and credible indication of U.S. de-
termination than any of the steps, including the air strikes on the DRV, 
previously taken. 
13 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
-c-t 
;:a:::r: 
Om 
('")0 
mm 
(1)('") 
(I) -(I) 
o z 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
('I • '" 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV. 
The Decision Process 
A. 
Proposals for Actions Before the National Security Council 
Working Group, Late 1964 
EventB in the late 1964-early 1965 period moved a.t such a rapid 
pace as almost to defy isolated analysis. 
On 3 November 1964, just 
two days after the Viet Cong successfully attacked the U.S. air base 
and billetting at Bien Hoa, Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy 
convened the ne\dy established NSC Working Group on SVN/SEA. 
Member-
ship in the group included the State Department, OSD/ISA, the JCS, 
and CIA. 34/ 
Debate wi thin the group centered around three proposed 
courses of action, none of which contained a major U.S. ground troop 
commitment to SVN. 35/ 
Ground troop commitment was addressed in draft 
papers circulated within the group by the principals, but it does not 
appear that anyone was thinking in terms of a major U.S. effort on the 
ground in counterinsurgency operations. 
William Bundy's own papers 
mentioned CINCPAC OPLAJT 32-64 and CINCPAC OPLAN 39-65, both of which 
contingency plans provided for the input of US ground combat forces 
into SEA in response to Chicom or DRV aggression or a combination of 
the two. 36/ 
In a draft dated 13 November 1964, Bundy discussed ground 
troop commitment and said in part that he did "not envisage the intro-
duction of substantial ground forces into South Vietnam or Thailand in 
conjunction with these initial actions." 37/ 
The initial actions to 
which he referred were the three basic options under consideration at 
th-2 time by the "lorking Group. 
Bu,,"'ldy went on in the same draft memo-
randum to state that the question of ground troop involvement needed 
further consideration, including the possibility of the introduction 
of a multilateral force into the northern provinces of South Vietnam. 
In discussing the pros and cons of ground troops, Bundy did not mention 
the security of bases but he did suggest that the presence of troops 
in South Vietnam might invite Viet Cong activity against them. 
Other drafts circulated in the NSC Working Group dealt with ground 
forces. 
In a memorandum to the itlorking Group dated 30 November 1964, 
and entitled "Alternative to Air Attacks on North Vietnam: 
Proposals 
for the Use of U.S. Ground Forces in Support of Diplomacy in Vietnam," 
Messrs. Johnson and Kattenburg of the State Department proposed the 
introduction of a token ground force to provide proof of our resolve 
as a prelude to a major diplomatic offensive. 38/ 
The Joint Chiefs 
of Staff aJ_so made a propose.l for the introduction of ground troops in 
their 23 November 1964 memo to the Secretary of Defense. 39/ 
In that 
JCffi1, which was principally concerned with analysis of various courses 
of action to increase pressure on the DRV, the JCS recommended the 
collateral deployment of Marine units to Da Nang and other units from 
Okinawa to Ton Son Nhut Air Base for purposes of security and deterrence ' 
in accordance with CINCPAC 
OPLili~S. 
There is no documentary evidence, 
however, that these drafts 'tTere in any ',ray included in the memo sE;Ot to 
the President. 
On 1 December 1964, the President approved the recommendations of 
Ambassador Taylor and the NSC Principals to proceed 'In th the implementa-
tion of the Working Group's Course of Action A and, after 30 days or 
14 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
more and with some GVN progress along specified lines, to enter a second 
phase program consisting !!principally of progressively more serious air 
strikes,!! as in Option C. 40/ 
Again, the U.S. focus was on the air war, 
not on the ground. 
:B. 
The Foc1..~s of the Joint Chiefs of Staf.':' 
I 
In forwarding on 11 February 1965 their proposed program for the 
first eight weeks of military actions against North Vietnam the JCS 
, 
told the Secretary of Defense that their plan called primarily for air-
strikes but also included the collateral deployment of a MEB to Da Nang 
and an Army Brigade to Thailand. 41/ 
Nei ther of these deployments were 
for purposes of counterinsurgency but rather were intended to deter any 
overt DRV/Chlcom retaliation and to put us in a better posture in case 
the deterrent failed. 
The JCS forwarded this proposal to the Secretary 
again on 4 March 1965, still without mention of the possibility of ground 
combat action against the Viet Congo 42/ 
The first proposal from the 
JCS that U.S. troop units be sent to SVN for active operations against the 
Viet Cong came on 20 March 1965, well after the landing of the Marines at 
Da Nang. 43/ 
That the JCS were conSidering such a proposal before the 
Marines were landed is indicated obliquely in Chairman Wheeler's cover 
letter to the Secretary of Defense of 1 Narch 1965} under which he for-
warded the JSOP-70 and in which he said: 
!!In arriving at the proposed 
force levels the present situation in Southeast Asia was only indirectly 
considered, and had little, if any} influence upon the JSOP-70 force 
levels. 
This is pointed out to identify a specific problem area that 
requires a near term and long term solution. 
By separate action the JCS 
are addressing the problem and will provide you with their views on this 
subject. 11 44/ 
While the Marines were l anding at Da Nang} a key man from 
the Washington scene was a visitor in Saigon. 
Although his visit was 
unconnected with t:o.e Marine landings per se} his actions on return to 
Washington provided a fair measure of the attitudes prevalent in the 
U.S. conununity in Vietnam at that juncture. 
General Johnson} Chief of Staff of the Army, was in Vietnam from the 
5th through the 12th of March 1965. 
He was given a thorough briefing on 
the situation by C-eneral Westmoreland and other members of the United 
States miSSion} ~nd he brought back to Washington detailed situation 
reports prepared by MACV and the Ambassador. 
The view from Saigon} as 
reflected in those reports, was very grave indeed. A succinct summation 
of the views of the entire U.S. Mission Council in Saigon appeared in the 
Ambassador's Sitrep forwarded to the State Department on 11 March 1965: 
nUnless (and this is primary), NVN support is checked} 
GVN military and paramilitary reS01..'rces jncreased, pacifica-
tion goals p,nd concepts refined, administrative efficiency 
improved, and an adequate political-psychological base 
created, there is little likelihood of stemming the tide of 
the VC insurgency. 
Only U.S. resources can provide the 
pressures on NVN necessary to check Hanoi's support, al-
though some measure of SVN armed forces participation will 
be required for psychological reasons; the other measures 
and programs required to stem the tide of VC insurgency 
15 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
.TOP SECP~T - Sensitive 
are largely internal to SVN, but even here success will 
require a marked increase in U.S. support and participa-
tion." ~ 
There is little doubt that General Johnson was impressed by the gravity 
o:f the situation in SVN as presented to him at the very time the Marines 
were landing at Da Nang. 
The report ~ which he submitted to the 
Secretary of De:fense on 14 March contains speci:fic proposals, including 
some :for deployment of additional U.S. ground combat :forces, which 
Johnson felt should be implemented i:f the U.S. was to realize its ob-
jectives in SVN. 
Those objectives as seen by Johnson were: 
(1) to 
persuade the DRV to abandon its support and direction o:f the insurgency, 
(2) to defeat the Viet Cong insurgents, and (3) to create a stable GVN. 
In accord with the Ambassador, General Johnson called for U.S. action 
because "what the situation requires may exceed "rhat the Vietnamese can 
be expected to do." 
To arrest the current deteri"oration Johnson pre-
sented a list of 21 specific actions to be taken. 
The upshot of these 
21 points "ras greater U.S. involvement in terms o:f money, ships, air-
craft, advisors, and assorted hardw'are , but no ground combat units were 
involved. 
They meant essentially more of the same, and all 21 points 
were approved by the President on 1 April 1965. ~ There was more 
to the Johnson recommendations, however. 
To release RVNAF for o:f:fensive 
action, he proposed deploying a U.S. division either to defend the Bien 
Roa/Ton Son Nhut airfield complex plus some coastal enclaves or to 
defend the highland provinces of Kontum, Pleiku and Darlac. 
Johnson 
obviously preferred the latter alternative because the enemy in the 
Montagnard populated highlands would be more easily identified by U.S. 
:forces. 
The Secretary of Defense in commenting on the proposed 
deployment also preferred the second alternative although he thought 
neither a:fforded an efficient return in terms of RVNAF :forces released 
per U.S. :force input (alternative 1 called for 23,000 U.S. :forces to 
release 5,000 ARVN; alternative 2 ratio was 15,000 U.S. to 6,000 ARVN). 
Secretary McNamara directed the JCS to consider the 2d alternative while 
emphasizing that he preferred an ROK division to one of our own. ~ 
The culmination of General Johnson's report was his recommendation that 
the SEATO treaty be invoked to get allied participation in a :four 
division force counter-in:filtration cordon to be placed across the DMZ 
and the Laotian panhandle from the South China Sea to the Mekong River. 
In closing his report, General Johnson observed: 
"In order for the USG to evaluate his LCOMUSMACV'i! 
requests properly when submitted, a policy determination 
must be made in the very near future that will assure the 
question: 
What should the Vietnamese be expected to do 
:for themselYes and how much more must the U.S. contribute 
directly to the security of South Vietnam?" 
In reference to this obser~ation Secretary McNamara wrot~ that the 
"Policy is: 
an~:rthing that will strengthen the position of the GVN 
will be sent ... " l:!}) 
• 16 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C. 
Attitudes West of CONUS 
Both CINCPAC and General Westmoreland were very much concerned 
during early 1965 with the possible implementation of existing con-
tingency plans, at least two of which as already mentioned, called 
for the input into Southeast Asia of U.S. troop units. 
The alert 
(Phase I) of OPL~~ 32-64 was in effect as of 1 January 1965. 
CINCPAC 
clearly indicated that his thinking was geared to contingency plans in 
his cabled objections to the proposed deployment of the 173rd Airborne 
vice the Marines into Da Nang. 2Q/ All of his OPLANs had buildup pre-
dicated on the Marines' use of Da Nang as a base. 
CINCPAC is equally 
clear in his cable traffic Of. this period, however, that he is not 
immediately thinking in terms of the commitment of U.S. ground forces 
in operations against the Viet Congo 
In a cable to Chairman Wheeler 
on 5 March 1965 he said that "the single most important thing we can 
do quickly to improve the security situation in SVN is to make full 
use of our air power." He went on in the same cable to say that the 
MEB should be deployed to Da Nang as soon as possible for security 
and also to give the GVN a boost and the Viet Cong a warning. ~ 
General Westmoreland and his staff had been concerned with 
planning for the input of U. S .. ground troops into South Vietnam in 
conjunction "'\ofith the aforementioned CINCPAC contingency plans since 
late 1964. ~ In view of the enemy's capabilities and the obvious 
deficiencies of the ARVN, both of which were all too apparent to ob-
servers in Vietnam (by early 1965), it is hard to see how the military 
planners in MACV could have disassociated the deployment of the Marines 
from further troop input. 
In the ~ffiCV Comm~~d History for 1965 there 
are several statements which would tend to confirm sequential thinking 
in the MACV staff. 
On the day the Marines were landing at Da Nang it 
is said in the History that "thus step one in the buildup of forces had 
been taken and subsequent steps appeared to be assured.".211 
The 
History also states that "the Phase II, RVN, portions of OPLAN 32-64 
were essentially implemented by the U.S. buildup during 1965, although 
on a larger scale than planned. "2!J 
On 27 March 1965, General 
lvestmoreland forwarded to CINCPAC his estimate of the situation in 
Vietnam and his recommendation for U.S. troop input for offensive 
action against the Viet Congo 
In that cable COMUSMACV states that his 
staff commenced preparation of the estimate and troop recommendations 
on 13 March, five days after the Marines went into Da Nang, and the 
day after the Army Chief of Staff's departure from Saigon. ~ 
Ambassador Taylor was not enthusiastic about any continuation of 
troop buildup after the landing of the Marines. 
He had already stated 
his reasons in the lengthy cable of 22 February contained herein. 
On 
3 March, in resp0nse to a Department of state query regarding the 
possible employment of an international force, Taylor conveyed the text 
of a conversation about the MLF between Ambassador Johnson and the 
A~stralian envoy to South Vietnam. 
The Australian had voiced fears 
similar to Taylor's in that he foresaw an increased manifestation of 
Vietnamese xenophobia with the input into South Vietnam of foreign 
troops, and he feared such a move would cause the GVN "to shuck off 
17 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
greater responsibility onto USG.
1t 2!:J 
Taylor told the Secretary of 
State in another cable on the same day that he had no idea what the 
GVN attitude toward a HLF might be and that there were many problems 
involved with such a move that had yet to be ironed out. 211 
The HLF 
was clearly only in t he talking stage, ~ while the Marine BLT's were 
a fact. 
The discussion of the MLF is included to illustrate that the 
Ambassador v~s consistent in looking beyond the immediate tactical need 
to support a faltering GVN -- a need which Taylor saw just as clearly as 
did MACV -- to analyze the long-term ramifications of the introduction 
into Vietnam of for eign combat troops. Taylor's warnings in this regard 
were, in light of the present situation in SVN, prophetic indeed. 
18 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
v. 
Expectations 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
There seems to be sufficient evidence to conclude that General 
Westmoreland and his staff saw in the deployment of the Marines the 
beginning of greater things to come. 
The 1965 Command History says 
as much, and the rapidity with which the staff followed on the Marine 
BLT's with more proposals would tend to back up such a conclusion. 
It hardly seems a coincidence that General Johnson, immediately 
following his briefings by ~~CV, returned to Washington and recom-
mended, among other things, that a U.S. division be deployed to SVN. 
CINCPAC, although obviously concerned with OPLANs and their focus 
I 
• 
on troop deployments, comes out clearly in his cable traffic for 
reliance on air power for the moment and for troop commitment to 
secure bases only. 
The JCS, because they had yet to address the 
overall question of U.S. ground force deployments, necessarily saw 
the Marine deployments as a stopgap measure to insure the security 
of U.S. lives and property in case of a partial or total GVN 
collapse. Traffic between the Embassy and the Department of State 
indicated that further ground force deployments as a deterrent to 
NVN invasion "Tere in the t hi nking but were not yet in the proposal 
stage, and the Ambassador clearly had serious objections to further 
troop input. It appears that for the moment, with the possible 
exception of General l'lestmoreland, his staff, and perhaps an im-
portant ally in the person of General Johnson in Washington, the 
Marine deployment was taken at face value and that the official 
Washington hopes .i'lere pinned on early NVN response to the Rolling 
Thunder pressure, then just in its beginning stages. 
19 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
VI. 
Analysis 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
~ 
This paper has raised basically two analytical questions. First, 
what was the significance of the landing of the two Marine battalions 
rather than other units, such as the 173rd. Airborne? 
Second, what was 
the mix of obj ecti ves behind the deployment, and did the d.eployment meet 
these objectives? 
--
The significance of putting the Marines into Da Nang turns on whether 
this d.eployment was intend.ed. or was viewed (1) as the first elements in 
a phased. build.-up of U. S. ground combat forces, or (2) as a one-shot re-
sponse to a peculiar security need. at Da Nang. 
There is evidence for 
both propositions. 
There are two pieces of evid.ence in support ' of the phased build-up 
proposition. First, no less than seven CINCPAC contingency plans treated 
Da Nang as a base for U.S. Marine Corps activity, and. at least two of 
those plans provided for major Marine ground forces in the I Corps tacti-
cal zone of South Vietnam. 
Except for Phase II of OPLAN 32-64, however, 
contingency plan build.-ups of force were predicated on overt DRV or Chi-
nese Communist action. 
At the time of the initial landings, such overt 
action was anticipated. in the OPLAN but had. not yet occurred.. It was 
a fact, on the other hand, that some sort of action was needed in the 
South to halt the course of the insurgency there, and that two Marine 
BLT's would not do the trick. 
The second piece of evidence vTas the last minute attempt by Ass' t 
Secretary of Defense McNaughton to substitute the 173rd. Airborne for the 
Marines, and CINCPAC's strong reaction against this attempt. 
The only 
apparent rationale for the McNaughton move is as a blocking measure against 
expected pressures for further build.-ups as embodied in the contingency 
plans. 
The substitution vlould have created. planning tangles for the Chiefs 
and. CINCPAC and., therefore, would have delayed pressures for further d.e-
ployment pending the development of new plans. 
CINCPAC's vigorous response, 
based on administrative and. logistic arguments, coupled with concern for 
the loss of an airmobile reserve force, persuaded. Washington and thwarted 
the McNaughton effort. It is interesting to note, in this regard, that 
McNaughton, at least on the record, did not receive any support for his 
attempt. 
Conceivably, Ambassad.or Taylor, who had. expressed. serious res-
erva tions about the implications of the ground. force d.eployment, could. have 
joined. forces with McNaughton. 
Taylor's failure to d.o so was probably 
based on the fact that he did. not believe the pressures could. be signi-
ficantly thwarted. by the substitution, and. that, therefore, it made much 
more military St.:nse to proceed. as planned .• 
The evidence against the phased build-up proposition and for the 
one-shot-$ecuri ty hypothesis r ests on one major d.ocument., and. paradoxically, 
on the absence of other documents. 
The maj or d.ocument is the McGeorge Bundy 
Memorandum for t he Presid.ent of February 7, 1965. 
In this memorandum, 
Bundy r evievTs the entire situation in Vietnam without any reference to 
future ground for ce d.eplo;yment -;- even .though the request for the Marine 
20 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
BLT's was only two weeks away. 
Moreover, the usual flood of documentation 
-preceding a decision of significance is not to be found. 
In other ,vords, 
it appears that the key decision-m~~ers in Washington are not focusing 
hard on the importance of the deplo;yment. 
The attention-getter, as the 
Bundy memo indicates, vTaS the impending air war against North Vietnam. 
The significance of the Marine BLT deployment must also be measured 
up to the objectives intended by the deployment. 
There were four dis-
tinguishable rationales: 
(1) 
Freeing ARVN forces from static defense to base security; 
(2) 
~roviding added security for U.S. air bases being used in the 
air war against North Vietnam; 
(3) 
Signaling Hanoi with increased U.S. determination to pay a 
higher price in meeting its commitments; and 
(4) Bolstering GVN moral e . 
The first objective "ras the one most stressed publicly -- to release 
RVNAF for offensive action against the Viet Congo 
General Westmorel~nd 
cabled the JCS on 22 February saying that the deployment of the Marines 
to Da Nang l10uld result ultimately in freeing four RF companies, one tank 
platoon, and another RF battalion then being formed. 59/ 
The MACV 
Monthly Evaluation of March 1965 stated that only t"roRF companies had in 
fact been released. 60/ 
It is apparent, then, that this objective could 
not have been taken very seriously. While it can be argued that any slight 
improvement in the local force ratios vis-a-vis the Viet Cong ,>Tas desir-
able; even the most optLmistic prediction of releasable RVNAF units would 
not have had much importance. 
A second rationale 'l'TaS the notion of security for a major U.S. air 
base being used in bombing operations against North Vietnffin. 
Da Nang 
was exposed and the probability of a Viet Cong attack on it . could not 
be ignored. 
While the two Marine BLT deployment, by itself, was recog-
nized as being insufficient for high level of confidence about base 
security, there can be little doubt that U. S. troops did. make that im-. 
portant base more secure. 
In retrospect, it could be construed that this 
"las the first sign of U.S. a'>Tareness of RVNAF inadequacy. 
There is, 
hOviever, no documentary evidence available to support this vie,>T and, in 
fact, the real eA~ent of this ineffectiveness was not recognized until . a . 
few months later . 
A thi.::'d obj ;ctive may have been to signal Hanoi ''Il th the seriousness 
of the U.S. resolve in Vietnam. 
Not'ilithstanding the relatively minute 
combat pOI>Ter imposed in tvlO battalions, the very fact that they were d'e-
ployed '\vould be a much clearer sign to He.noi of U. S. determination in the 
fleeting appearance of a fevr jet aircraft or the shadO'iV,f presence off-
shore of a mighty fleet of spips. 
Taken in conjunction \li th the well-
knQ\.m U.S. shibboleth against involvement in a major Asian land.. "rar, the 
21 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
deployment should have been a highly visible step une'Iuivocal in its 
meaning to Hanoi . 
Yet, there is no evidence that anyone in the U.S. 
government intended t he deployment to convey such a signal and there was 
no discussion of what responses we expected from Hanoi. If this indeed 
were an unsl'oker obj ective, it made little d.ent on NVN designs. If any-
thing, it may have aid.ed. those in Hanoi who wanted to send additional 
regular NVA units into SVN. 
A fourth U.S. objective was 'bolstering morale within the GVN and the 
concomitant willingness to carry on the fight. It was 'Iuite reasonable 
to assume that the Marines, like the air strJ._kes on NVN that preced.ed 
them, did have a beneficial effect on morale. It is eClually obvious, 
however, t hat any such effects would be transitory. 
Long-term improve-
ments in morale could only come with dramatic and lasting alteration of 
the situation, and the two Marine battalions did. not have that capability ' 
by themselves. 
It seems f r om t his vantage point that only the objective of base 
security r eally made sense. 
The deployment of the Marines to Da Nang might 
have d.eterred an attack on the base by a regiment of main force Viet Cong. 
The Marine Infantry w'ere dug in on commanding terrain facing the North 
and. West along t he most likely avenues of approach. 
The 'security of the 
base was by no means assured. by their presence, however, as by their own 
. admission they were in no position to prevent d.e:bermined attack -- or, 
especially; rai ds and. mortar attacks -- the kind that had d.one so much 
damage to Bi en Hoa the year before. ~ The U.S. forces only had. re-
sponsibility for half of the base complex, and it was doubted that the 
RVNA.F could prevent the Viet Cong infiltrating sabotage s'Iuad.s through 
the heavily populated areas on the GVN side. 
The Marines did. not, as 
Secretary Rusk said they would., put a tight security ring around. the 
base. 
The ring was not closed. until considerably later, and even then, 
the Viet Cong successfully penetrated the defenses and. caused. consid.era-
ble damage in a raid on 1 July 1965 -- the first of a series of raids 
that have continued up--to the present. 
The landing 9f the Marines at Da Nang was a watershed event in the 
history of the U. S. involvement in Vietnam. It represented a major d.eci-
sion mad.e without much fanfare -- and. without much planning. 
Whereas the 
decision t o begin bombing North Vietnam was the product of a year's dis-
cussion, debat e, and. a lot of paper, and whereas the consid.eration of 
pacification polici es reached. talmudic proportions aver the years, this 
decision created less than a ripple. A mighty commandment of U.S. foreign 
policy -- thou shall not engage in an Asian land war -- had. been breached .• 
Besides CINCPAC and General Westmoreland who favored the deployment, .Am-
bassad.or Taylor who concurred. 'I'd th deep reservation, and ASD McNaughton 
who apparent_ly tried to add. a monkey wrench, this is a d.ecision without 
faces. 
The seeming ease with which the Marines were introduced and the ' 
mild reaction from Hanoi served to facilitate what was to come. It also 
weakened the position of those who were, a few scant months later, to 
oppose the landing of further U.S. ground combat forces . 
22 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
,. 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
VII. 
FOOTNOTES 
1. Msg, JCS to CINCPAC, 6 March 1965. 
2. 
MSg, CINCPAC to JCS, 24 February 1965 • 
. 3. Msg, MACV to CINCPAC, 220743Z February 1%5. 
4. 
MACV Command History 1965, p.30. 
5. 
MACV Msg 220743Z February 1965. 
6. 
EMBTEL 2699, 22 February 1965. 
7. 
Msg, CINCPAC to JCS, 24 February 1965. 
8. JCSM-130-65 dated. 24 February 1965. 
9. 
DEPTEL 1840, 26 February 1965. 
10. 
EMBTEL 2789, 28 February 1965. 
11. 
MACV Command History 1965, p.31. 
12. ' DOD Tel 6166, 2 March 1965. 
13. 
MACV Command History 1965, p.31 and EMBTEL 1954, 2 March 1%5. 
14. Msg, CINCPAC to JCS 030230Z March 1965. 
15. 
OASD (PA) News Release, 6 March 1965. 
16. Msg, JCS to CINCPAC, 6 March 1965. 
17· 
18. 
19· 
20. 
21. 
Simmons, E.H., "The Marine Corps Response to Vietnam. and. 
Santo Domingo," Monograph 15 May 1967, p.l. 
Ope cit., p.2. 
News Conference of Hon. R. S. McNamara, 7 Febr~ry 1965 
(OASD (PA) releas e of text). 
MACV Monthly Evaluation Report, February 1965. 
CIA Situation Reports and !~CV Monthly Evaluation Reports for 
January and February 1965. 
22. 
Op. cit. ( CIA) 
23 • . M.ACV Command History 1965, pp. 31, 32 • 
23 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I' 
I 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
24. 
Msg, . CINCPAC Eyes Only to Wheeler, 5 March 1965. 
25. 
CIA Situation Report, February 1965. 
26. 
Dept of thE: Army Pamphlet No. 550-40, "USA Handbook for Vietnam," 
GPO 1964. 
27. 
MACV Monthly Evaluation Report, February 1965. 
28. 
National Intelligence Board, Special National Intelligence 
Estimate "The Situation in South Vietnam," 1 October 1964. 
29. 
National Intelligence Board, Special National Intelligence 
Estimate "Communist Reactions to Possible U.S. Courses of 
Action against North Vietnam," 18 February 1965. 
30. 
Special Assistant to the Presid.ent McGeorge Bundy: 
Memorandum 
for the President, 7 February 1965. 
31. 
Halberstam, David, ·The M~king of a Q,uagmire (New York: Random House) 
1965. 
Mecklin, John, Mission in Torment (New York: Doubleday & Co.) 1965. 
32. 
Shaplen, Robert, The Lost Revolution (New York: Harper & Row) 1965, 
p. 328. 
33. 
Sell, Ted, "Marines in South Vietnam Give War New Aspect," Los 
Angeles Times, 10 March 1965. 
34. 
Bundy, William, Memorandum to Members, National SeGurity Council 
Working Group, 3 November 1964. 
35. 
Ibid .. 
36. 
NSC Working Group File - The Bundy Papers. 
37. 
Op. cit., Draft Memorandum dated. 13 November 1964. 
38. 
NSC Working Group File - Paper dated 30 November 1964, and prepared 
by R. H. Johnson and P. M. Kattenburg. 
39 • . JCSM 982-64, dated 23 November 1964. 
40. 
JSC Horkin[ Group File - Attachment; to Mp.Inorandum for SFA 
Principals, 29 November 1964. 
. 
41. 
JCSM 100-65, dated 11 february 1965. 
42. 
Msg, JCS to CDTCPAC, 5 March 1965. 
43. 
JCSM 204-65, dated 20 March 1965. 
, .. 
24 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
' 
\ . 
L 
r -, 
l 
( 
• 
44. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
JCS Chairman Wheeler, letter dated l March 1965, forwarding 
JSOP:"70. 
45. 
"Estimate of the Situation in SVN" (signed. by the Ambassador 
and concurred in by all members of the mission), II March 1965 
(Dept of State Airgram from Saigon to State, II Mar 1965) • 
. 46. 
Johnson, Harold K., Gen., "Report on Trip to South Vietnam" 
(Memo to SecDef and others), l4 March 1965. 
47. 
Special Assistant to the President McGeorge Bundy, Draft NSAM 
(contained in Memo to SecDef and others), 5 April 1965. 
48. 
McNamara, Robert, Secretary of Defense. 
This and following quota-
tions are taken from SecDef mar ginal comments on The Johnson Report, 
original copy (SecDef files). 
49. Ibid. 
50. 
Msg, CINCPAC to JCS 030230Z March 1965. 
5l. Msg, CINCPAC Eyes Only to Wheeler, Info Westmoreland, 5 March 1965. 
52. 
MACV Command History, 1965, p.30. 
53. 
Op. cit., p.32• 
54. 
Op. cit., p.l57. 
55. 
Msg, COMUSMACV to CINCPAC, 27 March 1965. 
56. 
EMBTEL 3ll2, 3 March 1965. 
57. 
EMBTEL 20l4, 3. March 1965. 
58. 
DEPTEL l876 , 3 March 196 5. 
59. 
Msg, COMUSMACV to JCS, 22 Februaryl965. 
60. 
MACV Monthly Evaluation Report, Marchl965. 
, . 
. 
, 
6L 
FMFPAC, Operations of The III Marine Amphibious Force Vietnam, 
March-September 1965, p.l7 and p.33. 
25 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
