Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

jungles. The North Vietnamese believe they are right;

they consider the Ky regime to be puppets; they believe

the world is with them and that the American public will

not have staying power against them. Thus, although they

may have factions in the regime favoring different approaches,
they believe that, in the long run, they are stronger than

we are for the purpose. They probably do not want to make
significant concessions, and could not do so without serious
loss of face. 5

He then analyzed two alternative military courses of action which
he labeled "A" and "B". In Course A the full troop requirement request
from COMUSMACV was to be honored, and subsequent military actions
intensified not only in the south, but especially in the north. This
program consisted of an addition of the minimum of 200,000 men; 100,000
in the 2-1/3 division "minimum essential" force in FY 68 and another
100,000 in FY 69, with possibly more later to fulfill the JCS ultimate
requirement for Vietnam and associated worldwide contingencies. Course
B proposed limiting the force increases to no more than 30,000 thereby
stabilizing the ground conflict within the borders of South Vietnam and
concommitantly concentrating the bombing on the infiltration routes
south of the 20th parallel. He analyzed the two courses of action in
the following terms.

COURSE A would be chosen with a view to bringing addi-
tional military pressure to bear on the enemy in the South
while continuing to carry out our present missions not
directly related to combating enemy main-force units. It
would involve accepting the risk -- the virtual certainty --
that the action especially the Reserve call-up, would stimu-
late irresistible pressures in the United States for further
escalation against North Vietnam, and for ground actions
against "sanctuaries" in Cambodia and Laos.

Rationale

: Proponents of the added deployments in the South believe
that such deployments will hasten the end of the war. None
of them believes that the added forces are needed to avoid
defeat; few of them believe that the added forces are required
to do the military job in due course; all of the proponents
believe that they are needed if that job is to be done faster.
The argument is that we avoided military defeat in 1965; that
we gained the military initiative in 1966, since then hurting
the enemy badly, spoiling much of his ability to strike, and
thus diminishing the power he could project over the popula-
tion; and that even more-vigorous military initiative against
his main forces and base areas will hurt him more, spoil his

151 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
