Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

102. The President approves NSC Action No. 1111 recommended
by the Joint Chiefs of Staff which immediately suspends
"shipment of military end-items under U.S. MDAP” to
Indochina. NSC Memorandum for Secretary of Defense,
ED WB OSH be in-oe nin neca.cleserneattinele cleunt oe Httal did ere Gaskidie Gcereldeleinete EDO

103. Secretary Dulles forwards the basic instructions
approved by the President for the head of the U.S.
Delegation to Geneva. "The United States is not pre-
pared to give its express or implied approval to any
cease-fire, armistice, or other settlement...." which
would subvert the local governments, impair territorial
integrity, or jeopardize forces of the French Union.
Dulles TOSEC 138 to Geneva, 12 May 1954.....ccccccccecsncecee 457

104. A proposal tabled at the Planning Board meeting on
13 May 1954, suggests that "the U.S. is endeavoring
to avoid the loss of Indochina and to resolve the
colonialism problem by the creation of a regional
grouping.” General Bonesteel Memorandum to NSC,
1S Maye OSes os codes poe sae nas Vee bs ea soos ease venewenveces: 100

105. lLaniel and Schuman appear well pleased with the U.S.
position, especially that U.K. participation is no
longer a prerequisite to U.S. intervention. The one
serious objection to Eisenhower's conditions, however,
is that "France publicly accord to the Associated
States the right of withdrawal from the French Union
at any time.” Unless some way can be found around
this, "the French will never ask for outside assis-
tance." Paris 4383 to Dulles, 1} May 1954....cessesccccceee. 462

106. In referring to the French objection to Hisenhower's
conditions for intervention, Dulles indicates the U.S.
might be flexible but "there cannot be any equivocation
on the completeness of independence if we are to get
the Philippines and Thailand to associate themselves."
Without them the whole arrangement would collapse and
the U.S. is not prepared to intervene “as part of a
white Western coalition which is shunned by all Asian
states." Dulles ogi (TEDUL 73) to Paris, 15 May 1954....... 465

107. The “right of withdrawal" from the French Union is

unacceptable to France because it reflects on French

honor and questions the concept of the French Union.

It is proposed that existence of a powerful Vietnamese

National Army would clarify the independence status to

other Asian states and therefore the U.S. should assume

"primary responsibility for the training and equipping

of a Vietnamese National Army." Dillon 4402 to Dulles,

Lf May: 105 aawewsusiay es cdesesowslbeseccesmeecsenesecbeeesee | HES

xviii . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
