Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

y . i
ti TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The effect of this sequence of decisions stretching from mid-May
to mid-August 1964 was to increase the advisory effort by over 1O0O

personnel:
District Advisors: 293
Battalion Advisors: 350
Naval. (and Marine) Advisory Group: 82
Air Force Advisory Group: 80 __

TOTAL 1065 130/

This expansion, and the rate at which it was to proceed, was the product
of what may be termed “tacit bargaining" between Washington and Saigon.
Washington typically assumed the initiative in proposing increases and in
recommending that they be accomplished as quickly as possible. The
dominant concern was the fear that the countryside was being lost to the
ve and that the impending U.S. moves to exert direct military pressure
against DRV might come too late unless the pacification program could be
vitalized. U.S. officials in Saigon tended to prefer to expand gradually
and to insure that adequate support facilities were in place before addi-
tional advisors were deployed to the field. The product of desires driven
by political awareness of impending failure, on one hand, and desires
driven by managerial awareness of operational conditions, on the other,
was an advisory increase almost precisely of the magnitude and rate pre-
ferred by the managers in the field.

EVENTS OVERTAKE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EXPANSTON

The really important points to be noted, however, do not concern the
relative influence of General Westmoreland, Secretary McNamara, the JCS,
or other participants in determining the size and rate of this buildup.
Rather, the important points are, first, that the carefully studied deci-
sions did not address some central issues and, second, that events acted
to overtake the decisions which were made. The policymakers did not really
examine how district and additional battalion advisors would improve the
execution of the pacification plan: they simply assumed that a greater U.S.
presence would produce beneficial effects. The basis for operational
advisors for the paramilitary forces was, quite simply, COMUSMACV's reasoned
elaboration of the disutility of training advisors. There was no comple-
mentary assessment of the usefulness of operational advisors. It was
necessary to do something in South Vietnam to try to reverse a clearly
deteriorating position. The provision of more advisors came very close
to being a reflexive response to this situation.

The overall magnitude of the advisory increase bears directly on the

second major point, in which events in RVN overtook the new U.S. response.
This is particularly true in the instance of the new dimension in the

54 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
