Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SUCRET - Sensitive

evening (which Lodge denied) and that plans were now far advanced for a
coup sometime before Movember 2, He asked Conein to meet him later that
afternoon to discuss the details of the plan. In a separete cable dis-
puting some of Lodge s interpretative description of his statement to
Don, Harkins stated that he had repulsed Don's suggestion that they meet
again to discuss the coup plans. "I told Don that I would not discuss.
coups thet were not my business though I had heard rumors of many. he/
Taylor replied immediately, stating, "View here is thet your actions in
disengaging from the coup discussion were correct and that you should
continue to avoid any involvement." 43/

A Conein's meeting with Don on the evening of the 2th, the latter
indicated he had misunderstood General Harkins and had not seen Lodge. uh/
He said thet the coup committee had refused to release any plans because
of its anxiety ebout breaches of security. He did promise to turn over
to Conein for lodge's review detailed plans of the operation and the
proposed successor government two days before the coun, which he
reiterated would take place before Movember 2.

At this juncture, the nature of the dialogue between Lodge and the
White House began to change. On October 25, Lodge sent McGeorge Bundy
a long cable taking exception to Harkins' reservations about a coup and
arguing for a policy of "not thwarting." 45/ Wo successor government
could bungle the war as badly as Diem had, he argued, and, furthermore,
for us to prevent a change of government would be "assuming an undue
responsibility for keeping the incumbents in office." 46/ In his reply,
Bundy expressed the White House anxiety about reaping the blame for an
unsuccessful coup.

We are particularly concerned about hazard that an unsuccess-
ful coup, however carefully we avoid direct engagement, will be
laid at our door by public opinion almost everywhere. Therefore,
while sharing your view that we should not be in position of
thwarting coup, we would like to have option of judging and warn-
ing on any plan with poor prospects of success. We recognize that
this is a large order, but President wants you to know of our
concern. 47/

The discussion of these issues dominated the cable traffic between Lodge
and the White House up to the day of the coup, with Washington concerned
about detailed plans and prospects for success and Lodge stressing the
irrevocability of our involvement.

There were no further contacts with the coup group until the day
after the fruitless Lodge-Diem conversations. That Monday, October 28,
Lodge and Diem were leaving Saigon for Dalat to dedicate the Vietnamese
Atomic Nnergy Plant. At the airport before their departure, General Don
daringly took Lodge aside and asked if Conein was authorized to speak for
him. 48/ Lodge assured Don that he was. Don said that the coup must

hs TOP SECRET - Sensitive
