Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

US actions in stiffening up its physical support of Vietnam

and the remainder of Southeast Asia may be needed to bolster

the will to continue to resist the Communists. The inhibitions
imposed on such action by certain parts of the Geneva Accords,
which have been violated with impunity by the Communists, should
not prevent our action. We should consider joining with the
Vietnamese in a clear-cut defensive alliance which might include
stationing of US forces on Vietnamese soil. As a variant of this
arrangement certain SEATO troops might also be employed.

Bilateral military assistance by the United States pursuant to a
request by South Vietnam along the lines of that undertaken
during 1958 in response to the request by Lebanon for military
assistance, would be in keeping with international law and treaty
provisions. The provisions of the Geneva Accords of 1954, which
prohibited the introduction of additional military arms and per-
sonnel into Vietnam, would not be a bar to the measures contem-
plated. The obvious, large-scale and continuous violation of
these provisions of the Geneva Accords by North Vietnam in intro-
ducing large numbers of armed guerrillas into South Vietnam would
justify the corresponding non-observance of these provisions by
South Vietnam. Indeed, authorization for changing PEO Laos into
an ordinary MAAG was justified on this legal theory. It should
be recognized that the foregoing proposals require careful and
detailed consideration and preparation particularly with regard
to the precise mission of US forces used.

In addition to the previously cited advantages such an action
might have at least two other important political and military
advantages:

(a) It could release a portion of the ARVN from relatively
static military functions to pursue the war against the insur-
gents and

(b) It would place the Sino-Soviet Bloc in the position of
risking direct intervention in a situation where US forces were
already in place, accepting the consequence of such action.
This is in direct contrast to the current situation in Laos.

Alternatively, there are several potential political and military
disadvantages to such an action, principal among these being:

(a) Some of the neutrals, notably India, might well be
opposed, and the attitude of the UK and France is uncertain.

(b) This would provide the Communists with a major propa-
ganda opportunity.

(c) The danger that a troop contribution would provoke a
DRV/CHICOM reaction with the risk of involving a signficant

38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
