Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The memorandum closed with Heath's interpretation of
Secretary Dulles’ policy and his own thoughts as to what ought to be
done:

In our view, General Collins’ recommendations ignore the
basic factor that we would assist a Communist takeover by a
withholding of our aid, even if it must necessarily be given
to a government which is less than perfect. The Secretary
has analyzed the situation as one in which we are conducting
@ time buying operation. If we withhold our support to Viet-
nam, it will be taken over sooner than if we extend smaller
aid, at a figure of about a third of last year. In the mean-
time, we will proceed to do what we can to strengthen Cambodia,
Laos and Thailand. This is my understanding of the Secretary's
policy.

I recommend we inform the Secretary and General Collins
that we recognize the dangers posed by the above policy, but that
in the lack of more useful alternatives that we will continue
to support Diem, because there is no one to take his place who
would serve US objectives any better. This includes the Bao
Dai solution which is opposed by the facts of Bao Dai's lack
of support in Vietnam and his past demonstrations of inability
to govern. The fear that a fiscal commitment of over $300 mil-
lion plus our national prestige would be lost in a gamble on
the retention of Free Vietnam is a legitimate one, but the
withholding of our support at this juncture would almost inevit-
ably have a far worse effect." 86/

The substance of the memorandum was cabled to Secretary Dulles, then in
Paris for the Tripartite French, U.S. and British discussions. 87

h. Decenber Tripartite Talks

a. France Proposes Alternative to Diem, Dulles Seems to
Acqui.esce

On 19 December, Mendes-France opened the Indochina talks
by calling Diem's approach "wholly negative," said "not a single reform
suggested (by Franco-American working groups advising the government on
all matters) had been accepted by Diem," that the "French Government now
considered...a strong approach would have to be made to Diem." Reaffirming
his past agreement with Dulles’ "thesis that we must do our maximum to
permit Diem Government to succeed" Mendes-France added:

now...he was not longer sure that even maximum would help.
He said we must now have alternate formula in mind. Without
varying from our stated purpose of supporting Diem Govern-
ment as long as it exists we must now prepare in our minds
for alternative. 88

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
