Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Colonel Lansdale described their origins and operations as

follows: 62/

"One of the most promising ideas of this period came from
Kieu Cong Cung, who was sponsored by Defense Minister Minh.
Cung's idea was to place civil service personnel out among the
people, in simple dress, where they would help initially by
working alongside the people, getting their hands dirty when
necessary. The Vietnamese functionaries were aghast, since they
cherished their desk work in Saigon and their dignified white-
collar authority, and they fought hard within the government
machine to kill the idea. It took some months, with the personal
intervention and insistence of President Diem, to get a pilot
Civic Action program initiated. It was given administrative
support by the Ministry of Defense, at first, simply because no
other Ministry would help, although it was established as an
entity of the Presidency and its policy decisions were made in
Cabinet meetings.

"With 80% of the civil service personnel stationed in the
national capital, provincial administrators were so under-staffed
that few of them could function with even minimum effectiveness.

A French colonial administrative system, super-imposed upon the

odd Vietnamese imperial system was still the model for govern-

ment administration. It left many gaps and led to unusually
complex bureaucratic practices. There was no uniform legal code,
no uniform procedures for the most basic functions of government.
The Communists continued their political dominance of many villages,
secretly.

"Cung established a training center in Saigon and asked for
civil service volunteers, for field duty. With none forthcoming,
he then selected a small group of young university-trained men from
among the 800,000 refugees from Communist North Vietnam, after
security screening. Cung was working on a shoe-string, so his
training had added realism in the form of rough living querters,
outdoor classes, and students learning to work with their hands
by constructing school facilities. All students had to dress in
the "calico noir" of farmers and laborers, which became their
"uniform" later in the villages. (Provincial authorities originally
refused to recognize Civic Action personnel as government officials,
due to the plebian dress; Cung, dressed in the same manner, and as
a high functionary close to the President, made a rapid tour of the
provinces and gained grudging acceptance of this new style of
government employee.)

"Originally, four-man teams were formed; during training, the
members of each team were closely observed, to judge compatibility,

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
