Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

anti-Japanese war, however, is the immediate program of action
which is: (1) Organization of the masses -- workers, peasants,
women, and youth -- for the anti-fascist struggle. This has al-
ready attained promising successes. (2) Preparation of an in-
surrection by the organization of the people into self-defense
corps. (3) The formation of guerrilla bands and bases ‘which
will assume greater importance as we gradually approach the time
of country-wide military action.'" 17/

(a) Dong Minh Hoi

From the outset, the Chinese were suspicious of the
Viet Minh. In 1942, they arrested Nguyen Ai Quoc, and imprisoned him.
In October, 1942, more than one year after the founding of the Viet Minh,
the Kuomintang sponsored a second "united front” of Vietnamese nationalists
named the Vietnam Revolutionary League (Viet Nam Cach Menh Dong Minh Hoi).
Colocated with headquarters of the Viet Minh in Kwangsi Province, China,
Liuchow, the Dong Minh Hoi -- as it came to be known -- included:

-- The Vietnam Nationalist Party (VNDD)

-- The Vietnam Restoration League (Viet Nam Phuc Quoc
Dong Minh Hoi )

-- The Great Vietnam Nationalist Party (Dai Viet Quoc
Dan Dang)

-- The Viet Minh
-- The Liberation League (Giai Phong Hoi)

The Dong Minh Hoi was launched with the official sanction of Marshall Chang
Fa-kuei, the quasi-autonomous Chinese warlord; its initial program was ex-
pressly modeled after the Kuomintang's Three People's Principles of Sun

Yat Sen, and its paramilitary organizations were established with a view

to close cooperation with the Nationalist Army. However, after more than

a year in prison, Nguyen Ai Quoc was released by the Chinese -~ perhaps
on Chang Fa-kuei's orders, and without knowledge or sanction of Chiang
Kai-Shek's headquarters -- and installed, under the new alias of Ho Chi

Minh, as Chairman of the Dong Minh Hoi. The Viet Minh alone profitted by
this duality of leadership. Only in the person of Ho Chi Minh, and in
Luichow itself, was there any merger of the two “united front” organiza-
tions. Afield, and especially in Tonkin, they competed -- and occasionally
fought -- with one another.

The Dong Minh Hoi acquired only modest political and military power
in Vietnam, and became a significant political factor there only after
Chinese Nationalist forces occupied Tonkin in late 195. On March 28, 1944,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-22
