Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On February 10 DIA sent the Secretary a summary of the resupply situ-
ation in the first 48-hours of the truce. If the pattern of the first
48 hours continued, the DRV would move some 34,000 tons of materiel
southward, the equivalent of 340 division-days of supply. 29/

Thus the pressure on the President to resume mounted.
On February 12 when the truce ended, the bombing was not resumed, but
no announcement of the fact was made. The DRV were again invited to
indicate what reciprocity the U.S. could expect. But no answer was
forthcoming. Finally after more hours of anxious waiting by Kosygin
and Wilson for a DRV reply, the Soviet Premier left London for home
on February 13. The same day, the New York Times carried the latest
Harris poll which showed that 67% of the American people supported the
bombing. Within hours, the bombing of the North was resumed. The Presi-
dent, in speaking to the press, stressed the unparalleled magnitude of
the North Vietnamese logistical effort during the pause as the reason he
could no longer maintain the bombing halt. 30/ On February 15, Ho sent
‘the President a stiff letter rejecting U.S. demands for reciprocity and
restating the DRV's position that the U.S. must unconditionally halt the
bombing before any other issues could be considered. 31/ Thus, the book
closed on another effort to bring the conflict to the negotiating table.

B. More Targets
1. The Post-TET Debate

The failure of the Tet diplomatic initiatives once again
brought attention back to measures which might put more pressure on the
DRV. CINCPAC's January targetting proposals were reactivated for consid-
eration in the week following the resumption of bombing. In early February,
before the pause, CINCPAC had added to his requests for additional bombing
targets a request for authority to close North Vietnam's ports through
aerial mining. Arguing that, "A drastic reduction of external support to
the enemy would be a major influence in achieving our objectives...," he
suggested that this could be accomplished by denying use of the ports.
Three means of closing the ports were considered: (1) naval blockade;
.(2) air strikes against port facilities; and (3) aerial mining of the
approaches. The first was rejected because of the undesirable political
ramifications of confrontations with Soviet and third country shipping.
But air strikes and mining were recommended as complementary ways of
denying use of the ports. Closure of Haipheng alone, it was estimated,
would have a dramatic effect because it handled some 95% of North Viet-
namese shipping. 32/ Ina related development, the JCS, on February 2,
gave their endorsement to mining certain inland waterways including the
Kien Giang River and its seaward approaches. 33/

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

———i(
