Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

THE ROLLING THUNDER PROGRAM BEGINS

— ee  |'O000O Oe

SUMMARY and ANALYSIS

The United States decisions, in the early months of 1965, to
launch a program of reprisal air strikes against North Vietnam,
evolving progressively into a sustained bombing campaign of rising
intensity, were made against a background of anguished concern over
the threat of imminent collapse of the Government of South Vietnam
and of its military effort against the Viet Cong. The air war
against the North was launched in the hope that it would strengthen
GVN confidence and cohesion, and that it would deter or restrain
the DRV from continuing its support of the revolutionary war in the
South. There was hope also that a quite modest pombing effort would
be sufficient; that the demonstration of US determination and the
potential risks and costs to the North implicit in the early air
strikes, would provide the US with substantial bargaining leverage;
and that it would redress the "equation of advantage" so that a
political settlement might be negotiated on acceptable terms.

Once set in motion, however, the bombing effort seemed to
stiffen rather than soften Hanoi's backbone, as well as to lessen
the willingness of Hanoi's allies, particularly the Soviet Union,
to work toward compromise. Moreover, compromise was ruled out in
any event, since the negotiating terms that the US proposed were
not “compromise” terms, but more akin to a "cease and desist" order
that, from the DRV/VC point of view, was tantamount to 4 demand for
their surrender.

As Hanoi remained intractable in the face of a mere token
demonstration of U.S. capability and resolve, U.S. policy shifted
to a more deliberate combination of intensified military pressures
and modest diplomatic enticements. The carrot was added to the
stick in the form of an economic development gesture, but the coercive
element remained by far the more tangible ‘and visible eomponent of
U.S. policy. To the slowly but relentlessly rising air pressures
against the North was added the deployment of US combat forces to
the South. In response to public pressures, a major diplomatic
opportunity was provided Hanoi for a quiet backdown through @
brief bombing pause called in mid-May, but the pause seemed to be
aimed more at clearing the decks for a subsequent intensified
resumption than it was at evoking a reciprocal act of de-escalation
by Hanoi. The U.S. initiative, in any event, was unmistakably
rebuffed by North Vietnam and by its Communist allies, and the
opposing positions were more hopelessly deadlocked than ever before.

mOP SECRET - Sensitive
“TOP SECRET - Sensitive
