Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
Subject: American Policy with Respect to Indochina
General Observations

1. The Japanese aggression against the French in Indochina has
brought about a marked increase in the number of proposals advanced by
the French for the use of French forces and resources in the Pacific,

2, These proposals and recent military developments make it
essential that the United States reach a definitive determination re-
garding its policy toward Indochina,

3. It is established American policy to aid France to regain her
strength in order that she may be better fitted to share responsibility
in maintaining the peace of Europe and of the world. It seems par-
ticularly important that at this time the United States should draw
close to France and Great Britain, the sbrongest Western Powers, and
attempt to remove the sources of friction between the United States and
France, which include French apprehensions that we are going to propose
that French territory be taken eway. However, in pursuing this policy,
the United States must not jeopardize its increasingly important
interests in Southeast Asia and must take into account the dynamic
forces leading towards self government in that area since social,
economic or political instability may threaten the peace of the Far
Rast and the world.

4. The United States Government has publicly taken the position
that it recognizes the sovereign jurisdiction of France over French
possessions overseas when those possessions are resisting the enemy,
and has expressed the hope that it will see the re-establishment of the
integrity of French territory. The surrender of Indochina to Japan,
however, not only opened the wey to Japanese conquest of southeastern
Asia and the Indies but exposed China's southwestern flank in the midst
of its war with Japan. Until recently there was aclive collaboration
on the part of Indochina with the Japanese, but Japanese aggression in
Tndochina has now given rise to resistence on the part of local French
and native elements.

5. Although President Roosevelt had in the past expressed his
preference that Indochina should be placed under trusteeship, he
nevertheless approved a statement issued by the Secretary of State
on April 3, 1945 relative to the plans approved at Yalta which carried
the clear implication that Indochina would only come under a proposed
trusteeship structure through yoluntary action by the French. The
United States position that trusteeship should apply only to mandated
and enemy territory and territories voluntarily placed under the system

COPY

