Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The following sections deal with two rather significant sources
of ideas whose communications reached Secretary McNamara. However, their
views were known to other members of the Principals Group as well,

- through the normal interdepartmentel coordination procedures. Tiiese
proposals are simificant also because of their rather contending view-
points on the subject of U.S. courses of action.

a. JCS Views. On four different occasions during the period of
the Working Group's existence, the JCS submitted formal proposals for
direct military strikes against North Vietnamese targets. On each
occasion they took pains to remind the Secretary of Defense and other |
readers of their earlier recommendation for a preferred course of action,
which involved a systematic pattern of air attacks on major targets.

On 14 November, two such recommendations were made. One Was
intended to bring about expansion of the GVN's covert operations , to in-
clude "air strikes by wmerked aircraft" of the VNAF. It specified that
these were to be "separate and distinct from larger (more decisive) air
strike actions recommended...on 1 November 1964." The JCS stated that
such smaller attacks would be useful in: (1) continuing the pressure on
the DRV; (2) encouraging GVN leaders; (3) providing useful air defense
data; and (4) demonstrating patterns of DRV/Chinese reactions that could
be helpful in planning larger operations. 100/ The other recommendations
came in response to Secretary Mclfamara's request to examine possible
DRV/CHICOM military reactions to U.S. air strikes against North Vietnam.
In answer, they discussed various Communist military alternatives and
U.S. means to counter them, and they described what they viewed as the
most likely enemy reactions, These, they felt, would be primarily in
the propaganda and diplomatic spheres because of what was perceived as
China's general reluctance to become directly involved in conflict with
the United States, In addition, the JCS repeated their recommendations
of | November (with respect to the VC attacks on Bien Hoa) as retaliatory
actions equally applicable to any other serious provocations. They went
on to recommend deployments "to improve capabilities to conduct the
program of air strikes" recommended on 4 November 1964. 101/

Four deys later they submitted another proposal, in response
to Secretary McNamara's interest in a possible program of graduated U.S.
pressures against North Vietnam. This possibility was described as
"a controlled program of systematically increased military pressures
against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) applied in coordina-
tion with appropriate political pressures." (Interestingly, the Secre-~
tary's interest wes expressed on the same day as McNaughton's reactions
to the draft analysis of Option C.) The JCS referred to their statements
of 4 and ih November, describing their preferred course of action for
causing the DRV "to cease supporting and directing the insurgencies" in
South Vietnam and Laos. However, they also proposed an alternative
series. of specific actions, "should a controlled program of systematically
increased pressures...be directed." Moreover, they recommended a set of
operational objectives which they termed “sppropriate™ for such a gradu-
ated program, as follows:

' 30 | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
