Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and Buddhist activism was met with increasingly severe countermeasures,
violence spread and grew more serious. A tenuous truce was reached briefly
between Buddhist leaders and the GVN on 10 June (formally signed on 16 June)
in a mutual effort to reduce tensions--but proved short-lived. Almost
immediately the actions of both sides repudiated the agreements. 32/

The U.S. began to be apprehensive about the possible consequences of
the Diem government falling as the result of a coup. By early July, the
crisis was recognized as serious at the highest levels of the U.S. Govern-
ment. 33/

Through mid-July assessments remained reasonably reassuring. ‘There
was little evidence of impact on the military sector. In fact, indications
pointed to the military situation continuing to improve. DIA reported on
17 July that the general level of VC-initiated actions during the first
six months of 1963 was considerably lower than for the same period the
year before. Battalion and company-size attacks were at about half the
1962 level. It was noted, however, that despite reduced activity, VC
capability remained essentially unimpaired. Regarding the progress of
South Vietnamese counterinsurgency efforts, the DIA evaluation was cau-
tiously optimistic: though there was still a long way to go, GVN prospects
"are certainly better than they were one year ago." 34/

Quite abruptly, a disturbing element began to emerge. Little more
than two weeks later, the DIA Intelligence Bulletin of 4 August reported
a significant increase in the level of VC offensive actions. Moreover,
the rate was high for the third week in a row since mid-July. 35/ The
clear implication was that the VC at last were taking advantage of the
opportunity presented by the Buddhist crisis. It had been expected--
and feared--that they would seek to hasten political collapse and exploit
whatever military vulnerabilities there were. The U.S. was thus justifi-
ably concerned lest the recent revived VC ageressiveness be the opening
phase of a stepped up insurgency. Within ten days of this DIA report,
however, a reevaluation of the significance to be attached to the increased
rate of enemy actions allayed fears somewhat. On 14 August, SACSA, reporting
to the Secretary of Defense, discounted the upsurge in VC activity over the
past month. Its magnitude, comparatively, was below the average of the
preceding year and fell far short of the previous high. In this perspective,
SACSA saw no cause to read undue implications into developments that were
as yet neither particularly salient nor of long duration. 36/

The political crisis meanwhile took a turn for the worse. President
Diem, in an attempt to regain control, declared martial law on 20 August.
The decree was accompanied by forcible entry into pagodas and mass arrests
of Buddhist leaders and laity, and was immediately followed by a series of
preemptory repressive measures. Any hope of reconciliation was now shattered,
and the Diem government was irrevocably isolated.

if TOP SECRET - Sensitive
