Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A. Land Reform

B. Constitutional Evolution

C. National Reconciliation

D. Economie Stabilization

E. Improved Local Government

F. Radically Increased Emphasis on RD/Paci fication
G. Postwar Planning

H. Corruption

I. Port Congestion

Jd. GVN Reserves

In each of above categories, basic problem is to get GVN
commitment and willingness to state its intentions. 3/

Secretary McNemara put down his views on priorities in a Memorandum
to the President on October 14. He noted that the US had not yet found
the formula for training and inspiring the Vietnamese. The main thrust
of the memorandim concerned shifting ARVN more into pacification and
shifting the US pacification responsibility to MACV. But in discussing
GVN's weaknesses, he commented, "drastic reform is needed." He let that
one drop without any recommendation.

The conferees met in Manila on October 24-25, 1966, and after due
deliberation issued a long communique on policies for Southeast Asia in
general and South Vietnem in pertieular. They backed the defense of
South Vietnam against North Vietnamese aggression, and supported the
major outlines of US policy. ‘The GVN emphasized its promises of social
revolution, economic progress, and political freedom. They concluded
with the declaration of intent to withdraw all US and Free World forces
under specified conditions:

29. In particular, they declared that allied forces are

in the Republic of Vietnam because that country is the
object of aggression and its Government reauested support
in the resistance of its people to agsression. They shall
be withdrawn, after close consultation, as the other side
withdraws its forces to the North, ceases infiltration,

and the level of violence thus subsides. Those forces will
be withdrawn as soon as possible and not later than six
months after the above conditions have been fulfilled. }/

2. Bargaining Begins on National Reconciliation, October-December 1966

The USG, having chafed at the lack of action on the Chie Hoi Program,
wanted GVN to broaden it to attract high-level defectors by offering them
posts comparable to their existing ones in the VC organization. This
idea went down poorly with the Vietnamese. Lodge was pressing the idea
from the beginning of October, and although they were reluctant, Thieu
and Ky finally agreed on October 20 to proclaim the new program, called

a 35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
