Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

indignantly and called on their sons and daughters throughout
the country to rise as one in order to kill the enemy. Finally
they saved their people from danger, and their good name will

be carried into posterity for all time. The elders and prominent
personalities of our country should follow the example set by

our forefathers in the florious task of national salvation.

"Rich people, soldiers, workers, peasants, intellectuals,
employees, traders, youth, and women who warmly love your
country: At the present time national liberation is the most
important problem. Let us unite together! As one in mind and
strength we shall overthrow the Japanese and French and their
jackals in order to save people from the situation between boil-
ing water and burning heat.

"Dear compatriots!

"National salvation is the common cause to the whole of
our people. Every Vietnamese must take part in it. He who has
money will contribute his money, he who has strength will contribute
his strength, he who has talent will contribute his talent. I
pledge to use all my modest abilities to follow you, and am ready
for the last sacrifice.

"Revolutionary fighters!

"The hour has struck! Raise aloft the insurrectionary banner
and guide the people throughout the country to overthrow the Japanese
and French: The sacred call of the Fatherland is resounding in
your ears; the blood of our heroic perdecessors who sacrified
their lives is stirring in your hearts: The fighting spirit of
the people is displayed everywhere before you. Let us rise up
quickly! United with each other, unify your action to overthrow
the Japanese and the French.

"Victory to Viet-Nam's Revolution!
"victory to the World's Revolution!" 14/

(2) Component Parties and Program

D The Viet Minh was originally an "anti-fascist" league
of the following Viet nationalist groups:

-- The New Vietnam Party (Tan Viet Dang)

-- The Vietnam Revolutionary Youth League (Viet Nam Thanh
Nhien Cach Menh Dong Chi Hoi) = i al

-- Vietnem Nationalist Party (VNQDD ) (Only certain factions -
of this party elected to join the Viet Minh)

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-20
