Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

supplemental appropriation of $11 billion of new obligational authority
to cover increased Vietnam costs. ’

The Secretary recommended these measures, he said, because
of "dramatic recent changes in the situation...on the military side."
‘Infiltration from the North, mainly on greatly improved routes through
laos, had increased from three battalion equivalents per month in late
1964 to a recent high of a dozen per month. With his augmented forces,
the enemy was showing an increased willingness to stand and fight in
large scale engagements, such as the Ia Drang River campaign in November.
To meet this growing challenge the previously planned US foree levels
would be insufficient. Identical descriptions of the increased enemy
capability appeared in both McNamara's 30 November and 7 December memoranda.
In the former, but not the latter, the following paragraph also appeared:

We have but two options, it seems to me. One is to go
now for a compromise solution (something substantially less
than the "favorable outcome” I described in my memorandum of
November 3), and hold further deployments to a minimum. The
other is to stick with our stated objectives and with the war,
and provide what it takes in men and materiel. If it is
decided not to move now toward a compromise, I recommend that
the United States both send a substantial number of addi-
tional troops and very gradually intensify the bombing of
North Vietnam. Ambassador Lodge, General Wheeler, Admiral
Sharp and General Westmoreland concur in this two-pronged
course of action, although General Wheeler and Admiral Sharp
would intensify the bombing of the North more quickly.

McNamara did not commit himself -- in any of these papers,
at least -- on the question of whether or not the President should now
opt instead for a "compromise" outcome. The President, of course,
decided against it. He did so, it should be noted, in the face of a
"yrognosis" from McNamara that was scarcely optimistic. There were
changes in this prognosis as it went through the Secretary's successive
Presidential memoranda on 30 November, 7 December and 24 January. The

first of these stated simply:

We should be aware that deployments of the kind I
have recommended will not guarantee success. US killed-
in-action can be expected to reach 1000 a month, and the
odds are even that we will be faced in early 1967 with a
"mo decision" at an even higher level. My overall evalu-
ation, nevertheless, is that the best chance of achieving
our stated objectives lies in a pause followed, if it fails,
by the deployments mentioned above.

In the latter two memoranda, McNamara elaborated on this prognosis, and
made it even less optimistic. The versions of 7 December and 2h January

“U5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
