Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

members. At this meeting, the President discussed Tansdale's report,
and apparently indicated that Lansdale would be sent to Vietnam in

"a high capacity." If the appointment of Lansdale to replace Durbrow
was under active consideration, there is no record so indicating.

In March, Frederick E. Nolting was appointed to replace Ambassador

Durbrow. (Schlesinger, A Thousand Days, op- cit-, 320; Shaplen,
"The Lost Revolution,” op. cit. 148-149)

d. Implementing the CIP

In the meantime, the Ambassador and the Chief, MAAG,
carried out their instructions from Washington, obtaining an interview
with Diem and Thuan, Secretary of State for the Presidency, on
February 13, 1961. Both Diem and Thuan expressed concern as to how
they could finance the local currency costs for the. additional 20,000
men. The Ambassador expressed his firm conviction that by taking
"extraordinary measures" the Vietnamese government could raise suf-
ficient piasters. When Thuan asked what the U.S. position would be if
the Vietnamese could not see their way to finance the plan as a
whole, the Ambassador replied that the plan was a "comprehensive
document" and therefore all facets should “basically be carried out."
The Ambassador reported that he was "not very sanguine" that an agreed
plan could be worked out by the end of February. (From Saigon Deptel
1367, 13 February 1961, summarized in State Department Research
Project No. 630, op. cit., p. 15) .

A month later, Ambassador Durbrow discussed the
status of GVN acceptance of the CIP with Thuan. On the political
measures:

" . . . He repeated question of bringing opposition members
into cabinet would depend on whether such persons would agree
with government policy. I replied I felt certain GVN would
find loyal oppositionists who would be in basic agreement with
policy and therefore urged this step be taken. Thuan expressed
skepticism. He repeated legislative investigation of executive
only practiced in US, therefore GVN would not accept this
suggestion. . . ." (Saigon 1454 to SecState, 11 March 1961, p. 1)

On March 16, Durbrow raised the subject of the CIP
with Diem; by this time it was clear that agreement was being reached
on the main military CIP suggestions to a degree "which MAAG considers
it can live with provided GVN follows through with proper implementa-
tion," but the GVN position on other "fundamental" (in Durbrow's eyes )
CIP suggestions -- i.e., in the political sphere -- was not yet clear.
(Saigon Deptel 1466, to SecState, 16 March 1961) Durbrow enumerated
these remaining questions:

97 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
