Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of the enemy's situation and his strategy, views which he repeated
in a year end cable to General Wheeler and Admiral Sharp. 12/

He wrote:

",.eForces currently available to the enemy in SVN
as identified in MACV order of battle are nine division
headquarters, 3 regimental headquarters, 152 combat
battalions, 34 combat support battalions, 196 separate
companies, and 70 separate platoons totaling some 128,600,
plus at least 112,800 militia and at least 39,175 political
cadre. The principal threats posed are in the DMZ area,
the Chu-Pong region, and the Tay-Ninh/Phuoc Long area of
northern TII CIZ. Although enemy forces in these areas
have been punished in operations during 1966, they have
not been destroyed and are continuing efforts to reinforce,
resupply, and plan for resumption of operations in a
winter-spring campaign. Enemy capabilities throughout
SVN are summarized in the following paragraphs:

"A, Attack. The enemy can attack at any time
selected targets in I, II, and III CTZ in wp to division
strength and in IV Cf2Z in up to regimental strength,
supported by local force and guerrillas. Simultaneously,
he can continue harassing attacks throughout SVN.

(1) In TI CTZ, he can attack objectives in the
DMZ area (Quang Tri Province) with elements of the 3248
and 31st NVA divisions supported by one separate regiment.
Additionally, he can attack objectives in Quang Tin or
Quang Ngai Provinces with the 2d NVA division and two regi-
ments of the 3d NVA division. In Thua Tien and Quang Nam
Provinces he can attack in up to regimental strength.

(2) In IT CTZ, he has the capability to attack in
Western Pleiku, Southern Kontum, or Northern Derlac Provinces
with elements of the 1st and 1Oth NVA divisions, in Northern
Binh Dinh Province with one regiment of the 3d NVA Division,
and in Phu Yen and Northern Khanh Hoa Provinces with elements
of the two regiments of the 5th NVA Division.

(3) Im III CTZ, he can attack with the 9th VC
and possibly the 7th NVA Divisions in Tay Ninh, Binh Longs,
Binh Duong, or Phuoe Long Provinces, and in Phuoc Tuy and
Southern Long Khanh Provinces with elements of the two
regiments of the 5th VC Division. He also can sabotage

26 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
