51.

52.

93+

DD

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

BOOK II 1954
50. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend steps which the U. S,

might take to assist in achieving success of the Navarre
Plan. Among these steps are: a renewed emphasis by France °
on support of the Navarre Plan; an assignment of addi-
tional specialists to MAAG, Indochina; an increase in un-
conventional warfare activities; a re-examination of

current national strategy; and an interim revision of

French NATO commitments. JCS Memorandum for Secretary

of Défense, 15 January LOS. wosioee evinsvcir tenes ee sedes tess ue

The President approves the statement of policy in NSC 177,
"United States Objectives and Courses of Action with Re-
spect to Southeast Asia," which views the loss of Indo-
china as having "most serious repercussions on U.S. and
free world interests...." (NSC 177 was renumbered as

.

NSC 5405) NSC 5405, 16 January LOS... ce ecececcercceweveces

Senator Stennis informs Secretary Wilson that the U. S.
should stop short of sending troops or airmen to Indo-

china. "I do not think we can at all afford to take

chances on becoming participants in Indochina." Stennis
letter to Secretary of Defense, 29 January 1954...... ch) ODIO

The President's Special Committee decides to recommend
action on certain urgent French requests for twnety-two

B-26 aircraft and two hundred Air Force mechanics for
Indochina, and to await General O'Deniel'’s return before
deciding on other requests. It is generally agreed that

the importance to the U.S. of winning in Indochina could
lead to intervention by U.S. air and naval forces -- but
"not ground forces." ISA Memorandum for the Record,

30 January 1954..... er 54 AGS DUIDS SO RGlew RESO REPO e es WESC ORS cele

The President approves, and the CJCS notifies France of

U. S. transfer to Indochina of ten B-26 type aircraft

and two hundred USAF mechanics. This brings to twenty-

two the total of B-26 aircraft slated for delivery to
Indochina. Admiral Radford (Anderson) Memorandwn to

General Valluy, 30 January 1954........0e0e math eloraneleellece ele ahereie

General O'Daniel reports on General Navarre's lack of
enthusiasm on having a U. S. "liaison officer" and his
disinterest in U. 8. participation in psychological
warfare. O'Daniel recommends that a smail Joint Staff
be approved, additional fimds to STEM be approved, and
the employment of liaison officers be approved. He
comments that Dien Bien Phu can withstand any kind of
Viet Minh attack, but would be untenable to a force that
had several battalions of artillery with air observation.

O'Daniel Report to JCS, 5 February 195.......e.ecee. marsivtere's

Page ~

212

217

239

. 2ho

ahs

2ho

Vili TOP SECRET - Sensitive
