Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

After the coup failed, the Embassy pressed Khanh to exile the
coup leaders quietly; and in the upshot they were acquitted of the charges
against them. :

A fresh problem blew up on September 20 when Rhade tribesmen in
four CIDG camps edvised by U.S. Special Forces revolted against Saigon's
authority. It arose from a long-festering mistrust and contempt between
the Montagnards, encouraged by the VC, and the lowland Vietnamese. This
problem also vexed US/GVN relations, because the U.S. Special Forces ad-
visors generally got along well with the tribesmen, and some may have
sympathized with them; and in particular, it added to Khanh's suspicions
of U.S. intentions. Two or three Rhades had become officers in ARVN, and
Westmoreland suggested using them as intermediaries with the rebelling units;
but Khanh turned the idea down flat. He also declined to make concessions
to Montegnard discontent. Then Taylor sent General DePuy as his inter-
mediary to tell the Rhades they were off the payroll until they submitted
to GVN authority. This move produced a temporary settlement, but trouble
continued to boil. wp for another two or three weeks. 37/

The High National Council began its deliberations on September 2;
Taylor took the occasion to comment that Khanh conceded too much to organ-
ized pressure groups. Noting that GVN effectiveness and morale had virtu-
ally collapsed, he disliked the purely civilian makeup of the Council,
and hoped that it would take its time about writing a permanent constitu-
tion. GVN set a deadline of October 27 for this exercise. 38/ Watching
on the sidelines, here as at other times, Taylor opposed unsettling change,
and opposed excessive civilian influence because of their presumed factional-
ism and Jack of fervor in prosecuting the war.

6. The HNC Installs Civilian Leadership, October, 1964

The view that bombing the North was the key to success received
a fresh airing, this time in a public revelation of what USG was thinking.
Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy said in a speech delivered in —
Tokyo on September 30 that such bonbing would cut down the threat to GVN
in a matter of months.

Rayly in October, Khanh succeeded in exiling General Khiem, a
member of the triumvirate, whom he had suspected of instigating the Septem-
ber 13 coup attempt; Khiem beceme Ambassador to the U.S. 39/

| As the HNC deliberated, State sent Taylor its guidance on the
USG position during the formation of the new government-to-be:

"1. We concur that we mst...avoid any public
espousal of charter or people, although we will un-
doubtedly be charged in any event with considerable
responsibility for the selection of the form and per-
sonnel of any new government...We cannot privately
disclaim any preference for individuals or form of
government because of our intense interest in seeing
a new government having sound organization, able mem-
bers, end broad basis of popular support. We also

46 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
