Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"From late November onward, these choices were intensively examined
even as the military threat grew, the political confusion in Saigon
deepened, and all the indicators recorded increasingly shaky morale
and confidence not only in South Viet-Nam but throughout the deeply
concerned countries of Southeast Asia. By late January, it was the
clear judgment of all those concerned with policy and familiar with
the situation that thé first choice was rapidly becoming no choice at
all--and not, to use the phrase of one commentator, a ‘constructive
alternative.’ To ‘muddle through' (that commentator's phrase) was
almost certainly to muddle out and to accept that South Viet-Nam would
be turned over the Communist control achieved through externally backed
subversion and aggression.

?

"This was a straight practical judgment. It ran against the grain
of every desire of the President and his advisers. But I myself am sure
it was right judgment--accepted at the time by most sophisticated observers
and, in the light of reflective examination, now accepted, I believe, by
virtually everyone who knows the situation at all at first hand.

"There were, in short, only two choices: to move toward withdrawal
or to do a lot more, both for its military impact and, at the outset, to
prevent 4 collapse of South Vietnamese morale and will to continue.

"And as the deliberations continued within the administration, the
matter was brought to a head by a series of sharp attacks on American
installations in particular. These attacks were serious in themselves,
but above all, they confirmed the overall analysis that North Viet-Nam
was supremely confident and was moving for the kill. And as: they thus
moved, it seemed clear that they would in fact succeed and ‘perhaps in
a matter of months.

"Tet me pause here to clear up another current historical inaccuracy.
The basis for the successive decisions--in February to start bombing;
in March to introduce small numbers of combat forces; and in July to move
to major United States combat forces--was as I have stated it. It depended
on an overall view of the situation and on an overall view that what had
been going on for years was for all practical purposes aggression--and
indeed this term dates from late 1961 or early 1962 in the statements of
senior administration spokesmen."

* *% :

"But this historical point is less important than the fundamental
elements of the situation as it stood at the time. On the one hand, all
of what I have earlier described as the bedrock elements still remained:

a strong Chinese Communist and North Vietnamese threat to Southeast Asia,
a crucial link between the defense of South Viet-Nam and the realization
of that threat, and the validity of non-Communist nationalism, whatever
its. imperfections, in South Viet-Nam and in the other nations of Southeast
Asia.

_D-118
