Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

1S4. ;
TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

that he did not suggest any conditions precedent about
political changes by Diem, AmConsul Hue reports that
opinion among intellectuals and government officials in
that city is also almost unanimously in favor of intro-
duction of American combat troops. MAAG believes on basis
private conversations and general attitude Vietnamese
military personnel toward us that Vietnamese armed forces
would likewise welcome introduction US forces.

General Vietnamese desire for introduction US forces
arises from serious morale decline among populace during
recent weeks because of deterioration in security and
horrible death through torture and mutilation to which
Col Nam subjected, Expanded VC infiltration has brought
fully home to Vietnamese the fact that US has not inter-
vened militarily in Laos to come to rescue of anti-commu-
nists. Now that they see Viet-Nam approaching its own
crucial period, paramount question in their minds is |
whether it will back down when chips are down. Vietnamese
thus want US forces introduced in order to demonstrate US
determination to stick it out with them against Communists.
They do not want to be victims of political settlement
with communists, This is especially true of those publicly
identified as anti-communist like Dean Vu Quoc Thue who
collaborated with Dr, Eugene Staley on Joint Experts Report.

Most Vietnamese whose thoughts on this subject have been
developed are: not thinking in terms of US troops to fight
guerrillas but rather of a reassuring presence of US forces
in Viet-Nam, These persons undoubtedly feel, however, that
if war in Viet-Nam continues to move toward overt conven-
tional aggression as opposed to its guerrilla character,
combat role for US troops could eventually arise, 11/

The special commitment involved in committing even a small force of
ground troops was generally recognized. We have notes on an ISA staff
paper, for example, which ranked the various types of increased U.S.
military aid in ascending order of commitment, and of course, placed the
flood task force at the top, According to the notes,

Any combat elements, such as in the task force, would
come under attack and would need to defend themselves, com-
mitting U.S. prestige deeply. U.S. troops would then be
fighting in South Vietnam and could not withdraw under fire.
Thus, the introduction of U.S. troops in South Vietnam would

af TOP SECRET - Sensitive
