Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

There were no immediate or forceful U.S. reactions in 1964 to this
eontinuing political instability and military frustration in South Vietnam.
Declaratory policy raced far ahead of resource allocations and use decisions.
As events continued along an unfavorable course the U.S. pursued an ever-
expanding number of minor, specific, programmatic measures which were
inherently inadequate either to reverse the decline or to satisfy broad U.S.
objectives. Concurrently, the U.S. began to make contingency plans for
increasing pressures against NVN. It did not make similar plans for the
commitment of U.S. ground forces in SYN.

In the aftermath of President Johnson's landslide electoral victory
in November 1964, and in the face of persistent instability in SVN, the
Administration finally expanded the war to include a limited, carefully
controlled air campaign against the north. Early in 1965 it deployed
Marine battalions to South Vietnam. By April 1965, while continuing to
follow the announced policy of efforts to enable GVN to win its own war,
the U.S. had adumbrated a policy of U.S. military participation which
presaged a high degree of Americanization of the war effort.

This evolving expansion and demonstration of commitment was neither
continuous nor steady. The steps forward were warmly debated, often hesitant,
sometimes reluctant. -~ But all of the steps taken were still forward
toward a larger commitment; there were none to the rear.

THE INITIAL PERIOD: NOVEMBER 1963 - MARCH 1964

The Diem coup preceded President Kennedy's assassination by less
than a month. Thus, a new leader took the helm in the U.S. at a natural
time to reevaluate U.S. policies and U.S.-GVN relations. President Johnson's
first policy announcement on the Vietnamese war, contained in NSAM 273
(26 November 1963), only three days after he had assumed the Presidency,
was intended primarily to endorse the policies pursued by President Kennedy
and to ratify provisional decisions reached in Honolulu just before the
assassination. Even in its attempt to direct GVN's efforts toward concen-
tration on the Delta area, NSAM 273 reflected earlier U.S. preferences which
had been thwarted or ignored by Diem. Now was the time, many of the top
U.S. policymakers hoped, when convincing U.S. support for the new regime
in Saigon might allow GVN to start winning its own war.

Two developments -- in addition to the VC successes which followed
Diem's downfall -- undercut this aura of optimism. First, it was discovered
that the situation in SVN had been worse all along than reports had indicated.
Examples of misleading reports were soon available in Washington at the
highest levels. Second, the hoped-for political stability was never even |
established before it disintegrated in the Khanh coup in January 1964. By
February MACV's year-end report for 1963 was available in Washington. Its
gloomy statistics showed downward trends in almost every area.

ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
