Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that the northern targets had been destroyed, that that
had been militarily important, and that there would be

no need to return to the northern areas unless military
necessity dictated it. The shift should not be huckstered.
Moscow would almost certainly pass its information on to
Hanoi, and might urge Hanoi to seize the opportunity to
de-escalate the war by talks or otherwise. Hanoi, not
having been asked a question by us and having no ulti-
matum-like time limit, would be in a better posture to
answer favorably than has been the case in the past. The
military side of the shift is sound, however, whether or
not the diplomatic spill-over is successful. 6

McNeughton concluded his case against force level increases by
proposing a time-phased "suggested strategy":

(1) Now: Not to panic because of a belief that
. Hanoi must be made to capitulate before the 1968 elections.
Wo one's proposal achieves that end.

(2) Now: Press on energetically with the military,
pacification and political programs in the South, including
groundwork for successful elections in September. Drive
hard to increase the productivity of Vietnamese military
forces.

(3) Now: Issue a NSAM nailing down US policy as
described herein. Thereafter, publicly, (a) emphasize con-
sistently that the sole US objective in Vietnam has been
and is to permit the people of South Vietnam to determine
their own future, and (b) declare that we have already
either denied or offset the North Vietnamese intervention
and that after the September elections in Vietnam we will
have achieved success. The necessary steps having been
taken to deny the North the ability to take over South
Vietnam and an elected government sitting in Saigon, the

South will be in position, albeit imperfect, to start the
business of producing a full-spectrum government in South

Vietnam.

(4) June: Concentrate the bombing of North Vietnam
on physical interdiction of men and materiel. This would
mean terminating, except where the interdiction objective
clearly dictates otherwise, all bombing north of 20° and
improving interdiction as much as possible in the infil-
tration "funnel" south of 20° by concentration of sorties

163 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
