Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"THE PRESIDENT: No, the actual legal basis was to put us in a
position to fulfill our obligations under the SEATO Treaty.

"Q: Myr. President, are the other members of the SEATO Treaty organi-
zation doing the same?

"THE PRESIDENT: They have been asked to do so, and there have been
indications of a favorable response from several of them. This is a de-
cision for them. But we have responded and met our obligations.

x +

"The Intentions of Pathet Lao

"Q: Mr. President, back on the subject of Southeast Asia, has there
been any indication that the Pathet Lso intended to march against Thailend
or against the capital of Laos, and, second, under what conditions would
the United States send its troops into Laos?

"?HE PRESIDENT: In answer to your first question, I don't know what
their intentions may be. I am hopeful their intentions will be to main-
tain a cease-fire. Obviously, as I have said, the breech of the cease-fire
in the case of Nam Tha was a blow to the concept of the cease-fire. That
is what initiated our action in the case of Thailand. On the second matter,
we have to wait and see. I think -it is very important that the princes form
a government of national union. for the preservation of their own country."

eh, President Kennedy's Address at Graduation Exercises of the U.S.
Military Acad Public Papers of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1962
Dp. L53:

_ "Korea has not been the only battle ground since the end of the Second
World War. Men have fought and died in Malaya, in Greece, in the Philip-
pines, in Algeria and Cuba, and Cyprus and almost continuously on the Indo-
Chinese Peninsula. No nuclear weapons have been fired. No massive nuclear
retaliation has been considered appropriatt. This is another type of war,
new in its intensity, ancient in its origin -- war by guerrillas, sub-
versives, insurgents, assassins, war by ambush instead of by combat; by
infiltration, instead of aggression, seeking victory by eroding and ex-
hausting the enemy instead of engaging him. ‘It is a.form of warfare
uniquely adapted to what has been strangely called ‘wars of liberation,’
+o undermine the efforts of new and poor countries to maintain the freedom
that they have finally achieved. It preys on economic unrest and ethnic
conflicts. It requires in those situations where we must counter it, and
these are the kinds of chellences that will be before us in the next decade
if freedom is to be saved, a whole new kind of strategy, a wholly different
_kind of force, and therefore a new and wholly different kind of military

training."

0-23
