Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

or 1959, it was virtually inoperative. Bernard Fall has reported that
despite Diem's land reforms, 45% of the land remained concentrated in

the hands of 2% of landowners, and 75% in the hands of 15%. 66/ Moreover,
since the immediate beneficiaries were more often than not Northerners,
refugees, and Catholics, the programs acquired an aura of GVN favoritism,
and deepened peasant alienation. In time there wre also rumors of corrup-
tion, with widespread allegations that the Diem family had enriched itself
through the manipulation of the land transfers.

As an example of Diem's rural programs in action at the
village level which serves to demonstrate how they fell wide of the mark
of meeting rural expectations, that of the village communal land is
instructive. 6t/ After the long period of disrupted public administration
during the Franco-Viet Minh War, land records were chaotic. Under Diem,
the GVN seized outright nearly half a million acres of land whose title
was unclear. Some of this land was rented, the GVN acting as the landlord;
some was farmed by ARVN units; and some was converted into communal land
and the title passed to village councils. The village councils were then
supposed to hold an annual auction of communal land, in which farmers wishing
to use certain plots submitted sealed bids. Although this seemed to the
casual western observer an equitable system, in actuality it was quite
vicious. The bidding farmers were usually seeking to rent land they had
been farming free for years. Whether this were the case or not, however,
rice growing is a labor intensive process which requires of the farmer a
substantial capital investment year by year to build up dikes and ditches.
To assure himself that he would not lost this investment, a man farming a
plot declared communal land felt compelled to raise his bid each succeeding
year to avoid loss of that capital, and to preclude losing his hard work.
The consequent competition, however modern, shook the roots of traditional
Asian farming communities, for the arrangement had the major disadvantage
of creating uncertainty over land from year to year -- the antithesis of
security for the rice-growing peasant. To cap these disadvantages, village
councils were often less than honest, and tended to be considerably less
willing than a paternal landlord to tide the farmer over after a bad erop
year; if his subsequent bid were low, he lost his land.

There is another chapter in the history of GVN-farmer relation-
ships which illustrates similar clumsiness. In 1956, as the GVN launched
its land reform program, Ngo Dinh Nhu enlisted the aid of the Confederation
of Vietnamese Labor, which had been organizing tenant farmers in promoting
the government's policies through its rural representatives. 68/ The GVN
then proceeded to form its own, NRM-connected, Farmers’ Associations. The
latter, interconnected with province officials and with landowners, actively
opposed the union organizers, with the result that many of the latter were
jailed. Within a year or two, the union was destroyed for all practical
purposes. Few of the NRM Farmers’ Associations ever did function on behalf
of the farmers; of 288 associations reported in-being by the GVN, a USOM
study in 1961 could find only 35 which represented peasant interests in
any active sense.

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
