Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ten days after this joint memo from the Chiefs, General
Wheeler sent the Secretary a proposal of his own for the expansion of
the air war under a new ROLLING THUNDER program, number 58. 38/ Its
most important proposal was the reduction of Hanoi-Haiphong restricted
circles down to 3 and 1.5 n.m. respectively. With other specific
targets requested for authorization (of which the most important was
Gia Iam airfield), this new proposal would have opened up an addi-
tional 15 valid targets for attack on the authority of the field com-
mander. On the basis of an ISA recommendation, the reduction of the
restricted zones around the two cities was rejected on November 9, but
some of the additional individual targets were added to the authorized
list. Consistent with these little escalatory measures was McNamara's
decision on November 6 to authorize the deployment to Southeast Asia of
a squadron of the first six F-l1l1A aircraft to enter the Air Force active
inventory. 40/ like so many other decisions with respect to this ill-
fated aircraft, this one would come to an unhappy end too. One of the
specific objectives of the Chairman's proposal for constricting the pro-
hibited areas had been to attempt the isolation of Haiphong on the ground,
thereby effectively cutting off seaborne imports from their destinations
in the rest of North Vietnam and to the war in the South. An independent
CIA analysis of the air war at about this same time, however, had stated:

Even a more intense interdiction campaign in the North
would fail to reduce the flow of supplies sufficiently to
restrict military operations. Prospects are dim that an air
interdiction campaign against LOC's leading out of Haiphong
alone could cut off the flow of seaborne imports and isolate
Haiphong. 41/

In late November the Chiefs sent the Secretary still another
and far more detailed memo describing their plans for the conduct of all
aspects of the war for the ensuing four months. In it they spelled out
requests for expanding the air war against 24 new targets. They desired
authorization once again to mine the harbors of Haiphong, Hon Gai, and
Cam Pha noting that bad weather in the coming months would force curtail-
ment of much normal strike activity in the Red River delta. The harbor
mining was offered as the most effective means of shutting off supplies
“to the North. The CIA analysis previously referred to had, however, also
rejected such mining proposals as unlixely to succeed in their objective
of cutting off imports to support the war, although they would raise the
costs to the DRV.

Political considerations aside, the combined interdic-
tion of land and water routes, including the mining of the
water approaches to the major ports and the bombing of ports
and transshipment facilities, would be the most effective

112 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
