Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Unlike the Bundy paper this analysis eschewed pure domino theorizing
for a careful country by country examination. The overall evaluation
was that, "Except for its psychological impact, withdrawal from Vietnam
would not affect the present line of containment from its Korean anchor
down the Japan-Ryukyus-Taiwan-Philippine Island chain." 121/ Four
possible alternate defense lines in Southeast Asia were considered: (1)
the Thai border; (2) the Isthmus of Kra on the Malay peninsula; (3) the
"water Line" from the Strait of Malacca to the North of Borneo; and (4) an
"“Tnterrupted Line” across the gap between the Philippines and Australia.
Like other analyses of the strategic problem in Southeast Asia, this
paper rejected any in-depth defense of Thailand as militarily untenable.
The best alternatives were elther the Isthmus of Kra or the Strait of
Malacca; alternative four was to be considered only as a fall back posi-
tion. The paper stands as a terse and effective refutation of the full-
blown domino theory, offering as it does cool-headed alternatives that
should have evoked more clear thinking than they apparently did about
the irrevocability of our commitment to South Vietnam.

What the exact outcome of the deliberations on these
papers was is not clear from the available documents. Nor is there any
clear indication of the influence the documents or the ideas contained
in them might have had on the Principals or the President. Judgments
on this score must be by inference. A scenario drafted by Leonard Unger
and included by McNaughton with Carver's paper suggests that some con-
sensus was reached within the group reflecting mostly the ideas contained
in Carver's draft. Its second point stated:

On U.S. scene and internationally we will develop in
public statements and otherwise the dual theme that the U.S.
has gone into South Viet-Nam to help on the assumption that
(a) the Government is representative of the people who do want
our help (b) the Government is sufficiently competent to hold
the country together, to maintain the necessary programs and
use our help. President will elaborate this at opportune
moment in constructive tone but with monetary overtones if
there is any political turmoil or if Government unwilling to
do what we consider essential in such fields as countering
inflation, allocating manpower to essential tasks and the like. 122/

In fact, however, while we did attempt to steer the South Vietnamese
toward constitutional government on a democratic model, when the President
spoke out in succeeding weeks it was to reiterate the firmness of our
‘commitment and the quality of our patience, not to condition them. Ata
Medal of Honor ceremony at the White House on April 21, he said:

There are times when Viet-Nam mist seem to many a

thousand contradictions, and the pursuit of freedom there
an almost unrealizable dream.

106 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
