Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Hoa end Dong Phuong RR/Highway bridges/. The dropping of at
least one span in either and preferably both of these bridges
will sever the main north-south railroad and highway routes

in sufficient depth for an effective follow-on program. This
initial action would be accompanied by an intense armed recon-
naissance mission to destroy the isolated transport equipment.
Subsequent strikes against choke points throughout the isolated
area are designed to make the program effective and to compli-
cate the DRV recovery program. Day and night armed reconnais-
sance would be conducted at random intervals to harass these
recovery efforts and to sustain the interdiction, including
armed reconnaissance against junk traffic over sea LOCs. This
initial vrogram should bring home to the population the effects
of air strikes since consumer good will be competing with mili-
tary supplies for the limited transport. An effective inter-
diction in this area will also impede the DRV capability to mass
sizeable military forces and to deploy air defense resources.
The remaining few installation targets in this area would be
left for later strikes by VNAF. Also, the interdiction in this
area would be sustained by VIAF as US strikes moved to the north.

b. The second phase, the launching of the interdiction
campaign north of the 20th parallel, introduces a consideration
which was not a major factor in the campaign in the southern DRV;
i.e., the possibility of MIG intervention as strikes are made
against targets progressively closer to the Hanoi-Haiphong area.
In order to reduce this possibility to a minimum, the first week
of air operations north of the 20th parallel includes strikes
against the radar net in the delta area to blind or minimize
DRV early warning and intercept cavability. Following these
preparatory attacks, operations against the LOCs north of the
20th parallel are scheduled with the primary objective of
isolating the DRV from external overland sources; i.e., rail
and highway supply routes from Communist China. Subsequent to
cutting these primary LOCs, the initial phase of the interdic-
tion campaign would be completed by striking LOC targets in
depth throughout the erea of the DRV north of the 20th parallel.

ec. Having completed the primary interdiction program
in the delta area, a substantially lower effort should maintain
its effectiveness. With his overland LOC cut, blocked, and
harassed, the enemy can be expected to turn more and more to
his port facilities and sea LOC. The ninth week air strikes
will include attacks against these port facilities and the
mining of seaward approaches to block the enemy from relieving
his resusply problems over the sea LOC. Strikes will be initi-
ated during the tenth week against ammunition and supply dumps
to destroy on-hand stores of supplies and equipment to further
agsravete his logistic problems.

78 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
