Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

statement was a "new formulation," but quickly pointed out that it
had been prefaced by a reaffirmation of the four points and did not
deal with the specifics of when, where and hcuw negotiations would
take place. 2/

: Rusk's efforts to downplay the significance of the Trinh
statement notwithstanding, it can be assumed that some U.S. response
was sent to Hanoi. Reinforcing this impression is the fact that on
January 3 bombing was again completely prohibited within 5 n.m. of both
Hanoi and Haiphong for an indefinite period. 3/ (Some confusion my
arise as to the various constraints that were placed on the bombing near
the two major cities at different times and for different radii. "Pro-
hibited" meant that no strikes had been or would be authorized; "restricted"
meant that the area was generally off limits but that individual targets,
on a case by case basis, might be approved by "highest authority" for a
single attack. The 30 n.m. restricted zone around Hanoi and its 10 n.m.
counterpart around Haiphong had existed since the beginning of the bombing
in 1965. ‘The prohibited zones were established in December 1966. In
1967 they had been 10 n.m. for Hanoi and 4 n.m. for Haiphong.)
on January 16 when the White House Luncheon group met they authorized
only two targets that McNamara and Rusk had not already agreed to in
Peer oe they specifically reaffirmed the prohibition around the two
cities.

: The following day, the President, in his annual State of
the Union address, softened somewhat the U.S. position in what may have
been intended as a message to Hanoi. He called for "serious" negotiations
rather than the "productive" talks he had asked for in the San Antonio
speech. Unfortunately, he also stated that the North Vietnamese "must
not take advantage of our restraint as they have in the past." 5/ News-
men mistakenly took this for a hardening of the U.S. position by the
President, an error Dean Rusk tried to dispel the following day. But, as
on many occasions in the past, if this was intended as a signal to Hanoi
it must have been a confusing one. Once again the problem of multiple
audiences scrambled the communication. Not surprisingly then, on January el,
Wham Dan, the official North Vietnamese newspaper condemned the San Antonio
formula as the “habitual trick" of the President who was attempting to
impose "very insolent conditions" on Hanoi. The U.S. had no right to
ask reciprocity for a cessation of the bombing since it was the aggressor. 6/

His intent having been misconstrued, the President used the
next most convenient opportunity to convey his message -- the confirmation
hearings of the Senate Armed Services Committee on the appointment of his
close friend and advisor, Clark Clifford, to be Secretary of Defense. In
the course of his testimony, Clifford replied to questions by Senator
Strom Thurmond about the timing and conditions the Administration intended
for a bombing halt. Here is the essential portion of that testimony:

1k2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
