Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

by a process akin to the economic assumption of "flotation to stability
through development" went unchelllenged as a basic assumption, Critics
pointed to needed improvements; the question of whether or not these
could be accomplished, or why, almost never was raised.

"Operation Sunrise", for example, was criticized in some detail
by the US MAAG. Much better planning and coordination was needed in order
to relocate effectively: Aerial surveys were necessary to pinpoint the
number of families to be relocated; unanticipated expenditures needed to
be provided for; preparation of sites should begin before the peasants
were moved; and GVN resource commitments should be carefully checked by
U.S. advisors at all levels. 92/ There was no discussion of the vulnera-
bility of the strategic hemlets to VC infiltration (as against VC attacks)
or of the subsequent steps to winning support. That was not, one may
assume, the military's prime concern.

Political observers who examined this follow-on aspect were
cautiously optimistic:

The strategic hamlet program is the heart of our effort
and deserves top priority. While it has not -- and probably
will not -- bring democracy to rural Vietnan, it provides truly
local administration for the first time. Coupled with measures
to increase rice production and farmer income, these local
administrations can work a revolution in rural Vietnam. 93/

The same tone was reflected in Michael Forrestal's report to President
- Kennedy in February 1963 following his visit to Vietnam with Roger Hilsman,
The visitors found Ambassador Nolting and his deputy, William C, Trucheart,
optimistic about the results which the program might achieve once the
materials for it, then just beginning to come in, reached full volume. 95/

The Department of Defense was devoting considerable effort to
insuring that these materials did reach Vietnam in, the quantities needed
and in timely fashion. Secretary McNamaxa had been stuck with this prob-
lem during his May 1962 visit to “Operation Sunrise". He saw especially a
need to program SDC, CG, and Youth Corps training so that it would match
the role of hamlet building end to insure the provision of proper commu-
nications for warning purposes, 96/ A substantial amount of the MAAG-~DoD
effort subsequently went into programming. The Agency for International
Development had agreed to fund the "Strategic Hamlet Kits” (building
materials, barbed wire and stakes, light weapons, emmunition, and comnu-
nication equipment), but in August 1962 it demurred, stating that support~
ing assistance funds in the MAP were inadequate for the purpose. O7
Secretary McNamara agreed to undertake the financing for 1500 kits (13
million) but asked if the additional 3500 kits requested were really
necessary and, if so, on what delivery schedule. The target levels and
delivery dates underwent more or less. continuous revision from then until
the question became irrelevant in lete 1963. 98/ A separate but related
effort went into expediting the procurement, delivery, and installation of

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

gh]
