Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

NEWS ANALYSIS: Joseph Alsop, February 14 (from Saigon):

"CART BEFORE HORSE,..Al1 thet really mattered at Honolulu
was a Presidential decision to provide the forces needed to
keep the pressure on the enemy here in Vietnam. The odds
are heavy that the President, who seems to prefer doing good
by stealth, actually took this decision behind the electorate
smokescreen of talk about other matters. The question
remains whether the needed forces will be provided soon
enough, One must wait and see.

"But at the risk of sounding captious, and for the
spake of honesty and realism, it must be noted that there
was a big Madison Avenue element in all the talk about.
‘pacification' during the Hawaii meeting and Vice President
Humphrey's subsequent visit to Vietnan.

"This does not mean that pacification of the Vietnamese
countryside is an unimportant and/or secondary problem. On
the contrary, it will eventually be all-important and primary.
But one need only glance at the list of priority areas
marked for pacification now, to see the adman's touch in the
present commotion.

"There are: An Giang Province, which belongs to the
Hoa Hao sect and has been long since pacified by the Hoa
Hao; the Hop Tac region near Saigon, where General Harkins
experimented unhappily with the so-called oil spot technique;
parts of Binh Dinh Province along the north-south highway;
and the fringes of the Marine enclave at Da Nang.

"Fach area differs from the others. In the case of the
nine villages on the fringes of the Marines’ Da Nang enclave,
for instance, pacification is needed to insure airfield
security from mortar fire. Most of these villages have been
Viet Cong strongholds for over 20 years, and they could be
dangerous.

"| ,.Pacification by the Marines looks very fine...But
it takes far too many Marines to do the job.

"Nonetheless, the real objections to making a big-
inmediate show of pacification are quite different, The
Hop Tac experience tells the story. Here a great effort
was made by the Vietnamese authorities with the strong
support of General Harkins. A good deal was initially
accomplished, Boasts began to be heard, Whereat the
enemy sailed forth from the nearest redoubt area, knocked
down everything thet had been built up, murdered all the

: Ci TOP SECRET - Sensitive
