Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

"President Eisenhower, in his address of April 16, 1953, explained
that a Korean armistice would be a fraud if it merely released aggressive
armies for attack elsewhere. I said last September that if Red China
sent its own army into Indochina, that would result in grave conse-
quences which might not be confined to Indochina.

"Recent statements have been designed to impress upon potential
aggressors thet aggression might lead to action at places and by means
of free-world choosing, so that aggression would cost more than it
could gain.

"The Chinese Commmists have, in fact, avoided the direct use of
their own Red armies in open aggression against Indochina. ‘They have,
however, largely stepped up their support of the aggression in that area.
Indeed, they promote that aggression by all means short of open invasion.

"Under all the circumstances it seems desirable to clarify further
the United States position.

"Under the conditions of today, the imposition on Southeast Asia
of the political system of Communist Russia and its Chinese Commmist
ally, by whatever means, would be a grave threat to the whole free com-
munity. The United States feels that that possibility should not be
passively accepted but should be met by united action. This might involve
serious risks. But these risks are far less than those that will face us
a few years from now if we dare not be resolute today.

"The free nations want peace. However, peace is not had merely by
wanting it. Peace has to be worked for and planned for. Sometimes it
is necessary to take risks to win peace just as it is necessary in war
to take risks to win victory. The chances for peace are usually bettered
by letting 2 potential aggressor know in advance where his aggression
could lead him.

"I hope that these statements which I make here tonight will serve
the cause of peace.

"Let me now discuss our political relations with Red China, taking
first the matter of recognition.

"The United States does not recognize the Chinese Conmunist regime.
That is well known. But the reasons seem not so well known. Some think
that there are no reasons and that we are actuated purely by emotion.
Your Government believes that its position is soberly rational.

"Let me first recall that diplomatic recognition is a voluntary
att. One country has no right to demand recognition by another.
Generally, it is useful that there should be diplomatic intercourse
between those who exercise de facto governmental authority, and it is
well established that recognition does not imply moral approval.

B-8
