Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

However, Administration actions to find a way to accelerate progress
in South Vietnam continued. On 7 November 1967, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff indicated, in a memorandum to the Director, Joint
Staff, that he had been urged again to take all feasible measures to
deploy Program 5 forces at the earliest possible date. He directed that
the Joint Staff explore what further foreshortening of the deployment
dates could be accomplished. 95/

On 8 November, at the White House luncheon meeting, the Secretary of
State recommended that the Department of State and the Department of
Defense prepare a joint policy document which would govern political and
military operations in Southeast Asia for the next four months. Secretary
Rusk's proposal was expressed in broad terms. He considered that parameters
should be established for political, military, and economic operations
over the upcoming four months' period in order to preclude the need for
weekly examinations of many small and short-range operations. This pro-
posal was agreed to by the principals at the meeting, and the Chairman
directed the Joint Staff to prepare as a matter of priority the recommen-
dations of the JCS for military operations in SEA over the cited time
period. He directed that the recommendations of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff cover the following as a minimum:

a. Air operations against North Vietnam --

Fixed targets important to our air effort against
North Vietnam; authorization for re-strike of important tar-
gets; allocation of air effort between North Vietnam and
South Vietnam.

b. Ground operations -- /

Large ground operations in South Vietnam to include
operations in the Delta region; ground operations in Laos;
ground operations in Cambodia; and possible ground operations
against North Vietnam.

ec. Bombing Pauses --

In addressing this subject the Joint Staff should take
note of American Embassy Saigon to State cable #10563. Ambassador
Bunker reported that Vice President Ky believes that bombing
pauses of 2 hours each for Christmas and New Years and 48 hours
at TET should be announced in the near future by the allied
forces. 96/

In reply to the Chairman's request to explore foreshortening of

' deployment dates, the Director, Joint Staff on 21 November furnished
the following resume: :

225 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
