Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnamese will continue to be able to support their war
effort both in North Vietnam and in South Vietnam. 79/

But the lines were already clearly being drawn in this
internal struggle over escalation and for the first time all the civilians
(both insiders and significant outsiders) were opposed to the military
proposals in whole or part. At this early stage, however, the outcome
was far from clear. On the same day the Chairman criticized the Bundy
paper, Roger Fisher, McNaughton's longtime advisor from Harvard, at the
suggestion of Walt Rostow and Doug Cater, sent the President a proposal
re-orienting the U.S, effort both militarily and diplomatically. The
flavor of his ideas, all of which had already appeared in notes to
McNaughton, can be derived from a listing of the headings under which
they were argued without going into his detailed arguments. His analysis
fell under the following six general rubrics:

1. Pursue an on-the-ground interdiction strategy
(barrier);

2. Concentrate air attacks in the southern portion
of North Vietnam;

3. Offer Hanoi some realistic "yes-able" propositions;
h, Make the carrot more believable;
5. Give the NLF a decidable question;

6. Give local Viet Cong leaders a chance to opt out
of the war. 80/

The arguments to the President for applying the brakes to our involve-
ment in this seemingly endless, winless struggle were, thus, being made
from all sides, except the military who remained ademant for escalation.

2. The May DPM Exercise

The available documents do not reveal what happened to
the option exercise that Katzenbach had launched on April 24. But at
this point in the debate over future direction for U.S, policy in South-
east Asia, attention shifted to a draft memorandum for the President
written by John McNaughton for McNamara's eventual signature. (A W. Bundy
memo on May 30 suggests the Katzenbach exercise was overtaken by Defense's
DPM effort.) The DPM at the Pentagon is more than a statement of the
Secretary's views, however, it is an important bureaucratic device for
achieving consensus (or at least for getting people's opinions recorded
on paper). McNaughton began his DPM by stating that the question before

the house was:

_ 30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
