Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

economy, for increased educational opportunities

in hamlets, for increased production of rice, for

marketing of fish, and so forth. McNamara believed

@ well publicized announcement of this nature

would find ready response among people and would

materially assist Khanh to obtain and hold support
' of Vietnamese people.... 58

9. NAM 288

The program formulated in March 196 in connection with the trip
to Vietnam was reported orally to the President by the Secretary of
Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs on their return, then
presented formally to the President and the NSC by memorandum to the
President dated 16 March. It was finally approved as NSAM 288 dated
17 March 1964. As such NSC documents go, NSAM 288 was comprehensive
and programmatic. It reviewed U.S. objectives, appraised the situa-
tion, discussed various alternative courses of action, and finally
recommended a rather detailed program intended to serve the defined
objectives and to meet the situation as it had been described. It
consisted of seven parts. The first was a discussion and definition
of objectives, the second a description-of U.S. policy, the third an
appraisal of the present situation, the fourth a discussion of alter-
native courses of action, the fifth a consideration of possible actions,
the sixth a mention of other actions considered but rejected, and
seventh and last, a statement of specific recommendations.

NSAM 288, being based on the official recognition that the
situation in Vietnam was considerably worse than had been realized
at the time of the adoption of NSAM 273, outlined a program that
called for considerable enlargement of U.S. effort. It involved an
assumption by the United States of a greater part of the task, and
an increased involvement by the United States in the internal affairs
of South Vietnam, and for these reasons it carried with it an enlarged
commitment of U.S. prestige to the success of our effort in that area.

In tacit acknowledgement that this greater commitment of prestige
called for an enlargement of stated objectives, NSAM 288 did indeed
enlarge these objectives. Whereas, in NSAM 273 the objectives were
expressly limited to helping the government of South Vietnam win its
contest against an externally directed Communist conspiracy, NSAM 288
escalated the objectives into a defense of all of Southeast Asia and -
the West Pacific and redefined American foreign policy and American
security generally. In NSAM 273 the statement of objectives was
comparatively simple and limited:

It remains the central object of the
United States in South Vietnam to assist the
people and the government of that country. to win
their contest against the externally directed

16 TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
