Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from No Peace for Asia by Harold Isaacs, 1947, quoted in
Viet Nam: History, Documents, and Opinions on a Major World Crisis,
Marvin E. Gettleman, ed., 1965, pp. 49-50, 53-55.

Ho Chi Minh was born in the province of Vinh, in northern Annam.
"The home of revolutionists," the Annamites call that place with its
sparse hills and valleys, its thickly crowded population. From out
of that mass grubbing in the soil to live has come a peculiarly large
proportion of Indochina's greatest national leaders. As a boy of
twelve, Ho began his revolutionary career as a courier, carrying
messages from village to village for his conspiring elders. Today,
at fifty-five, he likes to think of himself as a man who has cast
aside parties and programs. He speaks not in class political terms
but in nationalist terms. "My party is my country," he liked to say;
"my program is independence.” In long discussions we had of the
problems of the Nationalist movement in general and in Indochina in
particular, he would impatiently wave aside all misgivings. "Inde-
pendence is the thing," he said. "What follows will follow. But
independence must come first if there is to be anything to follow at
all later on."

ie GA

Upon whom could [the Vietnamese now/...count? Certainly not now
upon the Chinese. China was so immensely larger than the little
Republic of Vietnam--and perhaps there would come a day when China
would haye realized her capacities and assumed her place as the leader
of Asia. On that day Vietnam would profit, perhaps, from being China's
neighbor. But China now was weak and assailed, rent by internal
struggles and external pressures. Jt was ruled by the kind of men
who were in northern Indochina now, sucking at the land like leeches.
Because they held the French at arm's length, they were temporarily
helpful. But that could not last. The Chinese were already negoti-
ating their settlement with the French and would be interested only in
gaining their own immediate ends. From those ends, Annamite nationalism
had little enough to gain.

What of the Russians? Would they bring any strong political sup-
port to the Annamite cause? I met no Annamite who thought so; and I
spoke to many Annamite Communists. The Annamite Communists, like all
their fellow nationalists, suffered from a terrifying sense of their
isolation. They were unusually frank and cynical about the Russians.
Eyen the most orthodox among them, like shaggy-haired Dran Van Giau,
the partisan organizer, granted that the Russians went in for “an excess
of ideological compromise," and said he expected no help from that
quarter, no matter how distant or verbal it might be. "The Russians
are nationalists for Russia first and above all," another Annamite

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-11
