Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

increase pressures for an international conference or that the DRV

was testing U.S. reactions to a contemplated general offensive 34/ a

have lost some credibility. Subsequent events and DRV actions have
appeared to lack any consistent relationship with such motives. Perhaps
closer to the mark is the narrow purpose of prompt retaliation for an
embarrassing and well-publicized rebuff by a much-maligned enemy. JInex-
perienced in modern naval operations, DRV leaders may have believed that
under cover of darkness it would be possible to even the score or to pro-
vide at least a psychological victory by severely damaging a U.S. ship.
Unlike the first incident, the DRV was ready (5 August) with a propaganda
blast denying its own provocation and claiming the destruction of U.S.
aircraft. Still, regardless of motive, there is little question but that
the attack on the destroyers was deliberate. Having followed the destroyers
for hours, their course was well known to the North Vietnamese naval force,
and its advance units were laying ahead to make an ambushing beam attack
fully 60 miles from shore.

The reality of a North Vietnamese attack on 4 August has been corro-
borated by both visual and technical evidence. That it may have been
deliberately provoked by the United States is belied to a considerable
degree by circumstantial evidence. Operating restrictions for the DE SOTO
Patrol were made more stringent following the first attack. The 11 n.m.,
rather than 8 n.m., off-shore patrolling track indicates an intention to
avoid -~ not provoke -- further contact. On li February the rules of engage-
ment were modified to restrict "hot pursuit" by the U.S. ships to no
closer than 11 n.m. from the North Vietnamese coast; aircraft were to
pursue no closer than 3 n.m. 35/ Given the first attack, the President's
augmentation of the patrol force was a normal. precaution, particularly
since both Ticonderoga and C. Turner Joy were already deployed in the
inmediate vicinity as supporting elements. Moreover, since the augmenta-
tion was coupled with a clear statement of intent to continue the patrols
and @ firm warning to the DRV that repetition would bring dire consequences,
their addition to the patrol could be expected to serve more as a deterrent
than a provocation.

The often alleged "poised" condition of the U.S. reprisal forces was
anything but extraordinary. U.S.8. Constellation was well out of the
immediate operating area as the patrol was resumed on 3 August. In fact,
one reason for delaying the launching of retaliatory air strikes (nearly
1100 hours, 5 August -- Tonkin Gulf time) was to permit Constellation to
approach within reasonable range of the targets. Target lists from which to
make appropriate selections were already available as a result of routine
contingency planning accomplished in June and July. In preparation for
the resumed DE SCTO Patrol of 3-5 August, the patrol track was moved farther
north to make clearer the separation between it and the 34-A operations. 36/
The ways in which the events of the second Tonkin Gulf incident came about
give little indication of a deliberate provocation to provide opportunity
for reprisals. “

BROADENING THE IMPACT

There is no question, however, that the second incident was promptly ;
exploited by the Administration. The event was seized upon as an opportunity

.

it TOP SECRET - Sensitive
