ee

ee ee eS EEE

——

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and of divergent approaches between, in the initiel steps, the U.S.
(focused on security measures) and Diem (concerned more with control
measures). Since the physical actions to achieve security and those
to impose control are in many respects the same, there was generated
yet another erea in which assessments of progress would be inconclusive
and difficult to make.

U.S. attention, once an apparent consensus had been forged con-
centrated on program management efforts in two categories: to convince
GVN to proceed at a more measured, coherent pace with a qualitative
improvement in the physical construction of strategic hamlets; and to
schedule material assistance (fortification materials, etc.) and train-
ing for local defense forces to match the rate of desired hamlet con-
struction,

U.S. assessments, at the seme time, concentrated on the physical
aspects of the program and on VC activity in areas where strategic
hamlets had been constructed. Assessments tended to be favorable from
a security (or control) viewpoint and uneven with respect to political
development. The general conclusion was almost always one of cautious
optimism when security (control) was emphasized, one of hopeful pessi-
mism when political follow-up was stressed. The impression in Washing-
ton was typically slanted toward the more optimistic appraisals if for
no Other reason than that hamlet construction and security arrangements
were the first chronological steps in the long process to pacification.
Was it not, after all, "progress" to have moved from doing nothing to
doing something even though the something was being done imperfectly?

These U.S. assessments changed only marginally throughout the life
of the program. By the time, in 1963, thet the hopeful pessimist voices
were clearer, it was also much clearer that the Ngo brothers had made
the Strategic Hamlet Program into one closely identified with their
regime and with Diem's rather esoterically phrased "personalist revolu-
tion." Fears grew that Diem was attempting to impose loyalty from the
top through control rather than to build it from the bottom by deeds.
These fears were not limited to the Strategic Hamlet Program, however;
they extended to urban as well as rural phases of South Vietnamese life
and were subsumed, as the Buddhist question moved to the fore, by the
general issue of the viability of Diem's regime.

President Diem grew increasingly unwilling to meet U.S. demands for
reform. He believed that to do so would cause his government to fail.
U.S. observers held that failure to do so would cause the nation, not
just the goverrment to fall. In the event the government fell end the
nation's counterinsurgent program took a definite turn for the worse,
put the nation did not fall. The Strategic Hamlet Program did. Closely
identified with the Ngo brothers, it was almost bound to suffer their
fortunes; when they died it died, too. The new govermment of generals,
presumably realizing the extent of peasant displeasure with resettlement
and control measures, did nothing to save it.

iv TOP SECRET Sensitive
