Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The debate within the Defense Establishment continued into the fol-
lowing day. In a memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, dated 2 March,
Assistant Secretary of Defense Warnke gave his answer to General Wheeler's
"two fatal flaws" of the population control strategy.

1. Increasing Fighting in the Cities. General Wheeler

is concerned that the proposed strategy will mean increased
fighting in or close to population centers and, hence, will
result in increased civilian casualties. This argument over-
looks, I believe, the fact that the enemy demonstrated during
the TET offensive his willingness and ability to attack
populated centers regardless of our strategy. He is demon-
strating that capability again right now in the Quang Tri-Hue
area and may soon do so in the Delta. If the enemy continues
to choose to fight in the cities, we will have no choice

but to engage him in those areas at the cost of civilian
casualties. The proposed strategy may actually reduce civilian
casualties if we can succeed in attacking enemy concentrations
before he can attack the cities. Moreover, in attacking the
cities, the enemy will face American as well as ARVN forces
engaged in offensive patrolling operations around the cities.
This should result in fewer casualties than have come from the
liberation of cities in the post-TET period. By freeing

forces now engaged along the DMZ and in lightly populated high-
lands for active offensive operations near population centers,
we should make the enemy effort against cities less effective.

2. Enemy Ability to Mass Near Population Centers. General

Wheeler's concern that under the proposed strategy the enemy
will be more capable of massing near population centers north
of Saigon is difficult to understand. In fact, prior to TET,
because we were operating primarily along the coast, along the
DMZ, and in the highlands, we were permitting the enemy to
mass along the demographic frontier as he did prior to the TET
offensive. In fact, one of the advantages of the new strategy
is that we will be able to keep the enemy off-balance in this
area. General Wheeler may believe we advocate a posture of
static defense. This is not true. In the strategy sketched in
the paper, one of the primary missions of U.S. forces would be
to operate in this area, remain highly mobile and carry out
attacks against suspected enemy base camps. 59/

h3 2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
