Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

14. President Truman informs Hurley (China) that it was agreed
at Potsdam to divide Indochina at latitude 16° north for
operational purposes: the south going to Southeast Asia
Command (SEAC) and the north going to the China theater.
Hurley is urged to get Chiang Kai-shek's concurrence.
Truman telegram to Hurley from Berlin, 1 Avgust 1945.......... 44

15. William J. Donovan, Director of the Office of Strategic
Services (OSS), reports on the French attitude toward
the Indochina Provisional Government to the Secretary
of State. A French committee was to negotiate with
Annamite leaders on terms favorable to Indochina; the
French were to act as advisors to the Indochina Pro-
visional Government with the power to sign treaties
for France. Annamite leaders, however, expressed the de-
Sire to have status as an American protectorate, exclud-
ing both French and Chinese occupation. Threats of

“violence over a French reoccupation were made. Memoran-
dum by Donovan for Secretary of State, 22 August 1945. .....-+. 45

16. Dean Acheson, Acting Secretary of State, reasserts U.S.
policy toward French control of Indochina to the Chargé
in China (Robertson). The U.S, neither opposed nor
assisted re-establishment of French control in Indo-
china, Robertson was told. The U.S. "willingness" to
see French control is based on the future outcome of
French claims of popular support. Acheson 1622 to
Rober isons 5 Octeber IO4G=.ssncc'sencicces aceon vines sleceeeaseenen AO

17. Caffery (Paris) informs Secretary of State of the
Franco-British agreement on Indochina which recog-
nizes the French Civil Administration as sole author-
ity in Indochina south of the 16th parallel. Caffery
6006 to Secretary of State, 12 October 1OK5. weesecssccccovvee HQ

18. Caffery reports that de Gaulle rejected announcing a
far-reaching, progressive policy designed to give
Indochinese greater authority, representation, and
responsibility in government under the pretext of
the state of disorder which prevailed in Indochina.
De Gaulle felt that "no such policy could be imple-
mented pending restoration of French authority.” °
Caffery 6857 to Secretary of State, 28 November 1945......... 50

1946

19. Matthews requests direction from Acheson on transfer
of Lend-Lease vehicles from the British to the French
in Indochina. Acheson replies that President Truman
thought the U.S. should agree to the transfer. Acheson-
Matthews motes, 18 January JONG. ccccccssemsscessceecsssseuese 52

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive

