Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRUT - Sensitive

oes

entirely to strategic hamlets; the office of Prime
Minister to be created and Mr. Thuan to become Prime
Minister; Archbishop Thue to leave the country. In
addition, the students and Buddhists would be liberated;
Decree Law 10 would be repealed; the pagodas would be
repaired and conciliatory gestures would be made. All
of this, if agreed to, might be announced by President
in Washington. 61/

These suggestions became the basis of discussion of a "where do we go
from here" NSC meeting on the same day.

In the absence of the President, Secretary Rusk chaired the meeting
at the State Department, and called for consideration of the Lodge
proposals, but said he felt it was unrealistic to start off by asserting
that Nhu must go. 62/ Secretary MclNemara urged that we “establish
quickly and firmly our line of communication between Lodge, Harkins and
the GVN." He pointed out that "at the moment our channels of communica-
tion are essentially broken" and that "they should be reinstituted at
all costs." 63/ These considerations were soon submerged, however, in
a broader discussion of the negative impact of the regime's actions on
the war effort. Hilsman, supported by State's Kattenburg of the Vietnam
Working Group, argued that we should not continue our support of a Nhu-
dominated regime because its repressive policies would eventually have
a disastrous effect on the war, even if the statistics did not yet reveal
their negative impact. 64/ Hilsman and Kattenburg pointed to the growing
disaffection and restiveness of middle level bureaucrats and military
officers as a factor which would steadily erode the military effort. 65/
Unconvinced, both Secretary McNamara and General Taylor asked for evidence
of this development,

Kattenburg offered his estimate that we would be thrown out of the
country in six months if the regime remained in power and that the
question the meeting should be considering was "the decision to get out
honorably." 66/ Taylor and Nolting immediately took exception to these
views and Secretary Rusk remarked that they were "largely speculative." 67/
He continued, "that it would be far better for us to start on the firm
basis of two things -- that we will not pull out of Vietnam until the war
is won, and that we will not run a coup." 68/ Secretary McNemara and
Vice President Johnson supported Rusk's views, the Vice President saying
he had never really seen an alternative to Diem. The meeting ended incon-
clusiyely; the only decision taken was to ask for Lodge's advice,

As the only documented meeting during this period of major policy
deliberation, the August 31 meeting is significant for the viewpoints
it reveals. Rembling inability to focus the problem, indeed to reach
common agreement on the nature of the problem, reflects disorientation
in the aftermath of the initial failure. More importantly, however, the
meeting is the first recorded occasion in which someone followed to its
logical conclusion the negative analysis of the situation -- i.e., that
the wer could not be won with the Diem regime, yet its removal would

22 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
