Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201!

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to the Government. In fact, estimates at the time of
my departure indicated that there was a very limited
number of hostile individuals under arms in the country.
Two territorial regiments, reinforced occasionally by
one or two regular army regiments, were able to cope
with their depredations.'

"That would indicate a far greater degree of internal stability
in Vietnam than that which existed 4 years ago; would it not?

"MR. DURBROW. Yes, sir.

"SENATOR MANSFIELD. I read further from Major General Myers'
statement. Speaking of the Vietnamese armed forces, he says, and
T quote:

"They are now able to maintain internal ‘security and
have reached the point where that responsibility could
be turned over to the civilian agencies. If there should
be renewed aggression from the north on the part of the
Vietminh, they can give a really good account of themselves.
There are many Vietnamese who are even more optimistic
than that statement implies and feel that they have the
capability of counterattack.'

"That statement would indicate, would it not, considerable
reduction of the danger of invasion from the north as it existed
h years ago, or at least a far greater capacity to cope with it;
would it not?

"MR. DURBROW. I would say the latter, sir.

"SENATOR MANSFIELD. A far greater capacity to cope with it?
"MR. DURBROW. Because there are still Communists around, the
danger is always there, ever present. But the possibility of

countering it is much greater than it was before....

"SENATOR MANSFIELD: What is the nature and purpose of military
aid in Vietnam at the present time?

"GENERAL WILLIAMS (Chief, MAAG, Vietnam). I would answer that

in this way: The purpose of military aid in Vietnam is to enable
the Vietnumese armed forces to provide for the internal security
of their country and act as a deterrent against outside aggression.

"SENATOR MANSFIELD. Would that explanation hold for 1955 as well?

"GENERAL WILLIAMS. Yes, sir....

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
