Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

We have no ambition there for ourselves. We seek no

dominion. We seek no conquest. We seek no wider war. But
we must all understand that we will persist in the defense

of freedom and our continuing actions will be those which
are justified and those that are made necessary by the con-
tinuing aggression of others.

‘These actions will be measured and fitting and adequate.
Our stamina and the stamina of the American people is equal
to the task.

Ambassador Taylor received the news of the President's new program ~
with enthusiasm. In his response, however, he explained the difficulties
he faced in obtaining authentic GVN concurrence"in the condition of
virtual non-government" which existed in Saigon at that moment. The
Vietnamese Armed Forces Council had arrogated unto itself the authority
of appointing the Chief of State and the Premier, and had left him to
his own devices in trying to form a cabinet. Any GVN concurrence that
Taylor could obtain would have to be a consensus of a lame-duck acting

'. prime minister, a widely mistrusted military commander-in-chief, a prime-

minister-designate with uncertain prospects, and assorted other power
figures in a foundering caretaker government. This Alice-in-Wonderland
atmosphere notwithstanding, Taylor was undaunted:

It will be interesting to observe the effect of our pro-
posal on the internal political situation here. I will use
the occasion to emphasize that a dramatic change is occurring
‘in U.S. policy, one highly fevorable to GVN interests but de-
manding a parallel dramatic change of attitude on the part of
the GVN. Now is the time to install the best possible govern-
ment as we are clearly approaching a climax in the next few
months. The U.S. Mission and the GVN will have serious prob-
lems to work out together, many of them complicated matters in
the field of foreign affairs where the GVN must strengthen its -
professional representation. We need the first team and we
need it fast.

There is just a chance that the vision of possible victory
may decide Khanh to take over the government at this juncture.
Alternately, it may create some measure of national unity which
will facilitate the task of Quat or of any other Prime Minister
who succeeds in forming a new government. 64/

Quat's chances for creating national unity -- even with the assist
of an imminent "dramatic change in US policy" -- were slim indeed. Quat's
government was the ninth attempt to form a viable structure since the
overthrow of Diem. It was obvious from the outset that it would be under
the domination of the Armed Forces Council which had publicly declared
that it would "act as a mediator until the government is popularly elected.

Bale. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
