Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

b. Depriving the VC of assistance within SVN by expanding the
counterinsurgency effort -- military, economic, and political -- within
SVN.

c. Continuing to seek a viable effective government in SVN
based on the broadest possible consensus.

d. Maintaining a military readiness posture in Southeast Asia
that:

(1) Denonstrates the U.S. will and capability to escalate
the action if required.

(2) Deters a major Commumist aggression in the area. 9/

The program recommended by the JCS included a list of actions
to be tsken within South Vietnam and a separate list of actions outside.
The Chiefs had listed them in order of increasing intensity, and they
requested authority "to implement now" the first six actions within the
country and the first eight outside. The letter included air strikes
by GVN/FARMGATE aircraft against Communist LOC's in Laos and in the
southern portion of North Vietnan. 10/

In the context of the reported worsening situetion in South
Vietnam, the JCS proposal was given serious consideration in OSD.
Since Ambassedor Taylor had expressed concern over initiating overt
pressures against North Vietnam "before we have a responsible set of
authorities to work with in South Vietnam,” a copy of the JCS paper
was forverded to him for review and comment. The OSD's stated intention
was to consider the Ambassador's views before developing a proposal to
present to President Johnson. 11/

: While this proposal was still wnder consideration (1 November
1964), Viet Cong forces attacked U.S. facilities at the Bien Hoa airbase
with Slmm mortar fire. Four American servicemen were killed, and five
B-57 tactical bombers were destroyed, and major demage was inflicted on
eight others. 12/

Administration attention was focused immediately on the question
of what the United States should do in response to the Bien Hoa provoca-
tion. It will be recalled that such an eventuality had been discussed
at the September Strategy meeting. The Presidential directive which
resulted from it stated: "We should be prepared to respond as appro-
priate ageinst the DRV in the event of eny attack on U.S. units or any
special DRV/VC action against SVN." 13/ As of the end of October (in
anticipation of resumed DE SOTO Patrols), élements of our Pacific forces
were reported as "voised and ready" to execute reprisals for any DRV
attacks on our naval vessels. Thus, there was a rather large expectancy
among Administration officials that the United States would do something
in retaliation, f

.
.

“3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
