Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

preferably a battalion of the lst Air Cav Division; or
alternatively, employment of a sweep against Pleiku,
including destruction of installations, rapid withdrawal,
and the ambush of reaction forces.

"The present disposition of enemy forces can be
analyzed in relation to such a strategy. Despite several
major defeats and heavy casualties, the enemy still main~
tains three divisions near the demilitarized zone. Elements
of these forces have infiltrated again into Quang Tri and
Thua Thien provinces. They pose a constant threat to terri-
tory and installations in Quang Tri and Thua Thien Provinces
and have forced the prolonged deployment of four US Marine
battalions and four ARVN battalions to northern Quang Tri
Province, enemy initiative in Quang Tri and Thua Thien has
increased during the past several months and is expected to
increase further. The enemy has the capability of launching
large scale attacks across the DMZ at any time. This is
not meant to imply that massive multi-division attacks
necessarily will occur. More probably, by an increased
buildup and tempo of coordinated main force/guerrilla opers,-
tions, the enemy may attempt to expand his forces southward
and gradually overwhelm the area below the DMZ. Whether by
attack or encroachment, such efforts would serve to force
the deployment of additional US and Vietnamese troops to the
area, and thereby thin out those forces in support of Revo-
lutionary Development. The enemy's deployment of a division
to Quang Ngai has served to increase his pressure in that
Province. His division formerly in Binh Dinh has been .
mauled by the lst Cavalry Division and either has dispersed
in Binh Dinh Province or has withdrawn to Quang Ngai. The
enemy division that was deployed to Phu Yen has been dis-
persed; however, one regiment has attempted to consolidate
itself in Khanh Hoa. The enemy's strategy in attempting to
pin down allied forces in the coastal areas in order to
divert attention from the highlands has been unsuccessful
thus far. However, his concentration of two divisions in
Cambodia west of Pleiku and Kontum Provinces has forced the
deployment of a minimum of four US battalions to the high-
dands to provide surveillance over the border areas. These
minimum forces had to be reinforced during the past year
from other areas, and further reinforcement probably will
be necessary during the coming month when these two North
Vietnamese Divisions ready themselves for offensive operations.
In the III Corps area the enemy has adopted a similar strategy.
He has deployed two divisions in the northwestern quadrant. of
the III Corps Tactical Zone and has been developing a base
and assembling a division in the mountainous and jungle-
covered areas of Phouc Tuy Province.

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
