Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

So, tonight, in the hope that this action will lead to
early talks, I am taking the first step to de-escalate the ~
conflict. We are reducing -- substantially reducing -- the
present level of hostilities.

And we are doing so unilaterally, and at once.

Tonight, I have ordered our aircrart and our naval vessels
+o make no attacks on North Vietnam, except in the area north
of the DeMilitarized Zone where the continuing enemy build-up
directly threatens allied forward positions and where the
movements of their troops and supplies are clearly related to
that threat.

The area, in which we are stopping our attacks includes
almost 90 percent of North Vietnam's population, and most of
its territory. Thus there will be no attacks around the
principal populated areas, or in the food-producing areas of
North Vietnam.

Even this very limited bombing of the North could come to
an early end -- if our restraint is matched by restraint in
Hanoi. But I eamnot in good conscience stop all bombing so
jong as to do so would immediately and directly endanger the
lives of our men and our allies. Whether 2 complete bombing
halt becomes possible in the future will be determined by
events.

Our purpose in this action is to bring about @ reduction in
the level of violence that now exists.

It is to save the lives of brave men -- and to save the lives
of innocent women and children, It is to permit the contending
forces to move closer to a political settlement.

And tonight, I call upon the United Kingdom and I call upon
the Soviet Union -- as co-chairmen of the Geneva Conferences, and
as permanent members of the United Nations Security Council ~--
to do all they can to move from the unilateral act of de-
escalation that I have just announced toward genuine peace in
Southeast Asia.

Now, as in the past, the United States is ready to send
its representatives to any forum, at any time, to discuss the
means of bringing this ugly war to an end.

82 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
