Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

said no, the San Antonio formula, all these things remain
there on the table for anyone who is interested in moving
‘toward peace. They're all there. But ‘Shey know where

we live and we'd be glad to hear from them sometime at their
convenience when they decide that they want to move toward
peace.

MR. ABEL. I'm assuming, sir, that the San Antonio
formula stands as our longer term position here.

SECRETARY RUSK. That is correct. 12/

These views of the Secretary of State were reinforced on
February 8 when the North Vietnamese, obviously in the flush of their
psychological victory, again broadcast a repudiation of the San Antonio
formula. Meanwhile, they had been engaged in secret contacts with the
U.S. through the Italian Foreign Office in Rome. On February 14, the
Italians disclosed that two representatives from Hanoi had visited Rome
on February 44 to meet Foreign Minister Fanfani "for talks about the
Vietnam conflict and about possible hypotheses of a start of negotiations
+o settle it." 13/ Washington was fully informed, yet Rusk announced
on the same day that all U.S. attempts to launch peace talks "have resulted
in rejection" by Hanoi and that there was no indication she would restrain
herself in exchange for a bombing halt. To this the President, at an
unscheduled news conference two days later, added that Hanoi was no more
ready to negotiate at that time than it had been three years previously. 14/
These reciprocating recriminations in the two capitals were the logical
outcome of such dramatic events as the Tet offensive. They would, however,
soon give way to cooler evaluations of the situation, presumably on both
sides.

The primary focus of the U.S. reaction to the Tet offensive
was not diplomatic, however. It was another reexamination of force
requirements for avoiding defeat or disaster in the South. On February 9,
McNamara. asked the Chiefs to provide him with their views on what forces
General Westmoreland would require for emergency augmentation and where
they should come from. The Chiefs replied on February 12 to the startling
effect that while the needs in South Vietnam were pressing, indeed per-
haps urgent, any further reduction in the strategic reserve in the U.S.
would seriously compromise the U.S. force posture worldwide and could not
be afforded. They reluctantly recommended deferring the requests of
General Westmoreland for an emergency augmentation. 15/ Rather, they
proposed & callup of reserves to meet both the requirements of Vietnam
augmentation in the intermediate future and to bring drawn-down forces in
the strategic reserve up to strength. The tactic the Chiefs were using
was clear: by refusing to scrape the bottom of the barrel any further
for Vietnam they hoped to force the President to “bite the bullet" on
the callup of the reserves ~~ @ step they had long thought essential,
and that they were determined would not now be avoided. Their views not-
withstanding, the Secretary the next day ordered an emergency force of

148 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
