Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

There had been more progress in efforts to create 4
national Vietnamese army, "an essential prerequisite to growth in the :
political stature of the Vietnamese government and to ultimate- non-
communist solution in Indochina," but "progress in the formation of
the Army is retarded by lack of capable officers at all levels of
command, shortages of equipment, and the apathetic attitude of the
populace." (Weaknesses in officers -- in large part the policy of
officer recruitment and promotion -- have fatally weakened Viet-
namese army Operations ever since.) In the end, the French neither
built a genuinely Vietnamese army, nor allowed the native armed force
any role or status which might have made it an effective adjunct of
nationalism.

On the conmunist side, the estimate noted that:

"The communist party role has been strengthened, with strict
party liners coming more into the foreground . . . in the
absence of further military victories, Viet Minh popular sup-
port appears unlikely to increase . . . while we are unable to
determine whether the Viet Minh is actually losing any of its
popular appeal, the regime apparently is dependent more and
more on tightened communist controls. .. . these tightened
controls may prevent defections and facilitate the exploita-
tion of people already under Viet Minh control."

Two years later, NIE-91 of 4 June 1953 continued to
emphasize the critical problems of lack of support for the Bao Dai
regime and lack of Indochinese will and ability to resist the Viet
Minh. Some political progress could be pointed to during the preceding
year, including local elections in secure areas, and decisions in
March 1953 to increase the size of the Vietnamese National Army;
and, a note that reads familiarly nearly fifteen years later:

“Another Vietnamese program, undertaken with U.S.
economic assistance, which involves the relocation of
scattered villages in the [fonkin/ delta into centralized
and defensible sites may be an important step toward the
eventual 'pacification' of heavily infiltrated areas."

However,

"Despite these advances, Vietnam still lacks the degree
of political strength essential for the mobilization of the
country's resources. TYTam's ‘action’ program remains more
shadow than substance. Elected local councils have no real
power, promised land reform and other social and economic
reforms which might generate popular support have not left

o TOP SECRET - Sensitive
