Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

within both the Army and the Marine Corps in Vietnam. It noted that
the Army was short of buck sergeants everywhere, rifle companies were
extremely short of non-commissioned officers, Marine Corps squads and
platoons were operating below acceptable manpower levels, and hundreds
of Marine enlisted men with infantry training were being jerked out of
other jobs and sent to combat units to replace men in battle. 4s/

Iucas had come remarkably close to the truth and as a consequence
the replies which were requested from the various service secretaries
tended to focus upon the more detailed criticisms of manpower levels
in different units in Vietnam, on military occupation specialty shortages,
etc. None of the internally generated replies really grappled with
the basic issue of whether or not the mobilization level was in fact
dictating force levels and requirements in Vietnam.

The 3 July edition of the New York Times featured another article
this time by Neil Sheehan, entitled "The Joint Chiefs Back Troop Rise
Asked by Westmoreland" in which he noted that 70,000 additional men
were needed to retain the U.S. initiative in the ground war. In this
article, again very perceptive and accurate, a large amount of detailed
information, supposedly classified, surfaced. The writer quoted the
Joint Chiefs of Staff as having warned the Johnson Administration that
if General William C. Westmoreland's minimum request for 70,000 more
troops was not met the United States would run "a high risk of losing
the initiative in the ground war in South Vietnam." 47] Sheehan noted
that the recommendation was submitted to Mr. McNamara on April 20
according to his sources and the administration had taken no action on
it. This was, of course, JCSM 218-67. Sheehan believed the inaction
on the COMUSMACV request was because the administration could not grant
the increase without a partial mobilization of Reserves and significant
rise in war costs--an estimate that was remarkably close to the truth.
In the article Sheehan also revealed discussions about two alternatives,
or what he called two levels of requirements, both of which he correctly
identified as the "optimum" and the "minimum essential.” He was a bit
short of the level of the optimum quoting it as only 5 divisions or
about 150,000 men. According to Sheehan's sources, Westmoreland had not
supported his request for the "optimum" with the detailed arguments,
apparently believing that he had little hope of obtaining it. But, the
general had argued strongly for his minimum requirement of two more
divisions with supporting units, about 70,000 men, warning that he needed
these troops to retain the initiative in South Vietnam. On the 4th of
July, Secretary McNamara sent a note to Mr. Phil Goulding, Public Affairs,
asking him to follow up with Secretary of the Army Resor for replies to
the charges made in the Sheehan article. On 5 July, Secretary Resor
replied that in view of the low fill levels for officers in the Seventh
Army, which reflected upon the overall Army readiness and which tended
to substantiate some of the charges Sheehan had made about the problem

193 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
