Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The summary CIA assessment was that ROLLING THUNDER
had not helped either to reduce the flow of supplies South or to shake
the will of the North:

The evidence available does not suggest that ROLLING
THUNDER to date has contributed materially to the achieve-
ment of the two primary objectives of air attack --
reduction of the flow of supplies to vc/NVA forces in the
South or weakening the will of North Vietnam to continue
the insurgency. ROLLING THUNDER no doubt has lessened
the capacity of the transport routes to the South -- put a
lower ‘cap’ on the force levels which North Vietnam can
support in the South -- but the 'cap' is well above present
logistic supply levels. 103/

The bombing had not succeeded in materially lowering morale among the
people, despite some “war weariness." The leaders continued to repeat
in private as well as public that they were willing to withstand even
heavier bombing rather than accept a settlement on less than their
terms. As to the future:

There may be some degree of escalation which would
force the regime to reexamine its position, but we
believe that as far as pressure from air attack is con-
cerned the regime would be prepared to continue the
insurgency indefinitely in the face of the current level
and type of bombing program. 10}/

A key factor in sustaining the will of the regime, according
to the CIA analysis, was the "massive" economic and military aid provided
by the USSR, China, and Eastern Europe. Economic aid to NVN from these
countries, which ran about $100 million a year on the averege prior to
the bombing, increased to $150 million in 1965 and $275 million in 1966.
Military aid was $270 million in 1965 and $455 million in 1966. Such
aid provided NVN with the "muscle" to strengthen the insurgency in the
South and to maintain its air defense and other military forces; and it
provided the services and goods with which to overcome NVN's economic
difficulties. So long as the aid continued, CIA said, NVN would be able
and willing to persevere "indefinitely" in the face of the current
ROLLING THUNDER program. 105/

The military view of why ROLLING THUNDER had failed in its
objectives in i966 was most forcefully given by Admiral Sharp, USCINCPAC,
in a briefing for General Wheeler at Honolulu on January 12, 1967.

Admiral Sharp described three tasks of the air campaign in achieving

its objective of inducing Hanoi to "cease supporting, controlling, and
directing" the insurgency in the South: "(1) reduce or deny external
assistance; (2) increase pressures by destroying in depth those resources
that contributed most to support the aggression; and (3) harass, disrupt
and impede movement of men and materials to South Vietnam." 106/ CINCPAC

179 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
