Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

General Lansdale seems on sound ground in arguing that
continued nagging, let alone stronger pressures, to win Diem's
acceptance of political changes he did not want and which he regarded
as specific threats to his regime, could only subtract from Diem's
confidence in the U.S. This in turn imperiled hopes of winning his
cooperation on military measures believed crucial to security.
Nevertheless, the State Department endorsed the Ambassador's notions
for continued representations to Diem on the urgency of political
reforms, and instructed him to follow up his 14 October demarche on
the liberalization of his regime. In his approach to Diem, the
Department suggested the Ambassador follow the line:

". + « Would prefer, for moment, put aside questions internal
reforms GVN calculated primarily increase its efficiency (such
as Internal Security Council) and focus on liberalization since
any announcements GVN makes this subject will be matter great
public interest . .. " (Underlining added)
" , « « It Embassy's observation events November 11 and 12,
whatever their cause, have led to increased atmosphere uneasiness
and some doubt projected reforms will be adequate (Embtel 1151).
This adds emphasis to basic premise against which, we believe,
program of liberalization should be tested: it should be
genuine, if limited, liberalization on several fronts to be
announced simultaneously . . . if liberalization not clear
cut and genuine and not made on several fronts, public will
Feel deceived and GVN will lose rather than gain popular
support . .. " (Deptel 898 to AmEmbassy Saigon, 15 December
1960, pp. 1-2)

The Department picked out several "liberalization"
measures from the 14 October demarche, including the right of the
National Assembly to investigate the GVN; greater freedom for domestic
press; better relations with the foreign press; and several rural
measures.

Durbrow reported on the resulting conversation with Dien:
" ,. . . While Diem was pleasant during hour and three-
quarters of discussions, he was basically negative. Diem did
not reply to my remarks immediately but insisted essential have
additional 20,000 troops since would do no good to try to put
in reforms, build factories, roads and bridges, etc., unless
these things and people could be protected. He referred several
times to the need for 20,000 men stressing need because of
deteriorating Lao situation. I then remarked we had just learned
that he had increased: force level of civil guard to 64,000 and
asked if this increase would not fill security force needs.

78 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
