Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Even if the enemy stands and fights as he did before
TET, the results can only be disappointing in terms of
attriting his capability.

Over the past year the United States has been killing
between 70 and 100 ve/iNVA per month per U.S. combat bat-
talion in theater. The return per combat battalion deployed
has been falling off, but even assuming that additional
deployments will double the number of combat battalions,
and assuming that the kill-ratios will remain constant, we
could expect enemy deaths, at best, on the order of magni-
tude of 20,000 per month, but the infiltration system from
North Viet Nam alone could supply 13,000-16,000 per month,
regardless of our bombing pattern, leaving the remainder --
4,000 -- to be recruited in South Viet Nam -- a demonstrably
manageable undertaking for the VC.

The current strategy thus can promise no early end to
the conflict, nor any success in attriting the enemy or
eroding Hanoi's will to fight. Moreover, it would entail
substantial costs in South Viet Nem, in the United States,
and in the rest of the world. 50/

These substantial costs, the paper indicated, would indeed preclude
the attainment of U.S. objectives. In South Vietnam,

«the presence of more than 700,000 U.S. military can
mean nothing but the total Americanization of the war.
There is no sign that ARVN effectiveness will increase,
and there will be no pressure from the U.S. or the GVN for
ARVN to shape up if the U.S. appears willing to increase
its force levels as necessary to maintain a stalemate in
the country.

The effect on the GVN would be even more unfortunate.
The Saigon leadership shows no signs of a willingness--let
alone an ability--to attract the necessary loyalty or sup-
port of the people. It is true that the GVN did not totally
collapse during TET, but there is not yet anything like an
urgent sense of national unity and purpose. A large influx
of additional U.S, forces will intensify the belief of the
ruling elite that the U.S. will continue to fight its war
while it engages in backroom polities and permits wide-
spread corruption. The proposed actions will also generate
inereased inflation, thereby reducing the effectiveness of
the GVN and making corruption harder to control. Reform
of the GVN will come only when and if they come to believe
that our continued presence in South Viet Nam depends on
what the GVN does. Certainly, a U.S. commitment to a sub-
stantial troop increase before the GVN conmits itself to
reform’ and action can only be counterproductive. Whatever

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
