Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Defense~President trio, it went to the major field commanders charged
with its execution as well. Events, as much conscious rational deci-
sions, were to shape the outcome of the disagreement, but before the
gap was closed, and people began to understand (if not accept) the
dynamic and complex nature of our objectives in South Vietnam the
divergence between Washington policy and the ground direction of the
war was to assume important proportions.

4. The Strategic Concept Under Fire: Seeds of Doubt

State Department concern about the current strategic concept
paralleled the debate in DoD. A paper prepared in Under Secretary
Katzenbach's office historically analyzed the evolution (or more pre-
cisely non-evolution) of the strategic concept in Vietnam. It observed
that:

"Basic precepts behind the counterinsurgency doctrine
have survived in principle but have been little applied in
practice. As program has succeeded program, not only have
the principal deficiencies in implementation become increas-
ingly clear, but it has also become evident that these
deficiencies have been essentially the same ones from the
outset. They may be summarized as follows:

1. With rare exceptions arising from the
attributes of individual commanders, the Vietnamese
Army (ARVN) has never escaped from its conventional
warfare mold. Both in its military tactics and in
its relations with the people, it has all too often
acted counter to the basic principles of counterinsur-
gency rather than in support of them. The US military
leadership in Vietnam has, on balance, done littie
to reorient ARVN toward counterinsurgency. In the
meantime, the paramilitary forces, locally recruited
and locally based and theoretically the backbone of
any counterinsurgency effort, have been repeatedly
ignored or misused.

2. Despite elaborate planning and creation of
machinery to execute and sustain a combined political-
military pacification campaign, relatively few Viet-
namese leaders have clearly understood the goals of
pacification or articulated them effectively through
the supporting administrative apparatus. Some leaders
have viewed pacification largely in a military con-
text while others, however committed to the political
principles involved, have lacked either a pragmatic
appreciation of their impact on the peasant or a
willingness to approach pacification in revolutionary
terms.

13 | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
