Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"General Westmoreland states thst individual
encadrement of ARVN units neither required nor feasible."

Instead the plan was to "brigade" U.S. forces with ARVN troops.
Consideration of the issue was ended with the understanding that General
Westmoreland "will submit a written statement describing the command re-
lationships which will prevail when U.S. forces are engaged in offensive
conibat actions, alone or with Vietnamese or other forces."

The introduction of U.S, Army Civil Affairs teams into the pro-
vineial government structure was also considered at Honolulu. It was
decided to experiment in three provinces with U.S, teams designed to pro-
vide ample civil as well as military initiative and advice. At least one
of the three teams was to be headed by a civilian. Ambassador Taylor
was instructed to seek the concurrence of GVN, "recognizing that a large
number of questions must be worked out subsequently.” 25/

Early in May, General Westmoreland submitted his detailed command
concept. It traced the evolution of the relationship between U.S. and
ARVN armed forces. Initially, U.S. forces were strictly advisory. In the
period from 1960 to 1962 the U.S, had in addition provided military capa-
bilities such as helicopters and tactical air support. The advisory effort
was extended to ARVN battalions, and advisors accompanied units into com-
bat. With the large scale commitment of U.S. ground forces in Vietnam,

a logical extension of this evolution was the suggested command concept
of coordination and cooperation. Operational control of each nation's
forces was normally to be exercised by commanders of that nation.

COMUSMACV envisioned that the initial mission of U.S. forces
would be security of base areas, a function to be coordinated throvgh
senior ARVN commanders. Subsequent deep patrolling and offensive opera-
tions by U.S. forces would occur within specified Tactical Areas of Re-
sponsibility (TAOR's) with ARVN in separate and clearly defined areas.
Eventually, on search and destroy operations, U.S. forces would provide
combat support at the request of the senior RVNAF commander. The U.S.
commander would move to the RVNAF command post to agree on details, but
close and intricate maneuver of units of the two nations’ forces was to be
avoided. 26/

This Saigon proposal did not settle the matter. SecDef urged
formation of a joint command with GVN and the creation of a “small com-
bined coordinating staff to be jointly headed by COMUSMACV and CINCRVNAF"
as a useful device at this stage of development of the U.S. force struc-
ture. 27/

There were continuing indications from USG representatives in
Saigon of a sensitivity to South Vietnamese criticism that the United
States acted as though we were fighting all by ourselves. On May 17,
Ambassador Taylor felt it wise to relay to Washington a Saigon Post
colum to that effect. 28/

if TOP SECRET - Sensitive
