Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

whole rationale for contempleted U.S. courses of action. He asked
whether the situation in South Vietnam could be improved in time to
save it if the DRV were now to withdrew its support. CIA Director
McCone conceded that the VC would still have plenty of capability
remaining but exoressed the view that the situation could be coped
with from the standpoint of internal security criteria. At this point
Under Secretary of State George Ball asked if bombing North Vietnam
could improve the situation in South Vietnam directly. McNamara re-
plied that it could not unless the bombing actually cut down the infil-
tration into the South. After agreeing with a Rusk comment that the
struggle would be a long one, even with the DRV out of it, the group
reached consensus that South Vietnam could be made secure, provided the
Saigon government could maintain itself. 114/ This was the first of
several major policy judgments reached in the course of the meeting.

Other points of clear consensus (with no more than a single
dissenting opinion) were as follows:

(2) That the situation in South Vietnam would deteri-
orate further under Option A even with reprisals,
but that there was a "significant chence” that the
actions proposed under "B" or "C" would result in
an improved GVij performance and "make possible" an
improved security situation (George Ball indicated
doubt) .

(3) That any negotiating outcome under Option A (with
-or without U.S. negotiating participation) probably
would be clearly worse than under Option B or C.

(4) That it was doubtful (contrary to the view expressed
in the Working Group papers) that Option B would
have the best chance of achieving the full U.S. ob-
jectives (General Wheeler expressed agreement with
the Working Group statement).

(5) That the requirement of Option C, "that we maintain
@ credible threat of major action while at the same
time seeking to negotiate," could be carried out
despite acknowledged public pressures.

(6) That the Administration could safely assume that
'- South Vietnam could "only come apart for morale
reasons, and not in a militery sense,” as a result
of intensified VC effort.

(7) That early military actions against North Vietnam
under Option C should be determined, but low in
scale -- that at this stage, strong damaging actions

* 39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
