Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

US aircraft during the period 1 May through 31 May. This one
month expenditure equates to 2600 metric tons in missile hard-
ware (consumables used in delivering missiles to launch pad
not considered). MIG jet fuel consumption for a one-month
period is estimated to be approximately 7,500 metric tons
(resources expended to accomplish delivery not included).

AAA munitions-firing equates to approximately 18,000 metric
tons per month. Based on the CIA estimate of 5300 metric
tons per day import rate, it is notable that the enemy is
willing to use up to 15% of his total imports (by weight)

in air defense. Most of this tonnage is used in defense of
the industrial/economic structure in Route Packages V and VI.
Even though 83% of all US attack sorties are flown in Route
Packages I-IV, the enemy has not expended an equivalent
amount of air defense consumables to protect this area. It
ean be assumed he would, which should add to the probability
of increased losses to ASA/SA~2 south of 20", if we greatly
reduce attacks north of 20°. 173/

Brown's political point was familiar but had not been stated
quite so precisely in this particular debate. Bombing was regarded by
Brown as an indivisible blue chip to be exchanged in toto for some
reciprocity by the North Vietnamese, a condition that did not seem likely
in the present circumstances. Once stopped, the bombing would be extremely
aifficult to resume even if the DRV stepped up its infiltration and its
half of the war generally. Moreover, the timing for such a halt was bad
with the South Vietnamese elections only two months away.

With respect to the loss rates in the various parts of the
country, Brown noted that losses in Route Packages IVA & B had declined
dramatically over the preceding year, even though the DRV was expending
far more resources to combat the sorties. If bombing were suspended
north of 20° we could expect the DRV to redeploy much of its anti-aircraft
resources into the panhandle thereby raising the currently low loss rates
there. Since bombing effectiveness in the northern area was marginally
more productive, the return pure aircraft loss overall would decline by
“such a geographical limitation of the air war. 174/

It is not clear what impact this line of analysis had on
McNamara, but since he had previously gone on record in favor of alter-
native B, and no other new evidence or argumentation appears before the
final decision in mid-July to adopt alternative C, it seems very likely
that Brown's thinking swayed his oral recommendations to the President.
Reinforcing Brown's analysis was the internal U.S. Government rejection

yet TOP SECRET - Sensitive
