Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"We still have the feeling that the Viet Cong are regroup-
ing in the provinces in the northern half of the country and
are probably preparing some kind of offensive action. However,
there are a few indications that suggest that Viet Cong morale |
may be dropping. They have given up four major arms caches
during the month without a sustained fight and the number of
defectors during the week (129 Viet Cong military personnel and
23 political cadre) is the highest defection figure since weekly
statistics were initiated in January 196}.

"On the manpower side, unaudited figures indicate that
government military and paramilitary forces increased by some ;
10,000 during the month of March of whom two-thirds were
volunteers. This rate exceeds the target of 8,000 accessions
per month which we had considered the best the government could
do with a maximum effort.

"Quat continued his program of provincial visits, making a
tour of the Delta area from which he returned full of new ideas
and bubbling with enthusiasm.. He was quite impressed with the
senior officers whom he met in the IV Corps and, as always, en-
joyed talking to the country people who assembled to greet him.

"His principal concern remains the unruly generals and the
continued evidence of lack of unity in the senior officers corps.
You have probably noted the case of insubordination in the Navy
wherein several senior naval officers petitioned the removal of
Admiral Cang, the Chief of Naval Operations. Quat is handling
‘this matter routinely by a board of inquiry but is disturbed by
this new evidence of lack of discipline in the armed forces. In
his campaign to bring the generals under some kind of control,
he is about to take the step of abolishing the position of
‘Commander-in-Chief, while increasing the functions of the Minis-
ter of National Defense. This is a move in the right direction
but his troubles will not end as long as the military command
structure is clouded by the presence of the Armed Forces Council.
Quat is fully aware of this problem and intends to resolve it,
but slowly and cautiously.

"Your John Hopkins speech and the reply to the 17-nation
overture attracted much attention in Saigon where the reaction
was generally very favorable. As one might expect, the phrase
"unconditional discussion" brought forth considerable editorial
comment, but the conclusion was that the term suggested no real
difference in aims between the Vietnamese and the United States
Government. On two occasions, I have urged Quat to sit down with
Alex Johnson and me to discuss various alternative courses of
international political action which may require consideration

43 TOP. SECRET - Sensitive
