Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Having successfully carried off their coup, the generals began to
make arrangements for a civilian government. Vice President Tho was named
to head a largely civilian cabinet, but General. Minh became President and
Chairman of the shadow Military Revolutionary Council. After having delayed
an appropriate period, the U.S. recognized the new government on November 8.
As the euphoria of the first days of liberation from the heavy hand of the
Diem regime wore off, however, the real gravity of the economic situation
and the lack of expertise in the new government became apparent to both
Vietnamese and American officials. The deterioration of the military situa-
tion and the strategic hamlet program also came more and more clearly into
perspective.

These topics dominated the discussions at the Honolulu Conference on
November 20 when Lodge and the country team met with Rusk, McNamara, Taylor,
Bell, and Bundy. But the meeting ended inconclusively. After Lodge had
conferred with the President a few days later in Washington, the White House
tried to pull together some conclusions and offer some guidance for our con-
tinuing and now deeper involvement in Vietnam. The instructions contained
in NSAM 273, however, did not reflect the truly dire situation as it was to
come to light in succeeding weeks. The reappraisals forced by the new
information would swiftly make it irrelevant as it was "overtaken by events."

For the military coup d'etat against Ngo Dinh Diem, the U.S. must
accept its full share of responsibility. Beginning in August of 1963 we
variously authorized, sanctioned and encouraged the coup efforts of the
Vietnamese generals and offered full support for a successor government.
In October we cut off aid to Diem in a direct rebuff, giving a green light
to the generals. We maintained clandestine contact with them throughout
the planning and execution of the coup and sought to review their operational
plans and proposed new government. Thus, as the nine-year rule of Diem
came to a bloody end, our complicity in his overthrow heightened our re-
sponsibilities and our commitment in an essentially leaderless Vietnam.

viii | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
