Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

-TOP SECRET - Sensitive

operating for certain private interests, At the same time,
thousands of persons are mobilized for exhausting work, com~
pelled to leave their own jobs, homes and families, to par-
ticipate in the construction of magnificent but useless
“agrovilles" which weary them and provoke their disaffection,
thus aggravating popular resentment and creating an ideal
terrain for enemy propaganda.

The economy is the very foundation of society, and public
opinion ensures the survival of the regime. The government
must destroy all the obstacles standing in the way of econ-
omic development; must abolish all forms of monopoly and
speculation; must create a favorable environment for invest-
ments coming from foreign friends as well as from our own
citizens; must encourage commercial enterprises, develop
industry, and create jobs to reduce unemployment. At the
same time, it should put an end to all forms of human exploi-
tation in the work camps of the agrovilles.

Then only the economy will flourish again; the citizen
will find again a peaceful life and will enjoy his condition;
society will be reconstructed in an atmosphere of freedom and
democracy.

Mr. President, this is perhaps the first time that you
have heard such severe and disagreeable criticism ~~ so
contrary to your own desires. Nevertheless, sir, these words
are strictly the truth, a truth that is bitter and hard, that
you have never been able to know because, whether this is in-
tended or not, a void has been created around you, and by the
very fact of your high position, no one permits you to per-~
ceive the critical point at which truth shall burst forth in
irresistible waves of hatred on the part of a people subjected
for a long time to terrible suffering and a people who shall
rise to break the bonds which hold it down, It shall sweep
away the ignominy and all the injustices which surround and
oppress it.

As we do not wish, in all sincerity, that our Fatherland

should have to live through these perilous days, we -~ without
taking into consideration the consequences which our attitude
may bring upon us -- are ringing today the alarm bell in view

of the imminent danger which threatens the government,

Until now, we have kept silent and preferred to let the
Executive act as it wished. But now time is of the essence;

39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

