Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy, like so many others,
found himself in between Westmoreland and Ball. The U.S. needed to avoid
the ultimatum aspects of the 44 battalions and also the Ball withdrawal
proposal, both of which were undesirable in Bundy's estimation. On
1 July, Bundy suggested to the President that the U.S. should adopt a
policy which would allow it to hold on without risking disasters of scale
if the war were lost despite deployment of the full 44 battalions. For
the moment, according to Bundy, the U.S. should complete planned deploy-
ments to bring in-country forces to 18 maneuver battalions and 85,000
men. The Airmobile Division and the remainder of the lst Division should
be brought to a high state of readiness, but the decision as to their
deployment should be deferred. By so acting the U.S. would gain time in
which to work diplomatically to realign Southeast Asia and thereby salvage
its honor and credibility. The forces in Vietnam, which Bundy assumed
would be enough to prevent collapse, would be restricted to reserve .
reaction in support of RVNAF. This would allow for some experimentation
without taking over the war effort -- a familiar theme. Bundy felt, as .
did Ambassador Taylor, that there remained considerable uncertainty as
to how well U.S. troops would perform in the Vietnam environment. We
needed to find out before going big. 141/

E. The Influence of the President and This Secretary of Defense

It is difficult to be precise about the position of the Secretary
of Defense during the build-up debate because there is so little of him
in the files. In March, Ambassador Taylor sent to Saigon the following
description of the Secretary's views regarding the JCS's three-division
plan: 142/

"a. The JCS has recommended to the Secretary of Defense
the early deployment of a three division force with appropriate
combat and logistic support. This force would include the en-
tire MEF and I Corps area. An Army Division in the high plateau,
and a Korean Division, location unspecified. The Chairman, JCS
emphasized the urgent necessity to deploy a logistical command
and the forward deployment of tactical fighter squadrons as well
as the earliest possible construction of the airfield at Chu Lai
and a runway at Da Nang.

"b. Ambassador Taylor indicated that 3 divisions seemed
high; that Quat was not persuaded that more troops were neces-
sary; that anti-American sentiment lies just below the surface
and that finally there are two very real limitations on the
number and rate of introduction of U.S. and Third Country

' forces. First is the absorptive capacity of the country and
second logistical limitations.

"c, The Chairman, JCS outlined the importance of estab-
dishing a goal against which logistics planning could proceed.

106 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
