Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(4) Relieve the divisions of their primary responsibility
of fighting VC and leave them to pacification.

(5) By expression of COMUSMACV's concern, encourage inten-
sification of adviser efforts to solve the divisions'
underlying problems. If there were no improvement, with-
draw all advisers. If there were still no improvement,
withdraw, all MAP support.

COMUSMACV vetoed the last proposal and had it removed from the study.
His guidance was to avoid sanctions against GVN, to intensify the effort
to associate and integrate the 5th and 25th ARVN Divisions with the lst
and 25th U.S. Division, and to consider the possibility of greater U.S.
participation in pacification in Hau Nghia and Binh Duong provinces. 4d /

In April, a study based on exhaustive analysis of field adviser reports
and interviews was presented to RVINAF. It concerned itself with several
major problem areas; Leadership, discipline, and personnel management.

RVNAF reacted positively and quickly to the recommendations by establish-
ing a committee to develop a leadership program. 45/

In response to COMUSMACV guidance in May, J-5 studied courses of
action to produce more dynamic progress in the counterinsurgency effort
in RVN. It recommended establishing a Deputy COMUSMACV for RVNAF matters
as a way to influence RVNAF more. General Westmoreland said in his en-
dorsement that this step had already been taken with the appointment of
Brigadier General Freund as Deputy Assistant to COMUSMACV. At the same
time, he directed J-5 to review Brigadier General Freund's Terms of
Reference and recommend changes or extensions. The completed J-5 study
was forwarded to Chief of Staff Army on July 23, recommending that the
Special Assistant to COMUSMACV not be given responsibility for any portion
of the U.S. Advisory effort. 46/

Low personnel strength was another critical factor in ARVN effective-
ness. Only one of 22 battalions rated combat ineffective or marginally
effective in July did not report a shortage of personnel. COMUSMACV
advised Chief JGS to form an inspection team at general officer level to
inspect the strength situation of ARVN division. The Inspector General,
JGS, headed the team and was assisted by COMUSMACV's personal represen-
tative. The team began its inspection with the 25th Division. 47/

8. Economic Policy and the Port of Saigon, April-June 1966

As noted, this period saw rising pressure for renewed direct negotia-
tions with GVN. When the first phase of the Struggle Movement ended in
mid-April, Washington was thoroughly dissatisfied with accumulated delays
on the economic program agreed at Honolulu. The USG had gone ahead and
delivered on its side of the bargain, but GVN had done nothing. State
proposed the threat of sanctions; without apparently going that far, Lodge

F 27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
