Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Cooper submitted his report on 4 December. It was based on
(1) a State-sponsored updating of the so-called Jorden Report, which
described also the pDRv's direction, control and materiel support of
the insurgency (this hed been discussed during the policy discussions
in the Spring and initiated during the Summer); (2) the MACV infiltra-
tion study, based on interrogations of VC prisoners and completed in
October; and (3) reports from a DIA/CIA INR team who went to Saigon
in mid-liovember to evaluate the MACV report (they confirmed its validity).
His report consisted of four items: (1) a summary statement and a more
detailed public discussion of VC infiltration /T4B D/; (2) a list of
possible questions and suggested answers for use with the press or the
Congress; (3) "a reconciliation, or at least an explanation of past low
estimates of infiltration given in Congressional testimony and to the
press"; and (4) a listing of available documentary evidence and graphic
materials to aid in public presentations. In his covering memorandum,
Cooper urged that the materials be forwarded to Saigon so as to make
MACY and mmbassy officials fully aware of the proposed approach and to
make consistent its use by U.S. and GVN personnel. 183

The Cooper materials were forwarded for review to the Saigon
Embassy on 8 December, and to the Principals on the 9th. 184/ = Shortly |
thereafter, Secretary Rusk cabled Ambassador Taylor, expressing his
concern that early release of the infiltration data "would generate
pressures for actions beyond what we now contemplate." He sought
Taylor's advice as to whether release would be wise. In the Ambassador's
reply, he urged early release. He stated, "I do not feel that, at this
point, the substance of the release will generate pressure for extreme
action." Moreover, he expressed the view that release would serve to
quiet the currently rife speculation among news correspondents and parts
of the GVH concerning what the United States was intending to do in SVN.
Citing a New York Daily News article (7 December) as an example of what
he felt were increasingly likely leaks, he expressed his desire to make
planned deliberate announcements of what the United States was now doing
and what might be done in the future. He expressed his intention to
have the GVN release the report on infiltration, complete with press
briefings end statements, between 10-17 December. 185/

Despite strong recommendations from the field to release the
infiltration data, the Principals determined that it should not yet be
made public. During the first part of December, the chief advocate for
not releasing it was Secretary Mciamara. At their meeting on 12 December,
Mr. Vance stated that Mr. Mcllemara wanted to withhold the infiltration
date for the time being. His rationale was not recorded in the minutes.
The State Department opinion in response was that the Department "did not
consider it of any great moment." Thereafter, the Principals decided
that release should be withheld, at least until their next meeting,

19 December. 186/

By the time they met again, a week later, several expressions
of support for releasing the data had been received. On the llth '

64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
