Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"I have the honor to report that at his request, I re-
ceived a visit this morning from M. Ho Chi-minh, 'President
of the Republic of Viet-Nam', who confirmed the news pub-
lished in the local press that the Fontainebleau negotiations
between the Viet-Nam representatives and the French repre-
sentatives have practically broken down and the Viet-Nam
delegation will be returning to Indochina within the next
few days....He said that he and his party aspired to Viet-
Nam ‘independence’ in an ‘Union Francaise’. He said that
they would like to receive some 'help' from us, but did not
specify what he meant by that. He took occasion to say that
he was not a communist.

"From the general fuzziness of his remarks, I gathered
that he would like us to get into the game and he would be
very pleased if he could use us in some way or other in his
future negotiations with the French authorities.

"I expressed our interest in Indochina and the people
of Indochina but made no commitments.” 25/
fanderlining added/

Under Secretary of State Dean Acheson, for one, was not alto-
gether persuaded by Ho's representations. In December, 196, he cabled
a U.S. diplomat in Hanoi the following instructions:

"Assume you will see Ho in Hanoi and offer following
summary our present thinking as guide.

"Keep in mind Ho's clear record as agent international

communism, absence evidence recantation Moscow affiliations,

confused political situation France and support Ho receiving

French Communist Party. Least desirable eventuality would

be establishment Communist-dominated, Moscow-oriented state
Indochina in view DEPL, which most interested INFO strength
non-communist elements Vietnam. Report fully, repeating or
requesting DEPT repeat Paris....

"If Ho takes stand non-implementation promise by French
of Cochinchina referendum relieves Vietnam responsibility

compliance with agreements, you might if you consider advis-
able raise question whether he believes referendum after such

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

c-42
