Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

Nolting's second suggestion had been adopted and a high-level commission
had been named to settle the problem, The commission, headed by Vice
President Tho, met belatedly with the Buddhists on June 5.

On June 8, Truehart had an interview with Diem to protest Mme,
Whu's public criticism of the Buddhists, which was poisoning the atmos-
phere for a settlement. When Diem refused to disavow her statements,
Truehart threatened a U.S. “dissociation” from any future repressive
measures to suppress demonstrations. Truehart left the meeting with the
impression that Diem was more preoccupied with security measures than
with negotiations. 31/ Nolting's low-key policy had by now been abandoned,
both in Washington and in Saigon, in favor of a new tough line.

The situation was dramatically altered by the first Buddhist suicide
on June 11. Alarmed, the State Department authorized Truehart to tell
Diem that unless drastic action was taken to meet the Buddhist demands
promptly, the U.S, would be forced to state publicly its dissociation
from the GVN on the Buddhist issue. 12/ Truehart made his demarche on
June 12, Diem replied that any such U.S. announcement would have a
disastrous effect on the GVN-Buddhist negotiations. 13/ The negotiations
finally got under way in earnest June 1 and the joint communique was
issued June 16.

Truehart made repeated calls on Diem in late June and early July,
urging him in the strongest language to take some action indicating the
government's intention to abide in good faith by the June 16 agreement,
His efforts were unavailing. Diem was either noncommittal, or talked in
generalities about the difficulties of the problem.

On June 27, President Kennedy named Henry Cabot Lodge to replace
Ambassador Nolting effective in September, After a brief stop in
Washington, Nolting was hurried back to Saigon on July 11 to make one
last effort to get Diem to conciliate the Buddhists. Nolting, evidently
resenting the pressure tactics used by Truehart, met immediately with
Diem and tried to mollify him. 14/ He succeeded only in convincing Diem
to make the shallow gesture of the July 19 radio speech. Otherwise,

Diem merely persisted in appeals for public harmony and support of the
government, without any real attempt to deal with the Buddhist grievances.

Nolting spent his last month in Vietnam trying to repair U.S.~-GVN
relations and to move Diem to resolye the Buddhist crisis, but his
attempts were continually undercut by the Nhus both publicly and pri-
vately. They had grown increasingly belligerent about the Buddhists
during the summer, and by August spoke often of "crushing" them.
Washington asked Nolting to protest such inflammatory remarks, and began
to suspect Diem's capacity to conciliate the Buddhists in the face of
Nhu sabotage. Nolting was instructed to suggest to Diem that hme. Nhu
be removed from the scene. 15/ Nolting asked Diem for a public declara-
tion repudiating her remarks but after initially agreeing, Diem then
demurred and postponed it, 16/ Finally, as a parting gesture to Nolting,

he agreed on August 1 to make a statement. 17/ It came in the form of

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
