Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

our nation’s proper course of action.

"To begin, let us remember that traditionally this country and
its government have always been passionately devoted to peace with
honor, as they aie now. We shall never resort to force in settlement
of differences except when compelled to do so to defense against aggres-
sion and to protect our vital interests.

"Tis means that, in our view, negotiations and conciliation should
never be abandoned in favor of force and strife. While we shall never
timidly retreat before the threat of armed aggression, we would welcome
in the present circumstances negotiations that could have a fruitful
result in preserving the peace of the Formosa area and reaching a solu-
tion that could be acceptable to all parties concerned including, of
course, our ally, the Republic of China.

"On the morning of August 23rd the Chinese Communists opened a
severe bombardment of Quemoy, an island in the Formosa Straits off the
China Coast. Another island in the same area, Matsu, was also attacked.
These two islands haye always been a part of Free China--never under
Communist control.

"This bombardment of Quemoy has been going on almost continuously
ever since. Also Chinese Communists have been using their naval craft
to try to break up the supplying of Quemoy, with its 125,000 people.
Their normal source of supply is by sea from Formosa, where the govern-
ment of Free China is now located.

"Chinese Communists say that they will capture Quemoy. So far
they have not actually attempted a landing, but their bombardment has
caused great damage. Over 1,000 people have been killed or wounded.
In large part these are civilians.

"This is a tragic affair. It is shocking that in this day and age
naked force should be used for such aggressive purposes.

"But this is not the first time that the Chinese Communists have
acted in this way.

"In 1950 they attacked and tried to conquer the Republic of Korea.
At that time President Truman announced the intention of protecting
Formosa, the principal area still held by Free China, because of the
belief that Forrosa's safety was vital to the security of the United
States and the free world. Our government has adhered firmly ever since
1950 to that policy.

"In 1953 and 1954 the Chinese Communists took an active part in
the war in Indo-China against Viet Nam.

B-36
