Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

liberal breathing spell:

“. . . since undoubtedly true that elections might
eventually mean unification Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh this
makes it all more important they should be only held as
long after cease-fire agreement as possible and in condi-
tions free from intimidation to give democratic elements
fin South Vietnam/ best chance,"

And so far as "respect" of that agreement was concerned, the U.S. and
U.K. meant they

| "would not oppose a settlement which conformed to seven

Vo. points . .. . It does not of course mean we would guarantee
much settlement or that we would necessarily support it

publicly. We consider 'respect'’ as strong a word as we can

possibly employ in the circumstances . ... 'Respect' would

also mean that we would not seek directly or indirectly to

upset settlement by force.” 16/

1. dies; Representation at Geneva Influences Favorable Outcome
a, French Request High-Level U.S. Representation

The seven points, Dulles' clarification of the U.S. posi-
tion on elections in Vietnam, and his delimitation of the U.S. obligation
towards a settlement were for the most part satisfactory to the French.
But to Paris, the firm American position, to be influential at the
Conference, had to be supplemented by high-level representation, Other-
wise, Mendés-France argued, the French could not present a strong front
when Molotov and Chou resumed their places in the coming weeks. Answering
U.S. doubts, Mendés-France averred that the French bargaining position
was precisely in line with the seven points and would not deviate sub-
stantially from them. With great feeling, he told a member of the U.S.
Embassy in Paris that the presence of either the Secretary or the Under
Secretary was "absolutely essential and necessary.” 17/

b. Dulles Objects to High-Level U.S. Representative

The U.S. remained opposed to any proposal that implied
acceptance of the final terms. While recognizing Mendés-France's
difficulties in carrying on almost alone, Dulles firmly believed the
French would end by accepting a settlement unsatisfactory to the U.S. --
whether or not the U.S. delegation was upgraded. 18/ Moreover, were
the U.S. to send Smith or Dulles back to Geneva only to find the French
compelled to negotiate an unacceptable agreement, Washington would be
required to dissociate itself in a manner “which would be deeply resented
by the French as an effort on our part to block at the last minute a4

A-39 MOP SECRET - Sensitive
