Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

the announcements that the President, the Chief of State

and the Prime Minister made....You men who are responsible for
these departments, you ministers and the staffs associated
with them in both governments, bear in mind we are going to
give you an examination and the "finals" will be on just what
you have done.

».-How have you built democracy in the rural areas? How
much of it have you built, when and where? Give us dates,
times, numbers.

---Larger outputs, more efficient production to improve
credit, handicraft, light industry, rural electrification --
are those just phrases, high-sounding words, or have you
"coonskins on the wall?" 162/

All parties regarded it as necessary for some mechanism to coordinate
the U.S. advisory activities which would help the Vietnamese to turn
promises into solid accomplishments. But they did not agree on how broad
should be the unit of the coordinator. Was he, or his office, to be
primus inter pares or a single manager? Did effective coordination
require policy primacy or operational supervision -- or both? Above
all, the participants did not agree on which individual or agency should
exercise whatever supra-departmental authority was needed.

Ambassador Lodge, who had consistently stressed the centrality of
the "other war,” began by assigning responsibility for all civil support
for Revolutionary Development (read “pacification") to his deputy, —
Ambassador Porter. The latter described his concept of his duties in
traditionalist Foreign Service Officer terms:

Ambassador Porter described briefly his new responsi-
bilities as he sees them in the pacification/rural develop-
ment area. He pointed out that the basic idea is to place
total responsibility on one senior individual to pull together
all of the civil aspects of revolutionary development. He

sees this primarily as a coordinating effort and does not

intend to get into the middle of individual agency activities
and responsibilities. As he and his staff perceive areas
which require attention and action by a responsible agency,

he will call this to the attention of that agency for the
purpose of emphasis; he intends to suggest rather than to
criticize. 163/

Porter's “coordination by suggestion" approach was not only an example ;
of extremely limited effective authority, it was also restricted explicitly

72 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
