Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"maintaining law and order," of ensuring that its plans for further —
operations would be carried out, and of coping with "the enemy reactions
which must be expected to result" from changes in the current pattern of
operations. 154/

The White House discussions of U.S. consultation with other
allies were prefaced by the President's strong affirmation that we needed
“new dramatic, effective" forms of assistance from several of these
countries. Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the Philippines were speci-
fically mentioned. Secretary Rusk added that the U.K. also could do more.
A possible Republic of China contribution was discussed, but the Secretary
expressed concern that introduction of GRC combet units would tend to
merge the problem of Vietnam with the conflict between the two Chinese
regimes, Apparently, the Principals' proposal to send a representative
to the governments of Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines was
approved. In each case, the representative was to explain our concept
end proposed actions and request additional contributions by way of forces
in the event the second phase of U.S. actions were entered. Vice President-
elect Humphrey was suggested for consultations with the Philippine govern
ment. The President asked about the possibility of a West German contri-
bution, but Secretary Mcliemara emphasized thet German political problems
would inhibit such a pledge from Bonn. Finally, it was agreed that Am~
bassador Taylor would cable the particular kind of third country assis-
tance caf would be welcomed after he had a chance to consult with the
GVN. 155

At the close of the meeting, the White House released a press
statement which contained only two comments regarding any determinations
that had been reached. One reaffirmed "the basic United States policy
of providing all possible and useful assistance" to South Vietnam, a,
specifically linking this policy with the Congressional Joint Resolution
of 10 August. The other stated:

"The President instructed Ambassador Taylor to consult
urgently with the South Vietnamese Government as to
measures that should be taken to improve the situation
in all its aspects," 156/

During the subsequent press briefing, George Reedy indicated .
to reporters that Taylor would be working on the specific details On his
forthcoming conversations in Saigon "for another two to three days and
would have at least one more meeting with the President before his
return. 157/ However, it seems clear that most of what he would say
to GVNN officials was settled during the initial White House meeting. A
proposed text was appended to the Principals’ draft position paper, and
it is clear that this was discussed on 1 December. Apparently, the only
change made at that time was to remove a proposed U.S, pledge to furnish
air cover for the GVN maritime operations against the North Vietnamese

coast.’ 158/

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
