Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Many of the actions described in the succeeding
paragraphs fit right into the framework of the
[Pacification/ plan as announced by Khanh. Wherever

possible, we should tie our urgings of such actions to

Khanh's own formulation of them, so that he will be
carrying out a Vietnamese plan and not one imposed b
the United States. /Emphasis supplied/ 63/

The discussion of the situation in Vietnam began with the statement
that the military tools and concepts that had been adopted were sound
and adequate. But much needed to be done in terms of a more effective
employment both of military forces and of the economic and civic action
means already available. This improved effort might require some
selective increases in the U.S. presence. These increases were not
considered to be necessarily major in nature and not in contradiction

to "the U.S. policy of reducing existing military personnel where South
Vietnamese are in a position to assume the functions..."

No major reductions of U.S. personnel in the near future were ex-
pected, but it continued to be the basic policy that there would be
gradual U.S. withdrawal from participation. ‘This was considered to be
sound because of its effect "in portraying to the U.S. and the world
that we continue to regard the war as a conflict the South Vietnamese
must win and take ultimate responsibility for." And along this line
there was the continued hope that "substantial reductions in the num-
bers of U.S. military training personnel should be possible before the
end of 1965. (The language-here suggested a beginning retreat from
NSAM 273).

It was conceded, however, that “the situation has unquestionably
been growing worse, at least since September..." Forty percent of
the territory was then under the Viet Cong control or predominant in-
fluence, and twenty-two of the forty-three provinces were controlled
fifty percent or more by the Viet Cong. Other indications of the
continuing deterioration were that large groups of the population dis-
played signs of apathy and indifference, while frustration was evident
within the U.S. contingent. Desertion rates within the ARVN and the
Vietnamese paramilitary were particularly high and increasing ~-
especially in the latter. Draft-dodging was high; but the Viet Cong
were recruiting energetically and effectively. The morale of the hamlet
militia and of the SDC, upon which the security of the hamlets depended,
was poor and falling. The position of the government within the pro-
vinces was weakening.

The machinery of political control extending from Saigon down to
the hamlets had virtually disappeared following the November coup. Of
forty-one incumbent province chiefs on November 1, thirty-five had
been replaced. Nine provinces had had three province chiefs in three
months, and one province had had four. Lesser officials had been re-

*

49 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
