Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"the first threat on which I wish to report is widely misunderstood:
the smoldering coals of war in Southeast Asia. South Vietnam is already
under attack -- sometimes by a single assassin, sometimes by a band or
guerrillas, recently by full battalions. The peaceful borders of Burma,
Cambodia and India have been repeatedly violated. And the peaceful.
people of Laos are in danger of losing ‘the independence they gained not
so long ago. 2

tio one can call these ‘wars of liberation.' For these are free
countries living under governments. Nor are these aggressions any less
real because men are knifed in their homes and not shot in the fields of
battle.

"The very simple question confronting the world community is whether
measures can be devised to protect the small and weak from such tactics.
For if they are successful in Laos and South Vietnam, the Sag will be
opened wide.

"The United States seeks for itself no base, no territory, no special
position in this area of any kind. We support a truly neutral and inde-
pendent Laos, its people free from outside interference, living at peace
with themselves and with their neighbors, assured that their territory
will not be used for attacks on others, and under a government comparable
(as Mr. Khrushchev and I agreed at Vienna) to Cambodia and Burma.

"But now the negotiations over Tne are reaching a crucial stage. The
ceasefire is at best precarious. The rainy season is coming to an end.
Laotian territory is being used to infiltrate South Vietnam. The world
community must recognize -- all those who are involved -- that this potent
threat to Laotian peace and freedom is individible from all other threats
to their own."

13. President Kennedy's News Conference, October 11, 1961 Public Papers
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1961, D. 660: 3
"Troops to Vietnam?

"Q. Mr. President, in reference to your decision to send General Taylor
to Vietnam, there may be some interpretation of that decision as implying
confirmation of reports that you intend to send American forces to Vietnam
or Thailend or Laos. Can you give us your appraisal of the conditions under
which you might find it necessary to send troops?

"DHE PRESIDEN: We are going to wait until General Taylor comes back
and brings en up-to-date description of the situation, particularly in Viet-
nam. As you know, in the last two or three months there has been a large
increase in the number of the forces that have been involved. There has
been evidence that some of these forces have come from beyond the frontiers.
General Taylor will give me and the Joint Chiefs of Staff an educated

C-13
