Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

710.0017 VW. /4-1045 ; Telezvamn
The Secretary of Stite to the Aubusador in France (Cajfery)

Wasutneron, April 19, 145—8 p.m,
1576. Prom Matihews." The Preach Rnibassy bas been informally

™ Pree ALheWs, Diteclor ol he Ofive af Burapedy Afades.

notified thar for the yeriod Mareh 29 to \prit 1h an annreciable num-
her of missions have | bee flown into Indo-China at direct reiest of
the ¥ rench ii addition fa other air forces operations into Trde-China,
Embassy was informed that steps have been taken to dron rations,
small arms antl elorhiie to oye partienlyy eroun in Invie-China aud
thal question of frathey assistance to other groups is subject of active
negotiations. [Matthews]

Strerrintcs

FWA PMW./4-2245
The Seevetary of State tothe French Ambassador (Bonet)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to Tis Excellency

‘the Ambassador of the French Republic and acknowledges the receipt

of the Kimbassv’s note Na. afdval Marcel 12, 1044, conveving the desire
ofthe French Provinisional Goverment ie conchide with the Govern-
ment ofthe United States an agreement aialogous to the Franca-\lied
agreement signed in London on Angust 25, 1944 and applicable to
Indo-China.

Careful consideration has been given to the above proposals The
Uniied States Government has consistently believed, and acted ae-
cordingly. that the development_of nilitax operations in the Far
Bast mist he alined at the earliest possible defeat of Japan, Such
Operitions ren vive the concentation and nse of all resources in armed

forves, munitions. and shipping and, consequently. the diversion. 1a

the inanedate fatire Of such +e SVR OSS io Pape ~itie mili ary Oper wtions t
in Indo-Chiia « cannot he contemph ated. Tn the. circmmstances, the
Governnient of the United Stares knows of no useful purpose which
would he served hy the conclusionat this time ofan wereenwnt alone
the lines ceatemplaied in the Kiubassy’s nore under acknowledgment,

Wastiweros, April 20, 20-45,
Tea | ;

Titeik Thee Ly
CONFIDENTIAL

C2
