Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

h. Rise of the Viet Cong, 1957-1960

The Department of State sponsored an intelligence estimate
for the U.S. SEATO Council Representatives, dated 3 April 1958, entitled
"Nature and Extent of the Communist Subversive Threat to the Protocol
States of Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos." This estimate held that the
DRV continued to pose a basic threat to the GVN:

"Although Communist tactics have shifted over the past
few years, the real objective -- ultimate Communist control
of all Vietnam -- has remained unchanged. Overt aggression,
employed by the Communists prior to the Geneve Agreements
and ceasefire, has been at least temporarily put aside in
favor of demands for ‘peaceful reunification,’ more in accord
with the general Soviet line of peaceful co-existence. The
Communist peaceful pose, however, has not brought any relaxa-
tion in the build-up of DRV military strength or repressive
Communist control over the population in North Vietnam. More-
over, support and assistance provided by the DRV for Communist
subversive activities in South Vietnam (as well as in Laos
and to a lesser extent Cambodia and Thailand) has not been
reduced...."

" ..The continuation of the Communist program to infil-
trate and support subversive cadres in South Vietnam is the
clearest indication of the unchanged nature of their objective
in Vietnam and the threat which this constitutes for the GVN.
The strongly anti-Communist policy of the GVN has forced the
Communists to operate underground rather than through legal '
parties or front groups. Little concrete information is avail-
able concerning the organization and leadership of the Communist
subversive apparatus in South Vietnam. At the time of the
armistice, a considerable number of armed and trained Communist
military personnel were left behind in South Vietnam, organi zed
into a basic structure of a hierarchy of Administrative and
Resistance Committees. Effective security measures carried out
by the Diem government have reduced these armed Communist cadres
to an estimated 1100-100. The remaining cadres probably retain
a roughly similar organizational pattern, although they have
reduced their unit size and reportedly have changed their struc-
ture at the lowest level to make it more difficult tor the GVN
to penetrate the network.

"Alongside the guerrilla nucleus (and undoubtedly with some
duplication of personnel), the Communists have maintained and
sought to expand their political network in South Vietnam. The
latter organization probably encompasses 4 considerably larger
number than the armed cadres, which, operating underground, are
more difficult to identify or assess..--

17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
