Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. Infiltration -- Remains the Key

Into February, infiltration held the focus of attention. Following
up his 18 January request, on the first of February, CINCPAC requested
authorization to conduct offensive mining against the North Vietnamese
ports. 45/ He stated his case:

"A drastic reduction of external support to the
enemy would be a major influence in achieving our objec-
tives in NVN. Despite fewer ship arrivals in 1966
compared to recent years the tonnage of imports has
increased. This increase demonstrates the rising need
for external support in NVN. While the nature of car-
goes discharged cannot be stated with precision, there
is little doubt that a major portion contains war sup-
porting materials. Additionally, the ability of NVN to
export products to other nations through its seaports con-
tributes significantly to its capability to support hostil-
ities in RVN. The closure of selected NVN ports would
result in a severely strained economy and reduce Hanoi's
eapability to support military actions in SVN.

"Closure of the port of Haiphong to ocean-going
ships is of paramount importance and would be effective
in compounding NVN logistic problems for the reasons
indicated below:

"a. 85 percent of imports come through Haiphong.
There is no satisfactory alternate port.

"B. Soviet cargo presently entering NVN through
Haiphong would have to be re-routed through Communist
China or off-loaded in time-consuming barge operations.
Thus far the CHICOMs have not permitted the Soviets unlim-
ited use of their rail systems.

"CG, he ability of CHICOM/NVN rail systems to
function as a substitute means to provide logistic support
is marginal. A demand for increased rolling stock as well
@s new port facilities would be generated.

"Closure of NVN ports would be a sign of U.S. deter-
mination to prosecute the war successfully thus bringing
increased pressure on Hanoi to terminate hostilities...." 46/

If Admiral Sharp received the "go" to conduct offensive mining
against the NVN ports, initial efforts would be directed at Haiphong.
He saw this action as...

ie TOP SECRET - Sensitive
