Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

TV. The U.S. Moved to Take Over the Land War -- The Search and Destroy
Strategy and the Battalion Debate

General Wesimoreland's message #19118, of 7 June 1965, already quoted
in part in Section I of this paper, punctuated a very grim period of ARVN
defeats. in Vietnam and stirred up a veritable hornet's nest in Washington.
Up to that time, most of the Washington decision makers had been content
to indulge in relatively low-key polemics about the enclave strategy and
to advocate some experimentation with small numbers of U.S. troops in
Vietnam. Westmoreland's request for reinforcements on a large scale,
accompanied as it was by a strategy to put the troops on the offensive

against the Viet Cong, did not contain any of the comfortable restrictions 7

and safeguards which had been part of every strategy debated to date.
Washington saw that it was Westmoreland's intention to aggressively take
the war to the enemy with other than Vietnamese troops, and in such a
move the spectre of U.S. involvement in a major Asian ground war was there
for all to see. With no provision for quick withdrawal, and there was
none, the long-term implications for the U.S. in terms of lives and money
could not be averted. Temperatures rose rapidly after 7 June, and the
debate was acrimonious and not without its casualties.

Just as Ambassador Taylor was consistent in his resistance to pro-
posed involvement of U.S. forces in the Vietnamese War, so also was
General Westmoreland equally determined to get enough Us/3rd Country
force into Vietnam to influence the situation. In addition to the level
of force, Westmoreland was also bent on having a free hand in the use of
it:

' A. Westmoreland Provided the Push

‘It has been suggested that COMUSMACV elected to interpret the
lending of two Marine BLT's at Da Nang as the first step in a build-up
of U.S. combat forces in Vietnam. It seems.clear that General Westmore-
land had reached the conclusion by early March that the RVNAF simply did
not have the capability to overcome the Viet Cong by itself. Outside
forces were going to be required to take up the slack until the GVN forces
could be revamped and built up. It appears that General Westmoreland had
a powerful ally in the person of General Johnson, the Army Chief of Staff,
who was in Saigon from the 5th through the 12th of March 1965, and who
returned to Washington to submit the first of many recommendations that
the U.S. send significant numbers of combat troops to Vietnam. 104/
Westmoreland was not far behind Johnson in submitting to Washington his
own ideas on the subject.

The "Commander's Estimate of the Situation" prepared by General
Westmoreland and his staff during the early weeks of March and completed

8h TOP SECRET - Sensitive’
