Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The expected reaction of the Soviet Union and China to these escalatory
options varied, but none was judged as unacceptable except in the case
of mining the harbors. Here the Soviet Union would be faced with a
difficult problem. The paper judged the likely Soviet reaction this
way:

+e.eLO the USSR, the mining of the ports would be
particularly challenging. Last year they moved some
530,000 tons of goods to North Vietnam by sea. If the
ports remained closed, almost all of their deliveries --
military and civilian -- would be at the sufferance of
Peiping, with whom they are having increasing difficulties.
They would be severely embarrassed by their inability to
prevent or counter the US move. It is an open question
whether they would be willing to take the risks involved
in committing their own ships and aircraft to an effort
to reopen the ports.

In these circumstances, the Soviets would at least
send a token number of "volunteers" to North Vietnam if
Hanoi asked for them, and would provide Hanoi with new
forms of military assistance -- e.g., floating mines and
probably cruise missiles (land-based or on Komar boats),
which could appear as a direct response to the US mining
and which would endanger our ships in the area.

The Soviets would be likely to strike back at the US
in their bilateral relations, severely reducing what remains
of normal contacts on other issues. They would focus their
propaganda and diplomatic campaign to get US allies in
Europe to repudiate the US action. They would probably
also make other tension-promoting gestures, such as
pressure in Berlin. The situation could of course become
explosive if the mining operations resulted in serious
damage to a Soviet ship. 37/

This confirmed Ambassador Thompson's judgment of a few days before,

Mining of Haiphong Harbor would provoke a strong
reaction here and Soviets would certainly relate it to
their relations with China....They would consider that
we are quite willing to make North Vietnam entirely
dependent upon GIINCOMs with all which t!at would imply. 38/

‘Thus, while considering a long list of possible escalations, it did not
offer forceful argumentsfor any of them. The copy preserved in McNaughton's
materials contains a final section entitled "Ways to Advance a Settlement."
A pencil note, however, indicates that this secticn was not sent to State
and preswnably not to the President either.

12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
