Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

22. "Some Fundamentals of American Policy," Address by Secretary Rusk
fore e U.S. Council of the ternational Chamber orf Commerce

at New York, March 4, 1965, Department of State Bulletin, March 22
1965, D. Lol.

* * *

"The defeat of these aggressions is not only essential if Laos and
South Viet-Nam are to remain independent; it is important to the security
of Southeast Asie as a whole. You will recall that Thailand has already
been proclaimed as the next target by Peiping. This is not something up
in the clouds called the domino theory. You don't need that. Listen to
the proclamation of militant, world revolution by Peiping, proclaimed
with a harshness which has caused deep division within the Communist
world itself, quite apart from the issues posed for the free world.

"The U.S. Stake in Viet-Nam \

"So what is our stake? What is our commitment in thet situation?
Can those of us in this room forget the lesson that we had in this issue
of war and peace when it was only 10 years from the seizure of Manchuria —
+o Pearl Harbor; about 2 years from the seizure of Czechoslovakia to the
outbreak of World War II in Western Europe? Don't you remember the hopes
expressed in those days: that perhaps the aggressor will be satisfied by
this next bite, and perhaps he will be quiet? Remember that? You remem-
ber that we thought that we could put our Military Establishment on short
rations and somehow we needn't concern ourselves with peace in the rest
of the world. But we found that ambition and appetite fed upon success
and the next bite generated the appetite for the following bite. And we
learned that, by postponing the issue, we made the result more terrible,
the holocaust more dreadful. We cannot forget thet experience.

"We have a course of aggression proclaimed in Peiping, very clear
for all to see, and proclaimed with a militancy which sayS that their
type of revolution must be supported by force and that much of the world
is ripe for that kind of revolution. We have very specific conmmitments--
the Manile Pact, ratified by the Senate by a vote of 82 to 1, a pact to
which South Viet-Nam is a protocol state. We have the decision of Presi-
dent Eisenhower in 1954 to extend aid...."

ee

23. "Viet-Nam Action Called "Collective Defense Against Armed Aggression',"
[Department Statement read to news correspondents on March 4, 1965
by Robert J. McCloskey, Director, Office of News/ » Department of
State Bulletin, March 22, 1965, p. 403.

"The fact that military hostilities have been taking place in South-
east Asia does not bring about the existence of a state of war, which is

D-30 é
