Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

According to Collins,

Whatever the reasons, the failure to utilize Quat
epitomizes lack of unity among Vietnamese and lack of decis-
ive leadership on part of Diem....Acceptance of status quo
with Minh elevated to Defense Ministry and sects reinforced
in veto power over government is simply postponing evil day
of reckoning as to when, if ever, Diem will assert type of
leadership that can unify this country and give it chance of
competing with hard, effective, unified control of Ho Chi
Minh. 83

Three days later, General Collins communicated his "final
judgment" on the situation. He made four recommendations:

A. Continue to support Diem along present lines for short
while longer but without committing US to specific aid
programs ;

B. Consider urgently, as possible alternative, the early
return of Bao Dai;

C. If after short period of further test Diem Government
fails to achieve substantial progressive action and if
return of Bao Dai is acceptable to US Government, to support
his prompt return;

D. If return of Bao Dai is not acceptable to US Government,
assuming Diem Government continues to demonstrate inability
to unite free Vietnam behind an aggressive program, I recom-
mend re-evaluation of our plans for assisting Southeast Asia
with special attention (to an) earlier proposal. 8)/

The earlier proposal, made by General Collins on December 13, was that the
U.S. gradually withdraw from Vietnam. Collins said this was the "least
desirable (but) in all honesty and in view of what I have observed here
to date this may be the only sound solution." 85/

3. State Department: Diem Is the Only Available Leader

The State Department went along with Collins' suggestion to
avoid specific assistance commitments at the present time but could not
see salvation in Bao Dai. A memorandum from Ambassador Heath, then working
in the Far East Bureau is indicative of State Department thinking. Heath
first called attention to "massive opposition" faced by Diem and French
unwillingness to firmly support him -- implying that all Diem's problems
were not Diem's fault. He then spoke of General Collins' "attempt to
achieve a rapid solution," said Collins' "recommendations are now based
on the circumstances of a satisfactory settlement prior to January 1" --
thereby suggesting that one not looking for a rapid solution might not
arrive at similar conclusions.

ERE TOP SECRET - Sensitive
