Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In further amplification of this point the Secretary almost claimed,
in effect, to have foreseen and to have forecast the degradation of
capability that it was then clear (in January 1964) had occurred
and,had,in fact continued ever since November, These were his
words,

We didn't say --but I think you could have predicted
that what we had in mind was --that (1) either Dien
would continue his repressive measures and remain in
power, in which case he would continue to lose public
Support and, since that is the foundation of successful
counter guerilla operations, the military operations
would be adversely affected, or (2) alternatively he
would continue his repressive measures and build so
much resistance that he would be thrown out, then a
coup Would teke place, and during the period of
reorganization following...there would te instability
and uncertainty and military operations would be
adversely affected, 13/

No fully persuasive explanation has been discovered of the
apparent discrepancy between this foresight concerning the possibile
ill affects of polictical instability and the generally optimistic
prognosis and the pro ram based upon that optimism. The Secretary had
had no enthusiasm for the coup. Possibly he adjusted, though reluc-
tantly, to the idea and decided that the political difficulties would
either be overcome by means he did not feel it was his duty to explore,
or would not be serious or lasting enough to be critical. However,
all of the thinking then in vogue about counterinsurgency insisted.
that favorable political circumstances were essential to success.
Therefore, unless it was assumed that favorable political circumstances
could be brought about, the counterinsurgency effort was bound to fail.
So long as the adverse case was not proved one had to assume ultimately
favorable political conditions because it was unthinkable to stop
trying.

Even before NSAM 273 was adopted, evidence began to accumulate
that the optimistic assumptions underlying it were suspect. First,
there was unmistakable and accumulating evidence that, in the period
immediately after the coup, the situation had deteriorated in many
places as a direct result of the coup. Then came increasing expres-
sion, Sf a judgment that this deterioration was not merely an
immediate and short lived phenomenon, but something, rather, that
continued well after the worst administrative confusions immediately
after the coup had been reduced. Finally, the impression, developed .
in many quarters, and eventually spread to all, that before the coup,
the situation had been much more adverse than we had recognized
officially at the time. Before the end of December, we decided to
institute a system of covert checks’ on the accuracy of our basic
intelligence -- a large part of which came from Vietnamese sources,
(There was Suspicion that the interests of these officials was often

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
