Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Eve fe. Ue

U.S. TRAINING OF THE VIETNAMESE NATIONAL ARMY,

1954-1959

A. Why did the U.S. undertake the training of ARVN?

Underlying the U.S. decision to train the ARVN were broad
political objectives and beliefs relating to Asia, together with
“narrower considerations relating to methods of achieving U.S. objec-
tives in Southeast Asia. Both broad and narrow considerations had
their origins in the post-World War II chaos in Asia; both stemmed
from the overall U.S, aim to deter or defeat communist aggression
wherever and whenever it might occur; and both became pillars of U.S.
a policy with the fall of Mainland China to the communists
in 1949.

On the broader level, the U.S. decision te train the Vietnamese
armed forces was viewed as necessary to preserve the independence and
freedom of Vietnam south of the 17th parallel, an essential prerequisite
to the containment of communism. Containment--lately a function of
SEATO as well as of the U.S.--was viewed as essential to the preserva-
tion of the rest of Southeast Asia from communist domination and control.
Communist domination of the area was viewed as the outcome associated
with the fall of Free Vietnam by the proponents of the domino theory,
which continued as a major influence on U.S. foreign policy throughout
the period examined here. "In view of the importance of Vietnam to all
of Southeast Asia, 1 am ‘convinced that the United States should expend
the funds, materiel, and effort required to strengthen the country and
help it retain its independence," reported General J. Lawton Collins.
"If the chances of success are difficult to calculate, the results of |
a withdrawal of American aid are all too certain, not only in Vietnan,
but throughout Southeast Asia. Such a withdrawal would hasten the rate
of communist advances in the Far East as a whole and could result in
the loss of Southeast Asia to communism. In my opinion, the chance of
success is not only worth the gamble; we cannot afford to let free Viet-
nam go by default." 3/

On the narrower level, several considerations tended to urge
an affirmative decision concerning a training role for the U.S.:

i. Throughout the French-Indochina war, U.S, authorities
continually urged the French to create and train a Vietnamese National
Army. This measure was pressed not only because the U.S, believed it
to be a necessary political gesture (evidence of the true independence
of the Associated States), but also because U.S. experts viewed it as
a military measure vital to the successful prosecution of the war. 4/

Le TOP SECRET - Sensitive
