Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"I know that you appreciate that this is essentially a
Vietnamese program and that what Porter would be supervising
would be the American end of it. I recognize the existence of
the view that we must in effect impose detailed plans and some-
how run the pacification effort ourselves. But I do not share
it. Nothing durable can be accomplished that way.

"As far as ‘administrative rearrangement’ is concerned,
I would like Sam Wilson to take the office now occupied by
Porter, with the rank of Minister, and to serve as Mission
coordinator. I intend to put Habib in the office now occupied
by Chadbourn with the rank of Minister....

"As soon as I receive word from you that this is satis-
factory, I intend to make the announcement about Porter. The
other appointments can be announced later. LopcE” 4/

From the beginning, Lodge, who felt that “a public announcement was
unnecessary" except as a “clear and visible sign to the Vietnamese and
to our own people that the Honolulu conference really marks a new de-
parture,” 4/ was not overly enthusiastic about the public designation
of his deputy as being "in total charge” of something. The docwmentation
is virtually nonexistent on the question of whether Lodge's feelings on
this point acted as a constraint on Porter, but it is hard to escape the
strong impression that from the outset, Lodge was going along with the
new authority for Porter only with reluctance -- and that Porter had to
keep this in mind whenever he considered putting heavy pressure on an

agency.

Porter also had his reservations about his role. Whether these were
caused by ea feeling that the Ambassador was not going to support him in
showdowns with the agencies, or whether his caution came from some more
basic feelings, there can be no doubt that he did not, in the period
between Honolulu and Manila, perform in his new role as the President
and his senior advisors had hoped. And thus once again, at Manila, a
reorganization was approved -- this time a much broader and far-reaching
one.

Porter's intentions were accurately foreshadowed in his first state-
ment to the Mission Council on the subject, February 28, 1966. He sought
then to allay the fears which the announcement had raised in the minds of
the agency chiefs in Vietnam;

“Ambassador Porter described briefly his new responsibili-
ties as he sees them in the pacification/rural development area.
He pointed out that the basic idea is to place total responsi-
bility on one senior individual to pull together all of the civil

57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
