Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"We have, during this century, twice spent our blood and our
treasure fighting in Europe--and twice in Asia. We fought because we
saw--too late to prevent war--that our own peace and security were
imperilled, by the urgent danger--or the ruthless conquest--of other
lands.

"We have gained wisdom from that suffering. We know, and the
world knows, that the°American people will fight hostile and aggres-
sive despotisms when their force is thrown against the barriers of
freedom, when they seek to gain the high ground of power from which to
destroy us. But we also know that to fight is the most costly way to
keep America secure and free. Even an America victorious in atomic war
could scarcely escape disastrous destruction of her cities and a fear-
ful loss of life. Victory itself could be agony.

"Plainly, we must seek less tragic, less costly ways to defend
ourselves. We must recognize that whenever any country falls under
the domination of Communism, the strength of the Free World--and of
America--is by that amount weakened and Communism strengthened. If
this process, through our neglect or indifference, should proceed un-
checked, our continent would be gradually encircled. Our safety depends
upon recognition of the fact that the Communist design for such encir-
clement must be stopped before it gains momentum--before it is egain too
late to save the peace.

"This recognition dictates two tasks. We must maintain e common
worldwide defense against the menace of International Communism. And
we must demonstrate and spread the blessings of liberty--to be cher-
ished by those who enjoy these blessings, to be sought by those now
denied them. :

"This is not a new policy nor a partisan policy.

"This is a policy for America that begen ten years ago when a
Democretic President and a Republican Congress united in an historic
declaration. They then declared that the independence and survival of
two countries menaced by Communist aggression--Greece and Turkey--were
so important to the security of America that we would give them mili-
tary and economic aid.

"That policy saved those nations. And it did so without the cost
of American lives.

"That policy has since been extended to all critical areas of the
world. It recoguizes that America cannot exist as an island of freedon
in a surrounding sea of Communism. It is expressed concretely by mutual
security treaties embracing 42 other nations. And these treaties reflect
a@ solemn finding by the President and by the Senate that .our own peace
would be endangered if any of these countries were conquered by Inter-
national Communism.

B-3}t
