Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The evidence supports the conclusion, therefore, that whether
or not the rebellion against Diem in South Vietnam proceeded independently
of, or even contrary to directions from Hanoi through 1958, Hanoi moved
thereafter to capture the revolution. There is little doubt that Hanoi
exerted some influence over certain insurgents in the South throughout
the years following Geneva, and there is evidence which points to its
preparing for active support of large-scale insurgency as early as 1958.
Whatever differences in strategy may have existed among Moscow, Peking,
and Hanoi, it appears that at each critical juncture Hanoi obtained
concurrence in Moscow with an aggressive course of action. Accordingly,
it was not "peaceful coexistence," or concern over leadership of the
"socialist camp" which governed Hanoi's policy. What appeared to matter
to Hanoi was its abiding national interests: domestic consolidation in
independence, reunification, and Vietnamese hegemony in Southeast Asia.
Both Soviet and Chinese policy seems to have bent to these ends rather
than the contrary. If Hanoi applied brakes to eager insurgents in South
Vietnam, it did so not from lack of purpose or because of Soviet
restraints, but from concern over launching one more premature uprising
in the South. Ngo Dinh Diem was entirely correct when he stated that
his was a nation at war in early 1959; South Vietnam was at war with
both the Viet Cong insurgents and with the DRV, in that the latter then
undertook to provide strategie direction and leadership cadres to build
systematically a base system in Laos and South Vietnam for subsequent,
large-scale guerrilla warfare. Persuasive evidence exists that by 1960
DRV support of the insurgency in South Vietnam included materiel as
well as personnel. In any event, by late 1959, it seems clear that
Hanoi considered the time ripe to take the military offensive in South
Vietnam, and that by 1960 circumstances were propitious for more overt
political action. A recently captured high-ranking member of the
National Liberation Front has confirmed that in mid-1960 he and other
Iao Dong Party leaders in South Vietnam were instructed by Hanoi to begin
organizing the National Liberation Front, which was formally founded
upon the issuance of its Manifesto on 20 December 1960. * The rapid
growth of the NLF thereafter -- it quadrupled its strength in about one
year -- is a further indication that the Hanoi-directed communist party
apparatus had been engaged to the fullest in the initial organization
and subsequent development of the NIF.

U.S. Perceptions of the Insurgency, 1954-1960 (Tab _}+)

Much of what the U.S. knows now about the origins of the insurgency
in South Vietnam rests on information it has acquired since 1963,
approximately the span of time that an extensive and effective American’
intelligence epparatus had been functioning in Vietnam. Before then,
our intelligence was drawn from a significantly more narrow and less
reliable range of sources, chiefly Vietnamese, and could not have

* The Washington Post, April 13, 1968, As.

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
