Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TV. Dealing with the Laotian Crisis

A. Laos in Danger: "Pressure Planning"

In mid-May 1964, a new factor entered the policy-shaping process --
a factor which cast a shadow of crisis management over the entire decision
making environment. On 17 May, pro-commmist *orces in Laos began an of-
fensive which led to their control of a significant portion of the Plaine
des Jarres. On the 2lst, the United States obtained Souvanna Phoma's
permission to conduct low-level reconnaissance operations over the occu-
pied areas. 69/ For several weeks the offensive threatened to destroy
the security of the neutralist-rightist position -- and with it the polit-
ical underpinning of U.S.-Laotian policy. These developments lent a greater
sense of urgency to the arguments of those advisers favoring prompt meas-
ures to strengthen the U.S. position in Southeast Asia.

The most avid of those urging prompt action were the JCS. On 19 May
they had recommended a new, more intensive series of covert operations
for the four-month Phase IT under OPLAN 34-A. 70/ On the 23rd, referring
to their earlier recommendations to incorporate larger border control and
retaliatory operations and overt graduated pressures in the next-phase
scenario, they expressed opinions on the urgency of preparing for such
actions. Particular emphasis was placed on the need to consult with the
GVN so that the necessary training and joint operational preparations could
take place. The JCS prodded State with the comment, "The Department of
State should take the lead on this but as yet has not," at the same time
recalling that the operations in question had been provided for under the
approved CINCPAC OPLAN 37-64 (17 April 1964). In another plea for prompt
implementation, they argued that since these operations were to be plausi-_
bly deniable by the United States, "efforts to create the necessary cli-
mate of opinion should not be, of necessity, too time consuming." n/

Figuring prominently in the retaliatory operations and the graduated
pressures advocated by the JCS against North Vietnam were air strikes --
some by the VNAF alone and some in cooperation with USAF/FARMGATE and other
U.S. air units. What they thought these kinds of operations could accom-
plish varied according to the targets struck and the composition of the
attacking force. Assuming an air campaign ordered for the purpose of:

(1) causing the DRV to stop supporting the Viet Cong and Pathet Lao and
(2) reducing its capability to renew such support, the JCS perceived the
following categories of accomplishment: Category A - They believed that
undertaking “armed reconnaissance along highways leading to Laos," strik-
ing "airfields identified with supporting" the insurgents, and destroying
"supply and ammunition depots, petroleum storage and military (installa-
tions) connected with PL/VC support" would result in “a reduction of DRV
suoport." Category B - They believed thet striking the "remaining airfields,"
destroying "important railroad and highway bridges" and "depots in northern
NWN," conducting aerial mining operations, and bombing "petroleum storage
in Hanoi and Haiphong” would result in a reduced"DRV military capability

to take action against Laos and the RVN." Category C - They cited the
remaining capability for effectively destroying the North Vietnamese in-
dustrial base. 72/

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
