i a ES

Set ea inl a ck a Nee ee ee eee ech a aes

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

to become engaged in a general war with Communist China and snould
ot, therefore, commit United States forces to that area; neither

ehould the United States commit its militery forces to Indochina

in order to assist the French in restoring internal security. ‘The

considerations undeflying these views are:

a2. Involvement of United States forces against Viet Minh

forces would be likely to lead to war with Communist China,
b. <A general war with Communist Chine would, in all

probability, have to be taken as a prelude to global war;

ome)

ce Our major enemy in a global war would be the USSR;

d. Our primary theater in the event of a global war would,
in all probability, be Western Europe; and

e. The forces of the Western Powers are insufficient to
wage war on the mainland of Asia and at the same time accomplish
the predetermined Allied objectives in Europe.

9. While minor commitments of United States military forces
might be sufficient to defeat the Viet Minhs in Indochina it is -
more probable that such commitments would lead to a major involve-
ment of the United States in that area similar to that in Korea or
even to global war. Accordingly, there would be great potential
langer to the security interests of the United States in the
commitment of any "token" or "iminor" United States forces in Indo-
china.

10. Indochina is an area in which the French bear primary
responsibility, and the problem of restoration of peace and security
to that country should continue to rest with the French, Overt
intervention by any foreign power on the side of France would

‘immediately enhance the danger of a global war and would lay France

and the other foreign powers open to a charge of imperialism.

11. Thus far the French apparently have failed in Indochina to
provide adequate political and military leadership, to develop
sound military plans, and to utilize properly their military re-
sources. The urgency of the situation in Indochina, however, is so
great that the present United States military aid program for that

country should continue, and steps should be taken to expedite

Shipment of the materlel earmarked for that area. However, it

would be desirable for the United States military assistance program
to be based on an over-all military plan for Indochina developed

by the French, concurred in by the Associated States of Indochina,
and acceptable to the United States. This plan should be developed
as a result of staff talks conducted in Saigon among revresentatives
Of the three countries. It should be made clear from the outset
