Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"It should be remembered that our retaliatory action
in Gulf of Tonkin is in effect an isolated U.S.-DRV incident.
Although this has relation...to /the/ larger problem of DRV
aggression by subversion in Viet-Nam and Laos, we have not
(repeat not) yet come to grips in a forzeful way with DRV
over the issue of this larger and much more complex problem. an/

later, he described a need for subsequent actions that would convey

to Hanoi that "the operational rules with respect to the DRV are
changing." 65/ Assistant Secretary of State Bundy believed that Hanoi
and Peking had probably been convinced only "that we will act strongly
where U.S. force units are directly involved.../that/ in other respects
the communist side may not be so persuaded that we are prepared to take
stronger action...." He saw the need for a continuous "combination of
military pressure and some form of communication" to cause Hanoi to
accept the idea of "getting out" of South Vietnam and Laos. 66/ CINCPAC
stated that "what we have not done and must do is make plain to Hanoi
and Peiping the cost of pursuing their current objectives and impeding
Ours....Our actions of August 5 have created a momentum which can lead
to the attainment of our objectives in S.E. Asia....It is most important
that we not lose this momentum." 67/ The JCS urged actions to "sustain
the U.S. advantage /recently/ gained," and later cautioned; "Failure to
resume and maintain a program of pressure through military actions...
could signal a lack of resolve." 68/

What these advisors had in mind by way of actions varied somewhat
but only in the extent to which they were willing to go in the immedi-
ate future. Bundy stressed that policy commitments must be such that
U.S. and GVN hands could be kept free for military actions against DRV
infiltration routes in Laos. Ambassador Taylor, CINCPAC and the JCS
urged prompt air and ground operations across the Laotian border to
interrupt the current (though modest) southward flow of men and supplies.
Both Taylor and CINCPAC indicated the necessity of building up our
"readiness posture" to undertake stronger actions -~ through additional
deployments of forces and logistical support elements and strengthening
of the GVN political base.

The mood and attitudes reflected in these viewpoints were concrete
and dramatic expressions of the increased U.S. commitment stemming from
the Tonkin Gulf incidents. They were candidly summed up by CINCPAC in
his statement:

".. pressures against the other side once instituted should
not be relaxed by any actions or lack cf them which would destroy
the benefits of the rewarding steps previously taken...." 69/

Increasingly voiced by officials from many quarters of the Admin-
istration and from the professional agencies were arguments which said,
in effect, now that we have gone this far we cannot afford to stop and
go no farther; our original signal must continually be reinforced. What

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
