Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

You may indicate that we will seek to keep governments
informed, subject to security considerations, of each opera-
tion as it occurs; as we did with Feevece to operations of
February 7 and 11. 66/

Although the cable does not indicate it, the first air action under
‘the new program was set for February 20th. Dubbed ROLLING THUNDER I, it
called for US strikes against Quang Khe Naval Base and concurrent VNAF
strikes against Vu Con Barracks, with appropriate weather alternates pro-
vided. The above cable was sent from Washington at 8:00 p.m. on February
18th. Five hours later, at 1:00 p.m., February 19 (Saigon time), Colonel
Pham Ngoc Thao, a conspiratorial revolutionary figure who had been active
in the coup against Diem, began his infamous semi-coup to oust General
Khanh -- but not to overthrow the Armed Forces Council. Aided by General

Phat, his forces succeeded in occupying the ARVN military headquarters

and other key government buildings in Saigon, including the radio station.
Until the coup was defeated andKhanh's resignation submitted some 4O hours
later, pandemonium reigned in Saigon. Ambassador Taylor promptly recom-
mended cancellation of the February 20 air strike and his recommendation
was equally promptly accepted.’ In a FLASH message to all recipients of
the cable quoted above, Washington rescinded the instructions to notify
respective heads of state until further notice "in view of the disturbed ~
situation in Saigon.” 67

The “disturbed situation" was not to settle down completely for
almost a week. Even though the semi-coup failed quickly and the Armed
Forces Council reasserted its full authority, the AFC continued the anti-
Khanh momentum of the coup-plotters by adopting a "vote of no confidence”
in Khanh. The latter made frantic but unsuccessful efforts to rally his
supporters. Literally running out of gas in Nha Trang shortly before
dawn on February 21, he submitted his resignation, claiming that a "foreign
hand" was behind the coup. No one, however, could be ouite certain that
Khanh might not "re-coup™ once again, unless he were physically removed
from the scene. This took three more days to eccomplish. On the after-
noon of February 25, after some mock farewell performances designed to
enable Khanh to save face, he left Vietnam to become an Ambassador-at-
Large. At the airport to see him off and to make sure that he was safely
dispatched from the country, was Ambassador Taylor, glassily polite. It
was only then that Taylor was able to issue, and Washington would accept,
clearance for the long por enone and frequently rescheduled first ROLLING
THUNDER strike.

C. The UK/USSR Co-Chairmen Gambit

Political turbulence in Saigon was not the only reason for delay-
ing the air action. Even before the semi-coup broke out, forcing can-
cellation of the February 20 strike, a diplomatic initiative was teken by
the Soviet Foreign Office in Moscow, that was eagerly picked up by London
and Washington,. and that quickly drew attention to the adverse consequences
that might flow from an air strike executed at that very. moment, concurrently
with the diplomatic initiative in question.

al

545} TOP SECRET. - Sensitive
