ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SUCKET ~ Sensitive

their plans had succeeded, the generals began assembling forces and pre-
paring for the siege of the palace. At about nine o'clock, they opened
an artillery barrage of the palace and its defenders. Since the palace
was being defended by some tanks, an infantry essault with tank support
was required to capture it. This began about 3:30 a.m. on November 2,
and lasted until about 6:30 a.m., when the palace fell, after Diem had
issued @ cease-fire order to the palace guard from his Cholon hideaway.

Throughout the night the brothers hed remained in contact with both
their loyal supporters at the palace, and periodically with the insur~
gents. The latter did not learn that the brothers had fled until the
rebel forces under Colonel Thao invaded the palace. At 6:20 a.m., Diem
calied JCS and spoke personally with General Don, offering to surrender
in exchange for a puarantee of safe conduct to the airport and departure
from Vietnem. 16/ Minh agreed to these terms, but Diem did not reveal
his whereabouts, still apparently unable to grasp the new realities.
Colonel Thao learned of the location of the hideaway from a captured
officer of the palace guard and received permission from Minh to go
there and get the brothers. When he arrived at the house, he telephoned
again to headquarters to report his location end was overheard by the
brothers on another extension. They escaped to a nearby Catholic church,
where once again Diem called General Don at 6:50 a.m. and surrendered
unconditionally. 17/ He and hu were taken prisoner shortly thereafter
by General Mai Huu Xuan, a long time enemy, who according to most accounts
ordered or permitted their murder in the back of en armored personnel
carrier enroute to JGS headquarters. 18/

The State Department reacted to news of the coup in terms of the
recognition problem with respect to the new government. Rusk felt that
a delay would be useful to the generals in nob appearing to be U.S,
agents or stooges and would assist us in our public stance of noncom-~
plicity. 19/ He further discouraged any large delegation of the generals
from calling on Lodge as if they were "reporting in.” A subsequent
message stressed the need to underscore publicly the fact that this was
not so much a coup as an expression of national will, a fact revealed by
the near unanimous support of important military and civilian leaders. 20/
It further stressed the importance of Vice President Tho to a auick return
to constitutional government end the need, therefore, for the generals to
include him in any interim regime. Lodge replied affirmatively to these
views, indicating his opinion that we should encourage other friendly
countries to recognize the new government first with the assurance that
the U.S, would follow suit shortly. 21/ Further, we should show our
friendly support for the regime and without fanfare resime payments in
the commercial import program.

The news of the brutal and seemingly pointless murder of Diem and
Nhu, however, was received in Washington with shock and dismay. 22/
President Kennedy was reportedly personally stunned at the news, par-
ticularly in view of the heavy U.S. involvement in encouraging the coup

59 TOP SUCRE ~ Sensitive
