Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the reserve forces if possible as they come up to defend;
and to dramatize the inability of the GVN to govern or to
build, by the assassination of officials and the sabotage
of public works. 16/

The purpose of this military strategy, Taylor asserted, was apparently not
to capture the nation by force. Rather, in concert with non-military means,
it was to produce a political crisis which would topple the government

and bring to power a group willing to contemplate the unification of Viet-
nam on Hanoi's terms. alg

It was in the U.S. interest, Taylor reasoned, to act vigorously --
with advice as well as aid -- in order to buy the necessary time for Vietnam
to mobilize and to organize its real assets so that the Vietnamese them-
selves might "turn the tide" and assume the offensive. 18/ But U.S. aid
and U.S. advice on where to use it were not enough. The Diem Government
itself had to be reformed in order to permit it to mobilize the nation.

Diem had, in Taylor's assessment, allowed two vicious circles to develop
which vitiated government effectiveness. In the first of these circles

poor military intelligence led to a defensive stance designed primarily to
guard against attacks, which in turn meant that most of the military forces
came under the control of the province chief's whose responsibility it was

to protect the populace and installations. This control by province chiefs
meant that reserves could not, because of tangled lines of command and
control, be moved and controlled quickly enough to be effective. The effect
of high losses in unsuccessful defensive battles served further to dry up
the basic sources of intelligence. 19

The second vicious circle stemmed from Diem's instinctive attempts
to centralize power in his own hands while fragmenting it beneath him.
His excessive mistrust of many intellectuals and younger Vietnamese, in-
dividuals badly needed to give his administration vitality, served only
to alienate them and led them to stand aside from constructive participation --
thereby further increasing Diem's mistrust. 20/ This administrative style

‘fed back, too, into the military equation and through it, created another

potentially explosive political-military problem:

The inability to mobilize intelligence effectively for
operational purposes directly flows from this fact /Diem's
administrative practice/ as do the generally poor relations
between the Province Chiefs and the military commanders,
the former being Diem's reliable agents, the latter a power
base he fears. The consequent frustration of Diem's mili-
tary commanders -- a frustration well-known to Diem and
heightened by the November 1960 coup -- leads him to ac-
tions which further complicate his problem; e.g., his un-
willingness to delegate military operations clearly to his
generals. pau :

General Taylor's recommended actions for the U.S. were designed
to demonstrate U.S. commitment in order to strengthen Diem's stand and,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
