Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

4

taken and that the British and French will support the action.

It wovld seen inavoronpriate to make a decision as
+ to our willineness to go to war without having fully
exolored the military implications. % would anpear
desiraodle for you to take the vosition that the
efense Department is not prepared to make such a
recommendation to the President until it is satisfied
. that the military implications are acceptable and it
had full opvortunity to exolain its findings end con-
clusions to the Council and the President.

4, That you reise the question whether, in view of the crucial
importance of reaching agreement with the French and British, the
Council should contemslate reacghins a firm national policy decision
-before such negotietions are undertaken,

In view of the great conplexities of the problem involved
and the heavy reliance we necessarily must vlace on our
allies in regard to SHA, it would be perhaps more sensible
to postpone a finsl Governnont decision on SDA policy
until after further exoloratory talks with the British and
French —— either on the Governnental or the political~
military level. able ; :

Se That you indicate that in your view it is umnecessery end
unwise for'us to contemplate unilateral action against Commnist-
China under prasent circumstances; and in view of the possibility of
leuaks, etce, you would orefer that no references be made to this
possibility in the present NSC volicy naper. You might point out
that as far as overt azeression is concerned, our main objective is
to deter it by a joint warning. We should not engage in a bluff.
Tre orimary need is, therefore, to reach sufficient agreement with
the U.X. and France @s to courses of action to vermit the issuance

‘ef such a warning.

ML ay

6. That you-exoress the view that the »resent paver concantrates

far too heavily on action to be taken against aggression; tnat by far
the greater danser is thet Southeast Asia will fall to subversive
tactics; that in the absence of overt aggression it is probable thet
before long France will be unable or wivilling to continue to carry
the burdens of the civil war; that the pawer vrovoses no courses of
action to meet these contingencles which are commensurate with the
burdens and risis waich it proposes we assute to deal with the lesser
risk of agsression; and that you provose that this deficiency in the
paper be resedied by the Senior Staff in their next draft.

sh AAR APO WCW tad an me tn

A a re 8 hr samt ds gs snr ’

pepe al pin,

neo

This is a major deficiency in the pronosed nolicy. If nothing
is to be done beyond what is now being done to prevent Communist sub-~
version in this area, there is grave doust as to the wisdom of assuming
