-

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The briefings given the Secretary in Saigon divulged very little
different from the considerations and arguments presented ad nauseum
in Washington. In fact they were devoted to nothing more than sup-
porting the programs already submitted which were under consideration
in Washington. But the discussions are useful to get a feel for what
greeted McNemara in SEA and the tenor of thought of those operators
on the ground in South Vietnam. Ambassador Bunker's remarks were
guarded, attributed partly to the fact, as he noted, that he had been
in Vietnam barely more than two months; Secretary McNamara and perhaps
many others out from Washington had spent more total time in Vietnam than
he had. Bunker proclaimed that there was general agreement as to what
U.S. objectives were, but he wanted to recall them. They included:

1. A just durable and honorable peace through negoti-
ations leading to a political settlement acceptable to the
United States, the GVN, Hanoi and NLF/VC;

2. A chance for the Vietnamese people to choose freely
the form of government under which they wish to live;

3. To help them build their own political institutions
and develop a viable economy;

h, To make credible our obligations under the Charter
of the UN and SHATO to resist aggression;

5. Eventually to develop regional organizations through
which the Southeast Asian countries can carry on joint under-
takings in economic development and mutual cooperation. 53/

He appraised our progress in the direction of achieving these objec-
tives and noted that the difficulties that we were to face were still
formidable. He disliked the term "the other war." To him, it was all
one war having many aspects but all a part of the whole with each of them
important and essential in achieving a successful conclusion. He thought
the problem of Vietnamese capabilities and performance was partially a
function of the fact that there was a relatively thin crust of managerial
and organizational talent. This talent had to be located and the person-
nel possessing it trained as we went along. He counseled patience
explaining that we could not expect the same degree of competence, effi-
ciency or speed from the Vietnamese that we demanded of ourselves and
that this tardiness on the part of the Vietnamese to react often became
frustrating and required the exercising of great patience in the future.
He did not sound like a man anticipating a quick solution to the prob-
lem -- especially a quick military solution. He felt that realism
demanded that a number of programs receive top priority. He listed:

197 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
