Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

continually pointed to its European defense posture
in explanation. In at least one case, U.S. per-
sonnel were requested (e.g., as aircraft mechanics),
and 200 were provided, when a pool of suitable
personnel existed in Metropolitan France.

(5) Statements to the contrary notwithstanding, the
French did not ameliorate neo-mercantilism or other
colonial policies, or provide "proper tutelage”
to the Associated States; nor did it develop a
command structure suitable to the United States.

(6) The U.S. "checks to satisfy itself that the condi-
tions" imposed were being satisfied, were, by and
large, few and far between, and were conducted at
the pleasure and within the specifications of the
French.

(7) The French chose not to refer Indochina to the
United Nations. Certainly the U.S. assistance
program bore on this decision; whether or not it
was the deciding factor is unclear.

The effectiveness of the United States assistance program
as an instrument of United States policy -- quite aside from the outcome
of the war -- was thus quite low.

8. Critique

As earlier sections of this paper have suggested, the U.S. was
persuaded to involve itself in the Indochina war by the perceived need,
following the fall of Nationalist China, to hold a line against communists.
This strategic drawing of the line at the Chinese-Indochina border was
reinforced by the belief that the fall of Indochina would undoubtedly lead
to the fall of the other mainland states of Southeast Asia, and that the
fall of Southeast Asia would eventuate in the virtually complete denial
to the United States of the Pacific Littoral of Asia. Prospects for a
French victory in Indochina were assessed in contemporary U.S. intelli-
gence documents as poor; nonetheless, the U.S. provided military and
economic assistance to the French and the Associated States in the belief
that a prompt, coordinated United States program of military, political,
and economic aid offered some prospect that France might succeed in gain-
ing the initiative in the struggle in that area. Six major points of
critique of U.S. policy follow:

&. The U.S. Misestimated France
U.S. policymakers apparently realized that the conditions

they imposed upon the French were impracticable to some degree. Nonethe-
less, they believed that pre-conditions were necessary and could assist

17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
