Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

it is evident that these pressures would be applied deliberately to permit
evaluation of results at each step. Yet, the initial form of "B” was in-
tended to embrace high intensity options -- in McNaughton's terminology,

a "full squeeze." It will be recalled from the discussions earlier in

the fall, that this term was applied to graduated operations that included
mining harbors, bombing bridges and LOC targets and eventually attacking
industries, 59/ As Option B developed, however, it became associated with
prolonged resistence to a negotiated settlement. 60/ Moreover, although
the intensity of the military operations it embraced remained about the
same, they were perceived as being applied at a faster, less flexible pace.
For example, in a comment about this option on 1k November, Admiral Mustin
wrote:

",.while the Joint Chiefs of Staff offer the capability
for pursuing Option "B" as defined, they have not explicitly
recommended that the operations be conducted on a basis
necessarily that inflexible. All implementing plans...would
permit suspension whenever desired by netional authority." 61/

Perceptions of Option ¢ became more like "B." Initially, the
additional pressures in "C" were conceived as "additional forceful measures
and military moves." 62/ They included such operations as extension of
the current ermed escort of reconnaissance flights in Laos to full-fledged
armed route reconnaissance -- gradually leading to similar attacks against
infiltration routes in the southern border regions of North Vietnam. The
initial Option C also provided for authorization of the slready plenned
for cross-border ground operations in Laos and possibly in Cambodia. By
8 November, however, the pressure portion of this option was perceived as
(1) including eventual attacks against other-than-infiltration targets in
North Vietnam end (2) giving "the impression of a steady deliberate
approach,” the pace of which could be quickened if necessary. Moreover,
in this later development of "C," the U.S. negotiating position would be
to insist from the outset on full acceptance of the current U.S. objectives.
Initially this position would incorporate certain additional bargaining
elements that could drop out in the course of discussion. 63/

This modification of the pressure end negotiation aspects of "Cc"
led other members of the Working Group to express reservations. Robert
Johnson stated that this "proposed stiffer version" was little different
fron "B." He argued that the only real differences now were (1) a
declared willingness to negotiate and (2) our unwillingness under "C"
to carry the action through to its ultimate conclusions." He cautioned
that the new version was unlikely to produce the hoped for advantages of
"pure C" and that it could convince the Communists that our negotiatory
spirit was not sincere, 64./ Enclosed with his comments were the views
of the CIA member, who also believed there would be confusion between "B”
and the new "C" ~~ particularly as observed by the DRV. Other reser-~-
vations were expressed by Assistant Secretary McNaughton, who urged that
the proposed pace of the new "C" be slowed dow. This would be accomplished

no far}

by dividing the additional pressure operations into distinct phases, with

"19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
