Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

fighting under a cover of U.S. sea and air power. In addition, the U.S.
defined the communist threat as the only real danger in the area; the U.S.

did not want to be drawn into an alliance directed against any other sort

of enemy, particularly desiring to avoid colonial conflicts. Hence, the

U.S. sought to restrict the applicability of any U.S. commitment to a few
specified nations especially vulnerable to communist aggression. Each of
these two major U.S. qualifications -- the proscriptions against land forces,
and. emphasis on anti-communism -- created its own dilemmas, solutions to which
proved to be elusive.

(1) Force Commitment

The resource -- political as well as military -- the U.S.
was prepared to commit to SEATO was bound to constitute its principal
strength. But the U.S., with its NATO commitments already a sizeable bur-
den, was not prepared to pay the price of a strong coalition. In no sense
was the U.S. prepared to commit itself to SEATO as it had to NATO. (It
is interesting that Dulles was so concerned with avoiding a public identi-
fication of SEATO with NATO that he tried to have the new treaty called
"MANPAC," for "Manila Pact." 25/) Rather, the U.S. searched for ways in
which other nations would provide troops. But few nations in 1954 possessed
the capability to field an army of significance within the SEATO region.

Vice Admiral Davis noted that:

"The United States was faced in this issue, I believe, with
the dilemma of attempting to attain two objectives that were
not completely compatible; on the one hand there was a desire to
place the communists on notice as clearly as possible that further
aggression on the area would meet with effective collective counter-
action. Such unequivocal notification would tend to enhance the
psychological effect of the Treaty on the Free World and the de-
terrent effect on the communists. Yet on the other hand, in spite
of the greater psychological effect that a strongly worded Treaty
might have, the attainment of this objective was necessarily limited
by the extent to which the United States, in its own interest,
could undertake advance military commitments under eae Treaty in
restriction of its freedom of action.” 26/

While the U.S. continued to call the prospective pact
"regional," a region existed only in the sense that a certain geographical

‘area was considered to be threatened by the expansion of communism. The

membership solicited for the SHATO conference was worldwide; potential
force contributors were overbalanced on the European side; and even within
the region itself, several countries did not desire to become participants,
and others were not invited. Determined not to become enmeshed in South-
east Asia without help from Europe, the U.S, settled for a SEATO based on
unspecified forces from eight nations, five of which were ethnically
European -- a position which apparently dismissed from consideration the
disadvantages which would accrue to armies drawn from former metropole
nations.

A-14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
