Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Paul Ely of 13 December 1954 was approved by the U.S, and, later, by

the French governments. The agreement, which provided for full autonomy
for Vietnamese forces by 1 July 1955 and for asswmption by the US MAAG
of full responsibility for assisting the Government of Vietnam in the
orgenizing and training of armed forces (under the general supervision
of the French High Commander and with the help of French advisors), led
to the assumption of this responsibility by General O'Daniel on le Febru-
ary 1955.

The reexamination of the decision, reported by the JCS on 2] Janu-
ary 1955, suggested that “although national policy prescribes making every
possible effort to prevent South Vietnam from falling to the communists ,
the degree to which the United States is willing to support this policy
in men, money, materials, and acceptance of additional war risks is not
readily apparent," and urged that: "Prior to consideration of military
courses of action with respect to this area, a firm decision at national
level. as to implementation of U.S. policy in Southeast Asia is mandatory."
Although no such cecision was forthcoming, and even this reexamination of
the decision to assist the Vietnamese did not choose one course of action
over any other, it did imply by repeated honks on the domino klaxon that
U.S. assistance to Vietnam was reduired. When, a week later, General
Collins expressed in more positive terms this need, the way was clear é
for the NSC to endorse a strong U.S. policy:in Vietnam, 31/ confirming
General O'Daniel's takeover on February 12--but the extent to which the
U.S. was prepared to support this policy (then or now) was never made
clear.

C. What was the threat to South Vietnam?

In addition to the more general considerations underlying the
U.S. decision to train Vietnamese forces was the specific consideration
of the enemy threat to South Vietnam. As perceived during the time this
decision was being taken, the threat consisted of three elements: the
dissident sect forces in South Vietnam; the communist forces in South
Vietnam, dominated by the decisionmakers in Hanoi; and the Vietnamese
People's Army of North Vietnam.

1. The sect forces, consisting of an estimated 10,000 Cao Dai,
2,500 Hoa Hao, and 2,600 Bien Xuyen forces, plus the urban police forces
which were at that time under the control of the Binh Xuyen, were in
opposition to the fledgling Diem government. 32/ "The politico-religious
armed groups called the Cao Dai, Hoa Hao, and Binh Xuyen are anti-
communist in orientation, but feudalistic and regressive in all other
respects. At present they have an effective veto power cver government
action. This power they use to block reforms which might threaten
their preferred military, economic, and political status. They will

