Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

helped by a quick end to the war, assuming always that a satis-
factory outcome was achieved. At present, U.S. military forces
must help the Vietnamese actively in order to get the Vietnamese
pacification effort moving -- let alone the war against the big
units. We have high hopes that eventually they can undertake
it all themselves and our soldiers have already expressed ap-
preciation for the newly created Vietnamese political action
teams and have recognized that they render the kind of service
no American can render. Nonetheless, our help is at present
indispensable in the field of criminal-terrorist war as it is
on the purely military side. ty i

To back up his feeling that now was the time for a big push, he quoted
General Eisenhower's saying that if you desire to conquer one well readied
organized and entrenched battalion with two battalions, you may succeed,
but it will take a long time and many casualties. However, if you use a
Division, you will do the job quickly and the losses will be slight.

Ambassador Lodge then went on to discuss the newest proposals for
pacification. He said that MACV had explained that:

dn the past ARVN had been so hard pressed by VC main .forces
and North Vietnamese army units that it had had no choice but
to concentrate on major offensive and defensive operations against
these forces, leaving regional and popular forces with primary
responsibility for providing local security in hamlets and villages.
The latter had not been adequate to this mission. Now the build-up
in US and Free World military forces makes it feasible to release
a major part of ARVN from its former primary task of search and
destroy operations and direct its main attention to pacification.
This new concept of ARVN support of pacification operations will
mean that US tactical forces will be carrying the main burden of
search and destroy operations against the VC main force in North
Vietnamese army units, while ARVN will be concentraing on pacifi-
cation. 8,

This new interest was picked up as far away as CINCPAC where a draft
military strategy to accomplish the U.S. objectives for Vietnam had been
prepared. This draft was sent to MACV for his comments on 23 August
1966. 9/ This draft strategy broke down our concept for Vietnam into
three inter-dependent undertakings. The first being U.S. actions against
North Vietnam, the second, by actions against Communist forces in the
South, and third, "nation building." In the section on nation building,
draft strategy stated:

Military operations will provide a steady improvement in
security throughout the country permitting extension of govern-
ment control in creating an enviromment in which RD can proceed.
The RD program is vital to the attainment of military success
in South Vietnam. Our forces will vigorously support and

57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

i *
