Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The complete collapse of colonialism is inevitable. The
downfall of the system of colonial slavery under the impact of
the national-liberation movement is a phenomenon ranking second
in historical importance after the formation of the world system
of socialism."

"The United States of America is the chief bulwark of present-
day colonialism...."

"....the working class of many capitalist countries, by over-
coming the split in its ranks and achieving unity of action of all
its detachments, could deliver a heavy blow to the policy of the
ruling circles of the capitalist countries and force them to step
up preparations for a new war, repel the offensive of monopoly
capital, and ensure satisfaction of its vital everyday and demo-
eratic demands."

"....The Communist Parties, guided by Marxist-Leninist teaching,
have always been against the export of revolution. At the same time,
they resolutely struggle against imperialist export of counter-
revolution. They consider it their international duty to call on
the peoples of all countries to unite, to mobilize all their internal
forces, to act vigorously and, relying on the might of the world
socialist system, to prevent or decisively rebuff the interference
of the imperialists in the affairs of the people of any country who
have risen in revolution.”

"The Communist Parties reaffirm the propositions of the 1957
Declaration concerning the question of the forms of transition of
various countries from capitalism to socialism."

"In conditions when the exploiting classes resort to the use of
force against the people, it is necessary to bear in mind another
possibility--that of nonpeaceful transition to socialism, Leninism
teaches, and historical experience confirms, that the ruling classes
do not relinguish power voluntarily. In these conditions the degree
of bitterness and the forms of the class struggle will depend not
so much on the proletariat as on the extent of the resistance of the
reactionary circles to the will of the overwhelming majority of the
people, on the use of force by these circles at one or another stage
of the struggle for socialism.” 206/

It is interesting, in the light of the foregoing, to read
the Communist Party history, written in South Vietnam around 1963 and cap-
tured on Operation CRIMP in 1966 (see Tab 2, p. 51 ff.). While such a
history must be regarded with caution--Soviet historians have not hesitated
to establish that the Bolsheviks overthrew the Czar--the CRIMP history,
consistent with other captured documents and prisoner interrogations, dates
the insurgency in South Vietnam from the Lao Dong Party conclave of May, 1959:

68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
