Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Ministers, other loyal officials, deputies and some military.
Nhu and Thuan have indicated that Diem, who not particularly
interested fundamental political matters is resisting some
suggested basic reforms." (From Saigon 1151, 4 December 1960)

The Ambassador reiterated the emphasis in his September
analysis both upon the threat from non-communist quarters and the
measures necessary to reduce it; however, it was apparent that one
effect of the coup had been to make one of the most important
measures, the transfer of Nhu, politically infeasible at the time.

"Just below surface there is much talk about another
coup unless Diem relaxes some controls, puts in effective reforms,
takes more effective action to fight VC and give protection to
population. There is still strong under-current of resentment
against entourage but because any action he took this score would
be under pressure and indicate weakness, and particularly his
resentment of press stories about entourage, coupled with fact
Diem feels he needs Nhu as loyal adviser, prospects Diem will
transfer Nhu to other work or abroad not in sight, at least
for some time. Despite this malaise and feeling about entourage,
most critics still respect Diem as only leader at moment but this
feeling could easily change unless he takes fairly drastic
action to meet criticism and basic desires most strata
population.

"We believe also that tmless Diem takes early effective
action on political front, coup has increased chances for
development neutralism and for anti-Americanism among those
critical of GVN. Despite our close identification with Diem
and his regime critics have not to date bracketed us with
government in expressing their dissatisfaction. Many have told
us however that only we can induce Diem adopt changes which
will save his regime, thus indicating they look to us to help
them. If, after failure of clearly anti-Communist coup
attempt to bring about changes we are not successful in inducing
Diem to make peaceful changes, critics may well become frus-
trated, turn against U.S., seek other means bring about change
and might even move toward neutralist position in middle. If
Viet Cong guerrilla successes in countryside continue at rate
registered during past year, this will also increase frustra-
tion of armed forces and population and could provide soil in
which neu*ralism may grow." (Ibid., pp. 23)

Since Diem was assuring the mission he was working on
reforms, the Ambassador concluded ".. . we should not at moment
press too hard," but it was still necessary to take appropriate

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
