Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and air and the counterinfiltration attacks within the Laotian
corridor. While the former would be covert...knowledge of
their occurrence could be made known...to give the morale lift
which is desired. Additionally we could engage in reprisal
bombings, to repay outrageous acts of the Viet Cong in South
Viet Nam...."

However, he added that even all these actions might not be sufficient
"to hold the present government upright," in which case we would have
to reconsider our policies. Our altematives, he said, would be either
to support one form or another of a replacement government or to "limit
our contribution to military action directed at North Viet-Nam." 126/

In addition to the military actions already identified with
morale-raising purposes, Taylor suggested:

"...we could begin to escalate progressively by attack-
ing appropriate targets in North Viet-Nam. If we justified
our action primarily upon the need to reduce infiltration,
it would be natural to direct these attacks on infiltration-
related targets such as staging areas, training facilities,
communications centers and the like.... In its final forms,
this kind of attack could extend to the destruction of all
important fixed targets in North Viet-Nem and to the inter-
diction of movement on all lines of communication. 127/

Ambassador Taylor's views regarding the circumstances under which
such escalatory actions should be initiated were not entirely clear in his
briefing to the Principals. After reiterating the necessity of stepping
up the 34A operations, increasing those in Laos, and undertaking reprisals
as part of the efforts to raise morale and strengthen the GVN, he stated
two somewhat different, although not necessarily contradictory, viewpoints
on the question of stronger military actions;

"If this course of action is inadequate, and the govern-
ment fells, then we must start over again or try a new
approach.... In any case, we should be prepared for emer-
gency military action against the North if only to shore up
a collapsing situation.

"Tf, on the other hand...the government maintains and
‘proves itself, then we should be prepared to embark on a
methodical program of mounting air attacks in order to

accomplish our pressure objectives vis-a-vis the DRV...."
He then proposed a scenario for controlled escalation, the actions in which
were quite similar to an extended Option A or a low-order Option C without
declared negotiating willingness. 128/

kh TOP SECRET -~ Sensitive
