Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Using these figures as a basis for comparison the J3 then
detailed what the enemy threats appeared to be especially in light
of increased or continued enemy infiltration. To meet these threats
he listed three roles in which our forces were deployed. One, con-
tainment or anti-invasion forces, countered the threat along the DMZ
and were needed for deployment opposite enemy sanctuaries in Laos and
Cambodia. Two, pacification and security forces required for support
of RD and security of base installations in LOC's; and three, offensive
forces required to defeat the enemy in the main force war and to invade
his in-country base areas. Under Course of Action A (Minimum Essential) -
21 battalions were required for containment; 168 for pacification and
security; and 100 for main force offensive, for a total of 289 by the
end of FY 67. These were, in the words of J-3 "within the time frame
under discussion a fixed overhead or a down payment on winning the war
which must be paid." 66/

Under Course of Action B (Optimum), the J3 estimated that contain-
ment forces would be increased to 27, this being based on the need to
counter the expected increased build-up of enemy forces along the DMZ,
in Laos and in Cambodia, all assumed possible because of restraints on
air interdiction plus the enemy's continued freedom of action in the
trans-border: sanctuaries.

Of the 42 U.S, battalions then committed to pacification/security,
16 were in support of RD, 13 were in combined pacification/security
roles, and an additional 13 were assigned base and line of communica-
tion security missions. Of the 22 free world battalions, 21 were on
pacification and security roles and one on a security role only. Of
the 80 RVN armed force battalions 53 were assigned RD support roles and
an additional 27 were assigned security missions. Of the total number
of maneuver battalions available at the end of FY 67, 25 U.S., one Free
World and 71 ARVN battalions were considered available for offensive
operations. Then, using the battalion equivalents which he had quoted
earlier, the J3 analyzed what he had labelled Courses A and B:

For a discussion of offensive capabilities under
course of action A and B, let us turn to the second
slide (UU). It summarizes the previous one and shows the
aggregate number of US, Free World, and GVN battalions
by the role to which committed. Note that the 97 batte-
lions available for offensive operations at the end of
FY 67 increases to 100 under course of action B. However,
these numbers do not give the true picture. By applying
the battalion equivalent ratio of 3 for a US or Free World
battalion and 1 for an ARVN battalion, the offensive

207 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
