Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

-SECRET

| Vietnam from the Communists by building something worth a man's
Hs | life to preserve. If it's a good program, we should encourage one
' strong political opposition to emerge, without endangering the national
i security. Here is where out political skill needs to be used, This
. political work is needed as a matter of grave urgency. Unless a con-
‘structive outlet’is found quickly, the opposition in Saigon is going to .
explode in vi iolence again and the Viet Cong are wide awake to exploit
_ it this time.

The Communist Threat.

It was a shock to me to look over maps of the estimated situation
with U.S, and Vietnamese intelligence personnel, as well as with
President Diem who held similar grim views. The Communist Viet
Cong now dominate much of the lst and 5th Military Regions, as well
as being active in spots in other regions, according to these estimates.
The probable strength of the Communist armed forces in South Viemam
was given to me in various guesses from 3, 000 to 15, 000. My guess is
that the strength is now closer to the latter figure and that only Hanoi
knows accurately. .

This strength estimate by itself isn't what shocked me. The

shocking part was to realize that the thousands of disciplined and trained
* Communist graduates of "proletarian military science" had been able
to infiltrate the most productive area of South Vietnam and to gain con-
trol of nearly all of it except for narrow corridors protected by military
actions and for a few highly-localized spots where loyal paramilitary
forces (Civil Guards and Self-Defnese Corps) have undertaken inspired
counter-guerrilia actions or where villagers work closely with the
military.

The Viet Cong have the initiative and most of the control over
the region from the jungled foothills of the High Plateau north of Saigon ©
all the way south down to the Gulf of Siam, excluding the big city area
of Saigon-Cholon, This is Vietnam's ERreaE Ae ae where most of
“its rice and rubber are grown.

Unlike the Philippines or Malaya, the Communists cannot be
cordoned off at the country's borders and then dealt with as an internal
security problem alone. The borders of Vietnam are long and include
some of the most difficult terrain in the world to patrol. It is apparent
that many of the Viet Cong infiltrate from Cambodia, particularly from
SEL ere ESOSSHESS Also, southeastern Laos has a reported Comrz nist -

=e — a - = st ae ee ” Ae be ee

+ a ees ey

& feen she
