C)

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

advisors favored at that time an ARVN penetration of the VC redoubt in
War Zone D prior to any operations aimed specifically at pacification.
But U.S. political desires to start some local operation which could
achieve concrete gains combined with Diem's preference for a pacifica-
tion effort in an area of strategic importance led to the initial effort
in March 1962, “Operetion SMRISE," in Binh Duong Province north of
Saigon. This was a heavily VC-infiltrated area rather than one of
minimal penetration, as Thompson had urged. But planning ~- as distinct
from operations -- continued on the Delta plan and strategic hamlets were
constructed in a variegated, uncoordinated pattern throughout the spring
and early summer. ‘The U.S. had little or no influence over these activi-
ties; the primary impetus was traceable directly to the President's
prother and political counsellor, Igo Dinh ihu.

‘In August 1962, GV produced its long awaited national pacification
plen with four priority areas and specified priorities within each area,
At the same time, however, it indicated that over 2,500 strategic hamlets
had already been completed and that work was already underway on more
than 2,500 more. Although it was not until October 1962, that CVN
explicitly announced the Strategic Hamlet Program to be the unifying
concept of its pacification and counterinsurgent effort it was clear
earlier that the program had assumed this central position.

Three important implications of this early progress (or, more pre-
cisely, reported progress) are also clear in retrospect. These impli-~
cations seem not to have impressed themselves acutely upon U.S. observers
at the time. First, the progrem was truly one of GV) initiative rather
than one embodying priorities and time phasing recommended by the U.5.
Diem was running with his own ball in programmatic terms, no matter who
articulated the theory of the approach. The geographic dispersion of
hamlets already reported to be completed indicated that there was, in
fact, a conscious effort to implement this phase almost simuitaneously
throughout the entire nation rather than to build slowly as Diem's
foreign advisors (both U.S. and British) recommended.

Finally, the physical aspects of Diem's program were similar if not
jdentical to earlier population resettlement and control efforts prac-
ticed by the French and by Diem. The long history of these efforts was
marked by consistency in results as well as in techniques: all failed
dismeally because they ran into resentment if not active resistance on
the part of the peasants at whose control and safety, then loyalty, they
were aimed. U.S. desires to begin an effective process of pacification
had fastened onto security as a necessary precondition and slighted the
historic record of rural resistance to resettlement. President Diem and
his brother, for their part, had decided to emphasize control of the
rural population as the precondition to winning loyalty. The record is
inconclusive with respect to their weighing the record of the past but
it appears that they, too, paid it scant attention. Thus the early
operational efforts indicated a danger of peasant resistence, on one hand,

iii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
