Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Free World, to deploy self sustaining U.S. forces to South
Vietnam either unilaterally, or as a part of a SEACDT
[Southeast Asia Common Defense Treaty -- a term used prior
to SEATO/ force.

dad. To withdraw all U.S. support from South Vietnam
and concentrate on saving the remainder of Southeast Asia. 12/

No such decision was made. Indeed, as explained in the summary and
analysis, there is no reason to believe that the need for such &

* os * * wie WT
decision was even seriously considered at "the highest level.

MAAG Vietnam was by 1960 still quite small in size, though it loomed
ever larger in importance. (It was the only U.S. MAAG commanded by a
Lieutenant General; all of the other MAAG Chiefs were officers of lesser
rank.) It was essentially city-bound, training center and Saigon-
oriented, devoted to technical-tactical training and high level per-
svasion aimed at influencing RVNAF organization. The personnel Limita-
tions imposed upon it resulted in highly centralized advice. But through
its efforts and material swpport this MAAG assisted in the creation of a
sizeable (140,000 man) conventional. army and of small navel and air
forces of approximately 5,000 men each.

The U.S, MAAG was also concerned with the establishment and training
of paramilitary forces, but it was not as directly concerned as it was
with the creation of conventional forces in ARVN. ‘The Civil Guard (ca)
and Self Defense Corps (spc) were at various times under the control of
the Ministry of the Interior or directly under President Diem. In the
field they were invariably under the direction of the Provinee Chiefs.
The U.S. civilian advisors who had been called in to give assistance
with police and internal security matters tended to favor making these
paramilitary forces less military per se and more police intelligence-
minded. MAAG tended to favor making them more consciously military and
territorially oriented in order to free ARVN for mobile, offensive opera-
tions rather than tying its forces down in static defense duties. 13/

By 1960, when Civil Guard training was passed to MAAG control, neither
course of action had been followed consistently but it was highly probable
that MAAG's views would henceforth prevail. Thus, questions of local
physical security would almost inescapably be decided with reference to
the effect they would have on the functions of ARVN, itself created with
an eye to external defense. ‘This may be said to be an awkward structure
from which to launch an effort aimed primarily at internal security. It
was, however, the structure that existed.

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
