fx
=a)
7

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But by the 16th both the MAAG Chief and the Ambassador were
taking a gentler line. Durbrow's cable of that date reports that ;
agreement on military reforms had reached a point "which MAAG considers
it can live with provided GVN follows through with proper implemente-
tion." He was more concerned about the civil reforms, but nevertheless
concluded the cable with:

Comments: Diem was most affable, exuded confidence
and for first time expressed some gratitude our CIP efforts
which he promised implement as best he could. Again before
giving full green light believe we should await outcome
detail discussion by GVN-US officials. In meantime MAAG
quietly ordering some equipment for 20,000 increase. 13/

And a week later, Washington replied, agreeing that the "ereen
light" should be held up until the CIP was approved, but also noting
that since success depended on the willing cooperation of the Vietnamese,
the Embassy ought not to push Diem too hard in the negotiations, 1/

Following this, the CIP negotiations dragged on inconclusively,
and there is a ghostly quality to it all. There are cables giving en-
couraging progress reports which, in fact, seem limited to vague promises
which, with hindsight, we know to have been quite meaningless. MAAG (and
eyentuslily tie JCS in Washington) grew increasingly impatient with
Durbrow's insistence on further holding up the "green light. " They wanted
to get on with the war.

By the end, Durbrow was simply holding out for Diem to actually
complete the paperwork on some steps he had long ago said he intended to
take. His very last cable (May 3) gives a good feeling for the flavor
of the negotiations that had been going on between Diem and Durbrow for
the nearly 3 months sinee the CIP talks began (and indeed it gives the
flavor of Durbrow's relations with Diem at least since the previous
October).

During the inauguration reception at Palace April 29,
Diem took me aside and asked if I had given green light for
US implementation of our part of counter insurgency plan
(CIP). I replied frankly that I had not and noted that as
stated in my letter of February 13 certain minimum actions
must be taken by the GVN first if CIP is to produce results.
I listed following actions: (1) Establishment of a central
intelligence organization; (2) assignment of operational
control for counter insurgency operations within military
chain of command; and (3) implementation of reforms an-
nounced by Diem on February 6. Diem replied that he would
do all these things, but that time was required to work
out details. He said various GVN Cabinet members and Joint

1)

——— Caer ms
