Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

18
“RELORTS FROM CAPTURED NORTH VIETNAMESE NAVAL PERSONNEL

Asa final point on this issue, U.S. naval forces in the 314 years which
have lapsed since the August 1964 incidents have captured several
North Vietnamese naval personnel. These personnel were extensively
interrogated. One of these, captured in July 1966, stated he had taken
part in the August 2, 1964, attack on the Waddoz, and his account of
that attack coincided with our observations. He professed no knowl-
edge of the August 4 attack and said that he believed that P'T boats
were not involyed in that attack. He stated that Swatows could have
been used for that attack. His disclaimer of PT participation 1s con-
tradicted by information received from a later eaptive, A North Viet-
namese naval oflicer captured in July 1967 provided the name of the
commander of a PT’ squadron. In intelligence ee received imme-
diately after the August 4 attack, this commander and his squadron
were identified by name and number as participants,

SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT CONCLUSION

Now, finally, if there was a second attack, was there sufficient evi-
dence available at the time of our response to support this conclusion?

Some of the details cited above, partienlarly the statements of eye-
witnesses, although gathered immediately after the attack, had not
reached Washington at the time that the reprisal air strikes were
ordered executed. Sufficient iInformationn was in the hands of te Presi-
dent, however, to establish beyond any doubt then or now that an
attack had taken place. Allow tne to repeat again that information:

An intelligence report of a highly classified and unimpeachable na-
ture received shortly before the engagement, stating that North Viet-

- hamese naval forces intended to attack the J/addow and Turner Joy.

Reports from the ships that their radars indicated they were being
shadowed by high speed surface vessels. :

Reports from the ships that they were being approached by the
high speed vessels and an attack appeared imminent.

eports from the ships that they were underattack,

A report from the ships that searchlight illumination had been
utilized by the attacking craft and that gunfire against the patrol had
been observed.

A report that two torpedoes had passed close to the Turner Joy and
that there had been positive visual sightings of what appeared to be
cockpit lichts of patrol craft passing near the Maddoz.

An intelligence report stating that North Vietnamese naval forces
had reported that they were involved in an enga gement, .

Reports from the U.S. ships that they had sunk two and possibly
three of the attacking craft. m

“An intelligence report stating that North Vietnamese naval forces

” had reported losing two ships in the engagement.

A veport from the onscene task group commander that he was cer-
tain that the ambush had taken place, although precise details of the
engagement were still not known. J

A report from: the commander in chief, Pacific, that he had no doubt
that an attack had oecurred. r :

All of this information was available prior to the time the Executive
order was issued.
