Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP: SECRET - Sensitive

Army and one Marine division forces, plus 15 Neval Reserve destroyers
and two Naval construction battalions. In addition, an unspecified
number of individual Reservists would be needed along with certain
types of Reserve equipment and aircraft. The Reserves would be replaced
by permanent units during FY 69-70. The Marine Reserve Division would
be deployed to SVN to be replaced after a year by an Army Division,
while the Marine Reserve Division would then revert to Reserve status.
In the JCS estimate they stated that we could meet the Fy 68 CINCPAC
requirement by March 1968 if we called Reserves or by September 1969

if we did not. The Chiefs were particularly exercised at the prospect
of very slow U.S. build-up over time which would continue to permit the
vc/NVA to react. They commented that:

The rate at which US power has been applied has per-
mitted North Vietnamese and Viet Cong reinforcements and
force posture improvements to keep pace with the graduated
increases in US military actions. It is fundamental to the
successful. conduct of warfare that every reasonable measure
be taken to widen the differential between the capabilities

of the opposing forces. Target system limitations, rules of
engagement, and force curtailments have combined to militate
against widening the gap between the total Free World force
capability, including South Vietnam, and the capability of
the enemy to generate, deploy, and sustain his forces while
improving the defense of his homeland.

a. Successful prosecution of the war in South-
east Asia requires the maintenance of simultaneous pressure
against all echelons of the enemy forces. In South Viet-
nam, this involves extensive ground, air, and naval opera-
tions against Viet Cong/North Vietnamese main forces and
major base areas, while continuing revolutionary development
and aggressive operations against Viet Cong provincial forces
and guerrillas. In North Vietnam, the effectiveness of LOC
interdiction cannot be greatly improved without significant
reduction of the present restrictions on bombing and mining
operations. Deep-water ports then can be closed or neu-
tralized, and it will be worthwhile to intensify the inter-
diction effort against other LOCs in North Vietnam. Con-
comitantly, remaining high-value, war-supporting resources
should be quickly, but methodically, destroyed. Attacks
against population centers, per se, would continue to be
avoided. (See Appendix B for requested changes in oper-
ating authorities and proposed expansion in air and naval
operations against North Vietnam.) Limited ground action in
North Vietnam might also become necessary to destroy forces
threatening the northern provinces. 10/

167 TOP SECRET: - Sensitive
