Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section Shs)
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnamese military action against the ships involved.
Moreover, another factor is whether we cin be fully

certain of target identification. The balance on this

one is extremely close, but we continue to question
whether expected gains would counter-balance the risks. 4o/

It is interesting that the entire discussion of bombing on
both sides in the DPM is devoted to various kinds of escalation. The pro-
posal that was eventually to be adopted, namely cutting back the bombing
to the panhandle only, was not even mentioned, nor does it appear in any
of the other drafts or papers related to the Clifford Group's work. The
fact may be misleading, however, since it apparently was one of the
principle ideas being discussed and considered in the forums at various
levels. It is hard to second-guess the motivation of a Secretary of
Defense, but, since it is widely believed that Clifford personally advocated
this idea to the President, he may well have decided that fully countering
the JCS recommendations for escalation was sufficient for the formal DPM.

To have raised the idea of constricting the bombing below the 19th or 20th
parallel in the memo to the President would have generalized the knowledge

of such a suggestion and invited its sharp, full and formal criticism by

the JCS and other opponents of a bombing halt. Whatever Clifford's reasons,
the memo did not contain the proposal that was to be the main focus of the
continuing debates in March and would eventually be endorsed by the President.

(Oy The President Weighs the Decision

1. More Meetings and More Alternatives

The idea of a partial bombing halt was not new within the
Administration. It had been discussed in some form or other as a possible
alternative at various times for more than a year. (In the DPM of May 20,
1967, McNamara had formally proposed the idea to the President.) It was
brought up anew early in the Clifford Group deliberations and, while not
adopted in the final report, became the main alternative under considera-
tion in the continuing meetings of the various groups that had been formed
for the Clifford exercise. As indicated previously, Secretary Clifford
reportedly suggested personally to the President the idea of cutting back
the bombing to the North Vietnamese panhandle. The first appearance of
the idea in the documents in March is in a note from Clifford to Wheeler
on the 5th transmitting for the latter's exclusive "information" a pro-
posed "statement" drafted by Secretary Rusk. The statement, which was
given only the status of a "suggestion" and therefore needed to be closely
held, announced the suspension of the bombing of North Vietnam except in
the "area associated with the battle zone." It was presumably intended
for Presidential delivery. Attached to the draft statement, which shows
Rusk himself as the draftee, was 4 list of explanatory reasons and condi-
tions for its adoption. Rusk noted that bad weather in northern North

_ 180 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
