Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

had asked for almost 4200 personnel. by 1. December 1964. and the balance
(comprising only Special Forces units) of the 4772 total increase by

1 February 1965. 125/ Secretary McNamara asked the JCS to study the
feasibility of accelerating the build-up so that it would be completed
by 30 September. The JCS replied that the advisory personnel could be
made available this quickly but that several support units -- particu-
larly aviation units == could not reach South Vietnam by 30 September
without causing extreme difficulties and the degradation of tests of
the airmobile concept then in progress. 126/ The Secretary of Defense
directed on 7 August that the accelerated deployment, except for certain
critical aviation items and jeeps, be completed by the end of September.
He further directed that COMUSMACV be queried as to his ability to absorb
these personnel and units by that date. 127/

General Westmoreland's reply stated that he could not reasonably
absorb this build-up in the time desired by Secretary McNamara. To do
so, he said, would generate an unorderly situation with respect to support
facilities and en undesirable hump in personnel rotation. The proposed
acceleration would not, moreover, satisfy the desired standards of advisor
training or dovetail with the planned expansion of the advisory effort:

The required training/schooling of Bn/District advisors
will be further sacrificed under the proposed compression. A
two week in-country orientation is being established to handle
the Sep-Oct increments which will not receive CONUS schooling
prior to arrival. Any further compression would create a
requirement for in-country training which is beyond our capa-
bility.

Districts must be able to accept advisors based on their
status of pacification. The present scheduling of district
advisors is phased with the pacification plan and projected to
coincide with its progress....

In summary, the compression of personnel and units would
overload our existing facilities and create administrative prob-
lems beyond our capacity to handle in an orderly manner. COMUSMACV
has discussed with Amb. Taylor who concurs. 128/

MACV'S PREFERENCE UPHELD AGAIN

Faced with this reply from the individual responsible for managing
the U.S. contribution to the advisory and support effort, Secretary
McNamara cancelled the accelerated deployment. The military services
were instructed to deploy personnel and units to South Vietnam in accordance
with General Westmoreland's initiel recommendation forwarded to Washington.
a month earlier, in mid-July. 129/

53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
