Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Thus, backed by the U.S., Diem obdurately refused to open talks with the
Hanoi government. He continued to maintain that the Government of South
Vietnam had not signed the Geneva Agreements and thus was not bound by
then.

"Our policy is a policy for peace. But nothing will lead
us astray of our goal, the unity of our country, a wiity in
freedom and not in slavery. Serving the cause of our nation,
more than ever we will struggle for the reunification of our
homeland.

"We do not reject the principle of free elections as
peaceful and democratic means to achieve that unity. However,
if elections constitute one of the bases of true democracy, they
will be meaningful only on the condition that they be absolutely
free.

"Now, faced with a regime of oppression as practiced by the
Viet Minh, we remain skeptical concerning the possibility of
fulfilling the conditions of free elections in the North." *

On 1 June 1956, the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs,
Walter Robertson, stated:

"President Diem and the Government of Free Viet-Nam
reaffirmed on April 6 of this year and on other occasions
their desire to seek the reunification of Viet-Nam by peace-
ful means. In this goal, we support them fully. We hope
and pray that the partition of Viet-Nam, imposed against the
will of the Vietnamese people, will speedily come to an end.
For our part we believe in free elections, and we support
President Diem fully in his position that if elections are
to be held, there first must be conditions which preclude
intimidation or coercion of the electorate. Unless such
conditions exist there can be no free choice." **

President Eisenhower is widely quoted to the effect that in 1954
as many as 80% of the Vietnamese people would have voted for Ho Chi
Minh, as the popular hero of their liberation, in an election against
Bao Dai. In October 1955, Diem ran against Bao Dai in a referendum
and won -- by a dubiously overwhelming vote, but he plainly won
nevertheless. It is almost certain that by 1956 the proportion which
might have voted for Ho -- in a free election against Diem -- would have
been much smaller than 80%. Diem's success in the South had been far
greater than anyone could have foreseen, while the North Vietnamese
regime had been suffering from food searcity, and low public morale

* Radio Broadcast by Premier Diem, 16 July 1955.
*x*%  fmerican Friends of Vietnam, America's Stake in Vietnam (New York:
Carnegie Press, 1956), 15 ff.

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
