Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

which Secretary Rusk publicly buoyed by the preceding day's announcement
of the Mansfield Resolution supporting the administration's policy in
Vietnam.

Resistance to the war and its costs were beginning to be reflected
in administration actions. In early February President Johnson asked for
$6.2 billion in foreign aid for two years, the smallest appropriation in
the 20-year history of the program noting that the opposition to a larger
program stemmed from "a view of needs at home and the costs of the struggle
in Vietnam." In early March the President announced that we were beginning
to mine the rivers in the north, authorizing long-range artillery shelling
across the DMZ and commencing naval bombardment of military targets in the
DMZ in North Vietnam border areas. When questioned, he defended the new
activities stating that he would "not describe them as a step up in the
war" but only as boosts "desirable and essential in the face of immediate
infiltration and build-up." 64/ There was increasing public emphasis
from the White House on peace feelers to Hanoi and detent with the Soviet
Government. The first exchange of letters between Kosygin and Johnson
confirming the willingness of the Soviet Government to discuss means of
limiting the arms race was publicly announced on 3 March. On 22 March
the Johnson-Ho letters were released, an event which in the view of most
commentators placed Johnson in a somewhat more tenable position vis-a-vis
Vietnam war policy than he had previously enjoyed.

Despite intensive efforts to alleviate the problem of credibility,
events continued to reveal that the administration was being less than
frank with reporters. In early February the Pentagon acknowledged that it
had lost 1800 aircraft in Vietnam as opposed to the 622 "combat planes" which
it had quoted earlier. R. W. Appel wrote in the New York Times questioning
COMUSMACV infiltration figures. A week later, in another article which
received wide circulation, Appel reported that the pacification effort was
greatly hindered by South Vietnamese Government foot-dragging, a conclusion
which found considerable sympathy among the group already dissatisfied with
South Vietnamese Government pacification performance.

The public and the press alike were becoming increasingly wary of the
statistics coming out of Washington. Even the Chicago Tribune in early
March surmised that either the figures coming out of MACV were wrong or
those coming out of the Pentagon were misleading. The paper cited a recent
joint press conference held by McNamara and Rusk in which they announced
that communist military forces in Vietnam had suffered tremendous casualties
in the past four months, quantitatively an increase of 40-50%, thus reducing
their effectiveness significantly, but in the next sentence announcing that
serious communist military activity in Vietnam had "increased substantially."

By mid-March editorial commentary was focusing on the theme that
generally there would be more and wider war. American casualties announced
on 10 March were higher than those for any other week of the war: 232 KIA,
1381 WIA, 4 MIA for a total of 1617. Four days later the U.S. conducted

99 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
