Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As stated in your [Gilpatric's memorandum, the proposed concept
set forth must be analyzed in the total context of the defense of
Southeast Asia. Any concept which deals with the defense of South-
east Asia that does not include all or a substantial portion of Laos
is, from a military standpoint, unsound. To concede the majority
of northern and central Laos would leave three-quarters of the
border of Thailand exposed and thus invite an expansion of communist
nilitary action. To concede southern Laos would open the flanks of
both Thailand and South Vietnam as well as expose Cambodia. Any
attempt to combat insurgency in South Vietnam, while holding areas
in Laos essential to the defense of Thailand and South Vietnam and,
at the same time, putting troops in Thailand, would require an effort
on the part of the United States alone on the order of magnitude of
at least three divisions plus supporting units. This would require
an additional two divisions from the United States.

What is needed is not the spreading out of our forces through-
out Southeast Asia, but rather a concentrated effort in laos where
a firm stand can be taken saving all or substantially all of Laos
which would, at the same time, protect Thailand and protect the
borders of South Vietnam.

But, if the Laos plan was "politically wmaccepteble at this time,"
the Chiefs "provided" (but did not explicitly recommend) "a possible
limited interim course of action" which could...

provide a degree of assistance to the Government of South Vietnam
to regein control of its ow territory, and could free certain
South Vietnamese forces for offensive actions against the Viet
Cong. While the Joint Chiefs of Staff agree that implementation
of this limited course of action would not provide for the defense
of Thailand or Leos, nor contribute substantially or permanently
to solution of the overall problem of defense of Southeast Asia,
they consider the Plan preferable to either of the two military
possibilities described in referenced memorandum. 2/

The following day, there appeared a new paper called "Concept of
Intervention in Vietnam." The paper, according to a pencilled note on
the availeble copy, was drafted mainly by Alexis Johnson, who was then a_
Deputy Under Secretary of State. We know from a note William Bundy (then
principal Deputy to Paul Nitze, who was then Assistant Secretary of Defense,
TSA) sent to Mcliemara that a "talking paper" by Johnson was to be discussed
at a meeting that included, at least, Rusk and McNamara on the afternoon
of the 10th. But we do not know whether the draft we heve available is the
"talking paper" or a revision put together later in the day, after the
meeting.

TT TOP SECRET - Sensitive
