Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fhe French eles recomnize the fact that they cannot
afford a continued military cost of hundreds of millions
of dolieare a yooy in a csmusien thet bas failed end that
tng no proa@mesta of tbrincing scout a military solution.
Ag HAP Aid is subsequently reduced, 4t will be inposeibbe
for the French to cerry this expense, Sven today, with the
hele of EHP, demestic picns of the Fransh Covermient cre
tsenly affected’ by this crain, which indirectly but power
fhity afiedta the Governncnt’s capeslty to desl with Labor,
fouiel and educational exigencies at home. -

Whe Prensh are also avere, realistically, of the
moittary sweakness On the continent dus to tre maintenance
of a miiitury setablichment in Indo-Uhina that abgzords
half ef th regular symy and the best Gatres Tor troop
treining, wnese losses srs continuous, and whose copietion
et French officer strencth eanugle the eutoht ef ness
etfieers fren the French «ilitery academics. Tita,
ineldentally though importantly, affects the United States
position an miditary dezistance te the Continont.

Psepiiea Feanch sentinentel aspirations for ebsoxbing
\ignial ereas: within the body and apivly of "metropolitan
yonse,” thers te no csubt that the sreneh are veallstie
Snoush, when not euotiotinliy disturbed, to apereciate tha
at that the psoples ey Vietnam oan no Llongor be
ntgeratec* in. that reapest.

2
a

=~

~
a
mii Soh

sar

Thavefora £% atseaxvs that the time hes come that an

Pode entivoaly rations! French consideration of this provlem uaet
vere plage, tnat ten be the foundation of rolicy oonelacra~
tions. dt ie strictly nacereary that this consideration be

fence now, go that U.S, poliey aay renaanad and Suctifie
ably work an eooneration with: the Prensh in attecotines to

beat A. make Tiga enl workable a 2esif-coverned Yietnan State cone

ditioned to find 4% desirable.ond aavantaxsous to bo a

part of the froneh Unian,

_, on short, v2 must find out whet the Frensh expect
| of Vietiam,
S~ Voclsions and actions nesencary to oreato public
| respect for the Bao Dat gevernnent. )

&. A Clear Gsfinition of the Frensh Union, its
moaning, ita yesapansibilitics an& sucrantees
including tat guarentee of a method rox.
“evolutionary” trentmont of counteies
aogepted as peptners within the Frensh Unton.

pik » ‘theese sonditions nave never bean definca, and
[} RO GA knova what -the Froench Union means,

. z D>, Inplomentat toa

