Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IIt. D. 1. THE OUTCOME FOR THE COMMUNISTS

1. Major Communist Powers Achieve Their Objectives

To judge from the public commentaries of the communist delegation
leaders -- Molotov and Chou -- China and the Soviet Union were satisfied
with the outcome at Geneva. The final settlement seemed to meet most of
their objectives, measured not simply in terms of their narrow interests
in Indochina, but more broadly in terms of their global interests. The
Viet Minh, however, accepted a settlement considerably at variance not
only with their initial demands and their actual military control in Viet-
nam, but with their compromise position as well. Yet, even the Viet Minh
appeared content with the results of Geneva. The reason -- the belief that
time was on their side.

&. Communists See Complete Takeover as Inevitable

At the final plenary session on 21 July, the Soviet, Chinese,
and North Vietnamese delegates agreed that the Accords, if properly imple-
mented, would end hostilities and give the DRV a territorial base in the
North. The stage would thus be set for general elections in Vietnam and
produce the desired communist takeover. The political situation in South
Vietnam was precarious. In addition, there was a multitude of armed sects
- and other groups hostile to the central government of Bao Dai who continu-
ally relied on the French. The communists certainly had good cause for
considering that South Vietnam could not cohere sufficiently within the
two-year period prior to national elections, stipulated by the Final Declar-
ation, to pose a viable alternative to the DRV. The communists had good
reason to believe that a stable regime in the southern zone would never
be formed; hence the DRV would assume control of the entire country almost
by default. ;

b. Chinese Not Adverse to Permanent Partition

Interestingly, however, the Chinese accepted the notion that
the Geneva Accords had, at least temporarily -- and perhaps permanently --
created two separate political entities. As early as June, Chou told Jean
Chauvel that the Chinese recognized the existence of Viet Minh and Viet-
namese governments. In talking of a final political settlement, Chou again
stated that this should be achieved by direct negotiations between the two
Vietnamese governments. 1/ So far as the CPR was concerned, partition
meant not a simple division of administrative responsibility -- which is
the implication of the Vietnam armistice provision (Article lla) for the
conduct of “civil administration" by the "parties" who were to regroup
to the two zones -- but the establishment of governmental authority in
North and South Vietnam. What still remains unclear, of course, is the
permanency which Chou privately attached to that arragnement.

D-5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
