Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

on genuine independence... Regardless of our united effort, it is
a truism that the war can never be successful unless large numbers
of the people of Vietnam are won over from their sullen neutrality
and open hostility to it and fully support its successful conclu-
sion... I strongly believe that the French cannot succeed in Indo-
china without giving concessions necessary to make the native army
a reliable and crusading force." 39/

Later, Kennedy criticized the French:

"Every year we are given three sets of assurances: first,
that the independence of the Associated States is now complete;
second, that the independence of the Associated States will
soon be completed under steps ‘now’ being taken; and third,
that military victory for the French Union forces is assured,
or is just around the corner." 40/

Another American knowledgeable concerning the U.S.-French
difficulties and with the Bao Dai solution was Robert Blum, who headed
the economic aid program extended to the Bao Dai regime in 1950. General
De Lattre viewed U.S. economic aid as especially pernicious, and told
Blum that: "Mr. Blum, you are the most dengerous man in Indochina." 41/
De Lattre resented the American intrusion. "As a student of history,

I can understand it, but as a Frenchman I don't like it." In 1952, Blum
analyzed the Bao Dai-French-American triangle as follows:

"The attitude of the French is difficult to define. On
the one hand are the repeated official affirmations that
France has no selfish interests in Indochina and desires
only to promote the independence of the Associated States
and be relieved of the terrible drain of France's resources.
On the other hand are the numerous examples of the deliberate
continuation of French controls, the interference in major
policy matters, the profiteering and the constant bickering
and ill-feeling over the transfer of powers and the issues
of independence... There is unquestionably a contradiction
in French actions between the natural desire to be rid of
this unpopular, costly and apparently fruitless war and the
determination to see it through with honor while satisfying
French pride and defending interests in the process. This
distinction is typified by the sharp difference between the
attitude toward General de Lattre in Indochina, where he is
heralded as the political genius and military savior ...
and in France, where he is suspected as a person who for
personal glory is drawing off France's resources on a
perilous adventure...

"Tt is difficult to measure what have been the results
of almost two years of active American participation in the
affairs of Indochina. Although we embarked upon a course of
uneasy association with the 'colonialist'-tainted but

A-27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
