Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the RF/PF and CIDG troops there under U.S. command. The ARVN battalions
thus released and shielded by a U.S. buffer along the Laotian border
should then move to the populous coastal provinces. No location was
specified for the ROK division, but the Chiefs recommended that its mis-
sion be similar to that of the U.S. divisions. They felt the Koreams"
presence would have good “psychological effect."

This "three-division plan," as it was dubbed, was discussed with
the Secretary of Defense and Ambassador Taylor on the 29th of March and
was undoubtedly the topic of some discussion during the subsequent NSC
meetings. 121/ In any case, even though the recommended deployments
were not sanctioned in NSAM 328, the JCS continued to plan for ultimate
implementation. 122/

In earlier sections of this paper the possibility that the JCS
may have gotten ahead of some of the other decision-makers in the U.S.
Government was discussed. Thus, in early April they were forced to back
down on the deployment they had ordered of the 173rd Airborne to Bien
-Hoa-Vung Tau, 123/ and in JCSM 321-65, 30 April 1965, they erroneously
described as "approved" a package of some 4,700 logistical troops which
were part of the three-division plan and still in the talking stage. 12h/
The mission of forces listed in JCSM 321-65 as 'kpproved” by the JCS was
to be as follows:

"These forces are to bolster GVN forces during their con-
tinued build-up, secure bases and installations, conduct
counterinsurgency combat operations in coordination with the
RVNAF, and prepare for the later introduction of an airmobile
division to the central plateau, the remainder of IIT MEF to
the Da Nang area, and the remainder of a ROK division to
Quang Ngai."

"Logistic forces of all services will strengthen support
of in-country forces, provide support for the new forces,
prepare bases and installations for possible future develop-
ments, and be prepared to support those additional forces."

The tone of JCSM 321-65 was consistent with the JCS' advocacy
of a full three divisions of troops for Vietnam plus an aggressive
mission for those troops. It was not in keeping, however, with the
cautious language of the "Victory Strategy" sanctioned at the Honolulu
Conference of 20 April. That strategy was the basis for the enclavists
and it promised success through denial of victory to the Viet Cong.

The enemy was to be denied victory because he would be unable to seize
a certain number of decisive areas held by U.S. and Third Country
forces, despite any successes he might enjoy throughout the rest of the
country. Realizing his own impotence, the enemy would be moved to seek
a negotiated settlement to the conflict. The level, of commitment

93 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
