Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Most happily, the Constituent Assembly completed its work on the
constitution just in time to permit Premier Ky to present a copy to
President Johnson at Guam. As had been the case on the two previous
occasions of top US/GVN talks, the communique which resulted from the
2-day meeting lay primary emphasis on political, economic, end social
matters. T1/ The military picture was presumed to be so encouraging
and improving as to need no special attention.

14, Routine Matters, April - September 1967

Most of the previous problems persisted during this period. By
.June the rate of infletion was predicted to be 45 - 50 percent per year,
and the piaster gap was to be 17.3 billion greater than projected. 78/
Hanh, now GVN Economic Minister, scheduled a September trip to Washington
and the list of expected topics read very much the same as agendas for
many previous such meetings. 79/ Hanh could upon occasion get very
excited, as in the case where & suit by a Greek shipping line froze the
GVN account in a New York City bank; 80/ but despite repeated urging
from Washington, nobody in Saigon could get up courage se to approach
GVN on those retroactive port clearing charges. 81/

On April 18, GVN finally issued a National Reconciliation Proclama-
tion which stated that "All citizens who rally to the national cause can
be employed by the goverment in accordance with their ability,"82/ but
the decree proved to be a mirage. It used the Vietnamese words for
solidarity rather than those for reconciliation and the program proceeded
in consonance with that distinction. Saigon reminded State that Premier
Ky had recently told the Ambassador that meaningful progress on national
reconciliation could only come after a constitutional government was es-
tablished. 83/

On the MACV side, Ambassador Kemer was getting organized. In response
to a Washington query on land reform he recalled his consistent position
but pointed out that it was not an important issue in Vietnam. Far more
important was the matter of security in the countryside. 84/

The US continued to deliver material assistance to improve the morale
of ARVN troops. A $2.83 million program for 913 ARVN dependent houses
was upgraded to provide more modern structures with utilities. 85/ USAID
helped the RVNAF commissary system for RVNAF end dependents. Although
rice was eliminated to avoid lowering its open market price, GVN sought
compensating increases in the meat and fish supplied. 86/ MACV programmed
over $3 million to the RVNAF Quartermaster Corps which supplied field and
garrison rations. 87/ .
But there were continuing signs that ARVN as a fighting force needed
propping up. Sporadic efforts at encadrement appeared. The USMC Combined
Action Companies in I Corps were well publicized. In April, the US 25th
Division completed studies, and transmitted to General Chinh, still CG

i 50 - OP SECRET - Sensitive
