Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Leadership and direction for Communist subversive
activity in the GVN is provided from North Vietnam by the
Communist Lao Dong Party. In the past, several South Viet-
namese Communist leaders who went North at the time of the
armistice have been identified as playing important roles in
directing and coordinating Communist operations within the
GVN. Most powerful of these is Le Duan, who has recently
enjoyed a swift rise to top-ranking status in the DRV hierarchy...."

",..The Communists are now believed to be actively culti-
vating the remnants of the Hoa Hao, Cao Dai, and Binh Xuyen
dissident bands, dispersed by GVN security forces in 1955.

As many as 1,500 armed non-Communist dissidents are believed
still in hiding in bands of various size in the delta region
south of Saigon, the Plaine des Jones, along the Cambodian
border and northwest of Saigon. Through the years, the weapons
of these outlaw bands have deteriorated, and ammunition has

run low. The Communists are believed providing many of these
bands with both assistance and guidance, in return for support
or at least lip service to DRV aims. The DRV has also included
a few minor sect leaders in its "Fatherland Front" in hopes

of attracting support from sect adherents in the South. In

its propaganda, the DRV claims to pursue a policy of religious
tolerance and denounces the GVN for alleged religious perse-
cution.

"A degree of success in the Communist efforts to subvert
the sects and sect leaders was indicated by a recent raid on
a French plantation about 50 miles north of Saigon. In addition
to robbing and some wanton destruction, an estimated 3-700
bandits claiming to be ‘religious men’ harangued the workers
concerning the benefits of life in the North and warned them
not to cooperate with the 'American-controlled' Diem govern-
ment. The Cao Dai Pope, living in exile in Phnom Penh, has
published statements in line with Communist themes, and an
organization combining various sect remnants has reportedly
been formed with a Communist advisor."

The MAAG intelligence estimate included in its mid-1958 report
("Narrative Study," 2h August 1958) was, however, more directly focused
on DRV conventional military strength, and displayed a somewhat different
view of "Viet Cong" than had been evident in earlier MAAG reports:

"ENEMY THREAT & PROBABLE COURSE OF ACTION

"Viet Cong (North Vietnam Communists):

"(1) Strength: It is estimated that the Viet Cong in
North Vietnam, currently have available approximately 268,000
regular army troops organized into 14 Infantry Divisions,

1 Artillery Division, 1 Anti-aircraft Artillery Groupment,

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
