Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Thus today in Vietnam we are not dealing with factional disputes or
the remnants of a colonial struggle against the French but rather with
a major test case of communism's new strategy. That strategy has so far
been pursued in Cuba, may be beginning in Africa, and failed in Malaya
and the Philippines only because of a long and arduous struggle by the
people of these countries with assistance.provided by the British and
the United States. .

"In Southeast Asia the communists have taken full advantage of
geography -- the proximity to the communist base of operations and the
rugged, remote, and heavily foliated character of the border regions.
They have utilized the diverse ethnic, religious, and tribal groupings
and exploited factionalism and legitimate aspirations wherever possible.
And, as I said earlier, they have resorted to sabotage, terrorism, and
assassination on an unprecedented scale.

"Who is the responsible party -- the prime aggressor? First and fore-
most, without doubt, the prime aggressor is North Vietnam, whose leader-
ship has explicitly undertaken to destroy the independence of the South.
To be sure, Hanoi is encouraged on its aggressive course by Communist
China. But Peiping's interest is hardly the same as that of Hanoi.

"For Hanoi, the immediate objective is limited: conquest of the South
and national unification, perhaps coupled with control of Laos. For Peiping,
however, Hanoi's victory would be only a first step toward eventual Chinese
hegemony over the two Vietnams and Southeast Asia and toward exploitation
of the new strategy in other parts of the world.

"Communist China's interests are clear: It has publicly castigated
Moscow for betraying the revolutionary cause whenever the Soviets have
sounded a cautionary note. It has characterized the United States as a
paper tiger and has insisted that the revolutionary struggle for ‘liberation
and unification’ of Vietnam could be conducted without risks by, in effect,
crawling under the nuclear and conventional defense of the free world.
Peiping thus appears to feel that it has a large stake in demonstrating
the new strategy, using Vietnam as a test case. Success in Vietnam would
be regarded by Peiping as vindication for China's views in the worldwide
ideological struggle.

"Taking into account the relationship of Vietnam to Indochina -- and
of both to Southeast Asia, the Far East, and the free world as a whole --
five U.S. Presidents have acted to preserve free-world strategic interests
in the area. President Roosevelt opposed Japanese penetration in Indo-
china; President Truman resisted communist aggression in Korea; President
Eisenhower backeau Diem's efforts to save South Vietnam and undertook to
defend Taiwan; President Kennedy stepped up our counterinsurgency effort
in Vietnam; and President Johnson, in addition to reaffirming last week
that the United States will furnish assistance and support to South Viet-
nam for as long as it is required to bring communist aggression and ter-
rorism under control, has approved the program that I shall describe in
@ few minutes.

D-7
