Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

67. Secretary Rusk Interview, Videotaped in Washington on January 31,
1967 and Broadeast by the British Independent Television Network
on February 1, 1967; Secretary Rusk Discusses Viet-Nam in
Interview for British Television," Department of State Bulletin,

February 20, 1967, p. 27h.

. oe

"DEKING AND SOUTHEAST ASIA

"Q. Mr. Rusk, could we look at the objects of this war? There
appears to us in Britain to be a certain confusion in your war aims.

the independence of South Viet-Nam? Could you tell us precisely what

your war aims are?
"A, I don't know that there is a choice between those two objectives.

My guess is that if the authorities in Peking were to throw their weight
behind peace in Southeast Asia, there would be peace in Southeast Asia.

"But, nevertheless, the immediate events which brought our Armed
Forees into South Viet-Nam were the movement of substantial numbers of
North Vietnamese men in arms, including some now 20 regiments of their
North Vietnamese regular army, into South Viet-Nam for the purpose of
imposing a political settlement on the South by force. Now, this cuts
right across our commitments under the SEATO Treaty. Under article IV
of that treaty, each signatory determines what steps it will take to meet
the common danger in the event of an aggression by means of armed attack;
and it was specifically understood at the time that that would apply to
an aggression by Ho Chi Minh, as well as to others.

"Now, the Chinese are not actively involved in this situation in
South Viet-Nam. We do know that they are trying to stir up problems
for the Thais in the northeast section of Thailand. China has publicly
announced that Thailand is next on the list; but the key point is that
if these countries would live at peace, we would be the first to give
that our full support--leave these countries alone ourselves, get out
of there."

* *

68. Sir Montague Burton Lecture by W. W. Rostow, The University of
Teeds, Leeds, England, 23 February 1967, "The Great Transition:

Tasks of the First and Second Postwar Gererations"; White House

Press Release, 23 February 1906/7.

ee ea

"The postwar Communist offensive had a certain shape and rhythn.

D-104
