Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

accepted these arguments and was willing to give France a hand in
disbursing aid to the Associated States. 52/ The U.S. chose

not to interpret the agreement this way. The State Department said the
U.S. merely indicated willingness to consult on such matters. 53/

On 29 October, Dulles told Mendes-France that the U.S. alone would dis-
perse aid; by late November Mendes-France finally tired of arguing an
obviously lost cause and dropped the matter. 5)4/

b. The U.S, Faults French Support for Diem

4 Despite apparent agreement at Washington to back Diem,
Becretare Dulles met with Mendes-France three weeks later in Paris about
the same subject. "For...ready reference" Acting Secretary of State
Herbert Hoover quoted for Dulles part of the 29 September Minute of
Understanding in which the

-.- representatives of France and the United States agree

that their respective governments support Ngo Dinh Diem in

the establishment and maintenance of @ strong, anti-Communist
and nationalist government. To this end France and the

United States will urge all anti-Communist elements in Vietnam
to cooperate fully with the Government of Ngo Dinh Diem in
order to counter vigorously the Viet Minh and build a strong
free Vietnam....While Ely seems to have attempted honestly to
carry out this agreement, the fact that many French elements
have never accepted Diem solution must have weakened Ely's
efforts and encouraged Hinh camarilla in its recalcitrance....
Unless Diem receives unreserved US and French support, his
chances of success appear slight. With such support, his chances
are probably better than even, repeat even. 55/

ec. Accommodation Between Paris and Hanoi?

Apart from the quiet backing given Diem's opponents
by French officers and officials in Saigon and persistent Paris proposals
for a change in government (Prince Buu Hoi, whose "political ideologies"
were repugnant to Dulles, was a French favorite at this time), the U.S.
found in French accommodative gestures toward Hanoi ample proof that
French backing for Diem was reserved at best. 56/ Ambassador Dillon
felt Mendes-France found in Vietnam a "situation ideally designed to
test (the) bases of his fundamental political philosophy of ‘peaceful
coexistence'" and that his government grew more and more "disposed to
explore and consider a policy looking toward an eventual peaceful North-
South rapprochement." 57/ French insistence on strict legal interpre-
tation of the Geneva Accords was one example of accommodation thinking.
France objected to anything which could possibly delay or destroy
elections in 1956; Dillon predicted Paris would accept the results of
elections "however academic that exercise may eventually prove to be." 58/

15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
