Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Administration), rested with the USAID Public Administration Division,
which in turn was at the third level of the USAID, reporting to the
USAID Director only through an Assistant Director for Technical Ser-
vices. Within the Public Administration Division (PAD) itself, to make
matters worse, improving village /hamlet government was only one of a
large number of activities for which PAD was responsible -- and in the
eyes of many traditionally-minded professional public administrators,
it did not automatically come first.

Other issues of obvious importance -- such as budgeting, strengthen-
ing the Ministry, improving the National Institute of Administration,
sending officials to the U.S, for participant training -- 211 came within
the normal PAD program as outlined in the AID Country Assistance Program
(CAP) for FY 67, and, moreover, they required more resources, more Ameri-
cans, more attention at high levels of AID, than the village/hamlet
government problem. When Ambassador Porter directed AID, in May of 1966,
to begin massive efforts to improve village government, his orders were
obeyed to the extent they could be within the context of previous AID
commitments. The result was a further stretching of the already taut
USAID/PAD staff, since no previous commitments or programs were cut back
to provide man and/or money for village government.

At the same time, other sections of the Mission which were expected
to support the renewed emphasis on local government were not producing
as requested. JUSPAO, asked to support the effort with psychological
operations, agreed in principle but found its existing list of priorities
pasically unchanged. The Embassy Political Section, which should have
supported the effort at least to the extent of urging through its politi-
cal contacts that the GVN revitalize the village structure, simply had
better things to do, The CIA was also asked to support the effort; with
their cadre assets, they were in a crucial position on the matter, par-
ticularly since some of the critics of the cadre had stated that the
cadre actually undercut village government instead of strengthening it
(as they claimed). Again, the CIA gave lip service to the idea, without
making any significant change in their training of the cadre at Vung Tau.

In this situation, Ambassador Porter tried several times to get
action, each time received enthusiastic, but generalized, words of agree-
ment and support from everyone, and finally turned his attention to other
matters; with the crush of business, there was always a more immediate
erisis.

Ol = TOP SECRET - Sensitive
