Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

both of these areas so that Revolutionary Development
can progress.

"Failure to provide two and one-third divisions for
I C@Z would result in the diversion of existing forces
from other tasks to deny and defeat infiltration or invasion.
Security in support of Revolutionary Development could not
be increased to the desired degree in the coastal area, the
major LOC's could not be opened throughout the CTZ, and the
enemy would be able to continue operating virtually unmolested
throughout the key Quang Ngai Province.

"It is emphasized that the relationship of the two and
one-third division force requirement for I Corps to that a
of Practice Nine is coincidental. This force is the minimum
essential required to support operations planned for FY 68
without reference to Practice Nine.

soe Sur

The next most dangerous situation appeared to be that in II Corps, 4
diverse geographical area which included major population centers along the
coastal plains as well as sizeable population centers and military bases
on the western plateau, such as Binh Dinh, Anke, Kontum, and Pleiku. Here
the enemy, orienting himself on the population, presented a different prob-
lem which, in the words of General Westmoreland, required "a, high degree of
mobility and flexibility in U.S. /FWMAT/RVNAP." As he analysed the corps
tactical situation, Westmoreland reemphasized what he had already said
about containing the large enemy military forces at the boundaries of the
sanctuaries:

"Enemy forces in the Pleiku and Kontum areas must be
destroyed, and infiltration from Cambodia and Laos must be
contained. Forces in-country will continue to make progress
in areas of current deployment. Those programmed for deploy-
ment will ausment this effort. However, there are gaps, as
discussed below, that must be filled before success can be
exploited and minimum essential security can be provided
within the II Corps area.

"large enemy forces remaining in heavily populated
Binh Dinh Province mist be destroyed. Security must be
established and maintained in the northern portion of the
province, particularly along the coastal area, so that
Revolutionary Development can progress, these security
forces also will facilitate the conduct of operations in
Quang Ngai Province.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
71
