Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV.C Evolution of the War (26 Vols.) 
Direct Action: The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968 
(16 Vols.) 
6. U.S. Ground Strategy and Force Deployments: 1965-1967 
(3 Vols.) 
c. Volume III: Program 6 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV. c. 6. (c) 
VOLLn,LE ITI 
S,ec Det Cant Fr. x----_lt~ 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
VOLUME III 
U. S. GROU~m STRATEGY AND FORCE DEPLOYME~~S, 1965- -1967 
TABLE OF COI\TTENrS and OUTLINE 
V. 
PROGRAM 6 
1. 
Emergency Augmentation .•••.••....•.. '. • . . • . . . . . . • . . . • • . • . . • • • • 
1 
2 . 
The Troop Request ...•••. ••.....•..••••.•..•.•...•..•....•.••• 12 
3. 
"A to Z" Reassessment ..• . ....•....••.. • •••. ~ ...••..••.•••.••• 16 
4. 
Drafting 8. Memorandum ... .•• ••. .• .•. • •.. • •.••.... • ....•.•.•.•• 33 
5. 
Recormnendation to the President .... . .. .. ..................... 51 
6. 
The Climate of Opini on. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . • . . . . . . • . • . . • . . . .. 64 
7. 
The President Ponders . . . •• .. • ... • .......•.••..............••• 71 
8. 
The F-.cesident Decides • ... . . •.... . •• • ..•• ..........•.....•••.• 76 
9. 
The Decision is Announced ...• . . ....•. •.. . • .••. • ......•.••.... 78 
10 . 
" I Shall Not Seek, and I \vil1 Not Accept" .... . . . .............. 80 
11 . 
Epilogue,. ,. . . ,. ,. . .. . .. .. . ... ... ... . .... . . . ..... . ,. ...... , . . . . . .. 90 
FOOTNOTES . . . • . . . . . • . . . • . . • . • . • . • . • . . . . . . . . . • . • . . • . • . . . • . • . • •. 94 
i 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
V. 
PROORAIvI 6 
1. 
Emergency Augmentation 
Thus, the year ended with the combat elements of Program 5 either 
closing in Vietnam or on their vlay to Vietnam on an accelerated schedule . 
The Joint Chiefs of Staff, however, could only promise that, even with 
these deployments, the rate of progress in Vietnam would continue to be 
slm·l in light of the continuing restrictions imposed on the conduct of 
mili tary operations . 
I n his year-end assessment of the military sitUation, however, 
COMUSHACV had a somewhat more optimistic outlook . 
He indicated that 
the Program 5 deployments had "provided us with an increased force 
structure and logistics base for offensive operations" . 
The past year , 
he indicated, had been marked by steady free 'iwrld progress, a notice-
able deterioration of the enemy ' s combat effectiveness, and his loss of 
control over large areas and population . 
"During 1967, the enemy lost control of large sectors of 
t he population . 
He faces significant problems in the areas 
of indigenous recruiting, moral e , health and resources control. 
Voids in VC ranks are being filled by regular INA. 
Sea illfiltra-
tiori through the Market Time area has diminished to near - insignifica-
t ion proportions . 
Interdiction of the enemy ' s logistics train 
i n Laos and N\m by our indispensable air efforts has imposed 
significant difficulties on him. 
In many areas the enemy has 
been driven away from the population centers ; in others he has 
been compelled to disperse and evade contact, thus nullifying 
much of his potential . 
The year ended with the enemy increasingly 
resorting to desperation tactics in attempting to achieve military/ 
psychological victory; and he has experienced only failure in 
these attempts . 
Enemy bases, with spa-ese exception, are no 
l onger safe havens and he has necessarily become increasingly 
r eliant on Cambodian and Laotian sanctuaries ... " 
"The friendly picture gives rise to optimism for increased 
successes in 1968. 
In 1967, our l ogistics base and force 
structure permitted us to assume a fully offensive posture ... 
A g:eatly improved intel ligence system fl'equently enabled us 
to concentrate our superior military assets in preempting enemy 
military initiatives leading us to decisive accomplisrunents in 
conventional engagements . 
Materiel and tactical innovations 
have been further developed and employed : 
Long range rc~con ­
naissance patrols, aerial reconnaissance sensors, new 0-2A 
observation aircraft , Rome ploHs,. 47 (Spooky) gunships, air-
mobile operations and t he Mobile RL verine Force (l<RF) , to name 
1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
a few. 
The MRF has been significantly successful in depriving 
the enemy of freedom and initiative in the population and 
resources rich Delta ar eas . 
The helico}'ter has established 
itself as perhaps the single most important tool in our 
arsenal -- and we will 1,-Tel come more . 
To air support in both 
RVN and ~NN (Army, Navy, Marine and Air Force ) goes much of 
the credit for our accomplishments . II 1./ 
The enemy ' s TET offensive, >vhich began with the attack on the U.S. 
Embassy in Saigon on 31 January 1968, although it had been predicted, ~/ 
took the U.S. command and the U.S. public by surprise , and i ts strength, 
l ength , and intensity prolonged this shock . 
As the attacks continued, 
the Secretary of Defense , on 9 February, r equested t he Joint Chiefs of 
Staff to furnish pl ans which would provide for emer gency r einforcement 
of COMUSMACV. 
After extensive backchannel communication with General Westmoreland, 
the JCS forwarded these plans on 12 February . J/ The Joint Chiefs' 
assessment of the current Vi etnam situation differed markedly from 
COMUSNACV's year-end assessment submitted only 17 days earlier : 
"a. 
The VC/f:.JVA forces have launched large-scale offensive 
operations throughout South Vietnam. 
lib. 
As of 11 February 1968, Headquarters , MACV , r eports that 
attacks have taken place on 34 provincial towns , 64 district 
towns , and all of the autonomous cities . 
"c. 
The enemy has expressed his intention to continue offensive 
operati ons and to destroy the Government of Vietnam and its Armed 
Forces . . 
"d. 
The first phase of his offensive has f ail ed in that he 
does not have adequate control over any popUlation center to 
i nstall his Revolutionary COTmni ttees 1,-Thich he hoped to form 
into a coalition ,vi th the NLF . 
"e. 
He has lost betvleen 30 and 40 thousand killed and captured, 
and I,re have seized over seven thousand weapons . 
"f. 
Reports indicate that he has committed the bulk of his 
VC main fOTce and local fOTce elements dovm to platoon level 
throughout the country, with the exception of six to eight 
battalions in the general area of Saigon . 
"g . 
Thus faT, he has cormnitted only 20 to 25 percent of his 
North Vietnamese forces . 
These I·rere employed as gap fillers 
1,-There' VC strength "Tas appa.rently not adequate to carlY out his 
initial t hrust on the cities and towns . 
Since November , he has 
2 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TO~ SECRET - Sensitive 
incr eased his ~WA battalions by about 25 . 
The bulk of 
these and the bulk of the uncommitted IfifA forces are i n the 
I Corps area . 
"h . It i s not clear vJhether the enemy will be able t o 
r ecycle his attacks in a second phase . 
He has indicated his 
i ntention to do so during the period from 10 to 15 February . 
"i. 
South Vietnamese forces have suffered nearly tl-TO 
t housand killed, over seven thousand ,-rounded, and an unknovm 
number of absences . 
MACV suspects the desertion rate may be 
high . 
The average present for duty strength of RV1T i nfantry 
battalions is 50 percent and Ranger Battalions, 43 percent . 
Fi ve of nine airborne battalions are judged by M~CV to be 
combat ineffecti ve at this time . " 
Based on this assessment, COjV1USI·~CV voiced to t he J oint Chi efs three 
major concerns : 
"a . 
The ability of the weakened RVNAF to cope vii th additional 
sustained enemy offensive operations . 
"b . 
and sea 
diction 
in that 
Logistic support north of Danang, because of vreather 
conditions in the Northern I Corps area, enemy inter-
of Route 1, and the probability of intensified combat 
area . 
" c . 
The forces available to him are not adeQuate at the 
moment to permit him to pursue his OIm c81npaign plans and to 
r esume offensive operations against a i·reakened enemy, consider-
i ng the competing reQuirements of reacting to enemy initiatives, 
assisting in defending Government centers, and reinforci ng ,.".eakened 
RVNAF units when necessary." 
The three plans for . emergency reinforcement examined by the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff were : 
"a . 
Plan One, ,·rhich is based upon prompt deployment of the 
82nd Airborne Division and 6/9 Marine di vision/,oring team, callup 
of some 120,000 Army and Marine Corps Reserves , and appropriate 
legislative action to permit extension of terms of service of 
active duty personnel and the recall of individual Reservists . 
"b . 
Plan Two, vThich vTOuld deploy as many Marine Corps 
battalions as are nOl"" available in cmms, less one battalion 
in the Caribbean, the battalion in the Nediterranean, and the 
Guantanamo Defense Force . 
This plan i-TOuld not be based upon 
a callup of Reservists or legislative action . 
3 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"c . 
Plan Three, which would deploy the 82nd Airborne 
Di vision but would leave Marine Corps battalions in CONUS . 
This plan would likevJise envisage no Reserve callup and no 
l egi slative action ." 
Under Plan One, elements of one brigade of the 82nd Airbor ne 
Divi sion could commence movement within 24 hours and the divi s i on itself 
36- 48 hours later . 
6/9ths of a Marine Corps Division/wing team could be 
r eady for deployment to Vietnam in one week without \l.tilizing Vietnam 
r epl acement drafts . 
Dependent upon the availability of ai rcraft and 
the degree of dravrdmm on the current level of Southeast Asia airlift 
support, the deployment could be completed 'I·ri thin three to four weeks . 
Under Plan Tvro, elements of two CONUS Marine Divisions, consisting 
of 12 battalions could be air transported to Vietnam, although two 'Iveeks 
preparation '\-TOuld be required . 
This deployment, hmvever, '\-TOuld deplete 
Marine Corps assets except for three battalions -- one afloat i n the 
Mediterranean, one afloat in the Caribbean, and one ashore at Guantanamo 
Bay, Cuba . 
Under Plan Three, as under Plan One, elements of one brigade of the 
82nd Airborne Division could commence movement in 24 hours, the division 
i tself 36- 48 hours later . 
All of these plans, hOl·rever, 'Ivould require dra'lvdowns on previously 
protected CONUS stocks during procurement lead- time for new production 
and would further aggravate the shortage of long procurement lead time 
items currently short, such as helicopters, tracked combat vehicl es , 
and ammunition . 
An examination was also made of the feasibility of an increased 
acceleration in the deployment of the four infantry battalions scheduled 
to deploy in March-April under Program 5. It was concluded that these 
units could not be deployed ea::clier "except under the most critical 
circumstances. " 
In examining the capacity to meet the possibility of 'Ividespread 
ci vil disorder in the United States, the Joint Chiefs of Staff concluded 
. that, . ,vhether or not deployments under any of the plans were directed, 
it appeared that sufficient forces would still be available for civil 
di sorder control . 
HOitTeVer, the Joint Chiefs of Staff cautioned that the residual COlIiUS-
based active combat-ready ground forces that would result from the exten-
sion of each of the plans examined 1,vould be : 
. "a . 
Plan One - 6/9 Marine Division/Wing Team. 
b . 
Plan '1':70 - One Airborne Division. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECP~T - Sensitive 
c. 
Plan Three - One and 3/9 Marine Division/lhng Team." 
Moreover, these forces were at various levels of readiness and a high 
percentage of their personnel were Vietnam returnees or close to the 
end of the obligated active service . 
The capability of these uncom-
mi tted general purpose forces \,ras further constndned, the Joint Chiefs 
pointed out, by shortages of critical skilled specialists and shortages 
i n mission essential items of equipment and materiel. 
Thus, the Joint 
Chiefs emphasized, our posture of readily available combat forces was 
seriously strained. 
Any decision to deploy emergency augmentation 
forces should be accompanied by the recall of at least an equivalent 
number, or more prudently, additional Reserve component forces and 
an extension of terms of service for active duty personnel . 
Indeed, 
the Chiefs, warned, 
"It is not clear at this time whether the enemy will be able 
to mount and sustain a second series of major attacks throughout 
the country . 
It is equally unclear as to how 'well the Vietnamese 
Armed Forces "rould be able to stand up against such a series of 
attacks if they 1,vere to occur. 
In the face of these uncertainties, 
a more precise assessment of US}ffiCV's additional force requirements, 
i f any , must avrai t further developments. 
The Joint Chiefs of 
Staff do not exclude the possibility that additional develop-
ments could make f\.l.rther deplo;yments necessary . II 
Based on this assessment of the situation, the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff concluded and recommended that : 
"a. 
A decision to deploy r einforcements to Vietnfull be 
deferred at this time. 
"b. 
Measures be taken no',r to prepare the 82nd Airborne 
Division and 6/9 Marine Division/Wing team for possible deploy-
ment to Vietnam. 
"c. 
As a matter of prudence, call certain additional 
Reserve units to active duty now . 
DeploYlllent of emergency 
reinforcements to Vietnam should not be made 'Ivi thout concomitant 
callup of Reserves sufficient at least to replace those deployed 
and provide for the increased sustaining base r equirements of all 
Services. 
In addition, bring selected Reserve force units to 
full strength and an increased state of combat readiness. 
"d. 
Legislation be sought now to (1) provide authority to 
call individual Reservists to active duty; (2) extend past 
30 June 1968 the existing authority to call Reserve units to 
active duty; and (3) extend terms of service for acti ve duty 
personnel. 
5 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensi ti ve 
"e . 
Procurement and other supply actions be taken now to 
overcome shortages existing in certain critical items of materiel 
and e~uipment such as munitions, helicopters, and other combat 
aircraft ." 
Thus, for perhaps the first time in the history of American involve-
ment in Vietnam, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recoffiITlended against deploying 
the additional forces re~uested by the field commander, in the absence 
of other steps to reconstitute the strategic reserve . 
At long last, the 
resources ,.;rere beginning to be dra"m too thin, the assets became unavail-
able, the support base too small . 
Notwithstanding the recommendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the 
Secretary of Defense almost immediately approved the deployment of one 
brigade of the 82ncl Airborne Division and one Marine regimental landing 
team to South Vietnam . 
A total strength of almost 10,500 was assumed 
and publicly announced. 'These deployments were directed by the JCS on 
13 February . 
Airlift of the brigade from the 82nd Airborne Division, at 
a strength of approximately four thousand, was to begin on 14 February 
and the brigade was to close in-country not later than 26 February 1968. 
4/ 
After coordination 1,'Ti th CINCSTRIKE and USCONARC, the strength of this 
unit was fixed at 3,702 . 
5/ 
The Marine Corps Regiment was to close in SVN not later than 26 
February also. 
The Regiment (reinforced) less one battalion, was to be 
deployed by air from California at a strength of about 3,600. 
One bat·· 
talion (reinforced) which \-Tas then embarked, "ras to be deployed by surface 
at a strength of about 1,600 . 
~/ 
In viel'T of the wide variation of strength associated vii th a Marine 
Corps Regiment (reinforced), CINCPAC was directed to advise all concerned 
of the identity, composition and strength of the force selected for 
deployment . 1/ CINCPAC nominated the 27th Marine Regiment, which included 
5247 Marine and 327 Navy personnel. 
Additionally, he included the deploy·· 
ment of a logistic support element of 389 personnel from Okinm-ra to reduce 
the impact on the already heavily committed logistic units in I CTZ . 
In 
addition, CINCPAC took the precautionary step of identifying, for follow-
on deployment, a sea-tail of reinforcing units totalling 1,400 personnel . 
This element, scheduled to follm.;r in April 1968, would provide the regiment 
the necessary self-sustaining combat pm.;rer in the event early replacement 
was not provided. 
~/ Thus, the total n~mber of troops deployed or alerted 
for the follo'tT-on sea-tail numbered 11,065 . 2/ 
The Joint Chiefs of Staff reacted almost immediately to the national 
decision to deploy these forces I'Ti thout a concomitant reserve callup . 
On 13 February 1968 they forwarded to the Secretary of Defense their 
r ecommendations for actions'i\fhich should be taken relative to callup of 
r eserves , obtaining legislation and instituti ng procurernent actions to 
provide support for these forces and to sustain their deployment . 
10/ 
6 
TOP SECRET' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A minimum callup of Reserve units to replace deploying forces and 
to sustain and support them was justified, the Joint Chiefs stated, by 
t he follm-Ting situation: 
"a. 
Army . 
The 82nd Airborne Division represents the only 
readily deployable Army divisi on in the CONUS-based active 
strategic reserve . 
The impending reduction of this division by 
one-third to meet approved deployments establishes an immediate 
r equirement for its prompt reconstitution ,.;hich is possible only 
by t he callup of Reserve units . 
In order to replace the forces 
deployed from the strategic reserve, to provide support units 
to meet anticipation requirements in I CTZ and to provide a 
I-rider rotation base of requisite ranks and skills , it will be 
necessary for the Army to call up tvro infantry brigade f orces 
of the Reserve components . 
This callup ,-Till total approxi mately 
32,000 personnel. 
These t,w brigades should attain a combat-
r eady and deployable status in 12 weeks following callup . 
"b. 
Marine Corps . 
"(1) 
The Marine Corps cannot sustain additional deployments 
to Southeast Asia under current personnel policies . 
Thus, the 
f orce authorized for deployment must be replaced with a comparable 
Reserve unit as soon as possible. 
The Reserve force required for 
t his purpose will consist of one Marine regiment, reinforcing 
combat support and combat service support units, and one composite 
Marine Air Group Hith one VWA, one VIv1P, and two medium helicopter 
squadrons (HMM). 
"( 2) 
The Reserve force ,-Till consist of approximately 
12,000 personnel . 
It will provide the capability to deploy a 
balanced , self-sustaining air/ground combat force in relief of 
the lightly structured 27th Marines (Rein) and permit return 
of t he 27th Marine Regiment (Rein) to the training/rotation base 
i n CONUS/Hmraii . 
This exchange would commence as soon as the 
Reserve unit becomes combat-ready (approximately 60 days after 
callup) and must be completed not later than 120 days after 
deplo~nent of RLT- 27 . 
"(3) It is envisioned that the Reserve forces Hill be. 
redeployed to co~rus without replacement after 13 months in South 
Vietnam. 
HOI-rever, if this does not OCC'1.r , it Hill be best to 
deploy a relief brigade from the 4th Marine Division/wi ng t eam. 
Alternately, an adequate rotation base in CONUS to sustain the 
continued deployment can be created but to do so requires 
extensions of terms of service and other personnel policy changes . 
11 ( ~ ) 
In addition, it must be recognized that the anticipated 
proportionate increase in pers?nnel losses 'dill r~quire an increase 
in the end strength of the actlve forces to sustaln these losses . 
7 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"c. 
Navy. 
Support of the newly authori zed deployments vTill 
r equire the callup of hlO Navy mobile construction battalions 
(NMCB ) totalling 1,700 personnel and 600 individual medical/ 
dental/chaplain Reservists . 
These callups "rill provide for 
bringing recalled Marine units up to strength, sustaining the 
Navy personnel organic to the deployed RLT, and adding medical 
staffing.required by the increased level of activity in South-
ea.st Asia to forward hospital facilities including Guam . 
"d . 
Air Force . 
The Air Force plans to support this approved 
deployment operation ,,'li thout recall of individuals or units . 
Reserve airlift augmentation neede d to supplement the deployment 
airlift can be accomplished by Reservists on a voluntary basis ." 
I n addition, the Joint Chiefs indicated that it would be both prudent 
and aclvisable to reach a readiness level that could be responsive to 
further COMUS}1ACV force requirements, if the remainder of the 82nd Airborne 
Di vision and one more RLT Ive;re required . 
COMUSMACV had already indicated 
the potential need for these units at an early date. 
To r each such a 
readiness level, the Joint Chiefs indicated that the follmving Reserve 
forces "lOuld have to be activated : 
"a. 
Army . 
Should the additional deployments be made, it "rould 
be necessary for the Army to recall (in addition to the hlo brigade 
forces previously discussed) one infantry division force and one 
infantry brigade force of the Army Reserve components , totalling 
58,000 men . 
These forces will be needed to reconstitute the 
strategic reserve and to broaden t he source of crttical r anks 
and skills to be applied against the increased rotation base 
requirements . 
The Reserve units should be recalled at this time 
to bring them closer to a combat-ready status prior to the probable 
deployment of the balance of the 82nd Airborne Division . 
The 
Reserve division force should attain a combat- capable status in 
15 vreeks after recall and the brigade force should require 12 vreeks . 
lIb. 
Marine Corps . 
(1) 
The most desirable Reserve callup consists of the 
entire 4th Marine Expeditionary Force (IvlEF ) , plus other units 
and selected individual Reserves . 
This totals about 51,000 . 
Mobilization and subsequent deployment of the Reserve forces 
should be accomplished incrementally . 
'l'his callup permits the 
early and orderly replacement of the 5th r.larine Division (-) 
in South Vietnam and the subsequent re(leployment of the 5th 
Marine Division (-) to CONUS, or, alternatively, the 4th Division/ 
Wing Team can meet the additional requirements .... 
"c. 
Navy. 
Support of these additional deployments. vrould 
r equire the callup of an additional three m,1CB (total of five) 
totallin a 4,150 personnel and a? additio?al 400 (for a total 
of 1, 0'00), medical/dental/ cnaplaJ.n ReserVlsts . 
These ca11ups 
8 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
would. provide for ll.f 1'MCB in RVN for direct construction support 
and an adequate rotation base to maintain these deployment's. 
The additional medical/dental/chaplain personnel will provide 
for bringing recalled Marine units up to strength, sustaining 
the Navy personnel in the additional deploying RLT, and adding 
some medical staffing to forward hospital facilities . 
Recall 
of an additional 2,800 personnel would be required to augment 
the logistic operations in Vietnam . 
The increased requirement 
for naval gunfire support for the larger deployments ,.lOuld 
necessitate the activation of two heavy cruisers to fill CINCPAC 's 
r equirements for additional shore bombardment capability to 
maintain hro l arge calibre gun ships on station in the SEA 
DRAGO=~ area and off RVN . 
Additionally, 15 destroyers should 
be activated from the mothball fleet to replace 15 Naval Reserve 
Training destroyers to be called to active duty . 
This '\wuld 
fill CINCPAC's requirement for an additional five destroyers 
on station off Vietnam and provide the rotation base to support 
them. 
The recall of 6,000 Naval Reserve personnel would provide 
the additional manpower' and skills base to man these reactivated 
ships . 
"d. 
Air Force. 
The deployment of the remainder of the 82nd 
Airborne Division to Southeast Asia ,-rill require the support of 
three tactical fighter squadrons, a tactical reconnaissance 
squadron, necessary elements of the Tactical Air Control System, 
one PRIME BEEF unit, and one security squadron . 
In order to 
provide support of the deploynlent and the broadening of the 
training and rotation base and to 
retain a minimum acceptable 
number of combat-ready deployable squadrons in the CONUS, these 
Air Force organizations will have to be replaced by activation 
of the following Air Reserve Forces: 
eight tactical fighter 
squadrons, five tactical reconnaissance squadrons, one Tactical 
Control Group, t"lQ military airlift groups, and one tactical 
airlift ,.ring, totalling 22 , 497 spaces . 
Activation of these Air 
National Guard/Reserve units include organizations not currently 
manned under COMBAT BEEF standards (100 percent)." 
The Joint Chiefs reiterated their recommendation that legislation 
be sought to: 
"(1) provide authority to call selected individual 
Reservists to active duty; (2) extend beyond 30 June 1968 the existing 
authority to call Reserve units to active duty ; and (3) extend terms 
of service for active duty personnel." 
The provisions of such legisla-
tion would, the Joint Chiefs indicated, i mpact on the Services in the 
follo"i ng manner : 
(1) 
Extension of terms of Service . 
P'.covides' an immediate 
i rr,pact on readiness worldwide in that critical skill specialists 
in short supply are retained on adive duty . It is estimated that 
9 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
between 30,000 and 40,000 additional trained personnel will be 
retained in the Army for each month of extension . 
For example, 
during the first six-month period of extension of terms of 
service, the Army would gain in excess of 500 helicopter pilots, 
of \-'hich there is a critical shortage . 
Other critical skill 
shortages \-,ould be similarly affected. 
"( 2) Selective callup of individual Reservists . 
The 
Army Iwnediate Ready Reserve contains 490,000 personnel, of 
which more than 90 percent are in grades of E- 4 and E- 5. 
A 
selecti ve callup of individual Reservists, coupled \-,i th an 
extension of terms of service, i-rill alleviate virtually all of 
the Army's current critical skill shortages . 
"b. ' Marine Corps. 
(1) 
Involuntary extension of enlistments of all 
enlisted personnel lvould produce an average of 5,766 enlisted 
men per month through June . 
11i thin this gain, an average of 
1,728 experienced NCOs per month would be gained . 
"( 2) 
Selective recall of individual Reservists \-lOuld 
be necessary in order to bring mobilized units up, to provide 
the essential rank and skills not contained in the organized 
Reserve. 
Within the Marine Corps Reserve, "out outside of the 
organized units, there is an invaluable pool of key personnel : 
, noncommissioned officers, officers (particularly pilots), and 
Marines possessing long lead time "hard skill" Military Occupa-
tional Specialties . 
"c. 
Navy. 
In the deploying ships of the Navy, there is a 
shortfall-or-32,500 in officers and the top six enlisted pay 
grades . 
(1) 
Involuntary extension of Reserve Officers and 
selected recall of Reserves 'Hould fulfill officer manning 
requirements in one to three months . 
"(2) 
Cancellation of early releases and selective 
involuntary extensions, recall of Fleet Reserves, deferral of 
transfers to Fleet Reserve, and recall of Ready Reserves would 
achieve 100 percent enlisted requirements by rate/rating in 
one to three months . 
"d. 
Air Force . If extension of terms of service were granted 
the Air Force could, on a selective basis, hold approximately 
20,000 skilled personnel out of a possible 70,000 that Hould 
be discharged over a six-month period. 
Retaining these critical 
sl<;:111s ,wuld sustain the force at an acceptable level. 
Should 
10 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
additional forces be deployed to meet possible future MACV 
r equirements, l egislation \vould be necessary i n order that 
active uni ts can be replaced by acti vati,on of corresponding 
Air National Guard units after 30 June 1968." 
Based on all the foregoing, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recomrnended 
t hat : 
"a . 
The follm·Ting Reserve component units be called to 
active duty immediately: 
(1 ) 
Two infantry brigade forces . 
(2) 
One Marine regiment, plus the support forces 
i ndicated in paragraph 3b(1). 
( 3) 
Tivo II.1J:;fCBs . 
"b . 
The following Reserve component units be brought to a 
high state of readiness for probable call to active duty on 
short notice : 
(1 ) 
One infantry division force and one infantry 
brigade force, i n addition to the hro brigade forces indicated 
above . 
(2) , The remainder of the Lfth Marine Expeditionary Force . 
(3 ) 
Three N'MCBs, in addition to the two i ndicated above . 
Also, de-mothball ivork and long lead time procurement should begin 
on t'HO heavy cruisers and 15 destroyers. , Fifteen Naval Reserve 
Training destroyers should be placed on active duty and cormnence 
immediate installation of modern communications/electronics 
equipment . 
11( 4) 
Eight TPS, five TPS, one TACS, five ARS, one 
PRIME BEEF unit, and one security squadron. 
"e. Measures be taken immediately to obtain the l egisla tio n 
to (1 ) 
provide authority to call selected i ndividual Reservists 
to active duty; (2) extend beyond 30 June 1968 the existing 
authority 'to call Reserve units to active duty; and (3 ) extend 
terms of service for active duty personnel. 
li d. 
A supplemental appropriation be requested to cover the 
un-ororrrammed cost of the approved and probable future deployments ." 
... 
0 
11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
" 
I n addition, the Joint Chiefs of Staff indicated that an updated 
assessment of U. S. mHi tary posture worldwide pertaining to addi t·ional 
problems for U. S. military caj:Jabili ties, to include specific recoIl1.I£lenda-
tions for r equired i mprovement , would be r eported in the near future. 
This request \·las overtaken, as \'le shall see, by subsequent require-
ments submitted by COMUSH,A.CV. 
2. 
The Troop Request 
Although the new Secretary of Defense , Clark Clifford, vTaS formally 
sworn into office by the President on 1 March, his work had begun many days 
before . 
In order to ascertain the situation in SVN and to determine subsequent 
MACV force requirements , General Earle \'lheeler , ChairrJlan of the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff, had been sent by the President to Saigon on 23 February. 
JIis r eport 
was presented to the President on 27 Februa.ry 1968 .ll1 On the basis of this 
r eport , and the recommendatioris it contained, the President ordered the i niti-
ation of a complete and searching reasses sment of the entire U. S. strategy 
and commitment in South Vietnam. 
The Secretary of Defense-designate, Mr . 
Clifford, was directed to conduct this review, aided by other members of the 
Cabinet. 
In his report, General ~'lhee ler summarized the situation in Vietnam 
as follo,vs : 
- The enemy failed to achieve his initial objective but 
i s continuing his effort. Although many of his units ,vere 
badly hurt, the judgment is that he has the will and the 
capabilHy to continue . 
- Enemy losses have been heavy; he has failed to achieve 
his prime objectives of mass uprisings and capture of a l arge 
number of the capital cities and touns . 
Morale in enemy units 
",hich were badly mauled or where the men ,.,rere oversold the idea 
of a decisive victory at TET probably has suffered severely. 
However, \-lith replacements, his indoctrination system l'lOuld 
seem capable of maintai~ing morale at a generally adequate level. 
His determination appears to be unshaken . 
- The enemy is operating "lith relative freedom in the 
countryside , probably recruiting heavily and no doubt infil-
trating rNA units and personnel. His recovery is likely to be 
r apid ; his supplies are adequate; and he i s trying to maintain 
the momentum of his ;;linter- spring offensive . 
_ The structure of the GVN held up but its effectiveness 
has suffered . 
12 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
- The RVNAF held up against the initial assault with 
gratifying, and in a way, surprising strength and fortitude . 
HO"ftleVer, ARVN is now in a defensive posture around to"l1nS 
and cities and there is concern about how well they will 
bear up under sustained pressure . 
- The initial attack nearly succeeded in a dozen places, 
and defeat in those places vlaS only averted by t he timely 
reaction of US forces . 
In short, it was a very near thing . 
- There is no doubt that the RD Program has suffered 
a severe set back. 
-
Rv}~F was not badly hurt physically -- they should 
recover strength and equipment rather quickly (equipment 
in 2 - 3 months -- strength in 3 - 6 months) . 
Their prob-
lems are mor e psychological than physical. 
- US forces have lost none of their pre-TET capability. 
- MACV has three principal problems . 
First, logistic 
support north of Danang is marginal owing to weather, enemy 
interdiction and harassment and t he massj.ve depl oyment of 
US forces into the DMZ/Hue area. 
Opening Route 1 will 
alleviate this problem but t akes a SUbstantial troop com-
mitment . 
Second; the defensive posture of ARVN is permitting 
the VC to make r apid inroads in the formerly pacified country-
side. 
ARVN,"in its 0"ft1l1 "ftlords, i s in a dilemma as it cannot 
afford another enemy thrust into the cities and to"ftmS and yet 
if it r emains in a defensive posture against this contingency, 
the countryside goes by default. 
MACV is forced to devote 
much of its troop strength to this problem. 
Third, MACV 
has been forced to deploy 50% of all US maneuver battalions 
into I Corps, to meet the threat there, ivhile enemy syn-
chronizes an attack against Khe Sanh/Hue-Q,uang Tri with an 
offensi ve i n the Highlands and around Saigon \'lhile keeping the 
pres sure on throughout the remainder of the country, MACV 
will be hard pressed to meet adequately all threats . 
Under 
these circumstances, T.tre must be prepared to accept some 
r everses . 12/ 
As to the future, General ~fuee ler saw the enemy pursuing a strategy of 
a reinforced offensive in ordel' to enlarge his control throughout thE:: 
countryside and keep pressure on the government and the allies. 
The enemy 
i s likel y, the Chairman indicated : 
To maintain strong threats in the DMZ. area, at Khe Sanh, 
in the highlands, and at Saigon, and to attack in force vrhen 
conditions seem favorable. 
He is likely to try to gai n 
13 
TOP SECRF.~ - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
control of the country's northern provinces . 
He 'Vlill con-
tinue efforts to encircle cities and province capitals to 
isolate and disrupt normal activities, and infiltrate them 
to cre.ate chaos. 
He viill seek maximum attr:ition of RVNAF 
elements . 
Against US forces, he vlill emphasize attacks by 
fire on airfields and installations, using assaults and ' 
ambushes selectively. 
His central objective continues to 
be the destruction of the Government of SVN and its armed 
forces . 
As a minimum he hopes to sei ze sufficient terri tory 
and gain control of enough people to support establishment 
of the groups and committees he proposes for participation 
in an NI,F dominated government. W 
General Hheeler stated that JflACV believed the central thrust of U. S . 
strategy must be to defeat the enemy offensive . 
If this were done vlell, 
the situation overall would be greatly improved over the pre-TET condition . 
IVhile accepting the fact that its first priority must be the security 
of the GVN in Saigon and in provincial capitals, MACV described its objec-
tives as: 
--First, to counter the enemy offensive and to destroy 
or eject the NVA invasion force in the north. 
-- Second, to restore security in the cities and towns . 
Third, to r estore security in the heavily popu-
lated areas of the countryside. 
-- Fourth, to regain the initiative through offensive 
operations . 14/ 
In discussing how General Hestmoreland vrould accomplish these objec-
ti ves, General IVheeler indicated the follol'ling tasks: 
(1) Security of Cities and Government . 
MACV recog-
nizes that US forces will be required to reinforce and 
support RVNAF in the secLU'i ty of cities, towns and govern-
ment structure . 
At this time, 10 US battalions are operating 
in the environs of Saigon . 
It is clear that this task I'rill 
absorb a substantial portion of US forces. 
(2) 
Security in the Countryside. 
To a large extent 
the VC now control the countryside. 
Most of the 54 bat-
talions formerly providing security for par::ific:ation are 
now defending district or province tOims. 
M.A.CV estimates 
that US forces vTill be r equired in a number of places to 
assist and encourage the Vietna..rnese Army to lea.ve the cities 
and tmms and reenter the country . 
This is especially true 
in the Delta . 
14 
TOP SECRET -
~ensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(3) 
Defense of the borders, the DMZ and the northern 
prov~~ . 
MACV considers that it must meet the enemy 
t hreat in I Corps Tactical Zone and has already deployed 
t here sl ightly over 50% of all US maneuver battalions . 
US f orces have been thinned out in the highlands, notwith-
standing an expected enemy offensive i n the ear ly future . 
(4) 
Offensive Operations . 
Coupling the increased 
r equirement for the defense of the cities and subsequent 
r eentry into the r ural areas, and the heavy requirement 
f or defense of the I Corps Zone, MACV does not have adequate 
forces at this time to resume the offensive in the remainder 
of the country, nor does i t have adequate reserves against 
the contingency of simul taneous large- scale enemy offensive 
a cti on throughout the country. ~ 
The conclusion 'vas obvious : 
Forces currently assigned to MACV, plus the residual 
Program Five forces yet to be delivered , are inadequate 
i n numbers and balance to carry out the strategy and to 
a ccomplish the tasks described above in the proper priority. 
HOI-leVer , it was the extent and magnitude of General Hheeler I s request 
that stimulated the initiation of a thorough review of the direction of 
U. S . pol icy in SVN. 
To contend with, and defeat, the new enemy threat, 
MACV indicated a total r equirement of 206,756 spaces over the 525,000 
ceili ng imposed by Program Five, or a new proposed ceiling of 731,756 . 
All of these forces , which included three Division equivalents , 15 tactical 
fighter squadrons , and augmentation for current Navy programs, were to be 
deployed into country by the end of CY 68. 
These additional forces l;-lere 
t o be del ivered in three packages as follows : 
(1) 
Immediate Increment , ~riority One : 
To be deployed 
by 1 May 68 . 
Major elements include one brigade of the 5th 
Mechanized Division with a mix of one infantry, one armored 
and one mechanized battalion; the Fj.fth Marine Division (l ess 
RLT-26 ); one armored cavalry regiment ; eight tactical fighter 
squadrons ; and a groupment of Na-v,y units to augment on going 
programs . 
(2) 
I1~mediate Increment, ~riority Two: 
To be deployed 
as soon as-possible but prior to 1 Sep bE. 
Major el ements 
i nclude the remainder of the 5th Mechanized Division, and four 
tactical fight er sq"lJ.adrons. It is desirable that the ROK 
Light Division be deployed 'dithin this time frame . 
(3 ) 
Follow-O~ Increm.ent: 
To be deployed by the end of 
CY 68. 
MaJor elements include one infantry division, three 
tactical fighter squadrons , and units to f\lrther. augment 
Navy Programs . }!i/ 
15 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A fork in the road had been reached . 
Now the alternatives stood 
out in stark reality . 
To accept and meet General ~fueeler 's request for 
troops would mean a total U,S. military commitment toSVN -- an Americaniza-
tion of the "\1a1:', a callup of reserve forces, vastly increased expenditures . 
To deny the request for troops, or to attempt to again cut it to a si ze vlhich 
could be sustained by the thinly stretched active forces, would just as surely 
signify that an upper limit to the U.S. military commitment in SVN had been 
reached. 
3· 
"A to Z" Reassessment 
These thoughts "l-Tere very much on Secretary Clifford ' s mind during 
his first meeting on 29 February "\'li th the people "\"ho were to conduct the 
reassessment of U.S. strategy. 
Present, in addition to Clifford, were McNams,ra, 
General Taylor, Nitze , FO"l11er, Katzenbach, Rostm'T, Helms, Bundy, Harnke , and 
Habib. 17/ 
Mr. Clifford outlined the task as he had received it from the 
P".cesident . 
He indicated to the group that he felt that the real problem to 
be addressed "l-7aS not whether we should send 200,000 additional troops to Viet-
nam. 
The real questions were : 
Should we follow the present course in SVN; 
could it ever prove successful even if vastly more than 200,000 troops were 
sent? 
The answers to these questions, the formulation of alternative courses 
open to the U. S., vIaS to be the initial focus of the revie,v . 
To that end, 
general assignments I'Tere made concerning papers to be written . 
These papers 
vTere to be prepared for discu.ssion among the Group on Saturday, March 2. 
The geners,l division of labor and outline of subj ects assigned was indicated 
by Mr . Bundy in a memorandum the subsequent day, as follows : 
1. Hhat 'alternative courses of action are available to 
the US? 
Assignment : 
Defense - General Taylor - State (Secretary) 
2. 
~fuat alternative courses are open to the enemy? 
Assignment - Defense and CIA 
3. 
Analysis of implications of Hestmoreland ' s r equest for 
additional troops. 
Series of papers on the follo",ing. 
Military i mplications - JCS 
Political implications - State 
(Political implications in their broadest 
domestic and international sense to include 
internal Vietnamese problem) . 
Budgetary results '- Defense 
16 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Economic implications - Treasury 
Congressional implications - Defense 
I mplications for public opinion - domestic and 
international - State . 
4. 
Negotiation Alterna,ti ves 
Assignment - State ~ 
In addition, Secretary Clifford indicated that certain rnilitary options 
were to be examined in this review . 
These options 'were: 
Option I: 
Add approximately 196 ,000 troops' to the present 
total authorized force l evel, i.e. Program 5 
(525,000) plus the six additional battalions 
already deployed (10,500 ). 
Restrictions cur-
r ently imposed on air and ground operations in 
Cambodia, Laos, and North Vietnam are relaxed 
to permit destruction of the ports, mining of 
t he watenvays , attack of complete target systems 
in NVN and offensive operations against VC/ NVA 
Army force s in Laos and Cambodia . 
Option IA: No change from Option I except that current 
r estrictions on ground and air operations in 
Cambodia, Laos, and NVN are maintained . 
Option II: No change to t otal authorized forc e level 
(525,000 plus 10,500 augmentation) except to 
deploy 3 fighter squadrons authori zed vTi thin 
the ceiling but not deployed . 
Option III: Add 50,000 troops above those currently authorized . 
Option IV: Add 100,000 troops above those currently authorized. ~ 
The ,main work in preparing a paper for Secretary Clifford to present 
t o the Y.cesident '\'las to be done in the Defense Department by a group of 
staff action officers '\wrking intensively under the direction of Mr . Leslie 
Gelb . 
These sta.ff officers worked as a drafting committee vlhile a group 
consisting of Mr. 'Harnke, !vIr . Enthoven, Mr . Halperin and Mr . Steadman 
acted as a policy revieitl board . 
Of the Hork done outside the Pentagon, 
only the papers on negotiations and SVN domestic policies prepared by 
IVlY . Bundy and Mr . Habib at State and General Taylor ' s paper on alternative 
strategies "Tent to the \<lhi te House. 
The other materials contributed by 
CIA, State, Treasury, and the Joint Staff were fed into the deliberative 
process at the Pentagon but vlere not included as such in the final product . 
Thus, the dominant voice in the consideration of alternatives as the r eassess-
ment pl'ogres'sed \'las that of the OSD . 
l7 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
These agency views were, hor,.rever, read and assessed by the working 
group and, although they Here not furnished to the President, they Here 
part of the background of the delj.berative process . It "\'1Ould be mis -
l eading, therefore, to say that they Here not considered or had no influ-
ence on the decisions taken . 
In any case, they provided some sense of 
the ideas and alternatives being considered and debated during these feH 
frantic days of late Februa~J - early March , 1968 . 
The CIA furnished three papers Hhich were considered in the reassess -
ment . 
The first, dated 26 February 1968, Has prepared for the Director of 
Central Intelligence prior to the formation of the Task Group. 
Entitled 
"The Outlook in Vietnam, " this paper stated the folloHing conclusion : 
We believe that the Cornlllunists "rill sustain a high level 
of military activity for at least the next hro or three 
months . It is difficu~t to forecast the situation which will 
then obtain, given the number of unknoHable factors r,.lhich 
will figure. 
Our best estimate is as follows : 
a . 
The least likely outcome of the present phase 
is that the Cornlll1..mist side Hill expend its resources to such 
an extent as to be incapable thereafter of preventing steady 
advances by the US/GVN. 
b. 
Also unlikely, though considerably l ess so, is 
the. t the GVN / ARVN Ivill be so cri ti cally weakened that it can 
play no further significant part in the military and political 
prosecution of the struggle. 
c . 
More likely than either of the above is that the 
present push "Till be generally contained , but with severe 
l osses to both the GVN and Communist forces, and that a 
period "rill set in during "\vhich neither will be capable of 
registering decisive gains . 521 
The second CIA paper, de.ted 29 February, "\Vas entj.tled "Communist 
Alternatives in Vietnam. II 
1\'10 main military alternatives were identified, 
as folJ.O\'lS: 
a . 
maintain widespread military pressure in Vietnam 
at l east for the next several months ; 
b. 
increase the level of military pressures by one 
or more of the folJ.ol·ring measures : 
(1) 
cornlllTLcingall of their r eserves from NVN, 
tantamount to an all-out invasion, to gain decisive re su~ts 
as quickly as possible; 
(2) 
cornrnitting hTO or three additional divisions; 
18 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEC&~T - Sensitive 
(3) 
seeking one major battle which promised significant 
political gains . 
(4) 
expanding current efforts in Laos . ~ 
Based on this analysis, Communist intentions were assessed as follows: 
The Communists probably intend to maintain vlidespread mili -
tary pressures in Vietnam for at least 'the next several months . 
A special effort '-'Till be made to harass urban areas and keep 
them under threat. 
They vlill probably calculate that the 
US/GVN vTill be forced to defend the towns and the countryside 
will be l eft more vulnerable to Communist domination. 
At 
some time, new Cormnunist attacks vrill probably be launched 
to seize and hold certain cities and towns. 
Where condi-
tions appear favorable they vTill engage US forces, seeking 
some significant local success which ,VQuld have a major 
political return . 
The total result of their campaign, they 
hope, will be to so strain the resources of the US and the 
GVN/ARVN, that the Saigon government will lose control of 
much of the couIltry and the US \Vill have little choice but 
to settle the w'ar on COIfu'nunist terms. ~ 
The third CIA paper, submitted on 1 March 1968, attempted to ans\Ver 
specific questions posed by the Secretary of Defense in his initial meeting 
with his senior working group on 29 February. 
Pertinent questions and the 
CIA assessment are listed belOl'T: 
. 
Q. 
What is the likely course of events in South Vietnam 
over the next 10 months , assuming no change in U.S. policy 
or force l evels? 
A. 
In the assUUled circl~stances a total military victory 
by the Allies or the Communists is highly unlikely in the next 
10 months . It is manifestl y impossible for the Commmlists to 
drive U,S, forces out of the country. It is equally out of 
the question for US/ GVN forces to clear South Vietnam of 
Comm1l..l1ist forces. It is possible, hOI'Tever , that the over-
all situation in this period .. Till take a decisive turn. 
We think it unlikely that this tt~n could be in the 
US/ GVN favor . ... Vle see no evidence yet that the GVN/ ARVN 
will be inspired to seize the initiative, go over to the 
attack, exploit the Communist VD~nerabilities , and quickly 
regain the rural areas . 
We doubt they have the ,-rill and 
capability to make the effort . 
Far more likely is an erosion of the ARVN's morale 
and effectiveness. 
We do not believe that the GVN 'will 
collapse , or that the ARVN v;i.ll totally disintegrate . 
But 
19 
TOP SEC.RET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
t here is a fairly good chance that Communist presssures 
wil l result in a serious '\veakening of the GVN/ ARVN apparatus 
and an end to its effective functioning in parts of the 
country. 
In these circumstances , virtually the entire 
bur den of the war '\vould fallon US forces . 
* -)(- * 
In sum, there is a high risk that both the ARVN 
and GVN I'lill be seriously weakened in the next months , 
and perhaps decisively so . 
Our best estimate i s that 
i n the assumed circumstances the overall situation 10 
months hence '\>Till be no better than a standoff . 
Q,. 
What i s t he likely Communist r eaction t o a change 
i n US strategy t01.·lard greater control over population 
centers , with or without increased forces? 
A. 
I n general the Communists would vie\-, this move 
as a success for their strategy. 
Their tactical response 
i n such circumstances would depend mainly on the natUre 
of US enclaves . If these were fairly l arge and embraced 
much of the outlying countryside, the Com.rnunists vlould 
believe them to be porous enough to infiltrate and harass, 
much as they are doing noW'.. If the defensive perimeters 
were fairly solid, however, the Communists would not try 
to overrun them in frontal assaults . 
Instead , they 
woul d concentrate for a time on consol idating the country-
side and isolating the various defended encl aves, in 
particular interdicting supply lines and forcing the US 
to undertake expensive supply movements from out of 
country. 
A Commurlist-controlled regime with a 
tI coal i tion lt 
facade vlould be set up in tlliberated
lt areas and attempts 
at terrorist activity inside the enclaves 'Ivould be under-
taken . 
Hanoi vlould hope that a combination of military and 
political presstITe, together W'ith the dim prospect for 
achievement of the original US aims in the Vietnam struggl e , 
'Ivould eventually pe:csuade the US to extricate itself through 
negotiations . 
Q, . 
vmat is the likely NVA/ VC strategy over the next 
10 months if US forces are increased by 50,000, by 100,000, 
or by 200,UOO? 
A . 
He would expect the Cormnunists to continue the ,.;ar . 
They still have resources available in North Vietnam and 
within South Vietnam to increase their troop strength. 
Their 
20 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
strong l ogistical effort and their ability to organize and 
exploit the people under their control in the South enable them 
t o counter US increases by smaller increases of their own . 
Over a ten-month period the Communists would probably be abl e 
t o introduce sufficient ne~-l units into the South to offset 
t he US maneuver battalion increments of the various force 
l evels given above . ~ 
These CIA assessments, then, painted very bl eak alternatives for 
U. S. policymakers . If U. S. policy and force levels did not change , there 
was a high risk that ARVN and the GVN 'iTould be seriously vleakened, perhaps 
decisively so . 
The US would assume the major burden of the war , and the 
situation Hould be no better than a standoff . If U.S. forces vlere increased 
by as much as 100,000, the Communists would probably be abl e to i ntr oduce 
sufficient new units in the South to offset this increase . 
I f the U. S. 
changed its strategy toward greater control over population centers , with 
or without increased forces, the Communists would adjust their strategy 
so as to preclude the achievement of U. S. aims . 
I n his various papers for the Working Group, Assistant Secretary of 
State William Btmdy attempted a deliberate approach . 
He furnished one 
paper i-lhich outlined alternative courses of action ,-lhich he considered 
deserved serious consideration . ~ Another paper outlined a checklist 
"to serve as a rough guide iD the pape:cs that need preparation under a 
systematic code ." W 
The alternative courses listed by Mr . Bundy were : 
a . 
Accep·t the ",7heel er/ Westmoreland recormnendation aimed 
at sending roughly 100,000 men by 1 May and another 100 , 000 
men by the end of 1968. 
b. 
Change our military strategy, reducing the areas and 
places we seek to control and concentrating far more heavily 
on the protection of populated areas . 
c. 
Adopt option b above in the south, but extend our 
bombing and other military actions against the North to try 
t o strangle the war there and put greater pressure on Hanoi 
in this area . 
d. 
Accept irmnedia tely thos e element s of the Tifheeler / 
\'Testmoreland proposals that could hope to affect the si.tu-
ation favorably ov er the next four months or so, but do not 
go beyond that in terms of fo:r;:ce plans and related actions . 
e . 
"Cut and shave" the \<7heeler/ lvestmoreland proposals 
and their action implications, but carryon basically in 
accordance ,-Ii th pre sent strategy . 
f. 
"All-out option. " . Announce that we ;-rer
6
e/ prepared 
to hold in Vietnam no matter ",hat developed. 
~ 
21 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The Department of State also prepared papers on the following 
subjects: 
a. 
Introductory Paper on Key Elements in the Situation ~ 
b. 
Probable Soviet, Chinese, \~estern European Reactions ?:§} 
c. 
Ambassador Thompson's Cable on Soviet Reactions to 
Possible U.S. Government Courses of Action 29/ 
d. 
European and Other Non-Asian Reactions to Major Force 
Increases ]!}) 
e. 
Asian Reaction to a Major U.S. Force Increase 31/ 
f. 
Options on our Negotiating Posture ~ 
These papers vTere presented to the Clifford Group at the meeting on 
3 March 1968 . 
However, as will be seen, they were quickly overtaken by 
the rapidly moving situation and, with the exception of the paper on nego -
tiating options, did not figure in the final memorandum which Ivas fOTITarded 
to the President on L~ March. 
General MaxvTell Taylor's paper on alternative courses of action is 
of greater interest in that it was furnished both to the Clifford Working 
Group and to the ~fui te House directly through General Taylor' s capacity 
as Military Advisor to the President. 
Although it is not known what weight 
was given to this paper, it was received by the President even prior to the 
Memorandum from the Clifford Group, and thereby could have gained some 
special vreight in the deliberations of the President. 
After a brief listing of the U.S. objectives in SVN, General Taylor 
concluded that, since there was no serious consideration being given at the 
moment to adding to or subtracting from our present objective, the discussion 
should be limited to considerations of alternative strategies and programs 
to attain that objective. W 
General Taylor concluded that, basically, our government had only hvo 
choices : 
a. 
We can tell General Westmoreland that he must make do 
withhis present forces in Viet-Ham and ask him to report to 
us vThat he is capable of accomplishing therevTi th . 
This vTould 
be an invitation to him to cut back sharply upon the military 
objectives he bas defined in his latest Combined Campaign 
Plan (1968). 
Alternatively, Ivhile making this decision to 
provide no further forces , \'Ie could give new strategic 
guidance to General Hestmoreland vrhich ,vould assist him in 
establishing the priorities for his efforts necessary to 
bring his mission vii thi.n ca,pabilities of the forces allotted 
him. 
22 
TOP SF.CRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
b . 
The other broad alternative is to increase his present 
forces by some amount varying from less than his figure of 
205,000 and ranging up to the full amoun~. Also in this case, 
we might well consider giving him revised strategic guidance 
in the light of what we have learned from the Tet offensive 
and its sequel. 
General Tayl or thus indicated that in the reassessment of our strategy, 
the government would be required to answer the following questions : 
(1 ) 
Do we decide at this time to send any additional 
r einforcements to General liTestmoreland? 
(2 ) If the anSvler is affirmative, should we agree to 
send all or part of the 205,000 r equest ed by General 
Westmorel and? 
(3) 
Whether the response is affirmative or negative, should 
we send Gener al VTestmoreland nel'l strategic guidance, hoping to 
l imit further demands on U.S. military manpower? 
(4) What Strategic Reserve should be retained in the U.S. 
i n the foregoing situations? 
General Taylor then listed some of the political considerations of the 
military course of action decided upon . 
He listed the following political 
actions as worth considering in connection with any decision on reinforce-
ment : 
(1 ) 
A renewed offer of negotiation, possibly with a private 
communication that we 'would suspend the bombing for a fixed period 
without making the time limitation public if we were assured that 
productive negotiations would start before the end of the period. 
(2 ) 
A public announcement that we would adjust the bombing 
of the North to the level of intensity of enemy grou:.n.d 8.ction 
in the South. 
(3 ) 
As a prelude to sharply increased bonibing levels, possibly 
to include the closing of Haiphong, a statement of our intentions 
made necessary by the enemy offensive against the cities and 
across the 'frontie:cs. 
( Lf ) Announcement of the withdrawal of the San Antonio 
forml)~a i n view of the heightened level of aggression conducted 
by North Viet-Name 
(5) 
Keep silent. 
23 
TOP SECRET - Sensit ive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I n choosing among these alternatives, General Taylor argued that the 
present military situation in South Vietnam argued strongly agai nst a new 
negotiation effort or any thought of reducing the bombing of the North . 
He further argu~d that, in any case , we would appear well-advised to 
wi thdraw from the San Antonio formula . 
Thus , he concl uded , there seemed to be at l east three pr ogr am 
packages worth serious consideration. 
They were : 
Package A 
a. 
No i ncrease of General Westmorel and ' s forces in South Viet- Nam. 
b. 
New strategic guidance . 
c. 
Build-up of Strategic Reserve . 
d. 
No negotiation initiative . 
e. 
Wi thdral·lal of San Antonio formul a . 
f. 
Pressure on GVN to do better . 
Package B 
a . 
Partial acceptance of General Westmoreland ' s r ecommendation . 
b. 
New strat.egic guidance . 
c. 
Build-up of Strategic Reserve ; 
d . 
No negotiation i nitiative . 
e . 
Wi thdrm'lal of San Antonio formula . 
f . 
Pressure on GVN to do better . 
Package C 
a . 
Approval of General Westmoreland ' s ful l request . 
b . 
c. 
d . 
e . 
f. 
Ii' 
Nevl stl?ategic guidance. 
Build-up of Strategic Reserve . 
No negotiation i nitiative. 
Withdrm'lal of San Antonio formul a and announcement of 
i ntention to close Haiphong. 
Pres sure on GVN to do better . 
Major effort to rally the homefront. 
24 
TOP SECRET - Sensitiye 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The working group within ISA had access to all of these documents . 
In addition, and at the request of the working group , other papers were 
prepared within the Department of Defense by the Assistant Secretary 
(Systems Analysis) and the Assistant Secretary (Public Affairs). 
Initially, Systems Analysis undertook a capability study in order 
to' determ.irie if the "tJfACV requirement could indeed be met. 
They concluded 
that, with the exception of Army aviation units, the MACV manpower request 
could be filled essentially as desired. 
This could even be done, the 
analysis concluded , without changing the one-year tour policy, without 
dra"l>Ting dO"l>m on Europe, and without widespread second tours with less than 
24 months i n CONUS. 
This assumed a reserve recall, added funds, and the 
required strength increases. 
Our maximum capability "\>Iould be to provide 6 maneuver 
battalions in May, 9 more in June, 9 in July and as many as 
6 more in August -- faster than the MACV request. 
These 
units would have the necessary artillery, transportation 
and engineer support . 
Added tactical air ' units could deploy 
on a matching schedule. 
The only significant shortfall would be in Army Aviation. 
Even "\>lith a reserve recall, present deployment schedules cannot 
be significantly accelerated. 
Production limitations are such 
that at least one year would be required to increase the out-
put of UH-l/ AF-l helicopters. 
Thus, it would be mid-1969 
before any added aviation units could deploy and mid-1971 
before the total MACV requirement could be met . ~ 
This SA paper also considered several other deployment options , as 
follows : 
cut 50,000 from present authorization; no increase in current 
authorization; increase by 50,000; increase by 100,000 ; increase by 200,000. 
The Qnits required under all these options, it was concluded, could deploy 
to Vietnam in a matter of months . 
The 50 ,000 man package could arrive in 
May and June; the 100,000 man package by August; and t he full 200,000 (with 
minor exceptions) by December. 
The principal exceptions under all options 
would continue to be Army aviation units. 
A surmnary of the various options 
considered is sholm below: 
Optional DeEloyments 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
Cut 
Current 
Add 
Add 
Add 
50 ,000 
Plan 
50 ,000 100,000 200,000 
Total U.S. persmmel 
485,000 
535,000 
585,000 635,000 631 ,000 
U.S. Maneuver Bns 
103 
112 
118 
124 
133 
Artillery Bns 
68 
72 
77 
83 
92 
Tac Air Sqds 
1~4 
45 
51 
56 
60 
Annual. Cost 
$23 Bil.. $25' Bil. $28 Bil. . $30 Bil . $35 Bil. 
Reserve Recall 
65,000 
200,000 250,000 ]2} 
25 
TOP SECRET .- Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Other papers prepared by Systems Analys i s during this period were 
furnished to the ISA working group upon their request . 
I ndeed , the subj ect 
matter and thrust of these papers indicated fairly early t he bias of the 
people preparing them as well as the direction in vlhich the reassessment of 
U.S. strategy was ' movi ng, at least within the working group in ISA. 
Papers were also furnished concerning pacification, costs and probable 
results of alter native U.S. strategies in South Vietnam, the status of 
RVNAF, problaas of inflation, and data for analysis of strategies. 
The 
main thrust of most of these papers was that IImore of the same ll in South 
Vietnam woul d not achieve decisive r esults and , i ndeed, would not be satis-
factory. 
The paper on pacification indicated that : 
Hamlet Evaluation System (RES ) r eports for CY 1967 indicate 
that pacification progressed slowly during the f irst half of 
1967, and lost ground in the second half. 
Most (60%) of the 
1967 gain r esults from accounting type changes to the RES 
system, not from pacification progress ; hamlet additions and 
deletions, and revised population estimates accounted for 
half of the January-June increase and all of the June -December 
increase . 
In the area. that really counts --VC-D-E hamlets 
rlslng to A-B-C r atings --we actually suffered a net loss of 
10,100 people betw'een June and December 1967. 36/ 
Based on General vlheeler ' s statement in his report to the Presi,dent, 
that "to a l arge extent the VC nOH control the countryside,1I the paper con-
cluded that lithe enemy ' s current offensive appears to have kill ed the progra.rn 
once and for 8011.
11
' 37/ 
In ana.lyzing the status of RVNAF, the Systems Analysis paper concluded: 
Highest priority must be given to getting RVNAF moving . 
In 
t he short rW1 r e- equipping the Vietnamese and helping them 
r egain t heir combat power insures that vle can prevent unnecessary 
l oss should the enemy attack the cities or put pressure there 
i-lhile hitting Khe Sanh. 
Further, present US force commitments 
mean that only a recuperated RVNAF will permit release of US 
units for other missions and accomplish any objectives in 
pacification. 
Finally:, restoration of security i n the cities 
i n conjunction ,·lith the National Police is a major new mission 
f or RVNAF which requires forces . 
V\1hat can i-le do? 
There are many indications that the man-
pOl'ler situation is i-TOrSe than r eported. 
Every effort must be 
made to determine hO'd many deserters there are and to approach 
them . 
Rounding up trained manpovrer delinquent in returning 
from Tet l'7ill help . 
US advisors can pressure the JGS to up-
grade selected Rl"/ PF into ARVN in addition to measures alr eady 
initiated by RVNA.F. 
26 
TOP SECRET - ,Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
COMUSMACV must identif'y I-leak RVNAF units . 
III Corps 
need special study and preparation of revised contingency 
plans . 
Pri ority on remanning, re- equipping and retr:ai ning 
must be given to the RVNAF elite units (VNMC ) which con-
sti tute the general reserve . 
COMUSMACV must plan for the 
use of thi s reserve and earmarked US units to defect VC 
attack of weak RVNAF units during the interim period . 
RVNAF modernization should take precedence over equip-
ping all US forces except those deploying to the combat 
zone . 
The remaining 82,000 M16 rifles must be delivered 
ASAP. It is also i n the US interest to equip the RF/ PF 
wit h M16s beforp. equi pping the US tra i ni ng base , which i s 
already programmed . 
Lastl y , COMUSMACV must make decisions about wh8.t 
missions RVN.I\F need not accomplish no-I'! . 
RVNAF is stretched 
t oo thin given its past and expected missions . It alone 
cannot protect the cities and hold the countryside where 
i t i s still deployed. 
Decision is needed to permit the 
build-up of weak units and better integrated use of US 
and RVNAF against whatever enemy scenario develops . ~ 
The paper entitled ttAlternate Strategies" painted a bleak picture of 
American failure in Vietnam: 
We lost our offensive stance because we never achieved 
the moment1JIfl 'essential for military victory . 
Search and 
Destroy operations can ' t build this kind of momentum and 
t he RVNl\.F vIas not pushed hard enough. 
We became mesmerized 
by statistic:s of known doubtful validity ,choosing to place 
our faith only in the ones that showed progress . 
We j udged 
the enemy ' s intentions rather than his capabilities because 
we trusted captured documents too much. 
We 'were not alert 
t o the perils of time lag and spoofing . 
In short, our set-
backs 'Here due to wishful thinking compounded by a massive 
intelligence coll ection and/ or evaluation failure . 
Indeed , in examining U. S. objectives in SVN, the picture of fail ure Ivas 
manifest : 
Since the original commitment of large US forces in 1965 , 
our stated objectives have been to : 
(1) 
Make it as difficult and costly as possibl e for 
NVN to continue effective support of the VC and cause NVN to 
cease its dh'ection of the VC insurgency . 
(While 1'78 have raised the price to NVN of aggression and 
27 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
support of the VC, it shOTtTS no l ack of capability or I'Till 
to match each nel'T US escalation . 
Our strategy OI~ "attri tion" 
has not worked . 
Adding 206,000 more US lnen to a force of 
525,000, gaining only 27 additional n:anetlver battalions and 
270 tactical fighters at an added cost tc the US of $10 bil-
lion per year raises the q,ucstion of ,'Tho is making it costly 
from whom.) 
(2) 
Extend GVN dominion, direction and control over 
SVN. 
(This objective can only be achieved by the GVN through 
its political and economic processes and vTith the indispensable 
support of an effective RVNAF. 
The T~T offensive demonstrated 
not only that the US he,d not provided an effective shield, it 
also demonstrated that the GVN and RVNAF had not made real 
progress in pacification -- the essential first step al ong the 
road of extending GV1~ dominio~ direction and control.) 
(3) 
Defeat the VC and NVA forces in SVN and force 
their I'Tithdl'a'lva1. 
(The TET offensive proves ,\qe 'Here further 
from this goal than \"e thought. 
Hol'l much further remains 
to be seen.) 
(4) 
Deter the Chinese Communists from direct inter-
vention in SEA . 
(This I"e have done successfully so far; 
hOl'Tever, greatly increased U. S. forces may become counter-
productive. ) 
We know that despite a massive influx of 500,000 US troops, 
1.2 million tons of bombs a year, 400,000 attack sorties per year, 
200,000 enemy KIA in three years, 20,000 US KIA, etc., our control 
of the countryside and the defense of the 'lU'ban areas is no\" 
essentially at pre-August 1965 levels. 
We have achieved stale-
mate at a high commitment . 
A nei-T strategy must be sought . 39/ 
Several alternative strategies vJere briefly discussed and all but one 
I'Tere Cluickly dismissed as being unlikely to bring success : 
(1) 
No change but increase the~ou~. 
This strategy alternative is implicit in the recoll1.rnenda-
tions of MACV and CJCS .... In brief, the ]Ylfi.CV and CJCS recommenda-
tions are f8r additional forces to regai:. this ground lost since 
January, 1968. 
Nothing is said as to I'lhether still more US 
f orces "lill be reCluired to finish the job. Another payment on 
an open-ended con~itment is req,uested. 
28 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
•
•
•• ~ " •• "....... 
~'
I 
. :-... -• • - ',. 
-
• 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(2) Widen the v-Iar. 
Adoption of this alternative would re':;J.uire more forces 
than are now being considered and it runs further risks of 
involving Chir.a and the USSR. 
The course of events already 
set in motion could lead to adoption of this alternative; 
increasing US forces in SVN would undoubtedly incre3.se \the 
possibili ties of it. And the option is open fe!r North \ 
Korea or other aggressive countries to t.est our will else-
where. 
(3) opt Out of the Har. 
The price of quitting now would include the under-
ffilnlng of our other commitments world-wide, bitter dissension 
at home, and a probable resurgence of active Chinese-USSR 
territorial aggrandizements. 
Before TET we could have done this with less risk than 
now. 
(4) 
Resuscitate GVN and RVNAF. 
This option is to return to the concept of a GVN 
war with US assistance instead of the present situation of 
a US war with dubious GVN assistance. 
Adoption of this alternative requires: 
(a) A solid commitment to a US force ceiling. 
;i 
__ ~----------~This(!c)mmitment must be communicated to the highest levels 
of GVN/RVNAF and our own military leaders. 
-----
(b) 
A ,skillful conditioning of US and world 
opinion to the limited US commitment to the South Vietnamese 
war and to our right of withdrawal if GVN/RVNAF determina-
tion or performance wavers. 
(c) A statement that the US objective in SVN is 
to develop the GVN capability to defeat the VC and NVA 
forces in SVN and force their withdrawal. ~
. 
The remalnlng Systems Analysis paper cited statistics to show that, 
in the past, the North Vietnamese had been able to match the U.S. buildup 
in SVNw.lib their own buildup. 
Also statistics were used to project the 
cost to the U.S. in casual~ies resulting from various deployment options 
and 'various strategies on the ground. 
These projections showed that a 
shift to a population control strategy which was unchallenged by the enemy 
would stabilize casualty rates, as some units would be underemployed. ~ 
29 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
" 
The paper prepared py the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public 
Affairs ) was entitled tlpossible Pu.blic Reaction to Various Alternatives ." 
Five alternative options 'were examined : 
1. 
I ncreased mobilization and deployment . 
This includes 
sending General Westmoreland 50,000 to 200,000 more troops 
and the additional moves this would require at home -- calling 
r eserves, extending enlistments , extra expenditures, bigger 
tax bill, etc . 
2. 
Increased mobilization/ deployment plus expanded bombing 
of North Vietnam. 
3. 
Increased mobilization/deployment plus' a bombing pause . 
4. Denial of the Westmoreland requests and continuation of 
the war "as is" - - as it 'vas being fought prior to the Tet 
offensive and Khe Sanh . 
5. 
Denial of the ~festmoreland requests and a change in 
war-fighting policy with greater concentration on defending 
populated areas and less on search-and-destroy in unpopulated 
areas . 
This ,vould include an announced program to begin 
troop vTithdra"\'ral at a fixed date. 42/ 
The Assistant Secretary, :Mr . Goulding, emphasized that all optlons 
vlere being examined from a public rea.ction standpoint only . 
He also 
emphasized that no' action would unite the country . 
The question to be 
attacked 'l<7aS Hhj.ch option will most coalesce supporters and most isolate 
the opposition . 
I n analyzing the various options above, :Mr . Goulding divided the 
public into hawks, doves, and middle-of-the-roaders. 
Under Option 1, 
he argued, increased mobilization and deployment moves , 'l<7ithout other 
neY] 8.ctions : 
.•. ldll make the doves unhappy because we become more 
and more enmeshed in the I'Tar . 
They vlill make the haiVks 
unhappy because 'l<Te still will be withholding our mil itary 
strength , particularly in the North. 
And the middle - of-
the-roaders vTho ba::;ically support the President out of 
conviction 'or patriotism will be unhappy becs.use they will 
see the ante going up in so many I-lays anci still. 'l<lill not 
be given a victory date, a progress report they can believe 
or an argument they can accept that all of this is in the 
national interest . 
(Further, they vTill read in the dissent 
colmnrls and' edi torials that 18 months from nOl'T , when the 
NOl'th Vietnamese have added 30,000 more troops, Tile vlill be 
right back 'l<There \'7e started. ) 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Thus , public reaction to this option would be extremely negative, and 
vrould become increasingly so as the deployment numbers , the financial 
costs , and the life-disrupting actions increase . 
The next two options, Mr . Goulding indicated, should be considered 
together since, from a public affairs standpoint, the decision to deploy 
additional troops of any significant mmiber must be accompanied by some 
"new" move . 
The tvro options discussed were deployment plus expanded 
bombing of the North, and increased mobili zation plus a bombi ng pause. 
The first course,Goulding concluded,would elicit more support i n 
the country than does the present course . 
This course would clearly bring aboard more havlks and 
further isolate the doves . It would also make the war much 
easier to accept by the middle -of-the-roaders. It would 
help unite the country. 
Some fence sitters, hOVlever , \'lOuld 
be added to those who already vie\v the Vlar as an unforgiveable 
sin. 
I think the campus and "liberal ll reaction vlOuld sur-
pass anything \ve have seen. 
The other option envisioned continuing to fight as we are i n the 
south, strengthening General Westmoreland vIi th part or all of his request, 
and coupling these moves \·Ti th a visible "peace ll campaign based upon a 
cessation of the bOrribing in the North . 
This course, Goulding concluded : 
... \vould alienate those who take the hardest line . 
We would be adding much to our cost, both by the extra 
deployment and the military price paid for the pause , 
without receiving any immedj.ate or concrete results . If 
the Communists took advantage of the bombing halt, the 
hawks and many of the military vlould react strongly .... 
The doves, of course, would enthusiastically endorse the 
pause and would i mmediately begin pleading and praying 
that it be continued long enough to explore every possible 
and conceiv8.ble corridor ...• Addi tionally, the doves would 
deplore the extra deployments . 
They would complain tha.t 
t he pause VJaS not unlimited or unconditional. 
They vTould 
argue that the deployments plus the failure to be lIuncon-
ditional" detracted from the effort . 
This two-pronged 
approach -- strengthen but seek negotiation -- would give 
new confidence to the middle-of-the-roaders . 
They would 
applaud the govern.ro.ent for doing II something" different , 
for seeking a 'Ivay mJ.t of the cluagmire . 
rhey would be 
more patient than the hawks to give the pause a chance , 
and l~ss disturbed than the doves at the mobilization . 
For them, it could be a \'lay out _.- and even a "could be" 
is better than the frustration they now feeL .•. The deploy/ 
pause OptiOE 'l'lould be more favorably received by the nation 
than the deploy/ escalate North, since it vlould, in the public 
mind, offer more hope of a:'n eventual solution to the ·war . 
31 
TOP SECRE'f' - Sensi tj. ve 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The fourth option, denial of" the vlestmoreland request and continue 
the "lar lIas is, II would please no one, according to Mr. Goulding . 
The 
ha'-Tks (and the military) l'lOuld protest vehemently. 
They would b"e less 
satisfied, and the doves v70uld be no more satisfied by this failure to 
take new ini tiati ves tOvrard peace. 
HOI-lever,!v',r . Goulding concluded, 
since fewer people would be affected by this course than by Option One, 
and therefore it would be preferable to that Option. 
The advantages of Option Five - denial of General Hestmoreland ts 
requests and a change in strategy in South Vietnam -- from a public affairs 
standpoint were ovenrhelming, the paper concluded . 
.... The pain of additional deployments, Reserve callups, 
i ncreased draft calls, increased casualties, extended tours 
would be eliminated. 
The hazards of bombing escalation 
would be eliminated . 
The dangers of a bomb'ing pause would 
be eliminated . 
The frustration of more -and-more -and-more 
into the endl es s pit vrould be eliminated . 
I'mat the people 
want most of all is some sign that 'de are making progress , 
that there is, some"l-rhere , an end . 
Vlhile this does not 
necessarily sho\-7 progress, it does sho,-r change . It does 
show the search for new approaches .... lt would prevent the 
middle-of-the-roaders from joining the doves . 
Hhile the 
doves vrant a pause, I "I·rould think they would prefer this 
to deployment-mobilization plus pause . 
vThile the ha"\-Tks 
want to escalate in the North, most of them (not all) also 
want an end to increased ground strength in the South . 
I believe that "I·re '-Tould be successf'Lll in getting members 
of Congress to make speeches in support of this . 
In summary, then, and strictly from a public reaction staJ:}dpoint , 
Mr . Goulding noted the options as folloi'7S : 
Acceptable : 
Only #5 -- Denial of requests and a 
change in policy in the South. 
Most acceptable of the others : #3 -- Deploy and 
pause. 
Next most acceptable : 
#2 -- Deploy and eA~and Air 
Har North. 
Next most acceptable: 
ff1+ -- Deny vTestmoreland and 
continue as is . 
Most objectiona"ble : 
#1 -- Deploy and continue as is, 
north and south .~}/ . 
32 
TOP SFCRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
4. 
Drafting a Jv:emorandum 
There is, of course, no way of knowing hOH much conside'ration 
and 'Yreight were given to each of these papers by the small group of action 
officers in the Pentagon Ivho were, in the last analysis, charged with 
digesting all of these factors, considerations, and vie'ds and actually 
drafting the reassessment of U.S. strategy r equired by the President of 
his new Secretary of Defense . 
The predilections of these drafters, per-
haps Ivere hinted at by the subj ect matter of the backup papers prepared at 
their specific request and sillillnarized above. 
By 29 February, this group had produced an initial draft of a memoran-
dum for the President Vlhi ch examined the situation in SVN "in light of U.S. 
political objectives and General westmoreland ' s r equest for additional 
troops , as stated in General Wheeler's report." ~ 
This draft was slightly revised by senior officers in ISA and apparently 
was discussed within the Defense Establisr~ent on 1 March . 45/ 
This paper began with an assessment of the current situation in South 
Viet Nam and a discussion of the prospects over the next 10 months. 
Quoting 
General \Vheeler ' s report, the draft memorandum indicated that the most i mpor-
tant VC goal in the Hinter-spring offensive was the takeover of the country-
side. 
In many parts of the country, it 'YTaS stated, they may have already 
succeeded in achieving this goal . 
The ' main event' thus is still to come, not in a one-night 
offensi ve but in a week-by 1;.1eek expulsion of GVN presence and 
influence from the rural areas, showing up on the pe.cification 
maps as a ' red tide ' flol,ring up to the edges of the province 
and district towns, and over some of them. L16/ 
Although ARVN held up vTell under ini tial assaults, the ISA memorandlIDl 
concluded that they Vlould not soon move out of their defensive posture 
around the ci tie sand to',ms . 
They would, in the future, challenge the VC 
offensively much less than before. 
In the neH, more dangerous environment to come about in 
the countryside~ and as currently led, motivated, and influ-
enced at the top, ARVN is even less likely than before to 
buckle dOim to the crucial offensive job of chasing district 
companies and (with U.S. help) provincial battalions . 
In that 
envirorlD.ent, informers \-rill clam uJl, or be killed; the VC will 
get more information and cooperation, the GVN les s ; officials 
and police ,vill be much l ess, willing to act on information or 
VC suspects and activities. ~ 
The memorandum Has even more pessimistic concerning the future direction 
and abilities of the South Vietnamese Govermnent, and read nore into the TET 
offensive than had been noted there by other observers. 
33 
TOP SBCPcET - Sens i ti ve 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
It is unlikely that the GVN 'l-lill rise to the challenge. 
It vlill not move toward a Govern.rnent of National Union. 
Current arrests of oppositionists further isolate and dis -
credit it, and possibly foreshadOlv the emasculation of the 
Assembly and the undoing of all promising political develop-
ments of the past year . 
Furthermore, it is possible that 
the recent offensive 'Ivas facilitated by a nevlly friendly 
or apathetic urban environment , and a broad 10lv-level 
cooperative organization that had not existed on the same 
scale before. If, in fact, the attacks reflect ne,v VC 
opportunities and capability in the cities, then the impact 
of the attacks themselves, the overall military response, 
and the ineffective GVN political response may still further 
i mprove the VC cause in the cities, as well a s in the country-
side . 
Even if the political makeup of the GVN should change 
for the better, it may ,.,ell be that VC penetration in the 
cities has no'\V gone or '\ViII soon go too far for real non-
communist political mobilization to develop . 48/ 
Based upon this bleak assessment of the future of the Government and 
Army of South Vietnam, the ISA draft memorandruu undertook to exmnine 
alternative military strategies . 
THO such strategies '\Vere to be compared, 
the current one and an alternative which emphasized population security . 
(Actually, only one "las analyzed in detail.) 
The two strategies ,.,ere to be 
compared at current force levels and '\Vith added increments of 50,000, 
150,000 and 200,000 . 
In analyzing our current strategy, the memorandum undertook a revie'\V 
of how our strategy in Vietnam evolved . 
At the time U. S. forces ,,,ere first 
cOlmnitted in South VietnaJ..ll in early 1965, the draft Presidential memorandum 
indicated , the political situation '\Vas a desperate one . 
There '\Vas 
iw~inent 
danger of a North Vietnamese-controlled seizure of pO'iTer in SVN and the 
Lrnposition of a communist regime by force. 
Thus, the immediate objective 
of the U. S. 'Ivas a military one - -to arrest thi s trend and to deny to the 
~vA/VC the seizure of political control by force. 
Once U. S. forces were committed in increasingly large numbers, ho'\Vever, 
the military and political situation began to improve significantly. 
By 
the end of 1966, our initial military objective had been achieved-·-no longer 
'\Vas it ' possible for NVN to impose its 'will upon SVN by force . 
By this time, 
hOvlever, our military obj ecti ves had been expanded at the expense of our 
political objectives. 
In the absence of political directives limiting the goals to be 
attained by U.S. military force , our objectives became: 
a. 
To make it as difficult and costly as possible for 
NVN to continue effective support of the VC and to cause NVU 
to cease direction of the insurgency . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
b. 
To defeat the VC and NVA forces in SVN and force the 
wi thdra,val of NVN forces .... 
c. 
To extend GVN control over all of SVN. 
Indeed, in asking for increased forces, General 'IVheeler and General 
westmoreland described their current tasks as follows: 
a. 
Security of Cities and Government. 
b. 
SectITity in the Countryside. 
c. 
Defense of the Borders, the DMZ, and the Northern 
Province. 
d. 
Offensive Operations. ~ 
The question to be answered, then, suggested the memorandum, was what 
we could hope to accomplish with these increased force levels in pursuit of 
our current strategy. 
The answer was not encouraging. 
With current force levels we cannot continue to pursue all 
of the obj ecti yes listed by General \ITheeler. 
Can vie do so with 
increased forces? 
MACV does not clearly specify hoW he would use the addi -
tional forces he requests, except to indicate that they 
would provide him with a theater reserve and an offensive 
capability. 
Even with the 200,000 additional troops r equested 
by MACV, we will not be in a position to drive the enemy from 
SVN or to destroy his forces . 
MACV's description of his key 
problems makes clear that the additional forces would be used 
to open Route 1, north of Danang; support ARVN units, particu-
larly in the Delta; and to maintain a reserve e,gainst enemy 
offensives . 
With l esser increases of 50,000 or 100,000, 
MACV would be in an even less favorable position to go on the 
offensive. 
Moreover, even before the TET offensive the 
enemy was initiating about two-thirds of the clashes and 
could, in response to our buildup, adopt a casualty limiting 
posture. 
The more likely enemy r esponse , however, i s that ,vi th 
which he has responded to previous increases i n our force 
levels, viz., a matching increase on his part. 
Hanoi has 
maintained a constant ratio of one maneuver battalion to 
1.5 U.S. maneuver battalions from his reserve in NVN of 
from 45-70 maneuver battalions (comprising 40 , 000-60,000 
men in 5-8 divisions ). 
35 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Even if the enemy stands and fights as he did before 
TET, the results can only be disappointing in terms of 
attriting his capability. 
Over t he past year the United States has been killing 
beh7een 70 and 100 VC/rWA per month per U.S. combat bat-
talion i n theater . 
The return per combat battalion deployed 
has been falling off, but even assuming that additional 
deployments will double the number of combat battalions, 
and assuming that the kill-ratios will remain constant , we 
could expect enemy 
deaths, at best, on the order of magni-
tude of 20,000 per month, but the infiltration system from 
North Viet Nam e,lone could supply 13, 000-16 , 000 per month, 
r egardless of our bombing pattern, les,ving the remainder --
4,000 - - to be recruited in South Viet Nam -- a demonstrably 
manageable undertaking for the VC . 
The current strateg~ thus can promise no early end to 
the conflict, nor any success in attriting the enemy or 
eroding Hanoi ' s Hill to fight. 
Moreover, it 'would entail 
substantial costs in South Viet Nem, in the United States , 
and in the rest of the world. 50/ 
These substantial costs, the paper i ndicated , 1i70uld indeed preclude 
t he attainrnent of U.S. objectives. 
In South Vietnam, 
•.. the presence of more than 700,000 u.S. military can 
mean nothing but the total Americanization of the vJar . 
There is no sign that ARVN effectiveness \Vill increase , 
and there will be no pressure from the U. S. or the GVN for 
ARVN to shape up if the U. S. appears "7illing to increase 
its forc e l evels as necessary to maintain a stalemate in 
the country. 
The effect on the GVN 'Iwl.:11d be even more unfortunate . 
The Saigon leadership shows no signs of a willingness--let 
alone an ability--to attract the necessary loyalty or sup-
~ort of the people . 
It is true that the GVN did not totally 
~ollapse dlITi ng TET, but there is not yet anything like an 
urgent sense of national unity and purpose. 
A large infll~ 
of additional U.S. forces will intensify the belief of the 
ruling elite that the U. S. v7ill continue to fight its war 
i"hile it enge,ges in be,ckroom politics and permits wide -
spread corruption. 
Tne proposed actions will also generate 
i ncreased inflation, thereby reducing the effectiveness of 
t he GVN and makj,ng cori
ouptiui.1. harder to control. 
Reform 
of the GVN \·,ill come only ,,,hen and if' they come to believe 
that our continued presence i n South Viet Nam depends on 
what the GVN does . 
Certainly, a U.S. cornnitment to a sub-
stantial trooD increase before the GVN commits itself to 
r eform'and action can only be counterproductive. 
Hhatever 
36 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
our success on the battl efield, our chances of leaving behind 
an effective functioning national government '\-lhen we at last 
wi thdral~ will be sharply diminished . 
In the United States, the effects would be equally unfor tunate . 
We ,\-lill have to mobili ze reserves, increase our budget 
by billions, and see U.S. casualties climb to 1,300-1, 400 
per month . 
Our balance of payments will be worsened con-
siderably, and we will need a larger tax i ncrease--justified 
as a war tax, or wage and price controls .... 
It 1ilill be difficult to convince critics that we are not 
simply destroying South Viet Nam in order to "save" it and 
that we genuinel y vlant peace talks. 
This grmving disaffection 
accompanied, as it certainly will be, by i ncreased defiance 
of the draft and growing unrest i n t he cities because of the 
belief that we are neglecting domestic problems , runs grea,t 
risks of provoking a domestic crisis of u..l'lprecedent ed pro-
portions . 51/ 
Thus, if our current strategy, even '\'lith increased troops , could not 
promise an early end to the conflict , what alternatives I'Jere available 
to the United States? 
No U. S. ground strategy and no level of U.S. forces, 
alone, could by t hemselves accomplish our objective in South Viet Nam, 
the draft memorandum stated . 
We can ob.tain our objective only if the GVN begins to 
t ake the steps necessary to gain the confidence of the people 
and to provide effective l eadership for the diverse groups 
in t he population. 
ARVN must also be turned i nto an effective 
fighting force . If '\-le fail in these objectives , a mil itary 
victory over the NVN/VC main forces, follOived by a U.S. Vlith-
drmval, ,vould OIl~y pave the ,\-lay for an NLF takeover . 
Our military presence in South Viet Nam should be designed 
t o roy the t ime during vlhich ARVN and the GVN can develop effec-
tive capability. 
I n order to do this , we must deny the enemy 
a,ccess to the populated areas of the country and prevent him, 
from achieving his objectives of controlling the population and 
destroying the GVN. 
The memorandum concluded that MACV shoul d be told that his mission 
was t o provide security to populated areas and to deny the enemy access to 
the population; that he should not attempt to attrite the enemy or to 
drive him out of the country. 
MACV should be asked to recommend an appro-
priate stl'ategy and to determine his force r equirements to carry out this 
objective ,vith the minimum possible casualties . 
37 
TOP SECRET - SeIlsitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
However, in the next section of the Presidential draft memorandum, 
t he Working Group rel ieved MACV of this responsibil ity by sketching one 
possible strategy (obviously the preferred one ) which should be able to 
be pursued "without substantially increasing our l evel of forces i n South 
Viet Nam, thus avoiding the adverse domestic and for eign conse~uences 
sket ched above ." 52/ 
The st rategy outl ined in the memorandum ~vas designed to attai n the 
i ni t i ative al ong the "demographic frontier ." 
I t consisted of the f ol lowi ng : 
Those forces currently in or near the heavily populated 
areas along the coast should remain in place . 
Those forces 
currently bordering on the demographi c frontier* should con-
tinue to operate from those positions , not on l ong search-and-
destroy missions , but in support of the frontier . 
Eight to 
10 battalions from the DMZ areas would be redeployed and become 
strategic research in I Corps ; six battalions from the interior 
of II Corps would be redeployed to Dien Binh province as a 
strategic reserve for defense of provincial capitals in the 
highlands . 
As security is restored in the previously neglected 
populated areas of coastal Viet Nam, additional U. S. battalions 
would move forward to the demographic frontier .... 
Based j ust beyond the populated areas, the forces on the 
demographic frontiers would conduct spoiling raids , l ong-
r ange reconnaissance patrols and, when appropriate targets 
are located, search-and-destroy operations i nto the enemy ' s 
zone of movement in the unpopulated areas betvleen the demo-
graphic and the political frontiers . 
They woul d be availabl e 
as a ~uick reaction force to support RVNAF when it was attacked 
wi thin the populated areas . 
Where RVNAF patrolling i n the 
populated areas is inade~uate , U,S. forces would be in a posi-
tion to assist . 53/ 
The advantages of the "demographic strategy of population security" 
~..,ere l isted as follows : 
1. 
I t would become possible to keep the VC/ NVA off 
bal ance in their present zone of movement. 
This area is 
nOvT l argely available to them for maneuver and massine;, no 
more than a day ' s march from any of the major cities porth 
of Saigon. 
2. 
I t would lengthen enemy LOC ' s from their sanctu-
aries in Laos and Cambodia. 
Base areas and LOC ' s within 
SVN "Tould be the subj ect of attack and disruption, without 
extending the war to neighboring countries . 
* This frontier rlUlS along the eastern foothills of the Annrunite chain, 
frola Quang-Tri Province to P?an Thiei in Binh Thuan, cuts across SVN 
along the northern ede;e of t he Delta from Phuc Tuy to the Cambodic'.il 
Border in Tay Ninh . 
Garrisons v70u~d be established 8.S at Bong Son 
and An Khe. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
---.-
dum. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
3. 
RVN.IV' , knowing the availability of support from 
U.S. r eaction forces , would perform more aggressively. 
l~. 
This would permit the patrolling and securing of 
populated areas to be accomplished primarily by Vietnamese 
forces. 
5. 
U.S. forces would keep active i n what i s now the 
enemy's zone of movement, no longer presenting static posi-
tions against ,vhich the ener:w can mass and attack . 
This, 
plus his increased logistical problems, ,vould reduce U. S. 
casualties while increasing his . 
In effect, we would force 
him to come to us, fight on terrain of our choosing . 
6. 
The increased patrolling of the populated areas by 
RVNAF combined Hith U. S. actions in the zone of movement 
would make it harder for the enemy to mass against and 
attack targets Hithin the populated areas . 
This would 
reduce civilian casualties and refugee generation. 
7. 
Garrisoning U.S, forces closer to RVNAF Hould facili-
tate joint operations at the maneuver level (battalion, 
company), again increasing RVNAF aggressiveness . 
8. 
1Vi th RVNAF thus supported by U. S. forces, it can be 
expected to r emain in uniform and engage in operations as 
long as it is paid and fed. ~ 
No disadvantages of this strategy \"Tere noted. or listed in the memoran-
Details of this strategy, by Corps area, vTere examined in an appendix . 
In I Corps, our present precarious position could be relieved. 
Were MACV to be provided guidance to forego position 
defense in areas remote from population centers and concen-
trate upon mobile offensive operations in and contiguous 
to the coastal plain, one division eCluivalent - eight to 
10 U.S. maneuver battalions - could eventually be relieved 
from operations in, or related to defense of Khe Sanh. 
Undoubtedly, however,these eight to 10 battalions would 
be required to restore tactical flexibility to and insure 
logistical sufficiency for the forces presently disposed in 
the Quang-'rri-Hue -Danang area . 
MA.CV presently is planning 
operations in the Aeschau LSi~7 Valley after April 1968; 
the new guidance ,,,ould preclude these. 
. 
Guidance to MACV in II Corps 
It •• • should counsel continued economy of force and shou~d 
specifically exclude determined defense of all but province 
39 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr - Sensitive 
. capitals in the highlands. 
Permission to wi thdraiv from 
Special Forces camps (e .g., Dak To), and other exposed 
positions remote from the coastal plain should be included . 
Under this guids"nce, six U. S. battalions could be with-
drawn from border defense operations in the highlands for 
use as a mobile reserve or for operations on the coastal plain. 
I n III Corps, no redepl oyment from present positions , wi th U. S. 
f or ces concentrated in the immediate environs of Saigon were envisaged . 
The guidance to MACV should be to concentrate on offensive 
operations in and around the densely populated portions of 
I II CTZ. 
MAC V should maintain a mobile strike force for 
defense of remote province capitals, ' but he should otherwise 
f orego l ong range or regional search-and-destroy operations . 
Withdrawals from Special Forces camps should be authorized . 
Fourth Corps - the Mekong Delta region - i s the onl y region of SVN in 
'which the burden of the I'Tar was still borne, chiefly by RVNAF. 
U. S. 
strategy should avoid Americanizing the conflict there . 
I nstead, our 
efforts should be aimed at catalyzing increased Rv]~F efforts there . 
Gui dance provided to MACV should be geared to galvanizing 
RVNAF by a strategy of : 
i. 
Defending province capitals , major towns, principal 
communication centers, and comrJercially important routes. 
2. 
Extending GVN control into the countryside, consis -
t ent with RVw\F capability to defend RD teams and other 
public administration there . 
3. 
Stimulating RVNAF operations by providing U. S, f orces 
on an occasional basis for combined operations against 
particularly promising targets , or in conjunction with key 
defensive operations . 
U. S. forces in the Delta for this 
effort should drmv on the existing Dong Tam and Saigon bases . 
4. 
Providing limited assistance to RVN.A.F vli th sophisti-
cated engineer equipment and reconnaissance apparatus I'There 
such would improve their ability to perform the missions 
sketched above. 
5. 
Bringing serious pressure to bear on RVN leaders in 
Saigon and within IV CTZ to mount active, sustained, offensive 
operations consistent with the foregoing missions. 
Considera-
tion should be given to: 
Providing additional RVW\F battalions to IV CTZ on 
a temporary basis from III CTZ--conceptually, battalions or 
regiments from the 5th or 18th AEVN ~ivisions Hould be deployed 
to IV CTZ, minus dependents, for perlods of one month or more 
of active operations . 55/ 
40 
TOP SECRBT 
~ S cnsit~ve 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In another appendix, the memorandum analyzed the effects of this 
strategy on those interior provinces outside the IIdemographic frontier ." 
It would be desirable to maintain all interior Province capitals, the 
appendix conclu1ed, because "the pol itical consequences of i<lithdra,qal from 
whole Provinces would be to recreate the atmosphere of 1954 or 1965, and 
while the situation may be that grim, we should at l east strive to make 
it appear otherwise . fl 56/ 
The Province capitals would be garri soned id th ARVN units of the 22nd 
and 23rd Divisions and, initially, some American units . 
These units iio'J~d 
have as their mission the holding of the Province to\m for a minimum of 
four days, giving time for the arrival of a relief strike force. 
Having secured the Province capitals, however , this strategy envisaged 
evacuating other installations in the interior Provinces, 
..• such as the frontier series running from Bu Dop to 
Dak To and the interior but vulnerable points as Vo Dat 
and Vinh Thanh . 
Althou~h these points are not held by 
allied main force units , they do tie dOHn other assets, 
such as Special Forces, CIDG, PF, and RF. 
Furthermore , 
their combined existence represents a potential strain for 
the limited r eaction ability currently available since iqe 
must respond, as 'He did at Dak To, v7hen the enemy massed 
for an attack. If a presence i s required in some of these areas, 
it should be in the form of a mobile striking unit, and not a 
garrison. 
Based upon this fl analysis" of our current strateg:y- and a strategy of 
protecting the demographic frontier, the draft memorandum recommended the 
follo,qing actions to the President: 
1. Approve a NSAIvI, stating that our political objective 
i s a peace which Hill l eave the people of South Viet 
Nam 
fre e to fashion their ovm lloli tical institutions •... The NSAlVl 
should state that the primary role of U.S. military force s is 
to provide security in the populated areas of South Viet Nam 
rather than to destroy the VC/ NVA or drive them out of the 
country. 
We shoul d plan on maintaining the posture necessary 
to accomplish this objective for a considerable period . 
2. 
Approve the iw~ediate dispatch of an additional 
10, 500 military personnel to Sciuth Viet Nam. 
3. 
Approve an accelerated and expanded program of 
i ncreased fire pO'lqer and mobility for ARVN and other ele-
ments of the GVN Armed Forces . 
4. 
Send General Taylor to Saigon to explain the NSAM 
to HA.CV and the GVN, and to request General \'Testmoreland to 
develop a strategy and force requirements to i mplement the 
military objectives stated in the NSAlI1. 
41 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.. 
5 . 
Dispatch one or two high-level civilians to Saigon 
1,Ti th General Taylor to warn the GVN that it must broaden 
their base of political support, end its internal bickering, 
purge corrupt officers and officials, and move to develop 
efficient administration and effective forces. 
They should 
also begin a discussion of negotiations while informing the 
GVN of the increased support to be provided for ARVN. 
6. 
Deliver a Presidential address to the American public, 
explaining OtIT new strategy in light of the enemy ' s new 
tactics . 57/ 
I n short, then, this initial reassessment of our strategy in SVN 
i ndicated to the President that no ground strategy and no level of addi -
tional U.S. forces alone could achieve an early end to the war. 
That 
could be done only if the GVN took the steps necessary to provide effec-
tive military and political leadership to its population. 
In order to 
speed up this process, the U.S. 
should J_imit its objectives in SVJl.T and 
adopt a strategy of population security. 
This would give the GVN time to 
organize and develop democratic institutions, and would give R\~F time to 
grow in effectiveness while our forces provided a protective screen for 
the populated areas at minimu.rn cost in resources and casualties . 
This paper was discussed 'ivi thin the military community at a meeting 
in the Secretary of Defense ' s office on 1 March. 
General Wheeler, the 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, "\"las appalled at the apparent repudi-
ation of American military policy in South Viet Nam contained in the ISA 
Draft Memorandum. 
He detected tlvO "fatal fla\<Ts" in the population security 
strategy . 
1. 
The proposed strategy would mean increased fighting in or close 
t o population centers and, bence, ·would result in increased civilian casualties . 
2 . 
By adopting a posture of static defense, we would allolv the enemy 
an increased capability of massing near population centers, especially north 
of Saigon. 
In addition, General Vlheeler was equally appalled at the statement in 
the ISA Draft P-.cesidential Memorandu."U to the efI~ect that "MACV does not 
clearly specify how he would use the additional forces he requests, except 
to indicate that they would provide him with a theater reserve and an 
offensive capability. " 
IvlJ\.CV had indeed clearly and specifically indicated 
to CINCPAC on 27 February, concurrent v?ith General Wheeler ' s original memoran-
dum to the President, the locations and missions of the requested add-on 
units . 
These had been trausmitted through the Joint Staff to each of the 
Services, ,..,ho indeed vlere engaged in studying and staffing these proposals . ]§) 
Apparently, this information had not specifically been furnished to the 
Office of the Secretary of Defense. 
42 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The debate '\'lithin the Defense Establishment continued into the fol-
lowing day . 
In a memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, dated 2 March, 
Assistant Secretary of Defense Warnke gave his answer to General Wheeler ' s 
"two fatal fla,vs " of the population control strategy. 
1. Increasing Fighting in the Cities. 
General ~fueeler 
i s concerned that the proposed strategy will mean increased 
fighting in or close to population cent ers and, hence, will 
r esult in increased civilian casualties. 
This argument over-
l ooks, I believe, the fact that the enemy demonstrated during 
the TET offensive his willingness and ability to attack 
populated centers regardless of our strategy . 
He is demon-
strating that capability again right now in the Quang Tri-Hue 
area and may soon do so in the Delta. If the enemy continues 
t o choose to fight in the cities, we will have no choice 
but to engage him in those areas at the cost of civilian 
casualties . 
The proposed strategy may actually reduce civilian 
casualties if we can succeed in attacking enemy concentrations 
before he can attack the cities. 
Moreover, in attacking the 
cities, the enemy vlill face American as ,'Tell as ARVN forces 
engaged in offensive patrolling operations around the cities. 
This ' should result in fe,-rer casualties than have come from the 
l iberation of cities in the post -TET period. 
By freeing 
forces now engaged along the DMZ and in lightly populated high-
lands for active offensive operations near population centers , 
we should make the enemy effort against cities less effective. 
2. 
Enemy Ability to Mass Near Popul ation Centers . 
General 
IVheeler's concern that under the proposed strategy the enemy 
wil l be more capable of massing near population centers north 
of Saigon is difficult to understand . 
In fact, prior to TET, 
because we were operating primarily along the coast, along the 
DMZ, and in the highl ands , we vlere permitting the enemy to 
mass along the demographic frontier as he did prior to the TET 
offensive. In fact, one of the advantages. of the nevT strategy 
i s that we will be able to keep the enemy off-balcmce in this 
area. 
General Wheeler may believe we advocate a posture of 
static defense. 
This is not true. 
In the strategy sketched in 
the paper, one of the primary missions of U.S. forces would be 
to operate in this area, remain highly mobile and carry out 
attacks against suspected enemy base camps. 711 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
General Wheeler fought back with arguments contained i n two docu-
ments . 
The first was a backchannel message from COMUS~~CV , dated 
2 March, which answered specific questions concerning the planned use 
of additional forces. 
These questions had been asked by General Wheeler 
i n a backchannel message the previous day. 
The first question concerned 
the military lIand other II objectives additional forces 'I'lere designed t o 
advance . 
General Hestmoreland was ambitious , indeed, and stated that 
t hese obj ectives ~vere to : 
(1) 
Defeat and evict from SVN the new NVA units now 
present in Western Quang Tri and Central Thua Trien provinces , 
t o i nclude the Ashau Valley and base areas 131 and 114. 
(2 ) Maintain positive governmental and military control 
over Quang Tri and Thua Thien provinces , particularl y the 
populous areas of the coastal lowlands and the DMZ area . 
Be 
prepared to bl ock or interdict the infiltration/ invasion r outes 
f rom ~NN through Laos. 
(3) 
Destroy VC/ NVA main force units and base areas i n the 
r emainder of I Corps and in the northeastern coastal and north-
western Laos border areas of II Corps . 
(4) Reduce the II calculated riskll currently entail ed in our 
e conomy of force posture in II and III Corps by providing the 
added flexib~lity and IIpunchll of an armored cavalry regiment . 
(5) 
Conduct aggressive and continuing offensive campaigns 
throughout the coastal areas of II Corps and into traditional 
enemy base areas and sanctuaries in III Corps along the 
Cambodian border ; especially in war zones II CII and IIDII . 
Restore 
t he offensive combat and pacification momentum l ost in III Corps 
as a result of the enemy's TET offensive and the requirement 
t o transfer the l Olst Airborne Division ( - ) to I Corps to stem the 
NVA incursion into Quang Tri . 
(6) 
Be prepared for contingency operations i f required . 
The second question a.sked by General Wheeler I'Tas : 
Questj:on B: 
What specific dangers are their dispatch to 
SVN designed to avoid, and \'That specific goals would the 
i ncrement of force aim to achieve -
In the next 6 months? 
Over the next year? 
44 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In his ans,ver , General 
~Testmoreland was equally optimistic 
•.• additive forces would serve to forestall the danger 
of local defeats due to the tactical degeneration or temporary 
disorganization of some ARVN units in the event of another 
general enemy offensive coupled with a massive invasion across 
the DMZ. 
The need to be prepared to support or reinforce 
ARVN units that are surprised by the nature and intensity of 
VC/NVA attacks became manifest during the enemy ' s TET drive 
and must be recognized in US troop requirement and deployment 
plans for t he foreseeable futm'e . 
By providing a tHO division 
mobile II syring force " which could be positioned and employed as 
required , the need to dral-T do"\VD on forces directly engaged in 
territorial security tasks probably "\vould be reduced. 
Thus 
t he danger of losing popular confidence in and support for 
GVN/US capabilities , policies and aspirations as a result of 
temporary mj.li tary or psychological setbacks would al so be 
diminished. 
(2) Provision of the immediately required additional 
forces also would make it possible to apply continuous pressure 
to some degree in all corps areas and thus reduce the danger 
of allo,ving the enemy the opportunity to solicit support from 
the population and to reorganize, refit and recoup so that he 
could soon field rejuvenated units, despite heavy losses suffered 
during the TET offensive . 
This is particularly i mporta,nt in 
view of the enemy capability to move additional divisions south 
t hrough the panhandle or DMZ without any clear intelligence 
indicators of such action. 
(This matter is of particular concern 
to me ) these forces will also make it possible to retain that 
degree of flexibility and rapid responsiveness necessary to 
cope ,vith an apparent ne,·r enemy tactic of searching for thin 
spots i n our force structure or deployment in order to laD-Dch 
his concent:cated mass attacks. 
(3) 
I n the next six months the presence of the armored 
cavalry regiment in II or III Corps i<lould reel.uce the degree of 
calculated risk i nherent in the economy of force posture in 
those areas, provide added territorial sec1ITity and further the 
goal of pr:oviding added combat flexibility. Addition of another 
Marine re ~ iment and its division headqUFl.rters in I Corps vTould 
t hicken troop density i n critical I CTZ, add to combat flexi-
bility and improve command and control capabilities in that critical 
area . 
(4) 
Over the neA't year the increment of force "\·:ould make 
it possible to : 
. 45 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 303 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR~T - Sensitive 
, 0 
A. 
Move progressively from north to south with a continuing 
series of hard hitting offensive c~npaigns to invade base areas, 
interdict and disrupt infiltration routes, and eliminate or 
evict VC/ NVA forces from SVN. 
B. 
At the same time, the highly mobile exploitation force 
(hlO divisions ) "I{ould be available to counter enemy aggression 
or to exploit opportunities ror tactical success an~vhere in 
SVN without reducing the minimal essential force necessary to 
guarantee maintenance of security in those areas where success-
ful military campaigns have already been "I·Taged. 
C. 
Addition of the ne", division in III Corps during this 
t ime frame °would re - establish the capability for conducting 
constant operations in and around IvaI' zones "e" and "D" and make 
possible the constant use of a division size force in the 
IV CTZ \'Thich capability °was removed vri th transfer of the 101st 
Airborne Division (-) to I Corps . 
In addition, combat operations 
conducted by this division would provide added security for 
LOC and the vital seat of government and economic center of 
Saigon. 
D. 
With the total additive combat force s requested it will 
be possible to deal with the invader from the north, and to face 
with a greater degree of confidence the potential tank, rocket and 
tactical air threat as vrell as the ever present possibility that 
he may reinforce vTith additional elements of his home army. 60/ 
The second document available to General i'lheeler was an analysis of 
the military implications in South Vietnam of the deployment of various 
increments of U. S. force s . 
This analysis vms done by the Short Range 
Branch, Plans and Policy Directorate, Joint Staff. It was an informal 
ste,ff document which had not been addressed by the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff or any of the military services separately. §/ 
The five 
options addressed were those indicated by the Secretary of Defense in 
his meeting of 29 February (see pages 7-8). 
This paper docurnented the 
large enemy buildup in South Vietnam: 
1 . 
The enemy, since November, has increased his forces 
in South Viet Nam by at least 41 maneuver battalions, some armored 
elements , a large number of rockets, and additional artillery . 
There are indications he i s preparing f or the use of limited air 
support, including logistical air drops and bombing missions. 
The Joint Staff paper took exception to COMUSM.A.CV I S stated first 
priority of insuring "the security of the GVN in Saigon and in the 
provincial capitals . " 
46 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The basic strategy which must be follo,,;ed by MACV in any 
circumstances is to defeat the current enemy offensive both 
i n Horthe::--n I Corps Tactical Zone where it is the most formidable , 
in the Highlands I'There it is highly dangerous, and throughout 
South Vietnam in defense of the government and the cities and 
tOlms .••• Allied forces are not conducting offensive operations 
of any great magnitude or frequency and therefore they are not 
wresting control of t he countryside from the enemy •.•• 
If the enemy offensive can be broken with sustained heavy 
casualties, then, and only then, will the cities be secure and 
the countryside reentered. 
Even "Ti th the largest force 
contemplated (Option 1) it will not be possible to perform 
adequately all of the tasks unless the current enemy offensive 
i s decisively defeated. 
This, therefore, is the first and most 
important task upon which all else depends •••• 
If the forces now in Vietnam or the forces under any of the 
options prove to be inadequate to break the enemy offensive, or if, 
conversely, the enemy sustained offensive breaks the Vietnamese 
armed forces (even short of destroying the GVN), then our objectives 
in South Vietnam and the tasks associated with them "Jill be un-
obtainable . 
Specifically, we vlOuld be unable to regain the 
ini tiati ve, that is, we lo7Ould not be able to conduct offensive 
operations at the scope and pace required either to prevent further 
enemy buildup or to r eenter the countryside. 
This would force US 
and allied forces into a defensive posture arOlmd the major 
population centers •••• 
Therefore , immediate action to break the enemy ' s current 
offensive is not only the first but the decisive requirement . 
In specifically addressing each of the options, the Joint Staff reach-
ed the following conclusions: 
47 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
OPTIONS 
I 
Add approximately 196,000 
to the present MACV Pro-
gram 5 authorized level 
(525,000) plus 6 addi-
tional bns already de -
ployed (10,500). 
Relax-
ation of restrictions on 
operations in Cambodia/ 
Laos/IITVN. 
TOTAL - 133 maneuver bns 
I-A 
Same additive forces as 
Option I-
No relaxation of restric-
tions on operations . 
II 
No change to present 
M.A.CV Program 5 author-
ized level (525,000) 
plus 6 additional bns 
already deployed (10,500 ). 
TOTAL - 112 maneuver bns 
III 
Add 50,000 US troops to the 
approximately 535,000 in 
Option II. 
TO'J'_A.L - 118 maneuver bns 
IV 
Add 100,000 to the ap-
proximately 535,000 in 
Option II. 
TOTAL - 124 maneuver bns 
CONCLUSIONS 
(TO Defeat the VC/NVA in SVN) 
This Option would : 
a. 
Assuming no additional deployments 
break enemy offensive and permit 
early and sustained operations 
against the enemy. 
b. 
Permit simultaneous operations 
against enemy main force, base 
areas, and border sanctuaries . 
c. 
Permit resumption of program to 
develop effectiveness of RVNAF. 
d. 
Permit greater employment of air as -
sets in conducting an expanded air 
campaign against NVN, Laos , Cambodia. 
Essentially the same as ~ption I except: 
a . 
The rate of conducting operations 
wouid be reduced by higher military risk. 
b. 
The enemy viould enj oy sanctuary 
across the Cambodian/ Laotian/ NVN borders . 
c. 
The rebuilding of the RVNAF would be 
at a slower pace. 
US objectives in SVN cannot be achieved 
as allied forces must remain in defensive 
posture. 
At present levels , allied forces can 
expect increasingly grave threats to 
their security 'vi th high casualty rates. 
This option could probably secure the 
cities but would be insufficient to 
counter the current enemy offensive or 
to restore security in the countryside . 
The results of this Option are essentially 
the same as Option I, except : 
a. 
The rate of progress 'l-Tould be sl01der. 
b. 
The enemy vTould retain the initiative 
in the border areas. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The paper, then, concluded that the larger forces of Option I and 
IA wou~d Itgreatly reduce risks to' Free World farces in SVN and ~'ill ac-
complish U.S. cbjectives more rapidly than tbe forces af the ather 
aptions," and recammended that iIP.mediate .actian be taken to provide the 
forces af Option I. 
Read anather way, hOI·rever, the Joint Staff analysis could be taken 
to' indicate that the United States cou~d successfully pursue a strategy 
af "population security" by adapting Optian III, adding 50,000 traaps 
to' the current level in SVN. 
At the 2 March meeting of the senior members af the Secretary of 
Defense's Working Group conducting the reassessment , nO' consensus was 
reB,ched an a new U. S. stra tegy. 
Apparently, Mr ~ vJarnke and Mr. Gaulding 
"Tere given the task of drafting a ne;v memorandum far the P"..resident which 
would be less contraversial than the initial ISA dacument. 
The draft memorandum far the P"..resident, dated 3 March 1968, which 
was prepared by these two individuals,differed markedly in tane fram the 
initial memorandum presented to' the Cliffard Graup an 2 March . 
Gane was 
any discussion of grand strategy. 
This memorandum recommended simply: 
1. Meeting General Westmareland's request by deploying as 
clase to' May 1 as practical 20,000 additianal traaps (appraximately 
1/2 of which "Tauld be cambat). 
2. Approval of a Reserve call-up and an increased end 
strength adequate to meet the balance af the request and to 
restore a strategic reserve in the United States, adequate far 
possible cantingencies. 
3. 
Reservatian af the decisian to deplay the balance of 
General Westmareland ' s new request. 
While "Te would be in a 
position to make these additianal deployments, the future 
decision to do So' viauld be cantingent upan: 
a. 
Cantinuaus reexamination af the desirability of 
further deplayments on a vleek-by-week basis as the situatian 
develops; 
b. Im:pravedpalitical perfarmance by the GVN and 
increa sed cantributian in effective military actian by the 
ARVN; 
c. 
The results af a study in depth, to' be initiated im-
mediately, af a passible neYl strategic guidance far the conduct 
af US military aperati~:ms in Sauth Vietnam. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
nvo appendices to this paper addressed the basis for these recom-
mendations and the context in which additional troop commitments to Vietnam 
should be examined . 
In explaining the basis for the recow~endation to deploy 20,000 
troops, the memorandum indicated that the first increment of forces re-
quested by General 'l<lestmoreland should be provided as an emergency 
measure to meet the prospect of continued abnormal levels of enemy 
activity. 
"This '\-lould, by May 1st, furnish him with an additional 20,000 
troops , 10,500 of whom would be for combat purposes . 
Because of the 
possibility that the North Vietnamese leaders may decide to l aunch a 
l arger scale invasion by main forc e units, vle should put ourselves in a 
position to provide the other 185,000 ground, sea, and air forces i n-
volved in General Hestmoreland ' s request." 63/ , 
Additional forces, ho\vever , should not be dispatched until the 
situation in Vietnam developed. 
A continuing and intensive revievl should focus not only on 
future enemy activity but also on the demonstrated ability of the 
GVN and the ARVN to pull themselves together, to get back into 
business , and to demonstrate significant improvements both in 
their ability to ''lin popular support and their willingness to 
fight 8.ggressi vely f or their own security. 
Unless these qualities 
are evidenced, there can be no real hope for the accomplishment 
of our poli tica.l aims. 
Finally, we believe that the striking change in the enemy ' s 
tactics, the willingness to commit at least two additional divisions 
t o the fighting in the South over the past few Iveeks , the obvious 
and not vlholly anticipated strength of the Viet Cong infrastructure, 
there can be no prospect of a quick military solution to the 
aggression in South Vietnam. 
Under these circumstances , we should 
give intensive study to the development of a neVl strategic guidance 
t o General Hestmoreland . 
This guidance should make clear the 
fact that he cannot be expected either to destroy the enemy forces 
or to rout t hem completely from South Vietnam. 
The kind of 
f...merican commitment that would be required to achieve these 
military obj ectives cannot even be estimated . 
There is no reason 
to believe that it could be done by an additional 200 , 000 American 
t roops or double or triple that quantity ...• 
The exact nature of the strategic guidance which should be 
adopted cannot nOI" be predicted. It should be the subj ect of a 
detailed inter-agency ,study over the next several Vleeks . 
During 
the progress of the study, discussions of the appropriate strategic 
guida.nce and its nature and implications for t he extent of our 
military commitment in South Vietnam should be undertaken with both 
General Hestrnol'eland and Ambassadol' Bun..'k:er . 64/ 
' 
50 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In pl acing these additional troop comwitments in a larger context , 
an additional appendix concluded : 
No matter "That the result in South Vietnam itself, we will 
have failed in our purposes if: 
a . 
The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where it is 
a major conflict leading to direct military confrontation 
wi th the USSR and/ or China; 
b. 
The war in Vietnam spreads to the point ,,,here we 
are so committed in resources that our other ",orld-wide 
commitments - - especially NATO - - are no longer credible ; 
c. 
The attitudes of the American people towards "more 
Vietnams" are such that our other commitments are brought 
i nto question as a matter of US will; 
d. 
Other countries no longer ,vish the US commitment 
for fear of the consequences to themselves as a battlefield 
between the East and the West . 
Under these circumstances, we recommend that under the leader-
ship of the State Department, with the assistance of the Office of 
t he Secretary of Defense, the JCS, and the Treasury, a review of 
our Vietnamese policy in the context of our globa,l politico-military 
strategy be undertaken with a due date of May 15 . 65/ 
Thus , the net result of this period of frantic preparation, consul-
t ation, writing, and reassessing was similar to all previous requests 
f or reinforcement in Vietnam. 
The litany '\Vas familiar : 
H'Ive "rill furnish 
what vre can presently furnish without disrupting the normal political and 
economi c life of the nation, while I'le study the situation as it develops ." 
No startling reassessment of strategy ,,7as indicated, although for the 
first time it was recognized that such a reassessment WD..S needed, that a 
limit to U.S. involvement in SVN had to be determined, and that any 
number of U .So troops could not achieve our ' objectives without · signj_ficant 
improvement in the a,bili ty of the GVN to "rin popular support and to 
fight aggressively for their O'lm security. 
5. 
Recon~e~~~ to the President 
This draft memorandum was discussed again within the Defense 
Department on 3 March, and several changes '\'Tere made . 
The 4 March draft 
memorandum for t he President was appg,rently approved by the Secrete,ry 
of Defense and fon7arded to the President. 
The paper llhich Has fcrwarded 
to the President bore a great :cesemblance to the 3 March draft, 9..1though 
the Systems Analysis influence on the 4 March paper yTaS evidenced by its 
greater detail, especially concerning actions to be required of the GVN. 
51 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The memorandum recapitulated General l-lestmoreland I s reClues~ for 
personnel and indicated that General Wheeler believed that we should 
meet this reCluest, and should act to increase and improve our strategic 
reserve in the United States. 
To achieve both these goals, the paper 
stated, staff examination indicated that the follolving actions would be 
r eCluired : 
a . 
A call-up of reserve units and individuals totaling 
approximately 262,000 (194,000 in units, 68,000 as individuals ). 
b . 
Increased draft calls . 
c. 
Extension of terms of service . 
These actions vlould produce 
a total increase in end strength in the Armed Forces of approxi-
mately 511,000 by June 30, 1969. 
(The staff exrunination referred 
to above included spaces t o add 31,500 troops in South Korea and 
a US naval proposal to add t wo cruisers and fifteen destroyers to 
the naval forces in Southeast Asia. If these proposals are 
disapproved in their entirety , the figures above will be ~ecreased 
t o approximately 242,000 and 454,000 respectively. 
The Secretary of Defense then recommended : 
1. 
An i mmediate decision to deploy to Vietnam an estimated 
total of 22,000 additional personnel (approximately 60% of 'vhich 
would be combat ). 
An i mmediate decision to deploy the three 
tactical fighter sCluadrons deferred from Program 5 (about 1,000 
men) . 
This vlould be over and above the four batta·lions (about 3700 
men ) already planned for deployment in April which in themselves 
would bring us slightly above the 525,000 authorized level . .. . 
2 . 
Either through Ambassador Bunker or through an early 
visit by Secretary Clifford, a highly forceful g.pproach to the GVN 
(Thieu and Ky) to get certain key c ow~itments for improvement, 
tied to our mm increased effort and to increased US support for 
the ARliN ...• 
3. 
Early approval of a Reserve call-up and an increased end 
strength adeCluate to meet the balance of the Westmoreland reCluest 
and to restore a strategic reserve in the United States, adeCluate 
for possible contingencies world-lvide . ... 
4. 
Reservation of the decision to meet the Westmoreland request 
in full. 
~{hile \'7e v70uld be putting ourselves in a position to make 
these additional deployments, the future decision to do so vlould 
be contingent upon: 
52 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
a . 
Reexamination on a week-bY-Iveek basis of the desir-
ability of further deployments as the situation develops ; 
b. 
Improved political performance by the GVN and 
i ncreased contribution in effective military action by the 
ARVN; 
c. 
The results of a study in depth, to be initiated 
immediately, of possible ne"l<T political and strategic guidance 
f or the conduct of US operations in South Vietnam, and of our 
Vietnamese policy in the context of our world-,'Tide politico-
military strategy . .• . 
5. 
No new peace initiative on Vietnam. 
Re-statement of our terms 
f or peace and certain limited diplomatic aCtions to dramatize Laos 
and to focus attention on the total threat to Southeast Asia . . . . 
6. 
A general decision on bombing policy, not excluding future 
change, but adequate to 'form a basis for discussion with the Congress 
on this key aspect . 
Here your advisers are divided : 
a . 
General Wheeler and others would advocate a substantial 
extension of targets and authority in and near Hanoi and Haiphong, 
mining of Haiphong, and naval gunfire up to a Chinese Buffer 
Zone ; 
b. 
Others would advocate a seasonal step-up through the 
spring, but without these added elements . 66/ 
In proposing this course of action, the Secretary of Defense indicated 
t hat he r ecognized that there "l<7ere many negative factors and certain 
difficulties. 
Nevertheless, he indicated the belief that this course of 
action, at least in its essential outline, 1'78.S urgently required to meet 
the i mmediate situation in Vietnam, as ,vell as ,vider possible contingencies 
there and elsewhere . 
Eight tabs to the draft memorandwn elaborated upon the reasoning 
which led to the recommendations contained therein . 
TAB A reviewed the 
justification for immediately sending additional forces to Vietnam. 
The situ.ation in SVN I'las analyzed as follows : 
Hanoi has made a basic change in its strategy and scale of 
operations . 
Perhaps because they thoughT, they were losing as the 
war and pacification,vere going, Hanoi is pressing hard for 
decisive r esul ts over the next feiv months . 
They are committing 
a high proportion of their assets, although it appears likely that 
they ,vould retain both the capability and ,'!ill to keep up the 
pressure next yea.r if this effort does not succeed . 
There is hope 
that, if this year 1 s effort could be th,·rarted, Hanoi and Viet Cong 
morale would be sufficiently affeoted to open up possibilities of 
peace, 'but this cannot be assessed as likely. 
53 
TOP SECR~T - Sensjtive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Within South Vietnam, there are key variables that could 
move the situation sharply, one ';lay or the other, in the 
coming months. 
Specifically: 
a. 
The degree to v7hich Hanoi and the VC are 
able to keep pressing, and how effectively they are 
countered in the military sphere. 
b. 
The degree to which the VC are able to extend 
their control in the countryside and recoup their losses --
or ,'Thether conversely the South Vietnamese can take the 
initiative and either neutralize such recoupment or set in 
motion a new favorable trend. 
c. 
The degree to which the GVN improves its per-
formance and gal vanizes potentially greater popular support 
than it can nOVT have. 
Thus, there was created an urgent need, both practical and psycho-
logical, to send such forces as could be effective within the next four 
or five months . 
The follovTing additional forces · of about 22,000 men could 
be deployed by June 15 in accordance vli th the schedule set 
forth below: 
Six Tactical Fighter Squadrons 
2 Squadrons by 
3 Squadrons by 
1 Squadron by 
- 3,000 men 
-
1 April 
-
1 May 
-
1 June 
4th Marine Expeditionary Force (minus ) - 18,100 men 
by 
- 15 June 
Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 
by 
1 May 
700 men 
In addition, it was reiterated that an urgent effort vTaS required to 
.improve and modernize the equipment of the SVN Armed Forces. 
Tab B elaborated on what shou~d be done to increase the effectiveness 
of Vietnamese efforts in conjunction with the U.S. troop i ncrease . 
~wo 
possible GVN r eactions v7ere foreseen to the ceployment of additional U. S. 
forces. 
The reaffirmation of the U.S. commitment would be welcomed, ,wuld 
add to the feeling of confidence, and might stiffen the GVN! s vTill at a 
time !I,'Then the tasks it faces are rather monumental. !I 
On the other hand, 
t here 'vas all'lays the danger that the Vietnamese ,wuld be tempted to relax 
behind the refuge of American pOI'rer, and the sense of arlxiety and urgency 
which had resulted from the TET offensive could suffer. 
The memorandum 
indicated , hOlvever, that the GYT'J had the capacity to take those civil and 
military actions ,-rhich "iould materially improve the political and security 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
,.' 
climate of South Vietnam, as well as the image of the GVN i n the United 
States . 
This involved, the memorandum i ndicated , a readiness for the 
U.S. to make specific demands upon the GVN in order to get it to take a 
wide range of decisions and actions. 
Among those things considered essential 
and feasible, the following acti ons were l isted : 
1. Mobilization - The Vietnamese Armed Forces should be 
increased to the maximum. 
As a first step, present plans to 
incree.se Vietnamese forces by 65,000 men should be amended to 
provide for an additional 30,000 men under arms by the end of 
1968 . 
The draft of 18 and 19 year olds should proceed as 
presently scheduled. 
This should be consistent with the ability 
to train and supply the forces, but avoid QDdercutting the 
need for key civilians in other governmental functions by 
diversion of skilled personnel . 
2. 
The Thieu-I\y Relationship and Unity of Leadership -
The failure of Thieu and Ky to cooperate fully and apply 
their individual talents to the needs of the situation has 
continued to plague the effective management of the Vietnamese 
effort. 
In turn this has had ramifications down the line in 
both the military and civilian chain of co~~an d. It has also 
complicated the chances of rallying the various elements in 
t he society, as the rivalry translates itself into interference 
,dth attempts at forming a national anti-communist front. 
Thieu and Ky and their follol'lers, as ,veIl as other 
elements in the society not associated directly with them, 
must be brought to realize that 'I,'1e are no l onger prepared to 
put up vlith anything but the maximum effort on their part. 
A clear and precise role for Ky should be defined . 
Thieu 
and Ky must bring their follovTers into line. 
The government 
should be prepared to engage the services of people with 
administrative and executive talent vTho are no,'1 not participating 
in the common task. 
Our expectations in this regard have to 
be m.ade crystal clear to each and every Vietnam.ese l eader in 
and out of Government. 
'V-li thout this fundamental change in 
the attitude and dedication of the leadership, the necessary 
reforms and the necessary inspiration of t he Vietnamese people 
will not be forthcoming quickly or sufficiently. 
3. 
Getting the Govermnent Back into t he Countryside -
\Ire must ,,15 n the race to the countryside, go on the offensive, 
r e-establish security in the rural areas , and restore the 
govern~ent
' s presence in the villages. 
The ARVN and other 
security forces must deploy aggressively, the RD cadre must 
r eturn to· their t a.sks , and governmental services reach out 
from the province capitals . 
55 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I n the final analysis rural security, the sine qua non 
of popular identification vIi th the GVN, must be provided by 
the Vietnamese themselves . 
The two keys here are (1) the 
cal ibre and role of the 44 province chiefs (and their sup-
porting staffs) and (2) a properly offensive sense of mission 
on the part of ARVN units - and their commanders - assigned 
to rural security support missions . 
In every area (village , 
district, province, DTZ and corps ) the RVNAF unit cOfimanders 
responsible for security in that area m~st be graded (i . e. 
promoted , commended or sacked) primarily on their ability 
to find, fix and eradicate the VC Force indigenous to that 
area. 
They must also be graded (with commensurate effect 
on their careers) vIi th respect to the behavior of their 
troops vis-a-vis the poptuace in that area. 
4. 
Drive on the Viet Cong Infrastructure -
In our con-
cern over the behavior of our allies, 'Ive must not neglect our 
enemies and the present opportunity to compound and exacerbate 
communist problems. 
Operation Phoenix which is targetted 
age,inst the Viet Cong must be pursued more vigorously in closer 
liaison with the US. 
Vietnamese armed forces should be devoted 
to anti-infrastructure activities on a priority basis. 
The 
Tet offensive surfaced a good deal of the infrastructure and 
the opportunity to damage it has never been better . 
This 
would force the VC on the defensive and head off the estab-
lishment of local VC aruninistrative organizations and VC 
attempts to set up provisional governmental committees. 
5. 
US-ARVN Command RelationshiEs - While we accept the 
Mission ' s reluctance to create a joint command, we believe 
that alternative arrangements which give the US a greater 
role in ARVN employment are necessary. 
This can be done at 
the Corps level and below. It vTould involve US participation 
in the planning and control of ARVN operations. It might 
even call for the prior approval by US advisors of ARVN 
operational plans -- this now exists in certain cases 
depending upon individual advisor relationships. 
We 
should request MACV to study the matter and come up with 
a specific plan to meet the r equirement . 
6. 
Government Reform and Anti-Corruption Campai gn -
The beginning steps at administrative reform 'Iilhich President 
Thieu has c,rmounced must be accelerated . 
This should be 
directly associated with a nevT deal on corruption, which must 
be dealt HUh by relief of a specified list of corrupt offi-
cials nO'\'7 and the pronise of severe action in the future. 
A capable Inspectorate should be established. 
Incompetent 
ARVN officers must be r emoved , beginning 'I'Ti th a specific 
list tha,t should be made available by MACV. 
Incompetent 
province chiefs 'Ivho have plagued our efforts in the past 
must be removed . 
The r emoval of incompetent commanders 
'l'OP SECRET - Sensi ti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and officials i s now more feasible in the light of per~ 
formance during the Tet offensive. 
We should not hesitate 
to make our desires known and back them up by refusing to 
provide sUfport for t he incompetent . 
For key c ow~anders , 
we should re~uire the r ight of prior approval on a secret 
and discreet basis . 
The precise tools of l everage to be 
applied in this r egard should be left to the US Mission, 
but could include wit~ho lding advice and assi stance at 
10C8,1 l evels in extreme cases. 
7. 
The Prime Minister - We should solicit Arnbassador 
Bunker I s vieivs on the desirability of replacing the Prime 
Minister. 
I f he is to be r eplaced vre should agree on his 
successor beforehand , in consultation with Thieu and Ky . 
8. 
The United Front - A nationalist spirit of coopera-
tion and unity came to the fore in the ilnmediate vlake of 
the Tet offensive. It is being manifested incompletely in 
attempts to organize gro1,J.ps in support of the national task. 
Despite the personal misgivings of old antagonists there has 
been some success . 
This is now threatened by personal rival-
ries , and most significantly by differences beti'leen Thieu and 
Ky. 
We need to find a formula for joint efforts . 
Ambassador 
Bunker suggests that the optimum r esult ,'lould be a 
II super frontll 
of the anti-communist groups . 
Although not directly tied to 
the government , such a front could serve to rally the people 
broadly and emotionally against t he Viet Cong o To succeed it 
must be backed by the leadership of the government - both 
Thieu and Ky - but not appear to compete i'lith the National 
Assembl y . It should encompass all elements in the society, 
but not be the vehicle for anyone power group . 
9. 
Economic Measures - There ,viII be increased inflation 
in Vietnam this year, and additional US troops ,'Till make it 
more severe . 
steps need to be taken nO,'l to counter the 
threat of inflation, if ;"Ie are not to be faced \'li th a severe 
crisis next fall and ·Hinter . 
The GVN needs to move on tax 
increases, and U.S. and GVN expenditures for non-essential 
programs in Vietnam shotud be restrained . 
On the other hand, 
;"Iage increases for civil and military personnel in the GVN 
are needed if inflation is not to vTeaken their i'Till and support . 
Additi0nally, ,-Ie must demand 0-1" the G-VN some measure of 
action on their part to compensate for the effect of addi-
tional US troops on the US balance of payments . 
This can 
be done by having the GVN provide to the US at no cost the 
addi tional piaster costs incurred by our troop increase. 
VoTe 
should also insist that GVN reserves be reduced to $250 mil-
lion from the present maximum reserve level of $300 mi llion 
and that a significant portion of the reS'2rve be invested in 
medium ,and long term US securities '. 
The details of these 
57 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
economic measures cannot be discussed in this paper, but 
a comprehensive economic package should be prepared and 
presented to the GVN - to include what the US is prepared 
t o do in t he way of increased financing of commercial imports . 
10. 
Resource Allocation - Non-essential use of resources 
should be elimina,ted. 
P'.cesent government programs to 
eliminate n evI luxury construction must be tightened and con-
tinued . 
Bars and night clubs should remain closed . 
Austerity 
should be fostered. 68/ 
The Appendix recommended that a high-level mission, probably headed 
by the Secretary of Defense, should go to Saigon to emphasize to the GVN 
that 1tTe consider improved GVN performance essential; that any further U. S. 
support must be matched by GVN actions; and that the above recownendations 
1tTould be used as a checklist for judging Vietnamese performance . 
In addi -
tion, this Appendix emphasized that VTe should do what ,vas necessary to 
improve the capability of RVNAF . 
Although no details were given,the state-
ment was made that: 
1T0n the basis of current planning estimates, this 
would involve additional expenditure of about $475 million over a period 
of 18 months .
1T 
Tab C of the Memorandum for the President consisted of a brief justif-
ication for increasing the strategic reserve. 
The basic argument was that 
we wou~d then be prepared to provide the additional ground, sea , and air 
forces involved in General ~'Jestmo reland I s request if the military si tua tion 
required . 
In addition, the paper indicated: 
If these additional forces are not deployed to Vietnam, 
our action in thus reconstituting the strategic reserve Hould 
nevertheless be fully vTarranted. 
Our strategic reserve has 
been appreciably depleted because of Vietnam demands. 
At 
present, the active division forces in the Continental United 
States, HaHaii and Okinm'<a, and including the Marine units 
in the Caribbean and Mediterranean, consist of 4-2/3 Army 
divisions and 1-1/3 Marine divisions. 
This compares with 
the 9 Army divisions and 3 Marine divisions in our strategic 
reserve on 30 June 1965. 
A call-up of 245,000, 1tTi th no 
deployments to South Vietnam in excess of the 20-30,000 
now recowmended, would yield a strategic reserve of 7 Army 
divisions and 2 Marine divisions . 
The unsettled situations 
in many pa'rts of the vTorld make this build-up a prudent 
action entirely apart from possible Vietnam contingencies. §2/ 
Relegated to Tab D of the Memorandum for the President was 1tThat had 
begun as the major task of the Working Group--the necessity for in-depth 
study of Vietnam. policy and strategic guidance . 
General \,vestmoreland I s request, this Appendix pointed out, does not 
purport to provide any really satisfactory ans,ver to the problem in Vietnam. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
There can be no assurance that this very sUbstantial 
additional deployment would leave us a year from today in 
any more favorable military position . 
All that can be said 
i s that tte additional troops would enahle us to kill more 
of the enemy and would provide more security if the enemy does 
not offset them by lesser reinforcements of his own. 
There 
i s no indication that they would bring about a quick solution 
i n Vietnam and, i n the absence of better performance by the 
GVN and the ARVN, the increased destruction and increased 
Americanization of the war could, in fact, be counter-
productive . 70/ 
There "Tere many other reasons for conducting a study of our Vietnamese 
p'olicy in the context of the U. S. i-lOr Idwide poli tical/mili tary strategy. 
No matter what the result in Vietnam itself, we will have failed in our 
purpose, the memorandum stated, if : 
a . 
The war in Vietnam spreads to the point "\-There it is 
a major conflict leading to direct military confrontation 
,vi th the USSR and/or China; 
b . 
The "lar in Vietnam spreads to the point where we 
are so committed in resources that our other "\-70rld-wide 
commitments -- especially NATO -- are no longer credible; 
c. 
The attitudes of the American people to'wards "more 
Vietnams" are such that our other commitment s are brought 
into question as a matter of US will; 
d. 
Other countries no longer wish the US commitment for 
fear of the consequences to themselves as a battlefield between 
the East and the II/est . 71/ 
In addition, any intensive review should focus on the ability of the 
GVN and the ARVN to demonstrate significant improvement, both in their 
Q,bility to win popular support and their willingness to fight aggressively 
for their O"Tn security. 
Finally, the memorandum stated: 
... the striking change in the enemy !s tactics, his 
willingness to commit at least two additional divisions 
to the fiGhting in the South over the pq,st few weeks 
and the obvious and not "\-7holly anticipated strength of 
the Viet Cong infrastructure , shows that there can be 
no prospect of a quick military solution to the aggression 
in South Vietnam. 
Under these circumstances , we should give 
intensive study to the development of ne"\-7 strategic guidance 
to General l'lestmorel and . 
This study may show that he should 
not be expected either to destroy the enemy forces or to 
rout them comuletely from South Vietnam. 
The kind of Americ8,n 
commitment that might be r equired to achieve these military 
59 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
objectives cannot even be estimated. 
There is no reason 
to believe that it could be done by an additional 200,000 
American troops or double or triple that quantity •. • • 
The exact nature of the strategic guidance \-Thich shou..ld 
be adopted cannot now be predicted. It should be the subject 
of a detailed interagency study over the next several weeks . 
During the progress of the study, discussions of the appro-
priate strategic guidance and its nature and implications 
for the extent of our military cowmitment in South Vietnam 
should be undertaken with both General Westmoreland and 
Ambassador Bunker. 15/ 
Thus , the tlA to Z reassessment tl of U. S. strategy requested by the 
President vlaS relegated by the Working Group to a future date . 
Tab E remained intact from the original 29 February draft memorandum. 
P".cepared by the State Department , it discussed negotiating options and 
possible diplomatic actions in connection with a buildup of U. S. forces. 
Concerning our negotiating posture, three broad options were listed : 
1 . 
Stand pat on the San Antonio formula and on our basic 
position to"\.;ard the terms of a negotiated settlement - - the 
Geneva Accords plus free choice in the South, rejecting a 
coalition or any special position for the NLF . 
2. 
Take some nel" initiative , either privately or publicly, 
that might iDvolve a change in our position on the San Antonio 
formula and/ or a change in our position on the elements of a 
settlement. 
3. 
No change in our position for the present, but pitching 
our course of action toward a strong move for negotiations \-Then 
and if we have countered Hanoi ' s offensive -- i . e . , in a matter 
of four months or so perhaps . 111 
The crucial question, the paper indicated, was r eally to examine 
what vIe could conceivably do by way of a nevl initiative under Option 2 • 
. After examining the situation, however, the conclusion w·as reached that : 
.. • any change in our position on the terms of a peaceful 
settlement would be extremely un,'lise at the present time . 
He 
may well vii sh to vlOrk on opening 1.l.p channels to the NLF, but 
this must be done in the utmost secrecy and in full consulta-
tion "I·lith the GVN. 
He do not knoi'l \-lhat the possibilities 
may be in this direction, but any public stress on this avenue 
would f eed the fires of a VC propaganda line that has already 
had significant disturbing effect in South Vietn~m . 
60 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
As to our conditions f'or stopping the bombing and 
entering into talks, we continue to believe that the San 
Antonio formula is "rock bottom." 
The South Vietnamese 
are i n fact talking about much stiff'er ·~ond itions , such 
as stopping the infiltration entirely. Any move by us to 
modify the San Antonio formula dOIVllward ",ould be extremely 
disturbing in South Vietnam, and ",ould have no signif'icant 
o~ etting gains in US public opinion or in key third countries . ... 
This being said , we believe that it would strengthen our 
over-all posture, and involve no signif'icant risks i n Vietnam, 
if vle "Tere to reiterate our basic position on our terms of 
settlement in South Vietnam. 
A systematic restatement of' our 
position on the Geneva Accords and free choice in the South 
could be a vital part of' selling our vlhole course of' action 
to the public, to Congress , and the world . 
Although vTe have 
stated all the elements at different times, we have not pulled 
them together for a long time and ,'le could get a considerable, 
impression of f'reshness , even novelty, and certainly r easonable-
ness by identif'ying more precisely the elements of' the Geneva 
Accords ; our position on free choice , and perhaps adding 
something on external guarantees, which have always been a 
generalized part of our position and that of the South Viet-
namese. ~ 
. 
Further diplomatic actions, the Appendix indicated, would be designed 
to dramatize the Communist threats to Laos, Thailand, and Cambodia. 
Among 
the actions suggested were the follo"ling: 
First , that the restatement of' our position on South Viet-
nam include sUbstantial emphasis on restoration of' the Lcl.OS 
Accords of' 1962 and on the presel~ation of' the neutrality and 
territorial integrity of' Cambodia under the 1954 Accords . 
I ndeed , "Te could go still further and take the occasion 
to talk in terms of an over-all settlement f'or Southeast Asia 
that would specifically provide that each nation Ivas free to 
assume vThatever neutral or other international posture it 
wished to take . 
We could explicitly state that vIe vTere pre-
pared to accept a Southeast Asia that was "neutral" in the 
sense of not adhering to any power bloc or forming a part 
of any alliance directed at others . 
He could say a favorable ,"lOrd about ree;ional arrange-
ments in Southeast Asia consistent with the concept, and 
could indicate our willingness to join with other outside 
nations to consider Ivhat kind of general assurcmces of sup-
port could be given to such a Southeast Asia .... 
Second, there are strong diplomatic steps that could be 
61 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
taken to dramatize the situation in Laos. 
We could encourage 
Souvanna to take the case to the UN where Laos and Souvanna 
have strong appeal. Concurrently, but We believe less effec-
tive in practice, Souvanna could press the British and Soviets 
to take action or even to reconvene the Geneva Conference of 1962. 
Third, we could attempt similar action for Cambodia. 
This 
Jnight be-through the Australians, to get Sihanouk to take his 
case also to the UN. 
Even if he made some accusations against 
us in the process, he 1wuld be likely at the present time to 
highlight his internal Chinese-backed threat, and the net result 
could be useful. 
A further possibility woul d be to seek to enlist India more 
deeply in the Cambodian situation. 
This is vlorth trying, but 
the Indians are a weak reed for action or for effective diplo-
matic dramatization. 
Fourth, we could consider getting the Thai to dramatize 
their-8ituation more than they have done. 
This takes careful 
thought, since they do not ,·!ish to alarm their o"m people. 12.1 
Other possibilities discussed were the enlisting and engaging of other 
Asian nations in tte search far peace in Vietnam a.nd the Soviet Union in an 
~ffort to find peace in Southeast Asia. 
In Tab F appeared a discussion of military action against North Viet-
nam. 
This tab contained two contrary views concerning the bombing campaign 
against NVN, and is discussed in detail in another Task Force paper . 
'J'his 
is the first place that any written discussion of the bombing campaign 
against the North appears in any of the papers of the Horking Group. It is 
interesting to note, in the light of subsequent developments, that neither 
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff nor the Secreta:ry of Defense made 
mention of a partial or complete bombing suspension of the North at this 
time. 
They differed only on the extent to which the bombing campaign 
against North Viet Nam should be intensified. 1§/ 
Tabs G and H, the final Tabs, considered the public affairs problems 
in dealing vIi th increased U. S. troop commitments to SVN and to the calling 
up of reserve forces. 
In dealing vli th publ~c opin~on a~d wi ~h Congress, 
these Appendices concluded that from a publJ.c affalrs vlevrpolnt: 
Beyond the basic points of establishing that the ,var is in 
the national interest, that there is a plan to end it satis -
factorily and that "le can identifY the resources needed to 
carry out that plan, 'de must prove: 
1. 
That General \~estmorelandneeds the additional troops 
being sent him. 
62 
TOP SECHET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
... . 
2. 
That he does not need further additional troops at 
this time . 
3. 
ThR.t the Strategic Reserve does need reconstitution 
at this time . 
4. 
That the possible need of General Westmoreland for 
possible future reinforcement is sufficientl y important 
to merit the callup . 
5. 
That there is not a bottoml ess pit. 
6. 
That the nation still has the resources f or the ghetto 
fight . ]]} 
Thus , the memorandum forwarded to the Presldent by the Secretary of 
Defense in response to the P-..cesidential reQuest for an If A to Z r eassessment lf 
of our Vietnam policy again r epresented a compromise . 
In this case, it 
,'las a compromise brought about by differences bet'\<Teen the Assistant Secre-
tary of Defense for International Security Affairs and his staff, and the 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff a.nd his officers . 
Initially, I SA had 
prepared a draft Presidential memorandum "i'Thich had indeed r eassessed U.S. 
strategy in SVN, found it faulty, and recommended a nel'l strategy of protecting 
the It demographic frontier" '\<Tith basically the U.S. forces presently in-
country. 
The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff found Itfatal flaVors 
II in 
t his strategy, could not accept the implied criticism of past strategy in 
the I SA proposal, did not think that the Defense Department civilians should 
be involved in issuing specific guidance to the military field commander, 
and supported this field cow~ander in his reQuest for the forces required 
to allo,'l him to Itregain the initiative.
1t 
The compromise reached, of course , 
'\<Tas that a decision on ne"i'l strategic guidance should be deferred pendi ng a 
complete political/ military reassessment of the U.S. strategy and objectives ' 
in Vietnam in the context of our '\<Tor Id'\dde corr.uni t ment s . 
The recormnendation for additional forces Has also a compromise and 
'\<Tas based , as had past decisions of this nature, on ",hat cou~d be done by 
the forces in-being 'I-rithout disrupting the nation . 
HOI'lever , there 'I·rere addi-
tional reasons adduced for not meeting all of COMUS~~CV ' S r eQuirements for 
forces. 
The situation in SVN "TaS not clear . 
The ability of the Government 
and of the Army of South Vietnam to survive and to improve ,'Tere in serious 
question . 
The ability of the U.S . to attain its obj ectives in SVN by mili-
tary force of vrhatever size vTaS not clear . 
Weighing heavily upon the minds 
of the senior officials '\<Tho prepared and approved the 4 March memorandum to 
the President Has , indeed , '\<That difference in the '\'lar , what progress tOvTard 
,victory such a buildup as requested by l.w._CV 'I'lOuld make . 
These l eaders vrere, 
finally, prepared to go a long i'lay do,m the road in meeting COMUS.MACV IS 
request . 
They recow~ended to the President that the first increment of 
this request be met . 
They also recommended a partial mobilization so as 
to be p;epared to meet additional reQuirement s if' and ''lhen it "TaS demon-
strated that these forces "'lere necessary and vrould make a strategic difference . 
63 
TOP SECRET _. Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
More importantly, hCNlever, these officials finally carne to the realization 
that no military strategy could be successful unless a South Viet n~mese 
political and m:i litary ~ntity was capable of "rirming the support of its 
people . 
Thus, for the first time , U. S. efforts "Tere to be made contingent 
upon specific reform measures undertaken by the GVN, and U. S. leverage was 
to be used to elicit these reforms. 
South Vietnam was to be put on notice 
that the l i mit of U.S. patience and commitment had been approached. 
Concerning negotiations and the bombing of the North , the Memorandum 
for the F-.cesident was conventionaL 
No changes i n Gur negotiating position 
were recom.mended and no r eally ne,'T dipl omatic initiatives Vlere suggested . 
Concerning the bombing of the North, the only issue indicated concerned 
the degree of intensification. 
There vlas no mention made of a partial reduc-
tion or cessation. 
Thus , faced with a fork in the road of our Vietnam policy, the Working 
Group failed to seize the opportunity to change directions . 
Indeed , they 
seemed to r ecommend that we continue rather haltingly down the same r oad, 
meanwhile consulting t he map more frequently and in greater detail to insure 
that we were still on the right road. 
6. 
The Climat~ of Opinion 
This memorandum was presented to the President on Monday evening, 
4 March, and at his request, the recommendations were passed to General 
Westmoreland for his comments . 
These comments were received by the Chairman 
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and passed to the Secretary of Defense on 
8 March 1968 . 
General Westmoreland welcomed the additional airpower 'which 
"would greatly enhance the tactical air support availe,ble to groll_l1d units ." 
The chairman indicated, however, that there had been no change in General 
westmoreland's requirements as originally proposed and, indeed, additional 
combat service-support forces had been requested. 
General Westmoreland states that although i m.'llediate 
authori zation for deployment of 22,000 additional personnel 
would provide much needed combat and combat support forces , 
the combat service support forces now in Vietnam are i nsuffi-
cient to support our present force structure . 
This is especi-
ally critical in view of the recent deployment of the 3rd 
Brigade of the 82d Airborne Division and RLT 27 to the I Corps 
tactic8,1 zone ,vi thout the appropriate slice of combat support . 
He emphasizes the absolute r equir e~ent to provide the support 
forces identified with the increased deployments prior to or 
at the same time the tactical forces are deployed . 
I n this 
r egard, General Westmoreland has this date fOYivarded his 
specific strength r ecoL~endations for the imnlediate essential 
combat service support forces to provide adequate support for 
combat units in I CTZ, including the 3rd Brigade of the 82d 
Airborne Division, RLT 27 and Army units Hhich have been 
redepl oyed to Northern I C'orps tactical zone . 
This r equest 
64 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE'f - Sensi ti ve 
has not 'yet been validated by CINCPAC, but i s currently under 
consideration here by the Joint Staff in anticipation of early 
action by Jl.drrLi,ral Sharp ' s headquarters . 
Finally, General Westmoreland recognizes that the forces 
which were contained in the Committee's recommendations were 
apparently based upon the capabilities of the Services to 
produce troops for deployment . 
He states that there has been 
no change i n his appraisal of the situation since my visit to 
Vietnam and thus there has been no change in his requirements 
as originally proposed . 'J!}) 
From the 4th of March until the final Presidential decision was annoQDced 
to the country, the Ivritten record becomes sparse. 
The debate \'lithin the 
Administration was argued and carried fori-lard on a personal basis by the 
officials involved, primarily, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary 
of State . 
The decision, hOI-lever, had been placed squarely on the shoulders of 
t he President . 
The recomrnendations of the 4 March memorandum had left him 
a profound political/military dilemma . 'The memorandum had recommended "a 
little bit more of the same" to stabilize the military situation, plus a 
l evel of mobilization in order to be prepared to meet any further deteriori-
ation in the ground situation. Any nevr strategic guidance , any new direction 
in policy, hovlever, vlere to be left to a subsequent study . 
But many political events in the first fevl weeks of March 1968 gave 
strong indications that the country was becoming increasingly divided over 
and disenchanted with the current Vietnam strategy, and would no longer 
settle for "more of the same" with no indication of an eventual end to the 
conflict. 
That the President was aware of these external political pres-
sures and that they influenced his decision is evident . 
Focus to this political debate and sense of dissatisfaction i-laS given 
by a startlingly accurate account , published in The New Yor~ Times on 
10 March, of General Hestmoreland ' s request and of the strategic r eassess -
ment 'which .. las being conducted wi thin the executive branch of the government . 
It also indicated the grolving doubt and unease in the nation concerning this 
policy reviel'l . 
Written by Neil Sheehan and Hedrick Smith, the ,article stated: 
General Hilliam C. Ife stmoreland has asked for 206,000 
Illore American troops for Vietnam, but the request has touched 
off a divisive internal debate within high levels of the 
Johnson Administration. 
A number of sub-Cabinet civilian officials in the Defense 
DepG,rtment , supported by some senior officis,ls in the State 
Department, have argued aga.inst General vlestmorela.nd ' s plea 
~I.'OP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
f or a 40 per cent increase in his rorces 'to regain the 
initiative' from the enemy . 
.•.. Many of the civilian officials are arguing that 
there should be no increase beyond the movement of troops 
now under way .... 
The contention of these high ranking officials is that 
an American increase vrill bring a matching increase by 
North Vietnam, thereby raising the level of violence vli th-
out giving the allies the upper hand . 
Senior Pentagon civilians have put fOT\<Tard a viri t ten 
counter-proposal to President Johnson, calling for a 
shift in American strategy to a concept of close-in 
defense of populated areas with more limited offensive 
thrusts than at present . 
Much of the military hierarchy 
is reported to oppose this approach .... 
The President has not yet decided on the question of 
substantial increases in American forces in Vietnam .... 
Nonetheless, the scope and depth of the internal debate 
vri thin the Government reflect the vrrenching Ql1certainty 
and doubt in this capital about every facet of the war left 
by the enemy ' s dramatic wave of attacks at Tet, the Asian 
NevT Year holiday, six vreeks ago. 
More than ever this has 
left a sense of weariness and irr:i.tation over the war. 
Officials themselves comment in private about wide-
spread and deep changes in attitudes, a sense that a water-
shed has been reached and that its meaning is just now 
beginning to be understood .... 
But at every l evel of Gover:nment there is a sense that 
the conflict, if expanded further, can no longer be called 
' a limited v18,r. ' 
Officials acknovTledge that any further 
American involvement carries serious implications for the 
civilian life of the nation--not only the call-up of mili-
tary reserves and enactment or a tax increase "out problems 
vlith t he budget, the economy and the balance of payments . 
In Congress, uneasy and divided, as the Senate debate 
on Thursday shOi"ed , there is a rising demand that Capitol Hill 
be consulted· before any critical ne\<[ step is taken . 
Even 
supporters of Administration policy, such e,s Senator Richard 
B. Russell, Dem:Jcrat of Georgia, I·rho is chair'man of the 
Senate Armed Services Committee, are openly critical of' 
American combat strategy. 
M.r . Russell has suggested that the 
66 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
United States has lost the battlefield initiative not only through 
the enemy ' s bold tactics but by what he calls its o,m defensive, 
gradualist ~sychology . •.• 
General westmoreland's re~uest for another 206,000 troops, 
beyond the present authorized 525,000-man level to be reached by 
next fall, vTaS brought from Saigon last month by Gen. Earle G. 
vfueeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ... . 
General Wheeler presented the r e~uest to President Johnson at 
the vfui te House on Feb. 28, when he delivered a report on his three -
day survey of the war situation in South Vietnam. 
The re~uest vTaS 
also forwarded to the President by the Joint Chiefs as a body 
',vi th our approval' •... 
Military leaders also contend that only a massive infusion of 
troops will restore the allied initiative. 
They say it would also 
permit the allied forces to resume the pacification of the country-
si de and the "rar of attrition against the Vietcong that they contend 
was being successfully waged before the Tet offensive. 
The main lines of the case against General Westmoreland's 
re~uest are contained in a position paper prepared over the last 
weekend by senior civilian officials in the Defense Department , 
i ncluding assistant secretaries. 
Most of these officials Here 
brought into the Government by former Secretary of Defense Robert S . 
McNamara . 
The argument goes like this: 
Since the United States military build-up began in 1965, Hanoi 
has gradually increased its forces in South Vietnam and maintained 
a reasonable ratio to the fighting strength of the American Forces . 
There is every reason to believe, these officials contend, that 
Hanoi is able and ·willing to continue to do so if more American 
troops are sent to Vietnam Hithin the next year . 
The reinforcements that General Westmoreland wants Hould thus 
not restore the initiative. 
They would simply raise the level of 
violence. 
The United States would spend billions more on the "Tar 
effort and "lould suffer appreciably higher casualties . 
North Vietnam would likewise endure substantially greater l osses . 
But the experience of the Tet offensive shOWS, according to this 
line of reasoning, that American Military commanders have gravely 
underestimated the capacity of the enemy to absorb such punishment 
and to be still able to launch bold offensive operations . 
' So there ,vould just be a lot more killing, ' one analyst said . 
67 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The White House is also reported to have received an analysis 
from the Central Intelligence Agency that support this view of 
North Vietnam ' s manpower resources and its will to resist. 
'Essentially, ' said one official, 'we are fighting Vietnam's 
birth rate. ' 
The Defense Department ' s paper ,vas verbally endorsed by Deputy 
Secretary of Defense Paul T. Nitze and fOl'i'Tarded by him to Clark 
M. Clifford, the new Defense Secretary, for transmittal to the 
President on Monday. 
Mr. Clifford was impressed with the caliber of the analysis , 
informants said, but it is not known whether he endorsed the 
document personally. 
The thrust of the argument in the Pentagon paper is reported 
to have gained the sympathetic support of a number of senior State 
Department officials, including Under Secretary Nicholas deB. 
Kat zenbach, William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for East Asian 
and Pacific Affairs, and others close to Vietnam policy. 
'i can tell you that all of us in this building are against a 
troop increase, ' one State Department official said. 
HOI-leVer , 
Secretary Rusk ' s position on the matter was unknown. 
The defense position paper concludes by proposing a change in 
American strategy in South Vietnam. 
This would entail withdrawing 
from exposed positions l ike Khesanh in the sparsely populated 
f rontier regions and concentrating on a mobile defense of the 
cities and populated areas nearer t he sea. 
But sOll'\e military officials contend this is not a realistic 
option . 
' Each t mm I-Till become a Khesa[l_h,' they assert, and civilian 
casualties will soar . 
Although most civilian officials declined to use the t erm 
' enclave ' to describe their proposed strategy, some conceded that 
it does amount to a modification of the theory advanced by Lieut. 
Gen. James '1 . Gavin, retired . 
He has fo:c months urged that the 
allies pull back t o defensive positions around cities and other 
i mportant enclaves al ong the coast . 
The Pentagon document suggests that on the political side the 
United States encouraged the Saigon regime to broaden itself by 
including non-Communist opposi tionelements such as the follo,tTers of 
the militant Buddhist leader Tri Quang. 
A broader base ,-Tould help 
the regime este.blish a better relationship with its population and 
make its army more effective, the paper asserts . 
68 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In their discussion of the American predicament in Vietnam, 
some civilian officials go significantly further and suggest 
that the Administration should concede that 'you can~ot completely 
defeat the enemy.' The United States, they say, should instead 
'buy time' 'with its present forces while the non-Communist South 
Vietnamese can strengthen themselves to the point where they 
'believe in their ability to survive against the Communists 
after some sort of internal compromise. ' 
Officials are vague about the ingredients of this compromise , 
but they acknovlledge that it would probably involve negotiations 
between the Vietcong and the non-CommQDists in the South. 
Although it clearly entails abandonment of the military 
solution that is i mplicit in current Aillainistration policy, they 
argue that such a compromise would not violate any public 
American commitment to South Vietnam. 
While avoiding any decision so far, President Johnson has 
gained time by putting pre ss u~e on General Westmoreland to obtain 
maximum use of the troops he nOH has . 
The President has instructed 
the general to justify in detail his request for reinforcements. 
Mr. Johnson has also set in motion extensive staff studies of 
the full political, economic and military r amifications of giving 
General Westmoreland more troops. 
Included among these may be an 
exwaination of the possibility of acquiring additional forces 
from Washington's allies in South Vietnam--Australia, South Korea, 
Thailand and the Philippines. 
. 
The thrust of the President's concern, however, has been with 
the consequences of troop increases . 
There is no indication at this 
time that Mr. Johnson and his closest advisers , Mr . Rusk, Mr . 
Clifford and Mr . Rostovl are seriously interested in extending the 
war to Cambodia and Laos or in changing to a stra,tegy of close-in 
defense of populated areas. 
They reject 8, political compromise \<lith the Vietcong at this 
point. 
Some senior civilian officials, in fact, believe Mr . 
Johnson is ' still intensely committed to a military solution.' 
These officials consider General vJestmoreland' s request for 
an additional 206,000 men 'unrealistic,' ho,\vever, and do not believe 
the P-..cesident viill grant it. 79/ 
69 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Even prior to this article , there had been a great deal of speculation 
in the press concerning the need for additional troops in SVN, and the 
general conclusi on seemed to be that some additions vTould be required. 
Members of Congress had already demanded that Congress be consulted 
before any decision was made to increase troop strength in Vietnam 
significantly. 
A number of prominent senators had i nterrupted debate 
on civil rj.ghts on 7 March to make this demand because of "disturbing 
information that a P"residential Decision was i mminent." 80/ 
The Sheehan article appeared one day before Secretary of State Dean 
Rusk appeared to testify before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . 
His 2-day grilling indicated a considerable growth i n open dissent 
within the Committee concerning U. S. policy in South Vietnam. 
Rusk even 
came under criticism from one of the few Administration supporters on 
the Committee, Senator Karl E. Mundt (R-SD), who warned him, "You are 
as aVTare as we are that the shift of opinion in this country is in 
the vTrong direction" - meaning ar.'lay from support of U.S. policy in Viet-
nam. 
"Something more convincing," said Mundt, "has to come from the 
Administration as to vThat this i s all about ' to match ' the sacrifices 
_ we are making . II 
Rusk sidestepped all attempts by Senators Fulbright, 
Gore, and other questioners to pin him down on a possible increase i n 
troops or other element of future Vietnam strategy . It would "not be 
right for me to speculate about numbers of possibilities," said Rusk, 
''vThile the P"resident is consul ting his advisors ." 81/ 
Later, on 12 March , both friends and foes of the President ' s policy 
i n Vietnam served notice that the present course must be r eassessed 
before more troops were sent to Vietnam. 
"Senator Fulbright (D-Ar k), Foreign Relations Committee chairman, 
warned against an escalation that could l ead to 'all-out war,' and 
insisted dtITing a tel evised hearing with Dean Rusk, Secretary of State, 
that Congress be consulted before crucial new decisions are made ." 
But Sena.tor Russell (D-Ga), Armed Services Committee chairman, took 
a different tack, contending that air and sea power should be used to 
the fullest extent before ground-force levels are increased . 
"If we are not willing to take this calculated risk, " Russell told 
a Veterans of Foreign Wars dinner, "we should not still be increasing 
the half-million men in Vietnam who are exposed to danger daily from 
weapons that might have been kept from the hands of our enemies ." 82/ 
These cormnents from tvTO pOlverf ul cormni ttee chairmen demonstrated 
the cross-currents of opinion sr.-Tirling around the President as he con-
t emplated General \'Jestmoreland ' s request and the r ecommendations of his 
advisors . 
70 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Adding fuel to this controversy was the unexpected triumph in the 
Nelv Hampshire Presidential Primary on 12 March of the Democratic lIpeace ll 
candidate, Senator Eugene McCarthy. 
This tri.umph was widel y heralded 
a s a r epudiation by the voters of the present Administration and its 
Vietnam policies, and it encouraged another critic of these policies, 
Senator Robert Kennedy, to announce on 16 March his intention to seek 
the Democratic Presidential nomination. 
7. 
The President Ponders 
At a meeting at the ~fuite House on 13 March, t he President 
decided to deploy 30,000 troops to South Vietnam in addition to the 10,500 
emergency augmentation already made . 
This would substantially meet 
General Westmoreland ' s initial package request . 
Army forces would 
replace those Marine Corps forces requested, as the Marine Corps could 
not sustain the requested deployments . 
Also an additional Army brigade 
(7,363 personnel) would be deployed to replace Marine RLT 27, and its 
associated support . 
RLT 27 sould begin to return to CONUS on 15 July. 
The forces to be depl oyed Ivere as follows : 
A. 
US ARlVIY 
Inf Bde (3 Inf Bns ) 
Mech Bde (1 Inf Bn , 1 Inf 
Bn (Mech), 1 Tk Bn) 
AVD Co, Sep Bde 
Armd Cav Sqdn 
MP Bn 
Cbt Svc spt 
Cbt and Cbt Svc Spt 
SUB-TOTAL 
B. 
7th AF 
4 TFS 
FAC/TACP 
Airlift 
Support 
SUB-TOTAL 
C. 
USN 
NSA Da Nang Support 
SUB-TOTAL 
D. 
TOTAL M 
.. A.CV 
71 
4,500 
5,041 
238 
1,030 
955 
3,316 
9,120 
24,200 
2,164 
191 
741 
929 
4, 025 
1,775 
1,775 
30, 000 
Deployment Date 
15-30 June 
12 July 
15 July 
15-30 June 
15-30 June 
15-30 June 
15-30 June 
15-30 June 
5 April 
1 June 
1 June 
1 June 
1 June 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
There would be hlO reserve callups to meet and sustain these deploy-
ments, one in March and one in May. 
The callup in March would support 
the 30 , 000 deployment . 
The one in May wOlUd reconstitute the strategic 
reserve at seven active divisions. 
Other ground rules decided upon were : 
(1) those Reservists to be called in May would not now be notified; (2) 
there would be no extensions of terms of service for personnel presently 
on active duty; (3) no individuals would be recalled, only units . 83/ 
This decision was formalized by the Deputy Secretary of Defense in a 
memorandQm to the Chainnan of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on 14 March 1968 . 
Mr . IUtze asked the chairman to inform General Hestmoreland of these pro -
posals, and to ask him vThether he considered the substitutions satisfactory. 84/ 
On 14 March, the Secretary of the Army fOYl'larded to the Secretary of 
Defense his recommendations concerning these Program Six deployments, and 
the Reserve callup necessary to sustain them and to reconstitute the 
strategic reserve. 
Secretary Resor pointed out, however, that an addi -
tional 13,500 men would have to be added to the figure of 30,000 to be 
deployed. 
ftIf the 3d Brigade of the 82nd Airborne is to be left in-country 
permanently and if the Army is to replace the RLT with 'an infantry brigade 
on a permanent bas i s then lilli t s \-li th TO&E strength of 13,500 mus t be 
included in the March 15 call-up and deployed .... In addition, the ~ACV 
ceiling will have to be increased from 565,000 to 578,500, unless MACV can 
provide trade-off spaces for all or part of this add-on .ft 85/ 
The strength of units to be called up in March would be 45,000, as 
follo\-ls: 
a. Units to provide for the additional deployments - 31,563. 
b. 
Units to provide the sustaining troops for 82d Airborne 
and RLT 27 replacement - 13,437. 
The May 15 cal1up ,-,ould comprise the fo11ovling: 
1 division plus 1 lSI 
1 brigade 
Post, camp and station comple-
ment to open 1 additional station 
Total' 
32,000 
4,000 
5,000 
41,000 
This 'would reconstitute the STRliF at the following levels : 
Divisioll 
lSI 
SSI 
6 
6 
1-1/3 §§} 
72 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In addition, the Secretary indicated that the Chief of Staff of the 
Army recownended : 
•.. that one division, its lSI and the station comple-
ment, a total of 37,000 TOE strength, be alerted 15 March 
and called up 15 April instead of 15 May in order to provide 
an earlier capability to react to the unpredicted, a stronger 
STRAF in light of growing uncertainties in Southeast and 
Northeast Asia and to assure an earlier i mprovement of the 
sustaining base to support the increased deployments and to 
avoid drawdown on Europe. 87/ 
The approval of an additional 13,500 deployment to support the emer-
gency augmentation was apparently approved very CJ.uickly. 
In a memorandum for the record on 16 March, the latest tentative plan 
for Vietnam Deployments and r eserve call-ups ldere listed as follo,'1s by the 
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Systems Analysis) : 
1. 
Deploym~...:?!. 
Program #5 
Emergency Augmentation 
Support for 10,500 
Additional Deplo~nent 
Total 
525,000 
10,500 
13,500 
30,000 
579,000 
2. 
The March reserve call, to be announced around 20 March 
will be : 
Support deployment 
Support personnel for the 10,500 
Total 
36,621 
13,437 
50,05B 
The March call will ''1ai ve the 30 days notice, so troops 
will report around t1arch 27 . 
3. 
Around a ,'leek or 10 days later, tl after a studytl there vJill 
be a second call of 48,393 .... These reservists will be given 
30 days, therefore reporting around 1 May. §!}/ 
Still, the 'President vIas troubled. 
In public he continued to indicate 
firmness and r esoluteness, but press leaks and continued public criticism 
continued to compound his problem. 
On March 17, the Ne"l-J York Times, again 
amazingly accurate, forecast that the President ,vould approve dispatch 
of an additional 35,000 to 50,000 men to Vietnam over the next six months .. §2j 
On March 18, nearly one-third of the House of Representatives, a total 
of 139 members, - 98 Republica.ns and 41 Democrats - joined in sponsoring a 
resolution calling for an i rrnnecUate Congressional review of the United 
states pol icy in Southeast Asi~. 90/ 
73 
TOP SECRE'I' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
On that same day, 18 March, Mr. Johnson ans';'lered these critics, as 
he charged in a speech before the National Farmers ' Union Convention in 
Minneapolis, that Hanoi is seeking lito win in Hashington \,rhat it cannot 
win in Hue or Khe SarLh. 
Your President 'Helcomes suggestions from com-
missions, from congressmen, from private individuals or groups,1I he 
continued, lIor anyone who has a plan or program which can stand inspection 
and open a hope of reaching our goal of peace in the world . 1I ~ 
At this time, the President sought the advice of a group of his friends 
and confidants outside of government. 
These men came to ~Tashington on 
18 March at the request of the President to receive briefings on the latest 
developments in the \'lar and to advise the President on the hard decision 
he faced. 
Present "lere : 
former Undersecretary of State George Ball; 
Arthur Dean, a Republican Nel" York lawyer who was a Korean War negotiator 
during the Eisenhmver Administration; Dean Acheson, former 
President 
Truman's Secretary of State : Gen . Matthew B. Ridge",ay, the retired com-
mander of United Nations troops in Korea; Gen . Maxvrell Taylor, former 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Cyrus Vance, former Deputy Defense 
Secretary and a key troubleshooter for the Johnson Administration; McGeorge 
Bundy, Ford Foundation President who had been special assistant for National 
Security Affairs to ~IT. Johnson and former President Kennedy; former Treasury 
Secreta~J C. Douglas Dillon and Gen. Omar Bradley. 
The only published account of this consultation, which is considered 
reliable, "las \'lritten by Stuart H. Loory and appeared in the Los Angeles 
Times late in May. 
According to this report, the group met over dinner 
with Secretary of State Dean Rusk; Defense Secretary Clark M. Clifford; 
Ambassador Ttl . Averell Harriman; Walt W. RostO'\v, the F-.cesident ' s special 
assistant for National security affairs; General Earle G. I'meeler, Chairman 
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Richard Helms, Director of the Central 
Intelligence Agency; Paul Nitze, Deputy Defense Secretary; Nicholas 
Katzenbach, Under Secretary of State; and William P. Bundy, Assistant 
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs . 
The outsiders questioned the government officials ca,refull y 
on the ",ar, the pacification program and the condition of the 
South Vietnamese government after the Tet offensive . 
They in-
cluded in their deliberations the effect of the war on the 
United States. 
After dinner the government officials left and the group 
received three briefings . 
Fhilip C. Habib, a deputy to William Bundy and nO'\"1 a member . 
of the American negotiating team in Paris, delivered an unusually 
frank briefing on the conditions in Vietnam after the Tet offensive . 
He covered such matters as corruption in South Vietnam and the 
grm'ling r ef\lgee problem. 
74 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Habib, according to reliable sources, told the group that 
the Saigon government '\Vas generally weaker than had been realized 
as a result of the Tet offensive. 
He related the situation, some 
said, with greater frankness than the group had previously heard . 
In addition to Habib, Maj . Gen. William E. DePuy, special 
assistant to the Joint Chiefs for counterinsurgency and special 
activities, briefed the group on the military situation, and 
George Carver, a CIA analyst, gave his agency ' s estimates of con-
di tions in the vrar zone . 
The briefings by DePuy and Carver reflected what many understood 
as a dispute over enemy strength bet\veen the Defense Department 
and the CIA which has been previously reported. 
Discrepancies in 
the figures resQlted from the fact that DePuy ' s estimates of enemy 
strength covered only identifiable military units, while Carver ' s 
included all known military, paramilitary and parttime enemy strength 
available . 
The morning of March 19, the advisory group assembled in the 
White House to discuss vThat they had heard the previous evening 
and arrived at their verdict. It was a striking turnabout in 
attitude for all but Ball. 
After their meeting, the group met the President for lu..nch. 
It was a social affair . 
No business vTas transacted. 
The meal ' 
finished, the advisers delivered their verdict to the President . 
Their deliberations produced this verdict for the chief 
executive: 
Continued' escalation of the wa.r--intensified bombing of North 
Vietnam and increased American troop strength in the South--would 
do no good. 
Forget about seeking a battlefield sol ution to the 
problem and instead intensify efforts to seek a political solution 
at the negotiating table. 
He vTas reportedly greatly surprised at their conclusions . 
When he asked them vrhere they had obtained the facts on which the 
conclusions vTere based, the group told him of the briefings by 
Habib, DePuy and Carver . 
Mr . Johnson knew that the three men 11ad also briefed his 
governmental advisers, but he had not received the srune picture of 
the war as RostO\'T presented the reports to him. 
As a result of the discrepancy, the President ordered his Oi-Tn 
direct briefings. At least Habib and DePuy--and almost certainly 
Carver--had evening sessions 'Ivi th the President. 
75 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Habib Ivas reportedly as frank with the President as he had 
been ,'lith the advisory group . 
The President asked tough questions. 
'Habib stuck to his guns, ' one source r eported . 
Whatever impact this group 's recommendations 
and the direct briefings 
he received had on the President was not immediately apparent in any 
decision which affected the deployment of forces. 
Even as the President 
announced, on 22 March , that General William C. Westmoreland would be 
recalled from Vietnam to become the Army Chief of Staff, 93/ 
the Defense 
Department continued to plan for the deployment of 43,500-additional 
troops. In a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense on 23 March 1968, 
the Assistant Secretary (Systems Analysis) forwarded his Program #6 
Summary Table based on 579,000 men in South Vietnam, 54,000 over the 
approved ~rogram #5 ceiling . 
This 54,000 was made up of the 10,500 
emergency reinforcement package, the 13,500 support forces for it, and 
the 30,000 additional package . 
The Assistant Secretary added, that upon 
notification of approval and desire to announce the new plan, the tables 
would be published. 94/ 
HO'tTever, these particular tables "Tere not to be published. 
The 
President sought further advice as he wrestl ed with the problem which 
had plagued his Administration. 
On March 26, General Creighton Abrams, 
Deputy COMUSMACV, arrived suddenly and without prior announcement, and 
vlas closeted I,d th the Fresident and his senior officials . 
These 
conferences were conducted in the utmost secrecy amid press speculation 
that Abrams I"ould be named to succeed General Westmoreland . 
Further 
press speculation .was that the conferences dealt primarily vTi th 
expansion c.md modernization of the South Vietnamese armed forces and 
that this tended to buttress earlier predictions that any increase in 
American forces in South Vietnam ",ould be modest . 95/ 
8. 
The President Decides 
Apparently the Presidential decision on deployment of additional 
U. S. forces to Vietnam vias made on 28 March and concurred in by General 
Abrams . 
In an undated memorandum (probably written on 27 or 28 March) 
for the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, the Deputy Chief of Staff for 
Military Operations, Lt General Lemley, indicated that the Joint Staff 
had informed him of: 
••.. tentative decisions arising from the recent conference 
betiqeen the' President, the Chairman, and General Abrams, as 
well as telecons between the Chairman and General Westmorel and . 
It is believed that a Presidential decision may be made by 
Friday (29 March) morning . 
76 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
New cei ling i n RVN: 
549, 500 
a. 
Program 5: 
525,000 . 
b. 
Emergency deployment of 82d Abn, 27th RLT : 
11, 000 .* 
13, 500 .* 
c. 
Support and sustain emergency deployment : 
d. 
Total : 
549,500 . 
*Incl udes estimated 1 , 444 Air Force and Navy. 
1st Bde , 5th Inf Div (Hech) ,'Till replace 27th RLT . 
Reser ve call-up of approximately 62, 000 . 
a. 
Army 
53, 957 
(13,301 
Support of 3/82d Abn Div & 1/5t h Inf Div) 
(40,656 - Reconstitute STRAF) 
b. 
Navy 
1, 453 
c. Air Force 
6 , 590 
d. 
Total 
62, 000 96/ 
A Joi nt Staff paper entitl ed IlHACV Troop List of Program 6 Add- on ,1I 
dated 28 Ma,rch, summarized service capability to satisfy IlHACV ' S 28 March 
1968 request for U. S. forces
ll as follows : 
T\vo Brigade Increment 
USARV 
- I nf Bde , Sep 
- Mech Bde , Sep 
- Armored Cav Sqdn 
- 2 TFS (F-100) (469 ea ) 
Brigade Increment 
(Combat Forces ) 
STRENGTH 
CONUS AVAIL DATE-X-
4,639 
I n-Country as 3d Bde/ 82d 
4, 882 
1,049 
994 
11,564 
Div 
Jul 68 
Aug 68 
Jun/Jul 68 
7th AF 
Total 
Support Increment (Combat Support and Combat Service Support Forces ) 
USARV 
- 2 FA Bn (155mm) 
- Engr Bn (Cbt ) 
- Other Support Units 
NAVFORV -
7th AF 
I II MAF -
Total Support Increment 
'I'OTAL DEPLOY1vIENT 
STRENGTH 
1,132 
812 
169 
2, 752 
2,219 
1,411 
900 
1,775 
895 
707 
496 
13 , 268 
CO~uS AVAIL DATE* 
Aug! Sep 68 
Aug 68 
J un/ Jul 68 
Aug 68 
Sep 68 
Oct 68 
Unk...l1o,m/ May 69 
J un 68 
Jun/Jul 68 
Unknovm 
Apr/ Sep 68 
24, 832 
(Excess over 24, 500 can be 
t aken from existing credit/ 
deoit account ) 
* CONUS availability date based on decision t o call up reserve elements . 97/ 
77 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
9. 
The Decision is Announced 
On Sunda.y, 31 March, it 'I'7as announced that the President would 
address the nation that evening concerning the vTar in Vietnam. 
The 
night before, Saturday, 30 March, a cable was dispatched to the U.S. 
Ambassadors in Australia, NevT Zealand, Thailand, Laos, the Philippines, 
and South Korea. 
This cable, slugged "Literally Eyes Only for 
Ambassador or Charge", instructed the addressees to see their 
respective heads of government and inform them of the following major 
elements of the President's planned policy annOtLDCement on Sunday 
~~:~ 
, 
a. 
Major stress on i mportance of GVN and ARVN increased 
effectiveness, with our equipment and other support as first 
priority in our own actions. 
b. 
13,500 support forces to be called up at once in order 
to round out the 10,500 combat units sent in February. 
c. 
Replenishment of strategic 'reserve by calling up 
48,500 additional r eserves, stating that these ,",ould be 
designed to strategic reserve. 
d. 
Related tax increases and budget cuts already largely 
needed for non-Vietnam reasons. 
3. 
In addition, after similar consultation and concurrence, 
President proposes to announce that bombing will be 
restricted to targets most directly engaged in the battle-
field area and that this meant that there I'Tould be no 
bombing north of 20th parallel. Announcement 'I'tlould leave 
open how Hanoi might respond, and 'I'70uld be open-ended as to 
time . 
HO'~'Tever, it vlould indicate that Hanoi ! s response 
could be helpful in determining I'lhether vTe v7ere justified in 
assumption that Hanoi 'I'70uld not take advantage if vle 
stopping (sic) bombing altogether. 
Thus, it vlOuld to 
this extent foreshadow possibility of full bombing stoppage 
at a later point. 
This cable offered the Ambassadors some additio~al rationale for this 
ne'l'T policy for their discretionary use in conversations with their 
respecti V ·3 heads of goverrr_Tllent. 
This r3.tiona le represents the only 
available statement by the Administration of some of its underlying 
reasons and purposes for and expectations from this policy decision. 
a. 
You should call attention to force increases that would 
be announced at the Saille time and vlould make clear our continued 
resolve . 
Also our top priority to re-equipping ARVN forces. 
78 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
b. 
You should make clear that Hanoi is most likely to 
denounce the project and thus free our hand after a short period . 
Nonethelesf', vre might wish to continue t:he limitation even after 
a formal denunciation, in order to reinforce its sincerity and 
put the monkey firmly on Hanoi ' s back for whatever follol'ls. 
Of 
course, any ma,j or military change could compel full-scale 
resumption at any time. 
c. 
With or without denunciation, Hanoi might well feel 
limited in conducting any major offensives at l east in the northern 
areas . If they did so, this could ease the pressure where it is 
most potentially serious . If they did not, then this vlould give 
us a clear field for whatever actions were then re~uired. 
d. 
In view of weather limitations , bombing north of the 20th 
parallel vlill in any event be limited at least for the next four 
weeks or so -- which we tentatively envisage as a maximum test-
ing period i n any event . 
Hence, we are not giving up anything 
really serious in this time frame. 
Moreover, air power now used 
north of 20th can probably be used in Laos (where no policy change 
planned ) and in SVN. 
e . 
Insofar as our announcement foreshadows any possibility 
of a complete bombing stoppage , in the event Hanoi really exercises 
reciprocal restraints, vole regard this as unlikely. 
But in any 
case , the period of demonstrated restraint would probably have to 
continue for q. period of several ,'leeks, and we would have time to 
appraise the situation and to consult carefully with them before 
we undertook any such action. 
Thus, in reassuring our allies of our IIcontinued reSOlve!!, the cable 
clearly indicated that not very much was expected of this change i n policy. 
It could possibly reinforce our sincerity and IIput the monkey on Hanoi's 
back for vlhatever follovlS . II 
It was not expected that Hanoi would react 
positively although they might IIfeel limited in conducting any major 
offensives at least in the northern areas
ll
, admittedly a highly dubious 
likelihood .. 
What, then, was the purpose of this change in policy? If it ';vas not 
expected that Hanoi ,'lould respond pos:Ltively, or that any other major 
mili tary benefits would accrue, \'lhat then vlas expected? 
The anSvler to 
these ~uestions~ of . course, could only be speculation at the time ) 
altho~.gh ma:ny of the answers vTere to be contained in the President ' s 
speech on 31 March . 
79 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
,,' 
10 . 
I Shall Not Seel<;:, . and I Will Not Accept ... 
The President ' s speech to the nation on 31 March began with a 
summary of his efforts to achieve peace in Vietnam over the years . 2J} 
Good evening, my fellovl Americans . 
Tonight I vrant to speak to you of peace in Vietnam and 
Southeast Asia. 
No other ~uestion so preoccupies our people . 
No other 
dream so absorb s the 250 million human beings vrho live in that 
part of the world . 
No other goal motivates American policy in 
Southeast Asia. 
For years, representatives of our goverI1JUent and others 
have travelled the ,vorld -- seeking to find a basis for peace 
talks . 
Since last September, they have carried the offer that I 
made public at San Antonio . 
That offer was this : 
That the United States would stop its bombardment of North 
Vietnam when that would lead promptly to productive discussions 
and that v7e would assume that North Vietnam v70uld not take 
military advantage of our restraint . 
Hanoi denounced this offer, both privately and publicly. 
Even '-7hile the search for peace was going on, North Vietnam rush-
ed their preparations for a sa.vage assault on the people, the 
government , and the allies of South Vietnam. 
This attack during the TET holidays, the President indico..ted, failed 
to achieve its principal objectives : 
It did not collapse the elected goverpJUent of South Vietnam 
or shatter i ts army -- as the Communists had hoped . 
It did not produce a ' general uprising ' among the people 
of the cities as they had predicted . 
The Commu .. l1ists v7ere unable to maintain control of any of 
the more than 30 cities that they attacked. 
And they took very 
heavy casualties. 
80 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
But they did compel the South Vietnamese and their allies 
to move certain forces from the countryside, into the cities. 
They caused vridespread disruption and suffering. 
Their 
attacks, and the battles that followed, made refugees of 
half a million human beings . 
The Co@nunists may renew their attack any day. 
They are, it appears, trying to make 1968 the year of 
decision in South Vietnam -- the year that brings, if not final 
victory or defeat, at least a turning point in the struggle . 
This much is clear: 
If they do mount another rouIld of heavy attacks, they ,\-Till 
not succeed in destroying the fighting pOvTer of South Vietnam 
and its allies . 
But tragically, this is also clear:' many men - - on both 
sides of the struggle -- ,\-Till be lost . 
A nation that has 
already suffered 20 years of IV'arfare "dill suffer once again. 
Armies on both sides vJill take nelV' casualties. 
And the w'ar will 
go on. 
There is no need for this to be so. 
In dramatically announcing the partial suspension of the bombing of 
North Vietnam as a nel'! initiative designed to l ead to peace talks, 
P'..cesident Johnson did not voice any of the doubts of the State Department 
cable of the previous night tha.t this initiative ""as not expected to 
be fruitful. 
Indeed , the central theme of this portion of the speech 
'\-las that our unilateral action '\-las designed to lea.d to early talks . 
The President even designated the United States representatives for 
such talks. 
There is no need to delay the talks that could bring an end 
to this long 'and this bloody war . 
Tonight, I renei'l the offer I made last August - - to stop 
the bombardment of North Vietnam. 
\qe ask that talks begin 
promptly, that they be serious talks on the substance of peace . 
ltle assume that during those talks Hanoi will not take 
advantage of our r estraint . 
We are prepared to move immediately tOl-lard peace through 
negotiations . 
81 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
So, tonight, in the hope that this action will lead to 
early talks, I am taking the first step to de-escalate the 
conflict. 
~'Te are reducing -- substantially reducing -- the 
present level of hostilities . 
And vre are doing so unilatera.lly, and at once . 
Tonight, I have ordered our aircraI~ and our naval vessels 
to make no attacks on North Vietnam, except in the area north 
of the DeMilitarized Zone "l'There the continuing enemy build-up 
directly threatens allied fOTlvard positions and where the 
movements of their troops and supplies are clearly related to 
that threat. 
The area in "l'Thich "l'Te are stopping our attacks includes 
almost 90 percent of North Vietnam ' s population, and most of 
its territory. 
Thus there will be no attacks around the 
principal populated area$, or in the food-producing areas of 
North Vietnam. 
Even this very limited bombing of the North could come to 
an early end -- if our r estraint is mD.tched by restraint in 
Hanoi. 
But I cannot in good conscience stop all bombing so 
long as to do so YTould i mmediately and directly endanger the 
lives of our men and our allies . 
Whether a complete bombing 
halt becomes possible in the future will be determined by 
events. 
Our purpose in this action is to bring about a reduction in 
the level of violence that now exists . 
It is to save the lives of brave men -- and to save the lives 
of innocent vlomen and children. It is to permit the contending 
forces to move closer to a political settlement . 
And tonight, I call upon the United Kingdom and I call upon 
the Soviet Union -- as co-chairmen of the Geneva Conferences, and 
as permanent members of the United Nations Security Council --
to do all they can to move from the unilateral act of de-
escalation that I have just announced to"\'lard genuine pea.ce in 
Southeast Asia. 
Now, as in the past, the United States is ready to send 
its representatives to any forum, at any time, to discuss the 
means of bringing this ugly war to an end . 
82 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
a.."'Il designating one of our most distj.nguished Ameri-
cans , Ambassador Averell Harriman, as my personal repre-
sentative for such talks. 
In addition, I have asked 
Ambassador Lle'Nellyn Thompson, who returned from Mosco~'T 
for consultation, to be available to join Ambassador 
Harriman at Geneva or any other suitable place -- just 
as soon as Hanoi agrees to a conference. 
I call upon President Ho Chi Minh to respond posi-
ti vely, and favorably, to this ne ... 7 step toward peace. 
If peace did not come through negotiations, h~·,ever , the President 
indicated that our common resolve was unshakable and our common strength 
invincible. 
As evidence of this, he listed the achievements of the South 
Vietnamese nation. 
Tonight , we and the other allied nations are con-
tributing 600 ,000 fighting men to assist 700,000 South 
Vietnamese troops in defending their little country. 
Our presence there has always rested on this basic 
belief : 
the main burden of preserving their freedom 
must be carried out by them -- by the South Vietnamese 
themselves . 
vie and our allies can only help to provide a shield --
behind which the people of South Vietnam can survive and 
can grovT and develop. 
On their efforts -- on their 
determinations and resourcefulness -- the outcome vTill 
ultimately depend. 
That small, beleaguered nation has suffered terrible 
punishment for more than twenty years. 
I pay tribute once again tonight to the great coura.ge 
and endurance of its people. 
South Vietnam supports armed 
forces tonight of almost 700,000 men -- and I call your 
attention to the fact that that is the equivalent of more 
than 10 million in our OHn population. Its people maintain 
their firm determination to be free of domination by the 
North. 
There has been substantial progress, I think, in 
building a durable government during these last three 
veal's. 
The South Vietnam of 1965 CO'J.ld not have survived 
the enemy ' s Tet offensive of 1968. 
The elected govern-
ment of South Vietnam survived that attack -- and is 
rapidly repairing the devastation that it vTrought. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The South Vietnamese kno,v that further efforts are 
going to be required: 
to expand their own armed forces, 
to move back into the cOtmtryside as quickly as 
possible, 
to increase their taxes, 
to select the very best men that they have for 
civilian and military responsibility, 
-- to achieve a new unity \vithin their constitutional 
government, 
-- and to include in the national effort all of those 
groups viho wish to preserve South Vietnam I s control over 
its own destiny. 
Last week President Thieu ordered the mobilization of 
135,000 additional South Vietnamese. 
He plans to reach --
as soon as possible -- a total military strength of more 
than 800,000 men. 
To achieve this, the government of South Vietnam 
started the d~afting of 19-year-olds on March 1st. 
On 
May 1st, the Government will begin the drafting of 18-year-
olds. 
Last month, 10,000 men volunteered for military service 
that was t"lVO and a half times the number of voltmteers during 
the same month last year. 
Since the middle of January, more 
than 48,000 South Vietnamese have joined the armed forces --
and nearly half of them volunteered to do so. 
All men in the South Vietnamese armed forces have had 
their tours of duty extended for the duration of the ,vaI', 
and reserves are now being called up for iw_mediate active 
duty. 
Preside'nt Thieu told his people last "leek: 
"We must make greater efforts and accept more sacrifices 
because , as I have said many times, this is our country. 
The existence of our nation is at stake, and this is mainly 
a Vietnamese responsibility." 
He warned his people that a major national effort is 
required to root out corruption and incompetence at all 
84 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
levels of government . 
We applaud this evidence of determination on the part 
of South Vietnam. 
Our first priority wilJ. be to support 
their effort. 
We shall accelerate the re-eg.uipment of South Vietnam ' s 
armed forces -- in order to meet the enemy ' s i ncreased fire-
pm'ler . 
This ~"Till enable them progressively to undertake 
a larger share of combat operations against the Communists 
invaders. 
The token increase in U.S. troop deployments to South Vietnam which 
presaged for the first time a limit to our commitment and pointed to a 
change in ground strategy, an issue which had caused such great specula-
tion in the press and controversy in Congress and within the Administration, 
received short mention in the speech. It seemed almost a footnote to the 
dramatic statements ''lhich had preceded it. 
On many occasions I have told the American people that 
we ~'lOuld send to Vietnam those forces that are required to 
accomplish our mission there . 
So, with that as our guide , 
we have previously authorized a force level of approximately 
525,000. 
Some weeks ago -- to help meet the enemy' s ne~'7 offensive 
we sent to Vietnam about 11,000 additional Marine and 
airborne troops . 
They ·Here deployed by air in 48 hours, on 
e.n emergency basis . 
But the artillery, tank, aircraft, and 
other units that ~'7 ere needed to work with and support these 
infantry troops in combat could not accompany them on that 
short notice. 
In order that these forces may reach maximum combat 
effectiveness, the Joint Chiefs of Ste,ff have recommended to 
me that we should prepared to send -:-- during the next five 
months -- support troops totalling approximately 13,500 TIlen. 
A portion of these men I<Till be made available from our 
active forces . 
The balance 'dill come from Reserve Component 
units which ,.Till be called up for service . 
The n ~xt po"':'tion of the President ' s speech detailed the cost of 
the Vietnam Har and made a plea for Congressional action to reduce the 
defici t by passing the surtax vThich had been requested almost a year 
before . 
In sunun.ary, the President reiterated the UoS, objectives in South 
Vietnam, and gave his appraisal of ~'That the U.S. in pursuit of those 
obj ectives, hoped to accomplish in Southeast Asia. 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I cannot promise that the initiative that I have announced 
tonight vIill be cDmpletely successf'ul in achieving peace any 
more than the 30 others that vIe have undertaken and agreed to 
in recent years. 
But it is our fervent hope that North Vietnam, after 
years of fighting that has left the issue unresolved, will 
nmv cease its efforts to achieve a military victory and will 
join "Ti th us in moving toward the peace table. 
And there may come a time vThen South Vietnam -- on 
both sides -- are able to ,qork out a "ray to settle their 
own differences by free political choice rather than by 
war. 
As Hanoi considers its course, it should be in no doubt 
of our intentions. It must not miscalculate the pressures 
within our democracy in this election year. 
We have no intention of 'widening this VTar. 
But the United States >'Till never accept a fake solution 
to this long and arduous struggle and call it peace . 
No one can foretell the precise terms of an eventual 
settlement. 
Our objective in South Vietnam has never been the 
annihilation of the enemy. 
It has been to bring about a 
recognition in Hanoi that its objective -- taking over the 
South by force -- could not be achieved. 
We think that peace can be based on the Geneva Accords 
of 1954 -- under political conditions that permit the South 
Vietnamese _ .. all the South Vietnamese -- to chart their 
course free of any outside domination or interference, from 
us or from anyone else. 
So tonight I reaffirm the pledge that we made at Manila --
that VTe are prepared to withdraw our forces from South Viet-
nam as the other side vTi thdra,vs its forces to the North, stops 
the jnfiltration, and the level of violence thus subsides. 
Our goal of peace and self-determination in Vietnam 
is directly related to the future of all of Southeast Asia 
86 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
where much has happened to inspire confidence during the past 
10 years. 
Ive have done all that we kne,v hOlY to do to contri-
bute and to help build that confidence .... 
Over time, a wider, frame,vork of peace and security in 
Southeast Asia Inay become possible. 
The ne,v cooperation of 
the nations in the area could be a fOQndation-stone. 
Cer-
tainly friendship with the nations of such a Southeast Asia 
is what t he United States seeks -- and that is all that the 
United States seeks. 
One day, my fellow citizens, there 1-rill be peace in South-
east Asia. 
It 1-Till come because the people of Southeast Asia want 
it -- those 1-Those arm..i..es are at war tonight, and those 'vho, 
though threatened, have thus far been spared . 
Peace will come because Asians were 'villing to 1-lork for 
it -- and to sacrifice for it -- and to die by tbe thousands 
for it. 
But let it never be forgotten: 
peace will come also 
because America, sent her sons to help secure it. 
It has not been easy -- far from it. During the past 
four and a half years, it has been my fate and my r esponsi-
bili ty to be comrnander-in-chief. 
I have lived -- daily and 
nightly -- 1-lith the cost of this 1-Tar. 
I knovT the pain that 
it has inflicted. 
I know perhaps better than anyone the 
misgivings that it has aroused. 
Throughout this entire, long period, I have been sus-
tained by a single principle: 
that ,vhat we are dOing nOH, in Vietnam, is vital 
not only to the security of Southeast Asia, but it is 
vital to the security of every American. 
Surely "Te have treaties which we must respect . 
Surely we have commitments that we are going to keep. 
ResoJutions of the Congress t estify to the need to 
resist aggression in the world and in So~theast Asia . 
But the heart of our involvement in South Vietnam 
under three P".cesidents, three separate Administrations 
has ahlays been America I s o,m security. 
87 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
And the la:rger purpose of Our involvement has always 
been to help the nations of Southeast Asia become inde-
pendent ane'. stand alone, self-sustaining as members of a 
great iVorld communitsy. 
-- At peace ,'lith themselves, and at peace with all 
others. 
With such an Asia, OUT country -- and the "lorld --
will be far more secure than it is tonight . 
I believe that a peaceful Asia is far nearer to 
r eality, because of what America has done in Vietnam. 
I believe that the m.en "Tho endure the dangers of battle 
-- fighting there for us tonight -- are helping the 
entire ,varld avoid far greater conflicts , far vIider wars , 
far more destruction, than this one . 
I pray that it vIill not be rejected by the l eaders 
of North Vietnam. 
I pray that they will accept it as a 
means by 'Hhich the sacrifices of their o,m people may be 
ended. 
And I ask your help and your support, my fellow 
citizens, for this effort to reach across the battlefield 
toward an early peace. 
Fina,lly, the President addressed himself in a highly personal manner 
to the issue that had seemed uppermost in his mind throughout the preceding 
month of deliberation, reassessment and reappraisal of our Vietnam policy --
t he issue of domestic unity. 
Yet, I believe t hat ,,,e must ahTays be mindful of this one 
thing, "lhatever the trials and the tests ahead . 
The ultimate 
strength of our cOlmtry and our cause will lie not in povlerful 
weapons or infinite resources or boundless vTealth, but will 
l ie in the unity of our people. 
This, I bel.ieve very deeply. 
Througbout my entire public career I have followed the 
personal p"liJ.osophy that I am a fr .~e man, an American, a public 
servant and a member of my Party, in that order always and only . 
For 37 years in the service of our nation, first as a 
Congressman, as a Senator and as Vice President a,nd nO'rl as 
your President , I have put the unity of the people first . 
I have put it ahead of any devisive partisanship. 
88 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.-' 
And in these times as in times be~ore, it is true that 
a house divided against it sel~ by the spirit o~ ~action, o~ 
party, o~ region, o~ religion, o~ race, is a house that can-
not stand . 
There is division in the American house nO"l-T. 
There 
i s devisiveness among us a,ll tonight. 
And holding the trust 
t hat i s mine, as President o~ all the people, I cannot dis -
regard the peril to the progress o~ the American people and 
t he hope and the prospect o~ peace ~or all peoples . 
So, I would ask all Americans, whatever their personal 
interests or concern, to guard against devisiveness and all 
its ugly consequences . 
Fi~ty-two months and ten days ago, in a moment o~ tragedy 
and trauma, the duties o~ this o~~ice ~ell upon me . 
I asked 
t hen ~or your help and God ' s, that we might continue America 
on its course, binding up our "l-lounds, healing our history, 
moving ~or'.'Tard in new unity, to clear the Ameri can agenda and 
t o keep the American commitment ~or all o~ our people. 
United vIe have kept that commitment. 
United "l-Ie have 
enlarged that commitment . 
Through all time to come, I think America ,viII be a 
stronger nation, a more just society, and a l and of grea,ter 
opportuni ty and ~ul~illment because o~ vlhat we have all done 
together in these years o~ unparalleled achievement. 
Our relvard will come in the li~e o~ ~reedom, peace, and 
hope that our children vIill enj oy through ages ahead. 
\<]hat i'le won \'Then all o~ our people united just must not 
nOV·1 be l ost in suspicion, distrust, sel~ishness, and politics 
ruaong any o~ our people . 
Having eloquently stated the need ~or unity in a nation divided, the 
President then made the dr.amatic arulOuncement which shocked and electri~ied 
the nation and the world, an announcement intended to restore unity to the 
divided nation: 
Believi~g this as I do, I have ~oncluied that I should not 
permit the Presidency to become involved i n the partisan 
divisions that are developing in this political year . 
With America ' s sons in the ~ields far away, with America ' s 
. ~ture LLDder challenge right here at home , with our hopes 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and the world ' s hopes f'or peace in the balance every day, 
I do not believe that I should devote an hour or a day 
of' my time to any personal partisan causes or to any duties 
other t han the awesome duties of' this of'fi ce -- the Presi-
dency of your country. 
Accordingly, I shall not seek, and I will not accept , the 
nomination of'my Party f'or another term as your President. 
But l et men everyWhere know, however, that a strong, a 
confident , and a vigilant America stands ready tonight to 
seek an honorable peace -- and stand ready tonight to defend 
an honored cause -- whatever the price, whatever the burden, 
whatever the sacrifices that duty may require . 
Thank you for listening . 
Good night and God bless all of you. 
On April 4, 1968, the Deputy Secretary of Defense , in a memorandum 
for t he Secretaries of the Military Departments and the Chairman of the 
Joint Chief's of Staff' established Southeast Asia Deployment Program #6. 
This program added 24,500 persom1el to the approved Program #5, and placed 
a new ceiling of 549,500 on U.S. f'orces in South Vietnam. 100/ 
None of' 
the some 200,000 troops requested by General Westmorel and on 27 February 
were to be deployed. 
Late in the afternoon of April 3, 1968, the vlhi te House released the 
f'ollolYing statement by President Johnson: 
Today the GoverQment of' North Vietnam made a statement 
which included the follovling paragraph, and I quote : 
ItHovrever , for its part, the Governm.ent of the Demo-
cratic Republic of Vietnam declares its readiness to 
appoint its representatives to contact the United States 
r epresentati ve vTi th a view to determining ,vi th the 
AIDerican side the unconditional cessation of the United 
States bombing raids and all other a.cts of' Ivar against 
t he Democratic Republic of Vietnam so that talks may 
start. '1 
Last Sunday night I expressed the position of' the 
Uni ted states I'Ti th r espect to peace in Vietnam and South-
east Asia as f'0110v7s : 
It NOvl , as in the past , the United states is ready to 
send its representatives to any forum, at any time, to 
discuss the means of bringing this vrar to an end . It 
90 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Accordingly, we vTill establish contact with the repre-
sentatives of North Vietnam. 
Consultations with the 
Government of South Vietnam and our other allies are now 
t aking place . 101/ 
The first step on vThat would undoubtedly be a long and tortuous road 
to peace apparently had been taken . 
In one dramatic action, President 
Johnson had for a time removed the issue of Vietnam from domestic political 
contention. 
In an unexpectedly prompt and responsive reply to his initi-
ative, Hanoi had moved the struggle for South Vietnam into a new path . 
As has been indicated, little had been expected to result from the 
partial bombing halt and the limitation upon U.S. troop commitments to 
South Vietnam. 
Why, then, were these steps taken? 
In March of 1968 , the President and his principal advisers were again 
confronted ,vi th a dilemma vThich they had faced before , but which they had 
postponed resolving. 
Although seldom specifically stated, the choice had 
alvlays been either to increase U. S. forces in South Vietnam as necessary 
to achieve military victory or to limit the U,S, commitment in order to 
prevent the defeat of our South Vietnamese allies while they put their 
political-military house in order . 
In the past, the choice had not been 
so clear-cut. 
Progress toward military victory had been promised with 
small incl~eases in force levels I'Thich did not require large r eserve call-
ups or economic dislocations. Military victory would then assure a viable 
South Vietnamese political body capable of protecting and gaining the 
support of its people . 
In March of 1968 , the choice had become clear-cut . 
The price for 
military victory had increased vastly, and there vTas no assurD-nce that 
it would not grovl again in the future. 
There were also strong indi ca-
tions that l arge and grow·ing elements of the American public had begun 
to believe the cost had already reached unacceptable leve.ls a.nd vlould 
strongly protest a large increase in t hat cost. 
The political reality vlhich faced President Johnson ·was that "more 
of the sa.rne" in South Vietnam, vTith an increased commitment of American 
l ives and money and i ts consequent impact on the country, accompanied by 
no guarantee of military victory in the near future, had become unaccept -
able to these elements of the American public. 
The optimistic military 
reports of progress in the war no longer rang true after the shock of 
the TET offensive . 
Thus, the y.cesident ' s decision to seek a new strategy and a nevT road 
to peace vTas based upon tl"70 major considerations : 
(1) 
The 
Secretary of 
Westmoreland 
convictions of his principal civilian advisers , particularly 
Defense Clifford , that the troops requested by General 
vlould not make a military victory any more likely; and 
91 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(2) 
A deeply-felt conviction of the need to restore unity to the 
American nation. 
For a policy from which so little was expected, a great deal \-Tas 
initiated. 
The North Vietnamese and the Americans sat dOiffi at the 
conference table in Paris to begin to travel the long road to peace; the 
issue of Vietnam largely ",as removed from American political discord; 
a limit to the cOrrLrni tment of U. S. forces i'las established; and the South 
Vietnamese ",ere put on notice that, I'lith our help, they would be expected 
to do more in their own defense . 
The "A to Z" reassessment of U. S. strategy in South Vietnam in the 
wake of the TET offensive did not result in the announcement of a nevI 
ground strategy for South Vietn~rn. 
But in placing General westmoreland 's 
request for forces squarely in the context of the achievement of U.S. 
political-military objectives in South Vietnam, 'the limited political 
nature of those objectives was for the first time affirmed . 
A nel'] ground 
strategy, based on trere limited objectives and upon the ceiling on U. S. 
troops became a corollary for the nei'l U. S. commander . 
American forces initially vTere deployed to Vietnam in order to prevent 
the South Vietnamese from losing the war, to insure that aggression from 
the north would not succeed . 
Having deployed enough troops to insure that 
NVN aggression ",ould not succeed, it had been almost a reflex action to 
start planning on hOH much it "It/ould take to "win" the war . 
Lip service 
was given to the need for developing South Vietnamese political institu-
tions, but no one at high l evels seemed to question the assumption that 
U.S. political objectives in South Vietnam could be attained through mili-
tary victory . 
However , it Ivas quickly apparent that there was an embarrassing lack 
of knowledge as to hoI'; much it i',1Ould take to win the war . 
This stemmed 
from uncertainty in hlo areas : 
(1) hOlv much effort the North Vietnamese 
Ivere I'Tilling to expend in terms of men and materiel; and (2) how effective 
the South Vietna..rnese armed forces "\-lould be in establishing security in the 
countryside . 
As the l-lar progressed, it appeared that our estimates of the 
former were too low and of the latter too high. 
Ho,oJever, committed to a 
military victory and having little information as to vThat was needed mili-
tarily, the civilian decision makers seemed willing to accept the field 
commander I s estimate of 'what "lvas needed . 
Steady progress ,'las promised 
and was apparently being accomplished, although the commitment of forces 
steadily increased. 
The TET offensive shol'led that this progress in many ways had been 
illusory. 
The possibility of military victory had seemingly become remote 
'andthe cost had become too high both in political and economic terms . 
Only then vTere our ultimate objectives brought out and re-examined. 
Only 
then ,'las it realized that a clear-cut mili ta:r~.f victory "I,ms probably not 
possible or necessary, and that the road to peace would be at l east a·s 
92 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
dependent upon South Vietnamese political development as it would be on 
American arms. 
This realization, then, made it possible to limit the 
American military commitment to South Vietnam to achieve the objectives 
for which this force had originally been deployed. 
American forces 'would 
remain in South Vietnam to prevent defeat of the Government by Co~nunist 
forces and to provide a shield behind "rhich that Government could rally, 
become effective, and win the support of its people. 
93 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
FOOTNOTES 
l. 
COMUSMACIl 61't~2" 260755 Jan 68, Subject: 
"Annual Assessment." 
2. 
"U.S. Aides Predict All-Out Red Drive as Prelude to Talks," by 
George R. Packard, Philadelphia BLuletin, 11 Jan 68, p. 1. 
3. JCstvI 91-68, 12 Feb 68, Subject: 
"Emergency Reinforcement of COlYIUSMACV ." 
4. 
JCS Msg 9926, 130218z Feb 68, Subject: "Deployment of Brigade Task 
Force of 82nd Airborne Division to SVN (S) 0 " 
5. Ibid. 
6. JCS Msg 9929, 130341Z Feb 68, Subject: 
"Deployment of Marine Corps 
Regiment (Reinforced ) to SVN (S)." 
7 • 
Ibid. 
8. 
c nrCPAC Msg to JCS/CINCSTRIKE, 150125Z Feb 68, Subject: 
"Deployment 
of Marine RegilJlent (U)" JCS in 12316. 
9· 
10. 
ll. 
12. 
13· 
14. 
15· 
16. 
17· 
DJSM 259-68, Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, Subject: 
"Marine .Deployments to Vietnam (U),," dated 6 Mar 68. 
JCSM 95-68, 13 Feb 68, Subject : "Emergency Reinforcement of COMUSMACV(C)." 
Report of Chairman, JCS on Situation in Vietnam and MACV Force 
Requirement s , 27 Feb 1968 (TS). 
Ibid. , pp. 1-2. 
Ibid. , p. 12. 
Ibido, pp. 12-13· 
Ibid. , p. 130 
Ibid. , p. 14. 
Hand,{ritten notes by Morton Halperin from conversation with 
Paul vvarnke, 29 Feb 1968 (TS-EYES ONLY). 
18. 
Memorandum from William Bundy to General Taylor and Mr . Warnke , 
29 Feb 1968 (TS-NODIS). 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
19. Halperin notes, Op e cit. 
20. 
Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency, 
MemorandUlll f oX' the Director, Subject: 
The Qutlook in Vietnam, 
dated 26 Feb 1968 (s). 
21. 
Central Intelligence Agency, Memorandum, Subject: 
Communist 
Alternatives in Vietnam, dated 29 Feb 1968 (s) 
22. 
23· 
Ibid., p. 1 
Central Intelligence Agency, Memorandu~ , Subject : Questions Concerning 
the Situation in Vietnam, dated 1 March 1968 (S). 
24. 
W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum for the Group, Subject: Alternative 
Courses·of Action , dated 29 Feb 1968 (TS ). 
25· 
26. 
27· 
28. 
29· 
30. 
31. 
320 
Department of State , Memorandum for the Group , Subject : 
Checklist of 
Factors Affecting Alternative Courses of Action, dated 29 Feb 1968, 
j.nitial ed by Nicholas deB . Katzenbach (TS-NODIS ). 
W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandulll for the Group, OPe cit., 29 Feb 68. 
W. P. Bundy, Draft Memorandum for the Group, Subject: Introductory 
Paper on Key Elements in the Situation, dated 29 Feb 1968 (TS). 
Department of State , "Possible Soviet Responses to Various US Actions 
in I ndochina -- Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia;" "Probable Chinese 
Responses to Certain US Courses of Action in Indochina- -Vietnam, 
Laos and CSJubodia;" "Probable Western European Reaction to Various 
US Course s of Action in I ndochina -- Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia ," un-
dated papers (TS). 
Cable , MOSCOVT 2983, 011515Z March 1968, TS-LITERALLY EYES ONLY for 
Under Secretary from Ambassador . 
W. P. Bundy, ~raft Memorandum, Subj ect : 
European and Other Non-
Asian Reactions to a Major US Force Increase , dated 1 Mar 1968 (TS). 
W. P. Bl1ndy, Draft MemorandQm, Subject : 
Asian Reaction to a Major 
U.S. Force Increase , dated 1 Mar 68 (TS) . 
';1. P. Dundy, First Draft , Subject : 
posture, dated 29 Feb 68 (TS). 
95 
Option, on Our Negotiating 
TOP SECRET -,Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
33. Undated Memorandu~ , Subject : 
Viet-Nam Alternatives, signed M.D.T., 
General Taylor took, as the U.S. objective , the statement of ~res. 
Johnson in his speech at Johns Hopkins University in April 1965: 
!lOur objective is the independence of South Viet-Nam and its freedom 
from attack . 
He "Tant nothing for ourselves , only that the people 
of South Viet-Nam be allowed to guide their cOlmtry in their own 
34. 
!l 
way. 
OASD/ SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: 
Alternatives , undated (S). 
35. Ibid . 
Deplo~~e nts - A Discussion of 
36. 
OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject: Pacification Slovldo"m, undated (C) 
37· Ibid. , p . 2 
38. 
OASD/ SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject : 
The Status of RVNAF, undated (TS). 
39· 
OASD/SA, Draft Memorandu~ , Subject : 
29 Feb 1968, pp. 1-2 (TS). 
Alternative Strategies, dated 
40. Ibid . , pp . 2-4. 
41-
OASD/SA, Draft Memorandum, Subject : 
undated (TS). 
Data for Analysis of Strategies, 
42. Phil G. Goulding, Draft Memorandum, Subject : Possible Public Reaction 
to Various Alternatives , undated (TS). 
43. Ibid., p . 5 
44. Memorandurn for the President, Subject : Alternative Strategies i n 
SVN, 1st Draft , 29 Feb 1968 (TS-SENS) 
45. Ibid., 3rd Draft , 1 Mar 1968 (TS-SENS ) 
46. Ibid. , p . 3 
47. 
~., pp 5-6. 
48. 
~. , pp. 6-7. 
49· 
Ibi~. , pp . 8-10. 
50. Ibid. , Annex II, Alternative Courses of Military Action, pp. 8-100 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
5l. Ibid. , 
52. 
~., 
53· Ibid. , 
54. i bi9:' , 
55· 
Ibid. , 
56. 
~~9:" 
57. 
~., 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
pp. 12-13· 
Annex :rr:I, Population Security, p . 15· 
p . 16. 
pp. 16-17. 
Appendix, Strategy by Corps Tactical Zone, pp . A-3 -
Appendix, Effects of Strategy on Interior Provinces, 
p . 2. 
A- 8 . 
pp. A-l 
58. 
Brig . Gen . Harris W. Holli.s , Director of Operations , ODCSOPS, DA; 
Memorandum for LTG Leml ey, Subject : 
CHTCPAC Force ReCluirem,,;nts , 
dated 27 Feb 1963 (S); 
Lt Col Spiller, ODCSOPS, DA, Supplemental 
Information, Subject : 
MACV ReCluirem::;nts and Major Grol..Uld Forces 
Deployment by Option) 1 Mar 1958 (S). 
59. Assistant Secretary of Defense, ISA, Memorandum for the Secretary 
of Defense , Subject : 
Genera l Wheeler ' s View of the TI·ro Fatal 
- A-3· 
Flaws in the Population Control Strategy, dated 2 Mar . 1968 
( TS-S~TS ). 
60. 
MAC 02951, 020947Z, from General Westmorel~nd to General Wheeler , 
(TS-LTIi.lDIS,EYES ONLY) 0 
61. 
Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Plans and Policy Directorate , 
Short Range Branch, J -5, Subject : 
Analysis of COMUSiYlL\.CV Force 
ReCluirements and Alterrn tives, dated 1 :Mar 1968 (TS-SENS). 
62. 
Memorandum. for the President) 3 Mar Draft (Goulding -\varnke ) (TS-SENS). 
63. 
Ibido, p. 8. 
64 • . lbid.) pp. 8-10. 
65. 
66. 
Ibid.) pp. 5-6. 
Draft Memorandum for the President , 4· Mar 1968 (TS-SENS) J pp. 1-2. 
Ibid.) Tab A, The Justification for I lIllll.ediate Additional Forces 
i-n South Vietnam, pp . 1-2. 
97 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
- --:---. - ---
---
68. 
70. 
7l. 
72. 
73· 
74. 
75· 
76. 
77· 
79· 
80. 
8l. 
82. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
" 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Ibid., Tab B, Increasing the Effectiveness of Vietnamese Efforts 
in-Conjunction "'ith a U.S. Troop Increase , pp. 1-7. 
Ibido, Tab C, Justification f or Increasing the Strategic Reserve, 
w.1-2 . 
Ibid., Tab D, Necessity for In-Depth Study of Vietnam Policy and 
strategic Guidance, po 1. 
Ib id ., pp. 1-2 • 
Ibi~., pp. 2-3· 
Ibid., Tab E, Negotiating Posture Options, and Possible Diplomatic 
Actions, p. 1. 
~., pp. 4-6. 
~., pp. 8-10. 
~., Tab F, Military Action Against North Vietnamo 
Ibid., Tab G, Difficulties and Negative Factors in the Course of 
~on; Tab H, Problems We Can Anticipate in U.S. Public Opinion, p. 4. 
CH-3098-68, Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, Subject: 
CO~mSMACV Force Requirements, dated 8 Y~r 68 (TS-SENS ). 
Neil Sheehan and Hedrick Smith, "Westmoreland Requests 206,000 More 
Men, Stirring Debate in AdmLDistration, New York Times, 10 Mar 1968, 
pp. l,ll. 
Joseph R .L. Sterne, "War Critics Denounce Any Troop Rises,t' 
Balt:LrnJre Sun, March 8, 1968, po 1; John W. Finney, "Criticism of 
War Widens in Senate on Build-Up Issue ," Nevl York Ti me s, 8 Mar 68, p. l. 
J oseph R.L. Sterne, "For Different Aims, Russell, Fulbright Ask 
Viet Restudy," Bal timore Sun, 13 March 1968, p. 1. 
Ibid. 
830 
Hand,·rritten notes by Alain Enthoven from meeting with Secretary 
, Clifford,:tvIr . Warnke , Mr. Resor, General lfueeler, 13 :tvlar . 1968. (s) 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
84. 
86. 
88. 
90. 
92. 
930 
950 
97 . 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Deputy Secretary of Defense, Memorandum for Chairill~n of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, Subject : 
Southeast Asia Deployments , dated . 
14 V18.r 1968. (TS ) 
Secretary of the Army, Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, 
14 Mar 1968 (s) . 
Ibid. 
Chief of Staff, USA, Memorandum for the Secretary of the Army, 
Subject : 
Call-Up of Reserves and Program 6 Depl oyment, dated 
14 Mar 1968 . 
Al ain Enthoven, Memorandum for the Record, 16 Mar 1968 . 
Robert H. Phelps, IIMore U. S. Troops Going to Vietnam," New York Times, 
17 ~Br. 1968, p . 1. 
Joh..n vi. Finney, IIThird of House Wants Review of War Policy," 
Ne"T York Times , 19 Mar . 1968, po 32. 
Muriel Dubbin, IjWar Foes Censured by Johnson, I. Baltimore Sun, 
19 Mar . 1968 , p. 10 
Stuart H. Loory, 
Charl es W. Corddry, ''IoJestmoreland Attains No. 1 Goal, II Baltimore Slm, 
23 Mar . 1968, pp . 1, 25. 
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Systems Analysis ), Memorandum for 
Secretary of Defense, Subject: 
Prog~ am #6 Sunmary Table (Tentative ) 
(U), dated 23 Mar . 1963, (TS). 
Mvrray Mardes , "General Abrams , LBJ Confer on Vietnam, II Washington 
Post, 27 JVlar . 1968, p. 1; Neil Sheehan, "Gen. Abrams in Capitol,Sees 
President and Aides, " NevT York Times, March 27, 1968, p. 2. 
Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Military Operations, Memorandum 
for Chief of Staff, U. S. Army, Subject : 
M~CV Requirements, undated, (S). 
Joint Staff, Pacific Division, J -3 , Subject : 
t~CV Troop List , Program 
6 Add-OD, dat,}d 28 March 1968 . 
Corrected 5 April 1968 . 
98.-
Department of State Message 139431, 30 March 1968 (TS-NODIS LITERALLY 
EYES ONLY, FOR AM.EASSADOR· OR CHARGE). 
99 . 
Remarks of the President to the Nation, March 31, 1968 . 
99 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
100. 
Deputy Secretary of Defense , Memorandum for Secretaries of the 
Military Departments, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
Assistant f'2cretaries of Defense, Subject: 
Southeast Asia 
Deployment Program #6(u), dated 4 April 1968(s) . 
101. 
White House Press Release, 3 April 1968 . 
100 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
