Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

from the DRV, and shortly thereafter DRV officials formally presented
45 tanks to Kong le. U.S. aerial photography identified also Soviet-
made artillery and radar in use by the Pathet Lao. Truck convoys of
20 to 300 vehicles were observed entering Laos carrying munitions, .
rice, motor fuel, and NVA troops. Altogether, the combined communist
forces demonstrated significant military superiority over the RIG
forces. Rightist forces (under Phoumi Nosavan), U.S. military aid
notwithstanding, were markedly unsuccessful in stemming the communist
drive. In May, 1961, a truce was struck, and the conflict was carried
into international conference; at Geneva on 23 July 1962, a new
political settlement was reached. As of that period, U.S. intelligence
reported 12 NVA battalions in Laos, some 6,000 strong. ‘In addition,
3,000 NVA personnel were serving with PL units. 199/

The Geneva Agreement on Laos of 1962 consisted of
joint declaration by the several nations concerned with Indochina --
including the U.S., the DRV, and the GVN -- agreeing that -Laos would
be neutralized:

"All foreign regular and irregular troops, foreign para-
military formations and foreign military personnel shall be
withdrawn from Laos . . . the introduction of foreign regular
and irregular troops, foreign para-military formations and
foreign military personnel into Laos of armaments, munitions,
and war materiel generally, except such quantities as the
Royal Government of Iaos may consider necessary for the
national defense of Laos, is prohibited..."

In concert with the Pathet Lao, the DRV circumvented these agreements. ©
Although measures were taken to conceal DRV presence and ostensibly

to withdraw DRV forces -- 40 North Vietnamese were removed under ICC
observation -- U.S. intelligence obtained good evidence, including

a number of eye witness statements, that the bulk of the NVA forces
remained in Iaos; U.S. estimates placed NVA strength in laos in early

1963 at 4,000 troops in 8 battalions, plus 2,000 Pdthet Lao advisors. 200/

In any event, by late 1960 the DRV could look upon
its Laotian enterprise as successful in substantially expanding its
sphere of influence in Laos, to include control over the territory
adjacent to South Vietnam over which passed its "Ho Chi Minh Trail"
of infiltration (see map). Eventually the enterprise brought about
Withdrawal of the U.S. military presence from laos, per the Geneva
Agreement of 1962. If the Vientiene government, braced with broad
U.S. aid, surprised the DRY with its resiliency, it at least proved
unable to challenge the Pathet Lao -- and DRV -- gains. Whatever the
DRV longer term goal in Iaos, reunification of Vietnam seemed there-
after to take priority over further extension in Laos. In any event, the
DRV succeeded in securing its Laotian frontier from U.S. or Laotian

62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
