Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

crews, do not initiate program. Take the following
measures: maximum use of most experienced ROLLING
THUNDER personnel, detailed briefing of pilots stressing
need to avoid civilians, execute only when weather per-
mits visual identification of targets and improved strike
accuracy, select best axis of attack to avoid populated
areas, maximum use of ECM to hamper SAM and AAA fire
control, in order to limit pilot distraction and improve
accuracy, maximum use Of weapons of high precision
delivery consistent with mission objectives, and limit
SAM and AAA suppression to sites located outside popu-
lated areas.

Take special precautions to insure security. If
weather or operational considerations delay initiation
of strikes, do not initiate on Sunday, 26 June. 176/

The emphasis on striking Hanoi and Haiphong POL targets on the
same day and trying to achieve operational surprise reflected an acute
concern that these targets were in well-defended areas and U.S. losses
might be high. The concern about merchant shipping, especially tankers
which might be in the act of off-loading into the storage tanks, reflected
anxiety over sparking an international incident, especially one with the
USSR.

With the execute message out, high-level interest turned to the
weather in the Hanoi/Haiphong area. The NMCC began to send Secretary
MecNemara written forecasts every few hours. These indicated that the
weather was not promising. Twice the strikes were scheduled but had to
be postponed. Then, on 24 June, Philip Geyelin of the Wall Street Journal
got hold of a story that the President had decided to bomb the POL at
Haiphong, and the essential details appeared in a Dow Jones news wire that
evening. This was an extremely serious leak, because of the high risk of
U.S. losses if NVN defenses were fully prepared. The next day an order
was issued cancelling the strikes. 177/

The weather watch continued, however, under special security
precautions. The weather reports, plus other messages relating to the
strikes, continued, handled as Top Secret Special Category (SpeCat)
Exclusive for the SecDef, CJCS, and CINCPAC. (It is not known whether
the diplomatic scenario which involved informing some countries about
the strikes ahead of time was responsible fcr the press leak; in any case,
the. classification and handling of these messages kept them out of State

‘Department channels.) The continued activity suggests that the cancella-
tion of the strikes on the’ 25th may have been only a cover for security

purposes.

126 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
