Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

pursue ways of continuing the struggle in concert with the Associated
States, the United Kingdom, and other allies. The National Security
Council was therefore requested to determine the extent of American
willingness to commit combat forces to the region with or without
French cooperation , But with the Dien Bien Phu siege just beginning,
and the Geneva Conference six weeks away, the Erskine Report suggested
that the United States influence and observe developments at the Geneva
Conference before deciding on active involvement.

g. NSC 177 Annex Raises Intervention Question Anew

Following the second part of the Erskine Report, the
President evidently decided that the Special Annex to NSC 177, which
had been withdrawn in January 1954, should be redistributed for considera~
tion by the Council's Planning Board. 10/ The Annex to NSC 177 posed
the fundamental choice between (a) acceptance of the loss of Indochina,
which would be followed by U.S. efforts to prevent further deterioration
of our security position in Southeast Asia, or (b) direct military action
to save Indochina before the French and Vietnamese became committed to
an unacceptable political settlement at Geneva.

Among the alternative courses of action outlined in the
Annex, two in particular -- both geared to direct U.S. action prior to a
Geneva settlement -- were discussed. Under the first, based on French
consent to continue fighting, the U.S. was urged to (1) seek a Franco-
Vietnamese settlement of the independence issue, (2) insist upon a build-
up of indigenous forces with U.S. advisory and material support, (3) demand
the maintenance of French forces in the field at their then present level,
and (4) prepare to provide sufficient U.S. forces to make possible the
success of a joint effort. Full internationalization of the war would
be discussed with the French later, thereby discounting immediate action
in concert with the British or Asian nations.

The second alternative assumed a French pull-out. In such
a case the United States could either accept the loss of Indochina, or
adopt an active policy while France gradually withdrew its troops. Should
we accept the latter course, our “most positive" step offering "the
greatest assurance of success" would be, NSC estimated, to join with
indigenous forces in combatting the Viet Minh until they were reduced
"to the status of scattered guerrilla bands." U.S. land, sea, and air
forces would be involved. e

The Annex was based upon assumptions that U.S. involvement
against the Viet Minh would not provoke massive Chinese intervention,
would not lead to direct Soviet involvement, and that there would be no
resumption of hostilities in Korea. It acknowledged that any change in
these assumptions would seriously jeopardize the success of the alterna-
tives proposed. In particular, it noted that U.S. participation heightened
the risk of Chinese intervention, and Chinese entry would alter radically
both the immediate military situation and U.S. force requirements.

B-9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
