Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

abeyance apparently following Peiping end perhaps Hanoi pressure.
President on Avril 7 had tried open up discourse but thus far |
channels blocked. If attacks on DRV were part of problem, Com-~-
munist response to present action might open up channels.

Dobrynin said he thought we would get some answer but could
not predict what.

I underscored importance action not be misunderstood in
Hanoi. Hanoi appears to heve impression they may succeed, but
US will not get tired or be affected by very small domestic
opposition or by international pressures, Hanoi cannot rely on
Saigon instebility. They may have wrong ideas on these points
and important they not misunderstand our action.

Dobrynin responded he saw no danger or misunderstanding but
problem was to find way.

Parallel with the Secretary's diplomatic moves, the President made
a mejor public address on the first day of the bombing pause, in which ©
he made no reference to the pause, but in which he urged Hanoi bo opener
a “political solution.” The speech, embracing the theme of the "three
faces of war" (1. armed conflict, 2. diplomacy and politics, and 3. human
need) contained the following passage:

The second face of war in Viet-Nam is the quest for 4
political solution - the face of diplomacy and politics - of
the ambitions and the interests of other nations. We know,
as our adversaries should also know, that there is no purely
military solution in sight for either side. We are ready for
unconditional discussions. Most of the non-Communist nations
of the world favor such unconditional discussions. And it
would clearly be in the interest of North Vietnam to now come
to the conference table. For them the continuation of war,
without talks, means only damage without conquest. Communist
Chine apparently desires the war to continue whetever the cost
to their ellies. Their target is not merely South Viet-Nam;
it is Asia. Their objective is not the fulfillment of Viet-
namese nationalism; it is to erode and to discredit America's
ability to help prevent Chinese domination over all of Asia.

#t,

In this domination they will never succeed, 10/
C. Transmitting the Messeges
Foy Kohler in Moscow, upon receiving the Secretary's instructions,
directed his Deouty Chief of Mission to telephone the North Vietnamese

Embassy on the morning of May 12 to request an urgent appointment for
Ambassedor Kohler with the North Vietnamese Ambassador. The latter, however,

116 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
