Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Q. Mr. Secretary, would you describe the net objective here then
as the containment of Chinese Communist militancy?

"aA. No. The central objective is an organized and reliable peace.

"Now if China pushes out against those with whom we have alliances,
then we have a problem, but so does China. If China pushes out against
the Soviet Union, both China and the Soviet Union have a problem.

"We are not picking out ourselves -- we are not picking out Peking
as some sort of special enemy. Peking has nominated itself by proclain-
ing a militant doctrine of the world revolution, and doing something about
it. This is not a theoretical debate; they are doing something about it.

"Now we can live at peace -- we have not had a war with the Soviet
Union, in 50 years of co-existence, since their revolution. We are not
ourselves embarked upon an ideological campaign to destroy anybody who
calls themselves Communist...."

a oe eS

76. Interview with Secret Rusk, Videotaped at USIA Studios in
Washington, D.C. on October 16, 1967 and Iater Broadcast Abroad;
Secretary Rusk Discusses Viet-Nam in Interview for Foreign Tele-

vision,” Department of State Bulletin, November 6, 1967, p. 595.

"Secretary Rusk:

"But in my press conference I pointed the finger at what I called
Asian communism because the doctrine of communism as announced and
declared in Peking has a special quality of militancy, a militancy which
has largely isolated Peking within the Communist world, quite apart from
the problem it has created with many other countries....

"Mr. Barnett: Mr. Secretary, since your last press conference, some
of your critics have accused you of using the threat of ‘yellow peril' to
justify the allied forces’ presence in South Viet-Nam. And, related to
that also is the fact that many people have seen what they consider a
shade different emphasis in your approach to this, that at one time
American forces were there to justify the self-determination of South
Viet-Nam, and now you're talking more in terms of giving strength to the
non-Communist nations in Asia as a defense against Peking. Could you

clarify this?

"Secretary Rusk: Yes. In the first place, I put out a statement
[on October 16/ in which I rejected categorically any effort to put into

D-126
