Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Pathet Lao and Free Khmer. Throughout the month of May, the DRV had demanded
that representatives of these movements be invited to the Conference to

sit, like the Viet Minh, as belligerents wielding governmental power.

These demands were consistently rejected by the non-communist side, which
argued that the Pathet Lao and Free Khmer were creatures of the Viet Minh,
guilty of aggression against the Cambodian and Laotian governments (in
contrast to the "civil war" in Vietnam), and not deserving status which

they had in no way earned. When Molotoy, on 17 May, recommended that
"military matters" should be considered first, the question of seating the
Pathet Lao and Khmer delegations was dropped.

Nevertheless, the Viet Minh persisted in their position on
an all-Indochina political settlement when the significant bargaining was
reduced to “underground” military talks between them and the French begin-
ning in early June. 25/ The first compromise of the Viet Minh's position
came on 20 May when Chou En-lai, in the same conversation with Eden at
which the chief Chinese delegate also agreed to separate military from
political matters, admitted that political settlements might be different
for the three Indochinese states. Chou thus moved a step closer to the
Western position, which held that the Laotian and Cambodian cases were
substantially different from that in Vietnam. Not surprisingly, the Viet
Minh, at a secret meeting with the French on 10 June, suddenly indicated
their preference for concentrating on Vietnam rather than demanding the
inelusion of Laotian and Cambodian problems in the bilateral discussions. 26/

g- Chinese Play a Major Role in Pathet Lao-Free Khmer Exclusion

The Viet Minh's major concern, as indicated on 16 June, was
that they at least obtain absolute control of the Tonkin Delta, including
Hanoi and Haiphong. 27/ Neither Chou nor the Viet Minh, however, went
so far as to dismiss the existence of legitimate resistance movements in
Taos and Cambodia. But in ongoing talks with the British, Chou proved far
more willing than the Viet Minh to push aside Pathet Lao-Free Khmer inter-
ests. On 17 June, at a time when four rounds of secret Franco-Viet Minh
military talks had failed to make headway, Chou told Eden that it "would
not be difficult” to gain Viet Minh agreement on withdrawing their "volun-
teers" from Cambodia and laos. Eden, moreover, got the impression from
his meeting with Chou that the latter earnestly wanted a settlement and
was greatly concerned over the possible break up of the conference. 28
Cambodian resistance forces were small, making a political settlement with
the Royal Government "easily" obtainable. In Laos, where those forces were
larger, regroupment areas along the border with Vietnam and China (Sam
Neua and Phong Saly Provinces) would be required. Asked by Eden whether
there might not be difficulty in gaining Viet Minh agreement to the with-
_ drawal of their forces from the two countries, Chou replied it would "not

be difficult" in the context of a withdrawal of all foreign forces. 29/

The Chinese, almost certainly with Soviet support, 30/ had.

made a major breakthrough in the negotiations by implicitly adopting the
Western view that the Pathet Lao and Free Khmer forces did not represent

c-2), TOP SECRET - Sensitive
