ASSUMPTIONS 1

FACTOR

1. Impact on progress of war,

@. Effect on settlement.

3. Major poltcy decisions required.

4, Probable reaction,

EG a. Domestics
ND
b. NVA/Viet Cong,
e, imsr/cHicom,
4 a. International,
oO
“oO
w
ads
cor]
ms Probable effects on SVN attitudes,
sf

16. Entimnted conta (through FY 69) in mddition to
- epproved FY 68 pop fudget. 2/

uw

@

=]

w

“7. Approximate end strength increases above present
(F Force levels (Through FY 69).

—

ie)

ij Vilene gross to.lmates of costa include one time costa,

For purposes or this portion of the analyate, the following level of military actions cutside SVN are assured:

Part II

ANALYSIS OF OPPOSTNG COURRES GF jeTient

fh. Expansion of the use of ANC LIGHT forces in Laos and Southern NVH; b. Closing principal SVN ports

ec. Enrly destruction of remaining high value targets and intensified interdictions of supply
movement into NWN" by land/nen/atr and from MV" to SVN.

CURSE A

Provides forces, in ¥Y¥ 68, to control the enemy thrent in the vicinity of the DM:
and ainaltenesisiy to meintain initiative and momentum in disrupting enemy ninin
force unti operations, defeating enemy provinelal forcer and fuerilin forces at the
eargin of Hevolutionuy Developrent, and minporting on expnnding nren of i! effort.
feavides in FY 69, forees for continuing momentic: in further expanded aren of
Particularly in IL amd IIT CTZ, and a two DFE exploitation force to give co
flexthiiity in destroying enemy main force units and major bace arene and respon!
conLinwency situations.

Wille this course ef action carriss no gunrantee of early settlement, poyvhologt-
enily, the noture of the actions teken showld convince the enemy of US determinstion
Lo puraue the war to a gucceasful settiesent, end militarily showle remult in ropid
freductlon of enemy controlled and organized effort in SVN, Wet effect should force
enemy to conference table or lead-in to final phase of war in which enemy will be
defented,

(1) National decision for callup of Heserves and involunnstry extension of teres of
service,

(2) Authorfzation for access to equipment from: COMIS depot amsete and progremuied
production deliveries; operational project, contingency, and Peserve cee ponent
gLocks; pre-pocltioned equipment In Burcoe; and non-deploying unita.

(3) Authortention for reopening of CONUS inactive dnatelintions and expansion of
facilitien.

(4) Tiwely provision of funds and authorization of end strength increases,

In near tera, expected to incrense opposition and Intensify polarization. In long
term, expected ty conlesce public opinion hehind edminstretiona apparent new
Uetensinntion and resolve to terminate wor on ncceptavle terms, particularly if
diplewatic efforta for negotiated settlement continue,

MVN wuld defend the trrgetea and seek ndditional aid, VC/NVA forces
Jn South Vietnwsa would probobly be d!rected to incrense thair
horhsnaent of the waterways in the South.

Increased force levels should couse no eienificant direct Soviet or CHICO
militery renction., Propaganda, end increased material and technical support to NVM
expected,

fone silverse renction gelerated by callup of renerveo and deployment of niifed forces,
Leopercd in certain quarters by reali. on US would be in better position to meet
worldulde comitrents, Bo major ¢lsraption of international attitudes so lon, as
forces used os dincussed Annex p, Increased cries of encelation and ras: Jorn of
support duc incrensed aic/noval actions, Cumbodian attreka would geocrate world-
wide pressures maningt US sctlons.

Favorable. Awnrenans of eroving force on their side would be expected wtiet ey}
femlers appetite for “totel victory” ond might meke them reluctant to cooperate
with US efforts to bring nbout a negotiated settlement short of defenting VC/IVA.

Army $ 8,659 mi Liton
Navy 1,400 milLton
Air Force 169 million
Marine Corps 1,19) million
Tatal $12,100 million
Anay 465,000 (ineluden 150,000 Reserves mobilized)
Navy 45,000 (aL Reserven) :
Atr Force 48,100 (Includea 7,700 ANG mobilized)
Marina Corpe pate! (ALL flecerves)
Total 2 0

such as equipping a division, renctivation BB, etc, and anminl recurring costs such as poy, O4M, ete, For details see Annex A,

Mining of porta and incrensed air actions expected rovoke Soviet diplomatic
reaction and deterioration in US Soviet relations, Intro? new/improred Soviet wospona,

COURIE B

Requires in-country re-deployment to meet threat to I CTZ thus inhibiting reaction
erpability in other arens. With only Course 3 forces, CCMASMACVY moy not be able to

Brintain menentim of present offensive eperntions and to attain objective of expanding

arens under GVM control. Courne B will confront CCMJGMACY with a choice between continued
large ocnle offencive operntions at expense of accuring additional aren. for expansion of

AD or slowing tenpo of offensive operations toraintnin security of areas cleared of enshy.
Puns rick of tenproary enemy ouccesa against vulnersble point in us/Fe posture or in alewing
of progrens of war. Present situation wherein ell forces in SVN ore fully comltted to their
respective geocrnphic orent denies COMUSMACY the menna to influence the course of one operati
without disergozing from another.

This incrementel incrense in effort in SVN, inconjunction with the incressed pressures
égainct WN, under favorable cireuastancen, mny permit progress towards settlesent. it
do more likely, hovever, thot the enemy determination will not be unmlercined nnd that, by
renewed effort, the enexy in the South wlll continue to be controlled snd sustained at a
sufficient level to unduly prolong the war,

Except for decision in regard to erllup of Reserves and exteneion of terms of service,
decisions rennin essentinily the arce tut vary in meymitude. Novever, Course fi entatle
a deliberate decision to pursue the conflict in SfAsia at a level less than that needed
to progress stendily toward atteinuent of US objectives.

Course B provides little cause for a near term change to domentic renctian to the war in SVN
but lock of marked resulta over the long term could result in further disenchantment with the
wor in SEAsin and incrensed presoures for the US to withiraw under lesa then ncceptable terms

Seme na Course A,

Some as Course A.

To eppreciable reaction in international, arena as result ineresced ground forces. Smee ac
‘for Course A for increased alr/noval actions end attacks on Cambodia,
|
oS
; * a]
Gene on Course A, vith less iepact on “total victory” appetite of OV" leaders. in
m
Cc
Army 5,820 7
savy $ L,ah5 m
fir Force me |
Marine Corps 0
TO55 '
Army 20l,cco wn
tavy N7,000 @
Air Force 25,000
Marine Corpa 2)
Total Bb, 00" .

BAT} {SU

aed GAN ‘4d ‘9TEE9 GNN equinyy afoig GNN

T10¢

€] Jopsg aanndexgq Jad parpissepaqg

(as

€"¢ WoH}Dag ‘9
