Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

" MOP SECRET - Sensitive

should produce a favorable reaction which would provide an opportunity
for increased U.S. influence in pressing for a more effective govermment.

He acknowledged the latent anti-American sentiments in the country
and their potential explosiveness, as had been evidenced in Hue the pre-
ceding week. He noted that these feelings limited the pressure that the
U.S. could bring to bear on ambitious forces like Khanh and the Buddhists.

On February 9, Taylor again firmly recommended that the program
of continuous graduated attacks on North Vietnam should begin. Nothing
but political turmoil. had folllowed his early-December attempt to induce
the GVN to do better by promising these attacks as a quid pro quo. Now he
disregarded this idea, and spoke only of the hope that the attacks would
convince North Vietnam to abide by the Geneva Accords of 1954 and 1962,
and would unify and encourage the South Vietnamese. On February 13, State
cabled authority to begin the plan of graduated strikes with Vietnamese
participation. It directed Taylor to get GVN approval and to get their

agreement to appear at the UN if that should prove necessary; the condition

of stopping the bombing would be the halting of aid by North Vietnam to
the Vc.

State's guidance to Taylor on political matters was that the U.S.
hand should not be too obvious in the government-shuffling outcome and that
the power of the Buddhists and of the military must be reflected in the
new government being formed. After two political hopefuls failed to round
up enough support, Quat formed 4 cabinet starting February 16. The AFC
chose to keep Sun as Chief of State and appointed a National Legislative
Council of twenty members balanced to represent all interests including
the military. The Buddhists quietly acquiesced in the new government,
installed just in time to be greeted by a coup attempt. 2/

On February 19, a new coup group (consisting of Thao and Phat
among other neo-Diem proponents) seized most of Saigon, Tan Son Mhut
airfield, and the radio station. In this instance, as in September, 1964,
MACY had to intervene to stop Ky's threat of VNAF bombing; this time it
would have been the airfield, with several thousand Americans in the area.
By midnight the leading members of the AVC had rallied forces and faced
down the coup group; and the next day they voted Khanh out. On February 2h,
Khanh left the country; the Embassy and Saigon settled back in relief.

The bombing phase of graduated pressures on the North (Rolling Thunder)

began, end the decision to land Marines at Danang was in the works. Taylor now
opposed the introduction of U.S. combat forces in SVN -- except for base
security. His acquiescence in the Marine deployment to Danang was in earee
part due to Westmoreland's strong recommendation to do so.

2. The Continuing Civilian Interregnum and First U.S. Ground Forces,
March-May, 1965

For severe. weeks an unaccustomed calm settled over US/GVN rela-
¢ions. The USG white paper on Vietnam issued February 28 without prior
clearance with GVN caused no visible upset. The proposal to land the
first two BUP's of Marines received prompt approval in an amicable atmos-
phere in the first few days of March, and the III MEF became the ITI MAT

66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
