Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

get authority for additional cross-border operations in addition to
the operations already authorized in two locations.

2. Concerning the VNAF training program, there was never any
intent, nor was it the policy of the USG to have USAF pilots parti- ‘
cipate in combat. Exception to this should be considered undesirable
and not setting a precedent. MACV was therefore to give first priority
to manning 75 AlHs with two Vietnamese pilots per aircraft, for a total
of 150 Vietnamese pilots; and he was also to determine the optimum
Size of the VNAF, tentatively using a figure of 125 to 150 AlH air-
crafte In connection with this the Secretary approved assignment to
the VNAF of 25 more AlHs by 1 October 1964 to replace 18 RT-28s on
hand.

3- When the Secretary asked Harkins if he needed additional
Special Forces, Harkins replied, "Yes." The Secretary then said that
when COMUSMACV stated requirements he would approve them if they were
valid. He said that a six-month duty tour was too short and the
normal tour should be extended to one year, reserving the right, of
course, to make exceptions for special cases.

4, When General Harkins handed. the Secretary a shopping list for
items and funds totalling about $7 million, the Secretary immediately
approved the list.

5e The Secretary directed COMUSMACV to submit in writing require-
ments for South Vietnamese military housing.

6. Concerning MACV needs, the "SecDef made unequivocal statement
that MACV should not hesitate to ask for anything they need. SecDef
gives first priority to winning the war in SVN. If necessary he will
take weapons and equipment from U.S. forces to give the VNAF. Nothing
will be spared to win the war. But U.S. personnel must operate in
compliance with USG policies and objectives." 93/

Near the end of the Secretary's stay General Khanh met with McNamara,
lodge, Taylor and Harkins; and judging from the report of the meeting sent
in by the Ambassador, Khanh put on a masterful performance. Khanh began
his talk by reviewing the recent course of the war claiming to have estab-
lished control, in the last three months, over some three million Vietnamese
citizens /sic/, However, the danger of reinfiltration by the Communists
still existed. Khanh said that the biggest and most time-consuming prob-
lems were political, and he was unskilled in such things and wanted to lean’
for advice on Ambassador Lodge. But religious problems were also pressing.
There was religious conflict between Catholics and Buddhists and within
the Buddhist movement. The Government of Vietnam was in the middle. The
real trouble-maker was Thich Tri Quang. Lodge was trying to help Khanh in
this. There was also a problem with the press, and with "parlor politi-
cians” (civilians). Khanh said that he was a soldier, not a politician,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Th
