Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

it." (They)...asked him to call up the French and request the armored
vehicles which the French had been holding at Bien Hoa so long without
delivering to the Vietnamese Army. The French rushed these vehicles to
Hinh's house (Vy's headquarters), evidently having been holding them just
outside town for this emergency, where Army men took them over and drove
them into the fight against the Binh Xuyen. Don said the French still
hadn't caught on, still thought that Vy would use this armor to bring the
Army into line to stop fighting the Binh Xuyen and be loyal to Bao Dai.
Don added that the Army felt the same as the Revolutionary Committee: Bao
Dai was finished." 132/ General Vy retreated to Dalat (and Bao Dai's
Imperial Guards), then left the country. °

During these days, General Ely had grown more convinced that
Diem was not only irresponsible, he was quite mad. Ely feared fighting
would spread to the European sector but was unable to win American or
British support for an attempt to reimpose the. cease-fire. American
Charge d'Affairs Kidder felt Ely himself was approaching hysteria and
that his emotional involvement compromised his usefulness to either
France or the United States. 133/ Ely's premonitions of violence between
Vietnamese and French forces proved unfounded. But violence did accompany
Diem's final offensive against the Binh Xuyen which opened on May 2 when
the VNA crossed the Chinese Arroyo and attacked Bay Vien's forces in
Cholon. By the following day, most of the Binh Xuyen had been driven out
into the Rung Sat swamps.

f When Collins returned to Saigon he urged Diem to hold the
Revolutionary Committee in check (Collins, most of the French and French
intelligence thought Vietminh had infiltrated the front organization;
they feared Diem would become its prisoner if he backed it too strongly).
Collins wanted Diem to reconstitute the government and get on with reforms,
leaving the problem of Bao Dai to an elected national assembly. 135/ Diem
followed this advice. He invited some 700 elected counselors from 39
provinces to consider Bao Dai's legality. An Estates General composed of
50 counselors drew up a program demanding Bao Dai transfer all civilian
and military powers to Diem who would exercise them until the assembly
met -- within six months -- to draw up a constitution. 136/

8. May Trilateral Meetings
@. Dulles Backs Diem

At this same time, France, the United States and Britain
met once again in Paris. The Tripartite session had been called to discuss
problems of Ruropean Defense but Vietnem was the real subject. The posi-
tions of both Secretary Dulles and French Prime Minister Edgar Faure (who
succeeded Mendes-France in February 1955) toward Diem had hardened. Dulles
insisted he be upheld:

Diem is only means US sees to save South Vietnam and counter-
act (the) revolutionary movement underway in Vietnam. US sees

Ss’ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
