Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. Views Lacking Consensus. Also discussed at the 2 November
Principals meeting were several issues on which consensus was not reached.
Most of these related to immediate U.S. actions that would need to be
taken irrespective of the option selected, or to problems faced in carry-
ing out a particular option. Since earlier agreements had indicated

- little interest in Option A, only "B" and "C" were examined further.

Discussions of Option B dealt primarily with questions of the
intensity of blows that might be struck at North Vietnam. With respect
to whether DRV airfields should be struck early or as a part of a more
gradual sequence, General Wheeler pointed out that early strikes on air-
fields were what made "B" operations so different. It was these strikes
at potential DRV capabilities to interfere with U.S. attacks, or to
retaliate, that made systematic, intensive air operations possible. In
response to a specific question from the Working Group, the possibility
of using nuclear weapons was also discussed. Secretary McNamara stated
that he could not imagine a case where they would be considered. McGeorge
Bundy observed that under certain circumstances there might be great
pressure for their use both from the military and from certain political
circles. General Wheeler stated that he would not normally vote for their
use ~~ never, for exemple, in an interdiction role. However, he suggested
that they might be considered in extremis -- for exemple, to hold off
an enemy to save a force threatened with destruction, or to knock out a
special target like a nuclear weapons facility. In response to Secretary
Rusk's query as to their potential for cordoning off an area, both
McNemare and Wheeler answered negatively. 118/

Discussions of Option ¢ dealt with the problem of early negotia-
tions and, at greater length, with that of deploying ground forces to
South Vietnam. On the former, there was little interchenge noted in the
proceedings. Despite the Working Group's admitted frustration with this
particular issue, only two Principals' comments were recorded. McGeorge
Bundy stated the view that we should let negotiations come into play
slowly. Secretary Rusk expressed concern that the GVN would be very
sensitive on the issue of a negotiating conference. Earlier, however,
he indicated his opinion thet pressure for a conference would not be a
serious problem as long as military actions continued. 119/

On the issue of sending ground forces to South Vietnam in the
early stages of Option C, there was no firm conclusion. Secretary
McNeméra stated that there was no military requirement for ground forces
and that he would prefer a massive air deployment. In response to
General Wheeler's suggestion that some ground forces could be justified
for air defense and base security purposes, he acknowledged that "we
might do both." Mr. McCone stated the opinion that U.S. ground forces
would help stabilize South Vietnam, similar to their effect on Lebanon
in 1958. They might even provide a general security force in the South.
McNamara disagreed. Secretary Rusk and McGeorge Bundy suggested their
utility in proving a "preemptive effect," presumably to deter North
Vietnamese offensive moves into the South. To this McCone added that

hy : TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
