Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Wiet-Nam is the test for a new technique of revolution. As nuclear
warfare is unthinkable and massed frontal attacks of the Korean type
are too dangerous to be tried, Communist leaders are drawn to 'wars of
national liberation.' Indeed, they have developed an elaborate doctrine
explaining the place of these ventures in their overall strategy. On
. their present scale, the hostilities in Viet-Nam could hardly continue
for any length of time without large-scale aid from China and the Soviet
Union. Deescalation of the fighting should follow logically if that
aid were to be reduced.

"But the Soviet Union has not so far responded to proposals of
this kind. Indeed, the Soviet Union still declines to join with the
United Kingdom in reconvening the Control Commissions either for Laos
or for Viet-Nam.

"In summary, we are bound to Viet-Nam by specific and general com-
mitments and by our own national interest.

"Above all, at this stage, whether one believes we were right or
wrong in getting into Viet-Nam in the first place, the hostilities in
Viet-Nam have been made the test of America's resolve to maintain that
network of security arrangements upon which the equilibrium of world
power has come to depend. There would be little security to protect our
interests anywhere in the world if America's promise faltered or failed
when the going got rough. As President Kennedy once said:

"The 1930's taught us a clear lesson: Aggressive conduct,
if allowed to go unchecked and unchallenged, ultimately leads to war.
This nation is opposed to war. We are also true to our word.'”

a HR UTE

"What principle of ethics makes it immoral to protect the safety
of the nation through methods which have the sanction of international
law and the United Nations Charter? In what way do we lessen our
capacity to seek social justice at home by defending the cause of peace,
stability, and social progress abroad?"

x * *

79. Address by Secretary Rusk (Excerpt) made at Cotumbus, Indiana,
October 30, 1967; "Firmness and Restraint in Viet-Nam,™ Department
of State Bulletin, November 27, 1967; Ds TO3.

"We're in Viet-Nem today for several reasons. These reasons cannot

be summarized in a single phrase or catchword. They are not reasons
which shift from time to.time but are always present.

D-132
