Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘ TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

dead in the water. After about eight minutes, the aircraft broke off

their attacks. In the meantime, Maddox had been directed by the 7th

Fleet Commander to retire from the area to avoid hostile fire. Following
their attacks on the PI's, the aircraft joined Maddox and escorted her back
toward South Vietnamese waters where she joined a second destroyer,

C. Turner Joy. The two ships continued to patrol in international waters.
Approximately two hours after the action, in early evening, reconnaissance
aircraft from Ticonderoga located the damaged PT's and obtained two photo-
graphs. The third boat was last seen burning and presumed sunk. 21,

On 3 August a note of protest was dispatched to the Hanoi Government,
reportedly through the International Control Commission for Indo-China.
Directed by the President, the note stressed the unprovoked nature of the
North Vietnamese attack and closed with the following warning:

"The U.S. Government expects that the authorities of the
regime in North Vietnam will be under no misapprehension as to
the grave consequences which would inevitably result from any
further unprovoked offensive military action against U.S. forces."

On that same day, measures were taken to increase the security of the

DE SOTO Patrol, the approved schedule of which still had two days to run.
At 1325 hours (Washington time) the JCS approved a CINCPAC request to
resume the patrol at a distance of 11 n.m. from the North Vietnamese
coast. 22/ later in the day, President Johnson announced that he had
approved doubling the patrolling force and authorized active defensive
measures on the part of both the destroyers and their escorting aircraft.
His press statement included the following:

I have instructed the Navy:

1. To continue the patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin off the
coast of North Vietnam.

2. To double the force by adding an edditional destroyer to
the one already on patrol.

3. To provide a combat air patrol over the destroyers, and

4. To issue orders to the commanders of the combat aircraft
and the two destroyers; (a) to attack any force which attacks them
in international waters, and (b) to attack with the objective not
only of driving off the force but of destroying it. 23/

THE SECOND INCIDENT
late the following evening the destroyers, Maddox and C. Turner Joy,

were involved in a second encounter with hostile patrol boats. Like the
first incident, this occurred following a South Vietnamese attack on North

‘ 6 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
