Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Yen Bay, and spread throughout Tonkin. The French reaction was quick,
efficient and severe. Nguyen Thai Hoc was captured and executed, along
with hundreds of lesser Nationalists; others fled to China. By 1932,
Nationalist Party remnants within Vietnam had been hounded into activity,
and the Party thereafter centered on the exile community in China. By
1940, in a series of factional struggles, three main branches evolved:

& pro-Japanese faction called the Great Vietnam Democratic Party (Dai
Viet Dan Chinh); a faction re-established in Vietnam called the Great Viet-
nam Nationalist Party (Dai Viet Quoc Dan Dang); and a Kunming faction
under Vu Khong Kanh bearing the original VNQDD name. The latter group
survived the war, and became important in its aftermath.

(3) he Primacy of the Indochinese Communist Party

The disunity, vulnerability, and meanderings of the
Nationalist Party -- notwithstanding its relative effectiveness compared
with most other parties -- stands in contrast with the solidarity and
resiliency of the Indochinese Communist Party (ICP). The main unifying
factor of the communist movement was Ho Chi Minh, and the coterie of dedi-
cated revolutionaries, most of whom he personally recruited, trained, and
led. But important as was such leadership, doctrine an@ discipline also
figured in communist success. Ho (then known as Nguyen Ai Quoc) partici-
pated in the founding of the French Communist Party, and after training
in Moscow, formed the Vietnam Revolutionary Youth League in Canton, pri-
marily nationalist in announced aims (Figure 2).5/ In its journal in
1926, however, Ho wrote that: "Only a communist party can insure the
well-being of Annam," and he apparently began about that time training
cadres for covert operations. By 1929, some 250 Vietnamese had been
trained in Canton, and at least 200 had returned to Indochina to undertake
organizational work; as of that year, some 1000 reported commmists and
collaborators indicated that 10% were in Cochinchina, some 20% in Annam,
and the remainder in Tonkin. 6/ In 1929 communists sought fusion with
the New Vietnam Revolutionary Party, and attacked the Nationalist Party
(VN@DD) as a “bourgeois party." That same year, a faction of the Revolu-
tionary Youth League formed an Indochinese Communist Party (Dong Duong
Cong San Dang), the first to bear the title. In 1930 the Revolutionary
Youth League, some members of the socialist Nguyen An Ninh Association,
and the exiled Annam Communist Party joined with the latter faction into
first the Vietnam Communist Party, and then -- per Comintern wishes to
broaden the party to embrace Laos and Cambodia ~- a reorganized Indochinese
Communist Party, which was recognized by the Comintern.

In the Nationalist-precipitated violence of 1930, about 1000 ICP mem-
bers led 100,000 peasants in strikes, demonstrations, and open insurrec-
tion. In Ho's home province of Nghe An, peasant soviets were set ups
jJandlords were killed, and large estates broken up -- methods so violent,
so tainted with pillage and murder, that the Comintern objected that they
were not in consonance with "organized violence” of Marxist doctrine. Wii
Again, however, French counteraction was swift and telling. French police
destroyed overt apparatus of the ICP in Vietnam during 1930 ana 1931, and

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-13
