Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

f , a
ALLL wane

TOP SECRET - Sensitive onclitaat?!

want to ayoid any private impression that we are dumping
Khanh and that as far as we are concerned everything is
up for grabs...

"2. As seen from here, evolving political situation
in Saigon contains at least two major problems for U.S,
EmbTe1 1054 strongly suggests HNC is leaning toward parlia-
mentary form of government with all the weaknesses which
were so apparent in the French 4th Republic. The second
problem, highlighted in EmbTel 983, is to avoid a sharp
split between the only real. powers in the country, the
military, and the civilien HNC. This split could occur
over form of government or its personnel. U.S. mist try
to bring stable government of persons acceptable to both
militery and civilian."

Then there followed three suggestions on form of government and
& paragraph on people.

"7, Winally, there is a delicate problem, during this
transition period, in our relations with General Khanh and
his military supporters. The present truth is they hold
such power as exists in SVN. ‘Their acceptance is prerequi-
site to any successful constitution of a new government.
Our problem is that we must not abandon one horse before
there is another horse which can run the course. I would
suggest: That you have full and frank discussion with
General]. Khanh about how he sees the development of the
situation so that what we ourselves do is in consonance
with the consensus among military and civilian leadership
which it is now our highest purpose to build...The in-
portent thing is that during this period we not find
ourselves in @ position where there is no one with whom
we can work." 0

Meanwhile, Minh allied himself with the High National Council
to put provisions for civilian control in the new constitution opposed
by Khanh and the now powerful junior membership of the MRC. Taylor tried
to persuade them to resolve their differences quietly, and to make suré
@ widely acceptable document was cleared all around before publication.
Thinking that things were more likely to get worse rather than better,
Secretary Rusk suggested that the USG should prefer Khanh and the "Young
Turks" to Minh and the HNC:

"Rob McNamara and I have following reaction to political
moves you have reported during last week.

"A struggle seems to be developing between Minh and HNC
on one hand and Khanh and Young Turk military on the other.
Between these two groups it seems to us our best interests
are served if Khanh comes out on top...Problem is to get

WY TOP SECRET - Sensitive
