Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

campaign leading to destruction of between 90 and 100% of all POL
storage, bridges, airfields, rail facilities, power plants, communica-
tions, port structures, and industry in North Vietnam. Whether the
Chiefs reasoned similarly is not apparent from the papers available.
Although they came out with comparable recommendations, they merely
"noted" this study. 94/

Certainly, in spite of McNamara's memorandum recommending
escalation, no clear view prevailed within OSD or among civilians
elsewhere in the government occupied with Vietnam policy. Among the
papers left behind by McNaughton are some fragments relating to an attempt
early in April, 1966, to rethink the question of what the United States
sought in Vietnam. These fragments suggest an evolution between winter,
1965-66, and spring, 1966, from hesitancy to perplexity.

The political situation in South Vietnam became increas-
ingly explosive. On March 31, 10,000 Buddhists had demonstrated in
Saigon against the government and the demonstrations had spread to other
cities in the next several days. On April 5, Premier Ky flew to Danang
to quell the rebellion and threatened to use troops if necessary. 9
In this context, a meeting was convened at the White House on Friday,
9 April. Vance and McNaughton represented Defense; Ball, Bundy, and
Leonard Unger the State Department; and George Carver the CIA. Walt Rostow,
who had just replaced McGeorge Bundy, took part. So did Robert Komer
and Bill Moyers. 96/

In. preparation for this meeting, McNaughton, Ball, Unger,
and Carver undertook to prepare memoranda outlining the broad alternatives
open. Carver would make the case for continuing as is, Unger and McNaughton
for continuing but pressing for a compromise settlement -- Unger to take
an optimistic and McNaughton a pessimistic view and Ball to argue for
disengagement. Then four options were labelled respectively, A, B-O, B-P,

and C.

Carver, advocating Option A, wrote:
OPTION A

I. Description of the Course of Action

1. Option A involves essentially persevering in our
present nolicies and programs, adhering to the objectives of

a. Preventing a North Vietnamese takeover of
South Vietnam by insurrectionary warfare, thus

(1) Checking Communist expansion in
Southeast Asia

93 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
