Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

aTeGr

iN es

WASHINGTON 25, D.C. 3 y re paige) Ther

ae *

13 March 1953

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Subject: Broadening the Participation of the
United States in the Indochina Operation,

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have re-examined the problems
of United States participation in the Indochina operation as
requested by your memorandum dated 19 January 1953, subject

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF 4 ey fy as a eal :

ST Wy

as above, and submit herewith their comments and reconmendations.

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered broadening U.S.

participation in the Indochina operation both from within and
without the framework of the Mutual Defense Assistance Program
(MDAP) with a view toward speeding and improving the develop-
ment of indigenous combat forces and supporting logistical and

operating fa elitties. Special consideration has been’ given, as

requested by your office, to the training of indigenous forces
and mintenance of U.S. supplied equipment by U.S. personnel.

3. NSC 124 /2 with regard to Indochina states in part that
",.ewe should use our influence with France and Associated
States to promote positive political, military, economic and
social policies," and "Continued recognition and carrying out
by France of its primary responsibility for the defense of
Indochina." NSC 124/2 also states ore . . - "Our influence
with the Trench and Associated Sta should be designed to
further those constructive oo economic and social
measures which will tend to increase the stability of the
Associated States and thus make it possible for the French
to reduce the degree of their participation in the military,
economic and political affairs of the Associated States." In
keeping with the foregoing policy, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
consider that actions to broaden U.S. participation in Indo-
china would require sensitive selection and application to
avoid any semblance of usurpation of Nrench responsibilities
and prerogatives. It is anticipated that any attempt by Che
United States to intrude in the French military responsibili-
ties in Indochina would be strongly resisted, but, the U.S.

Srcun! Y is gG ARTO

nha fis cad
