Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

and particularly the latter, are high and increasing.

b. Draft dodging is high while the Viet Cong
are recruiting energetically and effectively.

ec. The morale of the hamlet militia and of
the Self Defense Corps, in which the security of
the hamlets depends, is poor and falling.

3. In the last 90 days the weakening of the govern-
ment's position has been particularly noticeable. For
example:

&- In Quang Nam province, in the I Corps, the
militia in 17 hamlets turned in their weapons.

b. In Binh Duong province (III Corps) the
hamlet military were disarmed because of suspected
disloyalty.

ec. In Binh Dinh province, in the II Corps,
(5 hamlets were severely damaged by the Viet Cong
(in contrast, during the twelve months ending
June 30, 1963, attacks on strategic hamlets were
few and none was overrun).

d. In Quang Ngai province, at the northern
edge of the II Corps, there were 413 strategic
hamlets under government control a year ago. Of
that number, 335 have been damaged to varying degrees
or fallen into disrepair, and only 275 remain under
government control,

e. Security throughout the IV Corps has deteri-
orated badly. The Viet Cong control virtually all
facets of peasant life in the southernmost provinces
and the government troops there are reduced to
defending the administrative centers. Except in An
Giang province (dominated by the Hoa Hao religious
sect) armed escort is required for almost a11 move-
ment in both the southern and northern areas of the
IV Corps.

4, The political control structure extending from Saigon
down into the hamlets disappeared following the November coup.

Of the 41 incumbent province chiefs on November 1, 35 have
been replaced (nine provinces had three province chiefs in
three months; one province had four). Scores of lesser
officials were replaced. Almost all major military com-

mands have changed hands twice since the November coup. The

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
