Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

negotiation or military force as necessary, (4) if Tonkin

is lost, France will not fight in the South, (5) nor would

Vietnamese fight against other Vietnamese and sooner or

later the yhole of Vietnam will become communist. TEDUL

ee pr es IES pa rasan ere heieAuals eetereraie eee sive sie Bind welt wie nda eae sewiele EOD
127. Dulles feels that it is of "overriding importance" to

push on with action on Thailand's appeal to the United

Nations Security Council, TOSEC 368, 7 June 1954......eeee066 939

128. The U.S. will seek firm views of others once the "French
authoritively tell us they want to internationalize the
Indochina war." Further, when France decides to request
U.S. intervention, the U.S. must have the opportunity to
make its own decision based on prevailing circumstances.

"We cannot grant the French an indefinite option on us
without regard to intervening deterioration." TEDUL 175,
Bairea 05H s sieSulbcs owns pews esas Se mene Oro ene wan eas sen yee

129. Because of Thailand's strong feeling the scope of appeal
should not be limited to Thailand. The Thai government
has a negative attitude on limiting the scope and they
object to Czechoslovakia or other Soviet satellite mem-
bership on the Peace Observation Commission (POC).

United Nations 810 to Dulles, 8 June 1954.....secccescsscsess D'H2

130. Bidault replies to a conversation reported in DULTE 156
(not printed here) in which "agreement in principle” with
the U.S. had been reached. No major differences are
noted, however, French military believe any JCS war plan
would show the necessity of at least one Marine division
for the Delta. General Valluy's Convers sso a the
Pentagon are seen as most crucial. "Thus if we want
French military assistance...in Southeast Asia...it is
vital...JCS...approve a joint war plan justifying the
use of Marines." . Paris 4766 to Dulles, 9 June 1954.......... S44

131. Eden cites three major issues emerging on which “we cannot
compromise": (1) separate treatment of Laos and Cambodia
problem, (2) status and powers of international super-
visory authority and (3) composition of the international
supervisory, authority. Britain feels negotiations have
failed and little can be salvaged in Vietnam. DULTE 164,
MOI TOG, cae anise ced ries wha vy aan ey eTesawsed awe ae edicaareeeeeth MOMT

132. The French are upset because Admiral Radford had said

there was "no question of utilization of Marines in
Indochina." The U.S. position, according to Dulles,

xxi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
