Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"(3) One additional MAB to reinforce the ITI MAF.

"(h) Tactical air mits for support of increased
U.S. force {additional airfields in SVN and Thailand may be
required).

"(5) Required combat and logistic support forces to
include helicopter units to support the foregoing.

"Message has been discussed with AmbassadorsTaylor and Johnson.
Ambassador Taylor is prepared to comment thereon during current
visit to Washington."

In his subparagraph 'A' General Westmoreland did no more than
request expeditious approval of forces which had been in the planning
stages for some time. If his request had been approved as written, the
grand total of maneuver battalions so provided would have been 33. This
is one less than the total indicated in Section II of this paper as
approved and planned because the Airmobile Division, when it was finally
organized, had 8 rather than 9 airmobile battalions. If the 173d Airborne,
which was only to be retained until the Airmobile Division was ready to
begin operations, were counted, then the total of maneuver battalions
requested by Westmoreland on 7 June was 35. In subparagraph 'B' he iden-
tified a further 9 battalions which might be needed and requested at some
later date.

B. CINCPAC Appeared to Back Into Enclaves

The CINCPAC, Admiral Sharp, was by and large a consistent sup-
porter of General Westmoreland in the latter's drive to get more forces
into South Vietnam. With regard to the momentous recommendation of
7 June, CINCPAC concurred in General Westmoreland's evaluation of the
situation and agreed also that Allied troops were needed to enable the
friendly side to take the offensive. He said: "We will lose by staying
- in enclaves defending coastal bases." Having said that, Admiral Sharp
then went on to disagree with Westmoreland as to the proper place for the
Airmobile Division. Rather than have it deployed inland on the Qui Nhon-
Pleiku axis as planned by Westmoreland, CINCPAC would have had it based
on Qui Nhon with the primary mission of clearing Binh Dinh Province before
moving inland. Sharp was very concerned that logistic backup for the
Airmobile Division be assured before it be sent into the highlands.
Securing one division's LOC with another division (Westmoreland intended
to send the ROK's to Qui Nhon) was counterproductive, and Sharp felt that
€00 to 800 tons of aerial resupply per day, should highway 19 be closed,
would overtax the already limited airfield facilities in the highland
areas where the Airmobile Division was to go. 116/

Sharp's initial objections to Westmoreland's deployment plans
smacked of conservatism and may well have played into the hands of those

SLi... TOP SECRET - Sensitive
