Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

= TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in the reading of the North Vietnamese and the Chinese with respect
to our determination to see this war through. Second, Reserve call-
ups are traditionally a unifying factor. Third, as a larger problem,
a hard, long-term look should be taken at the degree to which we as
a government are becoming committed to a containment policy along
all the enormous southern border of China, Mr. McNamara said he
would ask for a JCS study of this last point and discussed it briefly.

state

During the course of the meeting, General Johnson also
pointed out that with respect to overseas deployment, the Army is
already shortchanging certain overseas areas so as to increase the
training cadres in CONUS, He pointed out that because of the effect
on the strategic reserve of deployments already made, the quality ~
of new units will be lower than at present, He raised certain additional
points affecting the Army. Mr, McNamara, Mr, Vance, Mr. Resor
and General Johnson will discuss these problems further.

tonal nl eet dei, ereeveeereen eye

single authoritative document which now sets forth the planned deploy-
ment schedule, Mr, McNamara said for the time being everyone
should operate off of the schedule in the December 11 Draft Memovran-
dum to the President. By Monday evening, February 14, Dr. Enthoven
will have a revised deployment schedule which will be distributed and
then become the official one, (Mr. McNaughton mentioned that people
should keep in mind that Phase If-A in the Draft Memorandum to the
President is not quite the same as Case 1.) A procedure will be
worked out for changing the deployment schedule in an official and
orderly way, probably through the use of a procedure similar to that
of Program Change Proposals.

It should be kept in mind that the deployment schedule referred
to covers only deployments to South Vietnam (and not to Thailand or
elsewhere in Southeast Asia), and that it is a planning deployment
schedule, Actual deployment authorizations will continue to be re-
quired from Mr, McNamara or Mr, Vance in writing, as at present,

Attachment John M, Steadman
a/s The Special Assistant 45/

33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
