Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -— Sensitive

After a short recess, Secretary Rusk then discussed the reasons
why Hanoi was not yet ready to negotiate, and said that if the GVN
puilt "the kind of society which is indestructible," then Hanoi would
probably come to the conference table more rapidly. "Anything that
can move faster rather than more slowly on our side and your side,"
he said, "anything that can cause them to realize that an epidemic
of confidence is building in the South and that momentum is gathering
could hasten the time when Hanoi will decide to stop this aggression."4/

The President then said: "I hope that every person here from the
U.S. side will bear in mind that before I take that plane back, I want
to have the best suggestion obtainable as to how we can bring better
military pressure on Hanoi and from the pacification side how we can
pring a better program to the people of South Vietnam, and finally,
third, what other efforts we can make to secure a just and honorable
peace. Now, I want to have my little briefcase filled with those three
targets -- a better military program, a better pacification program
that includes everything, and a better peace program." 5/

General Thang then presented the GYN's pacification plans, in a
briefing later made public. Thang said:

"The objective of the whole people of my country is a
unified democratic and strong Vietnam...To reach this ob-
jective, our National Leadership Committee has promoted
three main policies: first, military offenses; second,
rural pacification; and third, democracy.

",.-But it is necessary, Mr. President, to define what
this means by pacification. In my opinion, that is a failure
of the past government, not to define exactly what we mean by
pacification...

"I think thet it is necessary to...define pacification
as en effort to restore the public security first, and carry-
ing out a government policy which aims at improving the stan-
dard of living in this area in every respect -- political,
economic, social.

".,.the prerequisite is security...So our concept of paci-
fication is based on four main points:

Point Nd. 1: The rural pacification operation can only
implement through the real solidarity among the people,
the armed forces, and the administration...

Point No. 2: Our government should be very clear when

it says that it would like to build a new society for a
better life in rural areas. That is meaningless to the
peasant if you don't develop that in a concrete package.

38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
