Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

+

| FOR THES PRESS
JUNE 18, 1952 NO. 473

Secretary Acheson made the following statement at
his news conference today:

VISIT OF M. JEAN LETOURNEAU

As you are aware, M. Jean Letourneau, Minister of
the Associated States for the French Government, has
been spending the last feW days in Washington exchanging
views with representatives of various agencies of this
Government. The Ambassadors of Cambodia and Vietnam have
also participated in conversations with M. Letourneéu
and with our own representatives.

A communique covering the substance of the talks
will be issued later today and I will therefore not go
into details now. Yet I wouid Zike to share with you
the feeling of encouragement and confidence which M.
Letourneau inspires. His thorough grasp of the situation
and his constructive approach to the problems involved -
military, political and economic - have impressed us all.

As you know, the Communist aggression in Indochina
has been going on for six years. It has been greatly
stepped up because of assistance received from Communist
China during the past two years. Yet, unfler French
leadership, the threat’ to this part of ths free world
has been met with great courege and acmiratle resource-
fulness. The military situstion appears to be developing
favorably. It has been good to hear from M, Letourneau
of the part played in ashieving this result by the con-
siderable quantities of American arms and material which
the magnificent fighting qualities of the French Union
forces, including those of the Associated States, have
justified us in devoting to this area of the struggle
against Communist aggression. The effort to make of
Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia secure and prosperous members
of the free world community has made great progress.

I have been particularly impressed by what M.
Letourneau has told me of what is being done to enable
the people of the three Associated States to play the
constantly greater role in their own defense to which
they rightly aspire. Much has been accomplished toward
the creation, training and equipping of the national
armies. Units of these armies have distinguished themselves

518
