Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"As my colleague Under Secretary Averell Harriman said recently,
'T don't know how you can distinguish between Chinese communism and
Chinese imperialism. Chinese communism and all communism is imperialist.'

"Even before World War II, Communist parties of varying strengths
existed in all Southeast Asian countries, from Burma to the Philippines.
After the war the signal was given for armed Communist-led uprisings,
and these occurred in Burma, Indonesia, Malaya, Indochina, and the
Philippines. Even Thailand, the one country in Southeast Asia that had -
not known colonial rule, was threatened. By 1952 the revolts were mf
erushed in all but Malaya and Indochina. It took the British and the
new Malay Federation until 1958 to quell Communist guerrilla forces there.
This struggle, incidentally, provided valuable lessons which are now being
applied in Viet-Nam. We also might note that, except for Japan, Malaya is
now the most prosperous country in Asia.

"The efforts of some powers following World War II to restore colonial
rule along the pre-war pattern permitted the Commmists more effectively
to wave the banner of anticolonialism and, for example, through Ho Chi Minh,
at that time largely to capture the nationalist movement in Viet-Nam. :

"after the Geneva Agreements of 1954 on Indochina we took the lead in
the establishment of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, an alliance
of the Philippines, Thailand, Pakistan, Australia, New Zealand, France,
Great Britain, and ourselves, with the objective of providing security to
Southeast Asia through collective military action if the Communists em- J
barked on outright military aggression. The opening of the eighth meeting
of ministers of this organization was attended by Secretary Rusk this
morning in Paris.

“Whatever may be the criticisms of SEATO, the fact remains that, since
its inception, the Communists have not attempted open military action in
the area. Instead they have turned to the more subtle tactics of subver-
sion and insurgency, the prime example being the guerrilla warfare in
Viet-Nam carried on in the method mede classic in China by Mao Tse-tung.
Whereas the method employed by the Communists has changed, the objective
remains the same -~ destruction of the independence of the Southeast Asian
countries one by one and return to the days when they bore their tribute
to Peiping. While the armed struggle is manifest now only in Viet-Nan,

4% ceased in Laos through the settlement sagen ot just last year at Geneva,
after 14 months of negotiation.

"Implications of Struggle in Viet-Nam

"T have pointed out that Southeast Asia is not a homogeneous region
but rather a geographic expression. By this same token of geographic
terrelation, the security of the area is not stronger than that of its
component countries. All of us who were at Geneva in 1954 recognized that
Communist domination of the Red River Delta of North Viet-Nam would make
it much more difficult to defend the remaining areas. This has been true.
