Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

best interests but with almost unwavering support from Secretary of
State John Foster Dulles. And it is the period during which the anti-
communist moralism of Dulles and Diem rejected any rapprochement with
the North, ultimately ensuring that the temporary military demarkation
line would become a permanent division of Vietnam.

B. Initial U.S. Policy Toward Indochina

The U.S. began revising policy toward Indochina as the
Geneva Conference closed. The exercise was marked by urgency dictated
by the belief that Geneva had been a disaster for the free world.
Geneva gave Communist China and North Vietnam a new base for exploita-
tion of Southeast Asia; it enhanced Peking's prestige to Washington's
dismay and detriment; it restricted free world room to maneuver in
Southeast Asia. And its grant of Vietnamese territory above the
seventeenth parallel to the communist Ho Chi Minh was a painful
reminder of the scarifying French defeat by the Viet Minh, the first
defeat of a European power by Asians (Asian communists at that), a -
defeat shared by the United States to the tune of more than $1.5 billion
in economic and military assistance granted France and the Associated
States of Indochina. 7/

1. SEATO: The New Initiative?

The first step toward countering this disaster had been
discussed with Britain and France since the spring of 1954, and Walter
Bedell Smith's comment as Geneva closed, "We must get that pact!,"
heralded its inauguration. 8/ The Southeast Asian Collective Defense
Treaty was to be a "new initiative in Southeast Asia" to protect the
U.S. position in the Far Fast and stabilize "the present chaotic
situation . . . to prevent further losses to communism" through sub-
version or overt aggression. 9/ But the Manila Pact, signed on
September 8, 1954, proved to be neither the new initiative nor the
strong anti-communist shield called for by Secretary Dulles. Vice
Admiral A. C. Davis, deputy assistant secretary and Defense Department
representative at Manila, reported the Pact left Southeast Asia "no
better prepared than before to cope with Communist aggression." 10/
The failure was largely of American making. While Dulles wanted to
put the communists on notice that aggression would be opposed, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff insisted the United States must not be committed
financially, militarily or economically to unilateral action in the
Far East and that U.S. freedom of action must not be restricted. 11/
The two objectives conflicted and one cancelled out the other. Thus,
Article IV of the treaty, the mechanism for collective action in case
of enemy threat, did not pledge automatic response with force to force.
Instead, each signatory promised to "act to meet the common danger in
accordance with its constitutional processes." The United States,

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
