Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
VI.C Settlement of the Conflict (6 Vols.) 
Histories of Contacts (4 Vols.) 
2. Polish Track 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
VI. C. 2. 
VI. 
SET·l'LEME.NT OF THE CONFLICT 
c. 
Histories of Contacts 
2 . 
~Iar igold 
Sec Def Cent Nr. X-___________ ~--
( 
n 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
MARIGOLD 
Tnis study consists of tl-To parts, a chronology of the principal 
events in the negotiating initiative known as Marigold (Part II), and 
an analytic discussion of some of the principal questions raised by 
Marigold (Part I). Part I is based on Part II, with citations to it 
indicated by date. 
While Part I can be read without reference to 
Part II, it may be easier going with just a few of the main dates and 
happenings in mind: 
Late in June 1966, the Polish ICC Representative, Lewandowski, 
returned to Saigon from Hanoi with some ideas he felt could serve as 
a basis for negotiations. 
These were comnunicated to the US through 
the Italian government and followed up by discussions in Saigon with 
Lewandowski, D!Or.landi (the Italian Ambassador) and Lodge participating 
in various combinations. 
In addition, Le.-mndowski made several visits 
to Hanoi. 
On November 30, he presented a 10 point formulation, reflecting 
his understanding of the US position, -which he s13.id Hanoi would accept 
as a basis for direct IIconversationll betl-Teen US and DRV representatives 
in Warsaw. 
On December 2; Hanoi l, which had not been bombed since mid-
August, was hit by US airstrikes. 
On December 3, the Poles protested 
the attack as endangering the prospective 1<TarsavT meeting; and the US 
officially accepted Lewandowskils 10 points, subject to lIimportant 
differences of interpretation. II 
On December h, Hanoi was bombed again. 
During the next 10 days, the Poles and Americans argued about the pattern 
of US bombing and the IIdifferences of interpretationll clause. 
In the 
interim (December 6), however, Hanoi was officially informed of the US 
acceptance, as qualified. 
On December 13 and 14, Hanoi was bombed again; 
and the DRV inst~Ll.cted the Poles to end all conversa.tions about the 
proposed contact. 
On December 24, the US inforilled t!1e Co...'Ulllunists that 
it would refrain from bombir~ within a 10 mile radius of Banoils center, 
expressing the hope that this would permit the Harsaw meeting to take 
place; but the offer was not accepted. 
-1-
Strictly, the 3.rea within 5 miles of the cer.ter of Hanoi 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
i 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
o 
Ul 
() 
C 
Ul 
Ul 
o 
Z 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
The Role of the Polish Intermedia~J 
The part played in Marigold by the DRV is veiled in mystery, 
because all US transactions in the matter passed through Polish hands. 
The initiative for the contact can only be traced back as far as the 
Poles. It begins with Lelmndowski's return from Hanoi iu late June 
1966. 
Whether he acted on Hanoits reque stjon Soviet urging, or his 
own sense of enterprise is not known. 
The subsequent flow of informa-
tion on DRV viel-Ts and reactions came almost entirely through the Polish 
~hannel, and the Poles were, intentionally, ambiguous in distinguishing 
between the ir own thoughts and Hanoi .' s • 
Drawing conclusions from the story is a compounded problem because 
the Poles, by their own account, conceived of their function as quite 
different from neutrally passing messages: 
--They acted as brokers, probing us (and perhaps Hanoi) to find 
elements of "give" that would narrow the gap between US and DRV posi-
tions on the terms of settlement. 
Their most inventive act in this 
role 'lias producing a Polish formulation of the official US position as 
a starting point for US-DRY talks. 
In this ','lay) each side had a 
glimpse of possible areas of negotiation, without first committing 
itself to specific language or firm concessions. 
--They tried to steer the exchanges al-Tay from topics W2 preferred 
(especially de-escalation) toward those they said had greater chance 
of acceptance in Hanoi (the terms of an overall settlem2nt). 
--Tney acted as friends of Hanoi, not neutrals. 
--Most importantly, they applied pressure on the US to participate 
in good faith, by the ever present threat of disclos ing their version 
of the matter to influential world leaders or the public at large. 
T"us 
our first inti.rnation 0:' M,:'l.rigold came via the Italian Government, which 
had been informed in Saigon and Rome by the Poles. 
We k..l1ew immediately, 
and Viere forcefully reminded at critical moments later, that US responses 
which might be Viel-led by others as reluctance in the pursuit of peace, 
skepticism about finding a "political ll solution, or intransigence on 
matters of substance, might be used against us. 
The only tenable working assumptions on the US Side, therefore, 
were that the Poles pursued at least three objectives in Marigold __ 
and most likely a fourth as Viell: 
(1) 
Ending the violence in Vietnam. 
(2) Doing so on terms relatively favorable to the Communist side. 
(3) Building a case that could be used against the US, as pressure 
during the development of the contact or as a source of embarrassment 
to the US should the whole venture fail. 
(In addition, the Poles no 
doubt sought to cast themselves in a role of historical i.rnportance.) 
1 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
As so often with multiple oojectives, none seems to have been maxi-
mized. 
For example, if the Poles were concerned solely with ending the 
war (regardless of the terms), they should h::l.Ve acted Vlith greater 
discretion after the contact broke Gown, because this would better pre-
serve their usefulness as an intermediary in the future. 
On the other 
hand, had they been concerned solely with discomfitting the US, they 
could have used their ammunition to greater effect by leaking earlier 
and more sensationally to the press. 
Perhaps different individuals on 
the Polish side gave differing priorities to this objective or that.l 
In any case, the fact that none of the objectives was p·i.lrsued to its 
logical maximum must mean that, in some larger Polish scheme of things, 
all were accorded considerable importance. 
This is critical in interpreting the episode as a whole, because it 
implies that, with whatever degree of imprecision, the Poles were in fact 
trying to find areas of compromise between the DRV and US on acceptable 
outcomBs to the war. 
Their effort was taken seriously enough in Hanoi to 
result in DRV agreement to meet with a US representative in Warsaw·. 2 
T1is 
in turn must mean they received some serious guidance on policy from the 
DRV) even though it is quite unlikely that they were privy to Hanoi's 
minim~~ bargaining positions. 
What they conveyed to us about promising 
directions for negotiations, therefore, should reflect something of Hanoi1s 
considered judgments, but cannot of course be read as a map of firm and 
final DRV posit ions. 
It "laS apparently not until after the Warsaw contact was canceled 
that the Poles were asked to specify those messages they had passed on 
explicit instruction from Hanoi. 
There \{ere three, they said: LewandoVlski IS 
message to Lodge expressing DRV agreement to the "I.J"arsaw talks; the warning 
after the December 3 (sic) bombing of Hanoi that the contact was being 
reassessed by tl1e DRV; and the decision to cancel the 'i-J"arsaw meeting afte:r.' 
the Decenber 13-14 bombing of Hanoi. 
In addition, the Poles said they had 
numerous exchanges with Hanoi durj_ng the period of Gronouski IS contacts 
with Rapacki in Ttlarsaw (i.e., after December 5) and claimed that they "\{ere 
therefore able to reflect Hanoi t s views accurately even ,Then speaking on 
their own ini~iat~ve. 
IFor example, the cable traffic conveys a picture of Lewandowski as more 
detached than Rap2.cki, more concerned simply YTith bringing the contending 
parties together t han "Tith exacting concessions from the US or throwing 
the onus for failure upon it. 
On the other hand, this m3.Y reflect differ-
ences bet"Yreen the US reporters in Saigon and Warsaw as much as actual 
differences behieen the two Poles. 
2We do not Y..n01-1 
~That the DRV expected from the T{arsa"T meeting nor how its 
prospects W2re represented to Hanoi by the Poles. 
The evidence that the 
DRV cid in fact agree to the meeting is examined in another section. 
2 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
How accurate and explicit they were in transmitting US views to 
Hanoi is not known. 
They seem to have made at least one major blunder 
(described in the next section), and may well have made others. 
3 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Did the DRV Agree? 
It is at least possible that the Poles had no commitment from the 
DRV at all, but on balance this seems highly improbable. 
By the begin-
ning of December, they had gone far out on a limb in their contacts and 
arrangements with at least the Americans, the Italians and, apparently, 
the RusSians. 
It is hard to see what could have motivated them to go ' 
this far purely on speculation, given the conseq,uences for them of a 
revelation that the whole venture was built on air. 
The eVidence that the DRV did in fact agree to a meeting in Warsaw 
is: 
(1) Rapacki's statement to Gronouski that Lewandowski was acting 
on DRV instructions in lithe message he gave to Lodge . . . upon his 
return from Hanoi expressing NVN positive response to the Warsaw talks" 
(12/21/66); 
(2) 
Zinchuk's statement to Bundy that l1the Polish effort was 
serious and that the Soviets ' "Tere fully with it 
11 and that l1he had been 
surprised, in discussing the Polish initiative in the Department ... 
to see that it 'Has treated as doubtful
l1 (12/22/66); 
(3) Burchett1s statement to Isham that a DRV official had actually 
been en route to 'VTarsaw for the proposed meeting when l1the US resumed 
bombing Hanoi l1 and the contact was canceled (12/6/67). 
If Burchett1s information is accurate, it would mean that Hanoi 
had been informed by the Poles of US acc.eptance of the LewandO',vski formu-
lation and 'Ivas satisfied 'I-lith the US response. 
The US formally accepted 
Lewandowski's 10 points on December 3, with the q,ualification that l1several 
specific points are subject to important differences of interpretation.
l1 
If the Poles accurately conveyed the US position, therefore) j_t ,VQuld also 
follc;W' that the DRV had acq,uiesced in this extre.ra.ely broad reservation. 
Here, however, some further questions arise. 
Rapacki, in a meeting 
with Gronouski, indicated that Lodge had 
11 confirmed 11 Lewandowski1s formu-
lation on December 1, introducing the l1important differences of interpre-
tation l1 clause as a further condition two days later. 
(12/5/66) 
This 
would imply that Lodge accepted LewandQiolSki I s 10 points without referring 
them to Wa.shington; which seems extremely urLlikely. 
Apparently the Poles 
informed Hanoi prematurely of US acceptance, omitting the q,ualification 
about interpretation . 
(12/6/66) 
But by December 6 they had conveyed 
the US message j.n its final form. 
(12/7/66 ) 
If the DRVofficial was 
en r oute when the bombing of Hanoi resumed--December 13-14--the interpre-
tation clause must have been transmitted and accepted by the North Viet-
namese. 
4 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Tnis would mean that the content of the interpretation clause did 
not in itself cause the contact to abort. 
However, three days (December 
3-9) may have bE.en lost iolhile the Poles urged us to withdraw the clause 
and we demurred . 
Would the ~varsaw talks actually have begun before the 
December 13-14 bombing if this time had been saved? 
Would they have been 
continued if the bombing occurred after the first meeting or t wo? 
5 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
10 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
The Polish Vision of a Vietnam Solution 
At four point s during Marigold) Lewandowski offered sketches of 
a negotiated outcome to the war. 
None of these is precise or complete. 
None is an authoritative statement of what would be acceptable to the 
DRV. 
They differ in content) each serving a different purpose in his 
development of the contact. 
All) however, are consistent with each 
other) suggesting they derive from a single set of concepts. 
They are 
consistent) t oo) with several key planks of the revised NLF Program, 
released in August 1967 -- in particular) the call for new elections 
with universal surferage and the establishment of a government with 
Communist participation. 
His revelations have a pattern: 
The first was the come-on, couched 
in the most attractive but vaguest terms of all. 
The second and third 
were explorations Qf how much the traffic would bear) testing in turn the 
reactions of the Italians (perhaps as bellwethers of "w-orld opinion!!) 
and of official Washington. 
The last was the most serious) his OvTn 
formulation of the US position) designed to provide a substantive basis 
for direct talks between the US and DRV. 
Its language had therefore to 
encompass the ninimum outecmes acceptable to both sides) using amb:i.guity 
to cloak the diffe:rences his brokerage could not eliminate. 
Apparently, t he best terms he hoped to obtain were eventual US 
military withdrawa.l based on US acceptance of the NLF in a coalition 
governm.ent) along "With a sharp reduction in the role played in that 
government by militant anti-communists . 
The mini.mUlu he felt acceptable 
as a basis for talks is) naturally) harder to discern. It seems to have 
been less a final solution to the conflict than a change in the ground 
rules under \{nichthe struggle to rule SVN would continue. 
The principal 
elements seemed to be acceptance of the Communists as legitL~ate contenders 
for power j and the sUbs-titut:i.on of international machinery of some sort 
for US armed parti.cipation in regulating the outcome. 
.Left open is the 
question of what; if anything, the Communists would give in exchange (e. g., 
1TVA iVithdravTal, etc.) 
LewandQl-lski rs thoughts on settlement are described briefly below. 
More detail is giVen in the chronology, for which the relevant dates are 
also indicated below . 
(1) The Teaser . 
US interest (and Italian) was first aro""J.sed 
by a statement of things the DRV did not demand as part of a final 
settlement . 
I.ewandc",ski) just back from a trip to Hanoi in June 
1966) billed this negatlve list as !fa very specific peace offer,!f 
even thou~h it lacked the positive demands that vrould inevitably be 
in a fina_ settlement. Hhat Hanoi did not demand included: 
6 
TOP SECRET - HODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
immediate reunification; socialism in SVN; a change in SVN 
relations in foreign affairs; neutralization; immediate with-
drai-Tal of US forces; DRV interference in the SVN government. 
The last point, however, '-las modified to the extent of asking 
for a government led by "someone other than Ky." 
On the positive side, Hanoi!s demands seemed to concern 
negotiation procedures. 
It would enter negotiations if the NLF 
could "take part"(though not as sole representative of SVN) 
and if the bombing of the North were suspended. 
The first of 
these demands, of course, is not purely procedural, since giving 
the NLF a formal role in negotiations would move it toward a 
position of legitimacy in SVN politics, whatever the outcome of 
the negotiations. 
Lewandowski, then, seemed to suggest that the war could be 
brought to an end by strengthening the position of the NLF) 
weakening that of Ky (and) no doubt) the anti-communist tendency 
in SVN he represented)) fudging all other issues over at least 
the short run. 
(6/27/67) 
(2) Ruminations. 
During September) Leviandowski com.rnuned 
with D!Orlandi in Saigon on possible solutions. All of his 
thoughts) however) returned to a single theme: 
coalition 
govern.111ent. The bulk of the ministers could be "sensible SVN 
politicians," \oTith a man or two from the right (meaning the Ky 
government) and a man or two from the left (meaning the NLF) in 
"unimportant ministries," Of perhaps even greater significance: 
he firmly opposed any development designed to reinforce the 
status quo with respect to the then existing G~~ -- including) 
specifically) measures for mutual de-escalation of the war . 
(9/4/ 66-9/14/66) 
. 
Later, D!Orlandi outlined a settlement package that he 
thought "ould get immediate J serj.ous consideration in Hanoi. 
It included US withdrawal "eventu.ally"; internationally con-
trolled elections "after one or two years"; leading to a 
neutral, coa.lition government. 
Coalition, in his mind) was 
"not a Imust.!" Whether this package reflected l.ewandowski IS 
appraisal, or D10rlandi!s softening of the Pole1s view) is not 
clea.r. 
(10/16/66) 
(3) Probing the US. 
Just before visiting Hanoi in mid-
November) Lewandowski tried to take a serious reading on US 
attitudes. 
His questions were so phrased as to make the response 
desired by the com.111unist side apparent. 
They dealt with pro-
cedures that mig.h.t follo," a ceasefire and were no doubt an effort 
7 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
to find a set of actions which) if accepted by the US, would 
ultimately result in a situation in SVN acceptable to the 
communists. 
Specifically, he wanted to know if US troop withdrawal 
depended on GVN control over areas then governed or contested 
by the VC; if the US vrould withdraw from combat areas and not 
interfere in the creation of a nevrgovernment in SVN; if the 
US would oppose progress tovrard peaceful reunification; if the 
US would accept the ICC as the machinery for bringing peace to 
SVN. 
All but the third of these questions boil down essentially 
to one: 
to vrhat extent would the US remove itself from the 
contest over who should rule in SVN? 
All were framed without 
indication of a quid pro quo. 
Thus they reveal nothing of DRV 
willingness to remove itself from the contest. (11/14/66) 
(4) Speaking for the US. 
When Le,oTandowski returned from 
Hanoi at the end of November, he brought along his own formula-
tion of the US position on a final settlement . 
The critical 
points on the future of SVN include: 
US military IoTithdrawal 
after the restoration of peace; US acceptance that "the present 
status quo in SVN would be changed in order to take into account 
the interests of the parties presently opposing the policy of 
the US in SVN"; and US acceptance of the results of "free and 
democratic elections)" held "with the participation of all," 
under "the necessary control machinery ." (12/7/66) 
The political complexion of the new status quo is left 
open) but clearly SVN comnunists '\.JQuld be entitled to contend 
for pOl-rer. 
Clearly) too, the phrase "necessary control machinery" 
could not refer in Communist minds to the US presence or the 
existing GVN. 
On the other hand, no piece of "machinery" less 
forceful than these could be expected by the communists to enforce 
an electoral outcome regarded as unacceptable to the armed parties 
contending in SVN . 
Thus t!1e formulation does not provide a peace-
ful solution to the problem of who shall rule SVlT. 
It offers a 
way for the US to end its part in the I-rar. 
It leaves open the 
question of what the communist side would do in return. 
This, 
presumably, is what the fOlmulation left as the subject of nego-
tiation. 
8 
TOP SECPET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Unilateral Concessions 
Lewando"trski probed for US concessions on the terms of final settle-
ment beyond previously stated official positions) such as'the Fourteen 
Points and the Manila Communique. 
His method of operation vras such as 
to conceal what reciprocity (if any) might come from the DRV. 
In the 
end) however) he got virtually noconcessibns of substance. 
As a result) 
it might be argued the greatest unilateral movement away from previous 
positions was on the DRV side) which agreed to meet with the US without 
a cessation of the bombing of the North. 
While the nature of the pro-
spective contact remained in total obscurity -- we had no indication of 
what matters the DRV representative would be prepared to address -- the 
DRV must have hoped for something of value and was prepared to probe for 
it while the bombing continued. 
In effect) this meant tacitly accepting 
the bombing as an American blue chip in the bargaining process) something 
the DRV had sought tenaciously to avoid in the past. 
(See) hOl·rever) the 
XYZ episode.) 
, 
In response to the four questions Lewandowski posed in mid-November) 
the US replied: 
the Manila formulation spoke for itself with respect to 
US troop withdrawal; the US supported the constit~tional processes then 
emerging in Saigon as the route to representative government in SVN; the 
US would accept peaceful) freely chosen re-u.nification (as already indicated 
in the Fourteen Points); the machinery needed to enforce and supervise a 
final settlement should be decided by negotiations) taking account of 
problems revealed in the recent past -- Le., with the ICC. 
Nothing vras 
conceded at all. (11/14-15/66) 
Tne US accepted Levrandowski r s final 10 Point formulation as broadly 
reflecting its pOSition) but qualified this by stating) "We must add that 
several specific points are subject to important differences of interpre-
tation. II 
The qualifier was not elaborated) even though the Poles urged 
that the specific points at issue be indicated or that the formula.tion be 
revised to eliminate the need for this s'Heeping reservation. 
The point 
which raised the sharpest apprehension in Washington vras that indicating 
US acceptance that the "status quo in SVN 'dould be changed" to take 
account of commu.nist interests. 
Even this language, however) as State 
pointed out, was broad enough to mean an~~hing from putting the NLF into 
the government forthHith to a simple endorsement of the electoral pro-
cesses then being elaborated in Saigon. 
US troop withdrawal is explicitly 
linked to the ~.:ianila Communique) though the ' specific conditions of the 
Manila offer are not repeated. 
Levrandovrski r s fifth point) however) may 
have added something to the previous US stance) by calling for a GVN 
based on "the participation of all through free democratic elections," 
held under "the necessary control machinery." 
The US seemed to be 
accepting univer sal suffrage (no exclusion of cO~llunists and neutralists) 
as later specified in the R~~ constitution) and supervisory machinery not 
controlled by the non-Communist side, though what all this could mean in 
practice would have emer ged only through negotiations. (12/5/66, 12/7/66) 
9 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Given the suspicion with '\{hich the DRV undoubtedly vie.rs US 
intentions, the Lewandowski formulation, especially when seasoned with 
the "important differences" clause, is unlikely to have struck the 
North Vietnamese as at all forthcoming. 
In spite of this, they agreed 
to meet. 
While they may not have intended to offer much at Warsaw, 
their willingness to come while the bombing continued undercut the 
seriousness .Te .Tould attach from then on to their declarations of 
negotiating preconditions, their confidence about their miiitary 
progress, etc., etc. 
These factors are weighty enough ·to give 
importance to the question: 
why were they willing to meet at all? 
According to the reasoning above, the answer does not lie in our 
responses to Lewandowski. 
If not, we should look for factors external 
to Marigold -- the rising confusion in China, perhaps, or a pessimistic 
estimate of Communist military prospects in SVN, or .... 
Furthel'flore, 
if we did not lure them toward the conference table with the attractions 
of our offer, the possibility arises that the other preSStITes pushing 
them in that direction were sufficient to induce significant conceSSions, 
had the contact occurred. 
10 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
/ j 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
The Soviet Role in_~~rigold 
In the ~~terials available for this study, tne first explicit 
discussion of ~rigold between US and Soviet officials does not appear 
until yTell after the Warsaw contact had been canceled: 
On December 22, 
the Soviet Charge in Washington, Alexander Zinchuk, called on "l<Tilliam 
Bundy to express Soviet support for the Polish initiative and to dis-
courage the US from seeki.ng a "militaristic" solution in Vietnam. 
Zinchuk indicated that the matter had been discussed with DRV leaders 
visiting Moscow in late November and again in early December. 
He 
implied that the Soviet Union had felt ·unable to encourage the DRV to 
continue I'Tith the contact because of the bombing of December 2 and 4. 
The lateness of Zinchu.kts approach to Bundy and the content of 
his message would suggest the Soviets played at most a passive role in 
Marigold. 
This would be consistent with their abandoning sponsorship 
of the prospective Conference on Cambodia in ~y 1965, their refusal 
to transmit the US letter to the DRV Embassy in MoscoyT during Mayflower 
(VlaY 1965 )) and their freCIuent rebuffs thereafter of US efforts to 
invoke their mediation. 
On the other hand, the Italians on several occasions early in 
~rigold indicated th8.t they unde:rstood the Poles to be acting on 
So·.riet instructions. 
D !Orlandi also CIuoted L€vTandOYTski as saying that 
Hanoi lvaS "tightly controlled" by the Chinese and hence prel:L.'1linary 
talks would have to be be-cI{een Washington and Moscow, ';lith overt DRV 
participa.tion only as an acceptable basis for negotiations emerged. 
(6/29/66, 7/9/66, 9/14/66) 
There are no further references of this 
sort, however, after mid-September. 
It is at least possible, then, that the R.J.ssians yTere the principal 
sponsors of IvT.arigold. 
If so, they minimized their vj.sibility when 
Marigold appea.red to be succeeding, emerging to express their interest to us 
only after the bombing of Hanoi and the collapse of the "l<7arsaw contact. 
This is follOl{ed chronologically by tne unusually active Soviet role in 
Sunflower. 
Given past Soviet reluctance to mediate, it is notevrorthy 
that. the Russians would come to the fore at a time when conditions seemed 
relath-ely unpropitious. 
This raises at least t,m Cluestions: 
(1) 
As noted a"oove (under "Unilateral Concessions") the DRV may 
have had reasons external to the Marigold exchanges for wanting di:rect 
talks with the US at just this time. 
Did the Russians receive encourage-
ment from Hanoi to try fur·ther? 
11 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
., 
' •
.... "'l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
(2) 
Or was it the December bombing of Hanoi that stimQlated the 
Russians? 
Zinchuk expressed apprehension both to Bundy and Harry N"laC-
Pherson that Hanoi might call for Soviet volunteers under the terms of .the 
Bucharest Declaration ("if the war escalates and if help is necessary"). 
Tae Russians no doubt ·Hished to avoid such "escalation)" whatever Hanoi's 
feelings in the matter. 
TI1e Trinh formula (of January 28) 1967) made theSe two possible 
motives compatible) by tying US-DRV talks to the "unconditional cessation 
of US bombing and all other acts of war · against the DRV." 
At this point) 
the DRV attitude had hardened in one important respect) softened in 
another. 
It officially closed t~e door on the possibility of talks 
while the bombing continued) but it implied publicly (and made explicit 
privately) its willingness to talk if its conditions on bomoing were met. 
This at last gave the Russians a license to try on Hanoi's behalf) even 
though worsening the chances for success because of the stiff conditions 
demanded of the US. 
12 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
I n 
/ / 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Leaks and Pressures 
From the beginning, Lewandowski stressed the importance of secrecy 
to the possible success of Marigold, the reason given being opposition 
by co.l1L'llunist hardliners, especially the Chinese. 
In spite of this, the 
Poles leaked portions of their version of the episode at strategic moments 
during the contact in a relatively obvious effort to put pressure on the 
US. 
The US responded in part, as the Poles wished, by cooperating with 
Lewandowski's initiatives. 
~fuere this proved i~Bdequate, we took counter 
measures which combined the defensive leaking of the US version of p~r­
tions of the episode on the one hand with incentives and exhortations 
intended to induce other participants to maintain the privacy of the con-
tact on the other. 
The first Polish approach to the US in Marigold was conveyed through 
the Italians : 
D'Orlandi contacted Lodge in Saigon; F'enoaltea contacted 
State in Washington . 
Meanwhile) Fanfani described the matter to U Tnant. 
Somewhat later, Saragat took it up with Goldberg. 
It was immedi.ately 
recognized in Washington that any indication of US reluctance to res~ond 
would quite soon b.::: widely interpreted as lack of interest in a peaceful 
end to the war. 
Tfle therefore undertook to develop the contact, eYen 
though skeptical about the real promise it held forth. 
At the same time) 
we protested polj.tely to the Italians about trying to do business in this 
manner. 
(6/27-30/66, '7/6-10/66) 
Du!ing the rest of the summer and fall) as Le'wandowski felt he W8.S 
making progress, the problem of leaks abated. 
Immediately following the 
December 13-1L~ bombing of Hanoi and the DRV's cancellation of the ~iarS9.vl 
meeting, however, preSS1ITe through leaks res~'lled . 
On one day alone, December l5, Lewandowski revealed emotional tidbits 
of the episode to the Dutch Charge in Saigon, the Polish Ambassador in Rome 
managed to have the Pope quiz h.i1n about Vietnam, and Hanoi cabled Harrison 
Salisbury permission to visit the DRV. 
A fevr days later, the Polish 
Ambassador gave the Pope "the ';,;hole story. !I 
(12/15-19/66) 
v.le responded first by suspending the Hanoi targets in Rolling Thunder 
52, then by offering to halt all strikes within a 10 mile radius of the 
center of Hanoi 
:~n exchange for a similar shovr of rest:mint by the VC 
around Saigon J and finally putting the 10 mile Hanoi sanctuary into effect 
unilatera1ly--vThen the prospects of getting explicit reciprocity seemed 
too faint. 
Thus j.n order to revi ve Marigold, we offered formal assurances 
of restraint on our bombing that 'dent well beyond those the Poles had 
urged us to accept infonnally after the strikes of December 2 and 4. 
(12/15/66) 12/21/66, 12/24/66) 
The U3 version of Marigold 'Has explained 
in some detail to the Pope., U 'l'hant) and the Canadian) Italian, Australian, 
13 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
New Zealand and British Governments. 
TDe 10 mile sanctuary around Hanoi 
was stressed as '3. potential basis for revivin~ the contact) reflecting 
US goodwill and making it essential that the widening circle of those 
privy to the matter preserve the utmost discretion about it) secrecy 
being the sine qua non for success. 
Meanwhile a much less detailed 
report on the contact was given the GVN and other troop contributing 
countries) to forestall possible misgivings should they hear of the 
matter first from other sources. 
By mid-January) then) Marigold was known in varying degree to a 
large circle of diplomats) some briefed by us ) some by the Poles and most 
by both sides. 
On January 19) a brief reference to Marigold and its dis-
ruption by the mid-December bombing of Hanoi was filed in the press from 
ottaw·a . 
The infonnation was attributed to "high Canadian officials." 
By February 4) a much more complete version had been filed from UN Head-
quarters in New York. 
At this point) with so many possible sources for 
the story) there was no agreement among the Americans on the origin of the 
leak to the press. 
Goldberg thought the Poles 'Here responsible) while 
Gronouski argued that it had been the Canadians. 
(2/l-2/6"{) 2/7-8/67) 
The war of leaks gradually escalated during the spring. 
By }'1'ay: 
the Poles were expressing concern to Gronouski over a rumor they had 
picked up in Washington--that the US contemplated publishing a i-Thite 
paper on Marigold . 
nlis wOlLld force them) they said) to retaliate in kind. 
Just at this time} an extremely detailed account of the episode was pub-
lished by John Hightower of the AP. 
TI~e most controversial point in his 
story was the statement that US "officials ,{ere not sure the Poles had 
any commitment from North Vietnam to begin talks. 
Some ... doubted that 
Mr. Rapacki was in fact .•. making kllOi-Tn Washington ! s readiness for talks 
to Hanoi. 11 
Washington felt the HightOl-rer account ioTas "essentially 
accurate and reasonably favorable. 1: 
The Poles were told the US would 
publish no vThite paper. 
They replied that "US officials had appar ently 
chosen another 'Na.y to put out the story." HOi.J'ever: no official Polish 
rebuttal vTaS made public and the war of leaks smllered down on this 
acrimonious note. (S / 8 -9 /67 ) 
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the '!,{ar of leaks is the 
silence of the DRV. 
Although Hanoi did mount a propaga...'1da campaign 
against US bombing of the DRV ~nmediately after the collapse of the 
Marigold contact--e.g.} through the Harrison SalisblLTY visit) etc.-- no 
mention was ever made of the prospective Warsal{ contact and its cancel-
lation after the mid-De cember bombing. 
Properly handled) this could have 
been made a telling point vlith world opinion. 
Presumably) secrecy about 
the contact was of greater value to the DRV. 
It is quite possible) there-
fore) that the Polish l eaks Kere not appreciated in Hanoi and the Polish' 
handling of the matter was critici zed. there) as in Washington. 
(Alterna-
tively) hOI-rever) it may be that the Polish leal<'-B satisfied the DRV!s 
propaganda requirements) vithin the constraints imposed by DRV relations ' 
with ~lina) the maintenance of ra~~-and-file morale ~~ong Viet~ames e 
communist forces) etc . 
In that case, Hanoi:s silence would not in i~self 
i..1J1ply an adverse judg.."TIlent on the Polish r ole.) 
14 
TOP SECRET - HODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Bombing the North I: 
Blue ~n ip or Topic for Talks? 
The US proposed r epeatedly during Marigold that de-escalation be 
taken as the first topic between the two sides. 
What would the Commu-
nists do if the US stopped bombing? 
Lewandowski with equal persistence refused to accept this question 
as 'a point of departure. 
The DRV would reject it, he said) because 
de-escalation would be viewed as strengthening the governmental status 
quo in SVN) whereas it was precisely a change in the SVN government 
that the Communist side required. 
Instead, therefore) he urged that 
this subject be left for last. 
Once both sides agreed on terms for the 
ultimate situation in SVN) finding the route there via de-escalation 
would be easy . 
Although Le"randOl.;rski never, of course) made the argwnent himself J 
his approach meant Communist acceptance of the bombing as a blue chip 
in the bargaining process because the talks on settlement terms would 
have to take place while the bombing contimled. 
One inducement the 
Communists would have to accept terms desired by the US would be that 
this would end the bombi.ng . 
Too} his approach saved more face for the 
Communist side than ours; which required that the bombing be addressed 
explicitly. 
'\Illien, finally, the US "Tent along with I.ewandmvski I s approach) it 
upped the ante by the December bombings of Hanoi. 
The DRV cancellation 
of the contact meant, then, that it "Tould neither accept de-escalation 
. as a starting point for talks nor accept augmentation of the US blue 
chip through strikes on more sensitive targets. 
The cancellation of the talks over this issue measures the failure 
of LewandOl·Tski I s 1;)rokerage. 
He had not narrowed the gulf betvTeen the 
t'i-TO sides sufficiently. 
His version of possible settlement terms was 
not attractive enough to make the US forego upping the ante) on the one 
hand ) or to induce the DRV to accept the higher ante, on the other. 
15 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Bombing the North II: Signals) Intended and Inadvertant 
As is shown in a separate study) beginning in June 1966) there was 
a marked increase in the amount of ordnance eX2?ended against North Viet-
nam. 
This was true for "the country a.sa whole) for Route Package VI 
and for the areas within 10 miles of the center of Hanoi and 5 miles of 
the center of Ha.iphong. 
The general level of ordnance expenditure 
remained high until mid-November. 
During the last t wo weeks of November) 
probably on account of weather) air strikes against the North were at 
their lowest level since June) rising markedly again during the first 
and second "Teeks of December. 
The most sensitive area of all) that ,,7ithin 5 miles of the center 
of Hanoi ) was stru.ck ( with about 25 tons of ordnance) for the first time 
in the war during the last ",eek of June) as part of a general attack on 
POL facilities. 
About 3 tons more were expended in this area in mid-
August. It was not hit again until the first ,-reek j.n December (the 2nd 
and l~th) When almost 50 tons were expended) then hit yet again during 
the second ",eek in December (the 13th and 14th) with over 100 tons. 
The 
intended targets in all of the December attacks were the Yen Vien Rail-
road Yard and the Van Dien Vehicle Depot) but apparently there was 
collateral damage in all cases. 
In particular) during the December 13-14 
attacks) the Chinese and Rumanian Em~assies seem to have been hit) along 
with some residential structures in central Hanoi. 
From the ground) then) 
there might appear to have been an increase in the intensity of attack) 
mea.sured both in tons of ordnance expended and type of target) com..rn.encing 
December 2) i.e.) immediately foll01ving Hanoi's assent to some form of 
US-DRV meeting in Warsa"v. 
The Poles expressed alarm about the "intensification of the bombingtr 
on December 2) 7) 8) and 9) arguing that "such attacks could only threaten 
or destroy the possibility of contact in Warsaw . II 
They expressed these 
vieyTs as their own) not as a message transmitt.ed from Hanoi. 
However) 
Lewandowski told D'Orlandi (who in turn told US on December 9) that he 
believed Hanoi had attached Significance to the fact that during t.he two 
weeks he had been in Hanoi (approximat.ely November 16-30) the bcrnbing 
had appeared to be at a reduced level . 
LewandOY7ski thought Hanoi had 
interpreted this as a tacit signal of US support for his mission. 
In fact) the targets near Hanoi vhich were the object of attack in 
DecembeT had been authorized as part of Rolling Thunder 52) for vhich the 
execute message YTas sent on November 10. 
This vas prior to Lewandowski's 
departure for Hanoi, though the approxi.rna.te t.iJ1ing of his impending visit 
(llafter the US electionsll) was ·1<..nown in Washington when the execute 
message i.;as sent. 
(10/15-16/66) 
FresUJ."'D.ab1y) had weather not intervened) 
the strikes near Hanoi m.i ght well have occurred during his visit) rather 
than after his return with Hanci's IIpositive response.
1I 
Hanoi's review 
of Lei"andowski's proposals would have occurred in quite a different con-
text) one reflecting more accurately) perhaps) US attitudes . 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
2/ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
On December 10, Washington informed both the Warsaw and Saigon 
Embassies that it had been decided to leave the bombing pattern 
unchanged. 
Gronouski was forewarned that this might involve some 
targets Rapacki wo~ud insist reflected fUrther escalation. 
Apparently, the strikes of December 13-14 were so interpreted 
in Hanoi, which instructed the Poles on December 14 to terminate all 
conversations. 
On December 24, the US informed the Communists that bombing within 
10 miles of the center of Hanoi had been suspended as an act of goodwill 
in the hopes of reviving the Warsaw contact. 
This was a more substantial 
concession on the bombing than the Poles had urged after the December 2 
and 4 strikes} in that it reflected an explicit} well-defined conmitment} 
rather than the tacit, unformalized restraint suggested by the Poles. 
The DRV may have concluded that propaganda repercussions} actual and 
prospective, had forced a change in the US posture, causing Hanoi in 
turn to stiffen the conditions it imposed in exchange for talks. 
The 
Trinh formula of January 28, 1967, demanding an end to all bombing of 
the DRV) may reflect this calculation. 
17 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
US Good Faith 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Prior to the December 2 bombing of Hanoi, no conditions with 
respect to US military actions had been demanded by the Communists as 
a price for the "\<Tarsaw meeting. 
The only terms, as expressed by 
Lewandowski to Lodge on November 30} were: 
"I am authorized to say 
that if the US are really of the views which I have presented (i.e.) 
his 10 points)} it would be advisable to confirm them directly by con-
versation with the North Vietnamese Ambassador in "\<Tarsaw." 
In 
addition to this, he urged only speed and secrecy. 
The US had several times previously suggested that mutual de-
escalation be undertaken by the two sides. 
In a major policy state-
ment} Goldberg offered "a cessation of all bombing of North Vietnam--
the moment we are assured} privately or other,{ise, that this step 
will be answered promptly by a corresponding and appropriate de-
escalation on the other side." (9/22/66) 
But de-escalation I.raS 
rejected by Lewandowski as the wrong subject with which to start. 
Thus the US had no commitment to avoid bombing Hanoi stemming from 
the agreement to meet in Warsaw, and in fact, as noted above, strikes 
against Hanol. had been authorized since mid-November but had not 
occurred) presumably for reasons of weather. 
lhe Poles argued that there was a difference between de-escalation 
and non-escalation. 
lie should have been willing to trade the latter 
for talks, even if not the former. 
Secondly} they stretched the meaning 
of our official position. 
B.apacki claimed, "you have said over and over 
again that you would end all bombing if there "Tas an assurance from Hanoi 
that there would be a response tovTard peace from Ha.noi; however} ,,;e did 
not ask that you stop bombing but only that you not intensify it." And 
IIrecalling speec...hes of Goldberg} the President, Secretary B.usk and others, 
once "Te received the Signal "Te did, "le would have had every right to call 
for a stop in the bombing." (12/19/66) 
Without endorsing this particu-
lar formulation, D'Orlandi indicated his general agreement with the Polish 
interpretation. (12/18/66) 
Gronouski feared it would be widely shared 
and that the Communists '\Till have no trouble conVincing the leadership 
in every capital of the world that our stated desire for peace negotiations 
is insincere." (12/14/66) 
In their minds, the issue turned less on the 
precise laneuage of previous US expressions than on a general tenor which 
they felt was underc:ut by the December bombing.3. 
Washington apparently 
soon came to share this view; and the 10 mile bombing sanctuary around 
Hanoi t s center l{aS established to underline the seriousness of US intentions. 
18 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
(") 
:r: 
:::0 o 
Z o 5 
C> 
-< 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
The following chronology consists of brief 
summaries and interpretative statements about 
each date, followed by indented docwnentation. 
I I 
I 
! 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
June 27, 1966 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECBEI' - NODIS 
Marigold begins with a contact between D'Orlandi, the Italian 
Ambassador in Saigon, and Le1..randowski, the Polish Representative on the 
ICC, also working out of Saigon . 
Lewandowski, just returned from Hanoi, 
reported that he had a "very specific peace offer" to transmit, one 
that would lead to a "political compromise" settling the whole Vietnam 
question once and for all. 
The attractive features were (a) Hanoi 
would not ask for immediate reunification, (b) it would not demand a 
socialist system in SVN, (c) SVN would not have to change its relation-
ships in the field of foreign affairs, (d) "neutralization" would not 
be demanded, (e) U.S. ,.{ithdrawal could be scheduled along a "reasonable 
calendar," (f) Hanoi did not seek to interfere with the SVN government. 
Hanoi's conditions for entering negotiations were that (a) the 
NLF "take part lt and (b) there be a "suspension" of the bombing . 
D'Orlandi cOIDmUllicated all this to Lodge in Saigon, two days l ater 
(June 29), on instructions from Fanfani, who was also transmitting it 
directly to Washington . 
Saigon 5840 (to SecState) , TS/Nodis, 29 June 1966 
(Section 1 of 2) 
Literally Eyes Only for the President, The Secretary, 
and the Acting Secretary 
"I. This afternoon DrOrlandi, Italian Ambassador; 
telephoned to say it was urgent that I come to his office 
as soon as the Catholic service honoring the anniversar',f 
of the coronation of Pope Paul VI had ended. 
I went to 
his office at about 6: 45, and he began as follow's: 
"2. 
Two days ago, the Polish representative on the 
ICC, Lewandowski, came to him with a Ivery specific 
peace offer. I 
"3. D10rlandi said he had requested instructions 
from Fanfani, who told him (1) to submit the whole pro-
posal to me, and (2) said that he, Fanfani, .lould send 
the whole thing to Washington for their considel"ation." 
"9. 
The Pole began by saying that Hanoi has been 
deeply disappointed by the proposals made by Ronning 
which, they are sure, had emanated originally from the 
United States and not from the Canadians. 
Ronning had 
Irop SECREI' - HODIS 
1 
j 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRNf - NODIS 
proposed that the U.S. stop the bombing if North Viet-Nam 
stopped the infiltration, and had talked about the exchange 
of prisoners! parcels and letters. 
This had bitterly dis-
appointed North Vietnam. 
The first point, they had said, 
would be unconditional surrender, and they could not 
accept it, but they are open to a 'political compromise I 
settling once and for all the entire Viet-Nam question. 
"10. 
When D'Orlandi said that he was skeptical, the Pole 
said that Hanoi was prepared to go 'quite a long way.t 
lIt 
is useless for me to add,! said the Pole, 'that should there 
not be any kind of a preliminary agreement) Hanoi will deny 
flatly ever having made any offer.! According to the Pole, 
the North Vietnamese are !tightly controlled! by the Chinese 
Communists. 
The preliminary talks) therefore) should be 
betvTeen Moscow and viashington. 
1f!hen and if proposals should 
emerge which could be considered as a basis for negotiations, 
Hanoi would at that time and under those circun:stances get 
into it. Tne Pole said that Hanoi was afraid of the mlinese 
Communists who have an interest in dragging on the war for 
many years. D'Orlandi added that the Pole vTaS evidently 
!proud of himself! for having brought these proposals about. 
"11. 
The proposals are as follO'\vs: 
A. 
They insist that the so-called National Libera-
tion Front ttake part I in the negotiations. 
rl'he key word is 
'take part. t 
According to D !Orlandi, there is Ina question of 
their being the representative; they are not to have any monopoly.! 
"13. 
!negative 
immediate 
North and 
LODG.E 
B. 
There must be suspension of the bombing . 
These are the two proposals. 
Then there are other points, which DYOrlandi called 
ones) t l'tThich are that (a.) Hanoi will not ask for 
reunification) either by elections or otherwise, of 
South Vietnam" 
(Section 2 of 2) 
"(b) They will not ask for establis:b.Jllent of a'socialist l 
system in South Viet-Nam; (c) They will not ask South Viet- Naill 
to change the r elationshiP3 which it has in the field of 
foreign affairs; and (d) ~hey will not ask for neutralizatior... 
2 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
( 
! 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
(e) Although they will ask for U.S. withdrawal, they 
are ready to discuss a 'reasonable calendar.' 
(f) 
Although 'we would like someone other than Ky' - to 
quote the words of Hanoi - they do not want to 
interfere with the South Vietnamese Government.lI 
1118. 
The Pole said that his Government would be 
willing to arrange for D10rlandi to meet with appro-
priate Polish spokesmen anywhere - Hong Kong or 
Singapore. 
In response to a question by D'Orlandi as 
to why they had come to him, the Pole said they vranted 
Ian able debater to put the case to President Johnson, 
and we feel that the Italian Govermnent has the sym-
pathy of the United States Government. I Moreover, the 
Italians have the same int.erest we have in agreement 
betvTeen Washington and Moscow, and in shutting out 
Peking. 
"19. 
D'Orlandi's impression is that the Poles 
are desperately seeking a way out on Moscow's instl~C­
tions. 
This, he said, may need further exploration. 
He had the definite impression that nmv Hanoi "vas 
amenable to common sense' saying 'they do not want 
anything that would not stop the ,Thole ·war. 
They want 
a political settlement, and are prepared tc go a long-
way. 111 
LODGE 
June 29 ( _ 1966 
On the same day that D'Orlandi saw LDdge in Saigon, the Italian 
Ambassador Fenoaltea brought the information to the State Department 
in Washington. 
State saw little ne'iT in it, wlth two exceptions. 
The 
Italians were therefore asked to inquire discreetly if there was real 
movement on the following points: 
(1) Did the condition that the NLF 7!take partll in negotiations 
mean it need r~o longer be accepted as the lI..;ole representative ll of 
the SVN people? 
(2) 
Did the word 7!suspensionll mean that a bombing lIcessation" 
was no longer a prerequisite to negotiations? 
3 
TOP SECRET -
NOnrS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
State 4108 (to .~embassy Saigon), TS!Nodis, 29 June 1966 
Literally Eyes Only for Ambassador 
Embtel 5840 
"Italian Ambassador Fenoaltea came in today with 
Faroche, Italian Ambassador-designate to Canada, .... rho 
had hand-carried message similar to that contained 
ref tel and who said he was under instructions to hand-
carry our reply back to Rome 
" 
"We told Fenoaltea that, except for use of term 
tparticipate! with respect to NLF, ~hich could have 
implication Hanoi was not insisting NLF be "sole 
representative' of SVN, and 'suspension of bombing' in 
place of !cessation of bombing;! position Hanoi indicated 
to Pole was very similar to previous indications their 
position. 
Thus in light of various translations these 
words have gone through, it is not clear ',·rhether their 
use has any significance. 
Therefore, without indicating 
to Pole that message had been passed to USG, suggested 
Italian Government on its m.;rn responsibility, query 
Polish Rep on these t-W'o terms to determine whether form-
ulations contained in Polish version of Hanoi's position 
were used advisedly by Ha.noi and indicate some shift in 
position or were accidents of translation .... " 
BALL 
June 30, 1966 
Rusk expressed skepticism about the value of the DRV proposal, 
even if there were some movement on the points enTh~erated} because 
allowing the NLF to lItake partll might lead it eventually to a major 
even "fatal II -- role in SVN politics} however the negotiations ca:!:J1.e 
out, and because a bombing "suspension" would produce pressures for 
a "cessation." Given the risks of recrimination from Fanfani and 
Rapacki, though, he felt it necessary to follow up. 
He also predicted, 
correctly, that the POL strikes then programmed for Rolling Thunder 
might stiffen the DRV position momentarily, arguing against trying 
to move too fast. 
Lodge, on the other hand, thought the package so forthcoming as 
to arouse suspicions about the iCltermediary. 
Presumably, he .... ras 
less familiar than State with the content of previous Hanoi communica-
tions of the sort. 
.MudJ. of the proposal) as conveyed, vas old, but 
tIm points t o which he dre~T attention were ne',.,: 
the appa:cent acceptance 
of the existing Saigon govern:/nent and of its foreign relationships . 
4 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Canberra 58 (to SecState ), S/Nodis, 30 June 1966 
Eyes Only for Acting Secretary and Ambassador 
from Secretary 
112. 
I can.l'1.ot from here make any full assessment of 
that message. 
The NLF part seems vague , encouraging 
only i n that it abandons the 'sole r epr esentative' 
position. 
However, thi s position has always seemed a 
maximum opener, and we must keep in mind ahrays that 
even 'taking part! on a full basis would go very f ar 
to give the NLF a major, and likely fatal , part in SVN 
politics . 
On the bombing, a !suspension! could easily 
lead to heavy pressure for a 'cessation '. For the r est, 
the disclaimers of any immediate 'Sociali st' set-up in SVN 
or of immediate reunification plans have a familiar ring 
from some past noises by DRV Reps trying to make them-
selves sound. reasonable~" 
114. 
All this being said, I sup:pose · that if Fanfani 
asks us t o let D 'Orlandi foll 0\-7 up, we would virtually 
have t o agree .... With careful instr~ctions and 
reasonabl e precautions, we should be able to mlnl.1D.1Ze 
risks. 
In any case refusal to follow up -- even if 
message wholly phony -- would expose us to r ecrimination 
from Fanfani and Rapacki alike ..•. !! 
"5. 
Mor eover, there might just be sometning in it. 
Poles and Italians may seem devious cha.nnels , but not all 
that implausible if Hanoi is having any second thoughts. 
If so, POL strike might stiffen them momentarily, to avoid 
any appearance of ,·reakness or effect of strike) and this 
argues fo:1:' not moving too fast .!! 
RUSK 
Saigon 5855 (to SecState), TS/ Nodi s ) 30 June 1966 
LiteraJ.ly Eyes Only for the President, the Secretary-
and the Acting Secretary 
!!3. 
Tne proposals attributed to Hanoi, as a paC!kage, 
go far beyond anything w~ ha¥e heard mentioned before . 
.in fact, they ap~ear;:,o Ior"tucom:;.ng as 1;;0 a"'!'ouse 
5 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE'I' -
NODIS 
suspicion concerning the credibility of the Polish 
intermediary . 
It seems to us that not only is the 
so-called1~F being abandoned as the sole bargaining 
agent, but so also is the NLF program of a 'socialist' 
state, of unifying the North and South, and of 
'neutralization.' Also the phrase 'reasonable calendar' 
indicates a definite softening of position regarding 
IG~~. Troops. 
The same is true of acceptance of the 
Government of South Viet-Nam and its foreign relation-
ships. " 
LODGE 
July 6 & 7, 1966 
Fanfani also described the contact to U Thant, who in turn passed 
it on to Goldberg at UN headquarters. 
This increased fears of a leak 
from Fanfani on the US side. 
In fact, the disclosure to U Thant was 
consider ed such a leak and doubtless put pressure on the USG to pro-
tect i tself by pursuing the contact, on the one hand) 9.nd by taking 
defensive positions on the other. 
Geneva 61 (to St9.te), TSjNodis, 6 July 1966 
For Acting Secretary from Ambassador Goldberg 
"5. 
Syg informed me that on recent visit to Italy 
Fanfani reported to him that POL ICC Ambassador had had 
conversation with Ho Chi MipJl on June 27 in which Ho 
presumably said that they would be prepared to engage 
in serious discussions "lvith us, not'ilithstanding Chi.nese 
and Soviet objections, if bombings 1-le~ce suspended and 
if Viet-Cong participated in talks. According to Th9.nt, 
this information relayed by POL ICC ~~bassador to 
Italian Ambassador in Saigon who in turn communicated 
it to Fanfani. 
Thant further reported that Fanfani 
believed message contained tvro new elements: 
(A) 
that Ho was not insisting on unconditional cessation of 
bombir~g: merely a suspensionj and (3) Ho not insistent 
that Viet-Cong be sole representatives of South Vietna-
mese people at such negotiations. 
Far~ani had also told 
the Secretary General that he thought this message of 
such ilnportance that it vrarranted sending a special 
Italian emissary to Washington to commurlj.cate the sub-
stance of it to United States officials. 
Syg said 
Fanfani did this and that special emissary was asked i~ 
Washington to r emain there pending a probe through 
6 
TOP SECREr - NODIS 
.,. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Fanfani of the word, suspension, and also to inquire what 
Ho meant by saying Viet-Cong would have to participate in 
the talks. 
Fanfani swore U Thant to secrecy and the 
Secretary General therefor e imparted this information to 
me in the strictist confidence saying he had not communi-
cated to anyone in Secretariat. 
He asked in particular 
that I not raise this with Far~ani, but if latter mentioned 
it to me, I should disclaim knowledge of it from Syg, 
except as I migh·t receive know'ledge of it from Hashington." 
TUBBY 
State 2673 (to Aruembassy Tokyo), TS/Nodis, 7 July 1966 
For the SecretarJ from the Acting Secretal~ 
"As you will have already seen from TOSEC 188, Fanfani 
has already begun to leak, having told U Thant of Polish 
message and in turn U Thant heving passed it on to Goldberg 
"I privately spoke to Fenoaltea today and, 1tlithout 
mentioning Goldberg, said that we hed indirectly heard that 
Fanfani had mentioned matter to U Thant. 
Fenoaltea said 
he would drop a private note to Fanfani. 
Fenoaltea 
expl'essed full ur:derstanding of problem of attempting to 
do business in this manner end much skepticism as to whether 
there "as any real substance in approach. 
He said though 
that, as we knev, FaYl..fanj_ felt impelled to tdo something. t 
" 
State 2619 (to US If.L:ission Geneva)) TS/Nodis, 7 July 1966 
Literally Eyes Only for Ambassador Goldberg from 
Acting Secretary 
"Re pa}:3.S 5 and 6 of Genevats 61 strictly FYI, we have 
received report from Ita.lians along lines indicated by 
Fanfani to U ~Ehant ••. we are l'ollowing up in very dis creet 
me.nner to test its authenticity •.•. " 
EALL 
July 7-9, 1966 
Lodge was instx'ucted to develop the conte,ct further, by meeting with 
D10rlandi and Lewandm-rski himself in Saigon, but to tell Ky something of 
7 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
a general nature in case rumors began to circulate. 
Lodgels inquiries 
. were to addres s procedures, but one matter of substance was raised, as 
it would be again and again from the US side: vlliat would Hanoi do to 
reciprocate the suspension of bombing? 
He carried out these instruc-
tions two days later (July 9). 
State 2626 (to Amembassy Saigon)) TS/Nodis, 7 July 1966 
" ... we suggest that Ambassador D'Orlandi seek 
discreetly to arrange a meeting between himself, Lewan-
dowski and Ambassador Lodge in Saigon . 
" ..•. At such a meeting you should, referring to 
USGts understandings of Le,¥fandmvski: s statements to 
D'Orlandi, and making clear that you are acting under 
instructions, state as follows: 
Ill. State that the United States shares the 
desire for an over-all political settlement. 
"2. 
Inquire when, where and with what partj_es 
Hanoi contemplates that negotiations would take place. 
:13. 
Inquire 'I.;hat if any action Hanoi on its 
pal~ would propose to take or not take during the period 
of suspension of bombing. 
"4. 
Inquire whether Hanoi believes it reali.stic 
to keep negotiatiop.-S secret if the United States suspends 
bombing with the inevHable speCUlation this would entail. 
II •••• He are inclined to feel it ..... rould be desirable 
for you to say something of a general nature to Ky without 
disclosing specifics .... If 
BALL 
Saigon 604 (to SecState), TS/Ncdis, 9 July 1966 
"l. 
Le'trandowski, D tOrlandi and I met at D 'Orlandi's 
office at 4:30 July 9. 
112. 
After m:;.r saying it was a personal pleasure for 
me to see him again, I began, pursuant to your 2626, by 
referring to OUT understanding of Levandowski's indicati.on 
that Hanoi 'ITaS open to a 'political settlement' which 
would settle the Viet..:.Narn question once and for all. 
8 
TOP SEC REf - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
"3. 
I added that we understood that Lewandowski 
had said to D!Orlandi that Hanoi in effect made two 
proposals: 
(a) 
The National Liberation Front would 
ttake partl in the negotiations. 
(b) 
There must be a suspension of the 
bombing in North Vietnam. 
"4. 
Our understanding of Amb. Lewandowski I s 
approach to Amb. DfOrlandi. was, I said, that if pro-
posals emerged as a basis for negotiations) then Hanoi 
would be prepared to enter into negotiations. 
"5. 
I then said that acting under instructions of 
the United States Government, I was authorized to state 
the following: 
"6. 
A.l1d I stated the four points in your 2626.!f 
LODGE 
Saragat gives Goldberg an account of the DIOrlandi-Lewandowski 
contacts ii1. Saigon similar to ths.t already passed by DJOrlandi to 
Lodge and by Fanfani to U Thant and l-lashington. 
He adds two points to the previous versions: 
i. Lewandowski! s intention is that the r..egotiations take place 
substantially between Moscow and Washington. 
If secrecy is -preserved, 
this ,{ill permit Peking to be ignored. 
ii. ~le US airs±rikes against oil depots near Hanoi and Haiphong 
on June 28 have not, in Lel·randowski! s view) prejudged the effort to 
arrange contact. 
Rome 145 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, 9 July 1966 
From Goldberg and Sisco 
IIAmb Goldberg saw Saragat privately Friday night 
July 8 .... 
11 
9 
TOP SECRET- NODIS 
<. " 
J
' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
ItFollowing in full is text of document which Saragat 
gave to Amb. Goldberg .... Begin text: 
On June .27 the 
Italian Ambassador in Saigon D'Orlandi reported that the 
Polish representati ve to the ICC Ambassador Savira just 
back from Hanoi had told him that the North Vietnam 
Government vere prepared to enter secret pourparlers in 
order to reach a political compromise with the United 
States at two preliminary conditions: i.e.) suspension 
of bombing over North Vietnam and Vi.et Cong participation 
in the negotiations. 
As to the nature of such compromise) 
the Hanoj. Government ·Here willing: (1) not to ask for 
the immediate reunification of North and South Vietnamj 
(2) to relinquish their claim to imposition of D.S. 
socialist system in South Vietnam; (3) not to ask for 
changes in the existing relations bet"Teen South Vietnam 
and the western countriesj (4) to discuss the timing of 
the withdraw·al of l\.Jnerican troops from South Vietnam 
while maintaining their request for such withdra'·Tal. 
"Moreover, the Polish representatiye made it clear 
that in his own opinion negotiations were to take place 
substantially betweeri MOS COlv and Washington. 
If absolute 
secrecy vTere maintained about the preliminary contacts) 
Hanoi) he thought) could have i gnored Peking. 
"On June 28 it was reported that oil depots in Hanoi 
and Haiphong had 1)een bombed. 
The Polish Ambassador 
expressed some reservations as to the consequences of 
such initiative but later reported that the attempt to 
open negotiations was not in his OIffi eyes pre-judged . 
"In connection ,.;ith Ambassador D'Orlandi's reports) 
the Italian PriMj.n and the Italian Minister of Foreign 
Affairs) \'Tho "'iTe:ce then in Bonn) decided to send Signor 
Farace) Deputy Dir Gen for Political Affairs) to Washing-
ton so that he may sound) together with Ambassador 
Fenoaltea) the reactions of the American Govt .... Farace 
and Fenoaltea on July 1 met in \-lashington Acting Secy of 
State Ball (Rusk was then in Australia) and Ball's Deputy 
Alexis Johnson. 
The tvo ft.m2rican officials ... suggested 
that D'Orlandi should request clarification from the Polish 
Rep on two points: (1) He should fiad out whether the 
words 'part icip8.tion of the Front of Liberation to the 
negotiations r 1-rere meant to exclude the Govt of Saigonj 
(2) He should also find out whether the word 'suspension' 
as applied to bombing was deliberately meant as something 
different from tcessation.' 
On July 2, 3) and 4 _Ambassador 
D10rlandi made clear that North Vietnam simply asked for 
susper~ ion of the bombing as a prel~~inary condition for 
the beginning of negotiations aimed at reaching a political 
10 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' -
NOD IS 
comprOmise on the above-mentioned lines . 
Viet Cong 
participation, furthermore, obviously did not rule out 
the participation of' the South Vietnam Govt;. It "l-1aS 
only suggested that once the negotiations had begun 
General Ky may be replaced with 'a less extremist 
political personality. 
On July 5 Fenoaltea and Farace 
in the course of a new meeting vith Ball and Alexis 
Johnson passed on to these two American officials the 
information received from D t Orlandi. 
The Americans •.• 
reserved their position because President Johnson was 
away in Texas and Mr. Rusk was still abroad. 
According 
to iwbassador Fenoaltea, further American communications 
would not be forthcoming for two or three days. 
"On July 7 Ambassador Fenoaltea reported that he had 
again met together with Farace the two American officials. 
They had expressed their opinion that Ambassador 
D'Orlandi and Ambassador Cabot Lodge should get in touch 
jointly and unofficially ",ith the Polish Ambassador to 
explore the possibilities of the North Vietnamese offer.
1f 
July 10, 1966 
iinen Lodge mentioned the matter to Ky, he expressed doubt that it 
would turn out to he.ve an.y" real substance, but said it would be followed 
up. 
Ky apparently went along graciously, suggesting that it might be a 
good time fOl~ a US leaflet campaign in the DRV, stressing our desire for 
negotiations . 
Saigon 642 (to SecState ), S/Nodis) 10 Jul;y 1966 
Itl~ 
Pursuant your 2626. I called on Ky ostensibly 
to discuss General Thi and ~CCluisition of suitable 
premises for the US consul in Danang. 
But as I was 
leaving, I remarked that tby the wayt we had been get-
ting some rumors out of Hanoi indicating a desire to 
find a "¥l'ay out. 
None of these seemed to have any real 
substanl.!e, but ',1e ,.;auld foll0Y1 all of them up and, if 
anything important occurred, I·re would of course tell 
him at once .!1 
1t3. 
He ma.de the following suggestion which I thought 
interes·ting : 
11 
TOP SECRET .- NODIS 
""' .' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRErr' - NODIS 
"4. 
The time has come for the Americans to put on 
another 'good "Till leaflet' campaign. 
The message on 
the leaflets should be that liTe (Vietnamese and Americans) 
want D:egotiations; it'is your ~lers 'I-Tho don't." 
LODGE 
July 24, 1966 
When Lewandowski replied to Lodge, under instructions from Warsaw, 
he could say only that there could be no results without a bombing 
cessation, that the DRV's 4 points must be recognized, etc. 
This 
seemed a step bacbmrd to all participants. 
The matter was left for 
some weeks. 
Saigon 1785 (to SecState), SjNodis, 24 July 1966 
!flo 
D'Orlandi, LevTandowski and I met at D!Orlandi's 
office at 4:30. 
'I'he meeting lasted for tventy minutes. 
Lewandowski talked as follovTS: 
"2. 
'I have the following instructions from 'VJarsaw 
whicb, I have 'been asked to t :cansmi t to Ambassador Lodge: 
A. 
!It is difficult to discuss any proposition 
du:t'ing the current important escalation of "Tar activitieS 
in the South, and of the bombing in the North. 
B. 
'To hold such discussions could be looked 
upon as a maneuver to force the DRV to negotiate under 
American conditions. 
C. 
'We knml very w'ell that the DRV will not 
give up the fight while the United States pursues its 
present policy of military pressure. 
D. 
'We have reasons to state that no proposi-
tion without the cessation of the bombing of the DRV will 
produce results. 
E. 
'United States Government has no right to 
bomb the DRV and no right to propose conditions for its 
cessation. 
F. 
'If the United States desires a peaceful 
solution, it must :r:ecqgnize tl1e fOUT points proposed by 
the DRV and prove It In practlce. 
12 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
37 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
G. 
'The United States must stop bombing and 
other military activity against North Viet-Na'U. 
Only 
then can a political solution be eA-pected.' Tr 
"16. 
D'Orlandi then spoke as follovlS: 
"17. 
'This is definitely a step backward. 
I had 
thought that the first meeting was rather encouraging. 
Both the opening and the American questions were 
encouraging . 
I felt something might come out and, as 
a matter of fact, I still feel -this as a hunch. 
Accordingly, I hope the stiffness of your reply today 
.\"; 
is due to prevailing circumstances, and that this 
channel may be kept open and resumed as soon as 
possible. 
We were expecting a reply. 
Now we have a 
statement . 
I understood what led to this statement. 
It is the circumstances of the moment. ' 
Tr18. 
I asked to what circumstances he was 
referring . 
He said to all of the rumors in the ne"\.;rs-
papers of peace talk.1I 
LODGE 
September 4-.§.., 1966 
After a period of inactivity and a discouraging visit to Hanoi by 
Lewandowski, D I Orlandi and I,e"landowski attempted to revive the contact. 
They saw two main problems: that their exercise not be viewed as 
probing for Hanoi1s minimQm position; and that it not be directed at 
reinforcing the status quo or facilitating deescalating, but :cather at 
finding an overall settlement that. would permit the war to end. 
Saigon 5229 (to SecState), S/Nodis, 4 September 1966 
Ill. 
D'Orlandi said that Lewandowski had returned 
from 16 days in Hanoi profoundly discouraged. 
His two 
closest contacts P'nelD. Vari Dong and Gener2,1 Giap were 
both away. 
His talk '.-lith Ho Chi Nin..h. produced nothing 
of interest. 
Thel'e ',las absolutely no sign of a desire 
to stop the Har.Tr 
13 
TOP SECRET -
NODm 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
114. 
DfOrlandi said he would be willing to work 
with Lewandmvski to try to develop a compromise 
formula, which could then be submitted to Hoscow or 
Washington. 
115. 
Comment: 
What are Department IS views of 
this suggestion? It could be that some ideas and 
clarification might come out of it,and that it would 
not, of course, commit us to anything. 
I doubt 
whether the Pole iviII be authorized. 
End' COI!JIl1ent. II 
LODGE 
State 41695 (to AmEmbassy Saigon), 6 September 1966 
II ••• we see no objection to DfOrlandils pursuing 
this with Pole if latter is so authorized .•. " 
Saigon 5517 (to SecState), S/Nodis, 8 September 1966 
Ill. DtOrlandi told. me that in his recent talk 
with Lewandowski, the problem referred to in my 
last telegram regE'.rding I.ewandm{ski and D fOrlandi 
working up a proposal to submit to Washington a,nd 
Moscml vras discussed. 
Lewandowski made three points: 
itA. 
He did not want the O!1~y outcome of 
the procedure beti·ieen D10rlandi and hi:rriself to be to 
inform the United. States as to f just how far the 
North Vietnamese would giye in. t 
fiB. 
Al though J..rewandQi-Tski recognizes that I 
had already given him ample assurances; he feels that 
emphasis must be given to the need of the U. S. 
approaching the problem so as to concern South Viet-Nam 
alone and not South Viet-Nam as a Ipiece of a general 
Chinese puzzle. t 
LewandoHsk.i feels that the problem 
could be tsimple enough' if limited to South Viet-Nam 
but not if the United States is thinking of using con-
versations with Lewa!1dmvski (and LewandoVTski's talks in 
Hanoi) as a I·rayof getting at China or Chinese q,uestions .•.. It 
14 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEeREI' -
NODIS 
"C. 
Levandowski said that it i-ras only fair 
to state that the laim of the exerciser between him and 
DrOrlandi should not be to reinforce the status Cluo) 
but to get a 
I global t settlement. irlhen he says 
I global T , 
he obviously does not mean world-i-lide; he means 
T over 
all' as regards South Viet-Nam. 
ThiS, said D'Orlandi, 
Cluotir..g Lei-landowski, means 
T guarantees, etc. r; therefore 
rnot just de-escalation. I" 
"5. 
Le,-landowski said he was sure tha.t something 
could be done. 
Hanoi, he sa.id, looks at the situation 
through the distorted spectacles of the Viet Cong 
through whom they get all their information about the 
situation. 
Il--Ty job, r said Lewandmrski, I is to explain 
to Hanoi that they have a wrong view. r 
The last ti.'lle 
he had been in Hanoi neither Pharo Van Dong nor General 
Giap were there, and 'they are the only two in the 
whole place i-Tho talk sense and understand the real 
situation in the south.:" 
LODGE 
September 12)~96~ 
State agreed that the contact be :pursued, reserved its position 
on "changes in the status 'luo,l! and offered to look for a gesture of 
good intent to encourage Hanoi (and D10rlanii), such as a proposal of 
mutually-timed -withdrawal} or trading a bcmbing cessation ph:s a halt 
in the US troop buildup for an end to infiltration. 
State !~4917 (to Aruembassy Saigon), S/Nodis, 12 September 
1966 
Ref: 
Saigon 5517 
"2. 
Le-...randmlski ! s remark that the aim of the 
exercise should not be to Ireinforce the status quo r 
is all right if he is talking about the p:'esent 
status Cluo in South Viet-Ham. 
But vre cannot buy a 
discarding of the status CluO ante) i.e. the 1954' 
and 1962 Agreements ... "He do not rule out cons idera-
tion of revisions of t 11e nrovi-sions. of the G~nelva 
Agreemen-cs but '.re COUl..u. a-ccep-c no changes Ulll,}. . -...re 
15 
TOP SECRET -
NODTS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NOD IS 
had a clear picture of i-That was the total context 
of an understanding i-Tith the COIlIDlUi.lists •... " 
.... 
"5. 
. •. we will consider here whether there 
is something that could be given to D'Orlandi for 
his 'possible agreement formula' which could 
demonstrate our earnest desire move forward and 
smoke out Hanoi's intentions. 
This might lie, 
for example, in realm of mutually-timed with-
drawal formula, or quid pro quo on cessation of 
bombing and halt in expansion US forces against 
end to infiltration by Hanoi." 
RUSK 
September 1.4, 1966 
D'Orlandi reports that Lewandowski is not interested in de-
. escalation or any other sequence that .... lill lead to preserving the 
present personnel of the GV1'J. 
It is this part of the "status quo" 
which must change. 
On the other hand, the Geneva agreements of 1954 
and 1962 need not be affected. 
Saigon 5965 (to SecState), S/Nodis, 14 September 1966 
"I. Pursuant to your 1+4917 I had a long session 
with D'Orlandi. 
"2. 
He says the phrase 'status quo' refers 
exclusively to the political and governmental status 
quo in Saigon and has nothing whatever to do with 
the 1954 and 1962 agreements ••.• 
II 3. 
Lei-Tando"i{ski was definitely not referring to 
the 1954 and 1962 agreements. 
He is not interested in 
de-escala.tion or any kind of negotiation which i-Tould 
lead to a settlement and which ,TOuld at the same time 
perpetuate the personnel of the present government. 
LewandOFski means that those on his side are not 
interested :'n ending military activities if, by so 
doing} the political and governmental situation in 
Saigon is thereby frozen.!! 
.... 
16 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"12. 
D'Orlandi. would like to test how influential 
Lewandowski is with Pham Van Dong and Vo Nguyen Giap, 
with whom Lewandowski claims to be so close. 
He is 
looking around for 'some little thing' which could be 
interpreted as an indication. 
He is sure Lewandow'ski 
speaks for Rapacki and with Moscow approval every inch 
of the way. 
He is inclined to believe that Lew'andowski 
speaks for Pham Van Dong and Vo Nguyen Giap: but would 
like to make sure. 
"13. 
I ventured the guess that nothing eould be 
expected out of Hanoi until our November elections were 
over. 
The time between now and then, therefore) I 
suggested, could be valuable in discussing and formu-
lating proposals. 
"14. 
D 'Orlandi did not agree. 
He thought we 
should not 'discard the possibility of discussions now' 
due to the internal upheaval in China, whic.h he 
believes brought the Peking Government verf close to 
a breach of dj.plomatic relations with Moscow. 
This, 
he surmised--and not our elections--was dominating 
official thiD..king in Hanoi •..• " 
..... 
LODGE 
September 18, 1966 
Lewandowski tells D'Orla.ndi that a coalition government should 
be considered) the bulk of \vhich would be lIsensible SVN politicians," 
with a man or t'l-TO from the right and a man or t-.olO from the J:.J"LF in 
"unimpol'tant ministries." 
SVN would become a "second Cambodia. ll 
But he is discouraged about US intentions because of the incompati-
bility of lImilitary escalation and political proposals." 
Saigcn 6280 (to SecState), S/Nodis) 18 September 1966 
"1. D 'Orlandi had a meeting with Lewandowski 
Friday night. It started as a social affair on 
D'Orlandi's invitation and on Lewandowski's initia-
tive became a discussion of the war . 
According to 
Orlandi, Lewandowski said the following: 
TOP 
SECRE~r
· - NODIS 
17 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODI2 
"5. 
If the Americans ever really cared) they should 
especially concentrate on Pham Van Dong1s fourth point con-
cerning Iwho is to speak for South Vietnam. I 
This does 
not me~n that Hanoi would be trying to ram the Viet Cong 
down our throats. 
1rJe could consider the setting up of a 
coalition government the bulk of which vlOuld be made up of 
Isensible South Vietnamese politicians.! 
To preserve 
appearances you could have 'on the fringe! men from the 
'right' in one or two !unimportant ministries l and from on 
' the 'left! fill one or two tunimportant ministries with the 
so-called NLF.! 
"6. 
you want 
talks. 
D 'Orlandi -- this is unthinkable. 
If this is what 
to talk about, it is better for us to stop the 
"7. 
what he 
not the 
Lewandowski asked whether D'Orlandi realized that 
meant to say was that this would be the last step 
first. 
"S. 
D'Orlandi said: 
What would be the ultimate goal? 
If it is to have the Viet Cong in the Government of Vj_et 
Nam, I won't even submit such a proposal to Ambassador 
Lodge. 
"9. 
Le'l'landOlvski s!3,id that is not at all -vThat he meant 
to put to D!Orlandi. Plainly} the ultimate aim would be: 
'to make of South Vietr1.am a second Cambodia. t 
"10. 
DtOr landi said that makes more sense) it is at 
least worth talking about. 
"11. 
LevlandO\-Tski said: 
tEut I don It believe the 
Americans really wish to talk. 
They are trying to do two 
things a,t once: military escalation grouped with political 
proposals. 
You can t t do both. 
So long as they "Vion' t make 
up their minds, we can't do anything. 
We must wait until 
November. I" 
LODGE 
September 22)~96~ 
Goldberg I S speech to the UN General Ass2:m.bly sJcresses the US desire 
for a negotiated settlement) proposing a reductj_on in Communist military 
activities in SV1if in response for a bombing cessation, and mutual with-
drmval of milita17 forces under international supervisicn. 
He reiter-
ates President Johnson I s statement that Vietcong representatlon in peace 
negotiations vlOuld not be an insurmountable problem. 
IS 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
r-
.-.-
. '-" 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
New York Times, 23 September 1966 
"Text of Goldberg1s Address" 
United Nations, Ne .... r York, Sept. 22nd 
"U.S. Offers !First Step! 
" ••• United States is willing once again to take 
the first step. 
We are prepared to order a cessation 
of all bombing of North Vietnam -- the moment we are 
assured, privately or otherwise, that this step will 
be answered promptly by a corresponding and appropriate 
de-escalation on the other side. 
~ve therefore urge 
before this Assembly that the Goverrunent in Hanoi be 
asked the following question, to which we would be 
prepared to receive either a private or a public response: 
"Would it, in the interest of peace, and in response 
to a prior cessation by the United States of the bombing 
in North Vietnam, take corresponding and timely steps to 
reduce or bring to an end its own military activities 
against South Vietnam? 
"Another obstacle is said to be North ' Vietnamts 
conviction or fear that the United States intends to 
establish a permanent military presence in Vietnam.. 
'Ihere 
is no basis for such a fear. 
The United States stands 
ready to ,,\-I'i thdraH its forces as other 'tIithdra't1 theirs so 
that peace can be restored in South Vietnam, and favors 
international machinery -- either of the United Nations or 
other m.achinery -- to insure effective superv:Lsion of the 
withdrawal. 
We therefore urge that Hanoi be asked the 
following question also: 
"WOUld North Vietnam be willing to agree to a time 
schedule for supervised, phased 'vithdravlal from South 
Vietnam of all external forces -- those of North Vietnam 
as well as those from the United States and other countries 
aiding South Vietnam? 
itA further obstacle is said to be disagreement over 
the place of the Vietcong in the negotiations. 
Some argue 
that, regardless of different views on who controls the 
Vietcong, it is a combatant force and, as such, should take 
part in the negotiations. 
19 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
.. 
IISome time ago our vie"\\T on this matter was stated 
by President Johnson, who made clear that, as far as we 
are concerned, this question vTould not be Ian insur-
mountable problem. I 
We therefore in"rite the authorities 
in Hanoi to consider whether this obstacle to negotiat10n 
may not be more imaginary than real.
1I 
October 5, 1966 
When D 'Orlandi tells Le,\TandO\\Tski he plans to return to Rome shortly, 
the latter protests, lIyou must not leave; there will be much to do after 
the 15th of November.1t 
Saigon 7712 (to SecState), S/Nodis, 5 October 1966 
Ill. 
On Tuesday: October 4, at the Apostolic Dele-
gate ts reception, D I Orlandi said to Lewandm-Tski that 
he intended to say to Fanfani that there was no longer 
any reason for him to stay on in Saigon at the expense 
of damage to his health ·.rhen there vlaS absolutely 
not.hing to do. 
112. 
According to D'Orlandi) Lewandowski said with 
great emphasis and ear'nestness, 
~you must not leave; 
there vTUl be much to do after the fifteenth of Novem-
ber. III 
LODGE 
October 14, 1966 
Lewandowski probes D I Orland i with respect to possible US-Chinese 
collUSion, reporting that Chinese permission for Soviet flights to Viet-
nam have been withdrmm. 
He also raises the possibility of ousting Ky, 
though whether as part of the negotiating arra.ngements or part of their 
outcome is not clear. 
Saigon 8567 (to Sec State), S/Nodis) 14 October 1966 
115. 
Lewandm-Tski went on to say that he was worried 
about reports about the Chinese J particularly that the 
20 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECHEI' - NODIS 
tAmericans are trying to feel out the Chinese.' 
He 
added: 
tIn such a case: we are out., 
"6. 
He said there "iere 'added strains' between 
China and Russia and that, due to a recent Chinese 
decision, there are now 'no Russian flights going 
through China to Viet-Name ' 
"7. 
Lewandovsld then, according to D IOrlandi, 
asked whether he thought tKy could be ousted. t 
"8. DtOrlandi says he replies that he absolutely 
refused to 'hagglet end would not get into a situation 
in which they agreed to this in exchange for our 
agreeing to that. 
In any case, this was a matter which 
would 'take care of itself! in a few months when the 
new constitution goes into effect." 
LODGE 
October 15, 1966 
State inquires i.f Lewa.ndowski had a particular reason for attach-
ing importance to the date of November 15. 
State 66655 (to Am.Embassy SAIGON), S/Nodis 
15 October 1966 
Ref: 
Saigon 7712 
"2. 
D I Orlandi at r"ext suitable occasj.on should 
ask Le"andowski if he had particular reason to attach 
importance to the date of November 15 after. which 
according to him there would be :much to do' (Para 2, 
Saigon 7712)." 
RUSK 
October 19) 1966 
DrOrlandi, on probing from Lodge, indicates that Lewandowski 
reflects the views of Pham Van Dong and Vo Nguyen Giap. 
Neither 
D 'Orlandi nor Levrandovrski can judge the relati'le influence of these 
21 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
men in the Hanoi power structure. D'Orlandi refuses to pick up the lead 
given by Goldberg 's UN speech and help devise a bombing-infiltration 
. formula that might be acceptable to Hanoi. 
He says Lewando\vski is 
interested only in a total package, something IIfinal,1I not de-escalation 
or even a IItruce to allow conversation. II 
To illustrate the total package he sugges-'cs: 
internationally con-
trolled elections after one or two years; a neutral government; US 
withdrm·ral lIeventuallyll j 
a coa.lition goverI1..lD.ent (llnot a 'must' I:. ) 
In response to State's query, Lodge reports that LewandavTski plans 
to go to Hanoi shortly after the U.S. elections. 
Saigon 8583 (to SecState), S/Nodis, 16 October 1966 
Ill. 
This is in reply to your 66655. 
"2. 
On Saturday I asked D'Orlandi this question: 
Does LevTandowski' s strong position against 
what he calls any form of 'barter', i.e. 'We stop 
doing this and you stop doing that' reflect his own 
appraisal of Hanoi's position or is it based 
explicitly on what he has aeen told by North Viet-
namese? 
"3. D'Orlandi's reply: 
This q,uestion is not 
phrased so as to reflect the realities. 
Lewandowski's 
views reflect Pham Van Dong and Vo Nguyen Giap who 
are the only tyro North Vietnamese vTith vThom Lewandowski 
has been in contact. 
Are or are these not the real 
pOlver in Hanoi? 
Lewar~doivski does not know. 
D 'Orle.r:di 
believes you know more than ,·re do about that. 
"4. Question: 
Could LewaEdOlvski envlsage any 
variation on Goldberg's Septenber 22nd bombing-
infU tration formula vlhich "rould be compatible both 
with the principle of reasonable reciprocity and with 
Hanoi's apparent determination to avoid actions 1vhich 
could be interpreted as bowing to U.S. pressure? 
It). Answer: 
D'Orlandi says: 
I don't think he 
would answer thg,t question. It would be going back on 
what he has said he refused to do. 
He wants an over-
all agreement -- not a truce IV'hich would allow conversa-
tions. 
He wants a 'pacy..age deal' "llhich covers evey:y-
thing and \-Thich thereby avoids any chance of publicity. 
Hanoi will buy something that is 'final.' 
22 
TOP SECR:t"T - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
1t6. 
When I a'gked D!Orlandi what would be the 
elements of a package deal he said for illustration: 
after one or two years, elections internationally 
control.led; a Vietnaraese Government which would abide 
by a policy of neutrality; the United States to leave 
!eventually! (this vTord vTaS stressed); a coal.ition 
government (which he said was not a !must!) which 
would contain representatives of so-called !extremistsl 
having nominal ministries. 
By fextremists! he meant 
the Ky regime on the one hand and the Viet Cong on the 
other. D10rlandi was sure there would never be an 
answer to the question !what vTill you do if the bomb-
ing stopS?1 
But a freal package deal l would get Ivery 
serious I consideration and it would get it f immediately. fit 
1t8. 
As far as the question of your paragraph 2 
is concerned I think it is answered effectively by 
Lewandowskils intention to go to Hanoi immediately 
after the U.S. elections. 
Lewa.ndowski says he lattaches 
special importance I to these elections. 
Even though 
he says he does not understand our national politics 
he knows that the fact that the elections have been 
held "rill tclear the air, vThatever the results illay be. 1 
It will mean that the electoral question will have been 
removed and he will know that the United States Ican 
deal if it wants to. I 
119. 
Comment: 
I find this interesting since it 
confirms the belief which you and I have had for a long 
time that they must at all costs avoid publicity and 
consequent loss of face. 
I think long drawn out peace 
talks are very dangerous for us. It appears now that 
they are convinced that lop~ drawn out peace talks are 
utterly unacceptable for them. 
End com."Uent.1t 
October 25, 1966 
The USG, GVN and Troop Contributing Countries propose settlament 
terms at the Manila Conference. 
These include an end to aggression; 
territorial integrity for sv~r; reunification Qy free choice, resolution 
of internal differences in SV"N through a program of national reconcilia-
tion; and removal of all allied military forces and installations no 
later than si.x months after "the militax'Y and subvel'sive forces of North 
Vietnam are withdr awn, infiltration ceases, and the level of violence 
thus subsides." The settlement would be assured by interp...ational 
guarantees, particulars of which are open to negotiation. 
23 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
The pivotal-features of the proposal are that (1) the future of 
the insurgents is to be settled through the national reconciliation 
program j and (2) allied i'!i thdrawal is to come after law and order are 
restored. 
TheG'2 provisions would not allow a coalition government in 
which the Communists or HLF participated as an organized entity. 
New York Times, 26 October 1966 
TEXTS OF CO~~~IQUE AND DECLARATIONS SIGNED AT 
CLOSE OF THE MANILA CONFERENCE 
'Ihe Cormnuniq,ue 
"27. 
So that their aspirations and position would 
be clear to their allies at lf~nila and friends eve~J­
where, the Government of the Republic of Vietnam 
solemnly stated its Vie"'iolS as to the essential elements 
of peace in Vietnam: 
(i) Cessation of aggression. 
At issue in 
Vietnam is a struggle for the preservation of values 
which people everywhere have cherished since the dawn 
of history: 
the independence of peoples and the freedom 
of indiViduals. 
The people of South Vietnam ask only 
that the aggression that threatens their i ndependence 
and the externally supported terror that threatens their 
freedom be halted . 
No self-respecting people can ask 
for less. 
No peace-loving nation should ask for more. 
(ii) Preservation of the territorial integrity 
of South Vietnaru. 
The people of South Vietnam are 
defending their own territory against those seeking to 
obtain by force and terror Hhat they have been unable 
to accomplish by peaceftu means. 
~fuile sYF~athizing 
with the plight of their brothers in the North and whiJe 
disdaining the regime in the North, the South Vietp..runese 
people have no desire to threaten or harm the people of 
the North or invade their country. 
(iii) Reunification of Vietnam. 
The Government 
and people of South Vietnam deplore the partition of 
Vietnam into North and South. 
But t,his partition 
brought about by the Geneva agreements in 1954, however 
unfortunate and regrettable, 'tTill be respected until, 
by the free choice of all Vietnamese, reunification 
is achieved . 
24 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
(iv) Resolution of internal problems. 
The people 
of South iTietnam seek to resolve their own b.ternal differ-
ences and to this end are prepared to engage in a program 
of national reconciliation. 
vllien the aggression has 
stopped, the people of South Vietnam will move more rapidly 
toward reconciliation of all elemen~cs in the society and 
will move forward, through the democratic process, toward 
human dignity, prosperity and lasting peace. 
(v) Removal of allied military forces. 
The 
people of South Vietnam will ask their allies to remove 
their forces and evacuate their installations as the mili-
tary and subversive ~orces of North Vietnam are withdrawn, 
infiltration ceases, and the level of violence thus subsides. 
Effective guarantees. 
The people of South Vietnam, 
mindful of their experience since 1954, insist that aD~ 
negotiations leading to the end of hostilities incorporate 
effective international guarantees. 
They a~e open-minded 
as to how such guarantees can be applied and made effective. 
"28. 
The other pa.rticipatinES governments revie'l-led and 
endorsed these as essential elements of peace and agreed 
they -would act on this ba.sis in close consultation among 
themselves in regard to settlement of the conflict. 
"29. 
In particular, they declared that allied forces 
are in the Republic of Vietnam because that cou...'1.try is 
the object of aggression and its Goveyrunent r equested 
support in the r esistance of its people to aggression. 
They shall be wi thdra'lm) after close consu~ tat ion, as the 
other side 'Ivithd:raws its forces to the North, ceases 
infiltration, and the level of violence thus subsides. 
Those forces vTill be withdrawn as soon as possible and not 
later than six months after the above conditions have been 
fulfilled. " 
November 10, 1966 
Rolling Thunder 52 i s authorized. 
Railroad Yard and the Van Dien Vehicle 
Steel Plant, the Haiphong Cement Plant 
25 
The targets include the Yen Vien 
Depot near Hanoi, the Thai Nguyen 
and two other tarESets near Haiphong. 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
50 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr -
HODIS 
JCS 7735 (to CINCPAC)} TS/LIMDIS} 10 November 1966 
Refs: 
(a) JCS 6008 
(b) JCS 5427 
lt1. 
(U) 
This is an execute message. 
112. 
(TS) 
Guidance govern:ing ROLLING THUNDER 51 
set forth in reference (a) remains in effect for ROLLING 
THUNDER 52} except for added targets and additional 
~lidance contained in this directive. 
113. 
(TS) 
Effective upon receipt of this message} 
you are authorized to conduct air strikes against the 
following objectives in North Vietnam: 
'IGT# 
NA..ME 
a. 18.42 
Xuan Mai Hwy Br 
b. 
19 
Yen Vien RR C1f Yard 
c. 
51.1 
Ha Gia POL Stor SSW (Former Phuc 
Yen POL Stor) 
d. 
51.18 
Can Thon POL Stor (Former Kep POL 
Stor) 
e. 
63.11 
Ven Dien Vehicle Dpo (Note 2) 
f. 
KiI11J. No SAlVI Star 
g. 
Hano i SAM Star :rm 
h. 
Haiphong SAM Assembly 
BE Nill'illER 
616-0244 
616-0221 
616-0662 
616-1340 
616-0696 
616-00914 
616-0257 
616-02044 
i. 76 
Thai Nguyen Steel Plant (ft..reas 
616-0214 
G) K} All Rolling Stock) (Notes 1 and 3) 
j. 76 
Thai Nguyen Steel Plant (Jcrea Q) 
(Notes 1 and 3) 
k. 
77.1 
Haiphong Cement Plant (Not.e 3) 
1. 80 
Haiphong 'r'PP Ttl (Note 3) 
m. 
82.12 
Haiphong TPP E (Note 3) 
616-0214 
616-0706 
616-0007 
616-0051 
TOP SECBEr - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
November 11, 1966 
Rolling Thunder 52 is amended to defer strikes against the T'nai 
Nguyen Steel Plant and the three targets near Haiphong. 
JCS 7783 (to CINCPAC), TS/LIMDIS, 11 November 1966 
Ref: 
JCS 7735 
"1. 
(TS) Air strikes will be deferred repeat 
deferred (not canceled) against the following object-
ives in North Vietnam. 
TGT# 
76 
77.1 
80 
82.12 
November 13, 1966 
NAME 
Thai Nguyen Steel Plant 
FiB.iphong Cement Plant 
Haiphong TPPW 
Haiphong TPP E 
BE NUMBER 
616-0214 
616-0706 
616-0007 
616-0051 
On the eve of a major visit by Lel-randowski to Hanoi, State tries-
through Lodge to clarify Lewandm13ki r s relatj.onship to Hanoi and his 
OIm conception of his role. 
His concept of offering Hanoi a "final lt 
settlement is challenged, on the grounds that it requires the US to 
modify its position before any ind.ication of concessions from the other 
side. 
Another attempt at finding a de-escalatory fOrhlula is offered, 
the "Phase A-Phase B" package. 
(Under this concept, the US would 
suspend bombing as Phase A. 
After a Vlhile: mutual de-escalatory steps 
would be taken as Phase B. 
T-~us all the reciprocity would appear to 
be contained in Phase B, even though the total de-escalation on each 
side oVer both phases '-Tould be matching.) 
Tnis formula is offered by 
State as a I-lay to save face for Hanoi while retaining reciprocity for 
a bombing suspension . . 
State 83786 (to A~embassy Saigon), rS/Nodis 
13 November 1966 
Ref: 
Saigon1s 10714 
"3. 
T'nese are queries to be put to Lewandmlski: 
a. What role does he envisage for himself? 
Is he, on the one hand, seeking merely to facilitate a 
27 
TOP SECREI' -
NODIS 
-52 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
better understanding on each side of the other!s 
position in order to pave way toward some kind of 
direct contact, and, if so, does he have reason to 
believe Hanoi will agree to such contact? 
Or, on 
the other hand, does he contemplate serving as an 
intermediary, conveying a series of proposals and 
counterproposals bet'Teen two sides to try to 
achieve agreement on specific issues? 
b. 
What does Hanoi consider to be his 
role? 
Has Hanoi entrusted specific messages to 
him and, if so, to whom were they to be conveyed? 
c. 
As we understand it, LewandOl·Tski 
wants an overall agreement and says Hanoi will buy 
something that is 'final,! he doesn1t want a truce 
just to 'allow conversations.: 
How does he propose 
to get from here to there? 
How would he envisage 
oVercoming our considerable reluctance to modify 
our position on one point or another without haVing 
any indication of what if any helpful response 
this would evoke from Hanoi? 
d. lie understand that considerations of 
face inevitably playa role in Hanoi's thiwdng. 
Does this perhaps explain, in Lewandowski's View, 
why we are unable to get any meaningful response to 
the question 'what would happen if the bombing of 
NVN stopped? I 
Does I.e.randowski see any 1Hay ' ~round 
this? 
Could some package deal be worked out which 
in its totality represented what both we and Hanoi 
would agree to as a reasonable measure of mutual 
de-escalation, but which wOlud have two separate 
phases in its execution. 
R~ase A would be a 
bombL.'1.g suspension; while Phase B, which would 
follow after some adequate period, ';lould see the 
execution of all the other agreed de-escalatory 
actions. Hanoi's actions taken in Phase B would 
appear to be in response to our actions in Phase B 
rather than to the bombing suspension. 
"4. 
Lewandowski shou2..d understand that none 
of the foregoing represents a position which he is 
authorized to put to Hanoi on our oehalf. 
""Ie will 
review his replies to our questions and will then 
wish to determine what we wish to propose concerning 
his forthcoming visit to Hanoi." 
RUSK 
28 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
~ NODIS 
November 14-15, 1966 
Lewandowski answers Statels queries: 
His role is part broker) part 
interlocutor. If he can narrow differences bevween the two sides 
sufficiently) they vTould v1ish to talk direct.::..y with each other and he 
would step out completely. 
He evades as "theoretical" the difficulties 
in his "final" settlement concept and chooses to interpret the Phase A -
Phase B proposal as a US recognition that "you canlt trade the bombing 
suspension for something else." He expects the package deal to begin 
its evolution without a bombing suspension, but with an end to the 
bombing fitting somelvhere in the eVolutionary process. 
He too has questions to pose; 
i. Does the Manila offer mean US troop withdrawal depends 
on GVN control of areas not now under Saigon control? 
ii. In case of a cease-fire, would the US withdraw from 
combat areas and not interfere in the creation of a new government in 
Vietnam? 
iii. In case of.a cease-fire, would the US not interfere in 
peaceful reunificat:i.on, whether brought about by referendum or election? 
iv. 
In the case of a cease-fire and negotiations) would the US 
publicly declare its vTillingness to use the G-eneva machinery and ICC to 
bring peace to Vietnam? 
Statels replies are carefully worded and not fully responsive to 
Lewandowski1s probing: 
i. The ~Bnila formulation speaks for itself. It offers a 
"definite 'withdrawal period" as a basis for negotiations which could 
include the mechanics of phased withdrawal. 
ii. He support the presently emergi.ng constitutional process 
in SVN and would abide by the- results of free elections: 
-
iii. We would accept peaceful, freely chosen reuni~ication) a 
pre-requisite for ¥Thich is the restOl'ation of peace and order in SVN. 
iY. 
The 1954 and 1962 Geneva agreements are an adequate basis 
for peace in SE ASia, but developments since 1954 suggest better machinery 
may be needed. 
State reiter,~tes that the route to a final settlement must begin 
with de-escalation and asks again what Hanoi would do if we stopped 
bombing . 
The meaning of this exchange is not very clear. 
LevrandO¥Tski seems 
to ge ask~ng if ~e wou~d ~cGep~ procedu~~s (troop wi~hdrawa~~rn~nter­
natlonal lnspectlon, el:;c .) Uial:; would aJ..J..ml changes In the )jvn 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
29 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
government favorable to the co~munists. We seem to reply negatively. 
Secondly, LewandmTski, by ostensibly putting the bombing question 
aside until more of the total package emerges, may be willing to accept 
our attack on the North as a pressure on Hanoi for compromising other 
issues. State, by attempting to address bombing as an identifiable 
issue, may be aggravating Hanoils problem of face. 
The difficulty from 
State IS point of view, dlf course, is knowing .That, if any, concessions 
Hanoi is making on other issues as the total package is built up. 
Having 
Lewandowski, a Communist, as middleman aggravates this problem. 
Saigon 10856 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, 14 November 1966 
"1. 
I met Lewandowski at DIOrlandils apartment at 
3:00 p.m. Saigon time. 
"2. 
• •. on the eve of his visit to Hanoi.... 
He 
had four questions, as follows: 
a. 
IRegarding the offer e.t Manila concerni.ng 
the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Viet-Nam on the 
condition that the troO'ps of North Viet-Nam would with-
draw (and, he said, North Viet-Nam, of course, doesn't 
admit that they are there at all), does this condition 
mean the United States withdra.lal depends on control by 
the present South Vietnamese Government of territories 
not now t4~der the control of Saigon~ 
b. 
lIn case of a cease-fire, would the United 
States be prepared to wi thdra.T from the combat areas and 
not to interfere in the creation of a n.e,{ government in 
Viet-Nam? 
Tne question of how the new government of 
Viet-Nam .Till be formed will certainly arise. 
c. 
tIn case of a cease-fire, would the United 
States undertake not to interfere in peaceful progress 
toward unification of Viet-Nam if the people so wish, ' 
whether by referendum or by election? 
d. 
lIn the case of a cease-fire and negotia-
tions, would the United States be ready to use the Geneva 
Agree~ent and the m~chinery of the :nternational Commission 
in bringing peace to' Viet-Nam, and if so, would the United 
States pubicly declare its intention to this effect?1 
"3. 
I said that there i-Tere questions which I lwuld 
have to refer to the U.S. Government, and that I would do so 
and provide ansvers as soon as I could. 
30 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"4. 
I then said I had some questions to ask, and 
I asked him the four sets of questions listed in your 
State 83786 •••• 
"6. Without any pl'odding at all from me or D'Orlandi, 
he said 'Well, some of your questions cannot be answered 
nmT. 
As to your Question lifo. I, my present role is in 
accord with the instructions of my government who would 
be prepared for me to take any role which would bring 
peace nearer. 
The two roles set forth in your question, 
that is, on the one hand, to work to facilitate a better 
understanding and pave the 'fray to contact or, on the 
other, to be an interm~diary, do not exclude each other. 
In fact, they could be done together. If the ideas which 
can be developed are not too far apart, then there can be 
talks, and if the ideas then start separating, both sides 
can withdraw. 
On the other hand, if I am successful in 
bringing the two sides together and they agree on something 
together, I can withdraw feeling that I have achieved 
something useful. 
"7. 
As to the second question, Le,;"andowski said 
'you have worked in Southeast Asia and you realize that 
diplomacy in Viet-Ham is different than what it is in 
Europe or the United States. 
Clear-cut answers are very 
difficult to get, one has to be very patient and look for 
indj_rect symptoms . I 
He was not, he said, an agent of the 
Hanoi Government, but I if and when they decide they .Tant 
you to knO'tT something, I he said, Ithey would tell me. 
Of 
this I am cOJ:1..fident. 
Each time I go, the Prime Minister 
asks me about Americans and .That the Americans thiIL'k. I 
"8. 
IOn your third question, it is a frame without 
a picture, it is very theoretical. I 
"9. 
'As to the fou.rth question, it recognizes that-
you canlt trade bombing suspension for something else. 
The question of bombing suspension in the first instance 
could be discussed informally. 
But if well founded hopes 
developed for reaching some agreement, then the bombing 
suspension could be brought in in·the second phase. I 
"10. DIOrlandi remarked that in the beginning of our 
talks, Lewandowski had agreed that the bombing suspension 
would not be a precondition. 
31 
TOP SECREI' - r· ODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"11. 
Lewandowski said, IYes, there must be positive 
steps -- not speeches or declarations. A package deal 
is not only the most practical way of going at it; it is 
the only one. 
The A and B in your fOU1~h question are 
the beginnings of the alphabet. 
It might be quite useful. 
We must go right thro~gh to Z, including everything that 
needs to be in the package deal. I" 
LODGE 
State 84238 (to Am8mbassy Saigon), TS/Nodis, 
14 November 1966 
Ref: 
(a) Saigonls 10856 
(b) State 83786 
"4. 
. .. while 't.;e remain i.ntent on finding a pa-l:.h to 
a reasonable a.nd honorable settlement; we are not pre-
pared to withdraw and find that armed subversive elements 
from the North have moved in again. 
We are Serious in 
expressing our willingness to remove our troops, to dis-
mantle our bases, and accept a non-aligned South Viet-Nam 
so long as it is genuinely non-aligned. 
We do not regard 
the genuir~e neutrality of South Viet-Nam as opposed to 
our interests. Hith respect to our efforts to find an 
approach toward reciprocal actions of de-escalation, we 
are aW'are that Hanoi must assign weight to considerations 
of face, and \,j'e have said that so long as we were certain 
that the elements from the North 'were removed) we would not 
insist on any acknOl-lledgement that these forces had ever 
been in the South . 
"5. 
In addition to the foreg'oing, we have the foll0l-7-
ing specific comments on Lewandowskils four questions: 
A. 
Tne Manila formulation on withdrawal was con-
sidered and worded with the greatest care. It was included 
in the communique in the light of specific indications from 
Eastern European sources that such a mention of a definite 
withdrawal period would help in establishing an acceptable 
basis for negotiations. 
The mechanics of a phased YTith-
drawal would probably have to be a matter for negotiation 
although the initial de-escalatox'y steps might be taken by 
mutual example. 
32 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
f :.7 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
B. 
We have often said that we supported free 
elections in SO:J_th Viet-Nam to give the South Vietnamese 
people a government of their own cnoice. 
We are pre-
pared to abide by the genuine manit'estation of that free 
choice. 
We support the emerging constitutional process 
in So~th Viet-Name 
The orderly formation of a responsive 
and representative governm2nt based on free elections will 
receive our support. 
C. 
We are on record that the question of the 
reunification of Viet-Nam should be determined by the 
Vietnamese of both North and South through their own 
free deCiSion, without any interference from outside. 
Eevf soon that can take place depends on a number of factors, 
above all the r estoration of p'2ace and order in South 
Viet-Nam so that South Viet-Nam .Till be in a position to 
treat freely. with NVN on this matter. 
D. 
We have already declared our view that the 
1954 and 1962 Geneva agreements are an adequate basis 
for peace in Southeast Asia. 
Since 195)+ there have been 
many developments ,·rhich have revealed sharply the need for 
an effective and truly neutral mechanism of supervision 
and control. 
We viould be prepared to discuss all m'3.tters 
bearing upon this complicated problem. 
"6. 
We ,wuld also observe that .The:!:; Lewandowski 
terms our 'tneoretical t third question of how we get from 
here to there bears most directly upon his proposal for a 
tpackage dealt including, as he put it, not only A and B 
but all the other letters of the alp~abet. These range 
all the way from the reciprocal measures of de-escalation 
to the components of a final settlement. 
The immediate 
issue is to find out precisely and concretely even if 
quite privately ,{hat steps Hanoi would take if we stoPP2d 
bombing •••• " 
Y.ATZh'NBACH 
Saigon 10955 (to SecState ), TS/Nodis , 15 November 1966 
112. 
When. He three met} I read him slowly the ful.l 
text of your 84238. 
Then I read it a second time. 
Both 
DtOrlandi and Lewandowski took very careful notes and 
were at great pains to get evervthiD£ exactly right . 
My 
reference to Item 3.D. of your B3i8bwas not lost on 
33 
TOP SEC~~ -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Lewandowski. 
Comment: 
I am beginning to wonder if this 
is not becoming the crux of the matter. 
End Comment. 
LODGE 
Novem~ 16-20, 1966 
A separate attempt to elicit a response to the Phase A - Phase B 
formulation is made by passing it to the Russians via George Brown 
during his visit to MoscovT. 
They indicate interest, provided that the 
DRVts 4 points and the NLFts 5 points are accepted as a "basis for 
discussion" in the negotiations that follow. 
BrOlVll is not informed of 
the Lewandowski contact, and it does not come up during his talks in 
Moscow. 
State 86196 (to Amembassy London), S/Nodis, 
16 November 1966 
Please pass following message from Secretary to 
FonSec Brown 
" ••. Dear George: 
Your forthcoming visit to MOSCOl-T 
is obviously of the greatest importance in sounding out 
the Soviets on the possibilities of action tow'ard peace 
in Viet-nam .••• " 
"p..s one way of saving Hanoi t s face, you may wish 
to explore on your own initiative the possibility of a 
pacy.age deal vlhich in its totality represented what 
both we and Hanoi vTOuld agree to as a reasonable measure 
of mutual de-escalation, but which would have two 
separate phases in its execution. 
Phase A would be a 
bombing suspension, while Phase B J vThich would follow, 
would see the execution of all the other agreed de-
escalatory actions. 
Hanoits actions taken in Phase B 
might appear to them to be in response to our actions 
in Phase B rather than to the bombing suspension. 
Obvioucily, Hanoi cEmnot have the bombing suspension 
without also accepting Phase B. 
We would, of course, 
like to hear Moscow or Hanoits reaction to this 
admittedly general proposition before w~ make any 
specific commitments ." 
RUSK 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
.61 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
State 91787 (to Amembassy London), S/Nodis, 
20 November 1966 
Eyes Only for Ambassador from Secretary 
"I. Following text message to me from George 
Brown delivered by UK Embassy here ..•. 
"On the first day I tried hard to get Gromyko 
to layoff his gramophone record and get down to 
the ~uestion of the three issues (paragraph 10 of 
your message). 
However, he gave no ground but his 
interest was sufficiently intent to encourage me to 
give him an outline of the package (paragraph 14 of 
your message). 
This I did orally before dinner on 
the first evening, giving it to him as my own pro-
posal. 
Next morning, purely for the sake of clarity, 
I gave him a piece of paper. 
Tne actual words used 
are enclosed. 
He was pretty SUSPlClOUS but promised 
to pass it on to Kosygin only. 
"It was on the basis of this piece of paper 
that I talked vrith Kosygin this morning.... On his 
side after a lot of the usual stuff, pretty mu.ted, 
about American aggression, he said that they vrere 
prepared to make the North Vietnamese four points 
and the NLF five points ta basis for discussion. t 
When I said that I had interpreted a basis of dis-
cussion as meaning that they would be flexible 
neither he nor YlT. Gromyko contradi.cted me. 
Their 
pack.age ,Tould seem to be an unconditional stoppj.ng 
of the bombing, some de-escalation in the South and 
then negotiations on the basis as above ..•. " 
RUSK 
November 30-December 1, 1966 
Lewandowski returns from Hanoi. 
He has formulated 10 points to 
reflect the US position with respect to an overall solution of the 
Vietnam "rar. 
There is sufficient interest in Hanoi) he says , that the 
U.S. should, if the formulation is acceptable, confirm it directly to 
the DRV Ambassador in Warsaw. 
He urges speed to guard against a leak 
or sabotage by those "workj_ug against a solution. rr 
His source in 
Hanoi, he says) is Pham Van Dong, who has the "Presidium behind him. tt 
Most of Levandowski IS 10 points reiterate familiar US positions. 
His principal inaovation is US acceptance that "the present status ~uo 
in SVN must be changed in order to take into account the interests of 
35 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
[I) 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
the parties presently opposing the policy of the U.S. in SVN." 
He 
does not include the Phase A - Phase B formula for de-escalation, but 
states that the US would stop bombing to facilitate a peaceful solution} 
would "accept DRV modalities on the cessation}" and would not require 
the DRV to admit infiltration into SVN. 
Lodge believes, however, that 
he did gi ve his presentation in Hanoi in accord with the full Phase A -
Phase B formulation. 
Lodge refers the 10 points to Washington, to see if they are an 
acceptable representation of the US position. 
He points out two 
difficulties himself) however: 
the phrase "status quo in SVN must 
change" would be more acceptable if it read "status quo in SVN would 
change"; and the terms for de-escalation are poorly expressed. 
Saigon 12247, TS/Nodis, 30 November 1966 
"Lewandowski surnularized the 10 points to Lodge as 
follows: 
(1) 
The U.S. is interested in a peaceful solu-
tion through negotiations. 
(2) Negotiations should not be interpreted as 
a way to negotiated surrender by those opposing the 
U.S. in Vietnam. 
A .political negotiation "\wuld be 
aimed at finding an acceptable solution to all the 
problems , having in mind that the present status quo 
in SVN must be changed in order to take into account 
the interests of the parties presently opposing the 
policy of the U.S. in South Vietnam. 
(3) 
The U.S. does not desire a permanent or a 
long-terw military presence in SVN. 
(4) The UoS. is willing to discuss all problems 
with respect to the settlement. 
(5) 
The U.S. is vlilling to accept the partici-
pation of tall t in elections and the superVision of these 
elections by an appropriate international body. 
(6) 
The U. S. believes that reuni.fication should 
be settled by the Vi etnamese themselves after peace 
and proper representative organs are established in SVN. 
(7) 
The U.S. is prepared to abide by a neutral 
South Vietnam. 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
(8) The u.S. is prepared to stop bombing fif 
this will facilitate such a peaceful solution.' In 
this regard the U.S. is prepared to accept DRV 
modalities on the cessation and not require the DRV 
to admit infiltration into SVN. 
(9) 
The u.S. will not agree to 'reunification 
under military pressure. ' 
(10) 
The U.S. 'will not declare now or in the 
future its acceptance of North Vietnam's 4 or 5 points.' 
"Lewandowski asked if these 10 points were a 
proper formulation of the U.S. position. 
Lodge said 
that they seemed to be in order, but that the matter 
was of such sev~itivity and importance that he would 
have to refer the points back to Washington for 
approval. 
Lodge added, however, that he saw two 
difficulties right off. First, he suggested changing 
Point 2 to read 'would' instead of 'must.' 
Second, 
he questioned the phraseology in Point 8 -- lif this 
would facilitate such a peaceful solution.' 
"LevTandmTski insisted that his statement YT8.S a 
serious proposition based on conversations with the 
'most respectable governillent sources in Hanoi. I 
Later Lewandowski admitted that Pham. Van Dong was 
the SOl~ce and that he had the rPresidilm behind him.' 
"Lev7andovTski stated: 'I am. authorized to say that 
if the U.S. are really of the views which I have 
presented, it would be advisable to confirm them 
directly by conversation ,·lith the North Vietnamese 
Ambassador in Warsaw. ' 
"Lewandowski said that there was a vital need to 
move qUickly because (1) there was a danger of a leak 
and that secrecy was essential for Hanoi; and (2) that 
delays would give those 'working against a solution' 
time to 'put down the clamps on talks. ,II 
State 94660 (·to Aruembassy Saigon)) TS/Nodis 
1 December 1966 
"(5) Do we interpret your comment at the end of 
para D-8 correctly to mean that Lewandowski presented 
our phasing formulation fully and accurately,?11 
RUSK 
37 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Saigon 12323 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, 
1 Dec_ember 1966 
Ref: State 94660 
"5. 
Your para 5. 
Lewandowski did not repeat not 
present your pnasing formulation 'fully and accurately' 
in his conversation with me. 
He merely cited 'your 
Phase A and Phase B,I with clear implication that HS 
(Sic) had given his presentation in Hanoi in accordance 
with your formulation." 
LODGE 
December 2, 1966 
Airstrikes are run against the Van Dien Vehicle Depot and the Ha Gia 
POL Storage Facility 6.7 and 16 nautical miles, respectively, from the 
center of Ha.noi. 
December 3, 1966 
(NB. DOD files do not contain Wa.shington-Saigon or Washington-vTarsaw 
traffic on Marigold for December 2-1.J.. 
1f.aat follows is derived from later 
cables. ) 
On instructions from State, Lodge meets Lewandowski again to state 
that: 
i. The U.S. Fmbassy in VTarS8.l:1 I'Till contact the DRV Embassy on 
December 6 or soon thereafterj 
ii. Lewandowskifs 10 points broadly reflect the US positioDj but 
111. 
"Several specific points are subject to important differences 
of interpretation." 
LewandOl07ski, in turn, expresses concern a.bout US bombing of Hanoi, 
acting on instructions from Rapacki. 
(Saigon 12428) 
December 4, 1966 
Airstrikes are run against the Yen Vien Railroad Yard and the Ha Gia 
POL Storage Facility, 5.5 and 16 nautical miles , respectively, from the 
center of Hanoi. 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
December 5, 1966 
Grounouski is summoned by the Foreign Minlster in Warsaw and given a 
Polish recapitulation of Marigold. 
According to Rapacki's account of the 
December 1 meeting in Saigon, Polish support for a US-DRY contact in War-
saw was extended "after Lodge confirmed Lewandowski's resume." 
Thus 
Lodge's December 3 statement about "important differences of interpreta-
tion" appears as a revision of earlier US acceptance. 
Rapacki argues that the US reservations about interpretation are so 
broadly stated as to put the whole basis for the contact in doubt. 
Also, 
coming "after all the conversations which were held," the statement might 
undermine the role of Poland as intermediary. 
He urges inste~d that it be 
replaced by a statement defining the differences of interpretation the 
USG has in mind and asks Gronouski to take this up with the President. 
He also refers to the "intensification of bombing near Hanoi subse-
quent to the Lodge-LevTandowski conversations" as likely to create doubts 
on the DRV Side. 
It is hard to know precisely what has happened in Polish-DRY communi-
cations ~t this point. Rapacki's account suggests that the Poles told 
Hanoi they had US ~pproval of Lewandowski's 10 points after the December 1 
meeting. If so, the events of December 3 (the air strikes near Hanoi 
and the l1differences of interpretationl1 ) might well have been vieived in 
Hanoi as casting doubt on Polish reliability) on the sincerity of US 
interest in negotiations, or both. 
Altern~tively, Rapacki may simply have 
been trying to extract additional concessions or statements of position 
from the Americans, using these derelopments for leverage. 
Warsaw 1363 (to SecState), 5 December 1966 
For the President and Secretary 
111. 
I was called to Forni"iin 11: 30 a.ill. Dec 5 by Dir-
gen Michalowski who, after detennining that I knew what 
meeting 'IfaS about, took me in to see Forcl-1in Rapacki." 
"4. 
Rapacki continued that on IJec I, after return 
of Lewandowski from Hanoi, LevTandowski had third meeting 
with Lodge in which he gave a res~me of USG position as 
he had understocd it from the tyro previous conversations. 
After Lodge cont'irmed I,e'\.,randowski I s resume, LewandmTski 
said contact of USG and North Vietnamese Ambassadors in 
Ivarsawwould have support of Poles. 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
39 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
"5. 
Continuing his account of prior events) Rapacki 
said that on the afternoon of Dec 3, at a fourth meeting 
between :'odge and LevTandowski, Lodge) on the bas is of the 
Presidentts instructions, read a statement as follows: 
A. 
The President will instruct the U.S. Embassy 
in Warsaw to contact the North Vietnamese P~bassador in 
Warsaw on Dec 6 or as soon as possible thereafter. 
B. 
The U.S. Embassy in Warsaw will be in a 
position on Dec 6 to confirm to the North Vietnamese 
Ambassador that the Lewandowski Dec 1 resume of the Lodge-
Lewandowski conversations broadly reflects the position of 
the USG. 
C. 
tWe must add that several specific points 
are subject to important differences of interpretation. til 
"6. 
Rapacki said that Lodge was unable at the Dec 3 
meeting to precisely say which points were subject to 
differences of interpretation and what the nature of these 
differences of interpretation might be. 
"r(. 
Rapacki then stated that question of interpre-
tation put in doubt whole basis on vThich contact with North 
Vietnamese Ambassador in Warsaw was to have taken place. 
He expressed grave concern as to hOI', equivocation "Till be 
read by Hanoi. 
He added that Poles must transmit USG 
position to NV1{ Govt.; and that r ather than a general 
reference to differences of interpretation it would be 
better if position transmitted contained statement defining 
differences of interpretation we have in mind. 
He said 
such a statement might have a significant effect on Hanoits 
atti tude tovard both a meeting in 1.Jarsaw and the I-Thole 
problem. 
"8. 
Rapacki then asked what can be the position of 
Poland in its role as intermediary if after all the con-
versations which -.Tere held and statements made there still 
remains this doubt? 
He asked again how this reservation 
will be read by Hanoi, particularly with intensification 
of bombi~lg near Hanoi subsequent to the Lodge-IJewando\-Tski 
conversations? 
He said these questions had already been 
raised by Lewando~Tski during his Dec 3 conversation with 
Lodge. II 
40 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr - NODIS 
"12. 
Rapacki asked that I transmit to the Presi-
dent the Poles deep concern caused by modification of 
USG position which has been signaled by the Dec 3 
declaration of ~IT . Lodge and his hope that para on 
differences of interpretation can be deleted on grounds 
that it was based on misunderstandings which have 
since been clarified." 
GRONOUSKI 
December 5J 1966 
Gronouski is instr~cted to stick with the reservation as worded on 
the grounds that we mi~ht be charged with bad faith if we did not make 
clear the wide latitude for interpretation of the general language used 
by LeVlandOlvski. 
State 97016 (to Amembassy Warsaw), Nodis J 
5 December 1966 
Ambassador Eyes OJ:l~y TOSEC 14 Secretary Eyes Only 
Ref: 
Your 1363 
" •.•• We might expose ourselves to charges of bad 
faith in any subsequent negotiations if 1'7e did not 
make clear' that there is a wide latitude for interpre-
tation of the general language used by Lewandowskj .. 
ltLewandowskifs formulation broadly reflects the 
position of the US Government on the issues covered 
and we would be prepared to accept it as the basis 
for direct discussions vrith the North Vietnamese if 
they are in fact interested in plITsuing the matter] 
and if they were informed that latitude for inter-
pretation of such general language is inevits.ble." 
December 6J 1966 
Gronouski carries out his instructions and is told by Rapacki 
that the US statement ivill now be transmitted to Hanoi. 
Rapacki says that the DRV expects to receive at the first Warsaw 
meeting the precise and official position of tbe USG in order that it 
can express its position at an appropriate tD~e . 
He apparently 
41 
TOP SECRET - N0DIS 
(f 
Va 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr - NODIS 
understands Lodge to have indicated that such a package proposal would 
be forthcoming . 
Gronouski replies that he had anticipated a more limited scope 
for the first meeting--confirmlng Lewando~Tski I s formulation, dea.ling 
with matters such as time and place, etc. 
He refers the matter to 
Hashington. 
Meanwhile, Lel-randowski makes many of the same points to Lodge 
in Salgon. 
He adds that the "vlarsaw contact was shadowed by the 
bombing of Hanoi" and asks the US to "avoid adding to the difficulties. II 
Warsaw 1375 (to SecState), T3/Nodis, 
6 December 1966 
Ref: 
State 97016 
"1. 
Met with FonMin Rapacki 1300 hours Dec 6 and 
conveyed material in ref tel." 
"5. 
Rapacki said that he understood Lodge to 
have done the follow'ing: 
A. 
Presented official USG position or 
principles for peaceful solution; 
B. 
Stated that a new package deal of U3G 
proposals would be forthcoming; 
C. 
Expressed ivillingness of USG to discuss 
four points and any other points raised by other side. 
(FYI: 
'I'his summary was ap;r'opos of nothing. It was 
simply int erjected in the conversation.) 
"6. 
After repeating his view that proposal fer 
meeting in Warsaw was a significant Nv1-T response, h2 
said Poles must reserve judgment cmtil they can study 
situatien further to determine wneth2r USG had 
actually made step fO~iard. He expressed the opinion 
that what had transpired oet"reen Lodge and Le .. vandO-~Tski 
prior to latter's trip to Hanoi did represent step 
forward but the ~ualifications made by Lodge on Dec 3 
cast doubt on this judgment." 
"9. 
Rapacki sa.id that at any rate they cannot 
delay any longer in transmitting infonn"l.tion to HanoL 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
£. 7 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
He added that the original position of Lodge is known 
to Hanoi} and it remains a question as to how the 
qualification of Dec 3 will be interpreted by sensi-
tive elements in t he NVN Govt. 
Rapacki said that 
information transmitted to NVN will reflect the 
material presented to him today} but Poles must also 
express their own doubts and misgivings over the 
question of interpretation raised by Lodge. 
"10. 
Rapacki then turned to the substance of the 
first Ttlarsaw meeting with NVN Ambassador 
t in the event 
it takes place. t 
He said it is his unierstanding t~at 
during that meeting we will present to the NVN side 
the position of USG in order that the NVN Govt can 
express his position at an appropriate time on the 
attitude of the USG and on subsequent modes of pro-
cedure. 
He said the NVN Govt. expects to receive at 
the first Warsav' m.eeting the precise and official 
position of the USG and he aSSLuues (with a smile) 
that it will not be different than the one presented 
to Le~..randows ki. He said he presu.med I a1ready have 
locked in my safe such a statement which vTill be able 
to identify the specific points on which there is ,vide 
latitude for interpretation. 
(FYI: 
Rapacki read from 
. a Dec 3 statement given to Le1tTando"..rski by Lodge when 
making his reference to specific points.) 
He said he 
hoped at that meeting 1tT2 will be able to discuss 
diff'erences in interpretation (adding that he still 
was looking for 8.n anSvier to the questionfdifferences 
with whom r ip.asmuch as the NVN Govt. has not yet pre-
sented their interpretation.) 
"11. 
I said that I had presumed that the first 
meeting vlOuld be more limited in scope. 
I expected 
that the first meeting ';Tould be primarily concerned 
with establishing tbat both sides were interested in 
beginning negotiations} and deal ,dth such matters as 
time a..'1.d place of negotiation session. 
I added that we 
would also expect at the first meeting to confirm lfIT. 
Lewando-.Tskits formulation of our position as broadly 
reflecting the position of the USG with the qualifi-
cation regard.ing interpretation . 
I added} hOlvever} 
that 1 would inform "ltTashington of his underst3.nding 
of the nat.ure of the first meeting." 
GRONOUSKI 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
1 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Saigon 12601 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, 6 Dece~ber 1966 
"1. 
Le,randOvTski asked to meet me at D 'Orlandi I s 
today. 
He began by saying that he had asked for the 
meeting because of a co~mnunication which he had received 
from Mr. Rapacki in '\Ilarsa,T, which asked him: 
"2. 
tPlease turn the attention of Am'Jassador 
Lodge to the fact that the formulation of the last para-
graph of the statement of December ~1ree may be under-
stood as raising a Question about the whole positj_on 
embodied in the ten paragraphs and which -was to form the 
platform for the Warsaw Meeting. I" 
"5.' LewandmlSki then said, rather as an after-
thought, that Ithe overture of the WarsmT contact was 
shadowed by the bombing of Hanoi and He should; therefore, 
avoid adding to the difficulties. I" 
December 7, 1967 
Gronouski is told that the USG position 'das conveyed to Hanoi the 
previous day, that the intensification of the bombing is raising suspicions 
in Warsaw as ,Tell as Hanoi, and that the DRV will be keenly disappointed if 
the first meeting does not include a direct statement of the USG position. 
Tne DRV "is not interested in what Lei-randowski said. 11 
With respect to the bombing problem, the Poles reject the eJ<..-plana-
tions that the target list cannot be sudden~y altered without alerting 
many people that something unusual is happening and that 'What appears as 
an intensification of bombing is in fact d.ue to irJ.proyed. i-leather conditions. 
Rapacki. says "policy is more important than weather,lI and we are urged not 
to bomb in the vicinity of Hanoi and Haiphong. 
WarsmT' 1376 (to SecState), TS/Noc1is) 7 December 1966 
Ref: 
State 97016 and WarsavT 1375 
"3. 
Michalowski said Rapacki had conveyed USG 
position to Hanoi shortly after my meeting with him Dec 
6 •.•• tr 
/ 
:t5. 
Michalmrski said ... that mnr Govt. and even 
some in Polish Gevt. are suspicious that recently 
44 
TOP SECRET. - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP 
SECru..~ - NODIS 
stepped up bombing outside Hanoi is the work of some 
elements in USG who are trying to undercut Presi-
dentts peace move. 
He added that when this question 
was raised with Lodge the latter had replied that 
such raids are planned long in advance, and that a 
qUick reversal would alert many people that some-
thing unusual was happening. 
Michalo'Y7ski said that 
to many people this is an unconvincing ans,\.,rer, and 
expressed fervent hope that we can avoid future 
highly sensitive bombing raids in vicinity of Hanoi 
and Haiphong •••• 
"6. 
Michalo'YTski said he wanted to underscore 
Rapackits insistence that at the first meeting with 
the NVN Ambassador in Warsaw we do more than con-
firm, '\oli th qualification, Lewandowski! s resume of 
Lodge's ten points. 
He said the NVN Govt. is not 
interested in what Lewandm.,rski said, but rather in 
hearing USG position directly from us. 
He stressed 
extreme import9.nce of first meeting, and said the 
NVN Govt. will be keenly disappointed if its expec-
tation of receiving direct statement of USG posi-
tion at first meeting is not realized ••.. II 
GRONOUSKI 
'Vlarsa'YT 1376 (to SecState), TS/Nodis.1 7 December 1966 
Ref: 
Warsa'YT 13'76 
"l. 
Fou..~in Rapacki called me to his office at 
1800 hours Dec 7 .•.. " 
113. 
Rapacki then said that Poland could not 
continue in its role unless it is convinced that we 
have or will put an end to this intensified bombing. 
He added that if Pol9.nd has been satisfied on this 
score, and if it so happens that contact in Warsaw 
between the USG and NVI-J Govt. will occur, then 'I 
avail myself of this opportunity to state! that it 
is necessary fOT the USG to recapitulate to the ~~TN 
Representative its whole position as described by 
Lodge with a degree of clarity so that the other side 
would no longer fear that the USG position as formu-
lated might subsequently be changed through recourse 
to Lodge!s !important differences of interpretation! 
clause .... 
45 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
!!4. 
• •. 1 said that if I recall correctly, there was 
a lull in bombing flights in late October and early Novem-
ber simply because of bad weather conditions, and what 
appears to him to be an intensification of bombing may 
simply be a resumption of bombing to its normal level. 
!!5. 
Rapacki responded that !policy is more impor-
tant than weather! •..• 
!!6. 
• •. bombing against the vrhole of NVN was intensi-
fied and also vTaS more directed to Hanoi. 
This} he added, 
clearly appears to be provoking.!! 
GRONOUSKI 
December 7, 1966 
Gronouski!s instructions for the first meeting are refined. 
He is 
to stick with Lewandowski! s formulation, indicating its acceptability as 
a basis for negotiation even though subject to further elaboration and 
clarifj.cation as talks proceed. 
He do not wish to reform"Ll.late it our-
selves because "',-re vTould. have to take harder positions than Levlandowski!s 
if we were to be held to precise lang~age and because any formulation 
attributable directly to us could be used to embarrass the GVN or our 
relations with them. 
Gronouski is therefore to avoid being drawn out 
on specifics, though for purposes of iIlustration he may point to the 
following: 
i. In negotj_ating a oombing cessation (point 8 L the Phase A -
Phase B formula might be considered. 
],1. 
Changes in the governmental status quo would ha-'ie to be made 
in accordance with the desires of the people of ST[N. 
Electoral procedures 
or other arrangements could be ascertained through consultations and 
negotiations there (points 2 and 5). 
(The most contentious point) he is warned, is that calling for a 
change in status quo, as it could mean anything from putting the NLF 
into the goverThnent immediately to a simple endorsement of the election 
process under the Constitution then being drafted by the GVN. 
Gronouski 
is to resist discussing this altogether.) 
He is to reassure the DRV that our reservation about !!differences of 
interpretation!! means only that complex matters are inevitably subject 
to clarification. 
For example, the phrase "long-term!! in point 3 has been 
partially clarified by the 6 months provision of the Manila Communique. 
46 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
r" ! 
11 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
We urge direct, secret discussion vlith the DRV as a matter of the 
highest importance and urgency. 
We hope that the Poles have no idea of 
participating and Gronouski is to avoid further substantive discussions 
with them if the DRV contact materializes. 
State 97930 (Amembassy vlarsaw), TS/Nodis, 
7 December 1966 
Ref: 
Warsawfs 1375 
"1. 
Your reference telegram will receive urgent 
consideration here tomorrow and you will receive 
further guidance from us then. 
"2. 
Ll1 the meantime, you should take no further 
initiative with GOP. 
"3. 
In the unlikely event that, before receiving 
further instructions, you should receive notice that 
NV]J representative is ready and available for talks 
with us, we submit the following for your interim 
guidance. 
"4. If such a meeting 'lith NVN rep:resentative 
should occur, you should follml prior- instructions. 
If desir-able, you are then authorized to read rpt re~d 
to him Lewandowski1s 10-point presentation of USG 
position as set forth at end of this cable, stressing 
that it is Lewandovlskifs formulation. 
"5. 
You should then inQuire whether points as 
presented by you are the same in all particulars as 
those passed on to Hanoi by Lewandowski. 
"6. 
For your information only, one of our princi-
pal concerns about the ten points is set forth in the 
next following paragraph, but even if pressed you 
should avoid discussing the substantive problems re-
lating to these points with the N"VN representative at this 
stage and stress that such discussions should be the 
subject of actual negotiations. 
We would assume that 
NVN representative would have no authority on this first 
contact to do more than report your- presentation to 
Hanoi so we \o[Quld not anticipate s'J.ch probing at this 
time. 
Further cable tomorrow will spell out our thinking 
in greater detail and may suggest initiative to be taken 
if you have heard nothing after additional l~pse of time. 
47 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"7. 
Lewandowski's point two relating to change of 
present status quo in SVN is obviously most troublesome. 
This point could be interpreted variously to mean (a) 
NLF must be put into government of South Vietnam forth-
with or (b) sL~ple endorsement. of election process under 
constitution now being drafted. If it is necessa~J to 
point out ambiguities in Lewandowski's statement, however, 
you should not refer to this point but allude to less 
contentious ambiguities elsew'here in statement. 
"8. 
Lewandowski's ten point statement follows: 
'1. 
I have insisted that the United States 
is interested in a peaceful solution through negotiations. 
'2. 
Negotiations shou~d not be interpreted as . 
a way to negotiated surrender by those oppOSing the 
United States in Viet-Nam. 
A political negotiation ",ould 
be aimed at finding an acceptable solution to all the 
problems, having in mind that the present status quo in 
South Viet-Nam would be changed in order to take into 
account the interests of the parties presently opposing 
the policy of the United States in South Viet-Narr, 
and 
that such a solution may be rea.ched in an honorableo and 
dignified 1'lay not detrimental to natj.onal pride and 
prestige. 
(FYI: 
Lewandm,lSki's original presentation 
states status quo 'must' be changed but when Lodge 
questioned this point Lewandowski said he would be glad 
to change word from !must t to 'would' ) Elim FYI). 
'3. 
That the United States are not interested 
from a point of view of its national interests ill having 
, a per'manent or long term military 
in South 
Viet-Nful1 once a peaceful solution to the 
reached. 
That is vhy the offer made in Manila regarding 
the withdraval of U.S. troops and the liquidation of 
FJnerican bases should be considered in all seriousness. 
'4. 
The United States 'tTould be ready, should 
other parties shmr a constructive in-:;erest in a nego-
tiated settlement, to 1-lork out and to discuss vith them 
proposals of such a settlement covering all important 
problems involved from a cease-fire to a final solution 
and wi thdra\\fal of U. S. troops. 
'5. 
That the United States, vithin a general 
solution, vould not oppose the formation of a South 
Vietnamese Government based on the tru.e will of the 
Vietnamese people vith participation of all through. free 
democratic elections, aDd that the United States would 
48 
TOP SECRE'f - NODIS 
73 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREl' - NODIS 
be prepared to accept the necessary control machinery 
to secure the democratic and free character of such 
elections and to respect the results of such elections. 
r6. 
The United States held the vie ... .; that 
unification of Viet-Naill must be decided by the Viet-
namese themselves for which the restoration of peace 
and the formation of proper representative organs of 
the people in South Viet-Naill is a necessary condition. 
'7. 
The United States are ready to accept 
and respect a true and complete neutrality of South 
Viet-Nam. 
'8. 
The United States are prepared to stop 
the bombing of the territory of North Viet-Nam if this 
will facilitate such a peaceful solution. 
In doing so, 
the United States are ready to avoid ap~ appearance 
that North Viet-Naill is forced to negotiate by bombings 
or that North Viet-Nam have negotiated in exchange for 
cessation of bombing. 
Stopping of bombings would not 
involve recognition or confirmation by North Viet-Naill 
that its al~ed forces are or were ir~iltrating into 
South Viet-Nam.' 
"At this point you should interrupt recitation of 
Lei.;andowski 's points and state as follows: 
QUOTE lfJr. 
Lewandowski clearly implied to .~bassador Lodge that 
in Hanoi he had given his presentation in connection 
with the point on the bombing of North Viet-Nam in 
accordance vIith Ambassador Lodge I s earlier formulation, 
which ·Has as follows: 
A pack.age could be worked out 
which in its totality represented .... That both the United 
States and North Viet-Nam would agree to as a reasonable 
measure of de-escalation, but which would have two 
separate phases in its execution. 
Phase A would be a 
bombing suspension, while Phase B, which would follow 
after some adequate period) would see the execution of 
all the other agreed de-escalatory actions. 
North 
Viet-limn's actions taken in Phase B .... Tould appear to be 
in response to United States actions in Phase B rather 
than to the bombing suspension, ~ID QUOTE. 
You should 
then reSQme the recitation of the ten points. 
'9. 
I have informed the proper governmental 
sources that at the same time, the United States, while 
not excluding the unification of Viet-Naill) would not 
agree to unification under military pressure. 
110. 
While the United States are seeking a 
peaceful solution to the conflict, it would be unreal-
istic to expect that the United States will declare 
TOP SECREI' - rJODIS 
fl't 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr - NODIS 
now or in the future its acceptance of North Viet-Namls 
four or five ;points. r (llJl) OF LEWANDOWSKP S STA,'I'EYIENT) 
"9. If NVN representative probes further on 
cessation of bombing} you should merely state that 
as you have already indicated ¥x . Lewandowski has 
suggested a possible procedure for agreeing on phasing 
and timtn.g which could be the subject of later 
discussions." 
KATZENBACH 
State 98754 (to Aroembassy Warsaw), TSjNodis 
7 December 1966 
Ref: 
State 97930 
"1. 
If a meeting with the North Vietnamese is 
arranged, you should proceed in accordance with 
instructions contained in State 96235 and State 95711 
except as modified below. 
As regards the presenta-
tion to the North Vietna'llese representative of our 
pOSition, you should follow closely the following 
formulation: 
r a. 
LewandOi-lski has informed us of his 
discussions with your government in. Hanoi and of the 
position he communicated to them as that of the U.S., 
based on Lewando"Tski I s prior oral discussions -with 
Ambassador Lodge in Saigon. 
He assume that his dis-
cussions in Hanoi were conducted entirely orally as 
they were with Lodge in Saigon and that no pieces of 
paper have been exchanged I-lhich purport to state 
governmental positions. 
We are prepared to enter 
into di:rect discuss ions with Y01J.r government on the 
basis of the position which Lewandowski has informed 
us he presented to your government in Hanoi. 
lb. 
The position was stated to us by lewan-
dowski as follow's: 
(Here you should read the ten 
points as contained in State 97930) para 8 with the 
additional point about bombing covered uner Point 8). 
r co 
T,{e wish to emphasize that this language 
is that of Lewandowski and not that of the United States. 
Nevertheless it presents a general statement of the US 
position on the basis of "hich we would be prepared to 
enter into direct discussions.r 
50 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"2. 
FYI The North Vietnamese and perhaps the Poles 
as well appear to be seeking a reformulation of our 
position in order to compare it with what Lewandowski 
has said. wnile we are entirely prepared to have Lewan-
dlowski's formulation stand as 'present,ing a general 
statement of the US position,' we are anxious to avoid 
a restatement of our position in our ovm words because 
(a) this would oblige us to take some harder positions 
than those put fo~·ard by Lewandowski which apparently 
have gone far enough to make the North Vietnamese ready 
to consider talking "I-lith us and (b) ap.:y formulation 
which can be attributed directly to us could be used 
to embarrass the GVN or to embarrass us in our relations 
with them. 
In other words, if we stand on Lewandowski's 
formulation through the first step in discussions with 
the North Vietnamese, we can al"lvays say .Tith regard to 
any specific point that we don't accept just those words 
used by Lewandowski and thus maintain some room for 
maneuver at least until ·we l<"..nOVT the discussions are 
really under way. 
END FYI. 
"3. 
After reading the ten points you should point 
out to the North Vietnamese that some matters, because 
of their complexity and the danger of varying interpreta-
tion) would be the subject of further elaboration by us 
as soon as discussions were to get under way. 
One of 
these has to do loTi th the package agreement containing the 
so-called phases A and B with respect to bombing and a 
program of de-escalation. 
The second relates to certain 
points which directly involve ma,tters of basic concern 
to the people of South Viet-Naill (as for example points 
2 and 5). \<Jhatever detailed arrangements .are made on 
those matters '\-Tould have to be acceptable to the South 
Vietnamese people; however) this could be ascertained 
through consultations and negotiations there. 
"4. 
If the North Vietnamese refer to the earlier 
point made by us that several specific points are sub-
ject to important differences of interpretation) you 
should explain that this is not intended to suggest that 
the statement as it stands is any less a general state-
ment of the U.S. position but rather that it is inevitable 
with matters as complex and controversial as those covered 
in the ten points that they would be subject to interpre-
tation and that their clarification would be the normal 
function of the discussions which we hope we will be 
embarking on. 
If the North Vietnamese press for an 
illustration you rnigtt refer to the phrase lIang-term' 
in Point 3) noting that it was specifically to clarify 
this point that the Manila Co~~uni~ue specified a six-
month period. 
51 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
't" 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRt,-or' - NOD IS 
"5. 
Otherwise you should be guided in your 
discussion with the North Vietnamese by the limi-
tation set forth in para 6 of State 97930, stress-
ing that further discussion of substantive questions 
should be the subject of the actual direct negotia-
tions which vle hope can be got undel~ way promptly. 
"6. 
In conclusion you should say that your 
gover~ment is prepared to enter into secret dis-
cussions with the North Vietnamese Government at 
any time and we regard this as a matter of the 
highest importance and urgency. 
"7. 
We understand from your latest reports 
that the next step, if all goes well) will be the 
opening of the direct discussions with the North 
Vietnamese and if this in fact materializes you 
should avoid any further substantive discussions 
with the Poles. We, of course, are anxious for 
direct ard private discussions with the North Viet-
namese and hope that the Poles have no idea of 
participating therein." 
KATlENBACH 
Decamber 8) 1966 
Rusk and Katzenbach reiterate our willingness to considel" a 
bombing cessation or other de-escalatory measures on terms previously 
indicated, but not as a precondition for talks. If Rapacki threatens 
to interrupt the contact over this issue: he is to be warned the 
responsibility for the breakdovm ;'lill be his. 
State 9892)+ (to Amembassy Warsaw)} TS/Nodis) 
8 December 1966 
For Ambassador Gronouski from Katzenbach 
"I. 
In response to Rapacki! s statemen-cs reported 
in your 1394 ••. you should remind Rapacki that the sub-
ject of bombing ',Tas one of the matters discussed in 
Hanoi by LevTandmTGki and that we are prepared to pursue 
this matter with the North Vietnamese in the saTIe tenns 
which we affirmed to him. 
You should read reference on 
package contained in paragraph ·3 of Le;,randowski! s 10 
points (State 97930) to remind him of LevTando,vski! s 
statement to Lodge. 
You should underline that inherent 
in this formulation is the package approach to de-
escalation. 
52 
TOP SECP-El' -
NODIS 
77 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"2. 
If Rapacki attempt to nail us to anything 
on bombing beyond our first contact ,-lith the North 
Vietn~mese, or again threatens to break off the 
operation, you should inform him in no uncertain 
terms that if he maintains this position he will 
have to accept the full responsibility for the 
breakdown of what appears to us to be a promising 
pSlssibility for peace." 
KATZENBACH 
Taipei 1072 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, 
8 December 1966 
Ref: 
TOSEC 65 
. FOR the Acting Secretary from the Secretary 
" 
I do not believe vTe should be drawn into 
commitments about our O\m military operations -with-
out some indication from the other side as to .That 
they are going to do about their military operations. 
Nevertheless, we should be ready to discuss this 
problem alongside or before a broader discussion 
of political matters." 
McConaughy 
DeceTIlber 8:.9 z 1966 
Rapacki protests the ':fdifferences of: interpretation" clause and 
the bombing of Hanoi in a strong demarche to Fanfani and, through 
Lewandowski) to D10rlandi and hence Lodge in Saigon. 
Hanoi cannot be 
expected to enter discussions in the face of such lIescalation." 
Fanfani on the one han1 urges Rapacki to go ahead and arrange the 
contact in \\iarsaw, on the other instructs D fOrlandi to convey the 
message to Rusk (then in Saigon) and to seek a reply. 
At their meeting on December 8, DtOrlandi tells Lewandowski that 
no contact has yet taken place because of Ra9acki ' s apparent refusal 
to convey the US message to Hanoi. 
He is apparently unaware tnat the 
message was passed December 6. 
On December 9, Rusk asks D'Orlandi to tell Lewandowski and Fanfani 
that we are in direct touch Hith Rapacki on both points. 
He adds that 
bombing can be the first topic for discussion, if this is of especial 
concern to F~ noi. 
53 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
DiOrlandi gives the follmving as view's of Lewandowski: 
i. Clarifj.cati ons prerequisite to the Warsaw contact should 
occur in Saigon, with a LevlandovTski visit to Hanoi immediately possible 
if needed. 
Thus D!Orlandi surmises that Rapacki!s taki~g over this 
phase may be an effort "to be clever and get the U. S. to withdraw 
"all reservations" before the contact is made. 
ii. De-escalation is a difficult topic 
more promising to look for a final package. 
of 14 positions, 2 each for the Ky Group and 
10 for "neutrals or whatever." 
(This is the 
Lewandowski September 18.) 
to start on. It is 
This might be a cabinet 
the 1~F) the remaining 
formula proposed by 
iii. During November 16-30, when Le,vandowski viaS in Hanoi) bombing 
appeared to be at a reduced level at least in t~e Hanoi area . 
Tnis was 
interpreted in Hanoi as a tacit signal of US support for Lewandovlski! s 
mission. 
(NB. 
In fact, these were the first two 'weeks of RT 52. 
Presumably, weather accounts for the lack of action against targets 
near Hanoi.) 
Rusk stresses to D/0rlandi several times that the USG is indicating 
its position vlith no reciprocity from Hanoi or even assurance of hOI'T 
Lewandowski has presented the points to F...anoi. 
D!Orlandi urges "a little 
faith in LewandOlvski." He himself completely credits LeHandowski! s 
clai..1U to have gotten Pharo Van Dong to obtain Presidium agreement to the 
vlarsaw contact . 
Saigon 12953 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, 9 December 1966 
'~tOrlandi asked to see Secretary and .~bassador 
this evening following dinner party in Secretary!s 
honor. 
Conversation was a follows: 
"1. 
Lewand m,'ski had called urgently on D I Orland i 
evening of December 8) on j.nstructions, to express 
grave concern that U.S. had carr:Led out heavy bombing 
attacks in Hanoi area on December 2 and December 4, 
directly following December 1 conversation between 
Lewand01{ski and Lodge. 
Lewandowski conveyed lurid 
repor~s from Polish attache Hanoi aJleging that 
December 2 attacl( had included bombing and machine-
glllning within city area and rad caused 600 casualties. 
December ~- attack also described as serious and in 
Hanoi area . 
Lewandmlski protested to D !Orlandi - urging 
him to convey message to Lodge and to' Secretary if 
possible - t hat such attacks could only threaten or 
destroy possibility of contact in Warsaw . 
LewandOviski 
argued that Hanoi could not be expected to enter 
TOP SECREr -
NODIS 
79 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
discussions in face of such escalation. 
(While vThole 
tenor of message was extremely strong, Lewandowski 
did not repeat not state that he was actually report-
ing Hanoi. I s expressions of view, but r at her "\;Tarsaw 
judgment . ) 
"2. D10rlandi had responded to Lewandowski ·that 
no contact had in fact taken place as yet because of 
apparent refusal of Rapacki to convey firm message , 
that U.S. had taken forthcoming action in declaring 
itself ready for discussions and prepared to make 
contact on December 6) and that it was thus not fair 
to say possibility of contact destroyed by U.S. action. 
D I Orlandi vT2nt on to say that his hope had been to 
make contact i.n any event . 
"3. 
In addition t o Lewandowski message December 
8) D IOrland.i had just received cable f rom Fanfani, on 
evening December 9, reporting that Rapacki had sent 
Fanfani strong demarche protesting U.S. insistence on 
reservations of interpretation, and further protesting 
U.S. bombing attacks . 
In this cable, Fanfani had 
instructed D'Orland i to convey substance of message to 
Secretary, if possible) and ask for reply . 
Fanfani 
had also included in the cable statement that he hilu-
self had replied to Rapacki urgin.g that he go a.head 
and arrange contact nonetheless. 
"4. 
Secretary responded to D10rlan::J.i as follows : 
A. 
He asked D 'Orlandi to tell Le"'TandovTski 
that we vTere in di:rect touch with Rapacki on t~e 
points r aised •.•. 
B. 
D 'Orlandi shoul d reply to Fanfani vTi th 
same first point) adding that if Hanoi vras concerned 
about bOt-ubing ) this could be first topic in discussions .... 
"5. 
During course of conversation, D'Orlandi pro-
vided following add::.tional conjecture and infOl'illati on : 
A. 
D'Orlandi was fairly sure that Lewandowski 
had wi.shed \-Tarsaw contact to take place, with any points 
requir ~_ng clarification to be explored through tri partite 
talks in Saigon and possible Lewandowski further vis it 
to Hanoi (which Le.,;andoVTsld had also suggested D' Orland i 
as immediate possibility) . 
D'Orlan::J.i therefore surmised 
that Rapacki had :tried to be clever' and get U. S. to 
withdraI-T all reser vations before contact made . 
(U.S. 
side at no ti.llle confirmed that this vas in fact exactl y 
'Hhat Rapacki had said in \{arsa',.; .) Secretary suggested 
55 
'T'OP SECRET -
NODI S 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
that - in light of prior expressed statement that Soviets 
informed - Rapacki actions might have been dictated from 
Moscow. 
D'Orlandi expressed doubt, on basis his reading 
of Lewandowski attitude and remarks by LeiorandO"wski about 
Rapacki OVer a period of time. 
Matter was dropped at 
this point. 
B. 
. .. Lewandowski had particularly expounded 
to him difficulties he savT in getting discussions started 
on reciprocal actions in connection with bombing. 
Hence, 
at DtOrlandi I S suggestion LewandOioTski had started to work 
out how situation in SVN might look one or two years hence 
and might be described in acceptable form to Hanoi and 
Washington, so that in effect a package deal would emerge. 
D'Orlandi stated that, when he asked Lewandowski just 
what kind of role VC might have - would it be like Czecho-
slovakia, or what - LewandOvTski had corne up with sample 
formula of 14 cabinet positions with 2 each for present 
Ky Group and VC/NLF, and remaining 10 allotted to 'neutrals 
or whatever.' 
(Tnis is of course formula given by D10rlandi 
to Harriman, as D'Orlandi's own, in Rome c:)nversation in 
early NoveIuber.) 
C. 
In connection vith Hanoi attitudes on U.S. 
bombing of North, LewandOvrski had told D'OTlandi that he 
believed Hanoi had attached significance to fact that 
during the tvo weeks Le\vandoviski had . been in Hanoi (approxi-
mately November 16-30) bombing had appeared to be at 
reduced level at least in Hanoi area. D'Orlandi said 
Lewandowski thought Hanoi had interpreted this as tacit 
Signal of U. S. support for Levandovski mi.ssion. 
116. 
Secretary sevel'al tilnes pointed out that vhole 
episode to this point was unique in that we were acting 
on '~ I..e\vandowski's statement of U.S. position without any 
clear indic8.tion io:hatever of Hanoi position) or even any 
assurance LewandOlvski had discussed points with Hanoi in 
manner covered by statE"..ment. 
D 'Orlandi appeared to 
accept that we had indeed taken forthcoming attitude in 
viev of these circLLlnstances, although he himself stressed 
vievl that one h3.d to have a little faith in Lewandmvski, 
and he appeared to credit completely Lewandowski claim 
that he had finally got Pham Van Dong to obtain Presidium 
agreement to 'V;iarsa" contact. 11 
LODGE 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
/i 
(' . 
o· I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
December 9, 1966 
In Warsaw, Gronouski assures the Poles that the Lewandowski formu-
lation is consistent vlith our vie,rs, that he lIassumes II Phase A - Phase B 
de-escalation formula is the IInew package deal ll the Poles believe Lodge 
to have promised, and that the pattern of cur bombing is not related to 
the projected US-DRV contact. 
Rapacki is satisfied with respect to the interpretation clause. 
He rejects de-escalation as too narrow a package but blurs the issue 
by suggesting that IIde-escalationll may be US shorthand for a deal 
including all outstanding issues. 
On the bombing, he is adamant in his dissatisfaction. 
He reads 
what he says is a November 14 statement by Lodge, declaring USG 
willingness to hear suggestions on IIpractical measures ll it might take 
to show its good intentions and allay the distrust the NLF and Hanoi 
may have of it. 
He feels the Pole'S bombing suggestions were not 
received in this spirit. 
He implies that Lodge's statement was not 
conveyed to Ha~oi. 
As Gronouski found no threat to break off the talks, he did not 
issue the warning on his instructions of December 8. 
Warsavl 1421 (to SecState), TS/No:1is} 9 December 1966 
Section 1 of 2 
Ref: 
State 98924 
'fl. 
Met Rapacki at my request at 1600 Dec 9. 
Michalowski and Janczewski present. 
"2. 
My opening remarks, based on ref tel, were 
as fo110l-1s: 
A. 
I have requested today's meeting as a 
result of consultations I h.'3.ve had with Washington 
since our meeting \<Jednesday afternoon. 
B. 
I can now assure you that at the time 
of the first TtTarsaw meeting with representatives of 
the North Vietnamese GOYern.LLlent, I will be prepared 
to confirm to the rrvN Govt the position of the USG 
with respect to negotiations. 
I can also assure you 
that this confirmation will be consistent ',Tith the 
discussions Mr. Le'tlandmlSki had with them and 'tlith us. 
C. 
With respect to the question you raised 
Wednesday on bombing, I can state flatly that the 
pattern of our bombing in :r-J'l/N has nothing to do with 
with the current efforts of the Polish and USG's to 
get underi.Tay the projected US-NVN taP<;.s ••.. 
57 
TOP SECRE~ - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI
1 
-
NOD IS 
D. 
You 'Hill recall that the subject of bombing 
NVN was one of the matters discussed in Hanoi by Mr • . 
Lewandowski. After his return from Hanoi Mr. Lewandowski 
clearly L~plied to Amb Lodge that be had discussed this 
matter in Hanoi in accordance with Amb Lodge's earlier 
formulation. 
Amb Lodge h2d suggested that a package 
could be worked out .... Inherent in this formulation is 
the package approach to de-escalation which I assume you 
had in mind "l-iherr you referred to 'a ne"l-T package deal' 
during our conversation last Tu.esday.fI 
"3. 
Rapacki responded ••.• fI 
"4 .... with respect to my first point (presentation 
of USG negotiating position to IrvN) he said if this is 
done in a way ,{hich will dispel doubt on invoking interpre-
tation clause) then one of the difficulties has been reduced. 
fl5. 
On bombing question) he said .•• bombing was 
clearly intensified at the precise time it would create 
provo cat ion ••.. 
"6. 
Rapacki read what he said 1tlaS Nov. 14 statement 
by Lodge: 
USG understands that the Liberation Front and 
Hanoi have de?p-seated distrust of USG; that is Hhy USG 
is willing to t9.ke practical measures to show good 
intentions } and would be willing to hear any suggestions. 
Rapacki said this state.'U.ent by Lo'ige was treated as 
addressed lonly to Polish ears}' adding Poles have been 
proved right in treating it so because in the case of 
their bombing suggestion they have not found such readi-
ness to listen to suggestj,ons as Lodge indicated. 
"7. 
Rapacki expressed concern over my use of term. 
Ide-esca.lation)! noting that Lodge said itJashington 'Has 
convinced t"hat not much can be accomplished in getting 
talks underway with partial de-escalation. 
He said 
Lodge's accent was on the package deal which "l-Tould cover 
all problems} including withdrawal of US troops. 
If my 
use of de-escalation represents a short-cut for a package 
deal including cessation of hostilities and the resolution 
of a variety of other outstanding problems) then his 
concern over rr;y use of the term is s imply a matter of 
semantics. 
He asked if my US2 of the term -was consistent 
with Lodge's declaration on a package deal fI 
GRONOU-SKI 
58 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
WarsaH 1412 (to SecState), 9 December 1966 
Section 2 of 2 
"8. 
I said I did not clearly 1.:nderstand "'hat he 
was driving at but referred to my opening text and 
p8inted out that the degree or m~nner of de-escalation , 
is not subject to unil~teral determination. 
I said 
that this would have to be resolved in negotiating 
sessions between the U3G and NVN ••• " 
"17 • 
Comm'~nt: Rapacki 1 s position was much less 
intransigent toiay than during Dec 7 meeting . 
I thought 
it significant that when I stressed importance of initi-
ating talks MichalQ'wski, Rapacki!s major adviser on 
Vietnam war, nodded his head affirmatively three or fQ'ur 
times. 
Because I found no threat to break off talks 
that was implied Dec 7, I did not use para 2 of ref tel, " 
GRONOUSKI 
December 10, ~2~§ 
Rusk and Gronouski are informed that Hashington does not viish to 
withdraw authorization for RT 52 at this tIme. 
It is anticipated; 
therefore, that sorrre targets may be hit which Rapacki vill insist reflect 
further escalation. 
State 100624 (to Amembassy Saigon)) TS/Nodis 
10 December 1966 
Ref: 
A. 
Saigon 12953 
B. 
~Tarsaw 1421 
C. 
Warsaw Ilt-22 
For Secretary from Katzenbach 
"2. 
On the bombing point ,you should ImQ'w that 
RT-52 stands as it was at time of your depar·ture from 
Washington and targets earlier set aside rem~in in 
suspense." 
KATlENBACH 
59 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr - NODIS 
State 10067 (to Amembassy 1<iarsaH)) TS/Nodis 
10 December 1966 
Ref: 
A. Warsaw 1421 
B. Warsaw' 1422 
"4. 
FYI only (rpt. FYI only). 
You should be aware 
that for the L~ediate future the bombing pattern will 
remain unchanged from \·;rhat it has been over the past 
several weeks. 
This may Hell involve some targets "Thich 
Rapacki ",.Till insist represent further escalation) just 
as in the past he took to be escalation certain varia.-
tions in our bombing pattern which in fact represented 
no real new departures in the pattern as a whole. 
With 
foregoing in mind you should avoid giving Poles eVen 
any sli&~t indications which they might take to mean 
that we are escalating or de-escalating at present. 
Present bombing pattern has been authorized for some time 
and we do not wish tOvTithdraw this authorization at 
this time." 
KATlENBACH 
December 13, 1966 
R3.packi quotes a US Navy spokesman as saying that new targets have 
recently been placed. on the bombing list; adding "you can assume;,;hat 
effects such statements have in Hanoi) given the fact that in r ecent 
weeks ne,v targets have in fact been added." 
He again urges restralnc; 
in bombing, argui.ng tl:.at overt pressure "will be utilized by all those 
who have a different vision of this peace move than we have here in 
Warsalv. " 
Warsaw 1458 (to SecState j) ~m/Nodi s ) 13 December 1966 
Section 1 of 2 
Ref: 
1<larsaw 1'+29 
"5. 
Rapacki adied tbat we should realize that 
leadership of DR1~!N does not want to and caQ~ot yield 
under pr'essure; every step from o'ur side that evokes 
impreSSion that NVN is acting un:3.er pressure would be 
interpreted as sign of iveakness and be utilized by all 
those who have a different vision of this peace reoVe 
than WC2 hE'.Ve here in 'ilJarsaw . 
( Comment: 
Rapacki 
repeated. this point with emphasis and vTaS, I believe ) 
making a clear reference to CO~11lnunist China.) 
60 
TOP SECREl' -
]\fOD T8 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
119. 
Rapacki said that in first position expressed 
by Lodge it appeared that this truth was grasped by USG 
and thi.s is why Poles I-lere so hopefti-l. 
However the 
events of Decem.ber mean} if the vorking hypothesis Poles 
are usi ng is sound, that US does not fully appreciate 
this situation. 
He added that recent statements by USG 
officials leave the impression that USG wants to evoke 
pressure . 
He quoted from Reuter news story of Dec 12 
US Navy spokesman's statement that US intends gradually 
to increase air raids on NVNj Rapacki interjected at this 
point his realization that Navy spokesman ma.y not have 
known all that was going on and this could very well be 
an old idea. 
But he added that the Navy spokesm.an's sub-
sequent reference to escalation and to nel-T targets having 
been recently placed on bombing list represented current 
information. 
He said 'you can assume vhat effects such 
statements have in Hanoi, gi ven the fact that in recent 
weey..s new targets have in fact been added. ,11 
GRONOUSKI 
December 13-14 1966 
_=-:..1.. __ 
_ 
The Yen Vien Railroad Yard and Van Dien Vehicle Depot are bombed. 
They are both 5 nautical miles from the center of Hanoi, and have been 
struck previously. 
Tass claims, in addition, that residential areas 
in Hanoi and its suburbs were hit. 
A later US official investigation shows that only t!'lese targets 
were intended, bu:t it is possible that US ordnance fell within the Hanoi 
city limits by accident. 
State 103586 (to Amembassy Warsaw), S/Nodis, 
15 December 1966 
112. 
. •• Washington a.pproval of targets including 
high level revie'rl by Defense and State is required and 
takes j.nto consideration location of targets with 
respect to population centers in effort to minimize 
civilian casualties. 
TTpes of targets struck have 
included lines of communication, bridges, POL storage, 
selected thermal pOYler plants, militaY'J installations } 
~nd anti-aircraft missile sites and missile facilities 
that are a threat to our aircraft . 
61 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
ri/ 
'J'~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"3. 
Latest strikes near Hanoi were Yen Vien 
railroa.d yard and Van Dien vehicle depot) which are 
5 p~utical miles northeast and south of Hanoi 
respectively) and 'Hell outside of Hanoi city limits. 
Both of these targets were struck on December '13 
and 14 but this was not first time in either case .... 
'.'4. 
Tass alleges our aircraft bombed built-up 
area of Hanoi at west end of Red River bridge and 
suburb of Dhatran to the southwest (have been unable 
locate Dhatran on any map). 
Hanoi has made similar 
charge . 
\ole have not received complete reports; hm{-
ever: nothing in reports so far to substantiate this 
and area alleged to have been attacked nowhere near 
aree.s targetted for attack. 
It is important to note 
that there was heavy SAM) anti-aircraft and MIG 
activity and our aircraft took action against S.AJ.\1 
sites. 
Quite a nlnnber of SlJIIs were fired at our air-
craft; errant SM.-1s or anti-aircraft shells of course 
could ce.use dmnage . 
"e:; /. 
(c) 
There is no basis for charging us with 
escalation of conflict over past few days) either in 
geographic terms or as to types of targets. 
Hanoi's 
POL facility three nautical miles from center of Hanoi 
was struck on June 29) and POL facilities on edge of 
Haiphong 'Here struck June 29) July 1 and August 2. 
T t-10 
targets of December 14 are both five nautical miles 
from Hanoi's center (farther than June 29 strikes); both 
had been struck earlier. tI 
"( f) .... In comparable periods of good 
weather) e.g.) November 22 and 23) December 2) 3) 4 and 
5; and Dec 13-14 essentially same type of targets were 
struCk) some intensity of air activity in and around 
Hanoi took place as he.s frequently been the ce.se for at 
least six months ..•. " 
K..L\.TZENBACH 
62 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
State 106358 (to il1nembassy \-Tarsaw) ) 21 December 1966 
Ill. 
Our investigation of alleged bombing in Hanoi has 
been thorough. 
The only targets were military ones more 
than five miles from the Hanoi city center. 
However we 
cannot rule out completely the possibility of an accident. 
Any US ordnance that may have fallen \-lithin the Hanoi city 
limits was the result of such an accident. II 
RUSK 
December 14) 1966 
State does not interpret Rapacki's December 13 statement as a nega-
tive reply from Hanoi) cloSing the ¥~r igold door. 
It is) however) now 
inclineo. to wonder whether the Poles ever had a commitment from the DRV 
for the Warsa\-T contact. 
In any case) further conve:csations in \-Tarsal" 
are to have two objectives: 
i. Keeping the Qoor open for talks to develop. 
ii. . L-etting the record ShO'17 cur persistent efforts to move 
forward) "lhile refuting Polish contentions that our actions and state-
ments blocked the opening of conversations. 
Gronouski is therefOl'e instructed to make the following points to 
Rapacki: 
i. Military actions by both sides were takir.g place throughout 
the conversations in Saigo~ ----
ii. 
As soon as the US began talking ,vi th the Poles preparatory 
to meeting with the DRV) new tenns and conditions ivere put forward 
for opening the talks. 
iii. 'He are now confused about vThat reflects the views of Hanoi) 
as opposed to t.he Polish Government. 
Direct contact is needed. 
iv. 
To leave no stone unturned} we suggest taking up de-escalation 
along the lines of the Phase A-Phase B formv~a) as a manageable opening 
piece of the total picture. 
v. 
If the other side prefers) though} \-Te \-Till start at the other 
end} looking first at possible terms of an agreed settlement. 
vi. 
Rapack.i i s to be 1-iarned that he will bear full responsibility 
if Polish obstructionism prevents the contact. 
\'Thile these instructions are en route) however) Gronouski is 
SUI!IDJ.oned by Rapacki to learn that the DRV has asked for all conversations 
to be termj_nated . 
The IIbrutal raid on the residential area in Hanoi 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
precisely at the moment when the USG knel'T that the matter of a Warsaw 
contact with Hanoi was actively being considered" is the reason,. 
Rapacki cla:ims that :immediately after the Poles transmitted "a direct) 
positive response from Hanoi about the possibility of talks in Warsaw') 
.•. the USG reserved the possibility of modifying its attitude and) of 
far greater :importance) entered a nevT stage of escalation." 
Gronouski appeals to the President. 
If the newspaper accounts of 
the Hanoi raids are true) "then we are in an incredibly difficult 
position. 
I am convinced that if this represents the breakdown of the 
current peace initiative ... the Soviets) the Poles and the North Vietna-
mese will have no trouble convincing the leadership in every capital 
of the VTorld that our stated desire for peace negotiations is insincere 
•... We have no choice but to take :immediate action to try to get dis- , 
cussions back on the track." 
He proposes) therefore) to accept Rapacki's reasoning : to give 
no impression of bombing intensification during the negotiations about 
opening talks in Warsaw -- in particular) to halt' bombing near Hanoi 
and Haiphong. 
"We VTould again express our deep desire for the initia-
tion of talks and ask the Poles to continue their efforts." 
Thus just as Gronouski is ordered to launch a pre-emptive offensive) 
he is h:imself recommending retreat. 
State 162295 (to Amembassy PARIS) TS/Nodis 
14 December 1966 
For the Secretary from the Acting Secretary 
Ref: 
SECTO 62 
"I do not rpt not interpret Rapacki's statement of 
Dec~~ber 13 to Gronouski as a negative reply from Hanoi in 
effect cloSing the Marigold door. 
Firm instructions are 
being prepared for Gronouski designed to keep the dialogue 
going) vThile at the sa.me time making a clear record of the 
legitimacy of our partiCipation in the MARIGOLD effort 
since its inception." 
State 1°42960 Ct.o AmellJ,bassy iifarsavT), TS/Nodis 
1 
December 1966 
Ref: 
Warsaw 1429 
(Info to Aroembassy Paris & Saigon: Paris for Secreta~J 
Eyes OP~y; Saigon for kubassador Porter Only) 
"1 •
...• In light of Polish tactics we are now 
inclined to wonder whether they ever had any NVN 
co:trhllitment to a meeting in Warsaw or whether it is 
not more lil~ely that they have been engaging in a.n 
effort to get us committed to something as close as 
possible to our maximum position and then see whether 
they could get Hanoi lined up to talk on that basis. 
In any event °ife mu,st bear two following objectives 
in mind in ful~her conversations with Poles on this 
subject : 
64 
TOP SECREI' -
HODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
(a) We ID::an to keep the door open as l o.:::tg 
as there seems to be any possibility of talks develop-
ing, bnt at the same time sticking to our position as 
generally r epresented by Levralldowski I S 10 poi nts, and 
(b) 
We sincerely want to begin substantive 
talks and the record should clearly show our persistent 
efforts to move forward and that Polish contention that 
our acti ons and statements have thrown roadblock in the 
way of opening ·of conversations in War saw are thoroughly 
refuted. 
"2. 
'Iberefore you should ask for further meeting 
with Rapacki and present him with following full state-
ment of OUI position at present time: 
(a) You should first review history of 
Lodge-D'Orlandi-Lewandovski conversations starting with 
November 14-15 conversations in Saigon ••.. 
(b) 
You should then point out to Rapacki 
that before, during and after all this was taking place , 
the conflict in Viet- Nam continued, i ncluding the 
bombing of North Viet- Naill, the infiltration of North 
Vietnamese men and supplies into SO;J.th Viet- NaB) Viet 
Cong terrorist 
bu~bings , assassinations, kidnappings, 
etc ...• 
(c) As soon as we began to talk with the 
Polish Government in Ttlarsaw) presUlu'3."!Jly preparatory t o 
our meeting directly with the North Vietnamese repre-
sentati ves, we found that new terms and conditions 
seemed to be put fO~Nard with the opening of direct 
talks contingent on our fulfilling them .... 
( d) 
But our des ire is to move tovTard peace 
and our conviction is that the best road to t ake is one 
of direct discussion with Hanoi I s representatives . 
vIe 
are somewhat confused as a r esult of the conversations 
in 'i-larsa"Vl as to "That Hanoi has said and 1Nhat represents 
the views of Polish Government . 
Our strong impression 
is that, in spite of our readiness both in Sai gon ·with 
Lewandowski and now in vlar saw to present quite fully 
and frankly our pOSition, we have not received any 
communication at all from the North Vietnruaese Govern-
ment. •••• 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP 
SEC~
'T -
NODIS 
(e) Nevertheless we \-Tant to leave no stone 
unturned in our search for peace and would like to 
turn for a moment from the total picture to one sec-
tor of it in which conceivably we might begin to move. 
This is with respect to the possible beginning of de-
escalation through a two-phased arrangement referred 
to in LewandOTtTski! s eighth point. . . . 
Perhaps the 
coming holidays and the truces associated with them, 
offer an opportune occasion to take some useful steps 
along these lines; this in turn should make it easier 
for the authorities in Hanoi to proceed then to dis-
cuss other matters standing between us and a peaceful 
settlement. 
(f) On the other hand, if they wish to 
proceed promptly to a total agreement representing 
the terms of an agreed settlement, we are prepared to 
move along that track including de-escalation as the 
final ite.m. 
(FYI: 
In other words 1,Te will start at 
either end of a total agreement. 
END FYI) 
(g) 
You should conclude your statement of 
our position with the langua.ge contained in para 2 
of State 98921~, leaVing Rapacld in no doubt that l{e 
have done everything possible to open up the ivay to 
peaceful settlement and we are very much disturbed at 
our having been unable to move forward at Harsa1,; as 
we had been led to expect from the earlier conversa-
tions in Saigon." 
KATZEITBACH 
\varsaw 11~71 (to SecState)" TS!Nodis, 
15 December 1966 
For the President from Ambassador Gronouski 
"1. 
I met with Rapacki (Michalowski and Janczev-
ski present) at Poles! reauest at 1800 Dec 14. 
(In 
contrast to previous meetings, Rapacki entered the 
room unsmiling) and during entire meeting maintained 
a calm) serious a.nd matter-of-fact attitude.) 
H2. 
Rapacki said that first he would like to 
bring some precision with respect to our conversation 
of yesterday (HarsaI{ 1458). 
He said that this con-
versation took place before Poles were aware of last 
66 
TOP SECREI' -
NODIS 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
bombing of Hanoi. 
He said, 'If I had had this news then, 
our conversation of course would have had different 
character than it did. ' 
"3 . 
Rapacki continued, 'Today I must state the 
following facts. First , that the U.S. had to be con~ 
scious of and realize the L~portance of establishing 
direct contact with Hanoi. I 
He added, 'You had stressed 
t he unique possibility of a peaceful settlement that the 
Warsaw' talks vlith Hanoi presented. I 
He continued, 'We 
though'c so too, ever since we obtained the signal for 
which the USG had asked for for so long in so many 
official statements . t 
He added , lIn this instance we 
recei vea. more than a signal j '\{e r eceived a direct, 
positive response from Hanoi about the possibility of 
talks in Warsa\o/. I 
"4. 
Rapacki sai d that immediately after this dir-
ect r esponse vTaS transmitted to the USG the US reserved 
the possibility of modi fying their attitude and, of far 
greater importance , entered a new stage of escalation . 
"5. 
Rapacki continued that the USG was bound to 
be conscious of the reaction which its conduct vould 
evoke and of the consequences of such action . 
He added 
that the Poles have done everything in their pOYler to 
dispel any illUSions) noting that on six occasions in 
Harsaw and Saigon., llile have varned the USQ side in all 
seriousness and with the greatest emphasis of the conse-
quences of their actions.' 
"6. 
'Yesterday,' Rapacki continued) IThe US Air 
Force engaged in a nevl and particularly brutal raid on 
the residential area in Hanoi preci.sely at the moment 
when t he USG knevr that the matter of a Harsa\'; contact 
vlith Hanoi ,vas actively being considered. 
This, r he 
added , I'Nas the last drop that spill ed over the cup. 
From t he moment , in Hanoi and Warsaw, all doubts as to 
the r eal intentions of the USG disappea:::ed , i ncluding 
doubts not only in the present case but '\'lith r espect t o 
all other instances in the past I·,hen the US has advanced 
positions ilhich it has descri bed as peaceful initiatives .' 
"7. 
Rapacki then said, tWe understand therefore and 
fully share the 1'7ish of the Democratic Republic of North 
Vietnam) 'tThich vTaS transmitted to us today, that we 
terminat e all conversations begun months ago in Saigon . 
Tne Pol"::'sh Govt states that the vThol e respons i bility for 
lOSing this chance of a peaceful sol ution to the Vietnam 
TOP SECREl' -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
war rests on the USG.' 
He added) 'I would like to 
express flore than regrets becau.se of the utilization 
by the USG of our good will. 
Once again it becomes 
clear how difficult it is to believe in your words.' 
He added, 'In future only facts can je taken into 
consideration. ' 
"8. 
I said that I would have no comment except 
to say that I regretted this turn of events and \-Tould 
immediately convey these observations to Washington. 
"9. 
Comment: 
If Moscml dateline accou.nt of 
latest Hanoi bombing published in Dec 14 Paris edition 
of New York Times and Herald Tribune, and recounted 
to me tonight by Rapacki, is t~~e then we are in an 
incredibly difficult position. 
I am convinced that 
if this represents the breakdown of the current peace 
initiative -- and H surely does unless we take deci-
sive and im.'TI.ediate action -- then the Soviets, i:;he 
Poles and the North Vietnamese \-Till have no trouble 
convincing the leadership in every capital of the 
world that our stated desire for peace negotiations 
is insincere. If we treat this turn of events as any-
thing less than a c!'isis in our worJd leadership role 
then I believe VIe are making a tragic mistake. 
"10. 
I am convinced that up till nmT the Poles) 
accepting the genuineness of our interest in negotia-
tion, have used \-ihatever influence they have in Hanoi 
(in all likelihood with Soviet backing) in an effort 
to initiate US-1r~T peace talks. 
I also am convinced 
that Rapacki vas expressing genuine concern when he 
warned that the increase in bombing was destroying 
what appear'ed to him a good chance that NVN W01.J~d. over-
come Chinese influence and engage in Warsaw talks. 
"11. 
lie have no choice but to take immediate 
action to try to get discussions bacle on track. 
For 
any chance of success this would require, in my judg-
ment) conveying to Poles that vle are \-Tilling to accept 
Rapacki f s Dec 13 l'easoning (Warsaw 1458) and are pre-
pared nOl.] to assure the Poles that we will take care 
not to create impression of bombing intensification 
in NVU during the period. of delicate negotiations over 
the holding of Harsa'tl USG-NVN peace talks. 
He would 
also assure the Poles that 'VTe do not intend to bomb in 
the immediate vicinity of Hanoi and Haiphong .during 
this period. 
\-;e would again express our deep desire 
for the initiation of talks and ask the Poles to con-
tinue their efforts." 
GRONOUSKI 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
68 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
December 15, 1966 
After consulting the President, state aga.in instructs Gronouski to 
present a strong rejection of Rapacki!s argQments. 
We doubt the accur-
acy of the Communists! bombing account s and that the Poles really intend 
to sell their view of Marigold to world opinion. 
At the same time , Rolling Thunder 52 is amended to suspend strikes 
against the two Hanoi t ar gets hit December 13-14. 
This is not communi-
cated, however, to the other participants in Marigold. 
MeamThile Lewandowski has begun to leak his version of Marigold by 
giving a few salient points to the Dutch Charge in Saigon. 
We do not 
learn of this until December 17, and kn01-T only that I4wandowski! s con-
versation with the Dutch Charge occurred sometj~e between November 30 
and December 15. 
Harrison Salisbury of the New York Times receives a cable from 
Hanoi. 
A visa to visit the DRV, for which he had applied some montns 
earlier, has been granted and may be picked up immediately in Paris. 
The Polish Ambassador in Rome is contacted by the Pope who inquires 
if the former can "tell him anything -with respect to Vj.etnam," according 
to a later conversation bet1feen the Polish Ambassador and Fanfani. 
(For 
source, see December 19 entry.) 
State 103342 (to Amem.bassy Warsaw), TS/Nodis, 
15 Decem.ber 1966 
For i\mbassado:r. Gronouski from Acting Secretary 
Ref: 
(a) Warsaw 1471 
(b) State 102960 
(Info to Amembassy Paris & Saigon: 
Pa:ds for Secretary 
~Jes onlyj Saigon for Ambassador Eyes only) 
"l. 
Your message (ref tel a) has beEm discussed. 
,Yith the President and he has approved the comments and 
additional i:c.structions which are set forth below. 
112. 
Although Rapacki!s message to you reported 
ref (a) is also discouraging it does not alter our basic 
assessment as conveyed to you in State fs 102960 .... In 
spite of his reference in paras 6 and 7 ref tel (a) to 
views and decisions of NVN, 1-1e remain doubtful about hOYT 
much part Hanoi has played in scenario 1-Thich has w.-:fclded 
in Warsaw over past hro weeks. I! 
"7. 
Finally, a.nd in spite of the fact that Rapacki1s 
line as reported ref tel (a) makes it essential that he get 
TOP SECF:sJ.' -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TO? SECRET - NODIS 
the full force of our rejection of his arguments and 
our indignati on at the Polish GoverTh~ent!s changing 
the signals and then seeking to put the blame on us) 
we feel nevertheless that you should in the course 
of your presentation to Rapacki leave no doubt about 
our continuing strong desire to move forward in 
direct conversations with the North Vietnamese •..• " 
"8. 
Your further interpretation and discussion 
contained WarsaI,r I s 1475 is very much appreciated and 
I am sure you fully realize that all of us here pro-
foundly share your concern over the turn events have 
taken in the last feyT days. 
Likevrise I can well 
imagine that in the atllloSphE:re of ~varsai'T and without 
full infolwation available) particularly concerning 
the bombing of North Viet-Nam, the Poli.sh :position 
may appear to be a strong one, whatever their motiva-
tion in presenting it as Rapacki has just done. 
We 
want to assure you, hmrever, that on the bas is of the 
over-all picture as 'lore can see it from Washington, 
the Polish case, except for some fairly superficial 
and transitory matters) is a veak one and 'Ive ,.:onder 
whether they will try to sell it to "i-rorld opinion. II 
KATZENBACH 
JCS 1471 (to CINCPAC), TS/LJJ>IDIS, 15 December 1966 
Ref: 
JCS 7735 
"I. 
(TS) Ref authorizes air strikes against 
following targets in Hanoi area . 
BE NUMBER 
19 
Yen Vien RR Clf Yd 
616-0221 
63.11 
Van Dien Veh Dpo 
"2 •. (TS) 
Suspend further air strikes against 
these targets until further notice." 
'TO 
TOP SZCRET - NODrS 
1 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEC REI' -
HOD IS 
Saigon 13640 (to SecState), TS/Nodis 
17 Deca~ber 1966 
"I. 
CAS Station Chief came to political counselor 
Dec 17 and repoyced that one of his officers had been 
queried by Netherlands Charg~ Derksen about a statement 
by I.67andowski concerning negotiations with Hanoi •..• 
"2. 
In response to request CAS submitted follow-
ing as Memorandum of conversation with Derksen: 
A. 
In a conversation which took place in 
Saigon on an unspecified date between Nov 30 and Dec 15, 
1966, .A.mbassador LeHandowski told M-I' . Derksen . that he 
was recently in Hanoi for a somewhat longer period than 
usual. 
He went on to say that Ian organization l 
--
later he used the word ' group ' -- vTaS negotiating with 
Hanoi on the subject of peace talks. 
Mr. Lewandowski 
did not further identify the group or organization. 
B. 
Mr. LewandOl-lski was bitter because pro-
gress in these talks was halted by the recent American 
bombing of Hanoi (dates of air raids not specified). 
He 
told Hr. Derksen he 1-JaS so bitter than he planned to 
write 'a paper 1 on the subject .•.. 11 
B~hind the Lines--Hanoi, by Harrison E. Salisbury 
(Bantam, July 1967); p. 8 
II The n , on the morning of December 15, Seymour 
Topping, the foreign editor of The TLmes ; walked over 
to my desk and put a cablegram before me. . . . 
The visa 
to Hanoi did, indeed: await me in Paris." 
December 17) 1966 
State expresses alarm over the possible impact on the talks in Harsaw 
and also on Ky: should Le,Tandm-lski I s leak to the Dutch Charge rea,ch him. 
Lodge is told to gi ve Ky a low key indication that a possible lead toward 
peace is being investigated. 
State 104673 (to A~embassy Saigon), TS/Nodis 
17 December 1966 
Ref: 
Saigon 13640 
"l. Lewandmiski's indiscretions 2.re indeed most 
unfortunate and potentially harmful to talks in Wars a", ..•. 
'71 
TOP SECRET -
NODI8 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
~OP SECRET - NODIS 
"2. 
This leads us to suggest you should be prepared 
with line to use with Ky should outright leak occur) 
should Ky raise vith you on basis rumors floating around 
Saigon; or should you feel rumors ha' -e reached point 
where you should take initiative with Ky as preventive 
measures. 
Our thought is that in such eventuality) you 
would Simply in low key take following line: 
As we have 
told Ky before we get many apparent leads on subject of 
peaceful settlement. 
v.Te feel responsibility not to over-
look any possible lead which might offer some promise. 
Most of these leads dissipate immediately) some seem 
slightly more productive and are pursued further. 
Lewandowski contact with us over past few months has been 
such lead. 
At times it has a~peared to offer more 
possibilities and at times less. 
Ky may be assured that 
if any lead offers any real prospect of discussions with 
Hanoi, he will be promptly consulted." 
KATZEN"BACH 
December 18. 1966 
_ _ _ ___ 
0 _ _  
,$. __ 
• __ 
D tOrlandi tends to reject. our rationale for v,hat has happened in favor 
of the Polish version. 
He feels there is a "strong prima facie case 
against us" and that vTe should do "something quickly in "\-Jal'saw: It much the 
same view expressed by Gronouski on December 14. 
Saigon 13618 (to SecState)) TS/Nodis 
18 December 1966 
Ref: State 104673 
"6. 
DIOrlandi then said to Habib that he was himself 
surpl'ised at bombing on the 14th. 
He .tlondered iIf there 
were not some people in the US who had deliberately sought 
to create a problem. t 
This was denied in precise terms 
and with an expression of surprise that DtOrlandi would 
have s'C.ch a thought. It 'loTas pointed out that as D tOr1andi 
k..'1ew there vTaS no connection between bombings and lewan-
dowski IS proposals. 
Habj.b then gave D !Orlandi the rebut-
tal material contained in State I s Circular 103849 and ,vent 
oVer it in detail) suggesting it be used if Lewa.ndOVTski 
again r a ises issue of bombings. 1t 
72 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
17 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"2.2. 
Comment: 
Our judgment is that foregoing confirms 
correctness of changing venue to Warsa"l. 
D I Orlandi is not 
only showing his personal pique at turn of events, but is 
displaying definite tendency to discard our explanations 
while endeavoring to induce us to do Isomething quickly in 
Warsaw. I 
Instead of focusing on information provided by 
Habib, he launched into extended presentation of Lewan-
dowskils latest animadversions (sic), adding his own 
belief that there is Istrong prLma·facie case against us l 
as well as exhortation mentioned preceding sentence." 
PORTER 
December 19, 1966 
Gronouski carries out Statels instructions of December 15. 
In an 
angry exchange, Rapacki attacks both the accusations leveled against the 
Polish role and the US suggestion that the WarSai-f contact still be 
attempted. 
In Rome, the Pope is gi-,ren the llwhole storylf on Marigold by the 
Polish Ambassador) who later reports the episode to Fanfani, adding that 
he had been contacted by the Pope on December 15, to ask if the Poles 
"could tell him anything with respect to Vietr.am. a 
Warsaw 1513 (to State), TS/Nodis 
19 December 19\56 
Ref': 
Warsaw 1508 
"9. 
. ... He (Rapacki) added that Poles did not put 
forth ne'VT conditions but Irecalling speeches of Goldberg, 
the PreSident;, Secretary Rusk and others, once we 
received the signal we did we would have had every right 
to call for a stop in the bombing. t 
He said, 'you have 
said over and over again that you would end all bombing 
if there "TaS an assurance from Hanoi that there Vlould be 
a response tm-lard peace from Hanoi; however, we did not 
ask that you stop bombing but only that you not intenSify 
it.: " 
73 
TOP SECREf - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"13. 
. ... He said) 'I am astonished that at same tllie 
you accuse us of stalling talks) you ask us to help you 
get them going again.' 
..•. Inasmuch as NVN asked Poles 
to discontinue these discussions) what 'Has new to justify 
returning to NVN on this matter? .•.. II 
GRONOUSKI 
Rome 3409 (to Sec State)) TS/Nodis 
28 December 1966 
"4. 
Fanfani said that according to the Polish 
Ambassador the Pope on December 15 sent word to the Polish 
Government asking if they could tell him anything with 
respect to Vietnam. 
On December 19 the Polish Gover~~ent 
responded by telling the Pope the whole story . 
Fanfani 
indicated he did not rpt not knovT just vThat the Polish 
Ambassador meant by the 'whole story' but presumably the 
Polish Government had told the Pope ever,rthing they knew. t: 
REINI:I.AP.DT 
December 21, 196~ 
Rapacki clarifj_es the Polish role in Marigold. 
The follovTing -were 
conveyed to us em instruction fror.J. Hanoi: 
l. Levvandowski I s message to Lodge immedie;tely upon his return 
from Hanoi expressing a positi1re response to the I{arsaw talks. 
ll. Rapacki's warning after the December 3 bombing) that Hanoi 
would have to reassess the situation. 
iii. The decision to terminate discussions 'in Warsaw. 
He added that there had been frequent exchanges between Hanoi and 
Warsaw during the conversations and felt confident the Poles accurately , 
expressed Ha!loi's views ) even when acting on their ovm initiative. 
While Gronouski is learning this in Harsa,.,) instructions are enroute 
for t.im to t ell the Poles that any damage from US ordnance vii thin Hanoi 
city limits "T,ras accidental . 
We are nO",., prepared to state there Hill be no 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
I I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEC REf -
]\JODIS 
bembing within 10 miles ef the center ef Hanei fer an indefinite peried 
if talks with the DRV can begin shertly . 
We "anticipate" seme "appre-
priate reciprecal actien" with respect to' NLF activities within 10 miles 
ef the center ef Saigen as "evidence ef geed faith ." 
Warsaw 1535 (to' SecState), TSjNedis 
21 December 1966 
Ref: 
State 105909 
"2. 
I asked Rapacki to' clarify fer me the rele 
that Hanei played in eur discussiens. 
Rapacki r eplied 
that the message LewandmlSki gave to' Ledge (he referred 
to' tthree sentences t ) upen his return frem Hanei 
expressing ~fVN pesitive respense to' Warsaw talks, 
Rapacki I s warning after the Dec 3 bembing, the,t Hanei 
weuld have to' reassess the situatien, and the decisien 
to' terminate discussiens in Warsaw 'I'Tere all decisiens 
by NVN which were cenveyed to' us by the Peles. 
He 
said further that cemments Peles made regarding danger 
ef creating the illlpressj.en ef pressure en Hanoi vere 
cemment s ef the Pelish Gevt, but the fears that Peles 
expressed in this regard were veri.fied subsequently by 
Hanei. 
He alsO' said that during precess ef '\\arSa-vl 
discussiens there ,.;ere a number ef ether exchanges 
betvreen 1{Tarsaw and Hanoi) adding that the Peles are 
cenfident that ,.;hat they expressed en tneir ewn initia-
tive accura,tely reflected Hanei.'s epinien. 
f13. 
Rapacki then made the point, in reference to' 
eur accusation that Peles have raised new cenditiens 
since talks shifted to' 1{Tarsaw, that interpretatien clause 
questien i·Tas raised by Levandewski irrn:nediately upen 
hearing it expressed by Ledge en Dec 3. 
He said 
t clearly yeu knOH that '\ore felt this ,.;as a matter ef 
cencern frem. the very beginning; it wasntt semething 
interjected as a new cendition after'tTards. f 
He added, 
teur cencern was well taken because the reactien to' 
interpretati en clause frem Hanei turned eut to' be '\oThat 
we predicted .!" 
GRONOUSKI 
TOP SECREr -
NODIS 
!'\; 
, ....... 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
State 106358 (to JI.m.embassy Warsml) 
21 December 1966 
"1. 
Our investigation of alleged bombing in Hanoi 
has been thorough. 
The only targets "\-lere military ones 
more than five miles from the Hanoi city center. 
How-
ever we cannot ~~le out completely the possibility of 
an accident. 
Any US ordnance that may have fallen 
within the Hanoi city limits "\-TaS the result of such 
an accident . 
"2. 
Nonetheless we are prepared to state that 
there will be no bombing wi~~in ten miles of Hanoi city 
center measured from 21 degrees 1 minute 37 seconds 
north, 105 degrees 51 minutes 21 seconds East, for an 
indefinite period if talks with North Vietnamese can 
be gotten underway shortly. Appropriate reciprocal 
action "\-lith respect to bombs, mortar and similar 
terrorist activities within ten miles of the center of 
Saigon measured from 10 degrees, 46 minutes, 28 seconds 
northj 106 degrees, 41 minutes , 10 seconds East .. would 
be anticipated by us as evidence of good faith.1I 
RUSK 
December 22, 1966 
Rapacki prefers to ,fait a day or tvTO (by which time Gronouski is 
to have returned to Washington for consultations) before tran6mitting 
the new US position to Hanoi. 
He is afraid the suspension of bombing 
near Hanoi appears to depend on reciprocal action f:i:'Oill the NLF and a 
Signal that Hanoi will establish contact. 
Gronouski argues that ';':e 
are not asking a qu.id-pro-quo but simply removing the factor that had 
blocked the contact and suggesting a quiet way for Hanoi and the 1~ 
to indicate readiness to discuss peace . 
. Rapacki repeats a theme expressed (less clearly) by him earlier: 
"Goldberg stated that if there was some indication from Hanoi regarding 
negotiations , bombing would cease throughout I~r and not simply around 
a small area of Hanoi." 
He is presumably referring to Goldberg's 
September 22 speech, though neither it nor Goldberg's December 20 
letter to U Thant contain such a s;veeping proposal. 
On the same day, Zinchuk sees Bundy in \-Tashington to indicate 
SoYiet avrareness of Marigold and Soviet support both for Polish actions 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
t() f 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
and the Polish interpretation of developments to date. 
He is appre- . 
hensive that the US "ivill adopt a militaristic approach to the "rar . 
The 
Soviet concern to get US-DRY talks started arises in large part the 
possibility that Hanoi will call for volunteers under the Bucharest 
Declaration ("if the war escalates and if help i s necessary!!). 
\varsaw 1537 (to SecState») TSjNodis 
22 December 1966 
Ref: 
State 106358 
"2. 
Rapacki) expressing desire to understand pre-
cisely) asked for reiteration of message. 
In response 
to his question as to whether this meant vre had no 
intention to bomb Hanoi proper but that it was possible 
we could have inadvertently hit residential area, I 
responded I did not exclude that possibility. 
In 
response his question vrhether orders would be issued 
to exclude from bombing area vithin coordinates descl'ibed 
for indefinite period, I responded that this my under-
standing ref tel. Afte:r bTief discussion of relationship 
of cessation of terro:rist activities i n Saigon to cessation 
bombing in Hanoi periro.eter) I reread section again and 
pointed out there vras no direct ~uid-pro-quo on cessation 
Saigon activities but that this was anticipated reaction 
by Hanoi as measu:re of good faith. 
"3. 
I expressed again my personal conviction that 
this proposal provided basis for movement in resolving 
the problem of initiating negotiations .•.. 
"4. 
Rapacki noted however that t"lw things 
intruded which might reduce the significance of this step: 
(A) The text of the communication a.:;>peaJ.'s to make U.S. 
action dependent on some signal that a. contact will be 
established by Hanoi; (B) There is an indirect linking 
or request -- that an appropriate step ere Saigon) will 
be taken by the other side. 
He added that it would be 
very rfunportant to avoid the appearance of forcing NVN 
into negotiations •.•• Goldberg stated that if there was 
some indication from Hanoi regarding negotiations, bomb i ng 
woulo. cease throughout NVN a.nd not simply around a small 
area of Hanoi. 
Furthermore} r egarding the alleged NLF 
activities arour:.d Saigon, while this is admittedly 
expressed in tel''Ills of an expectB,tion, the iInpression is 
given that you are trying t o !kill too many birds vith 
one stone .! 
This is a matter to be r esolved with the NLF 
and T (Rapacki) have tried to dissuade you from. linl<;,ing 
~\lN action i-Tith NLF matters ..•. II 
77 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr -
NODIS 
"8. 
. . .. I argued that R9.packi m.ust view our 
proposal not as an exercise of pressure by m.aking 
cessation of bombing dependent on Hanoifs indication 
of a willingness to talk, but as a removal of what 
Poles had regarded as overt pressure which Rapacki 
had insisted interfered with the prospects for talks. 
Cessation of a.ction in Saigon was not a direct quid-
pro-quo but a qUiet way for Hanoi and the NLF to 
give an indication of readiness to discuss peace. 
"9. 
Rapacki ... concluded with statement that 
he would prefer to delay day or two before trans-
mitting our proposal but expressed willingness to 
convey it nm-r if that 1faS 'iThat I desired. 
"10. 
I express·ed .Tillingness to discuss matter 
immediately on my arrival in -,;vashington." 
GRONOUSKI 
MemCon) TS/Noo.is/MARIGOLD: 22 December 1966 
Participants: Alexander Zinchuk, Soviet C'narge 
"Hilliam P. Bundy 
"2. 
Immediately after these exchanges, Zinchuk 
launched into a discussion of MARIGOID. 
After learning 
that I 'lla,S fully aware of the exchanges between Levan-
dOYlski and Lodge} as he put it initial~y, he said that 
it was very hard for them to understand why we had 
intensified the bombing of the :North with the attacks 
on DeceL1ber 2nd and 4th, and then aga:Ln on December 13th 
and 14th. 
He said that there 'iTaS great sensitivity in 
Hanoi on this subject, and strongly implied - - without 
directly saying so -- that there were differing schools 
of thought. 
Oal' bombing actions had left the Soviets 
and by implication, Hanoi -- in complete doubt as to 
what cur intentions and views really .Tere. 
Speaking 
more specifically for the Soviets} he said that he had 
thoug.~t they pretty 'dell understood our vieVls} but that 
this episode lef t them in real doubt ,·rhether there were 
military forces at work and "hether they simply did not 
understand fully 'tlhat ',.,e thoug..11.t and meant to do. 
78 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' - NOD IS 
"3. 
More specifically, he said that he himself had 
been in MOSCOVl, in late November and had gained the 
impression that Hanoi (or elements in it) were seriously 
interested in starting something . 
'l"ney had been encour-
aged by the apparent slackening in the pace of our bomb-
ing during this period. 
I at once asked "Thether this ,vas 
just a general impression or whether it had something 
more specific behind it. He replied that it was 'more 
than a general sense.' 
Then, follovTing the bombings of 
December 2nd and 4th, some Hanoi leaders (un-named) had 
been in Moscow on their way back from Budapest, and had 
met "lith top Soviet leaders. (I think he mentioned 
Kosygin and Brezhnev specifically). 
In the face of our 
bombings, the SOViet leaders had been unable to clarify 
U. S. thinking or (by clear implication) to enco1-lrage 
Hanoi to pursue the Le"Tandowski avenue. 
T'nen, he himself 
had seen Ambassador Kohler on December 9th, intending to 
convey a clear message against continued intensification 
of the bombing. 
He thus found it particularly difficult 
to understand our actions." 
116. 
I then said specifically that, "Thile we had 
made a considered decision that we should not alter the 
planned bombing pattern earlier) we I-Tere definitely aware 
of F~noits sensitivity to intensification of the bombing. 
I said that therefore ,ole had made a specific proposal 
within the last 24 hours, directed to precisely this point. 
I also noted that within the last 24 hours 'ioJe had ' had a 
contact that had substantially illuminated exactly "\vhat 
the Polish contacts and discussions with Hanoi had been. 
Finally, I reiterated that we were prepared to see really 
quiet and secret talks get under "laY on the bas is of the 
approaches that had been made. lI 
.... 
liS. 
In short, Zinchuk did not really seek to defend 
Polish handling of the matter, but was most eillp~atically 
trying to get it across that the Polish effort was serious 
and that the Soviets "Tere fully with it ..•. 11 
"9. 
. .. he said that he had been surprised , in dis-
cussing the Polish initiative in the Department at some 
earliel~ stage in December) to see that it was treated as 
doubtful ••.• 11 
79 
TOP SECR1~ - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECFEIT -
NODIS 
* * * * 
"2. 
He then said (as he had to Harry MacPherson 
on Monday) that the Soviet concern to get something 
started arose from a number of factors, but above all 
the possibility that Hanoi) under the Bacharest 
Declaration (!if the war escalates and if help is 
necessary,! in essence) might at some point be faced 
.,ith a Hanoi request for military volunteers. 
He 
noted the report today of North Korean pilots (which 
I of course did not deny) and something unspecified 
that the Cubans 'Here doing. 
He said that the Soviets 
would be put in a most avTk'.vard and difficult position 
if Hanoi asked for volunteers, and they hoped the 
issue would not arise. 
"3. 
He then asked me about SOllie commentator!s 
statement that the President saw tvTO alternatives) 
seeking a peaceful solution or escalating the 'tTar 
markedly by bombing so that the American people wouJ.d 
become engaged in simple loyalty to their aImed forces 
" 
December 23, 1966 
The problems of reciprocal de-escalation are illustrated by a. 
cable from Saigon, "assu.ming" that the proposed cessation of terrorist 
activity in the Sa.igon aI'ea does not re~ll1ire a cessation of GVN/US 
counter-VC activities. 
Saigon 14089 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, 
23 December 1966 
Ref: 
A. 
State 106358 
B. 
State 105909 
"1 • 
terrorist 
cessation 
••• we aSSTh~e department proposal on cessation 
activity in Saigon area does not envisage 
Gv'N/US counter-VC activities." 
PORTER 
80 
TOP SEC~~ - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
December 24, 1966 
We drop the :request for reciprocal action from the DRV in maintaining 
. the 10 mile booting l imit around Hanoi. 
(NE. source needed) 
December 26-27, 1966 
After ne"l-,spaper reports of bombi ng "12 miles from Hanoi," the Poles 
inquire if our circle about Hanoi is measured in nautical or' statute 
miles . 
Gronouski expresses concern over strikes this close to the 
proscribed circle . 
He is told "not to be diverted from the main effort 
by niggling and haggling about whether a particular bomb fell on this 
side or that side of this or tha.t circle." 
Warsaw 1567 (to SecState ), TS/Nodis: 27 December 1966 
Ref: State 107911 
"1. 
. •• Michalmlsld ... asked 
I for the record I 'Hhether 
r eference in r ef tel to ten miles from H~noi was in 
na.utical 01' statute miles .•.• 
"2. 
• .• NY lrimes, Ax Dispatch speaks of 
I target 
only t "l-lel ve miles from Hanoi: ••.• 
"3. 
. ... I am most concerned if vIe are choosing 
targets so close to the ma1'gi n that even a slight error 
could put us i n technical vi ol ation of 0U~ cOTIllliitment ..•. " 
GRONOUSKI 
State 108664 (to Aroembassy l,-Ja1'saw ), TS/Nodis 
27 December 1966 
" ••• you may inform Mtchal mlski or Rapacki that 
orders have been i ssued to ref~ain from bombing "I-,ithin 
the ten nautical miles from Hanoi city center •... It 
is very important for you and the Poles not to be 
diverted from the main effort by niggling and haggling 
about "I-,hether a particular bomb fell on this side or 
that side of this or that circle. 
The important thing 
is that an area of some 314 squar e nauti~al mil es will 
be free from bombing and that: thus far) 1,re have not 
seen any readiness on the part of Hanoi to sit down 
81 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
[.) (., 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
and talk business. 
The next move is up to them and 'tle 
cannot let them play games with a side issue in view 
of the major concession we have made to clear the way 
for talks •.• military briefers are not avlare of ~...A.RIGOLD 
and that some looseness i n language can be anticipated.It 
RUSK 
December 27-28) 1966 
Fanfani is told by the Polish Ambassador about the l atter 's contact 
with the Pope. 
I-Te in turn tell Fanfani of the 10 mile bombing sanctuary 
around Hanoi and of our continuing hopes to get talks started. 
We 
stress the importance of secrecy) if talks are to succeed. 
Meanwhile 
we decide to move the operation out of Saigon to the maximum extent , 
for security reasons. 
Gronouski i s instructed to t ake up the security 
problem with Rapacki., with special reference to the leak to the Pope. 
He i s also appri sed of doubts by Rusk that the Poles ever inte.nded to 
press Hanoi for talks '<li thout an unconditional and unreciprocated cessa-
tion of the bombing . 
Rome 3409 (to Secstate )) TS/Nodis) 23 December 1966 
Itl. 
Points contained State 108773 were conveyed 
privately to Fanfani evening Dec 28. 
fl2. 
Fanfani said he had been very severe i n his 
conversation with Polish Ambassador) he had emphasized 
that: 
A. 
Poles should i nitiate US contact with 
F..anoi without further delay; 
B. 
I.ewandowski should by all means r emain in 
Saigon as would D10rlandi; and 
c. 
It was a great mi stake break secrecy by 
informing the Pope . 
"3. 
Fanfani said Polish Ambassador had returned to 
see him evening December 27. 
Polish Arilbassador had said: 
A. 
Poles cannot undertake initiate US contact 
with Hanoi unless there is a cessation of bombing; 
B. 
Lewandowski 'Nill r epeat will r emain in 
Saigon; and 
C. 
It was not repeat not the Polish GoverI't~'llc nt 
which had taken the initiative in infoITuing the Pope but 
rather it was the Pope "\-Tho had approached the Polish 
Government . 
82 
TOP SECRET - NODTS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"4. 
Fanfani said that according to the Polish 
Ambassador the Pope on December 15 sent word to the 
Polish Government asking if they could tell him 
anything vith respect to Vietnam. 
On December 19 
the Polish Government responded by telling the Pope 
the whole story. 
Fanfani indicated he did not rpt 
not know just what the Polish ATTlbassador meant by 
the Iwh01e story! but presumably the Polish Govern-
ment had told the Pope everything they knew.
1t 
REINHARDT 
State 109639 (to Amembassy Warsaw), TS/Nodis 
28 December 1966 
FOR T1ffi AMBASSADOR FROM TEE SECRETftBY 
It •••• I call your attention to the statement 
made by the Polish J\mbassador to Fanfani on the eVen-
ing of December 27 that QTE Poles cap~~ot under~ake 
initiate US contact with Hanoi unless there is a 
cessation of bombing lJNQTE. 
This could resl..llt from 
Pclish Ambassador Rome not being informed of our move 
on December 24. 
But it also raises the possibility 
that the Poles have never had any intention of 
pressing Hanoi for talks i.Tithout a.n unconditional 
and unreciprocal cessation of bombing.:r 
RUSK 
State 108773 (to ATTlembassy Rome), TS/Nodis 
27 DecaJber 1966 
a. 
We are most grateful for prompt Fanfani 
report of his conversation with Polish Ambassador 
Rome, 
b. Fanfani himself should be aware that on 
Dec 24 we conveyed to Papacki that ,·re had given firm 
orders not r epeat not to bomb within ten nautical 
miles of point in center of Hanoi for an indefinite 
period .••. . 
TOP SECPBT - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
c. 
We are most grateful to Fanfani for 
expressing concern that Pope has been informed. 
We 
too are concerned over this an.d would now appreciate 
Fanfani advice ,·rhether we should ourselves indicate 
to Pop~ our y~owled ge that he has been informed. 
We 
recognize that it may be desirable not repeat not to 
indicate such awareness, in order to preserve Fan-
fani 's mTn sources and channels; hovlever, "le are 
also concerned if Pope may be receiving one-sided 
account. 
"2. 
Saigon should take no action. 
reasons alone, ,·re are trying to get this 
of Saigon to maximum extent possible .... 
For security 
operation out 
"3 .
.... If Rapacki or Micha.lowski admit that 
Pope has been informed you should say t.hat you must 
report this to Hashington and ha'J'e no doubt it will 
have disturbing effect on security grounds alone .... " 
RUSK 
Rapacki tells Gronouski .the 10 mile sanctuary has come too late and 
that the Poles now consider their role "at this stage as terminated." 
In Wa.shington, Dobrynin tells Thompson the Soviet Government is 
"frankly baffled by (US) action in Vietnam. . .. 
He said there "rere man,y, 
and he was one, that \oTondered whether some of our Bilitary were deliber-
ately trying to frustrate a policy of moving tovrard negotiations." 
Warsaw 1596 (to SecState ), TS!Nod.is) 30 December 1966 
Section J. of 2 
Ill. 
Rapacki opened by saying Poles have taken 
further action on my statement of Dec 24) but un-
fortunately this step could not make up for da.'rlage 
done by previous actions, particQlarly Air Force) 
during first part of Dece~ber. 
112. 
Rapacki added that 'we have to consider our 
role at this stage as terminated: .... " 
84 
TOP 
SECfu.,~ - NODrs 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECPET - NODIS 
"7. 
Rapacki said) .•. if that step you brouglt from 
Washington (on 24 December) had occurred on December 4 --
admittedly after the first bombing of Hanoi -- then I 
feel personally ve 'Ivould have had the first contact "Tith 
t he DRV behind us. 
Moreover) I think I have sufficient 
r easons for my personal feeling . 
Even between Dec 4 
and Dec 13, the matter was again actively being re-
considered . 
There had been no negative reaction as yet . 
We know, because we had contact with the proper quarter . 
The decision regarding breaking off the talks was made 
after Dec 13 •••• " 
MemCon, TS/Nodis/MARIGOIJ), 30 December 1966 
Participants: 
Ambassador Dobrynin, USSR 
Ambassador Thompson 
III asked the Ambassador if he had brought back any 
reply to the President's letter to Kosygin. 
He replied 
t hat i f he could speak completely off the record he 
could tell me that a reply had nearl y been completed 
ani that it vas one ve would have liked but then the 
bombing of Hanoi had occurred and this draft had been 
torn up and a.nother one of quite a different character 
started . 
He said he had seen the report from their 
F[abassy in Hanoi and that there 'ioTaS no doubt in the 
Soviet minds as a result of this report that our bombs 
had fallen on Hanoi itself .•. a reply would be made in 
due course ." 
I''lhe l!,mbassador re.c"';larked tl1at the initial stages 
of this affair' had given the Soviet Government con-
siderable hope and he said rather cry-ptically that they 
had other reasons for some optimism but that our action 
in bombing Hanoi had spoiled everything . 
I poi nted out 
that O'lr targets were selected several weeks i n advance 
and that it had been pure coincidence that the attacks 
on t he targets near Hanoi had occurred at this tlme. 
"The Jljubassador said that his Government ·i·Tas 
f::cankly baffled by our actions in Viet- Nam and did not 
knOll how to judge our policy. 
He said there "lere many, 
TOP SECPET -
NODIS 
{iO 
J 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREl' - NODIS 
and he was one of them, that \-TOndered \-,hether some of 
our military were deliberately trying to frustrate a 
policy of moving t o'Hard negotiations or \-lhether our 
policy really was one of military vi ctory." 
December 31, 196~ 
Porter suggests from Saigon that we switch to a more t rustworthy 
channel, from the Poles to the Canadians. 
Saigon 14702 (to SecState ), TS/Nodis 
31 December 1966 
"I. 
We have been ·..ratching with increasing puzzle-
ment the Polish M.inuet danced by Rapacki. ... We cannot 
disregard possibility that Poles constantly manipulated 
terms of understanding whether invol ving 'ten points! 
or later attempts to add provisos . 
Rapacki' s frequent 
r eturn to question of cessation of bombing and his 
failure to a.rrange contact with Hanoi are suspicious." 
113. 
With t he breakdown of the Polish channeL .. 
we suggest Department cons i der bringing in another party 
mor e trust\-Torthy as an interm7::diary from US point of 
view .... 1f 
116. 
We l ean in favor of the Canadians. It just 
so happens that the Canadian Commissioner Victor Moore 
is going to Hanoi on January 6 to spend a fe\-l days making 
his farewell calls at the el1d of his tour .... II 
. 
PORTER 
January 3, 1967 
Goldberg gi 'fes the US viev of M.ari gold to U Thant, 'who promises to 
hold it in confidence . 
86 
TOP SECREr -
NOD IS 
1\\ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
As i ncidental intelligence ) U Thant mentions that Peter) the 
Hungarian Foreign Minister) was visited in Buc:apest by Le Duan (Secx'etary 
General of the Lao Dong) early in December . 
Le Duan took a very hard 
line) much harder) Peter bel ieves, than wo~d Trinh, the DRV Foreign 
Minister . 
The latter had been expected ) but u:::-gent problems in Hanoi 
detained him and LeDuan came instead . 
USUN 3458 (to SecState) ) TS/Nodis) 3 January 196'( 
"As agreed upon .,ith the Secretary, . I had an 
extensj_ve discussion with U T.o.ant this afternoon 
l asting almost 1-1/2 hours. 
"I gave him the full account of Marigold) .... " 
.. 
, .. 
ItSyg assured me that he would keep thj_s in 
confidence and I do not believe that vTe need be 
concerned about his maki ng a publiC! dj.sclosure 
absent any additiona l dranati.c ever:ts ." 
" •.. he t old me that -when FM Peter of Hl_Ingarywas at 
the mY, Peter had told Syg thqt they wex'e expecting a 
visit from the North Vietnamese FlvI in Budapest in early 
Decemoer . 
Syg said that he had sj_nce been a.dvised by 
the Hungarians --
presLlli~bly the Hungarian UN Rep --
that the North Vietnamese PM found it iffipossible make 
the visit because of urgent problems at home. 
In 
his place Hanoi dispatched the Syg of the CO~TII!lunist 
Party who visited Budal)est early l ast m.onth and who 
has since returned to Hanoi. 
Hungarians :cepo.rted 
that Syg of Communist Pa.rty took a very hard line about 
settlement of Vj_etnamese conflict -- a harder li.ne than 
they believe wO'Lud have been taken by North Vietnamese 
FN. 
Of possible i nterest t o US in this connection was 
the observation of Syg of Commun.ist Party that it vlaS 
by no rr..eans certain that the NIJF vrou~_d support any 
peace proposal which might be acceptable to Hanoi. 
Syg 
cbserved that this 'tTaS a similar line taken by North 
Vietnamese Rep in Algiers in Septembe:c of last year as 
reported t o him by his jI~ge l'iar: sources . 
GOLDBERG 
87 
'TOP SECfu~ -
NOD IS 
111 
January ~6T 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRNf - NODIS 
Rusk soothes George Brovnts injured feelings over finding that he 
was not the sale intermediary for the Phase A-Phase B de-escalation 
proposal. 
State 112632 (to Amembassy London), TS/Nodis 
4 J anuary 1967 
PERSONAL FOR AMBASSADOR FROM SECRETARY 
"Please deliver fo11ovling personal message to 
Foreign Secretary George Brown : 
QTE Dear G-eorge : 
Thank you for your message. 
I do want to clear up 
one point, namely, that there was nothing on which 'He 
could have informed you prior to your vis i t· to Moscow . 
Your visH came at the time of LewandQl'Tskils visit to 
Hanoi but before we had any information vThatever from 
him on his visit . 
We understand he was in Hanoi most 
of the l ast half of November) and our first report 
upon his return to Saigon was r eceived i n a meeting 
on December 1. In fact , we gave you for your trip 
a major concession to the other s ide in the form of 
a t vTo-phased proposal in which vTe ,wuld stop the 
bombing if they vroula. agree that subsequently there 
could be a de-escal ation of the violence . 
I am 
sorry if there has been any misunderstanding on this 
point . 
"l-Ti th personal r egards, Sincerely J Dean RLlSk . 
UNQTE." 
RUSK 
January 4) 1967 
Gronouski takes issue '!lith Porter, that the Canadians replace the 
Poles as our cnannel to Hanoi because they are more "trustworthy ." 
He 
considers the Poles better suited to the mi ssion because they carl"'J 
more vrei ght in Hanoi . 
Warsa.T 1631 (to SecState )) TS/Nodis, 4 January 1967 
Ref: 
Saigon 14702 
"3. 
The fact that Poles presumably acted 
in Hanoi ! s interests in attempting to extract f:com US 
best possible terms prior to actual negotiations is 
no basis for concluding that Poles 'Here not interested 
in initiating lrTarsa'tT talks as soon as feasible. 
88 
TOP SEC REI' -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Feasibility, hmrever .• depended on Hanoi1s agreement, 
and I submit Poles had no reason on their mm 
initiative to delay that agreement ter:. minutes .... 
"4. 
Given this analysis, I cannot conceive of 
Canada or any other friend of the USG being more 
satisfactory than Poles as intermediary (see also 
paras 3 and 4, Warsaw 1630); t~('Ue, they iwuld be 
more t rustworthy from our point of vi eil . 
But for 
this reason they vlOuld also be even less effective 
than Poles were in conVincing Hanoi . 
I have no 
doubt that Poles had access to and exchanges with 
top officials of NVN, and that they delivered our 
messages. 
I am al so convinced, especially after 
Dec 24, that they encouraged Hanoi to meet with us 
in vvarsaw. 
A trust"lwrthy friend of USG could do 
no more and I suspect Iwuld be able to do much less. 
What vTe need i s help of someone with more influence 
on Hanoi than Poles} not less. It is for this 
reason that I suggested 1,,,e turn irmnedie.tely to 
Soviets." 
GRONOUSKI 
January 4} 1967 
Goldberg gives U Thant and Ignatieff (CaPBdian Ambassador to the u~r) 
a revieil of "the entire fil.arigold episode!f along ~he lines ~:;uggested by 
the Department . 
(Source: 
USUN 3465, 1/4/67) TS/nodis) 
January 5, 196"( 
Saigon r eports 13 VC incidents in the Sai gon- Gi a Dinh area. 
Saigon 14894 (to SecState) , TS/Nodis, 5 January 1967 
Ill. 
We have been keeping a speci al w·atch on 
incidents and actj_ons in the Saigon Gia-Dinb. area 
ever since Christmas. 
As a rough approxil!l.ation 
border of Gia-Dil:'ll province a'J"erages about 11 mn_es 
from the center of Saigon . 
"2. 
From Dec 28 to Jan 3 there were 13 incidents 
clearly initiated by VC in the area .... 
89 
I'"~ 
11\ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"5. 
. ... In order not to call attention to our 
interest in the 10 mile radius we are using standard 
statistics derived from police reports which are not 
always complErbe OJ.' absolutely accur"ite. I! 
January 5, 1967 
Reinhardt gives the Pope a similar revievl. 
He stresses that the 
US has been forthcoming by offering its Phase A-Phase B fonnula, by 
affirming Le'l.,randowski' s statement of the US position with no recip-
rocal act from the DRV side, and by offering to meet 'Hi th the DRV 
to discuss all outstanding issues, and that no military preconditions 
for the talks vTere initially asked by the other side. 
Even now, we 
are keeping open our suspension of bombing 'Hi thin 10 miles of Hanoi I s 
center. While the DRV has given a negative response, we continue to 
try to open talks. 
Secrecy is imperative if this effort is to succeed. 
We therefore request the Pope's cooperation in maintaining complete 
discretion. 
State 112886 (to Auembassy Rome), S/Nodis 
5 January 1967 
Eyes O~ly for .~abassador 
111. 
Ambassador should see Pope Paul soonest, 
Since Poles, and according to their report Hanoi, 
have stressed vital need for complete secrecy, uSG 
is deeply conscious of need to maintain rigid 
security this matter . 
HO'Ivever, in view of 
i.rnportance these discussions and their possible 
bearing on other i.ni tiati':res to 'Thich His Holiness 
is a party, we noW' believe it essential that His 
Holiness receive full and accurate account." 
"7. 
At this stage: the US had taken t'W'o 
important steps. It had put fOr'rTard the poss i-
bility of a tyro-phase handling of the bombing 
question, together "ith the poss:Lbility of dis-
cussing in one setting the ,Thole range of issues 
including the future situation 'Hithtn South Viet-
nam. 
Moreover, the USG had agreed to affirm. the 
statement of its position to Hanoi, subject only to 
the obvious necessity of interpretation 'tThile 
Hanoi itself had indicated only, as reported to 
us, that i-;:; was prepe.red to listen to such an 
affirmation. 
Tne USG at this poir:.t had. not --
and st:i.ll has not -- received any state.ment of 
Hanoi's ovm vieW's . 
Moreover, the message con-
veyed by Lewandov7ski contained no ment.ion of any 
prior condition other than secrecy, for the d.irect 
contact in Warsaw that was proposed ." 
90 
TOP SECRET - NO!)IS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
1114. 
On December 22, Gronouski again saw Rapacki 
to con'.fey a new proposal on behalf of the USG. 
This 
was t hat the USG was prepared to undertake that there 
would be no bombing within ten miles of the center of 
Hanoi for an indefinite period, if talks with the 
North Vietnamese could begin shortly; in the original 
proposal of December 22, this 'ioras linked with evidence 
of good faith in the form of action on the other side 
with respect to incidents near Saigon . 
However, when 
Rapacki demurred to the proposed linkage and asked 
reconSideration, Gronouski was authorized on Dec~~ber 
24 to state that the US had now given firm orders not 
to bomb within ten miles of the center of Hanoi for 
an i ndefinite period . 
This revised US proposal stated 
the understanding that, on the basis of what Rapacki 
had told us, direct talks could now begin shortly . 
The message also noted tha.t , in judging the good faith 
of the other side , we .... rould be T impressed I by similar 
restraint , for example, with respect to incidents, 
movement of forces (itself a violation of the Geneva 
Accords) i n the DI"lZ , or action with respect to infil-
t ration; j_t was stressed that there were examples, 
and t he phrasing made clear that these .... re:::-e not pre-
conditions . 
Rapacki indicated that he .... rould convey 
this message promptly to Ff..anoi . 
"15. 
On December 30 Rapacki repo:.::-ted to Gronouski 
that Hanoi had given a negative response and was flatly 
not prepared for t alks in Warsaw . II 
IISummary of Key Points 
116. 
Most basically of 8~ 1, the US remains entirely 
prepared for secret bilateral contacts .... 7i th Hanoi. 
Even 
though Rapacki has stated that he considers the channel 
now' dead, the US order of December 24 remains in force 
and I·rill so remain for the present. 
We have in fact 
revieved this whole matter carefully \lith Soviet repre-
sentatives, pointing out our difficu~ty in understanding 
Polish actions at several points. 
Moreover, we have i n 
mind the continued possibility of constructj_ve action 
by the Secretary Genel'&.l. 
For all these reasons , and in 
the light of ou1' basic view th&.t any dis closure of this 
whole series of discussions could affect 
Ha~oi r s willing-
ness to partic j.pate , .... re have maintained the tightest 
security on the \-Thole project, vill continue to do so, 
and must ask you in the strongest term.s to act in same 
manner." 
RUSK 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD LS 
.:January 6..l... 1967 
Saigon is instructed to tell Ky a little more about Marigold , 
interpreting it primarily as a DRV peace offensive designed to get the 
bombing stopped and reassuring Ky about our resolution. 
Rome is to tell Fanfani that vIe sti ll hope to open contact vith 
the DRVand i t is, therefore, imperative to maintain the strictest 
security concerning what has happened in the past. 
In Warsavl, the Poles tell Gronouski that the December 13-14 
attacks typed the scale in favor of DRV Presidium members who felt that 
t alking ,'lith the USG made little sense. 
Only a complete cessation would 
restore the necessary level of confi dence . 
On the other hand, if ve 
stopped bombing it should be possible to get negotiations going over 
Phase B in 3- )+ weeks . 
Gronouski urges the Poles to try again, proposing 
instead a Phase B agreement betveen the two s ides before the bombing 
cessation and the opening of talks . 
State replies by instructing Gronouski to avoi d further initia-
tives for the time being . 
State 114277 (to Amembassy Saigon), TS/Nodis 
6 J an,lary 196'7 
EYES ONLY FOR PORTJi:R MID WillIE 
ttl. 
. .. Canadians on January 2 gave us report they 
had obtained from U rrhant on December 28 , and whj.ch U 
Thant had r eceived from Poles on Decem'ber 23; .... 
tt2. 
. •• to seek to miniIilize l eak risk, decision 
was t aken to inform Pope; SYG, Canadians] and also 
Brttish .... n 
tt5. 
Our conclusion is that time has come vihen 
it is vise to convey word to Ky t hat vTould miti gate 
any MARIGOLD di sclosure or any stories based on 
Indian or Salisbury matters . 
Moreover , Salisbury 
speculation gives us good cover for making statement 
to Ky now. 
"6. 
Accordingly', you should see Ky if possl.ble, 
and Tran Van do as vTell, to say that GVN may be not.ing 
,'laVe of speculation on DRV TtTillingness to talk. 
USG 
has been recetving a n1..11llber of third country messages 
s ometimes based on conversations 'with DRV r epresentatives , 
92 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEC'"'.tiliT - rmDIS 
from wh:i.ch third nations are on occasion drawing 
Gonclusions we do not believe warranted . 
He our-
selves are inclined to believe that DRV, as Salis-
bury visit alone shoVTs, has become much more 
sophist icated in building up 1-rorld opinion against 
the bombing. 
They may well be engaged, with help 
from U Thant, Soviets, and others, in a detel~ined 
effort to get us to stop the bombing or cut it 
back in return for hints of DRV willingness to 
talk. 
Moreover, DRV may be probing for any change 
in our position. 
GVN may be assured that we have 
no intention of changing our well-knOlm position 
on conditions for the cessation of bombing, or 
yielding to pressures on any element of our posi-
tion. 
As Ambassador Lodge told Ky last July 
(Saigon 642 of Ju..ly 10) lore will of course be 
following up any rumors, however unlikely, that 
might indicate Hanoi was really seeking a ,·ray out. 
If anything of real substance or importance happens, 
we will of course be in touch with GiJN at once .... II 
RUSK 
State 114278 (to Amembassy Rome), TS/Nodis 
6 January 1967 
Ref: 
State 112886 
"1. 
..•. You should emphasize to Fanfani that 
although WarSai-T phase of exercise appears to have 
come to temporary conclusion y!e still mean to con-
tinue in whatever manner feasible to p::coillote initia-
tion of substantive discussions -,lith North Viet-
namese. 
Therefore it continuec1 to be of prirlle 
importance that strictest security be maintained 
concerning what has occurred in past. !I 
RUSK 
Warsaw 1646 (to SecState), TS/Nodis 
6 ,January 1967 
Section 1 of 2 
"4. 
MichaloHski opened his reply by observing 
that at one point i:l. my discuss:i.ons T,.;·ith Rapacki I 
93 
TOP SEC~~ -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
had expressed the hope that someone was putting as much 
pressure on Hanoi as Poles were placing on us to get 
negoti~tion s started. 
He said with some feeling that 
he could assure me that Poles put hearJ pressure on 
Hanoi and in fact put prestige of GOP on line in getting 
Hanoi to agree at outset to idea of having talks in 
Harsaw. 
He added that he personally knew how much 
pressure vTaS brought to bear be~ause he was engaged in 
exercising some of it. He went on to say that leader-
ship in Hanoi is by 120 means a monolithic group and that 
from the begilIDing, when Poles got agreement from Hanoi 
to initiate talks in "\iI!arsaw, it ,vas a very close decision 
with many of the Hanoi leadership strongly opposed. 
He 
said they obtained such agreement after exerting strong 
pressure and putting Poland's prestige on the line; but 
i t was a delicate matter in Hanoi, implying that agree-
ment vTas by a narrow· mar gin among the leadership. 
He 
said at this point the Poles had been able to convince 
Hanoi to have at least a small degree of confidence in 
intentions of U.S. 
He added that bombing of Dec 3 had 
given a vTea.pon to those in Hanoi \·Tho had not vranted to 
agree to negotiations in first place. 
He said it was 
for this reason that Poles had repeatedly coy"veyed to 
Lodge and me their fear of negative effects of a 
repetition of Dec 3 bQ~bing. But he said even after 
Dec 3 when bombing was explai12ed by Lodge as 120 new 
departure but simply something in the military pipeline, 
Poles were able to prevail in Hanoi to keep possibility 
of talks open, and 1believe me ,ole talked to them 
several times a day to keep pressure on them and con-
vince them.' 
But he said bombing of Dec 13-14 lunder-
cut our whole argument, destroyed that little bit of 
confidence that existed in Hanoi about intenti.ons of 
U. S., and left us wide oyen to charges of being com-
pletely naive. I 
He said .lith bom-bing of Dec 13-14. 
t hose who had initially been skeptical a"ocut negotiatio12s 
were given a pOVlerful tool to support their case and in 
fact prevailed . 
He added that even with Dec 3 bQ~bing : 
i f we had been able to interval betvTeen Dec 3 and 13 to 
come i n with the message 1..:re did come in v!ith on the 2~ .th , 
t hat part of leadership in Hanoi which wanted negotia-
t ions YOQld have prevailed and he is confident that talks 
would have happened. 
But he said by Dec 24 a whole new 
condition existed; 'We ,.:rere accused of being naive and 
had lost our effectiveness and those vTho on Dec 3 had 
been a.ble to cor.trol sitaation and move tovrard negotia-
tions vTere by this time discredited . ! 
Thus he said 
situation by Dec 2h in Hanoi had so changed that it viaS 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
1\1 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECP.ET - NODIS 
impossible to go back to Dec 1 or the Post-Dec 3 period. 
Now he said he feels that only stopping NVN bombing 
completely \oTill restore influence of those who are 
interested in negotiations. 
He said if bombing stopped 
Poles i-lOuld be i-Tilling to try for a third time and that 
he is quite cor~ident that three or four weeks there-
after negotiations between U.S. and Hanoi on Phase B 
could become a reality. 
He said, 'short of this, I am 
very pessimistic of any effective role ",;Te could play, 
given pressure we had exerted in Nov and Dec and the 
undercutting of our position in Hanoi by events of 
Dec 13-14. I 
He went on to say that he 'Hill never under-
stand how this could possibly have happened b1..1.t !this 
is past history, I guess . III 
GRONOUSKI 
Warsaw 1646 to State 
Section 2 
IIConversation betveen MichaloW"ski and Gronouski. 
IIMichalowski sa.id that the situation had nov 
entirely changed. 
1he Poles , he said, had been able 
to convince Hano:L to go on with the possibility of con-
tact after the Decernber 3rd U.S. bombings , but that the 
bombings of December 13 and 14 had made the future of 
negotiations between the DRV and the U.S. very blee,k. 
He now maintained that o:uy a complete cessation of U.S. 
bombings \·Till restore the necessary level of confidence 
needed to get negotiations started. 
He added that 
Hanoils original decision to talk with the U.S. in 
Warsaw had been hotly contested in the Presidium and 
that the bombings had now persuaded those who wanted 
to talk "\vith the U.S. that there '!las lit·tle sense in 
doing so. 
!Uronouski noted that this now put the parties back 
where they had started from. 
He suggested that the Poles 
try to get the thing going again by proposing to the DRV 
an initial Phase B agr~ement prior to the meeting between 
the U. S. Rnd the DRV in Moscow . 
ThiS, Gronouski said, 
would (1) meet Hanoi's inststence on stopping the bombing 
before talks began, 8..na. (2) meet th~ U.S. desire for some 
sort of indication that talks would occur in order to 
stop the bombing. 
95 
TOP SECREr -
NODIS 
l'i "\ 
_.V 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
State 1143'70 (to Amembassy Warsaw) , TS/Nodis 
6 January 1967 
Ref: 
Warsaw!s 1648 
"l. 
In view of complex of developments relating 
to Viet-Na~ problem we would like you to avoid for 
the present any further initiatives along lines 
section 2 reftel." 
"3. 
It has been our conception that ... 
Hanoi!s actions under Phase B would be expected to 
be generally equivalent toour actions in Phase B 
plus repeat plus our cessation of bombing of North 
Viet-Name II 
RUSK 
January 9-10; 1967 
------
-
Saigon and Rome carry out their instructions to brief the GVN} 
the Pope and Fanfani. 
~le results reported are satisfactory. 
In 'l-lashington, we learn that Brown is still very hurt. 
Bundy 
points out how complex the matter is and explains the necessity for 
the US to manage its mm role. 
Saigon 15204 (to SecState), TS/Nodis 
9 January 1967 
Ref: 
State 114277 
"l. 
I sent Habib to see Tran Van do to convey 
SUbstance paragraph 6 ref tel. This was done} rather 
than a direct app:coach to Prime Minister) to keep 
our dialoglJ.e vTith GVJ:T in appropriate 10"i-T key .... 
"2. 
. . .• He 'tTaS pleased to note our assurance 
that He have no intention of changing our position 
on cessat.ion of bombing .•.. II 
PORTER 
. TOP SECRET - NODIS 
----_.-
I') ' 
-I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
Rome 3531 (to SecState)) S/Nodis 
9 January 1967 
"2. 
The Pope rej.terated his deep appreciation 
of being informed.... 
He told me that he had publicly 
encouraged the "Hilson-Brown initiative because they 
had officially informed him of i .t . 
He had been unable 
to do the same l-lith respect to U Thant I s efforts 
because he had not been officially advised of them. 
He had however sent a private message to the Secretary 
General to avoid any feeling on his part that the Pope 
was shmling preferences with respect to various 
initiatives for peace." 
REINHARDT 
Rome 35'71 (to SecState)) TS/Nodis 
10 January 1967 
Ref: 
State 114278 
"1. 
I saH Fanfani last night J an 9 and carried 
out instructions in ref tel. 
Ee told me that shortly 
after the New Year) Polish ft~abassador had informed 
him of the interruption of the procedu:ral talks in 
"Harsa'w and had said that it. was iro.possible to e:A"pect 
North Vietnamese to enter into discus:=ions "Ylith the 
US as long as the bombing of North Vietnam continued . 
Fanfani said he had taken strong exception to this 
statement and had pointed out that US proposal envis-
aged terminatio.'1 of bombing and that Poles had known 
this all along •.•• " 
REINHARDT 
State 118905 (to ft..me:ubassy London)) S/Nodis 
10 January 1967 
LlTERA..l:LY EYE;3 01\'I.,Y FOR AMBASSADOR. 
FRO~"';: SECRETARY 
"2. 
Dean said Broyil1 still very hu:::-t over our 
failure to t ell him W·2 -N"ere conveying Il::;-'" t Ho- stage 
97 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
proposal on stopping bombing through Lewandowski chEl-nnel 
at same time that Brown vTaS going to Moscow with H . 
Brown did not wish to raise direct wi'ch me, hence Bundy. 
"3. 
Bundy made following points in reply, which 
we nOVl assume will go direct to Brown and also to PM: 
a. 
We gave proposal to Lewandovlski on 13th 
or 14th and to Br own on 16th .••. 
b •••. we felt that we should honor Polish 
insistence that L channel be kept totally secure, ..•• 
c. 
Brown message was the clear and solid 
one we were sure would get through. 
Moreover, Brown 
was a~med in the rest of our l etter to discuss the 
underl ying principles in depth, as L vIaS not . 
Brown 
could have a real exchange of views on the basis of 
total knOldedge of our position. 
d. 
In response to Dean r emark that Soviets 
must have known of message to L, and that this perhaps 
accounted for cross-examination of Brownls authority 
to t alk for us , Bundy said that vle did not see hOl-7 
Brownls opportunity could have been prejudiced by this 
even if true ••• we had al 'l-72.Ys regarded Soviets as much 
more serious and responsible, and Gromyko in October 
had responded to Secretary I s question which Eastern 
Europeans were closest t o Hanoi by sayi ng pointedly : 
'We are. t 
"4 •
••.. Speaking on private basis, Bundy added 
that we recognized absolute oblig2.ti on never to put 
British in false position 2.nd hence to provide them 
with all information they needed for any contacts they 
had. 
Th.is applied to forthcoming Kosygin visit . 
At 
same time, we were pl2.ying a multipl e chess game and 
could not be expected to cut the British in on all 
boards at all t ime1=) •••. 
"5. 
Bundy then ... reminded Dean of account Secre-
tary had gi ven Fr iday night of our ccnfidential read-
out from Salisbury, in which Pha.m. Van Dong ls unpublished 
parts of interview had spoken of Hanoi t aking Ian 
appropriate standI and 2.1so said lwe know what we should 
dol i f US stopped bombingj Secretary had told Dean this 
was same formula used l ast summer to Sainteny and that, 
since Pham Van Dong resolutely refused to elaborate, it 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr - NODIS 
was at most atmospherics and did not get us much further. 
Since Friday night report to Dean) there had been follow'-
ing developments : 
a. 
Baggs-Ashmore team had come out of Hanoi 
a nd would be gi ving us their report this week .... 
b. 
Sainteny had made str',:mg pitch to go to 
Hanoi to pursue what would happen if bOr.:J.bing stopped 
and to get general reading . 
v.Te were taking him up on 
this arid vlould be a!'1lling him with the t wo-phase proposal 
c. 
Thompson would be t alking Vietnam seriously 
in Moscow, probably this l-leek ..•• II 
"7. 
In light of all this, I am seeking authority 
for you to see y.lilson soonest, perhaps Monday .... " 
"11. 
For your calIon Wilson, you 5h01.1.1d knO-,l that 
he has sent tW'o-sentence message to Pres i dent speaking of 
his talk with you on matter seriously affecting our 
r elationships .•.• II 
RUSK 
January 18, 19§7 
Brovrn has forgiven us . 
London 5692 ( to SecState) , TS/Nodis 
18 Januar-v 106'7 
" 
-,' 
FOR SECHETARY FROM COOPER 
"2. 
All is well. 
No apologies from me. 
No abuse 
from BJ':"mm. 
No whining from Pr.1 •••• r: 
BRUCE 
J an'_1ary 19 1967 
-~-... 
-.-.-;- .~ 
Sali s'ou:ry !s intervie\-T y;ith Ph&"ll Van Dong produces a nu.'Uber of 
appa r ently forthcoming statements couched in very general language . 
99 
TOP SEC~iKi:' -
I'! OD J}3 
-----_._-----
121-
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
NODIS 
We surmise they are essentially mood music, accompanying a strong 
attempt to get us to stop bo.rnbing ,.;ithout reciprocity. 
Gr'onouski 
is to tell the Poles, i f they raise the subject, that there must 
be reciprocal actions . 
State 121586 (to Arnembassy Harsaw ), S/Nodis 
19 Januar-.f 1967 
"3. 
We have also recej.ved an extensive account 
from Harrison Salisbury of hts obse):'vatio!ls in H8,noi , 
highlighted by Pharo Van Dong 's response to Salisbur-.fls 
question as to whe.t actions Hanoi would take if the 
US stopped bombing, namely Iwe will take an appro-
priate stand. I 
He also said: (1) if the US Istops 
doing harm to the North) we knOr,.T "That "re should do I ; 
(2) the moment the IDS puts an end to the war, we 
will respect ea.ch other and settle every question I; 
and (3) after the cessation of hostilities) there will 
be tno lack of generosj.ty on ou:;..~ part. t 
Our net 
judgment is t hat these statemen-ss are interesting 
mood music but do not get us very far. 
Th.e first t,{O 
statem.ents are replays of earlier statements to other 
so~r.ces. 
~le latter two appear to be without substance. 
"4. 
At the same tim.e) 1rlhile \·re are treating 
these reports seriously for action purposes) ",e believe 
we may be dealing with a strong atteLlpt by Hanoi, 
perhaps aided consciously by the Poles and in any case 
sympathized with by the Indians ; to get us to stop 
bombing fully "rithout any r eciprocal action except 
possibly some claimed "rillingness to talk .... 
"5. 
. .. if the Poles raise the subject, you leave 
them in no doubt ,vhatever that any stopping of the 
bombing on our part requires 'a clear picture of reciprocal 
actions repeat actions that amount to an equitable 
reduction of hostilities." 
RUSK 
Estabrook of the '\vashington Post files a story ' from ottai-Ta \-Thich 
apparently alludes to Marigold : 
"Ca!ladia!l authorities blame some of 
the difficulty (in begirL.'1i.ng US-DRV talkS) O!l the acciden·tal US 
bombings of Hanoi i::l. mid-December. Pri vate sO'.J.ndings then under .. ray 
were disrupted, they say, and the attitude in North Vj.etnam appeared 
to harden .... " 
100 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR~~ - NODIS 
Paris Herald Tribune, 20 January 1967 
Estabrook -
IIOtl,awa-Sees Hanoi Ready to Ease War" -
OttaHa, Jan 19 
"Some high Canadian officials believe that Tlhrth 
Vietnam is now prepared to de-escalate the war in the 
south if the U.S. halts bombing in the North. 
This 
--. is essentially what United Nations Secretary General 
U Tnant and others have been saying for some time, 
but there are hlO important distinctions: 
f:1.rst, 
Canada has a representative on the ICC who regularly 
visits HF.tnoi and talks directly with authorities there; 
second, Canada is a close friend and ally and does not 
want to see the U,S. disadvantaged . 
The key unresol ved 
question authorities here assert is how soon af't.er a 
bombing halt a reciproca.l move by l\TVN 1-,ould take place . 
This move could be an end to the i nfiltration of the 
south, ,.,here U. S. sources say there are 20 identified 
North Vietnamese regiments, but it probably could not 
be expected immediately. 
These conclusions pel'sist 
despite the fact that feelers for peace discussions 
have produced nothing tangible so far and are in 
abeyance at the moment . 
Canadian authorities blame 
some of the difficulty on t.he accidental U.S. bom.bings 
of Hanoi in mid-December. 
PrivatE: soundings then 
underway were disrupted they say and the attitude in 
Nortl: Vietnam appeared to harden. 
Now they cannot be 
sure 1-,hether North Vietnam wants to talk seriously 
beca-Qse of the propaganda success it has enjoyed 
through world protes-i:;s at the bombing. 
Nevertheless, 
they 1-10uld take the chance on the ground that 
discussions, once started, and even with North 
Vietnam !s unacceptable 4-points as part of the 
agenda , would inevitably broaden . 
Tney do not 
believe that Hanoi has really retracted its offer to 
make the 4-points a basis for discussion ratheT than a 
mandatory outline for settlement. 
Although they believe 
that the U.S. must be a bit more fleXible, they do not 
believe that a bombing halt must be unconditional. 
'l1b.ey 
view as a distinct advance the U.S. offer to halt the 
bombing upon so..1'lle sign, public or private, that the 
other side would be willing to make some comparable move . 
! If 1 '-Tere the President , t said one high Canadian 
official, II i-lould Simply announce that trle bombing had 
been stopped with no reference t o conditions . 
If nothing 
developed over e.. perioc_ or if :f'fVN took advantage of the 
situation the bombing of military- targets could ahrays 
be reslJmed and the world wOlud knovT that the U. S. had 
tried.' 
Canadals mm confidential initiatives on VN have 
101 
TOP SECREJ:' -
NOD IS 
'j r,.' 
r .-,:) 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR~T -
NODIS 
---.--------
been centered in the ICC in which it shares responsi-
bility with Poland and India. 
~1e Canadian Repre-
sentati ve, Victor ltioor'e) has just been summoned home 
after a 10-day viR it to Hanoi and vr.ill be replaced 
by Norman Dier. 
Simultaneously .• Canada is pressing 
Poland to agree to a meeting of the ICC pm-Ters at 
an Ambassadorial level in the hope that this i-lill 
lead to a meeting of foreign ministers. 
Poland lact 
week rejected an Indian suggestion for a corl1'erence in 
New Delhi." 
Janua~ 20-21, 1967 
Saigon continues to check on VC incidents in Saigon-Gia Dinh area. 
There may be some diminution. 
Permission is requested, therefore, to 
inform Hestmoreland about Marigold so that he may participate more 
effectively in the incident \-latch . 
State doubts that there has been a real VC slm-rdmm and does not 
wish to enlarge the circle privy to details of Marigo2.d. 
Saigon 16144 (to SecState)) 'I'S/Nodis 
20 January 1967 
Ref: 
Saigon 14894 
"1. 
A continui.ng check on VC incidents in the 
Saigon··Gia Dil1l1 area raises question of whether there 
is not some di"rninutton in nUluber of incidents ini tia-
t ed by VC since ,January 4. 
This report; is a sequel 
to tnat given ref tel. 
(underlining supplied) 
"2. 
As best -VTe can determine there have been 
five incic'l.ents of this sort from Janu<1ry 4· to 20 
as follOi-lS: 
A. 
January 4; Cholon; Body of Policeman 
found. 
Presumed to have been victim of terrorist act. 
B. 
January 5; Go Yap (5 kIn from Saigon); 
Two U.S. soldiers injured when terroriBts tossed 
grenade into their jeep. 
C. 
Jan1).ary 6; Thu Due (11 km from S.9.igon); 
1\10 AEVH soldiers injured vrhen their steamroller 
exploded a mine. 
D. 
Januar-y 13; T:.'1L1. Due (11 i;:m from Saigon); 
National Police apprehended two 'Ie in tel'ro:dst 
~t:t~I(lFt ag~Jn.st eq1.li]2ment) Inc. facility. 
One VC 
'c; S Cc:1.1JeO.) 
0 l"he r cap-c'L'.rea . 
102 
TOP SECRET' -
NODrs 
----------
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREl' -
NODIS 
E. 
January 18j Eastern Gia Dinh Province 
(16 krn northeast of Saigon)j Vietcong platoon 
attacked three bridge sites, slightly damaged one. 
Four friendly "Tounded . 
"3. 
The question nOl-r arises I,vhether "Te are 
seeing a VC pause in the area ten miles around 
Saigon as a response to our own action in the Hanoi 
area. 
So far t.he ans"Yrer on the surfa8e .iOuld appeel' 
to be negative, but the number of inc1dents is small 
recently and some of them may not be properly counted 
as either VC initiated or within the ten mile limit, 
e.g., items A and E in Paragraph 2. 
114. 
General Westmoreland is not al-Tare of the 
Ivlarigold Exercise . 
He is, therefo:('e, not al-rare of 
any connection bet"YTeen the Hanoi bomb- free area and 
our search for an equivalent VC pause in Saigon area. 
I would like to be able to tell him that .Te have mad.e 
such a proposal to Hanoi, without revealing the 
Marigold context. 
I think we vill be able to analyze 
VC actions in the Saigon area better with his help 
and, more significantly, .Te might possibly be able 
to use the knmTledge to our mill military advantage . II 
LODGE 
State 123198 (to Amembassy Saigon)., S/Nodis 
21 January 1967 
Ref: 
Saigon 16017 and 16144 
"1. 
Reur 16144, our ill.press ion is that recent 
action not far fr'om Tan Son Nhut may have cancelled 
out your :impression that there may be a real slowdmm 
ot: any sort on other side. 
Moreover) we ,vc"Lud pl'efer 
not to enlarge circle privy to details in this series. 
Can you not create a special quiet watch on incident 
rate within designated radius of Saigon on general 
basis ,-Tithout informing We.stmoreland? .••. 11 
RUSK 
January 231 196T 
In Moscow) Podgorny says that medj.B.tion by the USSR would be fruit-
less until the bombing stopped. 
With respect to Thoropson1s question 
103 
TOP SECRET -
JlTODIS 
.... '6 
I
, ... 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
about what the DRV or USSR ,.,ould do j,f we did stop bombing, Podgorny 
suggests we stop 8.nd see . 
T'nompson dravrs attention to the agreements 
about Laos, which "Tere not kept by the other side. 
Moscow 3159 (to SecState), S/Nodis 
23 January 1967 
"4. 
. ... Podgorny then asked ",hether end to 
Vietnam "Tar was in sight . 
115. 
I replied we all very much hoped war 
"muld end soon and also hoped USSR could help us 
in bringing this about .... Podgorny said it was 
difficult expect something ne"T and stressed that 
since main parties to conflict were US and Viet-
nam one could hardly count on mediation. 
He then 
said he did not exclude possibility of Vietn8E 
taking certain steps but pointed out pre-condition 
for that "Tould be at least minirulJln move by US, 
such as; initially, cessation of bombings . 
Since 
no such mo~re evident) hardly anyone could mediate. 
"6. 
I said .... It would be helpful if \'Te 
knew at least when a response could be expected . 
Also, as Secretary had said to Dobrynin, it would 
be interesting to knaw 1tihat USSR would do if -vIe 
stopped bombings and other side continued Hs 
activities. 
"7. 
Podgorny asserted US had always placed 
conditions on cessa~ion of bombings . 
US had said 
it "Tould stop bombings if other side gave certain 
guarantees .•.. 
"8. 
As to reference to guarantees if Ive 
stopped bombing, we did not ask for guarantees but 
only for indication as to what ;"lQuld ha'p:pen in 
response . 
For reason I mentioned earlier, this 
important to us. 
Podgorny interjected we could 
stop bombings and then we would see. 
I continued 
that j.n conside:cing situation 'we had also to keep 
in mind fact that despite agreements whj_ch had been 
reached on Laos: .Laotian te:critory had been used by 
North Vietnam to infiltrate south .... 
THOfiIPSON 
'l"OP SECRET -
NODJS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECF.B,T -
l'TODIS 
January 27, 1967 
Fried, the NY Daily News correspondent, tells Lodge in Saigon that 
he knows of Gronouski1s contact with the Poles in Harsaw . 
Saigon 16677 (to SecState) , TS/Nodis 
27 J amlary 1967 
"Joseph Fried, Viet- Nam correspondent of the 
New York Daily Ne"ltlS , told me on Friday that he 
'knev : that JlJYlbassador Gronouski and the Polish 
Government had been having conversations about 
settling the ,Tar in Viet- Nam." 
LODGE 
Saigon continues to feel that VC incidents 1n the Sa.igon- Gia Dinh 
area may have abated. 
Saigon 16785 (to SecState) , S/Nodis 
29 January 1967 
Ref: 
A. Saigon 16144 
B. State 123198 
"1. 
This is another in the series of reports 
we have been providing on VC initiated incidents 
vrithin ten miles of Saigon . 
itle shall send these 
reports each week. 
"2. 
For the :perj.od .January 21-27 within the 
zone there ",-ere fmIT incidents that can be char-
acterized as VC initiated: 
A. 
January 22, four miles west of 
Saigon, an uriknmm number of enemy fired two rifle 
grenades at police station, wounded 2 V~ civilians. 
B. 
Jarkuar-J 23, Gia DiIl..h City, unknown 
person threvr gre::l3.c1e at house. no casualties . 
C. 
January 23, 9 miles west of Saigon, 
booby 'crap, 2 \j]';j k.illed and two wounded . 
D. 
January 24) Saigon, unknown per:::on 
threv grenade, wounded three VN civilians. 
105 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
---------
1)(\ 
t.....lv 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR}~ -
NODIS 
1f3. 
In addition to these incidents, there were 
t wo others in the area resulting from VN police and 
iillVN making a sw'eep and ruILl1ing on to VC. 
T..r1ese do 
not meet the criteria of being VC initiated. 
1f4. 
1;Hth respect to the action not far from 
Tan Son 1~ut on January 20 (cited para one ref B), 
we have looked into this . 
The record of the action 
shows that elements of two ARliN battalions on a 
search and destroy mission encountered a VC force 
nine miles west northwest of Saigon . 
'l'he ensuing 
fight S'Celllfl1,eC!. from that contact. 
There is no infor-
mation as to vih'ether VC was on the way to Tan Son 
Nhut, or any other spectal target . 
No available 
information as to which side fired first shot. 
A.RVN 
units ) however, 'Here deftnitely on the prmll. From 
interrogati on prisoners taken day l ater VC force 
was sixth battalion from VC 165 Regiment vhich is 
regularly present on fringes Gta Dinh Province . 
1f5. 
We have also examined the record of VC 
initiated i,ncidents during the area for the month 
of November 1966. 
During that period there Ive::':'e 11 
inCidents; ranging from the shelling of Saigon on 
November l,National Day, to platoon and squad attacks 
t o isolated grenadings . 
Of the 11 i ncidents; seven 
can be characterized as serious in the sense that 
they were obviously well-planned af;tacks by small VC 
u...'1its. " 
LODGE 
Estabrook files a more complete story on Marigold from !Jew Ym'k. 
In private) he gtves different versions of the story 1s source. 
He 
apparently first got word of the matter from the Canadians in Ottavra 
and later confirmed it with V Thallt . 
In one conversation he i ndicates 
that he also Ifhad it from. a high Polish source ... corroborated by 
'other Eastern European sources .! If 
In another, he den:i,es that it 
Ifcame from the Poles ." Goldberg beli eves the Poles to be th2 
origi nal source of the sto:;:-y and recoilllliends tnat neither t hey nor any 
other Bloc country be used as a channel to Hanoi. 
VSUN 3847 (to SecState), S/Nodis) 2 February 1967 
If Estabrook (Hash Post Correspondent) told 
Nisoff Feb 2 that his st qry, in }~e'b 2 PQst ~hout 
Hanoi readiness to talk JUs-s pr:LOl' to Dec -3 
106 
TOP SECR~ - NODIS 
8 \ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREl' -
NOD IS 
bombing of Hanoi vas founded on several sources. 
He 
had it from high Polish source '-Thien he "Tould not 
identify. It was corroborated by 'other Eastern 
European sources.' 
He had been given similar impres-
sion earlier in Jan from Can FonMin Mq,rtin. 
He had 
taken story to U Tha.nt vho stated his believ that 
it "TaS correct." 
"( In separate brief conver sation ,d.th Pedersen 
Estabrook denied story came f:l:'om Poles. 
Saj.d it came 
from Martin, while Estabrook '!las in Canada, and then 
from U Thant. 
Estabrook said he had nad story for 
couple of weeks. 
In response expression of s 1..1rprise 
he had used word 'learned' instead of something like 
'alleged!, Estabrook indicated this based on evalua-
tions both of Martin and U Thant.)" 
"My assessm.ent is that the original source of 
this sto:cy is the Poles them.selves. 
'I'hey have quietly 
been spreading this story throug..."1.out the UN.; I even got 
some of it from the Da.nish Deputy Fon Min the other day, 
who attributed it to Poles." 
" 
This leads me to r.ecomme.ndf;1.tion tha.t "Te 
should no longer use Poland or any other Bloc country 
as channel to Hanoi. It would be far preferable in my 
opinion to deal directly or through Sovs than to continue 
with this type of intermediary." 
GOLDBERG 
State 131692 (to Amembassy I-Tarsa,{), C/Nodis 
4 February 1967 
Ref: 
I-Iarsaw 1895 
"Test of FebruaT1J 4 I-Tashington Post story by 
Estabrook ",ill reach you in form circtel. 
Text of 
FebruaT1J 2 stor;y filed from. New York under February 1 
dateline follows: 
107 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
L3'L 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECP~~ - NODIS 
BEDDf TEXT: 
"A Polish initiative to establish peace dis-
cussj.ons behTeen North TTietnam and the United states 
failed because of American bombing of the Hanoi area 
in mid-December) it has been learned on excellent 
authority. 
"Exactly hOvl far the Poles had succeeded in 
obtaining commitments from Hs.noi is not clear) but 
high-level outsiders '·Tho knew about it regarded 
the j,nitiative ·as promising before the bombing 
hardened Hanoi 1 s a tt i t1A.de • 
QUOTE 
The Araerj. cs.ns 
bungled it END QUOTE) one informed source stated. 
"U.s. officials said that any bombing of non-
military targets was accidental; after Hestern 
reporters observed damage to civilian areas that 
the North Vietnllinese claimed was caused by D.S. 
bombing . 
Since December) U.S. planes have report-
edly been ordered to stay away from the Hanoi area 
unless engaged in self-defense. 
"At the moment the Poles are said to have 
suspended their efforts. 
They are represented as 
extr6uely frustrated. not merely over the effect 
of the -bombing) but ~ore particularly with the 
uncooperative attitude of Hanoi. 
tlRecently Poland declin2d a sugges"clon of 
India that representatives of the three countries 
constituting the International Control Commission 
in Vietnam -Poland) India and Canada - meet in 
Ne,·; Delhi to consider vrhat could be done. 
Use of 
the Commission frame .. Tork to promote peace disc:.;.s-
sions is an old suggestion of Canadian External 
Affairs Ninist8r Paul Martin. 
"Even after the 8.ttitude in Hanoi changed in 
the wake of t~e bombing) the Poles kept trJing . 
Among other mo·Ves a top Polish diplomat) Jerzy 
MichalOl-Tski) made an unreported visit to the United 
States in January. 
"1;-rriether any American representative sm, him 
cannot be learned) but two Canadian diplomats were 
sent to t alk 'rT i th him. 
108 
TOP SECFET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"Michalowski, a fonner delegate to the United 
Nations a.nd more recently in the Polish Foreign 
Office, i-Tent on a special Mission to Hanoi in 
January 1966 , as the result of the visit to liarsaw 
of roving U.S. Ambassador W. Averell Harriman . 
"Apparently the Polish effort stemmed in part 
from a conversation betvTeen Foreign Minister Adam 
Rapacki and Martin i-Then the Canadian Foreign Minis-
ter visited Warsaw last December. 
"All this has transpired outside the United 
Nations. 
Although he has been given a mandate by 
the United States to do what he can to facilitate 
peace discussions, Secretary General U Thant is said 
by others to feel that nothing more can be accomp-
lished at the moment. 
"Diplomats from 11 non-aligned countries have 
met here three times within the last 10 days to 
discuss vlhether they can undertake any initiative 
to advance a solution. 
As a result, Sudanese dele-
gate Falillreddime Mohamed was designated to callan 
T'nant to inquire whether a new initiative would be 
useful. 
He reportedly received no encouragement. 
END T:EXT." 
RUSK 
February 3; 1967 
---~---.-
. ---
At his press conference, the President says it vTonld not be 
helpful lito comment on any particular challi'1.el or communications 
at this point. II 
Referr'ing to Hanoi I s attitude, he adds, "I must 
say that I do not interpl'et any action that I have observed as 
being a serious effort to either go to a conference table or to 
bring the 'flar to an end. t! 
New York Times) 3 February 1967 
Transcrip~of the President's News Conference 
"Follo,dng is a transcript of President Johnson! s 
news confe::cence in ~Tash ington yesterday as recorded 
by The New York Ti~es
: 
109 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' -
NODIS 
"1. 
Prospects in Vietnam 
Q. 
Wetve been reading and writing a good deal lately 
about diplomacy aimed at a Vietnam. settlement. 
I 
wonder if you could give us your assessment of the 
peace front at this time. 
A. 
Mr. (Frank) Cormier of the Associated Press states 
a question that I knmT is on the minds of all the 
people here today and all the people in this country. 
As you knOl", I have underlj.ned over and over again 
the very deep interest of the United States in a 
prompt and peaceful settlement of all of the problems 
in Southeast Asia. 
I have said many times that we are ready to go 
more than half way in achieving this result. 
I would 
remind. all of you that we 'dould 'Ylelcome a conference 
in Southeast Asia and this might be a Geneva conference, 
it could be an all-Asian conference, or any other 
generally acceptable fOYQffi. 
He would be glad to see the unconditional dj.s-
cuss ions to which I referred in my statement of 
April, 1965, at Johns Hopkins . 
We .vould participate 
in preliminary discussions which might open the .. my 
for fOTInal negotiat:i_ons. 
We are pr.epared t ode.y to 
talk about mutual steps of de-escalation. 
We ioiould 
be prepared to talk about sl::.ch subjec.ts as the 
excha;'1ge of prisoners, the demilitarization or the 
demilitarized zone or any other aspect TtI"b.ich might 
take even a small step .in the direction of peace. 
v.Te should be prepared to discuss any polnts 
which the other side wishes to bring up along ·'tTith 
points iolhich VIe and our allies very m1J.ch want to 
raise oU1:'sel ves , or there cOl..1.1d be preliminary 
discussions to see vihether there could be an agreed 
set of points which could be the basis for negotiation. 
So it is against this background tnat ,.,e study 
very Carefully all of the public state:nents made which 
appear from time to time and which bear upon Southeast 
Asia and all the Vie"\Ts "\.,hich we receive from or 
through other governments . 
It would not be helpful to me -- and I do not 
intend to (,,0 so -- to comment on any particula.r 
channel or coItl'1lunications a·c thj.s point.. 
But you may 
be sure that I·re are diligent in our search for the 
possibility of a peaceful settlement. 
110 
TOP SEeBEr - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
In all candor I must say that I mn not a"Tare of 
any serious effor't that the other side has made in 
my judgment to bring the fighting to a stop and to 
stop the "lar." 
"2. 
Personal Role i n Talks 
Q. ' You Ive been soeloCluent in the past about express-
i ne; YOUtr· desire for peaceful negotiations . 
I'd like 
to ask you whether or not if you thought it 1:{Quld 
speed this war dalm the road to peace "Thether you 
vlOuld be willing personally to partid.pate in negoti a-
tions wi th some of your opposite numbers, such as 
t he leadership in Hanoi? 
A. 
We have made cl ear that i f the other side desires 
to discuss peace at any time "Tell we will be very 
happy to have appropriate arrangements made to see 
that that's carried oui:;. 
vlhere we vlOuld tal k and vTho would talk and what 
we would tal.k about are all matters that could be 
wo::cked out betHeen t he two governments involved. 
',,-Je have made clear to them anel to the ¥7orl.c1 the 
principles that 'I;Tebelieve must govern a peace meeting 
of this kind , and a settlement that we would hope 
would come out of it like the honoring of the Geneva 
accords of '54 and ' 62) the right of self-determination 
of the people of South Vietnam , and to insure that they 
are freed from the threat or use of force. 
But we have, I must say .• as of toda.y, no i ndica-
tion that the other side is prepared i n any way to 
settle on these limited and decent ter'IDs . 
We hope 
very much that He can have some signal s in t hat 
direction, but I, in candor, must say that as of nOVT 
l"e do not have." 
"3. 
Concessions for Peace 
Q. 
Mr. President, does your expressed willingness to 
negotiate a peaceful settlement :imply any .. fillingness 
to comfromi se on any of our st ated o~jectives in that 
part of the l{Qrld? 
A. 
I think that any peace agreement will involve 
understanding on both parts and certain concession on 
both parts and a certain understanding. 
I don't think we can determine those before we 
come together OT thTough any press conference tech-
niQues. 
I can only r epeat vrhat I said iil the State 
III 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr -
NODIS 
of the Union) that I wish that the conflict in Vietn&~ 
was over and I can only repeat what JIve said so many 
times -- I will do anything I can on the part of this 
Govern.'11ent to go more than halfway t.) bring it at an end. 
I must say that '\ole face great costs) we face agony. 
We do plan to carry . out our efforts out there, we are 
going to support our troops in the field) we are going 
to work with our Vietnamese allies to'\oTard pacification 
and constitutional government, but '\oThile we tre doing 
that) every hour of every day the spokesmen for this 
Government are under in~tructions to explore eve~J possi-
billty for peace. 
But I do not '\oTant to disillusion any of you and I 
don tt '\oTant any of you to be caught by speCUlation . 
As 
of this moment I cannot report that there are any 
serious indications that the other side is ready to stop 
the war." 
"4. 
Indications From Enemy 
Q. 
You have three times now used that phrase: 
"no 
serious efforts by t he other side to bring the 'i-Tar to a 
close." 
How would you characterize what has been going 
on in the last couple of 'Ileeks? 
Do you recognize any 
signs of maneuverability or fl'Lddity in their position? 
A. 
I see a.lmost every day some speC1Llation by some 
individua,lJ or some hope or desire eXl,Jressed by some 
Govermnent . 
.And I a.ssu.rne that different individuals 
get different impressions; certainly they have differ-ent 
hopes. 
I can only t speak for- myself) John. t 
And ,lith the 
information that I have) with the knm-Tledge that ~ s brought 
to me) I must say that I do not interpret any action the.t 
I have observed as being a serious effort to either go to 
a conference table or to bring the war to an end. II 
"Q. 
Would you discuss the reports thJ.t there has been a 
decline in the infiltration l'ate to the South and say 
whether you think the bombing has had any effect? 
A. 
Well, I stated in my Baltimore speech i.n early '65 
what '\ole 
ex~pected to come from the bombir.g . 
We felt that 
it would improve the morale of the people in South Viet-
nam ,{ho felt that they'd almost lost the ,-rar . 
He felt 
that it 'Iwuld make the North Vietnamese pay a Jl1.uch 
heavier price for what they ',;rere doing and lire felt that 
it would rr,ake the infiltrati on more difficult . 
'rop SECREr -
NOD I S 
\ ~1 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREl' -
NODIS 
We think it has achieved all of those expressed 
purposes. 
vle cannot speak Ifith cold assurance on the 
infiltration and the numbers each day or each .,eek 
or each month. 
In some quarters of the year our indications 
are that they increase . 
In other periods of the 
year -- the next quarter -- then they go down some. 
I know of nothing that I can conclude as highly 
significant from the guesses and the estimates that 
we have made. 
Q. 
Sir, we have said in the past that we would be 
willing to suspend the bombing of North Vietnam in 
exchange for some suitable step by the other side. 
Are you prepared at all to tell us what kind of other 
steps the other side should take for this suspension 
of bombing? 
A. 
Just almost any step. 
As far as we can see) they 
havenlt taken any yet and we would be glad to explore 
any reciprocal action that they or any of their spokes-
men would care to suggest. 
We have made one proposal after the other to --
weld like to have a cease-firej vre td be very glad to 
stop our bombing as W2. have on b-ro previous occasions, 
if I'le could have any indication of reciprocal action: 
but as of nOIf they have giYen none and I assume they are 
willing to give none until I hear further." 
February 4, 1967 
I~ Saigon) the VC are reported to mortar the 7th Precinct and 
carry out 4 grenade attacks during the period Januar~y 28-February 3. 
Meanwhile} Ky is distressed by ne~.Js stories of US-DRV contacts 
and asks Lodge if we still require concessions in return for a bombing 
suspension and whether there are lldivergences on such matters between 
Washington and Saigon. 
Lodge is instructed to reply by giving Ky more 
background on ~~rigold ) streSSing (a) our doubts about the genuineness 
of the Polish contact, (b) on the other hand our obligation to follow 
all potential leads , and (c) the need to avoid publicity during this 
"extremely interesting and delicate" phase of diplomacy. 
In connection 
with the latter, his attention is to be dralm to the "recent public 
comments of Presidential Advisor Walt Rostow." 
113 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Saigon 17295 (to SecState ), S/Nodis 
4 February 1967 
"FollOl·ring is the record of VC initiated incidents 
within 10 miles of Saigon during the period Jan 28 to 
Feb 3. 
A. 
Jan 30; Saigon-grenade superficially 
wounds two US servicemen. 
B. 
Jan 30, Saigon-grenade injures one US 
serviceman and one VN civilian. 
C. 
Jan 31, 5 miles NE of Saigon-grenade 
killing policemen and civilian, wounding school-
teacher. 
D. 
Feb 1, Saigon-six mortar shells fired 
into seventh precinct, wounding seven VN civilians. 
E. 
Feb 2, Saigon-VC small arms and grer-ade 
attack on seventh precinct outpost, one civilian 
killed." 
LODGE 
Saigon 17317 (to SecState), SjExdis 
4 FebrLlaI"J 1967 
Readd: CDTCPAC (FROM illCS-EXCLUSIVE FOR A.DM SF-ARP) 
"1. D' 
1 
urlng a 
ca~ on Ky •.•. 
"2. 
. .. he said, IDoes 'Hashington agree that there 
should be no publicity of any kind until there has been 
a concrete offer from the Communist side?1 
"3. 
I said that I felt sure that T,-Tashington VTas 
very much in favor of not having publicity, since 
publicity not only presented alvkward problems for us 
and for the Government of South Vietnam, but also made 
it difficult to get any kind of a peaceful understanding 
1tlith Hanoi. 
He agreed that 'He shoulo. avoid forcing 
Hanoi up against the wall by making them lose face. 
"4. 
It was evident that his attention had been 
attracted by the statements of Senator Robert Kennedy 
and the apparent leaks of the messages from Caire and 
New Delhi to a point where he ,·ranted ·to be sure that 
there were no Idivergencies I between I'Jashington and 
Saigon. 
He asked ivhether we still believed that in 
114 
TOP SECRET -
NODrs 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRb'I' - NODIS 
exchange for a bombing suspension we wanted some sort 
of concession on their part. Did vTe envisage a bar-
gaining process or I'Tere we to suspend bombing vrith no 
qUid pro quo? 
"5. 
I called his attention to the Presidentls 
press conference and to the fact that on three sepa-
rate occasions during the press conference, the Presi-
dent had said that so far there was nothing of sub-
stance from Hanoi •.•• " 
LODGE 
State 131715 (to Amembassy Saigon), S/Nodis 
4 February 1967 
Ref: 
Saigon 17317 
"3. 
Believe you should also give Ky fill-in 
generally •••• 
For his information) story is, as he 
may imagine) quite incomplete and misleading in a 
number of respects.... He were never sure vrhether 
the Poles ,{ere speaking for Hanoi or entirely for 
themselves and vre concluded ultimately that the 
exercise had been primarily a fishing expedib.on by 
the Poles in order to get us to change our posi.tion 
.Tith respect to bombing of North Viet-Narll •... Through-
out this exercise we had not undertaken to make any 
change in our basic position. 
At the same time we 
had indicated a readiness to consider the possibility 
of di.rect talks VTithout conditions with North Viet-Nam 
with the objective of bringing about a peaceful 
settlement. 
You should ad<i tha-'c we -would naturally 
be in touch with the GIlN if there were really sub-
stantive developments in this field. 
"4. 
vTith reference to Kyls query (para 2 of 
ref tel) about Hashington views on publicity, suggest 
you call to his 8.ttention recent pu'olic comments of 
Presidential Advisor \'Talt Rostovi. 
After referrj.ng to 
lextremely interesting and delicate I phase of diplomatic 
probes nQ'.{ under 1-lay Rostow noted that publicity could 
destroy effectj'veness of behind-the-scenes efforts to 
ascertain FBnoi!s intent and added Ithis is a bad time 
to talk about any particular stand which might turn out 
to be a negotiating situation. I" 
RUSK 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
115 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE'I' - NODIS 
Washington Post, 5 February 1967 
u.s. Is Wary on Report of Peace Bid, by Murrey Marder 
flUnited States attempts to launch peace talks with 
North Vietnam are now in Ian eA~remely interesting and 
delicate phase, I a 'Imite House adviser said yesterday. 
flWith that comment and variations upon it, the 
Administration declined to confirm or deny a report 
that the United States and North Vietnam had tried to 
start peace talks in Warsaw in December, at American 
initiative. 
flWal t W. Rostow-, Pres ident Johns on I s spe cial 
assistant for natioP..a1 security affairs, said: 
fI'This is an extremely interesting and delicate 
phase in what is or what might turn out to be a 
negotiating process. 
Nothing has yet happened that 
would justify us in saying we have a serious offer to 
negotiate. 
This is a bad time to discuss ~ny p~rticu­
lar negotiating tr~ck. ' 
flLack of Vigor. 
Rostow's comments were made 
during-a-Panel debate at a conference of college news-
paper edi.tors at the Sheraton-P~rk Hotel. 
Another 
pa~elist, Richard N. Goodwin, who had served as an 
adviser to both Presidents Kenndy and .Johnson, charged 
there was a lack of vigor in the present pursuit of 
negotiations. 
!t I If Hanoi wishes to negotie.te seriously)! sa.id 
Rostow, lyour government wou...ld not be embarrassed. 
It l.;auld be delighted. I 
"Rostow was questioned specifically by the students 
about the validity of a report in The Washington Post 
yesterday, by staff writer Robert H. Estabrook at the 
United Nations. 
lilt reported that an authoritative 1,-Testern source 
said that U.S. Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge, in Saigon 
on Dec. 2 and 3, asked a Polish diplomat to set up 
contacts with North Vietn~~. 
On Dec. 4, the report 
said, Polish Foreign Minister Adam Rapacki said Hanoi 
agreed to have arabassadorial-level talks with the 
United States in W~rsm,. The report said that Hanoi 
attached no conditions about first halting the Araeri-
can bombing of North Vietnam. 
116 
TOP 
SEC FL~ -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"Withdrew in Anger. 
According to the report Hanoi 
angrily withdrew its agreement after American bombing 
raids near Hanoi on Dec. 13-14 allegedly hit civilian 
areas. 
"RostOVl declined to get any more specific about 
that account except to repeat that 'this is a bad time 
to talk about a particular strand of what might be a 
negotiation. t 
"Other sources sought to emphasize that the frus-
trated negotiating effort described in the report from 
the United Nations was only one of many efforts being 
made to launch talks. 
"Some Administration sources said the point in 
The Washington Post account that they would challenge 
.. ras that Hanoi had 'agreed ' to the Warsaw talks. 
No 
offiCial, however, would discuss whether this question 
of agreement was a matter of differing interpreta:;ions 
or not. 
There was no challenge by any official of the 
reported Lodge-initiative to arrange for talks in Warsaw. 
"The State Department, in commenting Friday on 
earlier and considerably less-detailed versions of a 
similar report by The Washington Post and others said 
it salv lno merit' to contentions that the bombing of 
North Vietnam. interfered with efforts to start peace 
talks. 
"In a new' comment yesterday the State Department 
said: 
"lAs a matter of policy we do not believe it 
.. rould promote the cause of peace in Vietnam to comment 
on accounts of any alleged private talks or events 
relating to them. 
The President fully characterized 
the situation at his press conference last Thursday.' 
"At that press conference, President Johnson 
repeatedly said that 'I do not interpret any action 
that I have obse:rved as being a serious effort to either 
go to a conference table or to brin8 the war to an end.! 
The United States , he said, was a~~ious 'to explore any 
reciprocal action' to curb or end the war . 
"That comment ) Administration sources said, amounted 
to tu..."YTIing dovrn, as inadecpate, a bid by North Vietnam I s 
Foreign Hinister in which he saj.d there 
I could I be talks 
117 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
, 
r 
; 
~ j -,r.._ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECEili""T -
NODIS 
if there "ras an !unconditional! end to the bombings 
of his countroy. 
"Administration officials emphasized that t.he 
offer oP~y held out the possibility, not the promise, 
of talks , in any event. 
lIThe Soviet neviS agency, Tass) charged yesterday 
that President Johnson had spurned the 
I go od;,.ri 11 I 
gesture by North Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen 
Duy Trinh. 
Tass said the minister had displayed an 
'indication of willingness' by the Hanoi regime to 
talk .... rith the United States. 
l1The Soviet ne,vs agency added : 
l1''Ihe umrillingness of U.S. ruling circles to 
stop the criminal bombing of the D.R.V. (North Vietnam) 
can only be regarded as a refusal to meet around the 
conference table, and as a sign of the~r determination 
to further escalate the aggressive .... rar in Vietnam . ' 
l1Tass l s correspondent in Hanoi said President 
Johnsonts state~ents produced tlegitLmate indignation! 
in Hanoi. ,11 
February 6-]..L 1967. 
Australia and He,v Zealand are briefed on Marigold in some dete.:Ll. 
More'general accounts are given to the GVN and the M..anila countries. 
Ky accepts our explanation in good spirit, but points to 9.1arm. 
about 80- called l1peace 11 talk among Cathol:Lc leaders, certain Buddhists 
and the military in SVN. 
His and Thieu's strong anti-cormnunism would 
be reassuring to these elements, he believes . 
State 132347 (to .~anbassy Canberra; pE.embassy vlellington), 
TS/Nodis) 6 Februe.ry 1967 
Ref: 
DEPCIRTEL 131'{00 
EYES ONLY FOR Al~ASS_~OR 
111. 
On February 4 Bundy separately gave Ambassador 
'valler and Charge d! Affaires Shepherd a full account of 
the discussions betl'Teen USG and Poles about the possi-
bility of direct discussions bet .... leen USG and Hanoi .•.. 11 
118 
TOP SECRE'l' - NODIS 
., .... 
1 ...-' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
tt27. 
• .•• \{'nile we may have erred in not informing 
you fully on this matter) we iV·ere guided throughout by 
the absolute necessity of secrecy in seeking to deter-
mine wl.ether Hanoi was in fact prepared to sit down 
quietly without preconditions .••. 
tt28. 
Tnis full account is being given to 
Australia and New Zealand, with the request for the 
preservation of total confidence. 
A more general 
account is being given to Saigon and to the Manila 
countries. 
We have assured Saigon, as we have repeat-
edly assured you, that if "Vle should get clear evidence 
of a serious change in Hanoi1s position we would keep 
them fully inf·ormed." 
RUSK 
Saigon 17482 (to SecState)) S/Nodis 
7 February 1967 
Ref: 
State 131715 
"1. 
Pursuant to your 131715) I called on Prime 
Minister Ky Tu_esday morning ..•. " 
"3. 
Ky seemed to accept all of the above in good 
spirit. 
He evidently thinks that the purpose of the 
rather carefUl wording is to make it possible to 
achieve some kind of understanding vlithout ma~dng Hanoi 
lose face. 
In all my many talks 'vi th him) he has often 
voiced his belief that we should be trying to pers-J.ade 
Hanoi and make it easy for them to go along with us) 
and that we did not ·Hant to humiliate them) make them 
lose face) put them up against the wall. 
tt4. 
Changing the subject slightly) he then said 
that Catholic leaders in Viet-Nam were becoming alarm.ed 
by the so-called Ipeace l talk which they feared would 
actually mean military advantage for Hanoj_; and "Tere 
taking an attitude very different from that of the Pope. 
He was afraid that simj_lar divisions might occur among 
Buddhists and among the military. 
The hopeful element 
of the situation was the,t teveryone kne1tll hovT strongly 
anti-Communist he) Ky) and 'lldeuHere. II 
LODGE 
119 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr - NODIS 
February 7~l-96?: 
Wilson comments in Parlialllent about discussion with the Poles and 
a definite "pea:;e feeler" last December. 
Highest l evels in Washington 
fear this may undercut the President's February 3 r emarks. 
Gronouski takes issue .... Tith Goldberg, arguing that the Canadians 
.... lere probably Estabrook's source and that the Poles remain a better 
channel for qommunication with Hanoi. 
State 133105 (to Amembassy London), S/Nodi s 
8 February 1967 
FOR AMBASSADOR AND COOPER 
"1. 
Highest levels are deepl y disturbed by Wilson 
reference to December discussions "lith Poles in Parlia-
mentary response yesterday. 
Wilson comment is of course 
being .... lidely reported as confirming that some definite 
'peace feeler' did exist at that time , and is therefcre 
being construed to 'undercut' President ' s remarks of 
last .... leek . 
Moreover, revelation -Ghat I'Tilson has 'all 
the details ! is bound "to have serious complicating 
effect on our relations with Saigon and vith Manila. 
allies , who had not repeat not received any similar 
fu.11 account • • •• If 
RUSK 
Warsa .... T 1939 (to SecState ), :m/Nodis 
8 February 1967 
Ref: 
(A) State 130580 
(B) State 131716 
Ill. 
Based on personal knmTledge of the precedents, 
I have r eached quite different inferences and conclu-
sions r egarding Estabrook articles than those drawll by 
Amb. Goldberg in reftels. 
1f'2. 
With respect to Feb 2 story, ·while Estabrook 
referr ed to high Polish sources ) he denied that story 
came from the Poles. 
Rather , he said it came f rom 
Canadian Fon Min lvTe.rtin -.lhile Estabrook was in Canada) 
and the,t he had story a couple of ioTeeks . 
Tnis rings 
true, for Estabrook on Jan 19 filed from OttalTa essence 
of his ?eb 2 story (which appeared in J an 20 Paris 
Herald Tribune) saying : Car.t8.dian authorities bl allle some 
120 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
/--)' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEC REI' -
NOD IS 
of the difficulty on the accidental U.S. bombing of 
Hanoi in mid-December. 
Private soundings then under 
.,ay 'Here disrupted, they say) and the attitude in 
North V letnam appeared to harden. t 
Also, note that 
in his Feb 2 article Estabrook speaks of thigh level 
outsiders! as source, and links Polish peace effort 
to lIIartin-Rapacki discussions in December (which is 
not true , but it does not hurt :M..artin1s image to be 
Gase in this role), also) note that Estabrook spoke 
of 'Ilestern sources in his Feb 4 story. If 
"5. 
What'does surprise me, if we accept Esta-
brook1s statement that story came from Martin (and I 
see no a priori reason for Estabrook to implicate 
Martj_n and U 'I'hant and protect the Poles), is that 
Feb 2 story places developments in so unfavorable a 
light from standpoint of USG .... If 
"8. 
I am particularly concerned with recommen-
dation in final para of ref tel A, tbat li'Te shou~d no 
longer use Poland or any other Bloc countrJ as 
charL."1el to Hanoi. t 
As I noted in my analysis of 
Marigold role played by Poland (Warsaw 1631), I too 
had hoped that Soviets might play an intermediary 
role. 
But to my knovTledge experience has been that 
Poles are only Communist country .,illi.ng to take on 
this chore .... " 
GRONOUSKI 
Sizeable VC incidents within 10 miles of Saigon lead Lodge to 
suggest that there is no further need to look for indications of reci-
procity to our suspension of bombing near Hanoi . 
He suggests that the 
10 mile limit around Hano i be dropped. 
Saigon 11'759 (to SecState)) S/Ncdis 
10 February 1967 
"Follovling is the record of VC initiated inci-
dents 'Ifithin ten miles of Saigon during the period 
February 4 to Febrtl.ary 9. rr 
121 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
I 
i"- () 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRB~ - NODIS 
ITC. 
February 6, four miles 1-Test of Saigon -
unidentified platoon-sized unit fired submachine 
bursts nea:c police station and then withdrew'. IT 
LODGE 
Saigon 18329 (to SecState), S/Nodis 
18 February 1967 
"Following is the record of VC initiated inci-
dents vlithin ten miles of Saigon during the period 
February 10 to February 15. II 
ITC. 
February 13" Saigon - VC fired four mortar 
rounds in vicinity of MACV-I (details have been 
reported separately). IT 
IT2. 
\Vith this spate of activity it is clear 
that cons i derations behind preparing this series of 
reports are no longer relevant . 
This 1-rill) the:refore) 
be the last telegraphic repo:ct of this sort." 
LODGE 
Saigon 18535 (to SecState), TS/Nodis 
20 February 196"7 
IT2. 
The recent mortaring in tovn:) other terror-
ist incidents in the Saigon area, and the likelihood 
that we will get more) prompts me to suggest vIe con-
sider informing Hanoi) via the Foles) that we no 
longer consider ourselves bound by the 10 miles limit." 
LODGE 
March 3. 1967 
- . 
Goldberg (accOlllpanied by Lodge) sees DtOrlandi in Saigon, to hear 
the J.atterts versi.on of Marigold. 
His objective is a first-hand confirrn-
ation from an independent source of the ' inaccuracy of the Polish version 
conveyed to U Thant. D'Orlandits account, he finds, contains "no 
122 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
discrepancies from the version "Te already have. 
In particular D 'Orlandi 
is quite categoric in stating that the 10 points passed to Hanoi were 
formulated by ~wand o~ski) not by Lodge--as Goldberg believes the Poles 
told U Thant. 
On the other side) D'Orlandi is of the view that the 
December 13-14 bombing derailed the Warsa.T talks. 
He expresses great 
confidence in Lewandowski1s integrity. 
USUN 4238 (to SecState); S/Nodis 
6 March 1967 
FROM GOLDBERG 
"On March 3) day before leaving Saigon) I arranged 
entirely private and off record meeting with D'Orlandi, 
with agreement of and in pr'esence 11mb Lodge. 
My objec-
tive was to secure first-hand confirmation-from entirely 
independent source of inaccuracy of Polish version of 
late November-early December Marigold events, i.e., that 
it vlaS Lodge "Tho had formulated ten point proposal 
Lewandowski transmit'ted to Hanoi, only to take position 
subsequently that some of these points needed clarifica-
tion. 
(underlining furnished) 
flWithout any prompting on my :pe.rt, D'Orlandi 
really and fully recited course of events. 
His recital 
contained no discrepancies from version we already had 
and he was quite categoric in stating that ten points 
passed Hanoi by Lewandowski had been formulated by 
LewandQio;ski himself. t: 
"It is necessary to add) however) that D'Orlandi 
is of vie,'; that bombing of Dec 13-14 derailed Warsaw 
talks. 
He also expressed viev that it ."ou1d have 
furthered progress towards negotiations if Rapacki had 
not insisted upon transferring venue to Harsaw . 
D 'Orlandi I s vie"T is that it i-Tould ha.ve been preferable 
to carry on discussions through himself and LewandOi-Tski 
in Saigon, with Lewandowski commuting to Hanoi. 
t'D I Orland i expressed great confidence in Lewan-
dowski t s integrity and confirmed that -both LewandmTski 
and he \-Till be leaving Saigon for respective home or 
other posts." 
BUFYt.JM 
123 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
,. " 
I·~-~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECBEr -
NODIS 
On returning to New York) Goldberg tries to arrive at a common 
version of the facts about ~~rigold with the Polish UN Representative: 
Tomorowicz . 
The Polish version agrees with ours that the 10 points 
were formulatec. by LewandoVTski . 
Goldberg not2s three points of 
difference, hovTever: 
i. Their version does not mention that Lodge indicated the 
need to cla:r~ify certain points at the December 1 meeting in Saigon. 
ii. Their version indicates that Lodge first raised clarifica-
tion at the December 3 meeting ) through the "important differences of 
interpretation" clause. 
lll. According to their version, the Poles stressed avoiding 
intensification of the bombing either before or during talks from the 
December 1 meeting on. 
Goldberg urges Tomorowicz to review Marigold with Warsal-r so that 
these factual differences can be cleared up. 
USUN 
l~ 390 (to SecState), S/Nodis 
15 March 1967 
Hl. 
I arranged meet 1-lith Polish Perm ReI) Toraoro-
wicz Mar 14 PM shortly after he had called on SYG and 
just before he was due leave for roughly ten days con-
SUltation j.n Warsaw . II 
"3. Specifically, I noted there is one point of 
some importance re developments in ea.rly Dec on which 
there are two dj.ffering Vers ions , namely) who formu-
lated ten points 1Vhich Lel-TandovTsld presented to Hanoi ...• 
"4. 
I sai,d r had talked with D 'Orlandi privately 
while in Saigon, that D'Orlandi had reviewed Marigolci.-
developments 'Hithout any prompting from me) and that 
his review entirely confirmed our understanding of 
facts on this point. 
TomormTicz said that, in princi-
pIe) facts of this point as we understood them vTere 
quite Cl.ccurate. 
(underlining furnis'1ed) 
"5. 
His further comments) however) engendered 
discussi,on of tvIarigold developments throughout Dec 
which r evealed three other points on \-{hich 1,Te and 
Poles have differing facts) specifically: 
124 
TOP SECRET -
NODrS 
, "\-" 
i ,\ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREl' - NODIS 
A) PoliE.h version, as presented by Tomoro-
vlicz, makes no mention of fact that at Dec 1 mtg in 
Saigon, vThen Le,vandowski presented ten points to 
Lodge, Lodge raised guestion of need to clarify some 
of points, noting Points Band H in particul ar . 
(underlining furnished ) 
B) According Polish version, Loige first 
mentioned need for clarification at Dec 3 mtg, when 
he said there were important difference's of inter-
pretati on on Iserious matters l in ten points, although 
Lodge would not reply vrhen asked to identify points 
in need of clarification. (underl ini ng furni shed ) 
c) According Polish version, Poles placed 
stress on r elation between bombing and progress 
toward US-NVN talks from Dec 1 mtg on: 
le,vandowski 
211egedly told Lodge on Dec 1 that there must be no 
intensi fication of bombing either before or during 
t al ks ; at Dec 3 mtg vlith Lodge ) he 211egedly made 
strong r epresentat.ions re Dec 2 bombings ; and, on 
Dec 5, Rapacki allegedl y made another strong repre-
sentation re bombing to Gronouski, claiming Dec 2 
2nd 3 bombings had not ruled out chances of direct 
US-NVN talks but had certainly made progress toward 
talks more difficu~ t. (underlining furni shed) 
"6. 
As these differences came to light during 
discussion, I presented our understanding of facts 
and urged TomorQ1oiicz to re vi ew Marigold developments 
while in liar saw so tha.t we could clear up factual 
differences between us .... " 
GOLDBEHG 
March 16-17 , 1967 
----.~~---
Fanfani writes Rusk that LevTandmTski has proposed a new initiative 
to D IOrlandi . 
Lodge is instructed to follml uP, but he replies that 
D I Orlandi. has left Saigon for Rome . 
Reinhardt is therefore i nstructed 
to contact D I Orlandi latex' in Rome. 
Rome 4767 (to SecState ), S/Nodis, 16 ~~rch 1967 
lIMy Dear Secretary of State, 
125 
TOP SECRET -
NODrs 
is-v 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"I '\-lOuld feel remiss in my duty if I failed to 
inform you of 'l-That Ambassador D tOrlandi has communi-
cated to me after meeting vith Lewandowski, a few 
days ago, and revie'l.;ing with him the current Viet-
namese situation . 
DfOrlandi felt he had to tell me 
that, :i.n the present ch'cumstances, a resumption of 
negotiations would reCluire a three week long sus-
pension of bombings and the admission, on the part 
of the United States, that they are still willing 
to accept the .Tell knOvTn ten points. 
lIDtOrlandi adds that the duration of the sus-
pension could be kept secret and that it should not 
rpt not be difficult to secure a substantive counter-
part from Hanoi, to be presented as a compensation 
for some other, purely token} concession from the 
United States." 
REINHARDT 
State· 156826 (to Amembassy Saigon)} S/Nodis 
16 March 1967 
til. 
By no\-, you 1{ill have seen ... message from 
FonMin Fanfani to Secretary Rusk ... . 
"2. 
Points of greatest interest on which 'tle 
most want clarification are follOl-Ting; 
(a) When would the negotiations be 
resumed, after suspension had run three weeks or 
at initiation of three-week period? If the former, 
should it be assumed that suspension would be 
expected to continue as negotiations proceeded? 
(b) vfuat would be the tsubstantive 
counterpart I from Hanoi? 
Presume it would not 
merely be resLMption of negotiations but rather 
some de-escalatory action affecting infiltration, 
guerrilla or terror activity in the South or the 
1 "' 
_l.J.~e • 
(c) In phrase tresumption of negotiations I 
does this refer to (i) direct DRV/US talks which were 
to have been undertakerc in \,j'ars!3-'Iv last December 2 
and which we ,velcomed, or (ii) resu.ruption of arid 
exchanges between Gronouski and Rapacki? 
126 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
\ rf 
\2:, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr -
NODIS 
( d) 
vThat i s entailed in I accepting I the 
ten points? 
We assume this means nothing more than 
that we have in no ,'lay receded from acceptance in 
terms 'vle made }GlOWn to Lewandovlski and Rapacki in 
November and December. 
113. 
Please reviev these matters vith DfO:rlandi 
11 
Saigon 20590 (to SecState ), S/Nodis 
16 March 1967 
111. 
In response to your 156826, D fOrlandi 
left Saigon yesterday, Thursday, March 16 .... 
11 
LODGE 
State 158132 (to Amembassy Rome), S/Nodis 
17 March 1967 . 
Ref: 
(a) Saigon 20590 
(b) Rome 4767 
(c) State 156826 
"2. 
• ••• The SecretaI"J vould be most grateful 
if Minj.ster Fanfani IVQul d let Ambassador Reinhardt 
know vhen Ambassador DfOrlandi has r eached Rome so 
that the tvo Ambassadors mi ght discuss Le'vlandcwski IS 
approa ch . 
"3. 
For Reinhardt. 
Assu.rning the arrangement 
outlined above 'vlorks out, vle w01J~d appreciate your 
folloving up 'vlith D fOrlandi along lines sketched 
out Deptel 156826 .... " 
RUSK 
March 19, 1967 
Rapacki has told Wilson and Brmm that (1) Lodge f irst accepted 
Le'\'landovski f s 10 points, then reneged through the 
11 important differ-
ences of interpretation" clause, and (2) the December 13-14 bombing 
had sabotaged the entire project. 
State cables a rebuttal: (1) 
Lodge reserved the US position on the 10 points when !~il'st pres er..ted , 
December 1; hence he did not renege , (2) Although Lei.;andoVTski 
complained on December 3 3.bout our bombing Hanoi, "there 'vras no 
suggestion that the prospect for DRV-US talks depended in any dir'ect 
way on such matters . " 
127 
'1.'OP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' -
NOD IS 
State 158246 (to Aroembassy London), TS/Nodis 
19 March 1967 
Ref: 
London's 6998 and 7172 and State's 146803 
tlAccount in London's 6998 of Rapacki's conver-
sations with Brown and Wilson about the events of 
December provide further evidence of Rapacki's con-
tinuing vindictiveness. 
vJe assume that his feelings 
will badly discolor the Polisb contribution to a 
tmore detailed post mortem! between tbe British and 
the Poles. 
!'During his London visH, Rapacki evidently 
made two charges against us: 
(1) Lodge had reneged 
after giving firm agreement to the Lewandowski Ten 
Point package and (2) the December 13-14 bombing 
had sabotaged the entire project. 
tiThe cable exchanges betw'een Lodge and the 
Department in the early days of December provide 
an absolutely clear record that Lodge did not repeat 
not agree to I..e"ivandowski' s version of the Ten Points 
and therefore did not r'epeat not renege . 
On Decem-
ber 1, Le"'ivandowski told Lodge he had presented to 
Hanoi his understanding of the US position based on 
his conversations with Lodge on November 14 and 
earlj.er. 
He then read his Ten Points, whj.ch Lodge 
recorded precisely. 
Lodge ,vas not; ho'tTever; shown 
a paper contaj.ning the Ten Points. 
HAt the end of his statement, LewandovTski asked 
Lodge if he had correctly stated the US point of view. 
Lodge responded. carefully that 'obviously on a matter 
of such importance, I viQuld have to refer to my 
government for a definitive reply, but I could say 
off hand that ill"Ll.ch of what he cited vas in keeping 
with the spirit of our policy.' 
He then pointed out 
specific difficulties with Point 2 and Points 8. 
Neitber in tbis nor in la,ter discussions vitb Lodge 
did. Le"Tal.1dol-Tski indicate any misunderstanding of the 
qualified nature of Lodge's response to his presen-
tation of the Ten Points. 
For example) Lodge informed 
hi.111 on December 3 that our Embassy in Warsaw would 
contact the DRV representative on December 6 to confirm 
. that the Le"mndowski formulation broadly represented 
our position, althougb several specific points were 
subject to important differences of interpretation .... 
tI 
It is also 'worthy of note that D'Orlandi 
told the Secretary on December 9 that Rap~cki had 
128 
TOP SECRET-
NODIS 
153 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEC REf - NODIS 
----------
'tried to be clever' and to get the US to withdraw 
all its reservations about the Lewandowski formu-
lation before he established a direct contact in 
WarSal-l bet'\veen the US and DRV representatives .... 
II •••. It is true that on December 3) Lewan-
dowski under instructions; complair.ed to Lodge 
about bombings in the vicinity of Hanoi but there 
was no suggestion that the prospect for DRV-US talks 
depended in any direct way on such matters. 
IISubsequently; while Rapacki haggled; we I-lere 
blocked from a direct contact with the DRV at which 
this and all other pertinent subjects could have 
been dis cus sed • •. ,11 
KATZEl\TBACH 
ReirLhardt revie'\vs prospects for resuming contact via LewandO'l-13ki 
with D'Orlandi in Rome. 
State instructs hill to arrange a three-party 
meeting 'ilhen Le'l-TandO'\'lski passes through Rome in May. 
Rome 5266 (to SecState)) S/Nodis) 7 April 1967 
State 164750 (Ref?) 
Ill. 
In lengthy private cor..versation today at 
villa; D'Orlandi exposed his conviction that possi-
bili ty to achieve something through LevrandoVlski vas 
good and should be pursued 'Hithout undue delay 
since Pole would be leaving Saigon in May. 
D'Orlandi 
believed lesson of last try was that more details 
should be clarified and nailed dOi-Tn through Le ... ran-
dowski channel before actual negotiations between 
principals initiated. 
No doubt he had discussed 
these and other views in detail 1-lith Lodge. It 
was clear to me that D%Orlandi considered himself 
essential liJ:l-K to Lewandowski channel. 
112. 
Regarding specific questions (State 156826) 
para 2); he stated: 
A. 
Le .... randowski thought that suspension 
of bomb:ing should be initiated not later than his 
arrival in Hanoi to sound North Vietnamese and that 
three or four "reeks would be necessary to allmT 
sufficient time for initial exchanges ) suspension 
would of course be without any commitment) and whether 
it continued further would presu.mably depend on 
whether constructive developments take place. 
129 
TOP SECREl' -
!\TODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' -
NOD IS 
B. 
!Substantive contribution! would } he 
imagined} be something specific in milita~J field 
which US Command considered useful. 
C. 
!Resumption of negotiations! he 
thought meant US/DRV but was not sure that Rapacki/ 
Gronouski stage could be completely finessed if venue 
were 1-Tarsaw. 
D. 
'Accepting ten points ' he understood 
simply to mean reaffirmation of previous position 
including US reservations on interpretation and 
aSSUIance that there had been no recession in US 
position. 
"3. D!Orlandi said Lewandowski had revealed 
nothj.ng rpt nothing in his conversation which might 
cast light on why Hanoi published Johnson-Ho-Chi 
Min.h exchange. II 
REllffiARDT 
State 1802"(1 (to Aruembassy Rome), TS/Nodis 
21 April 1967 
Ref: 
Rome 5266 
"l. 
We appreciate having these additional 
comnents by D!Orlandi and suggest that in order to 
explore Hanoi's position further, as it is un¢l.er-
stood by Le1lTandOlTski) you propose quiet meeting 
beti{een the three of you next month when Lewandmrski 
passes through Rome en route to Ivarsaw . II 
RUSK 
~.ay 8 z 1961 
Hightmi'er files a lengthy account of Marigold from \vashington. 
T.fJ.e 
story contains enough detail to indicate that some of his sources were 
insiders. It is critical of the Polish role and reflects Washington's 
doubts the reliability of Poland as a channel to Hanoi. 
130 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
New York Times, 9 M~y 1967 
4-MONTH u.s. BID IGNORED BY HANOI) by John M. 
Hightower of the Associated Press 
"One of the 10 points provided that the United 
States would not insist that North Vietnam acknOl·rl-
edge publicly the presence of its forces in South 
Vietnam. 
The J ohnson Administration decided this 
should be clarified to require that if the troop 
issue was to be covered up for face-saving purposes, 
then the North Vietnamese forces should be ,rith-. 
drawn from the South. 
"Mr. Lewandowski was informed of this and other 
clarification points. 
The others seemed mainly 
matters of wording. 
But this one seemed to be sub-
stantial." 
"Mr. Rapacki's strong reSls-cance to the clari-
fication proposal caused some concern in Washington. 
Officials "rere not sure the Poles had any commitment 
from North Vietnam to begin the talks. 
Some high 
officials here doubted that Mr. Rapacki was in fact 
relaying United States views and making k~own 
WaShington IS readiness for talks Jco Hanoi. It 
"Informants sayan tmportant element in the 
Administrati on decision not to suspend the bombing 
plan was an attack by Communist forces on Sai gon 's 
main airfield and an unsuccessful attempt to blow 
up a major bridge in Saigon." 
"United States officials publicly took .issue 
with this. Privately they said that while the 
attack at Hanoi might have destroyed the Polish 
plan, it might also have presented Hanoi or Warsaw 
. with a convenient pretext for not going through 
with it." 
May 9-10) 1967 
In Warsaw, Polish concern is expressed over rumors that the US 
plans to publish a white paper on Marigold . 
This "Tould force them) 
131 
TOP SECREl' -
l'fODTS 
.J 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR1~ - NODIS 
reluctantly) to publish their own account. 
Gronouski recommends against 
publication. 
Washington replies that the Hightower piece is "essentially accurate 
and r easoll-B.bly favorable from our point of view." 
The Poles are to be 
told t hat we "\-Till not publish a "rhite paper. 
When so informed) the Poles respond that "US officials had apparent-
ly chosen another way to put out the story." They are especially dis-
tressed at the question r aised as to whether they had actually transmitted 
US messages to the North Vietnamese. 
~1ey state that they had delivered 
the messages. 
Warsaw 2700 (to SecState)) S/Nodis) 9 May 1967 
"1. 
During my separate calls on Winiewicz and 
Michalowski this morning) both of them expressed 
Polish concern about news r eports orj.ginating in U. S. 
that U.S. intends .to publish within next few days a 
white book covering Warsm-T talks of last December .... " 
1T5. 
lis11 their o'wn 
no alternative 
Poles "Tould be most reluctant to pub-
"I-Thite book but they ,{Quld be left "\-rj.th 
if U. S. publisned its O'tln. IT 
"7. 
I wouJ.d therefore recoIlJ!i1end against 
publication of official dept. version of :M..ARIGOLD 
events ••.. IT 
GRONOUSKI 
State 190899 (to l~membassy Warsaw )) S/Nodis 
9 If.l8.Y 1967 
Ref: 
"\tlarsa"\-T 2699 and 2700 
ITWe consider nel-TS stories filed yeste:rday on 
December peace ?robes to be essentially accurate 
and reasonably favorable from our point of V1.2"\'7 . 
We ·.rould prefer let matter rest there avo.iding to 
extent feasible public exchange of interpretations 
with the Polish Government. 
l-.1hen queried about 
story yesterday, official spokesman said he pre-
ferred not rpt not to com.'11ent on story) adding 
FOR BACKGROUND that he 'would have no quarrel with 
it. l 
lITe intend maintain this position. 
132 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
\ 57 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECP~ - NODIS 
IISince ;"7e have no desire exacerbate US-Polish 
relations over this matter, ;"7e have no present 
intentions publish !White Book' on this subject. 
You should so inform Michalovski. ••• " 
RUSK 
Warsaw 2727 (to SecState), S/Nodis 
10 May 1967 
Ref: State 190899 
Ill. .... When Kaiser said U. S. has no present 
intention of publishing white book, Michalowski 
responded that U.S. officials had apparently chosen 
another ,-laY to put out the story. 
He then referred 
to Hightower article which, he said, according to 
summary received by Polish FonMin, seemed to be 
based on high level official sources. 
There were 
disturbing distortions, errors and innuendos 
challenging the integrity of Rapacki and question-
ing whether Polish side had actually transmitted 
messages to North Vietnamese. 
He added that Poles 
had of course delivered mes.sages." 
JENKINS 
May 28, 1967 
US Embassies in Tokyo and Seoul are given background information 
on Marigold. 
State 203984 (to AmEmbassies: Tokyo, Seou2), S/Nodis 
28 May 1967 
Ref: 
State 197426 to Tokyo 
State 198946 to Seoul 
"We are repeating to you Staters 158246 and 
132347 which provide background info on Polish 
initiatives re Vietnam ;"7hlcb aborted last December. 
Text of Le'\Vandowski!s Ten Points ;,.'hieb were pre-
sented to Ambassador Lodge on DeceI.2ber 1 follovs:" 
RUSK 
133 
TOP SECRET - NCDIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRBT - NODIS 
Tnethree-party talks in Rome will not be possible as Lewandowski 
is not passing through. 
Rome 6506 (to SecState), S/Nodis 
6 June 1967 
State 191174 and Rome 5991 
"D'Orlandi has informed me that Lewandowski 
is not repea,t not coming to Rome. II 
REIN1LAFDT 
December 6, 1967 
Wilfred Burchett tells US officials in Paris that the DRV had an 
official en route to the lfJarigold Warsaw meeting at the time of can-
cellation--"when the US resumed bombing Hanoi. II 
Paris 7540 (to SecState), S/Nodis, 
6 December 1967 
"Burchett said North Vietnamese accuse us of talking 
peace while intensifying war. 
For example, North 
Vietnamese had agreed. to talk at I.]"arsaw last December 
and even had official en route "hen US resumed bombing 
Hanoi. 
He also mentioned North Vietnamese readiness 
to talk at Rangoon during 37 day pause." 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
