Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

forces of 150,000. Initial appraisal of new tasks assigned
CHMAAG indicates that approximately 100 additional military
personnel will be required immediately in addition to the
present complement of 685. f

(2) Expand MAAG responsibilities to include authority to provide
support and advice to the Self Defense Corps with a strength of
approximately 40,000. .

(3) Authorize MAP support for the entire Civil Guard Force of
68,000. MAP support is now authorized for 32,000; the remaining
36,000 are not now adequately trained and equipped.

(2) Install as a matter of priority a radar surveillance capa-
bility which will enable the GVN to obtain warning of Communist
over-flights being conducted for intelligence or clandestine air
supply purposes. Initially, this capability should be provided
from US mobile radar capability.

(5) Provide MAP support for the Vietnamese Junk Force as a means
of preventing Viet Cong clandestine supply and infiltration into
South Vietnam by water. MAP support, which was not provided in
the Counterinsurgency Plan, will include training of junk crews
in Vietnam or at US bases by US Navy personnel. 10/

The only substantial significance that can be read into these April 29
decisions is that they signalled a willingness to go beyond the 685~man
limit on the size of the US military mission in Saigon, which, if it were
done openly, would be the first formal breech of the Geneva Agreements.

For the rest, we were providing somewhat more generous support to the
Vietnamese than proposed in the CIP. But the overall size of the Vietnamese
forces would be no higher than those already approved. (The 20,000-man
increase was already part of the CIP.) No one proposed in this initial
draft that the Administration even consider sending American troops (other
than the 100-odd additional advisors). It was not, by any interpretation,

a crisis response.

Indeed, even if Kennedy had approved the whole April 26 program, it
would have seemed (in hindsight) most notable for the "come what may, we
intend to win" rhetoric in its introduction and for the supreme role
granted to Task Force (and indirectly to Lansdale as its operations offi-
cer) in control of Vietnam policy. Lansdale's memoranda leave no real
doubt that he saw the Report exactly that way -- which presumably was why he
made no effort to risk stirring up trouble by putting his more controversial
views into the paper. For example, although Lansdale believed the key new
item in.Vietnam policy was a need for emphatic support for Diem, only the
barest hint of this view appears in the paper (and it is not even hinted
at in Lansdale's preliminary draft of the report distributed at the
April 2th meeting of the Task Force), 11/

0)
z TOP SECRET - Sensitive
