Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

step forward. The example of the civilians moving at this pace also
created pressure and conflict within MACV, which was for the first time
confronted with a strong civilian structure. The GVN indicated that it
understood and approved of the new structure.

B. OCO on Trial: Too Little Too Late -- Or Not Enough Time?

Although it was slower than Washington desired, OCO did get off to
a start in December of 1966. Wade Lathram, who had been USAID Deputy
Director, was chosen to head up OCO -- a choice that was unfortunate,
pecause Lathram, a skilled and cautious bureaucrat, was not the kind of
driving and dynamic leader that OCO -- in a brink of disaster situation
from its inception -- needed.

Even worse, Porter was almost immediately diverted from OCO to pay
more attention to other matters. While the planners had hoped that
Porter would take OCO in hand and give Lathram direct guidance, instead
he left Lathram in control of OCO and was forced to turn his attentions
to running the Mission, during a long vacation (one month) by Lodge.

The most dramatic action that was taken was the selection of the
Regional Directors, a move which even attracted newspaper attention.
They included Henry Koren, formerly Porter's deputy; John Paul Vann,
the controversial former MACV advisor; and Vince Heymann of the CIA.

Slowly, the OCO then turned to picking its province representatives.
All in all, OCO accomplished many things that had never been done before;
given time it could no doubt have done much more. But it was plagued
from the outset by lack of support from the agencies and their represen-
tatives in Saigon, and Washington made higher demands than could be met
in Saigon.

It is not clear when the President made the decision to scrap OCO.
He communicated his decision to his field commanders at Guam, but there
was a two-month delay before the decision was announced publicly or dis-
cussed with the GVI.

D. The CORDS Reorganization ;

As Bunker took over the Mission, there was a considerable turnover
in key personnel. Bunker asked Lansdale and Zorthian to stay on, but
Porter, Habib, Wehrle, all left just as Locke, Komer, Calhoun, Cooper,
and General Abrams all arrived.

In the new atmosphere, Komer took the lead, making a series of recom-

mendations which maintained the civilian position within MACV, and
Westmoreland accepted them.

vii ‘ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
