Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. Recognition by the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam as well as
by Khmer and Pathet Lao, of the economic and cultural interests
of France in those countries. After the establishment of uni-
fied Governments in Viet-Nam, Khmer, Pathet Lao, the economic
and cultural relations of these States with France should be
subject to the settlement in conformity with the principles
of equality and mutual interest. Pending the establishment of
the unified governments in the Three States, the economic and
cultural relations of Indochina with France will temporarily

' remain without a change such as they exist now. However, in
the areas where communications and trade ties have been broken
off, they can be re-established on the basis of understanding
between both sides, The citizens of both sides will enjoy their
privileged status to be determined later in matters pertaining
to domicile, movement, and business activities on the territory
of the other side.

6. The belligerent sides undertake not to prosecute persons who
collaborated with the other side during the war.

7. ‘There shall be mutual exchange of prisoners of war.

8. Implementation of measures that are referred to in paragraphs
one through seven should be succeeded by the cessation of
hostilities in Indochina, and by the conclusion to this end
of appropriate agreement between France and each of the Three
States which should provide for a complete and simultaneous
cease-fire throughout the whole of the Indochinese territory
by all armed forces of the belligerent sides, ground, naval,
and air force. Both sides, in each of the Three States of
Indochina, for the purpose of strengthening the armistice, will
carry out a necessary settlement of territories and of the areas
occupied by them, and it should also be provided that (a) both
.sides should not hinder each other during the passage, for the
purpose of the above mentioned settlement, by the troops of
the other /sic/ side over the territory occupied by the other
side; (b) the complete termination of transportation into Indo-
china from abroad of new ground, naval, and air units of per-
sonnel, or of any kind of arms of ammunition; (c) to set up
eontrol over the implementation of the terms of agreement on the
cessation of hostilities, and to establish, for this purpose,
in each of the Three States, mixed commissions composed of the
representatives of the belligerent sides. 4/

-d. The DRV Proposals Demand a Political Settlement Before a

Cease-Fire

The meaning of Dong's list of proposals was clear. A politi-
cal settlement would precede a military agreement (cease-fire) rather than

C-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

—<————
