Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"But I don't know, when I em put up against it at this moment, to
find an alternative, to say what we would or could do. Then if I have
no better plan, I am not going to criticize what they have done."

x< + =

15. Final Declaration of Geneva Conference, J 21, 1954, 10/43 Rev. 2
July 21, 1954, Original: French:

"Final declaration, dated July 21, 1954, of the Geneva Conference
on the problem of restoring peace in Indo-China, in which the repre-
sentatives of Cambodia, the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nem, France,
Leos, the People's Republic of China, the State of Viet-Nem, the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom, and the United
States of America took part.

"1, The Conference takes note of the agreements ending hostilities
in Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam and organizing international control and
the supervision of the execution of the provisions of these agreements.

"2, The Conference expresses satisfaction eat the ending of hos-
tilities in Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam; the Conference expresses its
conviction that the execution of the provisions set out in the present
declaration and in the agreements on the cessation of hostilities will
permit Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam henceforth to play their part, in
full independence and sovereignty, in the peaceful community of nations.

"3. The Conference takes note of the declarations made by the
Governments of Cambodia and of Lacs of their intention to adopt measures
permitting all citizens to take their place in the national community,
in particular by participating in the next general elections, which, in
conformity with the constitution of each of these countries, shall take
place in the course of the year 1955, by secret ballot and in conditions
of respect for fundamental freedoms.

"h, The Conference takes note of the clauses in the agreement on
the cessation of hostilities in Viet-Nam prohibiting the introduction
into Viet-Nam of foreign troops and military personnel as well as of
all kinds of arms and munitions. The Conference also tekes note of the
declarations made by the Governments of Cambodia and Laos of their
resolution not to request foreign aid, whether in war material, in
personnel or in instructors except for the purpose of the effective
defence of their territory and, in the case of Laos, to the extent
defined by the agreements on the cessation of hostilities in Laos.

"5, The Conference takes note of the clauses in the agreement on
the cessation of hostilities in Viet-Nam to the effect that no military
base under the control of a foreign State may be established in the
regrouping zones of the two parties, the latter having the obligation
to see that the zones allotted to them shall not constitute part of

: B-23
