Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

stemming from inept imitation of Chinese Communism -~- including a harsh
agrarian program that reportedly led to the killing of over 50,000
small-scale “landlords.” The North Vietnamese themselves furnished
damning descriptions of conditions within the DRV in 1955 and 1956.

Vo Nguyen Giap, in a public statement to his communist party colleagues,
admitted in autumn, 1956, that:

"We made too many deviations and executed too many honest
people. We attacked on too large a front and, seeing enemies
everywhere, resorted to terror, which became far too widespread.

- . « Whilst carrying out our land reform program we failed to
respect the principles of freedom of faith and worship in many
areas. « . in regions inhabited by minority tribes we have
attacked tribal chiefs too strongly, thus injuring, instead of
respecting, local customs and manners. . . . When reorganizing the
party, we paid too much importance to the notion of social class
instead of adhering firmly to political qualifications alone.
Instead of recognizing education to be the first essential, we
resorted exclusively to organizational measures such as dis-
ciplinary punishments, expulsion from the party, executions,
dissolution of party branches and calls. Worse still, torture came
to be regarded as a normal practice during party reorganization." *

That circumstances in North Vietnam were serious enough to warrant

Giap's confiteor was proved by insurrection among Catholic peasants in
November 1956, within two weeks of his speech, in which thousands more
lives were lost. But the uprisings, though then and since used to
validate the U.S.-backed GVN stand, were not foreseen in 1955 or 1956;

the basis for the policy of both nations in rejecting the Geneva elections
was, rather, convictions that Hanoi would not permit "free general elec~
tions by secret ballot," and that the ICC would be impotent in supervising
the elections in any case.

The deadlines for the consultations in July 1955, and the date set
for elections in July 1956, passed without international action. The
DRV repeatedly tried to engage the Geneva machinery, forwarding messages
to the Government of South Vietnam in July 1955, May and June 1956,
March 1958, July 1959, and July 1960, proposing consultations to
negotiate "free general elections by secret ballot," and to liberalize
North-South relations in general. Each time the GVN replied with dis-
dain, or with silence. The 17th parallel, with its demilitarized zone
on either side, became de facto an international boundary, and -- since
Ngo Dinh Diem's rigid refusal to traffic with the North excluded all
economic exchanges and even an interstate postal agreement -- one of
the most restricted boundaries in the world. The DRV appealed to the
UK and the USSR as co-chairmen of the Geneva Conference to no avail.

In January 1956, on DRV urging, Communist China requested another

* General Vo Neuyen Giap, speaking to the Oth Congress of the Lao
Dong Party Central Committee, October 1956.

T TOP SECRET - Sensitive
