Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On the evening of May 18, the DRV Foreign Ministry issued a state-
ment denouncing the gesture as a "deceitful maneuver designed to pave
the way for new U.S. acts of war," and insisted U.S. planes had, since
May 12, repeatedly intruded into DRV airspace "for spying, provocative
and strafing activities."

Communist China's Foreign Ministry issued a statement May 21 fully
endorsing Hanoi's position and denouncing the suspension with charac-
teristic intbemperateness.

F. Aftermath

A still somewhat ambiguous diplomatic move was made by Hanoi
on May 18, shortly after the bombing had been resumed.

It appears that in Peris, on the morning of May 18, Mai Van Bo,
head of the DRV economic delegation there, approached the Asian Direction
of the Quai d'Orsay to explein the reasons for the DRV's rejection of
the Radhakrishnan proposals (involving a cordon sanitaire by Afro-Asian
troops along the 17th parallel). More important, however, Bo explained
with text in hand that the Pham Van Dong Four Points, enunciated on
April 8, should not be isolated from the decleration that had followed
the four points. He then softened the language of that declaration by
pointing out that the four points constituted the "best basis" from
which to find the "most just" solution, and that recognition of these
principles would create favorable conditions for a solution of the prob-
lem and would open the possibility of convoking 2 conference.

When asked if Hanoi recognized that realization of its proposed
"principle of withdrawal" of American forces would depend upon the
“conclusions of a negotiation," Bo responded "exactly," and indicated
that if there were agreement on the "bases," the "ways and means" of
application of “principles” would be found and in a peaceful manner; the
possibilities were many; a way out {porte de sortie) should be found for
the US; “our suggestion humiliates no one."

This happening, which occurred on May 18, was first reported by
a Quai official to the US Embassy's Political Counsellor in Paris
unofficially on May 19, in a highly glossed version, making it appear
that the DRV was clearly responding to the bombing pause by a significant
softening of its position on "prior conditions." In the official version
that Lucet, the Director of Political Affeirs of the French Foreign Office
‘conveyed to the DCM on May 20, however, the continued ambiguity of the
DRV position -- as to whether or not recognition of the four points
remained a precondition to talks of any sort -- was fully revealed.

This ambiguity was in no sense resolved a few weeks later, when

Blair Seaborn raised this question with the DRV Foreign Minister in Hanoi.
The U.S. had asked Seaborn in late May to seek an appointment with Pham

128 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
