Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

elements, and on the extent to which the South Vietnamese
ean be shocked out of their present pattern of behevior.

The first work of this reorganized U.S. pacification organi-
zation should be to produce within 60 days a realistic and ~
detailed plan for the coming year.

"From the political end public-relations viewpoint,
this solution is preferable -- if it works. But we cannot
tolerate continued failure. If it fails after a fair trial,
the only alternative in my view is to place the entire paci-
fication program -- civilian and. military -- under General
Westmoreland. This alternative would result in the estab-
lishment of a Deputy COMUSMACY for Fecification who would
be in command of all pacification .staffs in Saigon and of
all pacification staffs and activities in the field; one
person in each corps, province and district would be re-
sponsible for the U.S. effort."

"(It should be noted that progress in pacification, more than
anything else, will persuade the enemy to negotiate or with-
draw. )"

Fifth, the Secretary recommended & renewed effort to get negotiations
started, by taking steps "to increase our credibility” with Hanoi, by
considering a shift in the pattern of our bombing program considering
the possibility of cessation of bombing, by trying to “split the VC off.
from Hanoi,” and by "developing a realistic plan providing a role for
the VC in negotiations, postwar life, and government of the nation.”

His summation was somber. While repeating his prediction that the
next two years would not see a satisfactory conclusion by either large-
unit action er negotiations, McNamara advocated pursuing both routes al-
though "we should recognize that success from them is a mere possibility,
not a probability."

“The solution lies in girding, openly, for 2 longer
war and in taking actions immediately which will in 12 to
18 months give clear evidence that the continuing costs and
risks to the American people are acceptably Limited, that
the formula for success has been found, and that the end of
the war is merely a matter of time. All of my recommenda-
tions will contribute to this strategy, but the one most
difficult to implement is perhaps the most important one --
enlivening the pacification program. ‘The odds are less than
even for this task, if only because we have failed so con-
sistently since 1961 to make a dent in the problem. But,

* pecause the 1967 trend of pacification will, I believe, be
the main talisman of ultimate U.S, success or failure in
Vietnam, extraordinary imagination and effort should go
into changing the stripes of that problem.

102
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
