Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

as some sort of necessary device that needs to be propped up
and nominally catered to by the GVN in order to keep US and
Free World's interest and faith intact. However, any serious
or meaningful gesture in support of a program which ultimately
is designed to displace the powers-to-be (or at least force
them to become accountable or share in the power) is not forth-
coming. Infrastructure is not attacked even though the target
is known; budgets are not spent although the funds are avail-
able; GVN officials steadfastly refuse to visit their districts
or villages or hamlets although it is there that most immediate
problems exist. The list of limpid, half-hearted efforts to
prosecute the war is endless.

Material Cutoffs and Shortages: In August after several
months of negotiation, CORDS, Bien Hoa was forced to cut off
further shipment of replenishment stocks into province. The
reasons for this action were many but could be reduced to
Sloppy, shoddy and highly questionable logistical practices
and procedures on the part of the GVN. After eleven weeks, the
Provincial GVN finally agreed to carry out the reforms and
renovations as suggested by CORDS. However, that eleven-week
gap in the flow of materials (particularly during a period most
noted for its relatively high degree of GVN action) had a sig-
nificant effect on curbing construction programs and causing
even more delays. Then, as soon as this issue was resolved,
it was learned that cement and roofing weren't in supply and
rationed quotas for the remainder of the year further com-
pounded the damage caused by earlier material shortages.

To compensate, in part, for these factors, CORDS has had to
increasingly rely on the resources, skills and capabilities of
resident US military units. These units have, without exception,
effectively filled the gaps and their efforts have succeeded in
reducing the critical road situation that has been worsening
throughout the years. Their action in many other areas has been
highly commendable and CORDS Bien Hoa (as well as the GVN it-
self) owes a great deal to these units and their commanders who
have unselfishly devoted themselves to furthering pacification.
However, for all their efforts, for all the resources either
expended or on hand, the disturbing truth in Bien Hoa is that
it still remains for the government, with forceful and meaning-
ful direction from above, to begin to assume the responsibility
for prosecuting this war and the pacification effort. Thus far,
the GVN has not done this and it is the considered opinion of
CORDS Bien Hoa that unless major revisions are brought about in
the factors raised here, there is only to be a continuation of
the same ordeal with the accompanying frustrations, inaction,
corruption and incompetence. A continuation of this does not

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
