om,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

723 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

supporting that strategy. First of these was the growing emphasis on
pacification. The story of this growing emphasis is the subject of
another study in this series. However, a few of the highlights and
their implications for U.S. force requirements may be useful. Although
the war between U.S. and enemy battalions progressed satisfactorily
during the spring and early summer of 1966, it became increasingly
apparent that the pacification effort was not keeping pace. Urged on
by Komer's visits to Vietnam, both Ambassador Lodge and General West-
moreland turned their attention increasingly towards the problem of
pacification. On August 3, Ambassador Lodge in his weekly report to
the President mentioned that he "conferred with General Westmoreland
about the Vietnamese Regular Army -- the ARVN -- contributing more to
pacification. He agrees on the urgent desirability of hitting pacifi-
cation hard at this time when other things are going quite well." 5/

By 10 August, Icdge was putting even more emphasis upon the pacifi-
cation effort. This 10 August weekly report to the President gives an
indication of the atmosphere in Saigon at this time. Lodge's cable
opened with the following:

In the struggle of the independence of Vietnam, the follow-
ing can be said: we are not losing; we cannot lose in the normal
sense of the word; never have things been going better; indeed,
never have things been going so well. We are "on the track"
with regard to almost every aspect of the war and we are winning
in several...but all of this is still not called "victory."
Indeed, however much they disagree about many things everyone
-- in Washington and Hanoi and in Saigon -- seems to agree that
what we have now is not victory. In truth we do not need to
define "victory" and then go ahead and achieve it 100%. If it
becanes generally believed that we are sure to win (just as it
is now generally believed that we cannot lose) all else would be
a mopping up. If there is "the smell of victory" we will be
coasting. 6

Lodge followed this up by listing a number of things which would
psychologically mean "victory." Among these were "smashing results" in
the criminal war of terrorism, subversion and local guerrilla action,
movement towards constitutional democracy, spectacular success in the
Chieu Hoi program and the opening of the roads in Vietnam. Iodge esti-
mated that none of these things were "just aramd the corner." ‘Therefore,
it seemed to him that we had quite a stretch of time ahead of us. His
questions then were "Could we shorten the time? Should we shorten the
time? and if so, How? It was Iodge's judgment that a quick victory as
the result of a relatively big, fast offensive might be easier to obtain
than a victory achieved through a relatively moderate, slow offensive.
He observed that,

..-Maybe the Vietnamese can last indefinitely -- although it
may be dangerous to assume it. But certainly it would be

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
