Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

Admiral Radford shares doubts of other JCS members on the
adequacy of measures taken by General Navarre at Dien Bien
Phu. General Ely predicts the outcome at Dien Bien Phu as
"50-50" ana emphasizes the great political importance of
the battle. Radford is "gravely fearful" that French
measures will be inadequate, the consequences could lead
to loss of Southeast Asia, and to avoid this, the U. S.
must be "prepared to act promptly and in force" to a be-
lated French request for intervention. - See Annex B to
Document 63, page °77. JCS Memorandum for the President,
Os Maron LOGUE oe daaauae eh oeesaetdvades aca odeacs ances ate ete Coo

General Ely, Chairman of the French Chiefs of Staff, is
"unsympathetic" to the JCS view to expand MAAG, Indochina

to assist in training Vietnamese. Ely feels it would

encroach on French responsibilities, would affect "prestige"

and shows lack of confidence in French leadership.

(Annex A, Ely Memorandum for Radford; Annex B, JCS Memo-

randum for the President) JCS Memorandum for President's
Committce, 29 March 195U...csces severe covebeec SHevewenesewne | (Olt

The U. S. reiterates to the U. K. the following assumed

position; (1) that Britain supports our agreement to

discuss Indochina at Geneva provided France would not

turn over the area to the Communists; and (2) "we shall

not, however, be disposed to give Communist China what

it wants from us merely to buy its promises of future

good behavior." Dulles 5090 to London, 1 April 1954......... 291

The U. 8S. proposes a coalition of U, S., France, Associ-

ated States, U. K., Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, and

the Philippines, which would fight in Indochina as an

alternative to French Union surrender and as a position

of strength going to Geneva. Dulles 376 to Paris,

VAT UE LS SH arell tt cate eee we kre wee Me sire are Siviviview ewltrewivaiemstese | Teo

The British consider partition the "least undesirable

settlement" for Indochina and had not developed thoughts

on a confrontation with a French sell-out. Dulles 5177

Peter, CE RPT 1 OSM a. anreleu i eidios ant Grcwyelmaknn Maisie Seats pase ee” OD

The French request "immediate armed intervention of U. S,.
carrier aircraft at Dien Bien Phu" to save the situation.
Admiral Radford had previously assured Ely that he would
"do his best™ to obtain the U. S. support. Paris 3710 to
Dulles, 4) April lO5M.....cccccccecceeecees ihelseeesicmeameee | (oO

x TOP SECRET - Sensitive
