Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

target No. 18.8) and Thanh Hoa bridges (JCS target No. 14+) were the northern-
most fixed-target strikes in this campaign to be followed by additional armed
reconnaissance strikes to sustain the interdiction. ROLLING THUNDER 9

(2-8 April) through ROLLING THUNDER 12 (23-29 April) completed the fixed-
target strikes against 26 bridges and seven ferries.

ae ROLLING THUNDER 9 permitted three armed recce missions on specified
route segments. Sorties were increased to not more than 2h armed recce
strike sorties per 24-hour period in ROLLING THUNDER 10 through ROLLING
THUNDER 12. This effort was still far short of the level considered by the
JCS to be "required for significant effectiveness."

be Prior to ROLLING THUNDER 10, armed recce targets were limited to
locomotives, rolling stock, vehicles, and hostile NVN craft. For ROLLING
THUNDER 1O through ROLLING THUNDER 12 the rules were changed to provide day
and night armed reece missions to obtain a high level of damage to military
movement facilities, ferries, radar sites, secondary bridges, and railroad
rolling stock. It also included interdiction of the IOC by cratering, re-
striking and seeding choke-points as necessary. :

ec. From the beginning, armed recce geographical coverage Was limited
to specified segments of designated routes. By ROLLING THUNDER 9 it had
increased to one-time coverage of Routes 1 (DMZ to 19-58-36N), 7, 8, 15, 101,
and lateral roads between these routes.

d. The dropping of unexpended ordnance on Tiger Tsland was authorized
in this period. Prior to this time, ordnance was jettisoned in the sea.

ROLLING THUNDER 13 (30 April - May 1965) through ROLLING THUNDER 18
(11-17 June) continued U.S. and VNAF strikes against 52 fixed military
targets (five restrikes) as follows: six ammo depots, five supply. depots,
21 barracks, two airfields, two POL storages, two radio facilities, seven
bridges, two naval bases, one railroad yard, two thermal power plants, one
port facility, and one ferry. It was argued by the JCS that, as some bar-
racks and depots had been vacated, political insistence on hitting only
military targets south of latitude 20° was “constraining the program sub-
stantially short of optimmm military effectiveness."

a. During this six-week period armed recce sorties were expanded to
a maximum allowable rate of 4O per day and a maximum of 200 per week (60
additional armed reece sorties were authorized for ROLLING THUNDER LT) 6,
Although this period saw a significant increase in armed recce, the new
‘level was well below existing capabilities and, so the JCS argued, "the
increase was authorized too late to achieve tactical surprise."

b. With ROLLING THUNDER 13 armed recce authorizations changed from

stated routes, etc., to more broadly defined geographical areas, in this
ease the area south: of BO".

xXV TOP SECRET - Sensitive
