Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of military commanders and the Joint Chiefs of Staff for

@ systematic, timely, and hard-hitting integrated air
campaign against the vital North Vietnam targets. Instead,
and for policy reasons, we have employed military aviation
in a carefully controlled, restricted, and graduated build-
up of bombing pressure which discounted the professional
judgment of our best military experts and substituted
civilian judgment in the details of target selection and
the timing of strikes. We shackled the true potential

of airpower and permitted the buildup of what has become
the world’s most formidable antiaircraft defenses....

It is not our intention to point a finger or to second
guess those who determined this policy. But, the cold fact
is that this policy has not done the job and it has been
contrary to the best military judgment. What is needed
now is the hard decision to do whatever is necessary,
take the risks that have to be taken, and apply the force
that is required to see the job through....

As between these diametrically opposed views [ot the
SecDef and the military experts/ and in view of the unsatis-
factory progress of the war, logic and prudence requires
that the decision be with the unanimous weight of professional
military judement....

It is high time, we believe, to allow the military
voice to be heard in connection with the tactical details
of military operations. 16/

3. The Fallout

This bombing controversy simmered on for the next few
months and when a major secret peace attempt associated with the
San Antonio formula failed, the President authorized most of the 57
unstruck targets the JCS had recommended and which the Stennis report
had criticized the Administration for failing to hit. In addition,
the Chairman of the JCS was thereafter asked to attend the Tuesday
policy luncheon at the White House as a regular participant.

Tae Stennis hearings also created considerable confusion
and controvery within the Pentagon over the target classification and
recommendation system. The Senators had been at pains to try to estab-
lish whether targets recommended by the military were being authorized
and struck or conversely to what extent the military was being ignored.
