Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

"The following are the actions we believe can be taken
in order to improve the situation both in the immediate future
and over a longer term period. To emphasize that a new phase
has begun, the measures to be taken by the Khanh government
should be described by some term such as ‘South Vietnam's
Program for National. Mobilizetion.'" 47/

Two courses of action that Secretary McNemara considered and
rejected were destined to come up time and again. With respect to the
suggestion that the U,S. furnish an American combat unit to secure Siagon,
the Secretary reported "It is the universal opinion of our senior people
in Saigon, with which we concur, that this action would now have serious
adverse psychological consequences and should not be undertaken."

On U.S. assumption of commend, he said:

",,.the judgments of all. senior people in Saigon, with
which we concur, is that the possible military advantages
of such action would be far outweighted by its adverse psy-
chological impact. It would cut across the whole basic pic-
ture of the VN running their own war and lay us wide open to
hostile propaganda both within SVN and outside. Moreover
the present responsiveness of the GVN to our advice -- although
it has not yet reduced military reaction time -- makes it less
urgent. At the same time MACV is steadily taking actions to
bring U.S. and GVN operating staff closer together at all
levels, including joint operating rooms at key command levels." 48/

The President met with the National Security Council, on March 17
and approved McNamare,'s recommendations; NSAM 288 of that date directed
all agencies to execute the parts applying to them. To underline one
point further, State cabled USOM Saigon on March 18 to make sure to report
ali rumors of coups heard by any U.S. personnel to the Ambassador at once;
and it gave the Ambassador full reaction authority. 49/ Then the Presi-
dent summarized his view of the main thrust of the new policy, in a cable
to Lodge on March 20:

"AS we agreed in our previous messages to each other,
judgment is reserved for the present on overt military action
in view of the consensus from Saigon conversations of McNamara
mission with General Khanh and you on judgment that movement
against the North at the present would be premature. We here
share General. Khanh's judgment that the immediate and essen-
tial task is to strengthen the southern base. For this rea- ;
son our planning for action against the North is ona contingency
basis at present, and immediate problem in this area is to
develop the strongest possible military and political base
for possible later action."

Anticipating great things, the White House announced Khanh's
“mobilization plan” on March 17, and implied USG support for him:

iy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
