Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Tl think that unless you want to withdraw from the field and decide
that it is in the national interest to permit that area to collapse, I
would think thet it would be impossible to substantially change it par-
ticularly, as we are in a very intensive struggle in those areas.

"So I think we ought to judge the economic burden it places upon us
as opposed to having the Communists control all of Southeast Asia with
the inevitable effect that this would have on the security of India and,
therefore, really begin to run perhaps all the way toward the Middle East.
So I think that while we would all like to lighten the burden, I don't™
see any real prospect of the burden being lightened for the U.S. in South-
east Asia in the next year if we are going to do the job and meet what I -
think are very clear national needs.”

30. U. Alexis Johnson's Address Made Before the Economic Club of Detroit
"The United States and Southeast Asia," April 8, 1963, Department of
State Bulletin, April 29, 1963, p. 630:

ee

"What is the attraction that Southeast Asia has exerted for centuries
on the great powers flanking it on all sides? Why is it desirable, and
why is it important? First, it provides a lush climate, fertile soil, rich
natural resources, a relatively sparse population in most areas, and room
to expand. The countries of Southeast Asia produce rich exportable sur-
pluses such as rice, rubber, teak, corn, tin, spices, oil, and many others.
It is especially attractive to Communist China, with its burgeoning popu-
lation and its food shortages.

"“Militarily and strategically, Southeast Asia has great assets. It
stands astride of east-west trade routes. It stands in a critical, stra-
tegic relationship not only to China and India but to Australia, the
western Pacific, and Japan. Bearing in mind the implications of the recent
Chinese attack on India, Southeast Asia takes on an additional significance,
since its domination by the Communist powers would outflank the Asian sub-
continent. =

"Although still thinly populated for the most part, the human resources
of this erea are considerable and growing. Taken together, the peoples of
Southeast Asia represent an important segment of the free world and a tar-
get of prime importence to Communist imperialisn. -

"There is a rhythm to the tides of history. Just as the pressures on
Southeast Asia have in the past come alternately from China in the north,
India in the west, and the maritime powers along the sea, so Southeast
Asia is again threatened by a resurgence of pressure from the north. But
today the danger from this quarter is multiplied a hundredfold by the viru-
lence of the political doctrine which now rides on the backs of the Chinese
people.

c-28
