Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Tit

IMPLEMENTING THE POLICY

When Ambassador Taylor next met with the President on the afternoon
of 3 December, McGeorge Bundy was the only other official present. Prior
to this occasion, Taylor had sat with the other Principals to review
specific features of the Administration's position and to work out details
of the scenario that was about to go into production. When he left the
President's office, presumably having received the final version of his
instructions, the Ambassador told reporters that he was going to hold
"across-the-board" discussions with the GVii. Asserting that U.S. policy
for South Vietnam remained the same, he stated that his aim would be to
improve the deteriorating situation in South Vietnam. Although he hinted
of changes "in tactics and method," he quite naturally did not disclose
the kind of operations in which the United States was about to engage or
any future actions to which immediate activities could lead. 162/

1. Harly Actions

Phase One actions to exert additional pressures against North
Vietnam were cuite limited. Only two, the GVN maritime operations and
U.S. armed reconnaissance missions in Laos, were military actions. The
others involved stage-managing the public release of evidence of the
increased Communist infiltration into South Vietnem and the acquisition
of additional assistance for that country from other governments.

a. GV Maritime Operations. Maritime operations under OPLAN 34A
represented nothing new. These had been underway steadily since 4 October,
and their November schedule was in the process of being carried out at the
time the decisions on immediate actions were being made. On 25 November,
six PIF craft bombarded a barracks area on Tiger Island with 81mm mortars,
setting numerous fires. Moreover, a proposed schedule for December had
. been submitted by COMUSMACV on 27 November. This included a totel of 15
maritime operations involving shore bombardments, a junk capture, a kidnap
mission, and a demolition sortie against a coastal highway bridge. 164/
According to the concept, these were to be intensified during Phase One.

Soon after the decisions had been made to begin Phase One, the
JCS tasked COMUSMACV with developing a revised December 34A schedule to
better reflect the newly adopted pressure concept. CINCPAC was requested
to submit revised 344 plans so as to arrive in Washington not later than
8 December. The instructions specified that these were “to include pro-
posed sequence and timing for increased frequency of maritime operations"
in two packages. The first was to begin on 15 December, extend over a
period of 30 days and provide for "shallow penetration raids...on all

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
