Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In a paper written in August, 1966, Robert W. Komer, whose role in the
re-emphasis of pacification will be discussed in the next section, wrote;

"There is a growing consensus that the US/GVN pacifica-
tion effort needs to be stepped up, that management of our
pacification assets is not yet producing an acceptable rate
of return for our heavy support investments, and that paci-
fication operations should be brought more abreast of our
developing military effort against the NVA and VC main force.
The President has expressed this view, and so has Ambassador
Lodge among others." 7/

Why did Porter not live up to the expectations of Washington? While
the documentation is weak on this point, the following reasons can be
deduced from the available evidence, including discussions with people
who worked in both Saigon and Washington:

1. The Ambassador was not fully backing his Deputy, and Porter

was never sure of Lodge's support in Mission Council meetings,
in telegrams, in discussions with the agencies. Many senior
officials of the USG, including the President, had told Porter
that he had their full support, and that they expected him to
manage the Mission. But on a day-to-day basis, Porter had to
get along with the Ambassador, who was still (and legitimately
so) the boss. The result was a considerable gap between what
high officials in Washington considered Porter’s mandate, and
what Porter felt he would be able to do without antagonizing
the Ambassador, *

* This problem was foreshadowed in a remarkable way in 1963-1964. After
visiting Vietnam in December, 1963, the Secretary of Defense sent
President Johnson a memorandum in which he pointed out that the Mission
"lacks leadership...and is.not working to a common plan...My impression
is that Lodge simply does not know how to conduct a coordinated adminis-
tration... This has of course been stressed to him both by Dean Rusk
and myself (and also by John MeCone), and I do not think he is con-
sciously rejecting our advice; he has just operated as a loner all his
life and cannot readily change now. Lodge's newly-designated deputy,
David Nes, was with us and seems a highly competent team player. I have
stated the situation frankly to him and he has said he would do all he
could to constitute what would in effect be en executive committee opera-
ting below the level of the Ambassador." It is fairly well established
that Nes, whatever his own ability and shortcomings was unsble to
establish an “executive committee operating below the level of the Am-
bassador," and that, as a matter of fact his every attempt to move in
the direction indicated by the Secretary further alienated him from
the Ambassador. The presumed lesson in the incident was that it is
difficult and dangerous to tell one man's deputy that he has to assume
proad responsibility and authority if the top man does not want this
designation made.

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
