G3.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

II. DIEM'S JUNE LETTER

During his visit Johnson, on behalf of Kennedy, invited Diem to
prepare a set of proposals on South Vietnamese military needs for
consideration by Washington, In a letter May 15, Diem told Kennedy
that the definitive study would be ready in a few weeks. (He appre-
ciated this invitation, Diem told Kennedy, “particularly because we
have yn become accustomed to being asked for our own views on our
needs,

On June 9, Diem signed the promised letter, It was carried to
Washington by a key Diem aide (Nguyen Dinh Thuan) and delivered on the
ith, (Thuan played a key role on the Vietnamese side throughout 1961.
He was the man Durbrow, in the cable quoted in full earlier, suspected
was the only cabinet member Diem had told about the CIP. In a memo to
Gilpatric, Lansdale described him as Diem's "Secretary of Security,
Defense, Interior, etc.") }/

in the letter, Diem proposed an increase in the RVNAF to 270,000
men, or to double the 150,000 strength authorized at the start of 1961,
and 100,000 men more than envisioned under the CIP. That was a large
request; for up until the end of April, the U.S. and South Vietnamese
were still haggling over the go-ahead for a 20,000-man increase, Fur-
ther, Diem made it clear that he saw this force requirement as a semi-
permanent increase in South Vietnamese strength, which would continue
to be needed even should he eliminate the Viet Cong.

Here are some extracts from Diem's letter:

[The7 Situation...has become very much more perilous follow-
ing the events in Laos, the more and more equivocal attitude
of Cambodia and the intensification of the activities of
aggression of international communism. which wants to take the
maximum advantage to accelerate the conquest of Southeast
Asia, It is apparent that one of the major obstacles to the
communist expansion on this area of the globe is Free Viet-
nam because with your firm support, we are resolved to oppose
it with all our energies, Consequently, now and henceforth,
we constitute the first target for the communists to overthrow
at-any cost, The enormous accumulation of Russian war mate-
rial in North Vietnam is aimed, in the judgment of foreign
observers, more at South Vietnam than at Laos, We clearly
realize this dangerous situation but I want to reiterate to
you here, in my personal name and in the name of the entire
Vietnamese people, our indomitable will to win.

On the second of May, my council of generals met to evaluate

the current situation and to determine the needs of the
Republic of Vietnam to meet this situation, Their objective

58

TOP SECRET -— Sensitive
