Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

THE 1000-MAN WITHDRAWAL OF DECEMBER 1963

During the month of December, the planned 1000-man reduction was
executed. It proved essentially an accounting exercise. Technically,
more than a thousand U.S. personnel did leave, but many of these were part
of the normal turnover cycle, inasmuch as rotation policy alone, not to
mention medical evacuation or administrative reasons, resulted in an
average rate of well over a thousand returnees per month. Though the
replacement pipeline was slowed somewhat, year-end total in-country strength
nevertheless was close to 16,000. 52/ This did not even represent a
decline of 1000 from the October peak of 16,732.

That the avowed goal of 1000 would not be reached had in fact been
anticipated and acknowledged before mid-December. Despite close monitoring
of authorized ceilings and actual strengths, the force level kept rising.
On 11 December, for example, the estimate of projected year-end U.S.
strength in Vietnam had to be revised upward to reflect additional deploy-
ments approved since September. The adjusted figure now came to 15,89},

a net increase of 162 over the earlier estimate. This new strength ceiling
was what would be left after the 1000-man withdrawal then in progress was
completed. 53/ :

THE VIETNAM SITUATION WORSENS

In December conflicting estimates of the situation in Vietnam indi-
cated that the bright hopes and predictions of the past were increasingly
less than realistic. A McNamara memo to the President written following
a trip to Vietnam of 21 December, was laden with gloom. 54/ He wrote:
"The situation is very disturbing. Current trends, unless reversed in
the next 2-3 months, will lead to neutralization at best and more likely
“to a communist-controlled state." He went on to note that "the new govern-
ment is the greatest source of concern," and that "it is indecisive and
drifting." The Country Team, he added, “lacks leadership, and has been
poorly informed." One of the most serious deficiencies he found was a
"grave reporting weakness" on the U.S, side. "Viet Cong progress has been
great during the period since the coup, with my best guess being that the
situation has in fact been deteriorating in the countryside since July to
a far greater extent than we realize because of our undue dependence on
distorted Vietnamese reporting." Mr. McNamara clearly concluded that none
of these conditions could be reversed by the influx of more American
personnel, nor did he even mention that the U.S. could continue to withdraw
troops at all or as scheduled. His proposal was to hold the line: "U.S.
resources and personnel," he said, "cannot usefully be substantially
inereased...," although he did announce his intention to increase staffs
"to sizes that will give us a reliable, independent U.S. appraisal of the
status of operations." In his concluding paragraph, however, the Secretary
of Defense admitted that his ow estimate "may be overly pessimistic," inas-
much as the Ambassador, COMUSMACV, and General Minh were not discouraged
and looked forward to significant improvements in January. 5h/

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
