Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV.A Evolution of the War (26 Vols.) 
U.S. MAP for Diem: The Eisenhower Commitments, 
1954-1960 (5 Vols.) 
1. NATO and SEATO: A Comparison 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
· . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV.A.l 
----
NATO AND SEATO: 
A COMPARISON 
So 
Def Cant 
029 
'1 -. 
x~ ______________ ~ 
. \ 
l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV. A. 1. 
NATO AND SEATO: 
A COMPARISON 
SUMMARY 
Because the SEATO Treaty has been used by the Eisenhower, Kennedy, 
and Johnson Administrations to justify U.S. policy, aid, and presence 
in Vietnam, and because many have questioned this justification; the 
treaty has become a center of controversy. 
The issue is whether by 
intent of the parties and by treaty terminology the U. S. 'vas obligated 
to use force to help defend the territorial independence and integrity 
of South Vietnam. 
No one seriously challenges U.S. military and eco-
~omic aid provisions under the SEATO Treaty; the thrust of the criticism 
is the use of U.S. ground combat forces. 
There are plentifu]_ statements over time by the U. S. Government 
on the i mport ance of SEATO . 
President Eisenhower stated: 
assistance to the Republic of Vietnam. 
Southeast Asia Security Treaty -- which 
attack against this area would endanger 
that we would act accordingly.1I 
.'i. 
. 
IIWe gave military and economic 
We entered into a treaty -- the 
plainly warned that an armed 
our own peace and safety and 
President Kennedy stated: 
II •.• The SRA.TO Pact ... approved by 
the Senate with only, I think, tvlO against it, under Article 4, stated 
that the United States recognized that aggression by means of armed 
attack against Vietnam would threaten our own peace and security. 
So 
since that time the United States has been assisting the gover~~ent 
of Vietnam to maintain its independence ••. The attack on the government 
by communist forces, with assistance from the north, became of greater 
and greater concern to the Government of Vietnam and the Government of 
the United States." 
Secretary Rusk, speaking for the Johnson Administration, made 
the strongest statement of all: 
"We have sent American forces to fight 
in the jungles .•. because South Viet-Nam has, under the language of the 
SEATO Treaty, been the victim of 'aggression by means of armed attack. ' 
Those I.,ho challenge this rationale contend that unlike the NATO Treaty 
which specifically included the 'use of armed force' and unambiguously 
intended such action, the SRA.TO Treaty vlas not meant by its U. S. framers 
as an umbrella for Americ8,n military intervention. II 
This is the kind of issue that can readily be argued either vray. 
It is obvious the language of the SEATO Treaty allows the signatories 
the choice of military means. 
And, a respectable argument can be made 
for the further step of obligation. 
For example, the Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee Report on the treaty in 1954 stated: 
liThe committee is not impervious to the risks which this 
treaty entails. It fully appreciates that acceptance of these 
additional obligations commits the United States to a cause of 
action over a vast expanse of the Pacific. 
Yet these risks 
1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"r 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
are consistent i-lith our ow11 highest interests. There are 
greater hazards in not advising a potential enemy of "That he 
can expect of us, and in failing to disabuse- him of assumptions 
which might lead to a miscalculation of our intentions. It 
To the contrary, a statement before the Fureign Relations Com-
mittee by Secretary Dulles himself can be cited to demonstrate more 
modest, less obligatory designs: 
"I might say in this connection, departing somevhat 
from order of my presentation, that it is not the policy of 
the United States to attempt to deter attack in this area by 
building up a local force capable itself of defense against 
an all-out attack by the Chinese Communists if it should occur. 
We do not expect to duplicate in this area the pattern of the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and its significant standing 
forces. 
That ivould require a diversion and comi'l1itment of 
strength ivhich "Te do not think is either practical or desir-
able or necessary from the standpoint of the United States. 
"We believe that our posture in that area should be one 
of having mobile striking pover, and the ability to use that 
against the sources of aggression if it occurs . 
We believe 
that is more effective than if 'Vle tried to pin dmm American 
forces at the many points around the circumference of the 
Communist \-Torld in that area . 
"It may very well be that other countries of the area will 
want to dedicate particular forces for the protection of the 
area under this treaty. 
But we made clear at Manila that it 
was not the intention of the United States to build up a large 
local force including, for example, United States ground troops 
for that area, but that vre rely upon the deterrent pOvTer of 
our mobile striking force." 
By looking into the "lOrds of the treaty in the light of its orlglDS 
and the interests of the U.S. as perceived in 1954, and by comparing 
these vrith NATO language, origins, and development, it is possible to 
make a tentative judgment on the issue of obligation. 
Whereas it is 
clear that NATO vas intended for deterrence against aggression and 
defense vrith U.S. forces should deterrence fail, SEATO seems to have 
been designed vrith a vie'l'T only tm-rard deterrence. 
Defense, especially 
,vith U.S. ground forces, vras not seriously contemplated. 
There are t~1ree pieces of evidence in support of this contentious 
conclusion: 
(1) the stringent preconditions i..[hich the U.S. delegation 
to the Manila Conference to establish SRATO vrere instructed to insist 
upon; (2) the lack of institutional and force structure development in 
SEATO as compared to NATO; and (3) the fact that SEATO and NATO treaty 
terminology differ in respect to the use of force and other matters . 
2 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
I 
. , 
i 
, . , 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Unlike the guidance under \-;hich U. S. negotiators helped to frame 
NATO, U.S. representatives to the conference establishing SEATO were 
given four uncompromisable pre-conditions: 
(a) 
The U.S. would refuse to commit Rny U.S. forces 
unilaterally; 
(b) 
Were military action to be required, one or more of the 
European signatories \-TOuld have to participate; 
(c) 
The U.S. intended to contribute only sea and air power, 
expecting that other signatories would provide ground forces; 
(d) 
The U.S. \-lOuld act only against communist aggression . 
These instructions not only clearly exempt the use of U.S. ground forces, 
but presuppose multilateral action before the U. S. ,vould act in any 
capacity. 
With respect to the comparative development of SEATO and NATO, U.S. 
behavior also indicates great restraint and avoidance of commitment. 
NATO was formed in 1949, and ,vithin t'\vo years it \-las 1tIell institution-
alized -- combined command forces in-being and a Standing Group for 
policy guidance. 
The UoS. consistently resisted the efforts of its 
SEATO partners for comparable institutions . 
Secretary Dulles, in fact, 
sought to discourage public identification of SEATO \-lith NATO. 
Only 
in 1959, did the U.S. accede to the formation of a modest SEATO secre-
tariat . 
Moreover, SEATO had to \-mit until 1960 before the U.S. would 
participate in the development of a series of SEATO contingency plans. 
Most important, no U.S. troops have ever been designated specifically 
for SEATO. 
Comparing the specific terminology of the operative sections of the 
SEATO and NATO treaties gives additional credence to the non-obligation 
argument. 
The key articles of both treaties are those calling for action 
against an enemy threat. 
Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty declares 
that the member nations "agree that an armed attack against one or more 
of them in Europe or North America shall be considered an attack against 
them all," and that in that event each \-Till take "forthivith ... such action 
as it deems necessary, including the use of armed force .... " 
The cor-
relative phraseology in the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty 
Article Dr declares that "each Party recognizes that aggression by means 
of armed attack against any of the Parties, or against any state or 
territory vhich the Parties by unanimous agreement may hereafter desig-
nate, \-{ould endanger its own peace and safety, and agrees that it vill 
in that event act to meet the common danger in accordance \-rith its 
constitutional process." The SEATO \-lording is thus i ntentionally ambig-
uous on the point of just what response would be made by the members in 
the event of an armed attack. 
Such an attack against one of the SEATO 
members would be viewed as a "common danger" rather than as an "attack 
2A 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
I ! 
r ' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
on all." vlhere NATO prescribes action "fort ll1-rit h) " SEATO requires only 
that the "common danger" be "met" in accordance with "constitutional 
processes." 
SEATO also forecloses action on the treaty of any threat-
ened state without the consent of that state -- a qualification designed 
to reassure members that their independence was not threatened by neo-
colonialism or other domination in a SEATO guise. 
In some respects) hOvTever) the SEATO Pact is broader than its NATO 
counterparts. 
The nature of the threat is loosely defined in Article IV 
as "any fact or situation that might endanger the peace of the area" 
and provision is made to protect threatened member countries of the 
region. 
The area of applicability is left flexible. 
Moreover) Article 
II of the SEATO Treaty applies the pact against not only "armed attack" 
but also "subversive activities directed from without against fjftember,!}.7 
territorial integrity and political stability." Also) unlike the North 
Atlantic ~reaty) there is no clause in the SEATO Treaty implying a depen-
dence on United Nations intervention to restore peace once the treaty 
"lere invoked. 
2B 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r' 
( 
i 
Paragraph 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
Genesis. ...................................................................... ....... 
A-5 
a. 
Trurllan Doctrine , 1947 •.....•...•....•.•••••.•.. "... .•••... 
A-5 
b. 
Marshall Plan, 1947...................................... 
A-6 
c. 
ERP and NATO, 
19L~8-1949 .........•...•.•..•.•.••.••....... 
A-7 
d. 
The China Aid Program.................................... 
A-8 
e. 
MDAP, 1949............................................................................................ 
A-8 
f. 
Precursor Pacts in Asia.................................. 
A-9 
g. 
Indochina and United Action, 1954 ...................... .. 
h. 
Manila Conference , 1954 •..••.........•..•.•..••..••...••. 
(1) 
Force Commitment 
(2) Anti-Communism 
2. 
The Treaties Compared ............................................................................. .. 
a. 
Introductory Arti cles Alike .•.... .' ...•.••.•.....•..•••.•. 
b.. 
The Key Al-.ticles ................................................................................ .. 
c. 
Extent of Treaty Areas ..•.•..•.••••.•.•.••.•.• " ........... . 
d.. 
UN and Other 
~cts ............................................................................ .. 
e. 
Treaty Institutions ••.......•..••.•.•••.•••••...•.•.•..•• 
f.. 
TI'ea ty Longevity ................ ' ............................................................... .. 
g. 
The Appended U. S. ItUnderstanding
lt •••••••••••••••••••••••• 
h. 
The vtetnam-Laos-Cambodia Protocol .•.••••••.••••...••...• 
A-IO 
A-13 
A-15 
A-16 
A-16 
A-19 
A-19 
A-19 
A-20 
A-20 
A-21 
A-3 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
f . 
I 
Paragra-ph 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
3. 
Evolution of the Treaty Organization........................ 
A-23 
a. 
NATO Develops Rapidly................................... 
A-23 
b. 
SEATO Unstructured by U.S. Preference................... 
A-23 
c. 
SEATO Contingency Planning .. . • • . • • . • • • • • • • • • • • • • . . . . . • • • 
A-27 
(1) 
Laos Planning 
(2) 
Vietnam Planning 
(3) 
Thailand Planning 
(4) 
The Future 
Footnote s ...••...•....•...•.••..•.•.•....•..••.•.•.•............ 
Appendix A - A Comparison of the \yording of the 
NATO and SEATO Treaties .....•......••......•..•..•• 
A-32 . 
A-37 
Appendix B - Organi zational Charts .............................. 
A-46 
A-4 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV. A. 1. 
NATO and. SEATO : 
A Comparison 
1. 
Genesis 
a. 
Trmnan Doctrine, 1947 
In 1946, vlinston Churchill perceived. a postwar threat ina 
wartime ally: 
"Nobody knows what Soviet Russia and. its communist interna-
tional organization intends to d.o ... "That are the limits, if any, 
to' their expansive and. preselytizing tactics ... From Stettin in 
the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has d.escend.ed. 
across the continent ... "y 
And. he also depicted. a counter: 
"Neither the sure prevention of war, nor the continuous 
rise of werld. organization will be gained. without ... a special 
relationship between the British Commonwealth and. Empire and. 
the United. States ... I! 
. '  
These insights were reinforced. in early 1947 by influential analyses of 
George Kennan and. ethers of Soviet motives and. capabilities, which pointed. 
out that occasienal and. sporad.ic efforts to feil Soviet pelicy were severely 
disadvantaged.. 
These analysts held. that the West sheuld. seek to oppose 
Soviet expansionism by what the Foreign Affairs "Xl! article of January, 
1947, called. "the adreit and. vigilant application ef counter-ferce." '?J 
Such a s.trat egy, it was h eld , would. ferce the Soviet to reassess and. ad.-
just its policies, and. the U.S. ceuld. expect eventually the llbreak-up 
or the gradual mellewing of Soviet pe'Her. '.' 
Out of these , and. similar 
appreciations of Soviet intent emerged. the concept ef a U.S. strategy 
of involvement. 
Theory was swiftly abetted. by event. 
The British netified. 
the U.S. that it 'Hould. be un.able to extend. its economi c and. military aid. 
to Greece and. Turkey beyond. March, 1947. 
The U.S., rather than accept 
the distinct pO'ssibili ty O'f a Seviet intrusiO'n fO'llevdng British 'Hi thdra'Hal, 
chO'se to' take up the burd.en the British were l aying down in the eastern 
Medi terranean. 
Congress authO'rized. in May, 1947, some $400 million for 
direct aid. to' thO'se cO'untries, acting upen the recO'mmendatiO'n ef' President 
Truman in the March, 1947, message kne"m since as the "Truman DO'ctrine": 
"I believe that it must be the pelicy ef the United. States 
to suppO'rt fl'ee peoples who are resisting attempted. subjugation 
by armed. minorities or by eutsid.e pressures. 
I believe 'He must. 
assist free peoples to 'Hork out their mm d.estinies in their 
. 
"3/ 
own way... 
2J 
The Presid.ent ",ent en to' und.erscore the U. S. d.etermination to commit its 
r eseurces to contain communism,clearly subordinating military aid to 
A-5 
TOP SECRET· - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
economic and. political means. 
Fina,lly : 
liTo insure the peaceful d.evelopment of nations, free from 
coercion, the United. States has taken a lead.ing part in establish-
ing the Unit ed. Nations. 
The United. Nations is d.esigned to make 
possible frectl.om and. ind.epend.ence for all its members . 
We shall 
not realize our objectives, however, unless vle are ,villing to 
help free peoples to maintain their free institution and. their 
national integrity against aggressive movements that seek to i m-
pose upon them totalitarian regimes.
1I 
b. 
Marshall Plan, 1947 
The U.S. Secretary of State on June 5, 1947, proposed. the 
cooperative international economic aJd. subsequently entitled. the European 
Recovery Program (ERP), but knmm wid.ely as the Marshall Plan. 
ERP was at 
first explicitly d.esigned. to permit and. even attract Soviet cooperation : 
"Our policy i s d.irected. not against any country or d.octrine 
but a,gainst hunger , poverty, d.esparation and. chaos. 
Its purpose 
should. be the revival of a working economy in the world. so as to 
permit the emergence of political and. social conditions i n YThich 
free institutions can exist .
1I !!J 
But the Sovie t r ebuffed. the Marshall Plan, turned. Bloc propaganda against 
it as an adjunct of the TrUIllan Doctrine, and. by so d.oing , bifurcated. Europe . 
l'Ioreover, among three top-level U. S. cOITlmi ttees examining ways of bringing 
U. S. r esources to b ear on Europea.n recovery, the Committee on Foreign Aid. 
(Harriman Committee ) found. that: 
liThe interest of the Unit ed. States in Europe ..• cannot be 
measured. simply.in economic t erms . 
It i s also strategic and. 
poli tical. 
We all know that vle are faced. in the world. today 
with hlO conflicting i d.eologies ... Our position in the world. has 
b een bas ed. for at l east a century on the existence in Europe of 
a number of strong states cornrni tted. by trad.ition and. inclina-
tion to the d.emocra ti c concept ... II 11 
The bipolar world. had. begun t o emerge . 
In J anuary, 1948, the Briti sh 
Foreign Secretary, following talks with the U.S. Secretary of State , pro-
posed. an alliance among the U.K., France, and. the Benelux nations, r efer -
ring to lithe conception of the unity of Europe and. the preservation of 
Europe as the heart of vlestern civilization." §} 
At the end. of February, 
1948 , western Europe was shocked. by the fall of the Czechoslovakian govern-
ment to a communist coup d.'etat. · In March , the British-proposed. al liance 
was contracted. as the Brussels Ba,ct , a fifty-year treaty of collective 
d.efense and. economic collaboration. 
U.S. approval was immediate; the 
Presid.ent told Congress that: 
lilts significance goes fa.r beyond. the actual terms of the 
agreement itself. It i s a notable. ste'p in the d.irection of 
A-6 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
unity in Europe ... This development deserves our full support. 
I am confident the United States will , by appropriate means , 
extend to the free nations the support which the situation 
r equires ... It 1/ 
c. 
ERP and NATO, 1948-1949 
On 1 April, 1948, the Soviets initiated the blockade of Berlin. 
In late April, the President called a conference of his senior advisers 
to consider the Soviet threat, as well as the possibility of communist 
fomented uprisings in France and Italy. 
John Foster Dulles, then State 
Department consultant, later reported that the conferees agreed that: 
" ••. Onlya decisive pronouncement by the United States 
would check the fear that vlas inspired by Moscow ... Land that 
the U.S. shou~ proceed along the lines of a North Atlantic 
regional pact ... 1t 
Dulles also stated that Senator Vandenberg: 
1t ••• Felt that the Senate liked the idea of r egional associa-
tions and vlould be disposed to approve in prinCiple a further 
developing of such associations for collective defense.
1t W 
In May, 19Lf8, Senator Vandenbe.rg introduced a resolution adopted by the 
Senate on June 11, 1948, by a vote of 64 to 4, advising the Executive to 
undertake the: 
1t ••• Progressive development of r egional and other collec-
tive arrangements for individual and collective self-defense 
in accordance with the purposes, principles, and provisions of 
the Charter [Of the uJfl, association of the United States, by 
constitutional process, with such regional and other collective 
arrangements as are based on continuous and effective self-help 
. and mutual aid, and as affect its nc:-tional secu.rity. It 2/ 
The Department of State later explained to Congress that Itthe contents of 
this r esolution ... became our guide in the discussion and subsequent nego-
tiations 'Ivhich l ed to the North Atlantic Pact." ~ 
In June , 1948, Congress also passed the Economic Cooperation 
Act, establishing the Economic Cooperation Administration (ECA) to adminis-
ter a program of foreign aid . 
The following month, armed with the Economic 
Cooperation Act and the Vandenberg Resolution, the U.S. opened exploratory 
talks on an alliance with the Brussels Pact memuers and Canada . 
Subse-
quently, the talks "Jere broadened to include t.v.lelve nations. 
On April 4, 
1949, the North Atlantic Treaty was signed , and in late July ratified by 
the Senate. It entered into force August 24, 1949. 
A-7 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
d.. 
The China Aid. Program 
In the meantime, U.S. policy suffered. a s etback in Asia. 
A China Aid. Program had. been enacted. by Congress in June, 1948, in the 
". 
same omnibus foreign assistance legislation which authorized. ERP and. ECA. 
The China Aid. Pro~ram met almost i mmediate fail~re , for Mao's armies spread 
unchecked. over .the China mainland., and. by late 1949, the position of the 
Nationalists there was untenable. 
This "failure" of U.S. aid. -- it was 
t ermed. such by Congress ional critics -- no less than the urgent situation 
in Europe figured. in Congressional action on military assistance legisla-
tion placed. before it in 1949. ll/ 
e. 
MDAP) 1949 
In September 1949, the Soviets explod.ed. their first nuclear 
device. 
On October 6, 1949, Congress passed. the Mutual Defense Assistance 
Ac.t, designed. as a comprehensive law, provid.ing a Mutual Defense Assistance 
Program (MDAP) through which U,S. arms, military equipment and. training 
assistance might be provide d. for collective defense. 
In the first appro-
priations under MDAP, NATO tountries received. 76% of the total, and. Greece 
and. Turkey (not yet NATO members ), 16%. ~ But Korea and. the Philippines 
received. modest aid, and. the legislators clearly intended. the law to und.er-
write subsequent appropriations for collective security in Asia . 
The open-
ing paragraph of the Im'T not only supported. NATO, but foreshadowed. SEATO: 
"An Act to Promote the Foreign Policy and. Provide for 
the Defense and. General Welfcore of the United. States 
by Furnishing Military Assistance to Foreign Nations, 
Approved. October 6, 1949. 
!lBe it enacted. by the Senate and House of Representatives 
of the United. States of America in Congress assembled., That this 
Act may b e cited. as the 'Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949. ' 
'1 FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY 
liThe Congress of the United. States reaffirms the policy of 
the United. States to achieve international peace and. security 
through the United. Nations so that armed. force shall not be used. 
except in the common interest . 
The Congress hereby find.s that 
the efforts of the United. States and. other countries to promote 
peace and. security in furtherance of the purposes of the Charter 
of the United. Nations require additional measures of support 
bas ed. upon the principle of continuous and. effective self-help 
and. mutual aid.. 
These measures include the furnishing of military 
assistance essential to enable the United. States and. other nations 
dedicated. t o the purposes and. principles of the United. Nations 
Charter to participate effectively in arrangements for individual 
and. collective self-d.efense in support of those purposes and. 
principles . 
In furnishing such military assistance, it remains 
A-8 
TOP SECRET -Sensitive 
I 
\ 
. , 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the policy of the United. States to continue to exert maximrun 
efforts to obtain agreements to provid.e the Uni ted. Nations with 
armed. forces as contemplated. in the Charter and. agreements to 
achieve universal control of "[eapons of mass destruction and. 
universal regulation and. reduction of armaments, including armed. 
~', forces, under adequate safeguards to protect complying nations 
against violation and. evasion. 
"The Congress hereby expresses itself as favoring the cre-
ation by the free countries and. the free peoples of the Far East 
of a j oint organization, consistent with the Charter of the 
United Nations, to establish a program of self-help and. mutual 
cooperation designed. to develop their economic and. social well-
being, to safeguard basic rights and. liberties and. to protect 
their security and. independ.ence . 
"The Congress 'recognizes that economic recovery is essen-
tial to international peace and. security and must be given clear 
priority. 
The Congress also recognizes that the increased con-
fid.ence of free peoples in their ability to resist d.irect or 
ind.irect aggression and. to maintain internal security vdll ad.-
vance such recovery and. support political stability." r;J 
f. 
Precursor Pacts in Asia 
With the Nationalist evacuation to Formosa in November , 1949, 
an urgent situation developed. in Asia that in ways paralleled. the cond.i-
tions that prompted. formation of NATO. 
The rise of Mao's Peoples Republic 
of China (PRC ) seemed. to project the monolithic power of Soviet communism 
to the eastern shores of Asia, menacing the relatively small nations along 
China ' s periphery like the Russians threatened. Western Europe. 
The Chi-
nese parroted. the Kremlin's aggressive announcements, participated. in the 
assault on South Korea, and. provided aid. to Ho Chi Minh in Southeast Asia. 
U.S. counteraction was forthcoming. 
By 1951, in an effort 
to bolster the defensive capabilities of the area, the U.S. had. become 
a partner in five separate defense treaties in the region. 
Four bilateral 
arrangements linked. the U. S. vlith J apan, South Korea, Na.tionalist China, 
and. the Philippines, forming an arc around. the periphery of Communist China. 
In ad.d.ition, the ANZUS Treaty vIas signed. in 1951, and. the Five-Pm'ler Staff 
Agency (composed. of Australia, New Zealand., France, UK, and. US) vIas formed. 
in 1953 If to facilitate coord.ination on problems in Southeast Asia. II 
In 
1954, John Foster Dulles recall ed that: 
I1When I went out to the Pacific area in 1950 to b egin the 
negotiations which resulted. in the Japanese Peace Treaty and. 
a s eries of secQrity treaties, the original hope had. been that 
we could. have a fairly broad. collective security arrangement. 
As it happened., it was not possible to d.o at that time, and. we 
were content perforce vlith a series of treaties ... But those 
treaties themselves indicated. that vIe d.id. not regard. them as 
an end., but only as a b eginning ... It W 
A-9 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
" 
, ' 
( 
I 
t " 
I. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
From 1949 through 1953 the National Security Council maintained. the view 
that a broader r egional defense pact or association should. be initiated. 
by the countries of the area, gJ 
In the follo,ving 1950 exchange with 
Congressman Fulton, Secretary of State Acheson expressed. Administration 
policy: 
. 
"MR, 'FUI,TON: 
May I read. to the Secretary from the second .. 
paragraph of the Mutual Defense Assistance Act: 
'The Congress hereby expresses itself as favoring the crea-
tion by the free countries and free peoples of the Far East, of 
a joint organization consistent with the Charter of the United. 
Nations to establish a program of self-help and. mutual coopera-
tion designed. to develop their economic and. social well-being, 
to safeguard. the basic rights and. liberties, and. to protect their 
security and. independence. ' 
"Now may I point out that is a bipartisan policy, because 
it was two Republicans and. two Democrats on this committee v1ho 
put'that amendment in. 
My ~uestion then is to the Secretary 
and. to the State Department , why, when this was passed. clear 
back in 1949, October 6, has not the State Department taken 
steps to put into effect the d.eclared. bipartisan foreign policy 
of the Congress? IT 
"SECRETARY ACHESON: 
Mr. Fulton, I think it is important 
for you to really look at your own ''lOrd.s . 
You said. that the 
Congress expresses itself as favoring the creation by the free 
countries and. free peoples of the Far East of certain things. 
NOvl the President stated. he favors that. 
On all occasions he 
has stated. it and. I have stated. that that is the attitud.e of 
the Govern.rnent of the United. States. 
I should. think that the 
President and. I and. the Congress are all agreed. that the very 
important words are that this organization should. be created. by 
the free peoples of the Far East and. not created. by the United. 
States. 
We are not calling these nations together and. you never 
. asked. us to call these nations together and. tell them they should. 
create something. 
I knov; that your kno'V11edge of the Far East 
is sufficient to lead. you to conclude that if we did. that it "TOuld. 
have exactly the opposite effect of the one which you wish to 
achieve. 
The President of the Philippines has been going forward 
. to accomplish this. 
We have stated, to him, and. publicly, that 
we are most sympathetic to this activity on his part , but it 
is most important that it should. be a spontaneous Asian action.!t }fd 
g. 
Indochina and. United Action, 1954 
In the spring of 1954, however, the d.eterioration of the 
French situation in Indochina caused. a re-evaluation of U.S. policy on 
collective security in Asia and. precipitated proposals by the U. S. to 
the French,'the British and several other countries to establish some 
A-10 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
, . 
I 
l .' 
l _, 
\_-
r l 
r 
I 
" -
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
kind. of Southeast Asian coalition. 
On 6 April 1954, the NSC, asked. to 
consider Ilappropriate action regarding Ind.ochina and. the need. for U. S. 
military intervention, Il replied. that the best alternative was a regional 
grouping with maximum Asian participation. ~ On 13 May, the NSC looked. 
to It avoid. the loss of Indochina and. to resolve the colonial problem by 
the creation of a regional grouping.1t ~ Crisis transformed. the U.S. 
position on a tvide regional alliance from that of a potential joiner to 
that of an anxious organizer. 
When the U.S. position changed., the pendulum swung far, pro-
ducing not only the general concept of Itunited. action, It but also several 
specific plans for U. S. -allied. intervention in Ind.ochina in a variety of 
circumstances. 
Secretary Dulles approached. the British and. French directly 
with a plan in which a ten-nation coalition would. confront communist ex-
pansion in Southeast Asia. 
On 12-14 April, Dulles visited. London to get 
Eden's support for this plan, but was turned down. 
Eden thought it best 
to wait and. see "That could. be accomplished. at the Geneva Conference, then 
in preparation. 
Dulles did. get what he thought was Eden's agreement to 
a plan for an ad. hoc group of the same nations to meet and. d.iscuss plans 
for collective-action in case it became necessary, and. a public statement 
in favor of a broad. Asian alliance. 
Congressional reaction to the latter was immed.iate. 
The 
House Foreign Affairs Committee was at the time holding hearings, and. promptly 
issued. a statement end.orsing the Dulles and. Eden action, and. citing the 
~~P legislation. 
The following is from the Hearings: 
"MR. VORYS. 
Now, 
cou~d. I read. a paragraph from the text 
of the recent statement issued. by Messrs. Dulles and. Ed.en ... 
this para~raph was what caught my attention this morning. 
[j.ead.ing.:.../ 
'Accord.ingly l'le are ready to take part with the other coun-
tries principally concerned. in the examination of the possibility 
of establishing a collective defense within the framework of 
the charter of the United. Nations Organization, to assure the 
peace , security, and. freedom of Southeast Asia, in the "Testern 
Pacific. ' 
III have changed. our proposed. statement slightly. 
'The Committee on Foreign Affairs notes with approval the 
statement issued. in Lond.on on April 13, 1954, by the Secretary 
of State and. the British Foreign Secretary which is in line with 
recommendations previously expressed. by the Committee and Con-
gress in 1949. ' 
"The second. paragraph read.s as follows: 
I This paragraph "TaS drafted. by the Committee on Foreign 
Affairs and. incorporated. in the original Mutual Defense Assistance 
A-ll 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
, 
l _ 
, 
~ 
o 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Act. 
A similar paragraph Ivas incarparated. in the Mutual Security 
Act .of 1953 by the Cammittee an Fareign Affairs and. passed. by 
the Hause .of Representatives. 
This language was left aut .of the 
act as finally passed. because the cammittee .of canference regarded 
the existing paragraph .of the Mutual Defense Assistance Act as 
giving ad.equate expressian .of cangressianal palicy.'" ~ 
The U. S. maved. immed.iately ta assemble the ad hac graup Dulles had. dis-
cussed. with Ed.en, inviting representatives .of same 10 nations ta meet 
in Hashingtan an 20 April. 
Two days befare the meeting ",as ta take place, 
the British annaunced. they ",auld. be unable ta attend.. 
They had. nat realized., 
they said., that the meeting VTauld. take place sa saan; and. they had. nat 
been given the .opportunity ta pass an the canferees. gQ/ 
The meeting 
was held anY'tTay, but became a general briefing .of the twenty natians cam-
prising the allied. sid.e at the Geneva Canference. 
In the meantime, ather caalitian plans were in the making. 
An early cancept, t he first of many ta be advanced., pravid.ed. a chaice 
.of hla caurses of act ian : 
"The U.S. is prepared.ta jain actively in twa regianal graup-
ings. 
The first such grauping will include natians ready immed.i-
ately ta intervene in Indachina pravid.ed. certain canditians are 
met. 
The secand. such grauping shauld. be defined., with wid.er 
participatian, ta guarantee against cammunist aggressian .or sub-
versian .of all Sautheast Asia ';.lith the exceptian .of Ind.ochina 
sa lang as active fighting cantinues." .?:ll 
The first .of these graupings vTaS ta cantain the U.S., France, the Assaciated. 
States .of Laas, Cambad.ia, and. Vietnam, Thailand., and. the Philippines ~ 
The 
secand. was ta be campased . .of l1all cauntries ,vho ,vish ta jainl1 including the 
Calamba Plan countries (Burma, Ceylon, Ind.ia, Ind.onesia, Pakistan), Korea, 
and. "perhaps 11 the Chinese Nationalists. 
The U. S. wished. to avoid. a '\-,hite 
man's pc.rty"?:51 
in the formatian of any regional graup, but the powers 
able to contribute substantial military ~upport to the plans were not Asian. 
Neither coalition materialized. before Geneva. 
The dramatic fall of Dien Bien Phu served. notice to the world. 
of French military impotence in Ind.ochina. 
When the participants 
.of the 
Ind.ochina fighting moved. to the conference table in April, 1954, the U.S., 
fresh from the bitter experience of Panmunjom, looked. on the upcoming dis-
cussions apprehensively, fearing that the French tactical defeat presaged. 
strategic disaster. At one time or another during the Geneva Conference, 
the U. S. considered.: 
(1) merely urging the French to a greater effort, 
(2) assisting the French with material support in varying degrees, (3) 
intervening in canjunction with the British, (4) taking military action 
with all those prepared. to d.o so, and. (5) working out a long range South-
east Asia alliance. 
None of these courses of action proved. practicable. 
Nonetheless, the outcome of the Geneva Conference d.id. catalyze SEATO . 
Within the councils of the U.S. Government, the concession of half of Viet-
nam to the communists was considered another retreat before cammunist ex:pe.nsion . 
A-12 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r l . 
! 
I t. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Secretary of State Dulles publicly drew t'\vo lessons from Geneva: 
(1) that 
popular support was essential to combat communist subversion, and. (2) collec-
tivedefense against aggression could. not be d.evised. after the aggression 
was in progress.?Jj 
He went on to assert that a collective security 
system in Southeast Asia could. in the future check both outright aggression 
and. subversion. 
1~e U,S, moved. promptly to convene an international con-
ference at Manila in late summer, 1954, to d.evise such a security system. 
h. 
Manila Conference, 1954 
The outlook at Manila, however, tend.ed. to be more retrospec-
tive than futuristic. 
Vice Admiral A. C. Davis, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
of Defense (ISA) and. chief DOD representative in the U.S. delegation observed. 
in his report that: 
", .• the Manila Conference convened. following communist mili-
tary achievements in Ind.ochina and. political and psychological 
successes at Geneva. 
Against this background the effort of the 
Manila Conference to construct a collective d.efense arrangement 
for Southeast Asia and the Southwest Pacific was d.irected. in 
large measure to recovering from the psychological blOlv thus ad-
ministered. to the Free World.. 
Much of what was said. at the Con-
ference bore witness to the preeminence of psychological objec-
tives in the thinking of the participating States. 
In a real 
sense, the Treaty that emerged. at Manila is a response to the 
Geneva Agreements. II ?:l.±/ 
The task facing the conferees was formidable compared. with that Atlantic 
planners had faced. six years earlier. 
The Geneva reverse provid.ed a small 
basis for common action. 
NATO had. been created. in a relatively uncompli-
cated. political situation, in an atmosphere of und.erstanding and. common 
need., to meet an unambiguous threat. 
Moreover, the North Atlantic nations 
could build. collective d.efense on an infrastructure of shared. culture, 
poli tical id.eals, and. interd.epend.ent economies. 
Commitments of the member 
nations could. be clarified. to stipulate stand.ing forces, command. structures, 
and. roles in planning. 
The nations at Manila, on the other hand, confronted 
a complex of d.ilemmas. 
Anti-communism was no unifying force. 
Throughout 
the region, potential communist aggressors were likely to adopt causes of 
anti-coloniali'sm, anti-traditionalism, racism, religion, or irredentism. 
Moreover, the conferees represented. disparate cultures in countries scat-
tered. across the world.. 
Of the eight nations present, only two were Asia:!); 
several nations whose location mad.e them logical candidates for an Asian 
coalition chose not to attend .. 
The U.S. representatives at the Manila Conference in Septem-
be~ 1954, arrived. with instructions to insist on a number of preconditions 
for U.S. military action in Southeast Asia. 
First, with its commitments 
in Europe, the U.S. would. refuse to act unilaterally in Asia; further, 
any such action would. have to involve not only Asian nations, but also 
major European partners. 
Moreover, the U.S. would. not be prepared. to com-
mit ground. troops into combat in Asia; other nations would. do the ground. 
A-13 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
! 
I , . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
f'ighting und.er a cover of' U.S. sea and. air power. 
In add.ition, the U.S. 
def'ined the communist threat as the only real danger in the area; the U.S. 
d.id. not want to be dra,m into an alliance d.irected. against any other sort 
of' enemy, particularly d.esiring to avoid colonial conf'licts. 
Hence, the 
U.S. sought to restrict the applicability of' any U.S. commitment to a f'ew 
specified. nations especially vulnerable to communist aggression. 
Each of 
these two major U.S. qualifications -- the proscriptions against land. f'orces, 
and. emphasis on anti-communism -- created. its o,m d.ilemmas, solutions to which 
proved to be elusive. 
(1) 
Force Commitment 
The r~source -- political as well as military -- the U.S. 
was prepared. to commit to SEATO was bound. to constitute its principal 
strength. 
But the U.S., with its NATO commitments already a sizeable bur-
den, was not prepared. to pay the price of' a strong coalition. 
In no sense 
"Tas the U. S. prepared. to commit itself' to SEATO as it had. to NATO. (It 
is interesting that Dulles ",as so concerned. with avoid.ing a public identi-
f'ication of SEATO with NATO that he tried to have the ne,., treaty called. 
"MANPAC," f'or "Manila Pact." ?21 ) Rather, the U. S. searched. for ways in 
which other nations would. provide troops. 
But f'ew nations in 1954 possessed. 
the capability to f'ield. an army of' signif'icance within the SEATO region. 
Vice Admiral Davis noted. that: 
"The United. States was f'aced. in this issue, I believe, with 
the d.ilemma of attempting to attain t .. TO objectives that were 
not completely compatible; on the one hand there 'vas a desire to 
place the communists on notice as clearly as possible that further 
aggression on the area "Tould. meet with effective collective counter-
action. 
Such unequivocal notif'ication would. tend. to enhance the 
psychological effect of the Treaty on the Free World. and. the d.e-
terrent effect on the communists. 
Yet on the other hand., in spite 
of the greater psychological ef'fect that a str.ongly worded. Treaty 
might have, the attainment of this objective was necessarily limited 
by the extent to which the United. States, in its own interest, 
could. undertake ad:vance military commitments under the Treaty in 
restriction of its freedom of action." ?!i/ 
. 
While the U. S. continued. to call the prospective pact 
"regional," a region existed. only in the sense that a certain geographical 
. area was consid.ered. to be threatened. by the expansion of' communism. 
The 
membership solicited. for the SEATO conf'erence was worldwide ; potential 
force contributors were overbalanced on the European sid.e ; and. even within 
the region itself, several countries d.id. not d.e&ire to become participants, 
and. others were not invited.. 
Determined. not to become eruneshed. in South-
east Asia without help f'rom Europe, the U.S. settled. f'or a SEATO based on 
unspecif'ied f'orces from eight nations, f'ive of' which were ethnically 
European -- a position 1vhich apparently d.ismissed. f'rom consid.eration the 
d.isad:vantages .. ,hich "Tould. accrue to armies drawn from former metropole 
nations. 
A-14 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
f
' l 
r . 
l 
r 
I. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Several of the states at Manila were acutely disappointed. 
at the reluctance of the U.S. to place its military forces at the disposal 
of the pact; they were expecting a NATO-like commitment and. they were sur-
prised. when it was not forthcoming. 
Admiral Davis reported. that: 
"With respect to the military aspects of the Treaty, most 
of the participating States, notably the Philippines and. Thailand., 
urged. provisions that would. explicitly commit the Treaty Parties 
to take military action in event of aggression in the Treaty area. 
The commitment of the United. States to such action, of course, 
was the purpose of these urgings. 
Much was said. about the de-
sirability of the NATO as opposed. to the allegedly weaker ANZUS 
formula. 
Most of the participating States argued. that explicit 
commitments to take action were necessary if the Treaty 'vas to 
have the d.esired. d.eterrent effect on the communists. tI m 
.But the U.S. d.elegates maintained. their opposition, arguing that the U.S. 
had. to retain its freedom of action, and could. not accept a treaty commit-
ment that was inconsistent with Constitutional requirements,and. therefore 
prejudicial to ratification of the treaty by the Senate. 
(2) Anti-Communism 
At the beginning of the Manila Conference, the U.S. served. 
notice that it looked. on the future SEATO agreement as an anti-communist 
pact, and that it vlOuld. react only against a communist threat. 
The U.S. 
agreed. to trconsultll ,dth the other membersto decide future action, if 
faced. with a non-communist threat. 
This, of course, had. the effect of 
emphasizing once again the qualified. nature of the U.S. commitment: 
the 
strongest power in the pact reserved the right to opt out of contingencies. 
Other nations present at Manila sa"T many other threats to regional peace, 
some of which seemed.to them a good. deal more dangerous than communism 
(~. Indonesian relations vTith Malaya, and. Indian relations with Pakistan). 
There \vas, as a result, some hesitance to leok on the pact as a mutual band.-
ing together against all dangers. 
Few missed. the irony of the U.S. being 
the chief advocate of the SEATO pact, and. also its prime qualifier. ~ 
2. 
The Treaties Compared. 
Although Secretary of State Dulles wished. to avoid comparisons 
of SEATO with NATO, such were inevitable. 
Similarities 'fere in fact intended. 
by many of the Manila Conferees, and. emerged. in the vlOrding of the treaties. 
All the delegations at Manila, the U. S. included., took pains with treaty 
terminology, calcu.lating carefully the effect ic would have on their morn 
domestic politics, as well as ori the communist countries. As Admiral Davis 
reported.: 
tiThe Treaty is a d.ocument that speaks to many audiences; 
it supports self-determination of peoples, self-government and. 
independence in de ference to Asian nationalism; it provides for 
economic and. technical cooperation as an inducement to present 
A-15 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r " 
! l 
r l. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Asian 'neutralist' countries to associate themselves with the 
Treaty; it permits the accession of other states, thus avoiding 
the charge that the Treaty members form an exclusive club with 
aggressive designs 'against' other States; ... These elements of 
the Treaty attest to the importance the member States place on 
the effect o~ the document upon their resp~ctive publics .•• The 
success t0at the Treaty may have in enhancing the defense of the 
area will therefore have to be judged in light of the fact that 
it has psychological and economic as well as military objectives." 52./ 
a. 
Introductory Articles Alike 
The initial article of both treaties is the same, word for 
word.* The member nations promise not to use force in any manner incon-
sistent with the principles of the United Nations. Article 2 of NATO 
conforms to Article III of SEATO: 
an undertaking to strengthen free insti-
tutions and promote economic progress, and is identical except for speci-
fic mention in SEATO of technical assistance and promotion of social 
well-being, wording which is not in the NATO version. 
The reversal of 
the order of presentation of the second and third articles is interest-
ing. 
In NATO, the article committing the members to strengthen free in-
stitutions precedes the article on developing collective capacity to 
resist attack. 
The order is changed in SEATO, perhaps emphasizing defense 
over other considerations. Article 3 of NATO corresponds to Article II 
of SEATO: 
an expression of resolve to develop a collective capacity to 
resist armed attack. 
There is, however, a significant difference in the 
SEATO article with the addition of a clause applying the Treaty specifically 
to subversion. 
This clause, in combination with the provision of SEATO 
Article IV that the parties shall consult immediately on measures of com-
mon defense if threatened by other than armed attack, places subversive 
aggression, in the form of externally fomented or supported insurgency, 
or coup d'etat, within the purview of the treaty. 
b. 
The Key Articles 
Central to analysis of the two treaties is comparison of the 
articles calling for action to meet an enemy threat. 
These are Articles 
4 and 5 of the NATO Treaty, and Article IV of the SEATO Treaty. In general, 
the SEATO article has come under heavy criticism for lack of forcefulness. 
As presented below, the SEATO article has been transposed to parallel 
the two articles of NATO, but no words have been added or deleted. 
NATO Art. 4 & 5 
The Parties will consult together 
whenever, in the opinion of any of 
them, the territorial integrity, 
SEATO Art. IV 
If, in the opinion of any of the 
parties, the inviolability or 
the integrity of the territory or 
*Appendix A, Comparison of the Wording of the NATO and SEATO Treaties 
A-16 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
{ 
r 
I 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
NATO Art. 4 & 5 
political' independ.ence or security 
of any of the Parties is threatened .. 
The Farties agree that 
an armed. attack 
against one or more of them 
in Europe or North America 
shall be considered. an attack 
against them all 
and. consequently they agree that 
'if such an armed. attack occurs, 
each of them 
in exercise of the right of in-
d.ividual or collective self-
d.efense recognized. by Article 
51 of the Charter of the United. 
Nations 
will assist the party or 
parties so attacked. by taking 
forthvTi th, ind.i vidually and. in 
concert with:,;he other parties 
such action as it d.eems neces-
sary, including the use of 
armed. force. 
to restore and. maintain the 
security of the North Atlantic 
Area. 
A-17 
SEATO Art. IV 
the sovereignty or political in-
d.epend.ence of any Party in the 
Treaty ~ea or of any other State 
or territory to shich the provi-
sions of paragraph 1 of this Arti-
cle from time to time apply is 
threatened. in any way other than 
by armed. attack or is affected or 
threatened. by any fact or situation 
which might endanger the peace of 
the area, the Parties shall con-
sult immediately in ord.er to agree 
on the mea.sures which should. be 
taken for the common d.efense. 
Each Party recognizes that aggres-
sion by means of armed. attack 
against any of the Parties or 
against any state or territory 
which the Parties by unanimous 
agreement may hereafter d.esignate 
In the Treaty a;ea 
would. endanger its own peace and. 
safety 
and. agrees that 
it "Till in that event 
act to meet the common danger in 
accord.ance \vith its constitutional 
processes 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
l 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I . 
I I . 
r 
[ . 
NATO Art. 4 & 5 
SEATO Art. IV 
any such ·armed. attack and. all mea-
sures taken as a result thereof 
shall immediately be reported. to 
the Security Council.. 
Such measures shall be terminated . 
. when the Security Council has 
taken the measures necessary to 
restore and. maintain international 
peace and. security. 
measures under this paragraph shall 
be immediately reported. to the 
Security Council of the United. 
Nations 
It is und.erstood. that no action 
on the territory of any state 
designated. by unanimous agreement 
under paragraph 1 of this article 
or on any territory so d.esig-
nated. shall be taken except at the 
invitation or with the consent 
. of the government concerned .. 
As the American d.elegation at Manila not ed) the SEATO Article IV was in 
line with the ,'lOrding used. in the U. S . ,Philippine, Korean, and. ANZUS pacts. 
The issue of pre commitment to react to armed. attack was sid.e-stepped.: 
. "Secretary Dulles pointed. out during the conference that the 
word.ing of the North Atlantic Treaty, vihich speaks of an attack 
on one as an attack on all, nevertheless provid.es that the Parties 
will act in accordance with their constitutional processes. 
He 
persuad.ed. the Conference that the final agreed. wording of Arti-
cle IV viOuld be better re cei ved. by the Senate, should. tend. to 
minimize d.ebate, and. 1'lOuld facilitate ratification by the United. 
States. II J9J 
-
The SEATO Treaty wording is thus intentionally ambiguous on the point of 
just what response would be mad.e by the members in the event of an armed. 
attack. 
Such an attack against one of the SEATO members would. be viewed. 
as a "common danger" rather than as an "attack on all." Where the NiI.TO 
Treaty notes that action taken "forthwith" might includ.e the "use of armed. 
force," the SEATO Treaty' states merely that "common danger" would. be "met" 
in accordance with"constitutional processes." SEATO also. makes the provision 
that no action shall be taken on the territory of any threatened. state viith-
out the consent of that state, a qualification necessary to reassure small-
country members that their ind.epend.ence was not threatened. by neocolonialism 
or other d.omination, and. recognition of one of the most significant differ-
ences in the environment of the two treaty organizations. 
In some respects, nevertheless, Article IV of the SEfl..TO Treaty 
is broad.er than its NATO counterparts. 
The nature of the threat is loosely 
A-18 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
( , 
I 
l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
d.efined. as "any fact or situation that might endanger the peace of the area," 
and provision is mad.e to respond. to threatened. countries that are non-members 
of the pact. 
In add.ition, there is no clause implying dependence on the 
Security Council of the UN to step in to IIrestore and. maintain international 
peace and. security, It as there is in the NATO Treaty. 
Yet, the main point 
evid.ent is that bvth the wording of NATO and. that of SEATO provid,e the 
basis for a strong d.efensive strategy or, ind.eed., "TOuld, admit of a weak 
one . 
There is enough room for interpretation und.er the SEATO Treaty for 
membersto devise all the d.efensive protection that NATO offers, and, more. 
c. 
Extent of the Treaty Areas 
NATO Article 6 is the equivalent of SEATO Article VIII, dealing 
with d.efinition of the treaty area . 
Both are broad, but the SEATO article 
is the more flexible of the two. 
In SEATO the area is limited. on the 
north at latitud.e 21 d.egrees, 30 minutes, thus elirninatipg Formosa, Hong 
Kong, Korea, and Japan. 
The rest of the area is d.efined. only as "the 
general area of South-East Asia" and, "the general area of the South-West 
Pacific." 
The area, the treaty notes, can be mod.ified, at any time by 
unanimous agreement. 
The phrase that permitted, inclusion of "the entire 
territories of the Asian parties" was noted. by the U.S. d.elegation as 
having the advantage of bringing in West Pakistan Ilund.er the protection 
of the Treaty even though it is not in Southeast Asia." W 
d.. 
UN and. Other Pacts 
Except for a change in two or three unimportant "TOrds, NATO 
7 and, 8 are summed. up and, repeated in SEATO VI; these articles d.eclare 
that agreements between SEATO members and, the UN, or by members with other 
countries are not, nor will be, in conflict with ~EATO responsibilities. 
e. 
Treaty Institutions 
NATO 9 and. SEATO V establish a council for military and other 
planning. 
In the NATO Treaty this council is authorized to set up "sub-
sidiary bodies," while in the SEATO Treaty such authorization is not given. 
This 'vas a disappointment to several of the d.elegations at the Manila 
•. 
Conference. 
The Australians came forward. with a request for a strong 
organization, but the U. S. d.elegation ",as able to persuad.e them to accept 
a modification of their proposal, subst.ituting a concept of "consultation": 
"During the sessions of the Working Group it became evid.ent 
that some countries would. propose wording calling for the establish-
ment of military machinery, possibly along NATO lines. 
Recalling 
the position of [the U.S; StatiJ Department that military partici-
pation should be consultative along lines of the ANZUS arrangement 
rather than 'permanent and formal as in NATO, the Defense Representa-
tive .• ~pr oposed that consideration be given to the inclusion of 
the following wording after the first sentence of Article IV: 
ITo this end the Parties to the Treaty will consult with regard 
A-19 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
to military planning as required by the situation in the area.' 
Shortly thereafter the Australian delegation -proposed the follow-
ing addition to Article V: 
'The Council shall set up such sub-
sidiary machinery as may be necessary to achieve the military 
and other objectives of the Treaty.' 
Since the Australian proposal 
involv~d an open ended commitment, this Department and the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff opposed it and accepted the \-Tording suggested by 
the Defense Representative. 
The Department of State agreed, and 
instructed the U.S. Delegation to support incorporation of this 
wording in Article IV." 32/ 
Secretary Dulles was able to bring about deletion of the references to 
periodic or regular consultation that had been introduced into the draft 
treaty. 
f. 
Treaty Longevity 
The final NATO articles (11-14) are administrative, covering 
ratification of the treaty, the length of time it is to remain in for~e, 
provisions for review of the articles, and archival responsibilities . . 
These are paralleled in SEATO articles IX-XI. 
The NATO Treaty provides 
for withdrm'Tal of its members after 1969; members are to give a year's 
notice prior to such action. 
The SEATO Treaty is to remain in force in-
definitely, but members also may \-Tithdraw o~ one year's notice. 
g. 
The Appended U.S. "Understanding" 
Throughout the discussions at M.anila the U.S. insisted that 
the focus of the pact be on the prevention of further commUnist expansion 
in the treaty area. 
When the other nations would not acquiesce to a word-
ing of the treaty to make anti-communism its specific objective, the U.S. 
requested that an "understanding" be appended to the treaty. 
This \-TaS a 
U.S. unilateral statement of intent -- a qualifier upon the first paragraph 
of Article IV., in "Thich the members agreed that in the event of aggression 
they will "act to meet the common danger in accordance with constitutional 
processes." The U.S. in the understanding restricts the applicability of 
its agreement to act, stating that only communist aggression will be recog-
nized as \-Tarranting immediate response. 
In the event of other kinds of 
aggression, the U.S. would consult with the other member nations. 
Admiral 
Davis reported disagreement over this point at the conference: 
"All participating States except the United States supported 
exclusion of the word 'Communist' from the Treaty. 
The U.S. draft 
originall~r referred to 'Communist aggression' in the preamble and 
in Article IV. 
The chief reason advanced by the other signatories 
for the deletion was the desire of most of the Parties that the 
Treaty cover any kind of aggression in the area. 
Pakistan, for 
example, wished that the Treaty '!;VQuld apply to possible aggression 
by India. 
The United States position was that the United States 
could not properly say that any aggression in Southeast Asia would 
endanger its own peace and safety, and that it could accept the 
A-20 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r l. 
r ' ! 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
obligations of Article IV only in respect to Communist aggression. 
For this reason, the United States attached an 'understanding' 
to the Treaty in this sense. All other participants accepted the 
Treaty with the U. S. 'understanding.' It W 
In the "understanding" the U.S. further complicc..ted the matter by changing 
"aggression by means of armed attack" of Article IV to "aggression and armed 
attack"; in the same sentence, the understanding uses "aggression or armed 
attack" to refer to paragraph 2 of Article IV, which in fact is worded 
"threatened in any way other than by armed attack." The admixture of terms 
accentuates one of the major difficulties of the alliance: 
the governments 
of the SEATO treaty area were threatened by a complicated variety of destruc-
tive movements that might be called aggression against a member state. 
The appellation could be fitted in anywhere between "armed attack" and 
"fact or situation I-Thich might endanger the peace." 
The U.S. insistence on 
this point of "understanding" was probably superfluous. 
The latitude that 
the U.S. wanted already was built into the treaty, in Article IV. 
The 
emphatic nature of such an appendix to the treaty may have been calculated 
as a way to call the attention of the world to a pm'Terful U. S. stand against 
further encroachments of communism. 
Such a call would have been consistent 
with the U.S. feeling of a necessity to re-establish a psychological posi-
tion in the face of the "defeats" of Geneva: 
Nevertheless, the confirma-
tion of U.S. single-mindedness that made a communist threat the only valid 
call for immediate response narrowed SEATO at its inception. 
h. 
The Vietnam-Laos-Cambodia Protocol 
The final item of the SEATO Treaty is a "protocol," which 
states unanimous agreement among the members to include Cambodia, Laos, 
and "the free territory under the jurisdiction of the State of Vietnam" 
under the protection of Articles III and IV of the Treaty. 
In other words, 
these countries, witbout actually becoming members of the pact, would be 
entitled to "economic measures including technical assistance" and also 
to defense against any attack, overt or not, from without or within. 
The 
U.S. had wanted to include these countries in SEATO, but membership might 
have seemed legally a contravention of the Geneva Agreements. 
At Geneva, 
Laos had not signed any agreement prejudicial to such a pact, but the 
Laotian Government, on the final day of that conference, had made the 
following declaration: 
"The Royal Government of Laos will never join in any agree-
ment with other states if this aBreement includes the obligation 
for the Royal Government of Laos to participate in a military 
alliance not in conformity with the principles of the United 
Nations or w:;.th the principles of the fjierl.2.vi/ Agreement on 
the Cessation of Hostilities ... " W 
South Vietnam, on the other hand, "las coextensive with one of the "zones" 
described in Article 19 of the armistice, which specifies: 
A-21 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"The two Parties shall ensure that the zones assigned to 
them do not adhere to any military alliance and are not used for 
the resumption of hostilities or to further an aggressive policy." 32/ 
France -- one of the "Parties" to the armistice -- was thus not in a posi-
tion to admit the GVN to SEATO. 
However, nothing in the Geneva Accords 
appeared to exclude all three countries from being extended protection . 
under such a pact without member status.]§/ 
This was pointed out by the 
French delegation: 
"At French suggestion specific reference to Cambodia, Laos, 
and Vietnam was removed from the text of the Treaty, but these 
States are covered by the provisions of the Treaty in a separate 
protocol .•• The French ~elt that this method of extending the 
application of the Treaty to the Associated States was less 
likely to be construed as a violation of the spirit of the Geneva 
Agreements ~" B./ 
At the conclusion of · the Manila Conference, Admiral Davis 
wrote: 
"I believe the Manila Conference accomplished the objec-
tive expected of it from the United States point of view. 
In 
my judgment our Defense representation in the U.S. Delegation 
succeeded in its efforts to insure that the Treaty is consistent 
in its military implications with the positions taken by the 
·Joint Chiefs of Staff and by this Department." 3§) 
The U.S. had, in effect, made a public statement of its intent to counter 
further COIDnlunist moves in SEA, but left vague the specifics of its response. 
The pact, as intended, was fundamentally "consultative." 
There was to be 
no unified command, no bases, and no contribution of forces to a standing 
group; the U.S. accepted these lacks, and stressed the psychological gains 
of merely bringing a treaty into existence, pointing out that SEATO opened 
the way to a stronger and more all-encompassing defense of Southeast Asia 
than had theretofore been possible. 
A-22 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
f 
I· 
. r 
I 
' 
I 
, . 
3· 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Evolution of the Treaty Organization 
a. 
NATO Develops Rapidly 
NATO rapidly acquired institutions.* The treaty entered 
into force in August, 1949. 
By September, a Military Committee, a . 
Standing Group, and the Regional Planning Groups had been created. 
By 
November a Financial and Economic Board and a Military Production and 
Supply Board had been set up. 
By December agreement had been reached 
on a strategic concept for the integrated defense of the NATO area. 
A year later a centralized command and control structure was formulated, 
becoming operational as SF~PE on 2 April 1951, with headquarters in the 
old Hotel Astoria, in Paris. 
Spurred on by the events occurring in 
Korea, NATO was further simplified and streamlined in the ottawa meeting 
of September 1951, where a Temporary Council Committee chaired by 
W. Averell Harriman was set up. 
This became a permanent council, in 
March, 1952, a month after the accession of Greece and Turkey to the 
pact. 39/ 
In the wake of a major setback when the French Assembly 
refusedto ratify the European Defense Community (EDC) proposal in 
August, 1954, the Paris Agreements were pushed through in October, 
providing for the accession of West Germany to NATO, and the establish-
ment of a combined field command.** 
Early in 1956 the NATO Council 
appointed a Committee of Three Ministers (Martino of Italy, Lange of 
Norway, and Pearson of Canada) to study w~ys that further cooperation 
could be achieved within NATO. 
The report of this Committee was approved 
by the Council on 14 December, 1956. 
Consultation "Tithin NATO 1ms to 
become "an integral part of the making of national policy." 40/ 
The 
meeting of 16-19 December 1957 of the NATO Council included the heads of 
government, with Eisenhower and Macmillan participating. 
This meeting 
symbolized the significance which all the NATO countries attached to the 
pact -- and it ",as this sense of meaningfulness, commonality, and neces-
sity, more than the terms of the North Atlantic Treaty, that accounted 
for the rapid organizational growth. 
b. 
SEATO Unstructured by U.S. Preference 
The Manila Conference eventuated in a pact termed the 
"Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty and Protocol Thereto, Septem-
ber 8, 1954"j the treaty was ratified by the U.S. Senate by a vote of 
82 to 1, and entered into force on February 19, 1955. 41/ 
The history 
of the development of SEATO thereafter is quite different from NATO!s, 
since the initial policy of the U. S. was to discourage, rather than to 
assist, the evolution of a permanent structure. 
SEATO military staff 
* Appendix B, Organizational Charts 
. *-l(-
In the same month -- October, 1954 -- the WarsaYl Pact came into being. 
A-23 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
l 
l 
. 
1. .' 
L , 
I , , 
1 • 
i 
; 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
consultations were held frequently, but were attended by relatively 
low'-ranking U. S. officers, carefully instructed on limits of the ir 
planning flexibility. 
At the SEATO conference in Bangkok in February 
1955, the U.S. position on military arrangements under the pact was 
to avoid discussion of permanent formal organization. 
A Defense Depart-
ment memorandum on the U.S. stance again recommended that the ANZUS 
pact be used as a model: 
"The U.S. desires to make no commitments of U.S. forces 
for use under the Manila pact. 
(This view has not been con-
veyed to the other pm.,rers.) 
"vlith regard to military machinery for the coordination 
of measures to combat overt aggression, the U.S. is opposed 
to the establisrunent of formal military machinery or of a 
permanent SFATO staff. 
Instead, the U.S. supports the estab-
lisrui1ent of military advisors, who would meet periodically, 
formulate their own rules of procedure and any necessary 
organizational arrangements, designate planning assistants to 
work on specified projects, and insure that military planning 
activities are coordinated with those designed to counter sub-
versive activities. 
"While not explicitly so stated, the U.S. position is one 
of confining its activities and commitments to the scope of 
those made under the ANZUS Pact. 
Such apparent concessions 
to the other powers as have been made in the Working Group 
papers do not alter the fact that the U.S. is unwilling to 
commit any forces to the defense of Southeast ASia, opposes 
any military organizational arrangement i·rhich would require 
the integration of U.S. and allied war plans, and prefers to 
deal ,-lith its allies bilaterally rather than multilaterally. " 
4.2/ 
~nphasis adde~7 
The U.S., although it refused to become deeply committed 
in advance to a military organization styled along NATO lines, was 
well a'iorare of the necessity to be prepared to fight in the SEATO area. 
U.S. unilateral plans and preparations had been set in motion when, in 
January, 1955, the Secretary of Defense requested the JCS to provide 
"a concept of the possible application of U.S. military pOlver in the 
implementation of Article IV of the Manila Pact II under two different 
assumptions: 
(1) prohibition of nuclear weapons; (2) permission to 
employ nuclear \v(;apons. 
Requirements vrere estnblished for: 
"1. 
Broad outline plans for U. S. action ... to deter 
or counter overt aggression by Com.munist China or, where 
applicable, by Viet Minh, against each of the Southeast 
Asian nations vrhich are parties to the Manila Pact or 
against the free areas of Indochina vrhich might be covered 
by the Pact. 
LEmphasis adde~7 
A-24 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I~ •
••• a statement as to the readiness capability of U.S. 
armed forces, in the next fey' years, to conduct operations in 
implementation of Article IV, I, of the Manila Bact." 43/ 
The U.S. forces 'I,ould constitute a "mobile reserve" ready for commit-
ment to the treaty area , but the U.S. would enter no fixed agreement 
as to what those forces might be, or under what circunlstances they 
would be used . 
Despite this unilateral planning, however, instructions 
for the delegates to the Bangkok conference indicated that planning for 
~.-
or creation of combined commands ,.,ere not to be considered within the 
;,." scope of the SEATO Pact. 
Suppression of guerrillas was to be handled 
,. by "indigenous forces only" unless these proved incapable of coping 
with the problem. 
At the 1955 Bangkok Conference the Australians and New 
Zealanders repeated their willingness to make troop commitments to a 
SEATO force, but the U.S. representatives, following instructions, 
evaded discussion of the subject. 44/ 
The pressures on the U.S. team 
were strong, and the members came away with the conviction that the 
major factor "to contend "Tith" in future meetings 'fllas bound to be 
" . ' •. the obvious desire of the Asian nations to establish 
a NATO-type SEATO organization with everything that it implies 
in the nature of force commitments." 45/ 
Later in 1955, U.S. planners once more were approached by 
counterparts of several other countries with the proposal that, as a 
step toward some kind of SEATO standing group, a small secretariat be 
set up to study methods of creating a "possible future organizational 
structure." The report of the U.S. representatives stated, "The 
establishment of such an ad hoc arrangement should not prejudice the 
eventual creation or evolution of a standing group ... should the need 
become necessary because of inadequac ies revealed by experience." 46/ 
The JCS conrrnented: 
-
"The Joint Chiefs of Staff have no objection to the 
establishment of a small permanent secretariat, vThich would 
be an instrument of the Military Advisers and subordinate 
planning committees . 
However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
would not agree to the possible evolution of such a secre-
tariat into an organization of a standing nature .... " 47/ 
This 'I-TaS the same point of vieVT expressed by Cn~CPAC , VTho noted with 
apparent r eli ef that : 
"The recognition of the requirement for a small permanent 
secretariat has definitely forestalled for the foreseeable 
future any 'determined insistence for either a permanent staff 
planners organization, a standing group, or a combined staff." 48/ 
A-25 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The U.S. members attending the SEATO ~ilitary Staff 
Planners Conference in Pearl Harbor in November, 1955, received 
basically the same instructions as had been given to earlier planners: 
(1) 
No Lcceptance of a permanent "sta!lding group" staff 
organization. 
(2) 
No U.S. participation in the development of combined 
.plans. 
(3) 
No commitment of U.S. forces. ~ 
A demonstration by the U.S. 25th Ir.fantry Division was considered ~uite 
impressive by the conference delegates, but did not assuage the appetite 
among other SEATO nations for strong, concrete U.S. force commitments. 
The chief U.S. delegate, Rear Admiral A. P. Storrs, recommended to his 
superiors that the U.S. add "SUbstance" to SEATO by: 
(1) Accepting the concept of a permanent staff organization. 
(2 ) Accepting the concept of combined planning. 
(3) Maintaining a U.S. division in the Central Pacific., 2SY 
Storrs felt that these actions might satisfy the rest of the SEATO 
nations and ~uiet their demands for a permanent U.S. force commitment, 
but he focused on a fading issue . . While some SEATO members, especially 
Australia and Ne'\'J Zealand, kept up an insistence on a stronger organiza-
tion for the pact, others began to show less and less interest in SEATO 
per se. 
By the end of 1955, the U.S. realized that SEATO would fall 
apart unless something were done to provide a permanent structure. Admit-
ting that the Asian countries were !!losing faith!! in SEATO, the State 
Department decided to reexamine the U.S. position pertaining to a perma-
nent staff organization for the SEATO Council.dl! 
A decision for a 
permanent body of staff planners was taken at a meeting of SEATO Mili-
tary Advisers in Karachi in March, 1956. ~ The advisers agreed on a 
staff organization headed by a chief of staff with flag rank. 
Bangkok 
was selected as the site for SEATO head~uarters. 
At the ninth conference of SEATO Military Advisers, in 
February 1959, it was agreed that a series of outline plans for the 
"introduction of a SEATO force into threatened areas!! would be prepared. 121 
The plans would be based on the assumption that the initial re~uirement 
would be for one lrigade group or regimental coubat team with appropriate 
nav~l support. 
Discussion of a command structure to implement these plans 
was postponed to 'a later meeting, over the objections of the Pakistani 
delegate, ,vho insisted that the time for action was "now": 
A-26 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
l 
[ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"Until a command structure, even if only in skeleton form, 
for SEATO forces has been evolved, SEATO is not in a position, 
collectively, to operate instantaneously .•.. A study on command 
structure shpuld be started now." 54/ 
At the following meeting, in September 1959, a SEATO command was estab-
lished in embryo \-Then the U. S. agreed to the reorganization of the ' 
Military Planning Office into a configuration that could be assimilated 
by the planning staff of a permanent SEATO headquarters along the lines 
of SFAPE. 55/* By the twelfth SEATO Military Advisers Conference in 
Washingtonin May 1960, Secretary of Defense Gates w'as able to make 
the public announcement that SEATO had advanced significantly in organ-
ization and planning: 
"National forces of the Southeast Asia countries, backed 
by pOl-rerful mobile forces, contribute to the deterrent .... 
Coordinated SEATO military plans have been prepared and are 
capable of rapid execution to parry any likely Cormnunist threat .... 
SEATO exercises have progressed from simple observer type to ... 
sophisticated maneuvers .... " 56/ 
c. 
SEATO Contingency Planning 
During the i-Tinter of 1959-1960 a series of plans Ylas pre-
pared for contingencies throughout the SEATO area. 
By ·the spring of 
1961 these SEATO plans, numbered 1 through 6, came under consideration 
in the first "invoking" of the SEATO Treaty, when the Pathet Ufo forces 
threatened to overrun Laos and invade Thailand. 57/ 
From the U.S. 
point of vi e'\oT , the SEATO plans 1-lere derivatives of u. S. unilateral plans 
for Southeast Asia covering "action up to and including action '-rith 
Communist China ." The then current U.S. master plan, PACOM Operations 
Plan 32-59, served as the basis for U.S. contributions to the SEATO 
Plans. 58/ 
The U.S. led the way in preparation of a series of six 
contingency plans for the treaty area. 
By the fall of 1961 some of 
these plans had been approved and others were under discussion at 
Bangkok. 59/ 
Of these plans, at least three vere concerned vlith the 
SEATO Protocol states of Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam. 
Plan 1f1~ provided 
for the defense of Southeast Asia, including Pakistan, against attack 
by forc es of CorrSnunist China and the DRV. 
The general concept vTaS: 
(1) 
"To launch air and naval attacks; local forces to 
delay the enemy's advance as feasible while rapidly reinforcing 
with external SEATO forces." 
(2) 
"To establish ground defenses in order to hold the 
enemy forl-Tard of vital areas in South Vietnam, Thailand and 
East Pakistan, and to build up forces behind them i-,hile con-
ducting air and naval offensive against enemy forces, base 
areas, LOC's and war-making capacity.tI 
*See Appendix B for present organization. 
A-27 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
( 
. I 
) 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(3) 
IIAfter appropriate build-up) to launch a counter offen-
sive) including a major amphibious assault on North Vietnam} to 
inflict a decisive defeat on enemy military forces and at the 
same time liberate occupied territory." 60/ 
Plan 5 provided U.S. troops to release the Royal Laotion forces for 
offensive operations and to assist them lito regain areas lost." The 
U.S. would also provide "additional military and logistic support." 
This "I{as a fully developed and approved plan} for which "the Field Force 
Commander's plan is complete." 61/ 
Plan 6 provided for the defense of 
the protocol states against attack by forces of the DRV. 
The general 
concept was: 
(1) 
"To hold the enemy as far fOri-lard as possible and to 
provide defense in depth) securing main ports of entry and 
bases for build-up and deployment of forces for counter-offensive." 
(2) 
"To destroy the enemy's forces) ' LOC's and capacity to 
"lage .rar through an intensive interdiction program conducted by 
SEATO air and naval forces supported by such air and naval forces 
under national command as are made available." 
(3) 
"vmile maintaining the defense) forces for the counter-
offensive phase .Till be assembled and built up. 
VThen appropriate) 
a general offensive to include a major amphibious assault against 
North Vietnam will be mounted to inflict a decisive defeat on the 
enemy military forces and to liberate the territory overrun by 
the DRV." §3/ 
U.S. ground force commitment to the plans was a corps consisting of 
three infantry divisions plus a Marine Expeditionary Force of one division. 
Air support \-las a tactical bomber squadron) t"lVQ tactical fighter squad-
rons) and a Marine air Hing. 
Anticipated support of the' plans by other 
SEATO countries is evident in available ground rorce troop lists for 
plans 4 and 6: 63/ 
A-28 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
. ! 
t 
r 
r 
r 
I 
_ 
I 
-
" 
NATION 
Thailand 
Pakistan 
United Kingdom 
Australia 
Nevr Zealand 
France 
Philippines 
South Vietnam 
Total Non-U.S. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
TOTAL GROUND FORCES 
Plan 4 (SEA) 
Di.v 
RCT 
Bn 
"Div 
3 
4 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
1 
4 
11 
6 
2 
9 
CINCPAC Est. Rqmt 
15 
8 
12* 
Shortage 
4 
1-1/3 
3 
( 1) 
laos Planning 
Plan 6 (VN-L-C) 
RCT/BDE 
Bn 
3 
1 
1 
1 
1 
3 
5 
5. 
7-'1<-
5* 
2 
A modification of Plan #5 existed under the temporary 
title of "Plan 5-plus," drafted by the JCS in September 1961 as a pro-
posed contingency plan for intervention in laos. 
In, this concept, 
25,400 troops would be sent into laos. 
The force vlOuld consist of the 
following: 64/ 
Country 
In laos 
Support and Reserves 
U.S. 
5,500 
11,000 
Thailand 
11,400 
3,300 
Commonwealth 
4,400 
3,500 
(UK, Australia, NZ) 
?akistan 
1,400 
4,700 
Philippines 
200 
GVN 
2,700 
These troops '{Quld augment the Royal laos forces of 38,500 in the Regu-
lar Army, 11,000 Meos, and 29,800 other defense forces. 
In this modifica-
tion of Plan 5, it vTaS assumed that the Royal laotian Government would 
appeal to SEATO for assistance. 
This would initiate an airlift of SEATO 
forces into key points along the Mekong River at Vientiane, Paksane, 
Thakkek, Savannakhet, and Pakse. 
These forces would support the Royal 
Laotian troops against communist forces in the areas of northern laos 
bordering on Thailand and from all of the laotian panhandle. 
At the 
same time, Thai forces would operate around Luang Prabang and GVN troops 
would operate along the GVN-laos border. §:i/ 
" 
* Includes a two division reserve held outside the theater of operations 
and two RCT-size airborne units held in SVN. 
A-29 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.J" 
r 
l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(2) 
Vietnam Planning 
The JCS, in a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense 
on 5 October, 19h1, noted that although recommendations had been for-
warded on the subject of intervention in Southeast Asia, nothing had 
been done. 
liThe time is past,l1 they stated, 
I1when action short of inter-
vention could reverse the rapidly ,vorsening situation. 11 
The JCS con-
sidered that "the execution of SEATO Plan 5, or a suitable variation 
thereof" ioTaS the "military minimum commensurate with the situation." 66/ 
Defense replied on the same day, requesting JCS analysis of two concepts 
for SEATO intervention in Vietnam: 
I1There appear to be two principal military possibilities. 
One iolOUld involve the use of SEATO forces at the greatest 
possible number of entry points along the whole of the South 
Vietnamese border, probably excluding that part of the 17th 
parallel now held in force by the Vietnamese Army itself. 
An 
alternative possibility .[ould be the use of SEATO forces to 
cover solely the 17th parallel itself, which includes some 
major infiltration routes, and thus to free the Vietnamese forces 
nmv stationed there for engagement against the Viet Cong. 
Under 
either possibility, planning should envisage maximum possible use 
of the SEATO forces to establish effective communications in as 
wide an area of Viet-Nam as possible, and to serve as a means 
for introducing new techniques into the Vietnamese forces them-
selves. 
The forces would, of course, be entitled to take all 
necessary action for their own security, but would not (unless 
the concept were later expanded) engage in .offensive operations 
against the Viet Cong that were not strictly necessary to their 
Oiom security. 
Your military recommendations for the refinement 
of these guidelines into more precise rules of engagement should 
be a part of your response. 11 §]J 
The JCS reply, on 9 October 1961, noted that the use of SEATO troops 
all along the border was "not. feasible" because the VC could bypass such 
forces or attack them piecemeal. 
Further, the concept of use of SEATO 
troops at the 17th parallel was "feasible .... but militarily unsound l1 
because the area was not the VC main avenue of approach, and also because 
the move could easily be interpreted as aggression against the DRV. 
The 
JCS recommended, instead, that: 
11 ••• . the over-all objective could best be served by the 
implementation of SEATO Plan 5/61 or a variation thereof, 
novT." 68/ 
If this action could not be taken, the JCS continued, then the U.S. could 
I1provide a degree of assistance" to the GVN and could I1free certain South 
Vietnamese forces for offensive actions against the Viet Cong." 
No 
action 'Has taken to implement the SEATO plan. 
A-30 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(3) 
Thailand Planning 
In May 1962 when the Pathet lao threat against 
Thailand became acute, a U 
0 S. battle group .Tas dispatched on joint 
training exercises .Tithin the country. 
President Kennedy announced 
that more U oS. troops .Tould be sent, and by 15 May a second cont in-
gent landed. 
On the same day, newspapers reported that the UoS. was 
seeking SEATO help, and that W. Averell Harriman, then Assistant 
Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, had "outlined the U.S. 
position in separate conferences with envoys of Australia, New Zeland, 
Pakistan, and the Philippines." 69/ 
Within two days, all the SEATO 
members except France had agreedto send help if necessary. 
The U. S. 
sent 4,000 troops into Thailand. 
Three other SEATO nations actually 
put forces (albeit token forc es) into Thailand. 
The UK sent 10 Hunter 
jet· fighters, Australia sent a jet squadron, and New Zealand sent 100 
parachute troops and three transport aircraft. 
The Philippines and 
Pakistan publicly noted that they were standing by to help. 
(4) 
The Future 
Discussions on the best method under SEATO to "meet 
the common danger" in Vietnam have not produced an overall agreement, 
and three of the eight SEATO nations -- the UK, France, and Pakistan --
have not responded to Vietnam's invitation to commit troops there. 
Of 
the five SEATO nations now fighting in Vietnam; the strength figures as 
of 17 October 1967 were: 
U.S. 
1~69, 000 
Australia 
6,500 
Thailand 
2,500 
Philippines 
2,000 
New Zealand 
400 
Total 
480,400 
70/ 
One non-member of SEATO, the Republic of Korea, was contributing 48,000 
troops to the fighting as of that date, raiSing the Free \Vorld Forces 
total to 528,400. 
France, in view of past policies, could not be expected 
to make a contribution; the amount of SEATO "unity" displayed by French 
participation would be offset by other obvious considerations. 
Pakistani 
assistance might be welcomed as a gesture of support for SEATO. 
But the 
major shortfall to date in SEATO has been the British decision that it is 
unable to participate militarily in Vietnam. 
With all its weaknesses, the ~ajority of the SEATO pact 
nations have actually collaborated in regional defense in the Vietnam war. 
In fact, given the range of disparity among the members, it is a source 
of wonder that support of SEATO nations for Vietnam has been as strong 
as it has been 0 
The conflict in Vietnam is a crucible for SEATO; the 
future of the alliance will be profoundly affected by the outcome of the 
war. 
. A-31 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3_3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV. Ao 1. 
FOOTNOTES 
1. 
Winston Churchill, "Alliance of English-Speaking People," Vital 
Speeches of the Day, Vol. 12 (March 15,1946). 
Speech was delivered 
in Fulton, Missouri. 
2. 
By ItX," 
liThe Sources of Soviet Conduct, It 
Foreign Affairs, Vol. 25 
(July, 1947), 566-82. 
3. 
u.S. Department of State Bulletin, Vol. 16 (March 23, 1947), 536. 
4. _ Ibid., (June 15, 1947), 1159-1160. 
50 
Commi ttee of European Economic Cooperation, General Report, Vol. 1 
(U.S. Department of State Publication 2930, 1947), 13. 
6. 
Hansard, Parliamentary Debates, 446. 
H. C. DEB 5 S Col. 396-397 
(J-anuary 22, 191+8). 
7. 
u.S. Department of State Bulletin, Vol. 18 (March 28, 1948), 419. 
8. 
John Foster Dulles, War or Peace (1950), 95-96. 
9. 
Congressional Record, Vol. 94, Part VI, 80th Congress, 2d Session, 7791. 
10. North Atlantic Treaty, .Hearings Before the Senate Comrni ttee on Foreign 
Relations , 81st Congress, 1st Session, Part I, 237. 
11. Charles Wolf, Jr., Foreign Aid: Theory and Practice in Southern Asia 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1960), 40-52. 
12. Ibid., 53--54 
13. 
Documents on American Foreign Relations, 1949, 626. 
14. 
U.S. Congress , Hearings on Executive K, 83d Congress, 2d Session, 
Part I (November 11, 1954). 
15. 
NSC 48/2, 30 Dec 1949 (TOP SECRET) favors a regional association of 
non-Communist states in Southeast Asia, in which the U. S. 
II should 
not take an active part in early stages." 
NSC 48/3, 2h Apr 1951 (TOP SECRET) recommends that the U.S. "consider 
the desirability of security arrangements with other countries of 
Asia, either on a bilateral or multilateral basis. II 
A NSC progress 
report (5 Aug 1953) on NSC 124/2 states that the ·U.S. "rill continue 
to maintain the position that regional defense pacts should be initi-
ated by countries in the region. 
Cf., also note 23, below. 
A-32 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
-I 
• 
TOP SECRET - SeDs i tive 
( -
16. u.s. Congress, House, Hearings to Amend the ECA Act of 1948 as 
Amended> 1950, Part I, 33-35. 
17. Report of NSC 192d meeting, 6 Apr 195!.~ (TOP SECRET), 3. 
18. 
NSC 5405-2, Bonesteel Memorandum, NSC Policy Board (TOP SECRET), 
May 13, 1954~ 
19. u.s. Congress , House, Hearings on East-Hest Trade Before the Sub-
Committee on Foreign Economic Policy of the Committee on Foreign 
Affairs, 83d Congress, 2d Session (GPO, 1954), 292-2930 
20. 
Memorandum by Merchant (EUR) of conversation between Ambassadors 
Makin and Smith (U), and betvleen Makin and Dulles, 18 Apr 1954 
(SECRET); Tel DULTE 3,22 Apr 1954, from Paris (TOP SECRET). 
Re-
ported in State Department Research Project 370, 21-22. 
21. 
NSC 5405-2, Bonesteel Memorandum, NSC Policy Board (TOP SECR~T), 
May 13, 1954. 
22. 
Robert Cutler, ina White House Memorandum of May 7, 1954 (TOP SECRET), 
calls the 5-power Staff Agency a "w'hite man's party, II 
Cf., NSC File 
No. 5405. 
. 
23. 
NSC 5405-2, Policy Planning Board files, April, May, June (TOP SECRET), 
Paragraph 17 of NSC 
5!.~05 (TOP SECRET) states: 
"Take measures to pro-
mote the coordinated defense of Southeast Asia, recognizing that the 
initiative in regional defense measures must come from the governments 
of the area." 
ISA Memorandum, Wade to Bonesteel, 13 Apr 1954 (TOP 
SECRET) comments on this paragraph: 
"In view Of. what vre are now try-
ing to do t01>rard organizing a regional group, the initiative is ob-
viously with us." 
24. 
Memorandum to SecDef, "Report on the Manila Conference" (SECRET), 
14 Sep 1954, p. 1 (hereafter referred to as "Manila Report"). 
25. 
John R. Beal, John Foster Dulles (Ne,v York: Harper, 1957), 222; re-
ported in Roscoe Robinson, SEATO: An Appraisal (University of 
Pittsburgh Marter's Thesis, 1964). Cf., also Hearings, 83d Congress, 
2d Session, Part I, 1954. 
--
26. 
Memorandum to SecDef, "Report on the lvlanila Conference" (SECRET), 
14 Sep 1954, 3; A.S.B. Olver, SEATO: The Manila Treaty and Hestern 
Policy in Southeast Asia. (London: Royal Institute of International 
Affairs, 1956), p. 12. 
27. 
Manila Report (SECRET), 2. 
28. 
New York Times, September 8) 1954 
A-33 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
29. Manila Report (SECRET), 1. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33· 
Ibid. , 
Ibid. , 
Ibid. , 
Ibid. , 
3. 
4. 
3.' ; TOSEC 25 (Sep 3, 54) 
4. 
Sensitive 
34. Memorandum to SecDef from Herman Phleger, Subject: "Geneva Armistice 
Agreement Restrictions on Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam," . dated 
July 27, 1954 (SECRET). 
35. 
U.S. Congress, "Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities in Vietnam, 
July 20, 1954,11 in Background Information Relating to Southeast Asia 
and Vi etnam (Committee Print, 89th Congress, 2d Session), 43. 
36. 
Phleger, op. cit., (SECRET), 5. 
37. Manila Report (SECRET), 4. 
38. Ibid., (SECRET), 5. 
39. 
Lord Ismay, NATO: The First Five Years . (Utrecht: Bosch, 1952) passim. 
40. 
NATO Information Service, The NATO Handbook. (Utrecht: Bosch, 1963), 62 
410 
U. S. Congress, Background Information Relating to Southeast Asia and 
Vietnam, Ope cit., 70-74. 
42. 
DoD (ISA) Memorandum, Subject: ItAnalysis of Possible Implications of 
the Bangkok Conference, II January 31, 1955 (TOP SECRET), File #71325 in 
NSC 5405-2, 3. 
1.~3. 
SecDef Memorandum for JCS, Subject: IIConcept and Plans for the Imple-
mentation, if Necessary, of Article IV, 1, of the Manila Pact," dated 
January 6, 1955 (TOP SECRET). 
44. 
Memorandum, Subject: IIDepartment of Defense Contribution to and 
Participation in the Bangkok Conference, II dated March 29, 1955 
(TOP SECRET). 
45. 
Ibid., (TOP SECRET) 
46. 
JCS MemorarJ,dum CIvI-171-55, Subject: "Surmnary of Report of Military Staff 
Planners Conference ... Baguio; Philippines , April-May 1955,11 dated 
July 1, 1955, (TOP SECRET). 
47. 
Ibid. 
A-34 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
[ : 
{ 
r 
r . 
48. 
50. 
51. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
JCS Memorandum, Subject: "Report of Military Staff Planners Confer-
ence, Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, Baguio, Philippines, 
April-May 1955," dated June 2, 1955 (Appendix "A") (TOP SECRET)'. 
Defense Memorandum, "U.S. Support of SEATO Military Activities," 
(TOP SECRET), 1., in NSC 5405-3. 
Ibid., (TOP SECRET), 3. 
Defense Memorandum to SecNav, Subject: "Southeast Asia Collective 
Defense Treaty (SEATO) Staff Organization," dated December 16, 1955 
(SECRET). 
52. 
CINCPAC Message to OSD, 222208z March 1956, (TOP SECRET). 
53.· JCS Memorandum for SecDef, Subject: "Force Availabilities and Command 
Relations for the South East Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO)," dated 
March 23, 1959, (SECRET), 1. 
. /' 
54. 
Ibid., (SECRET), 2. 
55. 
JCS Memorandum for SecDef, Subject: "Proposal for Reorga..'Y1ization of 
the SEATO Military Planning Office, If dated September 8, 1959, (SECRET) ,1. 
56. 
Appendix to the Congressional Record, ALf475 (1960). 
57. 
State Departmant Memorandum of Conversation #8857, Subj ect: "Laos, " 
dated 29 April 1961 (TOP SECRET), covering meeting of SecState, SecDef, 
Atty Gen., JCS, and 8 others. 
58. 
Memorandum for SecDef, dated October 5, 1961, "Alternative Plans for 
Southeast Asia," (TOP SECRET) 
59. 
Memorandum for SecDef from Deputy Assistant SecDef, Subject: "Alterna-
tive Plans for Southeast Asia," (TOP SECRET), dated 5 October 1961. 
The plans, numbered 1 - 6, e.re not -avail able ; data on the plans had 
been obtained from cross-checking cOIlh"nentaries on them, and is incom-
plete. 
One plan ("5 plus"), an adoption of #5, is singled out as 
existing "only as a U.S. concept." Plan 5 has been "fully approved." 
Plans 4 and 6 are "being discussed this "reek at the SEATO MilAd Con-
ference in Bangkok. 
60. 
Study for SecDef from Asst SecDef (ISA) recommending U.S. troop list 
for SEATO plans 4 and 6, dated 22 September 1961, (TOP SECRET). 
61. 
Memorandum for SecDef, Subj ect: "Alternative P}.ans for Southeast Asia" 
(TOP SECRET), dated 5 October 1961. 
A-35 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
62. 
ISA Study of 2 September 1961, cited in Note 60, (TOP SECRET). 
63. 
Ibid., (TOP SECREr). 
64. 
JCS Memoranc1.um 661-61 to SecDef, Subject: "Plan for Military Inter-
vention ~n Laos," dated 20 September 1961, (TOP SECRET). 
65. 
Ibid., (TOP SECRET) 
66. 
JCS Memorandum 704-61 to SecDef, Subject: "Planning for Southeast 
ASia," dated 5 October 1961, (TOP SECRET). 
67. 
Memorandum from SecDef to JCS, Subject: "Planning for Southeast Asia," 
dated 5 October 1961, (SECRET) . . 
68. 
JCS Memorandum 716-61 to SecDef, Subject: 
"Concept of Use of SEATO 
Forces in South Vietnam," dated 9 October 1961, (TOP SECRET). 
69. 
The New' York Times, 15 May 1962. 
70. 
Figures from OASD/PA Vietnam Desk. 
A-36 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
'. 
I . 
r 
f 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
APPENDIX· A 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A COMPARISON OF THE WORDING OF THE NATO AND SEATO TREATIES 
NOTES: 
" 
1. 
In this layout, sections of the SEATO Treaty are transposed for comparison 
with like sections of the NATO Treaty. 
No "lOrds have been omitted. 
2. 
Significant passages pointing out differences are underlined. 
3. 
Comments are in brackets. 
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY 
Washington, D.C., 4~ 
1949* 
The Parties to this Treaty reaffirm 
their faith in the purposes and prin-
ciples of the Charter of the United 
Nations &~d their desire to. live in 
peace with all peoples and all Gov-
ernments. 
They are determined to safeguard the 
freedom, common heritage and civiliza-
tion of their peoples, founded on the' 
principles of democracy, individual 
liberty and the rule of la\-J. 
They seek to promote stability and 
well-being in the North Atlantic area. 
They are resolved to Unite their 
efforts for collective defense and for 
the preservation of peace and security. 
They therefore agree to this North 
Atlantic Treaty: 
* Effective 24 August 1949 
SEATO TREATY 
The Parties to this Treaty, 
Recognizing the sovereign equality of 
all.the Parties, 
Reiterating their faith in the pur-
poses and principles set forth in the 
Charter of the United Nations and 
their desire to live in peace \-ri th 
all peoples and all governments, 
Reaffirming that, in accordance 'with 
the Charter of the United Nations, 
they uphold the principle of equal 
rights and self-determination of 
peoples, and declaring that they "rill 
earnestly strive by every peaceful 
. means to promote self-government and 
to secure the independence of all 
countries whose peoples desire it and 
are able to undertake its responsi-
bilities, 
Desiring to strengthen the fabric of 
peace and freedom and to uphold the 
principles of democracy, individual 
liberty and the rule of law, and to 
promote the economic well-being and 
development of all peoples in the 
Treaty Area, 
A-37 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
ARTICLE 1 
The Parties undertake, as set forth 
in the Charter of the United Nations, 
to settle any international dispute 
in 'l'Thich they may be involved by 
peaceful means in such a manner that 
international peace and security and 
justice are not endangered, and to 
refrain in their international rela-
tions from the threat or' use of force 
in any manner inconsistent 'l'ri th the 
purposes of the United Nations. 
ARTICLE 2 
The Parties will contribute toward the 
further development of peaceful and . 
friendly international relations by 
strengthening their free institutions, 
by bringing about a better under-
standing of the principles upon which 
these institutions are founded, and 
by promoting conditions of stability 
and well-being. 
They will seek to 
eliminate conflict in their inter-
national economic policies and will 
encourage economic c')llaboration 
between any or all of them. 
Intending to declare publicly and 
formally their sense of unity, so 
that any po-tential aggressor 1"rill 
appreciate that the Parties stand 
together in the area, and, 
Desiring further to co-ordinate their 
efforts for collective defense for 
the preservation of peace and 
security, 
Therefore agree as follows: 
ARTICLE I 
The Parties undertake, as set forth 
in the Charter of the United Nations, 
to settle any international dispute 
in which they may be involved by 
peaceful means in such a manner that 
international peace and security and 
justice are not endangered, and to 
refrain in their international rela-
tions from the threat or use of force 
in any manner inconsistent with the 
purposes of the United Nations. 
ARTICLE III 
The Parties undertake to strengthen 
their free institutions and to co-
operate with one another in the 
further development of economic 
measures, including technical assist-
ance, designed both to promote 
economic progress and social well-
being and to further the individual 
and collective efforts of governments 
toward these ends. 
/Jhe SEATO Treaty places more stress 
on tecm1ical assistance and social 
well-being; reversal of the order of 
the second and third articles places 
emphasis on collective defense~ 
A-38 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
ARTICLE 3 
In order more effectively to achieve 
the objectives of this Treaty, the 
Parties, separately and jOintly, by 
means of continuous ~nd effective 
self-help and mutual aid, will main-
tain and develop their individual 
and collective capacity to resist 
armed attack. 
ARTICLE 4 
The Parties vlill consult together 
whenever, in the opinion of any of 
them, the territorial integrity, 
political independence or security 
of any of the Parties is threatened. 
ARTICLE 5 
The Parties agree that an armed 
attack against one or more of them 
in Europe or North ~m erica shall be 
considered an attack against them 
all, and consequently they agree that, 
if such an armed attack occurs, each 
A-39 
ARTICLE II 
In order more effectively to achieve 
the objectives of this Treaty, the 
Parties, separately 'and jointly, by 
means of continuous and effective 
self-help and mutual aid will main-
tain and develop their individual 
and collective capacity and to resist 
armed attack and to prevent and 
counter subversive activities directed 
from without against their territorial 
integrity and political stability. 
. 
LThe SEATO Treaty adds subversion as 
a contingency .. :.7 
ARTICLE IV 
2. 
If, in the oplnlon of any of the 
Parties, the inviolability or the 
integrity of the territory or the 
sovereignty or political independ-
ence of any Party in the Treaty Area 
or of any other State or territory to 
which the provisions of paragraph 1 
of this Article from time to time 
apply is threatened in any way other 
than by armed attack or is affected 
or threatened by any fact or situa-
tion which might endanger the peace 
of the area, the Parties shall con-
sult immediately in order to agree on 
the measures which should be taken 
for the common defense. 
LThe SEATO Treaty expands upon the 
word "threatened.':'7 
1. 
Each Party recognizes that aggres-
sion by means of armed attack in the 
Treaty Area against any of the Parties 
or against any State or territory 
vlhich the Parties by Unanimous agree-
ment may hereafter desig,.'1ate, vrould 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
of them, in exercise of the right of 
individual or collective self-defense 
recognized by Article 51 of the Char-
ter of the United Nations, will assist 
the Party or Parties so attacked by 
taking forthwith, individually and in 
concert vii th the other Parties, such 
action as it deems necessary, includ-
ing the use of armed force, to restore 
and maintain the security of the North 
Atlantic area. 
/:Armed force" is not specifically men-
tioned in the SEATO Treaty~ 
Any such armed attack and all measures 
taken as a result thereof shall imme-
diately be reported to the SecQYity 
Council. 
Such measures shall be 
terminated Ivhen the Security Council 
has taken the measures necessary to 
restore and maintain international ' 
peace and security. 
[This requirement is not in the SEATO 
Treaty·7 
ARTICLE 6* 
For the purpose of Article 5; an armed 
attack on one or more of the Parties 
is deemed to include an armed attack: 
* As amended by Article 2 of the 
Protocol to the North Atla.ntic Treaty 
on the accession of Greece and Turkey. 
endanger its m'lD peace and safety, 
and agrees that it "rill in that event 
act to meet the common danger in 
accordance vTith its constitutional 
processes. 
Measures taken under this 
paragraph shall be immediately 
reported to the Security Council of 
the United Nations. 
[The SEATO Treaty specifically covers 
non-members -- "any statel! -- this is 
not specific in the NATO Treaty.7 
3. It is understood that no action 
on the territory of any State desig-
nated by unanimous agreement under 
paragraph 1 of this Article or on 
any territory so designated shall be 
taken except at the invitation or 
with the consent of the government 
concerned. 
[This understanding is not specific 
in the NATO Treaty~ 
ARTICLE VIn 
As used in this Treaty, the I!Treaty 
Areal! is the general area of South-
East Asia, including also the entire 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
t, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
on the territory of any of the Parties 
in Europe or North America, on the 
Algerian Departments of France** on 
the territory of Turkey or on the 
islands under the jurisdiction of any 
of the Parties in th~ North Atlantic 
area north of the, Tropic of Cancer; 
on the forces, vessels, or aircraft of 
any of the Parties, when in or over 
these territories or any other area in 
Europe in ,vhich occupation forces of 
any of the Parties ""ere stationed on 
the date when the Treaty entered into 
force or the Mediterranean Sea or the 
North Atlantic area north of the 
Tropic of Cancer. 
- ARTICLE 7 
This Treaty does not affect, and shall 
not be interpreted as affecting, in 
any ""ay the rights and obligations 
under the Charter of the Parties 
which are members of the United 
Nations, or the primary responsi-
bility of the Security Council for 
the maintenance of international 
peace and security. 
ARTICLE 8 
Each Party declares that none of the 
international engagements nOH in force 
** On 16th January, 1963, the French 
Representative made a statement to the 
North Atlantic Council on the effects 
of the independence of Algeria on cer-
tain aspects of the North Atlantic 
Treaty. 
The Coun~il noted that insofar 
as the former Algerian Departments of 
France were concerned the relevant 
clauses of this Treaty had become 
inapplicable as from 3rd July, 1962. 
territories of the Asian Parties, 
and the general area of the South-
West Pacific not including the 
Pacific area north of 21 degrees 30 
minutes north latitUde. 
The Parties 
may, by unanimous agreement, amend 
this Article to include '\vi thin the 
Treaty Area the' territory of any 
State acceding to this Treaty in 
accordance vri th Article VII or other-
,vise to change the Treaty Area. 
Lfhis emphasis on flexibility of 
application is not in the NATO 
Treaty~} 
ARTICLE VI 
This Treaty does not affect and shall 
not be interpreted as affecting in 
any 'tray the rights and Obligations of 
any of the Parties under the Charter 
of the United Nations or the responsi-
bility of the United Nations for the 
maintenance of international peace 
and security. 
Each Party declares 
that none of the international 
engagements nOl'l in force beti'leen it 
and any other of the Parties or any 
third party is in conflict 'vi th the 
provisions of this Treaty, and under-
takes not to enter into any inter-
national engagement in conflict with 
this Treaty. 
A-41 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
f .l 
r 
( . 
! 
I I . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
betvleen it and any other of the 
Parties or any third State is in con-
flict with the provisions of this 
Treaty, and undertakes not to enter 
into any international engagement in 
conflict ,I/"i th this Treaty . 
ARTICLE 9 
The Parties hereby establish a coun-
cil, on which each of them shall be 
represented to consider matters con-
cerning the implementation of this 
Treaty. 
The Council shall be so 
organized as to be able to meet 
promptly at any time. 
The Council 
shall set up such subsidiary bodies 
as may be necessary; in particular 
it shall establish immediately a 
defense committee which shall recom-
mend measures for the implementation of 
Articles 3 and 5. 
A-"RTICLE 10 
The Parties' may, by unanimous agree-
ment, invite any other European State 
in a position to further the prin-
ciples of this Treaty and to contrib-
ute to the security of ,the North 
Atlantic area to accede to this Treaty. 
Any state so invited may become a party 
to the Treaty by depositing its instru-
ment of accession vlith the Government 
of the United states of America. 
The 
Government Qf the United states of 
America will inform each of the 
Parties of the deposit of each such 
instrmaent of accession. 
ARTICLE 11 
This Treaty shall be ratified and its 
provisions carried out by the Parties 
in accordance with their respective 
constitutional processes. 
The instru-
ments of ratification shall be deposited 
ARTICLE V 
The Parties hereby establish a Coun-
cil, on which each of them shall be 
represented, to consider matters con-
cerning the implementation of this 
Treaty. 
The Council shall provide for 
consultation with regard to military 
and any other planning as the situ-
ation obtaining in the Treaty Area may 
from time to time require. 
The Coun-
cil shall be so organized as to be 
able to meet at any time. 
LSee also NATO #12~ 
ARTICLE VII 
Any other state· in a position to 
further the objectives of the Treaty 
and to contribute to the security of 
the area may , by unanimous agreement 
of the Parties, be invited to accede 
to this Treaty. 
Any State so invited 
may become a Party to the Treaty by 
depo siting its instrument of accession 
with the Government of the Republic 
of the Philippines. 
The Government 
of the Republic of the Philippines 
shall inform each ·of the Parties of 
the deposit of each such instrument 
of accession. 
ARTICLE IX 
2. 
The Treaty shall be ratified and 
its provlslons carried out by the 
Parties in accordance with their 
respective constitutional processes . 
The instruments of ratification shall 
A-42 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3"3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
as soon as possible ,dth the Govern-
ment of the United States of America, 
"Thich ,·;ill notify all the other 
signatories of each deposit . 
The 
Treaty shall enter into force betvTeen 
the States which have ratified it as 
soon as the ratifications of the 
majority of the signatories, includ-
ing the ratifications of BelgiQm, 
Canada, France, Luxembourg, the 
Netherlands, the United Kingdom and 
the United States, have been deposited 
and shall come into effect with 
respect to other States on the date of 
the deposit of their ratifications. 
ARTICLE 12 
After the Treaty has been in force for 
ten years, or at any time thereafter, 
the Parties shall, if any of them so 
requests, consult together for "the 
purpose of revie1tTing the Treaty, 
having regard for the factors then 
affecting peace and security in the 
North "Atlantic area, including the 
development of universal as well as 
regional arrangements under the Charter 
of the United Nations for the main-
tenance of international peace and 
security. 
ARTICLE 13 
After the Treaty has been ~n force for 
tvTenty years, any Party may cease to 
be a party one year after its notice 
of denunciation has been gi ve"n to the 
Government of the United States of 
America, "Thich 'dill inform the 
Governments of the other Parties of 
the deposit of each notice of denun-
ciation. 
A-43 
be deposited as soon as possible 
with the Government of the Republic 
of the Philippines, ''lhich shall 
notify all of the other signatories 
of such deposit. 
3. 
The Treaty shall enter into force 
bet"ween the States which have rati-
fied it as soon as the instruments of 
ratification of a majority of the 
signatories shall have been deposited, 
and shall come into effect ''lith 
respect to each other State on the 
date of the deposit of its instrument 
of ratification. 
LTouched on in Article V of SEATO.7 
ARTICLE X 
This Treaty shall remain in force 
indefinitely, but any Party may 
cease to be a Pa,rty one year after 
its notice of denQDciation has been 
given to the Government of the 
Republic of the Philippines, I'lhich 
shall inform the Governments of the 
other Parties of the deposit of each 
notice of denunciation. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
. I 
l 
[ . 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
ARTICLE 14 
This Treaty, of which the English and 
French texts are equally authentic , 
shall be deposited in the archives 
of the Government of the United States 
of America. 
Duly certified copies 
will be transmitted by that Govern-
ment to the Governments of the other 
signatories. 
ARTICLE XI 
The English text of this Treaty is 
binding on the Parties, but when the 
Parties have agreed to the French 
text thereof and have so notified the 
Government of the Republic of the 
Philippines, the French text shall be 
equally authentic and binding on the 
Parties. 
FROM ARTICLE IX 
1. 
This Treaty shall be deposited 
in the archives of the Government 
of the Republic of the Philippines. 
Duly certified copies thereof shall 
be transmitted by that Government to 
the other signatories. 
UNDERSTANDING OF 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
The United States of America in 
executing the present Treaty does 
so vlith the understanding that its 
recognition of the effect of aggres-
sion and armed attack and its agree-
ment with reference thereto in 
Article IV, paragraph 1, apply only 
to Communist aggression but affirms 
that in the event of other aggression 
or armed attack it will consult under 
the provisions of Article IV, paragraph 
2. 
In witness vThereof the undersigned 
Plenipotentiaries have signed this 
Treaty. 
Done at Manila, this eighth day of 
September, 1954. 
A-44 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
( 
·1 
I 
. I 
t 
I ! 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
LOn 23 October 1954 a NATO Protocol 
permitted accession of the Federal 
Republic of GermanY~7 
A-45 
PROTOCOL 
Designation of States and territory 
as to which provisions of Article 
IV and Article III are to be appli-
cable: 
The Parties to the South-East Asia 
Collective Defense Treaty unani-
mously designate for the purposes 
of Article IV of the Treaty the 
States of Cambodia and Laos and the 
free territory under the juri~diction 
of the State of Vietnam. 
The Parties further agree that the 
above mentioned States and territory 
shalL be eligible in respect of the 
economic measures contemplated by 
Article III. 
This Protocol shall enter into force 
simultaneously with the coming into 
force of the Treaty. 
In witness whereof, the undersigned 
Plenipotentiaries have signed this 
Protocol to the South-East Asia 
Collective Defense Treaty. 
Done at Manila, this eighth day of 
September, 1954. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
NATO CIVIL AND MILITARY ORGANIZATIO!': 
~
. 
j 
. i 
NO~Tr; ATLANTiC COU~~CI L I 
~ 
PitE~I:>ENT: QJnl~ "f'I !'U!1~1 
• 
10
1 
r l 
CHA1P.MAN: ThO! Secl'!::;"rl Cio!r.cr:l 
J L 
-----.-:;w---- .~_ 
J 
! 
~ 
....... 
....,oc"""" 
.... ,._""".x""_"c= 
... """"'_"' __ =QWCO.~i~~~-:~:::r:~~~-~~-.~ 
~ 
~. 
IIHERNATlON.'C 
\ 
~ 
~ 
STAH/SECRETA!l,IAi'
. 
~ 
2--__ 
~~ 
1" 
STANDING GP'OU~ 
-~-- ~ 
REPP.ESEN:Ai:VE 
----
. 
COUNCI~ COMMIITW; 
CA:-lADA- U.S. 
'"" 
AWED COM:-1AND EUROPE 
ALLIED COMMAND ATLANTIC 
REGIONAL rLA.'lNING GROUP 
A-46 
. 
, 
TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE 
L 
i 
j 
1 
1 
I i , 
-I 
l 1 
I 1 1 
~ 
~ 
,; 
I 
I 
, ' j 
j 
1 
J i 'I 1 
" 
1 
'j 
1 
I 
J l ,I r-
t
~ 
j O' 
'j III 
I 
1 
1 
I-j 
, j 
0 
~ 
'"d 
I 
:1 
CJ) 
tr.1 
~ 
-n 
i 
~ 
tr.1 
i 
I-j 
.1 
1 
,1 I 
CJ) 
! _ _ tr.1 
Z 
CJ) 
~ 
I-j 
~ 
<: 
tr.1 
P R I N C I PAL C 0 til M . 
-:::: 5 O F TH E COU N C I L 
NORT H ATLANTIC COU NCIL 
=ut~ 
-
.~~ 
I 
I 
EJ 
COMMITTEE 
[ 
cr=:l~-= 
~~.~--= 
ANNUAL REVIEW 
COMMtiT 
OF POllT 
ADVISE 
CAL 
OF ECONOMIC 
COMMliTEE 
ARMAMENTS 
COMMITTEE 
SCIENCE 
COMHITI"e 
\S 
ADVISERS 
COMMliTEE 
ON INFORMATION 
AND CU" TURAl 
RELATIONS 
CIVILIAN BUDGET 
COMMITIEE 
I 
'---
MILITA RY BUDGET 
MMliTEE 
COl 
"-
SENIOR CIVIL 
EMERGENCY 
PLANNING 
,~ 
__ ~OI1t1 I!TE~ __ 
COMMITTEE 
OF EUROPEAN 
AIRSPACE 
! 
CO-ORDINATION 
""""----
~ 
~ 
~~,= 
CIVil DEFENCE 
COMMITIEE 
PLANNING SOARD 
FOR 
CO-ORCINATING 
OCEAN SHIPPING 
COMMITIEE 
INDUSTRIAL 
[ 
PLANNING 
COMMITIEE 
~"~-""-., ..... ----..--~ 
FOOD AND 
GRICUlTURE 
PLANNING 
COMMITIEE 
'sm 
PLANI\;ING i 
FOR EURO 
IN LAND SU 
TRANSPO 
:lARD 
EAN 
FACE 
RT 
MANPOWER 
PLANNING 
COMMITIEE 
INFAASTRUCTua" 
COMMITI"E 
NATO PIPELlI':" 
COMMITIEE 
--.""'" 
[ 
MEDICAL 
COMMITIEE 
PETROLEUM 
PLANNING 
COMMITTEE 
CIVIL 
AVIATION 
I 
Z 
I 
80 
I 
I 
I 
'"Or!> 
! 
.., c. 
I 
~ ~ 
, 
<II 
~ <II 
o 
_ . 
~ :l 
Zr!> 
,-
Q.. 
3 "0 
IJ'~ 
~ . 
:: tr1 
f 
z~ 
I 
8 g, 
I . 
, 
0' < 
: 
W~ 
i 
wO 
i 
f-
.., 
0'0-
l 
. 
~ 
to .., 
~ 
':<: w 
! 
Z~ 
~p, 
I 
t)C/J 
I 
t)g 
~ ::::::!". 
,... 
0 
~ ::s 
NW 
I 
O~ 
I i 
I 
,/ 
I I. 
I 
I · 
I 
1· 
,," 
~ 
I 
~ 
-J 
H o 
~ 
((l 
tx1 
() 
~ 
tx1 
1-3 
((l 
tx1 Z 
~ 
1-3 
~ 
<: 
tx1 
!)(ECUTlVE 
SECP.ETAflJAT 
NATO INTERNATIONAL STAFFISEC"RETARIAT 
UiVK! 0' THf flNAl'C;IAI. 
cONn.O ~lf. 1I. 
P'Ol.!TICAl 
AFFAIRS 
CIVI$ION 
SECRETARY GENI:RAl 
CHAIRMAN OF THE COUNCIL 
DEPUTY SECRETARY GENeRAL 
OffICE Of TH! S!C.\ET.v.Y 
C EN~AAI. 
ECONOMICS 
AND FINANce 
DIVISION 
"P~~~ 
... ~~,--:or-- .~--""-"""-
I'tMONS!I.AN:) 
AO~NlsrIV.:nON Sl '.V1 ~! 
PP,OOUcnON. 
lCG~snCS AND 
INFi'..ASTP.'JCTU?E 
OIVlSJO'l 
B 
DrV I ~10N 
O~ Sc!ENn!1C 
A.cFAI~S 
z 
a~ 
'i::i~ 
(3 iii 
<..;C. 
'" 
(1) 
'" 
() _. 
.... :ll 
ZI':> 
c:: c.. 
3 -0 
CT~ 
(1) 
tTl 
:; 
>< 
Z(1) 
z8 
tI :::'. 
< 
0\(1) 
~O 
~3. 
• 
(1) 
1J:i:' 
'< w 
.. 
Ul 
Ztv 
~ .0\ 
tic/) 
(1) 
tI~ 
p.j 
_. 
.... 
0 
~ ::> 
tv
W 
O w 
1 i 
J 
j 
1 I 
! 
J 
! 
1 
1 
:j 
j 
.-\ 
J 
1 .\ 
1 
j~ 
1 I 
l
~ 
i III 
.j 
1 
'1 
"1 ·1 
i 
1 I~ 
CIl 
M 
() 
::0 
M 
'-
I~ 
CIl 
M 
Z 
CIl 
H 
~ 
H < 
M 
THE MILITARY ORGANiZATION OF NATO 
y I 
~ Pari, 
ALLIED COMMAND 
WROP. 
France 
~ Norfolk' 
.. In Washington D. c., U.S., when In Permanent Session 
NORTH 
I 
ATLANTiC 
. 
COUNC1L 
Paris 
'=== 
~--'- ~'f"' 
-----, 
.. 
A LLIED COMMAND 
ATLANTIC 
MILITARY COMMITTEE 
I 
I 
I 
I. 
I 
I 
r---.J 
" "",'O,'O GROU' 
STANDING GROUP 
REPRESENTATIVE 
Paris 
U.S. ______ ___ J~ 
Wushln~to" 
~
--o NATO DEFENCE COLLEG::: (Paris) 
. 
-{) MILITARY AGENCY FOR STANDARDIZATION (London) 
--0 COMMUNICATIONS A.GENCIES IN EUROPE (Paris·London) 
--0 ADVISORY GROUP FOR AERONAUTICAL RESEARCH 
AND DEVELOPMENT (Paris) 
CHANNSL COMMITIEE 
London 
CANADA-U.S. 
REGIONAL PLANNING GROUP 
u.s. 
ALLIED COMMAND CHAN'5JEL 
Portsmouth/Northwood 
U.K. 
s=m?JjIT3."O'r ........ ~=X1V c:renz- .==:=,....". ~ 
Y/Jshingcon 
U.S. 
i r 
l I' 
I 
{' 
I 
r · ! 
! 
! 
Z 8e;, 
"CI~ 
~ . [ 
~ '" 
() _. 
..... :=J 
Z~ 
c: c.. 
3 -g 
0"..., 
~ tTi 
.. 
>< 
Z~ 
z8 
tI ::1'. 
< 
o-~ 
t30 
f-
..., 
0-0-
. 
~ 
ttl:' 
'< 
t,;.) 
.. 
V1 
ZN 
~ .0-
tic/) 
~ 
tI~ 
~ _. 
..... 
0 
(P 
::l 
Nt,;.) 
Ow 
\ 
, 
I 
J 
i 
. 1 
1 
.~ 
1 
j 
j 
] 
I .J 
'I 
.1 
1 
1 
i l -I , 
1 
1 
.j 
~1 
1 
4 
1 
1l> 
. 1 1 I 
~
H:>-
) 00 
j 1 
1 t-3 
1 
0 
1 
'"d 
1 
-·1 
Ul 
-1 
M 
() 
.1 
:;0 
~ 1 
M 
] 
t-3 
I 
j 
Ul 
1 
M 
.j 
Z 
~--
~ -. 
t-3 
H < 
M 
A L LI E D COM I'vUd\! D E U R 0 
~") Eo 
t 
I SUPREME ALLIED COMMAND.ER. EUROrL 
I 
Paris 
france 
I 
NAVAL DEPUTY 
DEPUTY SUPREME ALLIED 
COMMANDER 
L~ __ ~,_ 
COMMANDER-iN-CHiEF 
ALLIED FORCES 
NORTHERN EUROPE 
Kolsaas 
Norway 
COMMANDER 
. ALLIED LAND FORCES 
~ 
NORWAY 
~ 0,10 
NorwJY 
~--""""--=::";' 
COM MANDER 
ALLIED LAND FORCES 
DENMARK 
~~ 
Dcnmark 
COMMANDER 
ALLIED AIR FORCES 
NORTHERN EUROPE 
Ko/sa::s 
NOTW.Oy 
- ...... ,.=orrrn., 
COMMANDER 
ALLIED NAVAL FORCES 
.. NORTHEi'.N EUROPE 
Kolscas 
Norway 
-..... 
',.:, 
I 
I 
f 
COMMANDER-IN-CHiEF 
~ 
COMMANDER-IN-CHiEF 
b 
ALLIED FORCES 
~ 
ALLIED FORCES 
CENTRAL EUROPE 
P 
SOUTHERN EUROPE 
Font~incbleou 
. France 
~ NOP~~s 
italy] 
COMMANDER 
!---ii ALLIED LAND FORCES 
CENTRAL EUI\O~E 
I--
Fontainebleau 
Francc 
COMMANDER 
ALLIED AIR FORCES 
CENTRAL EUROPE 
Fontainebleau 
France 
U 
COMMANDER 
. ALLIED NAVAL FORCES 
~ 
C"NTRALEUROPE 
R Fontaincblc(;JU 
Franc.e 
CY'C 
5"'TT 
W 
COC1MANDER 
~ ALLIED LAND FORCES 
BSOUTI-!EASTERN EUROP" 
~ Izm;r 
Turkey 
I' 
_-
" 
~ 
P. 
COMMANDER 
~S ALLIED LAND FORCES 
~ 
SOUTHEI\N EUf\OPE 
'0 
Verona 
¥"}.;/caly 
I 
11 
COM~lANDER 
~: 
ALLIED AIR FORCES 
SOUTHERN EUROPE 
11...;:,::,':'.__ 
Italy 
COMMANDER 
L...-..;j 
NAVAL STRIKING 
" AND SUP?ORT FOf\CES 
SOUTHERN EUROPE 
Naple, 
Ita I:. 
AI~ DEPUTY 
. 
COM MAN DERol Nocj 
ALLIED FORCES 
MEDITERP.ANEAN 
Malta 
~-
COMMANDER 
COMMANOER 
-
GIBRALTAR-
WESTERN 
f--
MEDITERRANEAN 
MEDITERRANEAN 
Glbral'ar 
. Algicrs 
COMMANDER 
~ 
COMMANDER 
I--
CENTRAL 
EASTERN 
MEDITeRRANEAN 
~ 
MEDITERRANEAN f--
, N"plcs 
I'aly 
. Athcns 
Greece 
L 
COMMANDER 
l ooMM'N'" 
SOUTHEAST 
NORTHEAST 
MWITERRANEAN 
. 
MEDITERPcANEAN 
Alalca 
.~k_ara ___ 
TurkeY' 
I 
! 
Z 
i 
8e;, 
i 
>-cIrt> 
l 
..., c.. 
~ 
0 
~ 
! 
~. 'J} 
I 
~ til 
~ 
() _. 
t 
I 
1'""1" 
~ 
r 
i. 
Z ~ 
, 
c: 
f 
3 -g 
l 
0-..., 
~ 
:: 
>< 
~ tTi 
I 
Z~ 
t 
z8 
I 
t::1 :c. 
I 
8~ 
, 
,-,-,0 
\ 
f-
..., 
i 
O\~ 
: 
to: 
I 
':< ~ 
{ 
Ztv 
[ 
~ .0\ 
I 
HC/) 
, 
V 
~ 
I 
t::1~ 
~ 
~. 
,.... 
0 
~ ::l 
t. 
~ '-'-' 
f 
0,-,-, 
f ! I 
! , 
i 
1 
1 i 
j 
i 
q 
j 
j 
.f I 
, 
J 
.1 i 
J 
i 
j ~ 
j
~ 
j -..o 
• 1 
~ 
j 
·1 
! 1 
·l j 
j 
I i 
~ 
o 
'1:l 
Ul 
trJ n 
::a 
trJ 
'"i 
I 
..,.. · 1 Ul 
. ) 
trJ Z 
Ul 
H 
~ 
H 
-< 
trJ 
\ ' 
f...1J... 'r':-'; 
.lIl·"'," ,,; '11..{ 
ALL lED COM tv, P. ~\! D A T L A hI Ti l: 
COMMAtWER·IN·CHI"f 
WESTERN ATLANTIC MEA 
Norfolk 
U.s.A. 
, 
COMI1AND"R 
OCEAN 
-
SUB·AREA 
Norfolk 
U.s.A. 
COMMANDER 
i--
NORTH AM=RICAN 
ANTI· SUBMARINE DEfENCE 
.. 
FORCE ATLANTIC 
COMt1ANDER 
CANADIAN ATLANTIC 
su a·AK~ 
1--
~~ 
________ . _____ ~_C!:..n:!~ 
SUPREME ALLIED 
COMMANDER. ATLANTIC 
NJrrolr 
U.S.A. 
I DEPUTY SUPREME r 
COMMANDER 
• 
--------------
~ 
~" I 
~ .'M 
1 
i 
COMMANDER 
STRiKiNG FLEET ATLANTIC 
COMMANDER..JN·CHIEF 
EASTERN ATLANTIC AREA 
N~w York 
• 
U.S.A. 
Northwood 
COMMANDEit t MARITIME AIR 
LANTIC AREA 
EASTERN All 
North\vood 
U.K. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 1--
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Ro'yth 
. 
-c 
COMMAND"R 
NORTHERN 
SUa·AREA 
( 
r 
COMMAt-:DER 
MARITIME AIR 
THERN SUB·AREA 
NO:\' 
Ro,yth -
r---COMMAND"R 
CENTRAL 
SUB·AREA 
Plymou,h 
U.K . 
U.K. 
U.K. 
I L_. 
CO MM~NDER MARITlr1E AIR 
CE.'1TRAL SUB·AREA 
Plymouth 
11K. 
U.K. 
SUBMARINE FOil,CE 
COMMANDER J 
EASTERN ATLANTIC AREA 
Caspart 
UJ<. 
8re5~ 
. 
"" 
COMMANDER 
BAY OF BISCAY 
SUB·AREA 
France 
, 
i I ! 
I 
I I 
I 
r 
) 
Z Sc 
""dg 
a E" 
=. OIl 
(1) 
OIl 
(") _. 
~ ::ll 
Z 
rt> 
,... c.. 
3 "0 
O'~ 
~ t'I1 
.. 
>< 
Z(1) 
zg 
CI ::1". 
< 
0\(1) 
t30 
>-
.., 
0\0. 
• 
(1) 
to:' 
'< w 
.. 
t..Il 
ZN 
::E .0\ 
ClCIJ 
(1) 
CI~ 
!OJ 
- . 
~ 0 
~ :J 
N~ 
Ow 
\ 
\ . 
1 
1 1 
1 j 
! . 
~ j 
J l 'j 
1 J 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 ~ 
j 
, 
1~ 
1 ~ 
j 
1 
~ j 
'1 
) 
l 
~ 
1 ~ 
'1 
M 
~ 
o 
1; 
• 
n 
~ 
1 M 
~~ 
~ 
M 
Z 
~ 
H 
~ 
H 
<: 
M 
r--
ALLIED COt"1MAND CHAt\!NEL 
COMMANDER 
ALLIED MARITIME AIR' FORCE 
CHANNEL 
CHP.N NEL C9NMlTTEE 
1-, 
"e 
y, 
ALLIED COMMAND!:R-IN-CHIEF 
CHANNEL 
Portsm~uth 
, 
, 
U.K. 
U.K. -
Northwood 
U.K. 
I 
I 
I 
'_~ 
I 
I 
~ 
"I , "'""~===""""""'" 
1 
___ I~~i" 
~"-"""'T'-~''''r==~ ; 
COMMAND:;f\ 
BENELUX SUB-Ai\EA 
CHANNEl. 
COt1MANDE!'. 
NORE SUa·AREA 
CHANNEL 
Den Helder 
Neth. 
11 
CHANNEl. 
II 
~ Rosy,h 
&,.;::;-.-~.== 
. . 
I 
I 
I 
I 
U.K. I I 
~I 
~ Plymouth 
,; 
~ 
U.K. 
Rosyth 
COMMAND!:R. 
MARITIME A:R 
NORE SUS·AREA 
CHANNEL 
\ 
\ 
U.K. 
MARITIME AIR 
_ 
PI. YMOUTH SUa-AREA 
~I 
CHANNEl. 
Plymo"'" 
U.K. 
~COMMANDER 
I 
CHEf.BOU~G sua-AREA 
CHANNEl. 
Cherbourg 
Freoce 
''?''i''"l't''C'MXn7 
Brut 
COMMANDER 
BREST sua-AREA 
CHANNel 
i i . [. 
t r 
Z 8e;, 
"CI~ 
~ . [ 
~ '" 
() _. 
..... :=J 
Z~ 
c: c.. 
3 -g 
0'..., 
~ tri 
>< 
Z~ 
z8 
tI ::1'. 
Fronce 
< 
o-~ 
t30 
f-
..., 
0-0. 
-
~ 
ttl:' 
'< t,;.) 
.. 
V1 
ZN 
~ .0-
tic/) 
~ 
tI~ 
~ _. 
..... 
0 
(P 
::l 
Nt,;.) 
Ot,;.) 
'1 
l 
r 
.1 
\ 
'; . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
-1('* 1.' ,~ ,~ y., ,;, ,,~ '" * ,,'< ,;, ,~1.' * y., ':' y."~ * >:: ::' ,~~, [ 
* 
"* * 
SEATO COU)J"CIL 
* 
L-__________________ ,~~--~------------' 
r 
__ ~!~_______________ 
_ ___________________ 1 ___________________ -. 
- .[ 
r 
Council Representatives 
. Secretary G~n e ral 
~----------~ ______________________ ~ 
________________ __ 
I 
1-' 
-
, 
. Permanent vVo:cking Group 
-- - -: ----- ~-.. 
I 
Deputy Secretary-Gener8.l 
, 
-
Budget Sub-Comm.i'~tee 
r 
- I 
t. 
I 
. 
'Commi.ttee on Information 
Committee 
" 
I 
of Sec urity . 
, 
L_-l 
Committee of Eco~omic 
' 
Cultural, Education 
Experts 
Experts 
.tb 
[
Central 
3, e.rv~.c~s 
. 
Ofllce 
Cultural 
Relations 
Office 
. 
, 
Economic 
Services 
Office 
and Labour Activities 
Public 
Information 
Office 
Research 
Service 
Office 
***'~ *1.'When Council is in session 
- - - - - -Chairman of P. W.G. 
• t 
.\ 
Security 
Office 
A-50 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
., 
f 
f . 
i -. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET' 
Sensitive 
. [ .  _ _  
,--------J 
SEA TO COUNCIL 
I 
. . 
, 
. , 
; 
~: --- - --~ - - -:-- ---- - --'1 _______ M_i_ll_. t_a_r_Y,_A_'_d_V_is_e_I_' ::i_' ____ -l 
Group 
: 
I· . 
II I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i
· 
. I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I , f 
r 
s 
ec 
Senio 
Planner 
~cmmitt[ 
Planning 
Teams 
I 
. . I 
Chief, SEATO Military 
Planning Office 
Administrative 
I 
Deputy, PIO 
, 
r 
,-
SE;!C 
~-·_
·
_.:r 
uriiy 
!I 
I 
:Milital'Y 
! 
Lcretariat 
Staff 
(Military) 
L 
Co-or dinator 
" 
___ ..-1 
Senior Planners also act as the representa tives 
------:--- -in the Military Planning Office of their respective 
Military Advisers 
A-5l 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
--------
. 
. 
