Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In concluding, the Secretary said that his appraisal might be
overly pessimistic, and that Lodge, Harkins and Minh, while agreeing
on specific points, seemed to feel that January might bring a signifi-
cant. improvement.

Following his report to the President, the Secretary made the
following remarks to the press, at the White House:

--.We have just completed our report to the Presi-
dent...We observed the results of the very substantial
increase in VC activity, an increase which began
shortly after the new government was formed, and has
extended over a period of several weeks.

During this time, the Viet Cong have attacked and
attacked successfully, a substential. number of the
strategic hamlets. ‘he rate of that VC activity, how-
ever, has substantially dropped within the past week
to ten days.

this rapid expansion of activity, I think, could have
been expected. It was obviously intended to take
advantage of the period of organization in the new
government...We received in great detail the plans of
the South Vietnamese and the plans of our military
advisors for operations during 1964. We have every
reason to believe they will be successful. We are
determined that they shall be. 28/

4, Efforts To Improve Intelligence On Progress Of The War

The Secretary had made evident in his memo of 21 December to the
President that he had become seriously disturbed at the failure of the
reporting system in Vietnam to alert hin promptly to the deterioration
of the situation there. CIA Director McCone had accompanied him on the
trip to Saigon and, immediately upon his return, Mr. McCone initiated
efforts to improve the reporting system. On 23 December he wrote the
secretary: ,

---information furnished to us from MACV and the
Embassy concerning the current Viet Cong activities
in a number of provinces and the relative position
of the SVN Government versus the Viet Cong forces
was incorrect, due to the fact that the field offi-
cers of the MAAG and USOM had been grossly misin-
formed by the province and district chiefs. It was
reported to us, and I believe correctly, that the
province and district chiefs felt obliged to ‘create
statistics’ which would meet the approbation of the
Central Government.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
