Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

c. The present US objective in Vietnam is to avoid
humiliation. The reasons why we went into Vietnam to the
present depth are varied; but they are now largely academic.
Why we have not withdrawn from Vietnam is, by all odds,
one reason: (1) To preserve our reputation as a guarantor,
and thus to preserve our effectiveness in the rest of the
world. We have not hung on (2) to save a friend, or (3) to
deny the Communists the added acres and heads (because the
dominoes don't fall for that reason in this case), or even
(4) to prove that "wars of national liberation" won't work
(except as our reputation is involved). At each decision
point we have gambled; at each point, to avoid the damage
to our effectiveness of defaulting on our commitment, we
have upped the ante. We have not defaulted, and the ante
(and commitment) is now very high. It is important that
we behave so as to protect our reputation. At the same
time, since it is our reputation that is at stake, it is
important that we not construe our obligation to be more
than do the countries whose opinions of us are our repu-
tation.

d. We are in an escalating military stalemate.
There is an honest difference of judgment as to the suc-

cess of the present military efforts in the South. There
is no question that the US deployments thwarted the VC
hope to achieve a quick victory in 1965. But there is a
serious question whether we are now defeating the vc/PAVN
main forces and whether planned US deployments will more
than hold our position in the country. Population and
area control has not changed significantly in the past
year; and the best judgment is that, even with the Phase
TIA deployments, we will probably be faced in early 1967
with a continued stalemate at a higher level of forces
and casualties.

2, US commitment to SVN. Some will say that we have
defaulted if we end up, at any point in the relevant
future, with anything less than a Western-oriented, non-
Communist, independent government, exercising effective
sovereignty over all of South Vietnam. This is not so.

As statec above, the US end is solely to preserve our
reputation as a guarantor. It follows that the "softest"
credible formulation of the US commitment is the following:

a. DRV does not take over South Vietnam by force.
This does not necessarily rule out:

b. A coalition government including Communists.

ho - TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
