Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

",.. neither the Chief of State, nor the Vietnamese
Government, will consider themselves as bound by decisions
running counter to the interests, i.e., independence and
unity, of their country that would, at the same time, violate
the rights of the peoples and offer a reward to aggression
in opposition to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and democratic ideals.”

b. France Assures GVN it Will Mot Seek Partition

; In response to this clear-cut statement, the French came
forward with both oral and written promises. On 3 May, Maurice Dejean,
the Commissioner General for Indochina, said in Saigon:

"The French government does not intend to seek a settlement
of the Indochina problem on the basis of a partition of Vietnamese
territory...Formal assurances were given on this subject last
April 25 by the French minister for foreign affairs to the minis-
ter for foreign affairs of Vietnam, and they were confirmed to
him on May 1." 10/

Written assurance came from Bidault on 6 May, when he wrote Bao Dai that
the task of the French government was to establish peace in Indochina,

not "to seek here /at Geneva/ a definitive political solution." Therefore,
the French goal would be, said Bidault, to obtain a cease-fire with guaran-
tees for the Associated States, hopefully with general elections in the
future. Bidault continued:

_ "As of now, I am however in a position to confirm to Your
Majesty that nothing would be more contrary to the intentions
of the French government than to prepare for the establishment,
at the expense of the unity of Vietnam, of two states having each
an international calling (vocation)." 11

c. DRV Admits Feasibility of Partition

In their talks with the Viet Minh, however, the French found
their adversary as stubborn at the bargaining table as on the battlefield.
The negotiations during most of May made insignificant progress; but toward
the end of the month, the Viet Minh made their first major concession when
they strongly hinted that, given the right conditions, they might lift their
demand. for a united Vietnam. This, it can be speculated, was seen by Paris
as a way of getting itself off the hook. While it may have been unacceptable
to negotiate all of Vietnam away, half of Vietnam could be sold to the U.S.
as a realistic compromise.

On May 24, Hoang Van Hoan, DRV Ambassador to Peking and spokes-
man of the DRV delegation, informed a special envoy of the French newspaper
Le Monde (Jean Schwoebel) that a military settlement through a cease-fire

B-8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
