Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A. Closing the top of the funnel

Under this strategy we would mine the major harbors and,
perhaps, bomb port facilities and even consider blockade.
In addition, we would attack systematically the rail lines
between Hanoi and mainland China. At the moment the total
import capacity into North Viet Nam is about 17,200 tons
per day. Even with expanded import requirement due to
the food shortage, imports are, in fact, coming in at about
5700 tons per day. It is possible with a concerted and
determined effort that we could cut back import capacity
somewhat below the level of requirements; but this is not
sure. On the other hand, it would require a difficult and
sustained effort by North Viet Nam and its allies to pre-
vent a reduction in total imports below requirements if we
did all these things.

The costs would be these:

--The Soviet Union would have to permit a radical increase
in Hanoi's dependence upon Communist China, or introduce
minesweepers, etc., to keep its supplies coming into Hanoi
by seas

--The Chinese Communists would probably introduce
many more engineering and anti-aircraft forces along the
roads and rail lines between Hanoi and China in order to
keep the supplies moving;

--To maintain its prestige, in case it could not or
would not open up Hanoi-Haiphong in the face of mines, the
Soviet Union might contemplate creating a Berlin crisis.

With respect to a Berlin crisis, they would have to weigh

the possible split between the U.S, and its Western European
allies under this pressure against damage to the atmosphere
of detente in Europe which is working in favor of the French
Communist Party and providing the Soviet Union with generally
enlarged influence in Western Eurcpe.

I myself do not believe that the Soviet Union would go
to war with us over Viet Nam unless we sought to occupy
North Viet Nam; and, even then, a military response from
Moscow would not be certain.

With respect to Communist China, it always has the
option of invading Laos and Thailand; but this would not
be a rational response to naval and air operations designed
to strangle Hanoi. A war-throughout Southeast Asia would
not help Hanoi; although I do believe Communist China would

3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
