Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

cc

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Conventional operations of Corps-level magnitude, in
contrast to counterinsurgency operations, would of course
require closer coordination and possibly some form of inter-
national command mechanism. Until a combined command is
clearly in our best interests we should continue to stimulate
RVN resolve to fight a counterinsurgency war which is and
must remain their primary responsibility. Premature experi-
: mentation with new command arrangements would be counter-
productive should it weaken national unity within the RVNAP
or promote a feeling of apathy in the countryside. 16/

TAORS, SENIOR ADVISORS, AND A COMBINED STAFF

These exchanges effectively ended the question of unified command.
In the absence of unity of command, General Westmoreland had already
accepted the concept of the Tactical Area of Responsibility (TAOR),
an expedient coordinating mechanism originally worked out between the
local ARVN commanders and the Marines defending the DaNang perimeter.
The concept was a practical one for a war in which there are no front
dines and in which military units operate throughout the country.
Specific geographic areas were assigned to specific units who then
had exclusive authority and responsibility to operate within them.
Military units could not enter or fire into another unit's TAOR without
the permission of its commander. Subsequently, the concept would raise
some problems as the requirement for rapid redeployment and the extensive
use of air mobility made such formal, fixed arrangements awkward. But
in 1965 the TAOR provided a simple and effective solution to the coordina-
tion problem raised by units under different commands operating throughout
the country. Its adoption may be viewed as an attempt to provide limited,
territorial unity of command in the absence of an overall, national
unifying mechanism.

General Westmoreland attempted to compensate for this absence of
unity (which he had endorsed for non-military reasons) by the creation
of a combined coordinating staff at the national level and by making
the senior U.S. militery commanders also the senior military advisor
within their respective areas of concern. In April he decided to raise
with the GVN the question of a combined MACV-JGS staff. (He had already
extended the tour in RVN of the general officer he had chosen to head
this staff.) Such a staff might have permitted the development of
agreed operational plans based upon agreed priorities. It would have
been @ possible intermediate step toward unity of effort. But the
GVN (represented by Generals Thieu and "Little" Minh) resisted any.
suggestion for an integrating mechanism of this kind. The proposal. was
quietly dropped. 147/

62 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
