Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

confidence of the VC in their ability to successfully conduct
such operations. This self assurance and aggressiveness appear
to be characteristic of many actions taken by the VC since
September and have probably contributed to the low state of
morale reported in GVN security units by CAS sources.”
(Despatch 278 from Saigon, Encl. No. 1, p. 3)

It was incidents like this and "particularly an attack
on an ARVN regimental post near Tay Ninh in January, that brought on "the
full impact of the seriousness of the present situation":

"The Viet Cong attack on the Vietnamese Army installation
near Tay Ninh on January 26 is a dramatic illustration of the
increasingly aggressive tactics of the Viet Cong and of the
difficulty the GVN is having in controlling the internal security
Situation. The audacity of the Viet Cong in conducting the
attack, the likelihood of VC infiltration into ARVN, the indi-
cations of secret support of the VC by some of the local populace,
the successful planning and coordination in carrying out the
attack as opposed to apparent failure of ARVN which had been
told there might be an attack to be sufficiently alert for such
an attack and effectively counter once the attack had been
launched, are indications of many of the problems faced by
the GVN and discussed in this report." (Ibid, p. 1)

Armed propaganda operations involving large numbers of Viet Cong in
daylight were a third category of Viet Cong activities.

"....The fact that the VC can, and have on a number of
occasions, entered fair sized communities, spent several hours
or a day propagandizing the population and then retired without
meeting GVN resistance would indicate that the VC have an
effective intelligence system." (Ibid, p. 5)

"CAS sources have reported a gradual increase of the infil-
tration of VC cadres and arms from the DRV over the past few
months which has increased the VC strength to about 3000 in
the Southwest. (Based on available information CAS estimates
that the Viet Cong strength in all South Viet-Nam is presently
3000-5000 men.) Many of these new infiltrators, according to
a CAS source who is a GVN Official, are cadres who were regrouped
in the North at the time of the Geneva Accords and have had a
number of years of intensive military and political training.
The principal infiltration route of VC cadres from the North
continues to be through Laos to Cambodia although reports are
received of infiltration by sea. A CAS source with similar
access reports that some of the cadres arriving in SVN from the
North have the mission of establishing a VC headquarters to

dd TOP SECRET - Sensitive
