Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The new cabinet froze out Minh, no doubt to improve the
palatability of the new goverment to the dominant group in the MRC.
Minh then packed wp and went abroad on a good will tour; Taylor found the
cash cost to the U.S. running high, but recommended paying it. 47] in
his overall assessment of the balance of power in the new government,
Taylor thought that the MRC had allowed civilians to get power (as promised
jn August) because the MRC feared mob violence, and thought it expedient
to let the civilians make a mess of it so that military rule would agsin
become acceptable. That is, he hoped and expected that a military return
to power would become widely acceptable. Taylor thought the overall politi-
eal prospects were "faintly encouraging." Commenting in reply, State once
agein emphasized the accepted links between U.S. commitment and GVN morale
and efforts:

"A key element in either the immediate program or the
long-range course of action will be the nature of our dis-
cussions with the GVN. Sullivan has impressed on us the
seriousness of SVN doubts as to U.S. intentions...More
basically, we believe no course of action can succeed un-
less we are able to stiffen GVN to set its house in order
and take every possible measure for political stability
and to push forward .the pacification program." 48

These links received a full airing between Taylor and State and between
Taylor and Huong. To State, Taylor said:

"We have had a great deal of discussion here as to the
minimum leyel of government required to justify mounting
military pressure against the North. I would describe
that minimum government as one capable of maintaining lew
and order in the urban areas, of securing vital military
bases from VC attacks, and giving its efforts with those
of USG. As Reference B indicates we do not expect such
@ government for 3, to } months...perhaps not then if the
current attempts to chip away at the Huong government con-
tinue....However, if the government falters and gives good
reason to belicve that it will never attain the desired
level of performance, I would fuyor going against the North
anyway. The purpose of such an attack would be to give pul-
motor treatment for a government in extremis and to make

- sure that the DRV does not get off fF unscathed in any final
settlement." ho/

In his conversation with Huong, the latter requested:

"that I obtain a reaffirmation of U.S, policy toward
VN. Huong referred to U.S. action in Gulf of Tonkin and
the lift in morale VN had received at this display of
determination by the U,S. to strike against the North.
Subsequently, however, U.S, had appeared to emphasize
almost exclusively necessity considering war within SVN

.

hg TOP SECRET - Sensitive
