Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

accused the U.S, of joining forces with GVN in attacking his people, and
threatened violence against U.S. forces and facilities. Corcoran stood
firm, saying that U.S. forces would defend themselves. State's guidence
the same day, reaffirming the previous guidance, was to limit U.S.
assistance to administrative aircraft, and then only when GVN had none
available, to reassure Thi and the leaders of the Struggle Movement
about U.S, support for free elections, to bring opposite sides
(especially Ky and Thi) to face to face discussions, and to intervene

as needed to end the squabbling. On May 20, Tri Quang complained to
another U.S. official about the administrative aircraft who pointed out
to him that the U.S. also provided such aircraft to Thi and other dissi-
dent military officers. That same day a dissident leader threatened to
attack GViij forces at Daljang, and State directed that he be reminded that
the U.S. forces also in Daliang would have to defend themselves. State
also authorized the threat of total U.S. withdrawal. 21/

On Lodge's return to Vietnam at this time, he received detailed guidance
from State, very similar to that previously given to Porter, for his first
meeting with Ky. The guidance re-empheasized the demand for prior consul-
tation by GVN before it made any important move, and directed him to urge
GVE to be conciliatory and to use its forces with the utmost restraint:

1. We must have absolute candor from Ky as to his plans, _
and opportunity to comment before significant actions.

2. Tell him to leave pagodas alone, except for surveillance
and encirclement.

3. Keep ARV out of Saigon demonstrations.

4, Elections vs military role: Sound out.

5. Encourage election progress.

6. Keep GVii in contact with Buddhist leaders.
7. Help Ky meet Thi.

8. Consider further the suggestion of withdrawal from
DaNang and Hue.

9. Give us "your judgment as to whether we ought to move
forcefully and drastically to assert our power" to end
strife.

10. Suggest broadening the Directorate with civilians. 22/

By this time, Ky had begun leaning over backward to consult Porter,
te and then Iedge, before every move. GVII forces overpowered roadblocks

19 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
