Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. Rural Violence and GVN Counters, 1957-1960.

By early 1958, Saigon was beginning to sense that pacifica-
tion had eluded the GVN even as it had the French. In December, 1957,
the ill-fated newspaper, Thoi Iman, pointed out that terrorism was on
the rise, and that:

"Today the menace is heavier than ever, with the terrorists
no longer limiting themselves to the notables in charge of
security. Everything suits them, village chiefs, chairmen of
liaison committees, simple guards, even former notables....

In certain areas, the village chiefs spend their nights in the
security posts, while the inhabitants organize watches." 131/

"....The most urgent need for the population today is
security--a question to which we have repeatedly drawn the
attention of the authorities.

"Spectacular assassinations have taken place in the
provinces of An Giang and Phong-Dinh [in the Mekong Delta/.
In the village of Than-My-Tay, armed men appeared in the dead
of night, awakened the inhabitants, read a death sentence, and
beheaded four young men whose heads they nailed to the nearest
bridge...

"The security question in the provinces must be given top
priority: the regime will be able to consolidate itself only
if it succeeds in finding a solution to this problem." 132/

Besides the incidents cited, there had been a mass murder
of 17 in Chau-Doc in July, 1957; in September the District Chief at My Tho
with his whole family was gunned down in daylight on a main highway; on
10 October a bomb thrown into a Cholon cafe injured 13 persons, and on
22 October, in three bombings in Saigon, 13 Americans were wounded. 133/

Also in October a clandestine radio in Vietnam purporting to
speak for the "National Salvation Movement" was backing armed insurgents
against Dien. 134/ In Washington, U.S. intelligence indicated that the
"Viet Minh underground" had been directed to conduct additional attacks
on U.S. personnel “whenever conditions are favorable." 135/ U.S.
intelligence also noted a total of 30 armed "terrorist incidents initiated
by Communist guerrillas" in the last quarter of 1957, as_well as a "large
number" of incidents carried out by "Communist-lead /sic/ Hoa Hao and
Cao Dai dissident elements," and reported "at least" 75 civilians or
civil officials assassinated or kidnapped in the same period. 136/

Robert Shaplen wrote that:
"By 1958, the Vietminh had fully resumed its
campaign of terror in the countryside, kidnapping government

officials and threatening villagers who in any way co-operated
with the government....Military incidents in the countryside

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
