Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

successfully, to having an Ambassador report to a Task Force chaired by
the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and with a second defense official
(Lansdale) as executive officer. There may have been more to it. We

know Lansdale's experience and his approach to guerrilla warfare initially
won him a good deal of favor at the White House. But his memoranda suggest
that his ideas on a number of issues (support for Phowni in Laos, libera-
tion of North Vietnam, essentially unqualified support for Diem in South
Vietnam) went well beyond what the Administration judged reasonable. So

it is quite possible that the President would have had second thoughts on
Iansdale, aside from State's objections on bureaucratic grounds.

In any event, Iansdale's reaction to State's proposal on organization
was to advise McNamara and Gilpatric that:

My strong recommendation is that Defense stay completely out
of the Task Force directorship as now proposed by State...Having
a Defense officer, myself or someone else, placed in a position
of only partial influence and of no decision permissibility
would be only to provide State with a scapegoat to share the
blame when we have a flop...The US past performance and theory
of action, which State apparently desires to continue, simply
offers no sound basis for winning, as desired by President
Kennedy. 17/

But the final version of the Task Force Report, dated May 6, followed very
closely the State revision submitted May 3, including the shift in control
of the Task Force.

VIII. WIDENING THE OPTIONS

What is most striking about the revised drafts is that they excluded
a tone of almost unqualified commitment to Vietnam, yet on the really
important issues included qualifications which left the President a great
deal of freedom to decide whatever he pleased without having to formally
overrule the Task Force Report.

For example, the assertion (from the April draft) that the US should
impress on friend and foe that "come what may, we intend to win" remained
in the final paper. But this hortatory language is from the introduction;
it described one of the effects the program in the balance of the paper
was supposed to achieve, but did not ask the President to do or say any-
thing not spelled out in the body of the paper. (We will see, when we
come to the fall decisions, that the wisdom of an unqualified commitment
to save Vietnam fron Communism is treated afresh, with no suggestion that
any such decision had already been made in May.)

= On the other hand, the explicit recommendation in the Defense draft
that we make clear our "determination...to intervene unilaterally...should
this become necessary to save the country from communism..." was dropped.
Instead, there is a recommendation for exploring a "new bilateral arrange-

.

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
