Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

if that should be required; /and/ thet we are putting
forces into place to exact retaliation directly against
Communist China, if Peiping should join in an escalatory
response from Hanoi." 108/ ~

The broader context of Rostow's views on military actions was
described for Secretary Rusk on the eve of the first meeting of the
Principals to discuss the Working Group findings. Stating his agreement
with those portions of the latest intelligence estimate which stressed
the Asian Communist povers' desire not to become involved in a direct
conflict with the United States, he framed the "most basic” U.S. problem
as follows:

"..-ehow to persuade [the Commnists/ thet a continuation
of their present policy will risk major destruction in
North Viet Nam; that a preemptive move on the ground as

& prelude to negotiation will be met by U.S. strength on
the ground; and thet Communist China will not be a sanc-
tuary if it assists North Viet Nam in counter-escalation.”

He then. repeated his prescription of military moves earlier urged on
Secretary McNamara, However, he stressed that these moves would not,
‘in themselves, constitute a decisive signal." More significant in
Communist eyes, he felt, would be signals to ansver the question.

“Is the President of the United States deeply committed

to reinstalling the 1954-62 Accords; or is he putting on

a demonstration of force that would save face for, essen-
hee a U.S. political defeat at a diplomatic conference?”
109

In Rostow's view, the Communists would not accept a setback until
they were absolutely certain that the United States really meant business
~~ an assessment that could only come as a result of firm public commit-
ments on the part of the President and appropriate follow-through actions.
He stated;

"I have no doubt we have the capacity to achieve a rein-
stallation of the 1954-1962 Accords if we enter the exercise
with the same determination and staying power that we entered
the long test on Berlin and the short test on the Cube
missiles. But it will take that kind of Presidential comnit-
ment and staying power." ;

Acknowleding that. the kind of conflict we faced lent itself to prolonged
uncertainties and that the Communists could pretend to call off the

guerrilla war, only to revive it again, he stressed the need to maintain
pressure on them for some time. The installation of ground forces and a.
"non-sanguinary" navel blockade were suggested as particularly useful for

, . 36 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
