Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

5» With respect to 3d-country forces, Westy has equated
the 9 ROK battalions with 9 US battalions, saying that, if he
did not get the former, he must have the latter. I do not
know enough about ROK forces to know whether they are in all
respects "equal to" US forces (they may be better in some
respects and not as good in others). For purposes of the
study, it might save us time if we assumed that we would get
no meaningful forces from anyone other than the ROKs during
the relative time frame. (If the Australians decide to send
another battalion or two, this should not alter the conclusions
of the study significantly.) .

6. I would hope that we can minimize the amount of the
team's creative effort that must go into analyzing the ROLLING
THUNDER program or such proposals as the mining of the DRV
harbors. Whether we can or not, of course, depends a good
deal on the extent to which we believe that the ROLLING THUNDER
program makes a critical difference in the level of infiltra-
tion (or perhaps the extent to which it puts a "ceiling" on
logistical support) and the time lag in the impact of such
things as a quarantine of DRV harbors. My suggestion is we
posit that the ROLLING THUNDER program will stay at approxi-
mately the present level and that there will be no mining of
the DRV harbors. My own view is that the study group probably
should not invest time in trying to solve the problem by cutting
off the flow of supplies and people by either of these methods.
I do not know what your thoughts are about the wisdom of invest-
ing time in the proposal that ground forces be used to produce
some sort of an anti-infiltration barrier.

7T- Is it necessary for us to make some assumption with
respect to the nature of the Saigon government? History does
not encourage us to believe that Ky's government will endure
throughout the time period relevant to the study. Ky's beha-
viour is such that it is hard to predict his impact -- he could,
by his "revolutionary" talk and by his repressive measures gene-
rate either a genuine nationalist spirit or a violent reaction
of some sort. I would think that the study must make some obser-
vation, one way or the other, as to things which might happen to
the government which would have a significant effect on the con-
clusions of the study. My own thought is that almost anything
within the realm of likelihood can happen in the Saigon govern-
ment, short of the formation of a government which goes neutral
or asks us out, without eppreciably affecting the conduct of the
war. ‘The key point may be whether the Army rather than the
government holds together.

8. One key question, of course, is what we mean by the words

"assurance" and “win." My view is that the degree of "assurance"
should be fairly high -- better than 75% (whatever that means).

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
