Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The policy consensus reached in the high level discussions of ‘ September
was formalized in NSAM-314, These decisions were approved:

1. Resumption of U.S, Naval patrols (DESOTO) in the Gulf of Tonkin,
following the return to Saigon of the Ambassador.

2. 3A operations by the GVN to be resumed after completion of the
first DESOTO patrol. .

3. Discussions with the government of Laos of plans for a limited
GVN air-ground operation in the Laos corridor areas,

4, Preparation to respond against the DRV to any attack on U.S.
units or any spectacular DRV/VC acts against South Vietnam.

Following the statement of these specific action decisions, NSAM-314 re-
emphasized the importance of economic and political actions having immedi-

ate impact on South Vietnam such as pay raises to civilian personnel and

spot projects in cities and selected rural areas. The emphasis on immediate
impact should be noted. Finally, it was emphasized that all decisions were
"governed by a prevailing judgment that the first order of business at

present is to strengthen the fabric of the Government of South Vietnam..." 129/

In the period immediately after the August crisis, Minh, acting, in
effect, as Chief of State, although he did not actually hold the title, ap-
pointed a new High National Council to represent all elements of the popula-
tion and prepare a new constitution for the return of civilian government.

But there was no real stability. On 13 September, while Ambassador
Taylor was on his way back to Saigon from his visit to Washington, a bloodless
coup was staged in Saigon by General Lam Van Phat (who had been scheduled
to be removed as Commander of IV Corps). Soon after the coup began the U.S.
announced its support for the "duly constituted" troika regime of Khanh,

Minh and Khiem. This plus a counter-coup by a group of younger officers
including Nguyen Cao Ky and Nguyen Chanh Thi, put Khanh back in power.

One result of the Phat coup attempt, however, was that it established the
power of the younger general officers headed by Ky and Thi. Nguyen Van Thieu,
who was close to the Dai Viet party, was reported to be a major behind-the-
scenes manipulator of the coup, mainly by neutralizing his immediate boss,
General Khiem, 130/

The next several weeks amounted to a period of suspended animation for
the GVN (but not for the VC) while the new constitution was being prepared.
Except for some debatable progress in HOP TAC, little was accomplished in
pacification, Moreover, infusing an interim government with an efficiency
that neither it nor any predecessor had had was too much to expect, Tn
Saigon, much attention was given to establishing a policy coordination center
