Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

2

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for at least that period. Furthermore, French cooperation was essential
to the success of any U.S. project in Vietnam, and a decision to grant
any support for the FEC would jeopardize French cooperation. €6/

Although Heath and Collins prevailed and $100 million was
allocated to support the FEC during 1955, the French were informed thet
no further assistance could be expected beyond that time. €7/ The French
responded by making it clear that a drastic reduction of the FEC was in
the offing -- to a level of 40,000 by the end of 1955, and the Foreign
Office emphasized that although this action was based entirely on monetary
considerations there was also much sentiment in France for transferring
the FEC to North Africa. In Vietnam, it was stated, French troops were
serving the interests of the Free World; if the Free World would not pay
their costs, then they should be sent to North Africa, where they would
be serving the interests of France and the French Union. €8/

Pressures applied by Diem also influenced the French exodus.
Making no secret of his Frenco-phobia, Diem asked the French to withdraw
the FEC as early as September 1954, and in March 1955 Premier Faure
announced that France would withdraw the FEC at the demand of the Viet-
namese Government. By October 1955, the FEC had been reduced to
45,000; 69/ by February 1956 only 15,000 remained; 70,’ and on April 1,
1956 the remnants of the FEO left Saigon, leaving only small Air Force
and Navy training missions behind.

With the dissolution of the French dissolution of the French
high command on April 23, only the VNA was left to carry out the mission
of guarding South Vietnem against aggression from the north, a mission
which the French had been expected to perform.

hk. The pressures exerted by the Diem Goverment on the U.S.
regarding the Vietnemese National Army were consistently in favor of
larger forces than the U.S, was willing to support va and in the criti-
cally formative years of 1954 end 1955 were oriented toward regular
forces organized to combat an invasion from the north as well as to pro-
vide internal security. Just as Diem had felt the FEC should be deployed
along the 17th parallel, 72/ he believed that the VNA should be manned
and organized in such ea way as to counter any such invasion, although
"from the earliest days senior Vietnemese officers, including General Minh,
argued for the creation of an effective grass-roots security organization
in the countryside. They knew how the war had been fought and lost. Diem
at first had no idea, While the Viet Minh tactics were changing from
attrition to annihilation, Dien was abroad. He returned with the opinion
thet aircraft and naval craft were the essenticls and that even infantry
were no necessery. -Later he developed an attachment to artillery.... By
the time he came round to accenting the advice of his own generals, the
United States had embarked on its major plans for major reorganization,
and the paramilitery forces, which Diem had created in e half-hearted way,
were withering on the vine." 73/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

aay: Ly
