Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Recommendations 4, 6, and 7 of NASM-288 concerned increases in GVN
military forces and capabilities and were generally considered together:

hy To assist the Vietnamese to increase the armed forces
(regular plus paramilitary) by at least 50,000 men.

6. To assist the Vietnamese to improve and reorganize the para-
military forces and to increase their compensation.

Te To assist the Vietnamese to create an offensive guerrilla
force.

On 23 March 1964 a joint State-Defense-AID message asked the country
team to refine (and elaborate) these concepts and recommend a program of
implementing actions. The mission was authorized to initiate appropriate
first steps without waiting for final agreement between the USG and the GVN.
There followed, as already noted, the pertinent proclamations of early
April, but they were only proclamations, nothing more. On 27 April General
Harkins reported that GVN planning for reorganization of paramilitary forces
and development of a concept for programs was still in process. General
Phat, the Minister of Interior, was considering a merger of SDC and Combat
Youth into a single organization (the Popular Forces) under the Ministry of
Interior. The Civil Guard would go under the Army high command. Opera-
tional control of Popular Forces would be vested in sector and sub-sector
commanders at province and district levels. At village levels, Popular
Forces would encompass the total local security force and would include
both full-time and part-time personnel. Details of compensation and the
logistic mechanism were not clear. Harkins judged that the concept was con-
sistent with the Pacification Plan, but the total anticipated strength of
Popular Forces could not be projected until more detailed planning had been
accomplished. Detailed negotiations with the GVN were continuing and a
further report was to be made on 10 May. 75/

Two days later, on 29 April 1964, the JCS commented on the slowness of
the GVN in implementing recommendations for 6 and 7 and pointed out an
apparent divergence between MACV and GVN on the strength and organization
of the GVN forces. They explained that the 50,000 figure was an interim
planning figure, and that further increases should be recommended when and
as necessary. COMUSMACV was asked to submit his detailed plan for imple-
menting 4, 6, and 7 by the 7th of May. 76/

Almost simultaneously with this JCS message, Harkin's deputy, General
Westmoreland, was accompanying Ambassador Lodge to see Khanh on the :
occasion, already described, when Ambassador Lodge made his strong demarche
with the Vietnamese Premier. Westmoreland expatiated on the military
aspects of the Ambassador's complaint, especially the RVNAF deficiencies,
specifying increased desertion rates and inadequate enlistments and draft

. i: TOP SECRET - Sensitive

63
