SS a iS = Sse S—S t S — c

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

three alternative encadrement possibilities: (1) assumption of officer
and senior NCO command positions by U.S. personnel within the designated
ARVN battalions; (2) assignment of U.S. personnel as staff officers, and
in technical and specialist positions within the battalions; and (3) the
employment of U.S. troops as fire support elements within ARVN-comnanded
battalions. Two critical difficulties applicable to all of these schemes
were identified: the language barrier and the expanded support require-
ment that would be generated for U.S. personnel. Another negative factor
was the expected adverse effect of any such step on South Vietnamese
morale. These formed the basis for General Throckmorton's recommendation
that encadrement be rejected. COMUSMACV endorsed his deputy's recommenda-
tion and the general encadrement idea was officially pronounced dead
during the 18 April Honolulu Conference. 141/ Only three days had
elapsed from the birth of the proposal to its burial.

MARINE COMBINED ACTION PLATOONS (CAPs)

But while general encadrement was effectively killed by COMUSMACV
@ specific, limited experiment in encadrement was begun later in the
year almost off-handedly by the U.S. Marines near Phu Bai. Since the
Marine units had been assigned TAORs larger than they could secure,
innovative commanders sought ways to maximize local security resources.
In June, a company commander of the 3d Battalion, 4th Marines near Phu
Bail assigned a few Marines to the villages in his tactical area to work
with the Popular Forces platoons. Marine leadership, training, and access
to powerful fire support brought measurable improvement in the PF units.
As a@ result the Commanding Generel, lst ARVN Division, placed six PF
platoons under the operational control of the Marine battalion.

By November, the effort had achieved such results that it was brought
to the attention of the CG III MAF. Later that month an agreement was
reached between the I Corps Commander and the CG IIT MAF permitting the
integration of Marine squads into PF platoons in the Dallang area to
improve their effectiveness and stiffen their combat performance. The
basic unit of the new venture was the Combined Action Platoon (CAP) formed
by adding a Marine Rifle Squad of 14 men plus a Navy corpsman to a PF
platoon (32-38 authorized strength). ‘The PF platoon retained its own
organization and the integrated Marines advised the entire unit, living
with it, sharing its food, conducting combined patrols, and training
counterparts. At the end of 1965, there were seven such Combined Action
Platoons, but the success of the experiment in enhancing PF performance
and extending security prompted a rapid expansion during the next year.
The Marines have continued to press for expansion of this program and to
see in it an effective method by which to produce increased performance in
PF units. Critics have noted that the Marine advisors quickly become
de facto leaders of the CAPs and argued that a higher level of current
performance is purchased at the cost of stultifying the development of
South Vietnamese leadership. No general consensus has developed on the
relative merits of this assumed trade-off.

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
