Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET —- Sensitive

General Staff studying proposals and have different ideas.
Since he wants to be sure that whatever done is well thought
out, will be successful and not have to be changed in future
he letting responsible officials thoroughly consider pro-
posals. Diem stated that Secretary Thuan working on detailed
statute for central intelligence organization, but it re-
quired more work and needs to be polished up. I replied that
frankly time was slipping by and as yet there no action on
these three points, which essential before I can give "green
light" on equipment for 20,000 increase in armed forces.

In connection Diem remarks, Vice President Tho told me April

28 that he had not seen CIP, although he had heard of its
existence, and he does not believe other Ministers have seen

it either. Question thus arises as to whether Diem'’s state-
ment that various Cabinet members studying CIP refers only to
Thuan. I gave Tho fairly detailed fill-in on CIP contents.

Tho said action now by President, at least implementation of
reforms, needed in order capitalize on present upswing in
popular feeling about situation following GVN success in carry-
ing out elections despite VC efforts to disrupt. Stating he
did not know when if ever reforms will be implemented, he com-
mented that failure take such action after so many promises
would lose all momentum gained from elections, Tho added that,
aside from psychological impact, reforms likely take (sic; make)
little change inless’ Diem himself changes his method of opera-
ting. He noticed that if “super ministers” without real ~
authority they likely become just additionel level in buresuc-
racy without making GVN more effective.

On May 2 in course my formal farewell call I asked Diem if
decrees yet signed on intelligence organization, chain of
command and reforms. Diem stated he working on these matters
but went through usual citation of difficulties including
problem of convincing available personnel that they capable

and qualified carry out responsibilities. He stated he already
named Colonel Nguyen Van Yankee to head intelligence organiza-
tion, Colonel Yankee has selected building for his headquarters
and in process recruiting staff, while Secretary Thuan working
on statute for organization. Re chain of command, I strongly
emphasized that this one of most important factors in CIP, GVN
must organize itself to follow national plan with one man in
charge operational control and not waste time chasing will of
wisps. Diem replied that he not feeling well (he has cold) and
with inauguration he has not had time focus on this question
but he’ will do it. He stated that he realizes only effective
way is to place counter insurgency operations under Joint
General Staff, but that his generals disagreed as to exactly
how this should be done,

15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
