Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

area of IV Corps conducted a highly successful operation.

I believe that where the ARVN is weakest, however, is in
their pacification role where motivation and performance
still leave much to be desired. Here, of course, the
Regional and Popular Forces are also important elements

and all are getting increased attention. While ARVN

morale and performance have been improving there is

evidence that that of the VC has been declining. It has

had increasing difficulties in recruiting and a growing
share of the enemy war effort is being assumed by Hanoi. 55/

But he too saw that the crux of the military problem was how to
choke off the North Vietnamese infiltration. To him doing this, which
he fully believed feasible, carried at least three primary advantages:

a. It would drastically reduce the dimensions of
our problem in South Viet-Nam. Militarily we would be
dealing only with the Viet Cong whose problems of recruit-
ment and supplies would be enormously multiplied lacking
the assistance and reinforcements of North Viet-Nam. I
believe the result would be that the Viet Cong would eventu-
ally wither on the vine.

b. When the infiltration is choked off, it should
be possible to suspend bombings at least for a period and
thereby determine whether there is substance to the state-
ment in many quarters that Hanoi would then come to negoti-
ations; we should at least call their bluff.

ec. Tensions now existing between the U.S. and Viet-
Nam on the one side and Cambodia on the other should be,
over & period of time, relieved and our relations with
Cambodia improved, even though initially Sihanouk might
continue to allow the NVA/VC to use Cambodia as a haven
and a source of certain supplies. 56/

He realized full well that the means employed to achieve such an objec-
tive, of course, presented many difficult and delicate problems, both
military and political, but he expressed confidence "that with imagi-
nation and ingenuity, these can be met....”

What is involved, of course, are operations within
Laos but I do not believe this fact should present
insuperable obstacles. The North Vietnamese Government
is a signatory to the 1962 Geneva Accords but its forces
have been in Laos both before and since the signing of
the Agreements. It is now using Laos as the main route

199 _ MOP SECRET - Sensitive
