Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

objectives. The paper listed seven courses of limited pressure similar to
those already exerted, then discussed more serious actions. Lesser
pressures, it was stated, were to relay the threat of systematic, mili-
tary action against the DRV. Hanoi was to be informed that incidents
arising from the lesser actions or deterioration in South Vietnam--
particularly clear evidence of increased infiltration from the North--
could trigger thet sustained action. In any case, for planning purposes
the paper looked to 1 January 1965 es the starting point for the more
serious systematic pressures. 119/

' The Mission comment took the form of an alternative draft. It began
by egreeing with the assumption of the proposed Department paper, that
the present pacification plan, by itself, was insvfficient to maintain
national morale or to offer reasonable hope of eventaul success. Some-
thing more was clearly needed. The main problem in the immediate
future was to gain time for the Khenh regime to achieve a modicum of
stability and thereby provide a viable base for operations.

In particylar, if we can avoid it, we should
not get involved militarily with North Vietnam
or possibly with Red China if our base in South
Vietnam is insecure and Khanh's Army is tied
down by the VC insurgency.

A second objective was to maintain the morale of the GVINV. The mission
judged that this would not be difficuls if we could assure Khanh of ovr
reaciness to bring added pressure on Hanoi in return for evidence of his
ability and willingness to do his part. A third objective would be to
hold the DRV in check and restrain further infiltration to aid the VC
buildup.

1 January 65 wes agreed upon, for plenning purposes, as the date to
begin the escalating pressure on the DRV. Three aspects of these
pressures were considered by the Mission: first, actions to be taken
with the Khanh government; second, actions against Hanoi; and third,
after a pause, "initiation of an orchestrated air attack against North
Vietnam.” The first of these involved a commitment. "We should express
our willingness to Khanh to engage in planning and eventually to exert
intense pressure on North Vietnam providing certain conditions are met
in advance." Thus, before we would agree to go all out against the North,
Khanh must stebilize his government and make progress in cleaning out
his own backyard. Specifically, he would be required to execute the
initial phases of the HOP TAC plan successfully. ‘This would have to
succeed to the extent of pushing the VC awey from the doors of Saigon.
Moreover, the overall pacification program, including HOP TAC, should
progress sufficiently to allow earmarking at least three division
equivalents for the defense of the I Corps area should the DRV step up
military operations in that area.

In making these commitments to Khanh, the Mission would make clear

_to Khanh the limited nature of our objectives--that we were not ready

92
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
