Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(27

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

All of the above forms of leverage, and yet others, could
be useful at the proper time and in an appropriate way. But
they must be applied with discretion, and always in such manner
as to keep the GVN foremost in the picture presented to its own
people and the world at large....The exercise of leverage in a
personal manner and hidden from the public view is likely to
be most effective, while of the more operational means estab-
lishment of combined organization under a JCRR-type concept,
to include joint control of resources, would be most desirable.
In sum, we're gradually applying more leverage in Pacification,
but wish to do so in ways that least risk creating more trouble
than constructive results. 188/

What Komer really meant -- as his opinions expressed in a time frame
later than that embraced by the present inquiry would make clear -- was
the necessity to reserve the use of leverage for those few occasions in
which all] else had failed, in which copious records detailing the failure
had been accumulated over time, and in which the proven offender could
be severed from responsibility after his shortcomings were presented
behind the scenes to his superiors. Thus, the GVN would serve as execu-
tioner, the U.S, as observer-recorder. Leverage would be a last resort
rather than a continuing tool. ‘The product of the intermittent debate
on leverage was not so much a decision pro or con as it was a decision
to resort to leverage when all else had failed. In this sense it dodged
the difficult choices.

GROPING TOWARD BETTER INFORMATION

One of the programs that came under Komer's jurisdiction after he
took over CORDS was the controversial Hamlet Evaluation System (H@S).
Secretary McNamara had requested, during his October 1966 visit to Vietnam,
the development of some ADP system for evaluating the status of rural
security on an on-going basis -- data which would make possible compara-
tive judgments of progress over time. In November, he sent Mr. George Allen
and Colonel. Carter Clark to Saigon with a proposal. MACV revised their
suggested system and recommended it to the Mission Council which endorsed
i 13 December. MACV described the new system to CINCPAC in January
1967:

HES provides a fully automated procedure for evaluating
hamlet Revolutionary Development progress and establishes a
hamlet level data base. Data input for HES is provided by
MACV subsector advisors and district representatives, where
assigned, who evaluate all hamlets not under VC control.

They record their assessments in terms of 18 entries on a
hamlet evaluation worksheet utilizing six factors, each with
three indicators. Also, eight problem areas are evaluated. 189/

99 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
