Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In many ways the attacks on U.S. ships in the Tonkin Gulf provided
the Administration with an opportunity to do a number of things that had
been urged on it. Certainly it offered a politically acceptable way of
exerting direct punitive pressure on North Vietnam. In South Vietnam, the
U.S. response served to satisfy for a time the growing desire for some
action to carry the war to the North. Relative to the election campaign,
it provided a means of eliminating any doubts about President Johnson's
decisiveness that may have been encouraged by his preferred candidate's
image as the restrained man of peace. The obvious convenience and the ways
in which it was exploited have been at the root of much of the suspicion
with which critics of Administration policy have viewed the incident.

The documents available to this writer are not conclusive on this
point, but the evidence indicates that the occurrence of a DRV provocation
at this time resulted from events over which the U.S. Government exercised
little control. It has been suggested that the incidents were related
in some way to pressure coming from the GVN for U.S. action against North
Vietnam. However, the patrol was authorized on or prior to 17 July, and
General Khanh's oft-cited "Go North" appeal wasn't made until 19 July.

The first attack almost certainly was a case of mistaken judgment on the
part of the local Vietnamese commander. His probable association of U.S.S.
Maddox with the South Vietnamese raiding force is indicated by the circum-
stances preceding the event, the brief duration and character of it, and
the long-delayed (not until 5 August) and rather subdued DRV public com-
ment. Moreover, there is little reason to see anything more than coinci-
dence in the close conjunction between the GYil's maritime operations against
the North Vietnamese coast and the scheduling of the DE SOTO Patrol. The
two operations were scheduled and monitored from different authorities

and through separate channels of communication and cammand. Higher U.S.
naval commands were informed of the operations against the two islands

by COMUSMACV, but the task group commander had no knowledge of where or
when the specific Operations had taken place. As Secretary McNamara

told Senator Morse, in response to charges that U.S. naval forces were
supporting the GVN operation,

"Our ships had absolutely no knowledge of it, were not
connected with it; in no sense of the word can be considered
to have backstopped the effort."

In addition, there was no reason on the basis of earlier DE SOTO Patrol
experience to even suspect that patrol activity might precipitate hostile
action by North Vietnam. 33/

Although the events of the second attack were less clear-cut, the
evidence does not Support beliefs (which have been expressed) that the
incident was staged. On the contrary, the evidence leads readily to
other explanations, which’are at least equally as plausible.

DRV motivations for the second attack are umclear, but several

possibilities provide rational explanations for a deliberate DRV decision.
Those given credence at the time -~- that the DRV or China wanted to

_ 10 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
