Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"The FY 1968 force for SVN is primarily needed to
offset the enemy's increased posture in the vicinity of
the IMZ and to improve the environment for Revolutionary
Developnent in I and IV CTZs. To achieve the secure environ-
ment for lasting progress in SVN, additional military forces
must be provided in order to (1) destroy the enemy main
force, (2) locate and destroy district and provincial guer-
rilla forces, and (3) provide security for the population.
The increased effort required to offset VC/NVA main forces'
pressure is diminishing the military capability to provide
a@ secure environment to villages and hamlets. Diversion
of forces from within SVN and the employment of elements of
CINCPAC's reserve are temporary measures at the expense of
high-priority programs in other parts of SVN. Thus, if
sufficient units are to be available to provide both direct
and indirect support to Revolutionary Development throughout
SVN, added forces must be deployed.

"The three-TFS force for Thailand and the additional
Navy forces in the South China Sea and the Gulf of Tonkin
are required to bring increased pressures to bear on NVN." 40/

The service capabilities to meet the force requirements which the chiefs
recommended presented another problem. The JCS examined these capabilities
under two alternative cases:

"Case I - No Reserve callup or extension of terms of
service. Present tour and rotation policies would be main-
tained. By July 1968, only a one and one-third Army division
force, a part of the mobile riverine force, and no additional
Marine Corps forces could be in place in SVN. A second Army
division force to fill out the FY 1968 requirement probably
could not be provided until the first half of FY 1970. The
additional 8" gun cruiser, five additional destroyers, and
about half of the in-country naval forces could be provided in
FY 1968, but only by the undesirable expedient of extending
present periods of deployment. The three TFS in Thailand
and five in SVN requested by CINCPAC could be furnished in
FY 1968. Three TFS in SVN would be required to meet the need
for air support of the one and one-third divisions that could
be deployed in FY 1968.

"Case II -- Callup of Reserves and a twelve-month invol-
untary extension of terms of seryice. Present tour and
rotation policies would be maintained. A Reserve callup
and the collateral actions enumerated below would enable
the Services to provide the major combat forces required in

4d: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
