Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

d. The China Aid Program

In the meantime, U.S. policy suffered. a setback in Asia.
A China Aid Program had been enacted by Congress in June, 1948, in the
same omibus foreign assistance legislation which authorized ERP and ECA.
The China Aid Program met almost immediate failure, for Mao's armies spread
unchecked. over the China mainland, and by late 1949, the position of the
Nationalists there was untenable. This "failure" of U.S. aid -- it was
termed such by Congressional critics -- no less than the urgent situation
in Europe figured in Congressional action on military assistance legisla-
tion placed before it in 1949. 11/

e. MDAP, 1949

In September 1949, the Soviets exploded their first nuclear
device. On October 6, 1949, Congress passed the Mutual Defense Assistance
Act, designed as a comprehensive law, providing a Mutual Defense Assistance
Program (MDAP) through which U.S. arms, military equipment and training
assistance might be provided for collective defense. In the first appro-
priations under MDAP, NATO tountries received 76% of the total, and Greece
and. Turkey (not yet NATO members), 16%. 12/ But Korea and the Philippines
received modest aid, and the legislators clearly intended the law to under-
write subsequent appropriations for collective security in Asia. The open-
ing paragraph of the law not only supported NATO, but foreshadowed SEATO:

"An Act to Promote the Foreign Policy and Provide for
the Defense and General Welfare of the United States

by Furnishing Military Assistance to Foreign Nations,
Approved. October 6, 1949.

"Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives
of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That this
Act may be cited as the 'Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949.'

"FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY

“The Congress of the United States reaffirms the policy of
the United States to achieve international peace and security
through the United Nations so that armed force shall not be used
except in the common interest. The Congress hereby finds that
the efforts of the United States and other countries to promote
peace and security in furtherance of the purposes of the Charter
of the United Netions require additional measures of support
based wpon the principle of continuous and effective self-help
and mutual aid. These measures include the furnishing of military
assistance essential to enable the United States and other nations
dedicated to the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter to participate effectively in arrangements for individual
and collective self-defense in support of those purposes and.
principles. In furnishing such military assistance, it remains

A-8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
