Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for Course B. The end strength increases for Course A and B were
602,900 and 276,000 men, respectively. Within South Vietnam the addi-
tional combat force in terms of battalion months available to COMUSMACV
for operations was markedly greater for A than under Course B. The

JCS calculated that Course A would add 111 battalion/months in FY 68 and
373 battalion/months in FY 69 for a total of 484. Course B, on the
other hand, could add but 39 in FY 68 and 14 in FY 69 for a grand total
of 183. This added combat power in Course A which was recommended for
deployment in JCSM 218-67 would, in the JCS estimation, improve chances
for "progress in the war to a greater extent than the Course B forces.
The primary advantage offered is that of flexibility. COMUSMACV would
have forces available with which to maintain his present momentum as
well as to expand combat and RD operations throughout the country." 15/

If Course A forces were deployed as they desired the JCS noted they
could be used to conduct operations in the DMZ, and into Laos or Cambodia
if such operations were desired. Otherwise they could be properly
employed in South Vietnam such as in the IV CTZ (the Delta). Course A
would, they predicted, contribute to a hastening of the war's conclusion.
The smaller Course B force would require the continued in-country deploy-
ment of additional forces to I Corps Tactical Zone to meet the "formid-
able enemy threat in that area." According to the Chiefs, this drawdown
of forces from other areas would inhibit the reaction capability of
U.S. forces in SVN that even with the increase proposed by Course B
the US/FW/RVNAF would not be able to sustain the momentum of present
offensive Operations. The picture the memo painted of what would
happen under the smaller Course B force was bleak:

(1) If the enemy maintains his current strength and
force structure trends we cannot expect to attain objec-
tives much beyond present goals, particularly the objective
of expanding the areas under GVN control, unless forces
are diverted from offensive operations. Thus we are con-
fronted with an undesirable choice of a reduction of
continued large-scale offensive operations in order to
secure additional areas for expansion of RD activities or
slowing the tempo of offensive operations in order to
maintain security of areas cleared of the enemy.

(2) _Should the enemy successfully exploit a vulner-
able point in our military posture we run the risk of having
even @ modest enemy success publicized as a regression. The
present situation, with all forces in South Vietnam fully
committed in their respective areas, would not be greatly
improved. As a result COMUSMACV cannot influence effectively
the course of one operation without disengaging from another. 16/

169 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
