Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

When the Special CAS group turned in its final appraisal on 18
February, Gen. Harkins was asked by the CGCS to comment. Gen. Harkins
offered, 3 days later, a paragraph by paragraph commentary, much of
which agreed with the CAS group findings. There were a few minor
points of fact that were in disagreement. Where General Harkins
pointedly disagreed was in the matter of interpretation and emphasis
and where both the CAS group and Gen, Harkins agreed that past per-
formance had not been good, Gen. Harkins tended to emphasize the hope, _
as the CAS group did not, that under Khanh the situation would perhaps
improve. Beyond this, Gen. Harkins was,in general, somewhat disturbed
that the CAS group might be exceeding its terms of reference by report-
ing unilaterally, and misleading the national decision process by for-
warding information not coordinatedand cleared with other elements of
the U.S. reporting mechanism in Vietnam. Perhaps most significant of all,
at the very beginning of his comments he offered an observation that,
internationally or otherwise, raised very basic issues of the nature,
function, and limitations of the intelligence and estimation process.

Except for the spectacular and eye catching
lead sentence /"Tide of insurgency in all four |
corps areas appears to be going against GVN"/, I
have no quarrel with most of the statements con-
tained in the CAS Survey Team appraisal. Where
the statements are clean-cut, the supporting infor-
mation was usually provided by my field personnel
and reflected in reports already sent to Washington
by this headquarters. Where the statements are
Sweeping, they are based on opinion or an unfortu-
nate penchant for generalizing from the specific.

My detailed comments follow and are geared to the
specific paragraphs of the CAS message. 34/ /emphasis
supplied. ;

If-we examine this statement with particular reference to the words
and phrases underlined, the large, epistemological problem of the junc-
tion of intelligence and national decision-making is pointedly indicated.
By "clean-cut," Gen. Harkins undoubtedly referred to phenomena that were
concrete, highly specific and narrowly factual. These were the sort of
phenomena about which there could seldom or never be any serious dispute.
By "sweeping" statements, and by "unfortunate penchant for generalizing
from the specific," he was referring to the mental process of bridging
the gap from the small concrete detail-- which was seldom or never by it-
self a basis for large decision-- to the interpretation of that detail..
to the judgment of the significance of that detail. Only upon the basis
of interpretations (judgments) of the importance, meaning and relevance of
things could policy decisions be made. And that judgment or interpretation
was seldom or never inescapably inherent in the measurable, sharply defin-
able, completely unarguable concrete detail. It might be derived from or
directly reflect such data, but its form would be determined equally, or

oh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
