Gir

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C. U.S. Combat Forces and the Possibility

of New Relationships (1965)

THE ABORTIVE LIMITED EXPANSION OF ARVN

During the spring of 1965 General Westmoreland's staff prepared a
full-blown “Commander's Estimate of the Situation." The estimate,
delivered to Washington et the beginning of April, examined three
courses Of action for dealing with the crisis in South Vietnam. Among
these was an accelerated RVNAP build-up.

Even by accelerating the rate of ARVN expansion, COMUSMACV con-
cluded, the ratio of ARVN to VC battalions would decline by the end of
1965 from 1.7:1 to 1.6:1. General Westmoreland rejected this alterna-
tive on the grounds that it could not prevent a VC victory. It would
take too long to accomplish the puild-up and there was little assurance
that ARVN performance would match that of a constantly improving enemy.
(His lack of confidence in ARVN is further reflected in his argument
for U.S. forces, in which he estimated that one U.S. Army battalion is
the fighting equivalent of two ARVN battalions and one Marine BLT the
equivalent of three ARVN battalions.) 134/

These reservations notwithstanding, Westmoreland had requested
authorization on 20 March to implement the Alternative 2 RVNAF strength
increases proposed by him the previous November. After the April 1-2
conference in Washington and a review of the "Commander's Estimate," the
JCS recommended approval and Secretary McNamara agreed on 12 April to
expand RVNAF by an additional 17,247 spaces. An additional 160 U.S.
advisors were approved at the same time. 135/ In late May, the JCS
asked the Secretary of Defense to authorize MAP support for another
2,369 ARVN spaces to fatten out division bases for the eventual creation
of a tenth ARVN division out of existing separate regiments. 136 This
request was approved on 4 June. 137/

Thus, while it was decided not to continue to depend exclusively on
larger Vietnamese forces with U.S. air and navel support, the plan was
to conduct a modest expansion of ARVN in conjunction with the deployment
of U.S. forces. In the event, even the modest plans went down the drain
in the aftermath of the heavy casualties sustained in combat during late
May and early June. On 7 June, General Westmoreland informed CINCPAC
and the JCS that a moratorium on RVNAF build-up was unavoidable because
trainees in the pipeline would have to be used as fillers for existing
units. 138/

The U.S. build-up continued during the spring and early summer,
particularly as a result of ARVN reverses in combat. By the end of July
there were 18 US/Iw combat maneuver battalions deployed in South Viet-
nam. In the same message in which he advised of the halt in ARVN

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
