Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

number of VC "ralliers" to the GVN...In summary, the general
increase in offensive operations by GVN, U.S. and Third Country
forces and a correlative increase in enemy casualties have kept
the VC off balance and prevented his interference with the
build-up of U.S. forces. The often spoken of VC "monsoon offen-
sive" has not materialized, and it now appears that the VC have
relinquished the initiative in the conduct of the war.

"September, 1965: As the end of the monsoon season approached,
the military situation appears considerably brighter than in
May when the VC threatened to defeat the RVNAF. Since May the
puild-up of Free World Military Assistance Forces, coupled with
aggressive combat operations, has thwarted VC plans and has laid
the foundation for the eventual defeat of the VC...

"October, 1965: ...an increase in magnitude and tempo of engage-
ments as the GVN/FWF maintained the initiative...In summary, the
military situation during October continued to favor the Allies
as the VC experienced heavy casualties from the overwhelming
Allied fire power...

"November, 1965: The increasing tempo of the war was reflected
in casualty totals which reached new highs for VC/PAVN and

friendly forces...While keeping the enemy generally off balance,
GVN/FWMAF were able to maintain and, to some degree, to increase
the scope and intensity of friendly-initiated operations.

"December, 1965: Military activity in December was highlighted
by an increase in the number of VC/PAVN attacks on isolated
outposts, hamlets, and districts, towns, and the avoidance of
contact with large GVN and Free World Forces. The effectiveness
of this stratepy was attested by the highest monthly friendly
casualty total of the war, by friendly weapons losses in excess
of weapons captured for the first time since July, and by 3%
fewer VC casualties than in November...

"January, 1966: The Free World peace offensive, coupled with
TET festivities and the accompanying cease-fire, resulted in a
period of restricted military activities for both friendly and
enemy forces...Despite this decrease in activity, GVN and Free
World Forees continued to force inroads into areas long conceded
as VC territory..." 49/ /Bmphasis Added/

This is not the place for a detailed analysis of the reporting of
the war, or of the implications of the above-cited evaluations. But
several points do seem to emerge:

1. The reports are far too optimistic from January through April,
1965, and a big switch seems to come in June, 1965, when

3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
