Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

liberation’ and made it perfectly clear that it would be through applica-
tion of that strategy that the Communists would seek to subvert inde-
pendent nations throughout the world, seek to extend their domination,
their political domination, of other nations.

"Tt is very clear that that is the Communist Chinese strategy in
Southeast Asia. It is a strategy I feel we should oppose, and, while
it is not my war, I don't object to my name being associated with it." ~

‘ oar:

28. Statement by Secretary Ball on May 3, 1965 at the Opening Session

of the SEATO Council Ministers’ 10th Meeting at London, Department
of State Bulletin, June 7, 1965, p. 9ee.

x £ *

"We have, however, come to realize from the experience of the past
years that aggression must be dealt with wherever it occurs and no matter
what mask it may wear. Neither we nor other nations of the free world
‘were always alert to this. In the 1930's Manchuria seemed a long way
away, but it was only 10 years from Manchuria to.Pearl Harbor. Ethiopia
seemed a long way away. The rearmament of the Rhineland was regarded
as regrettable but not worth a shooting war. Yet after that came Austria.
And after Austria, Czechoslovakia. Then Poland. Then the Second World
War.

"The central issue we face in South Viet-Nam should, I think, be
clear for ell to see. It is whether a small state on the periphery of
Communist power should be permitted to maintain its freedom. And that
is. an issue of vital importance to small states everywhere.

"Moreover, it is an issue that affects the security of the whole
free world. Never has that point been more succinctly stated than by
one of the greatest of all Englishmen, Sir Winston Churchill. ‘The
belief,' he said, ‘that security can be obtained by throwing a small
state to the wolves is a fatal illusion." And let us not forget that
General [Vo Nguyen/ Giap, the head of the North Vietnamese armed forces,
has*said quite explicitly that if the so-called 'war of liberation’

technique succeeds in Viet-Nam, it can succeed ‘everywhere in the world. '"

ee oe

29. Remarks by President Johnson at White House Before House and Senate
Committees on May 4, 1965, “Congress Approves Supplemental Appro-

priation for Vietnam,” Department of State Bulletin, May ob, 1965,
D. Ls

x x *

‘D-41
