e

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

i ae
ovine alice tn &:

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive Pritichns PP

A

to make it clear that the USG had nothing to do with the coup. Cit &1s0
directed Lodge to try to keep "Big Minh" in the government, at least as
a figurehead. 29/') The next morning, right on schedule, Khanh took over.

3. The USG Accepts Khanh and Opens the

February, 1964

Keeping Minh was to prove difficult. Khanh wanted to try four
arrested generals for conspiring with the French to neutralize SVN; and not
only were these officers Mini's close friends, but Khanh said Minh was a
party to the plot also. 30/ ‘he affair was to drag on into September,
adding to the political uncertainties and thus to the paralysis of govern-
ment. 31

Bidding Against the North,

To improve government stability, Khanh broadened his government to
make the cabinet more representative of all the political and religious
groups, and expanded the MRC to include 17 generals and 32 other officers.
(By the end of March the MRC had 53 members.) Partly at USOM urging, General
Minh travelled around the country and reportedly gained popularity. ‘The
Council of Notables continued in its advisory role. 32

Following the coup, the USG reopened the question of extending U.S.
advisors into the districts. On February 7, 1964, the State Department
told Saigon: ;

"Inasmuch as recently displaced government evidently
took no definitive position on extension U.S. advisory struc-
ture to subsector level...we believe [the] Ambassador and
General Harkins should raise this subject at carly @ate with
General Khanh. It might be useful to point out to Khanh
that in addition reasons cited in our 1072, proposed exten~
sion U.S. advisory structure would represent expansion U.S,
commitment to support GVN in war against vc."

" State anticipated that Khanh might object but believed the possible harm

would be more than connterbalenced by improved effectiveness of GVN opera-
tions in countryside:

"if Khanh will not accept subsector advisors on scale
originally envisaged he should be urged to agree at least
to their establishment on experimental basis in few districts
in order to lay basis for determining whether there is any
substantial 111 effect in political sense from their presence." 33/

Two weeks later COMUSMACV reported Vietnamese acceptance of district ad-
visors in 13 districts of central Delta provinces. MACY J-3 had casually
arranged it with General Khiem, apparently without any new top-level U.S./
GVN discussion. 34/

Khanh's government was as receptive at first to top-level U.S,
advice as it was to advisors at lower levels, although the "brain trust"

8 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
