Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

their henchmen in order to achieve national unity and
complete independence and freedan throughout the country.
These two strategic tasks are closely related to each
other and spur each other forward. -

"The two revolutionary tasks of the North and South
belong to two different strategies, each task being aimed
at satisfying the definite requirement of each zone under
the specific conditions of our divided country. But these two
tasks have one common aim -- to achieve peaceful national
reunification and resolve one common contradiction of our whole
country -- the contradiction between our people and the
imperialists and their henchmen.

"The common task of the Vietnamese revolution at
present is: to strengthen the unity of all the people;
to struggle resolutely to maintain peace, to accelerate the
socialist revolution in North Viet-Nam while at the same
time stepping up the National People's Democratic Revolution
in South Viet-Nam; ... .

"The revolution in the South is a protracted, hard,
and complex process of struggle, combining many forms of
struggle of great activity and flexibility, ranging from
lower to higher, and taking as its basis the building,
consolidation and development of the revolutionary power
of the masses. During this process we must pay special
attention to the work of organizing and educating the ed
people, first and foremost the workers, peasants and
intellectuals, promoting to the highest degree the
revolutionary fighting spirit of the various strata of
our patriotic countrymen. We must unceasingly expose the
eriminal schemes and acts of the U.S. imperialists and
their henchmen, doing our utmost to divide and isolate them.

"To insure the complete success of the revolutionary
struggle in South Viet-Nam our people there must strive to
establish a united bloc of workers, peasants, and soldiers
and to bring into being a broad national united front
directed against the U.S.-Diem clique and based on the
worker-peasant alliance. This front must rally all the
patriotic parties and religious groupings, together with
all individuals inclined to oppose the U.S.-Diem clique.
The aims of its struggle are peace, national independence,
democratic freedoms, improvement of the people's living
conditions, and peaceful national reunification.

66 TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive
