42

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

menace of predatory communism, there is in the first place the dedica-
tion, courage, and resourcefulness of President Diem himself, In hin,
his country has found a truly worthy leader whose integrity and devotion
to his country's welfare have become generally recognized emong his
people. Asia has given us in President Diem another great figure, and
the entire free world has become the richer for his example of determina-
tion and moral fortitude. There is no more dramatic example of this
fortitude than President Diem's decisions during the tense and vital days
of the battle against the parasitic politico-religious sects in the city
of Saigon in the spring of 1955. These decisions were to resist the
multiple pressures to compromise that were building up around him, and
to struggle to the victorious end for the sake of a just cause. The

free world owes him a debt of gratitude for his determined stand at that
fateful hour.

"Consider Viet-Nam at three stages in its recent history:

"First, in mid-1954, partitioned by fiat of the great powers against
the will of the Vietnamese people, devoid of governmental machinery or
military strength, drifting without leadership and without hope in the
backwash of the defeat administered by the combined weight of Communist-
impressed infantry and of Chinese and Russian arms.

"Secondly, in early 1955, faced with the military and subversive
threat of the Communists north of the 17th parallel, confronted with
internal strife, its government challenged by the armed, self-seeking
politico-religious sects, its army barely reformed and of uncertain
loyalty, assailed from within by the most difficult problems, including
that of having to absorb the sudden influx of three-quarters of a mil-
lion refugees who would rather leave their ancestral lands and homes
than suffer life under Communist tyranny:

"And finally Viet-Nam today, in mid-1956, progressing rapidly to
the establishment of democratic institutions by elective processes, its
people resuming peaceful pursuits, its army growing in effectiveness,
sense of mission, and morale, the puppet Vietnamese politicians dis-
credited, the refugees well on the way to permanent resettlement, the
countryside generally orderly and calm, the predatory sects eliminated
and their venal leaders exiled or destroyed.

"Perhaps no more eloquent testimony to the new state of affairs in
Viet-Nam could be cited than the voice of the people themselves as
expressed in their free election of last March. At that time the last
possible question as to the feeling of the people was erased by an over-
whelming majority for President Diem's leadership. The fact that the
Viet Minh was unable to carry out its open threats to sabotage these
elections is impressive evidence of the stability and prestige of the
government.

"The United States is proud to be on the side of the effort of the
Vietnamese people under President Diem to establish freedom, peace, and

B29
