Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

but not those for it, becoming less valid each time." 32/ It was
this argument of McNaughton's which lay behind the Defense position
that one of the chief reasons for a pause was that even if it were to
produce no response from Hanoi, it might set the stage for another
pause, perhaps late in 1966, which might be "productive."

; The available materials do not reveal the President's
response to these arguments, but it is clear from the continuing flow
of papers that he delayed positively committing himself either for or
against a pause until very shortly before the actual pause began. Most
of these papers retraced old ground, repeating the arguments which we
have already examined. A State memorandum by William Bundy on 1 Decen-
ber, however, added some new ones. 33/ In summary, they were:

FOR a bombing pause (in addition to those we have already
seen):

--Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin had "recently urged a ‘pause'
on MeGeorge Bundy and had pretty clearly indicated the
Soviets would make a real effort if we undertook one;
however, he was equally plain in stating that he could
give no assurance of any clear result.”

--"American casualties are mounting and further involve-
ment appears likely. A pause can demonstrate that the
President has taken every possible means to find a peace-
ful solution and obtain domestic support for the further
actions that we will have to take."

--"There are already signs of dissension between Moscow,
Peking, Hanoi and the Viet Cong. The pause is certain
to stimulate further dissension on the other side and
add to the strains in the Communist camp as they argue
about how to deal with it." Moreover, it would decrease
the ability of Hanoi or Peking to bring pressure on
Moscow to escalate Soviet support.

.-"Judging by experience during the last war, the resump-
tion of bombing after a pause would be even more painful
to the population of North Vietnam than a fairly steady
rate of bombing."

_-"The resumption of bombing after a pause, combined with
increased United States deployments in the South, would
remove any doubts the other side may have about es.
determination to stay the course and finish the jo a

TOP SECRET -— Sensitive

2k
