Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

~ COMUSMACV's Minimum “Force
Requirement —- An Analysis

Ground Forces

MACV indicated on 18 March, and in Appendix B to JCSM 218-67, that
-his minimum essential needs are 2-1/3 divisions for I.CIZ. He now proposes
that 1-1/3 divisions go to I CTZ to supplement 2 brigades moved from Iil
CTZ, (a total of 2 divisions instead of 2-1/3) and 1.division goes to. III
‘Cfz. The III Cfz thus gains one brigade on balance.

The 1-1/3 more Hui cions in I CTZ appears excessive for the mission.
The total threat to I CfZ is only 95,000 VC/NVA-personnel, including
Srregulars and political infrastructure. There are already more than
200,000 friendly forces there, not counting the 2 SLF battalions earmarked
for 2 Gry. _Support. Any: invasion by the NVA divisions now near the DMZ
could eaiSly be held with the forces now deployed and available to MACV.
Calculations indicate that the 2 Army brigades already sent to I CTZ plus
one more brigade (already in Program 4 for PRACTICE NINE) should be ade-
quate to hold the DMZ and to extend the Marine tactical area of responsibi-
lity (AOR) throughout the coastal plains area of I CTZ. Uncertainties
-and other calculations may well produce different results, but informal
USMC staff review indicated our calculations were reasonable. In any
event, these calcualations are reproducible.

The MACV requirement is based on no known calculations. It is based
on unselective and unquantified goals: infiltration to be impeded,
invasion deterred or defeated, TAORs expanded and joined, enemy driven
to hinterlands, base areas destroyed, LOCs secured, RD programs expanded,
and GVN control extended, 7

The division for III CTfZ is justified by MACV to replace the 9th
division, always designated for IV CTZ, not III.CTZ. Nonetheless he could
have eeeed that at least: 2/3rd of the division is required to replace the
2. brigades sent to I CTZ. There is no evidence that the programmed III CTZ
forces, without the 2 brigades but with the additional brigade equivalent
now programmed (1 more Australian bn, an airborne ba, and an armored
cavalry squadron) is inadequate; or that added forces could accomplish
more. The force ration’ would still be about 345,000 friendly to 74,000 .
enemy (4.7 to 1). In addition there is a mechanized battalion programmed

-for IV CiZ that might well be used more effectively in II CTZ. Moreover,
the way III CIZ forces are employed, in multi-divisional operations of
the Junction City/Manhattan variety, should be analyzed with great care

- before additional forces are even considered. Our analysis has shown that
present forces could be employed more effectively (and at less cost) if
greater emphasis were given small unit operations.

125 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
