Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of paramilitary forces and the increased compensation for GVN
military forces?

bo Formation of an intelligence net of U.S. advisors’ re-
porting on conditions in the RVNAF?

c. Development of a capability for offensive guerrilla
operations?

d. Progress under decrees for national mobilization?

€. Progress in detailing and in carrying out operational
plans for clear-hold operations (the oil-spot concept)? 98/

Along with the solicitation of opinion from COMUSMACV and CINCPAC,
summary proposals were developed by SACSA on the "feasibility of strength-
ening RVNAP, CG and SDC by increased advisory efforts and/or encadrement."
SACSA's proposals, intended for consideration at the Honolulu meeting,
centered on three subjects. The first elaborated a concept which was called
"U.S. Advisory Assistance to the Vietnamese Civil Guard" which consisted of
a phased program of U.S. detachments at the district level to provide oper-
ational assistance to paramilitary forces. About one and one-half years
(or until the end of calendar year 1965) would be needed to expand the
current effort -- which consisted of two-man teams for only 13 districts --
to 239 districts with larger advisory teams (one officer and 3 NCO spe-
cialists). Thus, by the end of 1965, according to this plan, approximately
1,000 men would be assigned to the districts. To support this effort in
the districts about 500 more personnel would be needed, raising the total
to 1500. The limiting factor on this effort would be a shortage of inter-
pretors.

The second program proposed for consideration by SACSA was a "Pilot
Program for Provision of Advisory Assistance to Paramilitary Forces in
Seven Provinces.” This was directed exclusively to the seven critical
provinces, namely, Long An, Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, Hau Nghia, Tay Ninh,

Quang Ngai and Phu Yen. The concept in this case was to assign one advisory
detachment with one company grade officer and three NCOs to each of the 49
districts in the seven provinces. In addition to this total of 200 persons,
a 35 percent manpower overhead slice plus some augmentation at the province
level (70 + 30) would be required. This would mean about 100 men in addi-
tion to the 4 x 49 in the districts, or an overall total of about 300. In
addition, a minimum of 49 interpretors would be needed.

The third proposal for discussion was a suggestion that U.S. advisors
be placed at company level in regular ARVN units. Im investigating this

proposal, CINCPAC, COMUSMACV and advisors on the spot had been asked their
judgment, and all were reported to believe that this extension of advisors

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

80
