pat «|

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

winning was asked indicates that at the Secretary of Defense level there
was real awareness that the decisions to be made in the next few weeks
would commit the U.S. to the possibility of an expanded conflict. The
Key question then was whether or not we would become involved more deeply
in a war which could not be brought to a satisfactory conclusion.

Secondly, the definition of "win," i.e., "succeed in demonstrat-
ing to the VC that they cannot win," indicates the assumption upon which
the conduct of the war was to rest -- that the VC could be convinced in
some meaningful sense that they were not going to win and that they would
then rationally choose less violent methods of seeking their goals. But
the extent to which this definition would set limits of involvement or
affect strategy was not clear.

Thirdly, the assumptions on the key variables (the infiltration
rates, the strength of GVN forces, the probable usefulness of Third
Country Forces, the political situation in South Vietnam) were rightfully
pessimistic and cautious. If they were to be taken seriously, the con-
clusions of the Study Group were bound to be pessimistic. If the Study
Group was to take a "positive attitude," they were bound to be ignored.
The latter inevitably happened.

The study outlined the strategy as follows:
1, Concept:

a Presently organized and planned GVN forces, except
for present GVN national reserve battalions, possibly augmented
by a limited number of ranger and infantry battalions, retain
control over areas now held, extend pacification operations and
area control where possible, defend critical installations and
areas against VC attack and seek out and destroy Viet Cong
militia units.

b. US and Allied forces, in conjunction with the GVN
national reserve, by offensive land and air action locate and
destroy vc/PAVN forces, bases and major war-supporting organi-
zations in South Vietnam.

5» a. Under this concept the RVNAF, now hard-pressed by
the Viet Cong sunmer offensive, would continue to regroup
battle-damaged units and build up total strengths. For the
most part they would be relieved, except for the national re-
serve (6 Airborne Battalions, 5 Marine Rattalions), of offen-
Sive actions against main force units and would concentrate
their efforts on maintaining and extending the present GVN
area control. They would defend important installations from
attack and would conduct offensive operations against local VC
militia units. As the situation might allow, selected units

5 TOP SECRHT - Sensitive
