Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the notations appearing on the original draft NSAM, filed with other
papers from the NSC Working Group at the State Department. Therefore,
the following assessment of what occurred is limited to inferences
from that sparse evidence. Moreover, based on this evidence, it is
not absolutely certain that the changes indiceted came as a result of
the Principals meeting.

Several changes apparently were made in order not to ask the
President to commit himself unnecessarily (e.g., the language was
changed from "take" to "resume" a specific action in the second phase
to "be prepared to take," etc.). Others had policy implications. The
only significant change in the first category was to remove any reference
in the title to NSAM and to call it merely a "position paper. In the
latter category, several changes seem significant. For example, keeping
the GVN going through the effects of stronger U.S, action was deleted as
one of the circumstances under which we might initiate a program of
"graduated military pressures" against the DRV. Apparently based on
Secretary McNemara's comment, reference to the United States seeking to
control the negotiations and blocking South Vietnemese efforts in this
direction was removed. The swmary of JCS views was also removed from
the concept, in effect presenting a united front to the President. From
the description of 30-day actions, all reference to the intent to pub-
licize infiltration evidence or present it to allied and Congressional
leaders was eliminated, including the intention to Link reprisal actions
to DRV infiltration to develop "a common thread of justification.” Also
removed was reference to a major Presidential speech, apparently on the
advice of McGeorge Bundy. 144/

Although there is a bare minimum of rationale or explanation
for these changes in the available evidence, the pattern described by
the changes themselves is significant. In effect, Option A along with
the lowest order of Option C actions were being recommended by the
Principals in a manner that would represent the least possible additional
commitment. This represented a considerable softening of the positions
held at the end of the first Principals meeting, on the 2lth.

It also represented a substantial deviation from the findings
of the Working Group. It will be recalled that the group conceded
Option A little chance of contributing to an improved GV and saw its
likely impact on South Vietnamese morale as no more lasting ae Re
effects of the Tonkin Gulf reprisals. Moreover, even extended "A" was
believed “at best" to be capable of little more than an improved U.S.
position -- certainly not of a meaningful settlement. 145/ In effect,
the Principals were returning to the initial concept of Option C held
in the Working Group by Bundy, Johnson and McYaughton -- but without the
initially flexible attitude toward national interest and objectives in
Southeast Asia.

51 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
