Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"h, This is not just a jungle war, but a struggle for freedom on every
front of human activity. Our military and economic assistance to South

Vietnam and Laos in particular has the purpose of helping these countries
to repel aggression and strengthen their independence.

"The threat to the free nations of Southeast Asia has long been clear.
The North Vietnamese regime has constantly sought to take over South Vietnam
and Laos. This communist regime has violated the Geneva accords for Viet-
nam.- It has systematically conducted a campaign of subversion, which in-
cludes the direction, training, and supply of personnel and arms for the
conduct of guerrilla warfare in South Vietnamese territory. In Laos, the
Worth Vietnamese regime has maintained military forces, used Laotian terri- -
tory for infiltration into South Vietnam, and most recently carried out com-
bat operations -- all in direct violation of the Geneva agreements of 1962.

\

"In recent months, the actions of the North Vietnamese regime have
become steadily more threatening. In May, following new acts of communist
aggression in Laos, the United States undertook reconnaissance flights over
Iaotian territory, at the request of the Government of Laos. These flights
had the essential mission of determining the situation in territory where
communist forces were preventing inspection by the International Control
Commission. When the communists attacked these aircraft, I responded by
furnishing escort fighters with instructions to fire when fired upon.

Thus, these latest North Vietnamese attacks on our naval vessels are not
the first direct attack on armed forces of the United States.

"As President of the United States I have concluded that I should now
ask the Congress, on its part, to join in affirming the national determina-
tion that all such attacks will be met, and that the United States will
eontinue in its basic policy of assisting the free nations of the area to
defend their freedom.

"As I have repeatedly made clear, the United States intends no rashness,
and seeks no wider war. We must make it clear to all that the United States
is united in its determination to bring about the end of communist subversion
and aggression in the area. We seek the full and effective restoration
of the international agreements signed in Geneva in 1954, with respect to
South Vietnam, and again in Geneva in 1962, with respect to Laos."

x k

.

11. "Secretary Rusk Discusses Asian Situation on NBC Program," 5 August
1964, Department of State Bulletin, 24 August 1964, p. 268:

"Following is the transcript of an interview of Secretary Rusk by NBC
correspondent Elie Abel, broadcast over nationwide television on August 5.

"MR, ABEL: Mr. Secretary, are we going to get through this situation
without touching off a bigger war?

D-15
