Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The growing strength of US/FW Forces will provide the
shield and will permit ARVN to shift its weight of effort
to an extent not heretofore feasible to direct support of
RD. Also, I visualize that a significant number of US/FW
maneuver battalions will be committed to tactical areas of
responsibility (TAOR) missions. These missions encompass
base security and at the same time support RD by spreading
security radially from the bases to protect more of the
population...

"The priority effort of ARVN forces will be in direct
support of the RD program; in many instances the province
chief will exercise operational control over these units...
This fact notwithstanding, the ARVN division structure must
be maintained..." 36/

This long message, with its "new look” emphasis on pacification, was
sent apparently not for CINCPAC's routine consideration, as-would be the
normel case in the military chain of command, but for the edification of
high-ranking civilian leaders in Washington. It ended with a comment
added by Ambassador Lodge -- an unusual procedure in a military message:

"I wish to stress my agreement with the attention paid
in this message to the importance of military support for
RD. After all, the main purpose of defeating the enemy
through offensive operations against the main forces and
bases must be to provide the opportunity through RD to get
at the heart of the matter, which is the population of SVN.” 37/

The new emphasis on RD/pacification was thus coming from many sources
in the late summer of 1966. Porter and Komer, pushing the civilians
harder than they had ever been pushed before, had not only improved their
performance, but also to create pressures inside MACY for greater empha-
sis on RD. Westmoreland, responding to the pressure, and finding the
vo/NVA increasingly reluctant to give battle, was planning a two-pronged
strategy for late 1966-early 1967: attack and destroy enemy base areas,
and use more forces to protect and build up and expand the GVN population
centers.

90 ' TOP SECRET - Sensitive
