Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

route packages I through V and in Laos, SEA Dragon offen-
sive operations involved 1,384 ship-days on station and
contributed materially in reducing enemy seaborne infil-
tration in southern NVN and in the vicinity of the DMZ.
Attacks against the NVN transport system during the past
12 months resulted in destruction of carriers cargo
carried, and personnel casualties. Air attacks throughout
North Vietnam and Laos destroyed or camaged 5,261 motor
vehicles, 2,75 railroad rolling stock, and 11,425 water-
craft from 1 January through 20 December 1967. SEA DRAGON
accounted for another 1,473 WBLC destroyed or damaged from
1 January - 30 November. There were destroyed rail-lines,
bridges, ferries, railroad yards and shops, storage areas,
and truck parks. Some 3,685 land targets were struck by
Sea Dragon forces, including the destruction or damage of
303 coastal defense and radar sites. Through external
assistance, the enemy has been able to replace or rehabili-
tate many of the items damage or destroyed, and transport
inventories are roughly at the same level they were at

the beginning of the year. Nevertheless, construction
problems have caused interruptions in the flow of men and
supplies, caused a great loss of work-hours, and restricted
movement particularly during daylight hours. 68/

; The admission that transport inventories were the same at
year's end as when it began must have been a painful one indeed for
CINCPAG in view of the enormous cost of the air campaign against the
transport system in money, aircraft, and lives. As a consolation for
‘this signal failure, CINCPAC pointed to the extensive diversion of
civilian manpower to war related activities as a result of the bombing.

A primary effect of our efforts to impede movement of
the enemy has been to force Hanoi to engage from 500,000 to
600,000 civilians in full-time and part-time war-related
activities, in particular for air defense and repair of the
LoCs. This diversion of manpower from other pursuits,
particularly from the agricultural sector, has caused a
drawdown on manpower. The estimated lower food production
yields, coupled with an increase in food imports in 1967
(some six times that of 1966), indicate that agriculture
is having: great difficulty in adjusting to this hanged
composition of the work force. The cos and difficulties
of the war to Hanoi have sharply increased, and only
through the willingness of other communist countries to
provide maximum replacement of goods and material.has NVN
managed to sustain its war effort. 69/

133 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
