Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

CINCPAC endorsed his opposition to any further truce as did the JCS on
January 4. 15/ The Chiefs pointed out that the history of U.S. experi-
ence with such holiday suspensions of operations was that the VC/NVA

had increasingly exploited them to resupply, prepare for attacks, redeploy
forces and commit violations. Perhaps of most concern was the opportunity
such standdowns provided the enemy to mount major unharassed logistical
resupply operations. Thus, they concluded:

Against this background of persistent exploitation of
the standdown periods by the enemy, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
view the forthcoming standdown for TET with grave concern. To
grant the enemy 2 respite during a four-day standdown at TET
will slow our campaign, allow him time to reconstitute and
replenish his forces, and cost us greater casualties in the
long run. 16

This unanimous military opposition was falling on deaf ears.
The President and his advisors had already committed the U.S. to a
four-day truce and such a belated change of course would have clearly
rebounded to the public opinion benefit of the North Vietnamese (who had
already, on January 1, announced their intention to observe a 7-day TET
truce). ‘Thus, on January 14, Ambassador Lodge was instructed to get the
GVN's concurrence to maintain just the 96-hour standdown, but to tell
them that the Allies should be prepared to extend the pause if fruitful
contacts developed during it. 17/ Lodge replied the following day that
the proposal was agreeable to the GVN and to the Allied Chiefs of Mission
in Saigon. 18

Acknowledging the political considerations which required
@ pause, the Chiefs on January 18 proposed the announcement of a set of
conditions to the standdown: (1) that SRA DRAGON countersea infiltration
operations continue up to 19°; (2) that CINCPAC be authorized to resume
air attacks against major land resupply efforts south of 19°; (3) that
operations be resumed in the DMZ area to counter any major resupply or
infiltration; and (4) that warning be given that violations or VC/NVA
efforts to gain tactical advantage in SVN during the truce, would prompt
direct military counteractions. 19/ The reaction at State to these new
JCS conditions was vigorous. On January 21, Bundy-sent Katzenbach a memo
urging him to oppose anything that would compromise our suspension of
operations against North Vietnam.

~s.l strongly recommend against approving JCS proposals

for broader military authority to respond to North Viet-
Namese resupply activities in North Viet-Nam....In my view,

' resupply activities in North Viet-Nam cannot be considered
a sufficiently immediate and direct threat to our forces to
justify the great political and psychological disadvantages
of U.S. air and naval strikes against North Viet-Namese
territory during a truce period. 20/

h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
