Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Stennis report also raised a furor by exposing
the policy rift within the Administration. In an attempt to dampen
its effect the President called an unschedulel] news conference on
September 1 to deny differences among his advisors and to generally
overrule his Secretary of Defense on the bombing. More stinging for
MelNemara, however, than this oral repudiation must have been the sub-
sequent escalatory decisions against his advice. On September 10,
for instance, North Vietnam's third port at Cam Pha, a target he had
specifically counseled against in his testimony was struck for the
first time. MclNemara's year-end resignation seems in retrospect the
only logical course for someone who found himself so far out of line
with the direction of Administration policy.

B. The San Antonio Formula
1. Peace Peelers

In the midst of all this pressure on the President to
raise the ante in the bombing, a countervailing opportunity for contact
with the DRV on terms for peace developed in Paris. In mid-August a
channel to the North Vietnamese through U.S. and French academics
apparently opened up in Paris. lager as always to test whether Hanoi
had softened its position, the U.S. picked wp the opportunity. As
already noted, on 19 August a cessation of the attacks in the 10-mile
Hanoi perimeter was ordered for a ten day period beginning on August 2h.
Sometime thereafter, what was regarded as a conciliatory proposal,
embodying the language of the subsequent San Antonio speech, was apparently
transmitted to the North Vietnamese. The unfortunate coincidence of
heavy bombing attacks on Hanoi on August 21-23, just prior to the trans-
mission of the message, coupled with the fact that the Hanoi suspension
was to be of limited duration must have left the DRV leadership with the
strong impression they were being squeezed by Johnsonian pressure tactics
and presented with an ultimatum. Apparently, no reply from Hanoi had
arrived by the lst of September because the Hanoi suspension was extended
for 72-hours, and then on 7 September the suspension was impatiently
extended again pending a reply from North Vietnam. When the reply finally
came, it was an emphatic rejection of the U.S. proposal. The U.S. sought
+o clarify its position and elicit some positive reaction from the Hanoi
leadership but to no avail. The contacts in Paris apparently continued
throughout September since the bombing restraint around Hanoi was not
relaxed, but Hanoi maintained its charge that the circumstances in which
the message was communicated placed it in the context of an ultimatum. 18/

" 2, The President's Speech and Hanoi's Reaction

With Hanoi complaining that the raids deflected from Hanoi
were merely being retargeted against Haiphong, Cam Pha and other parts
of the North and that the U.S. was escalating not de-escalating the air
the President decided to make a dramatic public attempt to overcome

War s

101 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
