Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive.

declined to receive the American Ambassador "in view of the absence of
diplomatic relations between our two countries," and suggested instead
that the "important, high level private message” from the US Government
which Ambassador Kohler wished to communicate to the NVN Ambassador be
sent to the Soviet Goverment "in its capacity es Co-Chairman of the
Geneva Conference."

Kohler felt it would not be productive to press the NVN embessy
further, and cabled the Department for instructions as to waich of two
alternatives he should pursue: "(1) Transmit message by letter wie.
messenger to NVN ambassador; or (2) seek appointment with Acting Foreign
Minister Kuznetsov to convey message."131/

The Department's reply was as follows:

Believe you should pursue voth alternatives urgently,
explaining’ to Kuznetsov (who will by now heve heard from
Dobrynin) thet you recognize reluctance of Soviets to act
as intermediary and are asking solely that Soviets transmit
message to DRV Ambassador in accordance with DRV suggestion.

132/

Kohler acted promptly on both alternatives. He transmitted the
"oral" communication to the DRV Ambassador under cover of a letter signed
by Kohler, which read as follows:

In accordance with the suggestion made by member of
your staff today, I am attempting to reach the Acting
Foreign Minister tonight.

Since this may not be possible and because of its in-
portance, I enclose the message I had hoped to be able to
convey to you personally earlier today.

However, though hand-delivered by an American embassy employee to
a DRV employee, the communication was returned the following morning in
a plain envelope addressed simply Embassy of US of A. 133

At the same time, Kohler sought an urgent appointment with Acting
Foreign Minister Kuznetsov (Gromyko being out of town) but Kuznetsov was
not available and Kohler was able to see only Deputy Foreign Minister
Firyubin. The latter, after some temporizing, flatly refused his
government's services as an intermediary and Tectured Kohler at length
woon:- the US misconceytion of the real nature of the conflict in Vietnam.
Kohler's account of the conversation follows: 134/

I informed Firyubin that as he must know from report of
Dobrynin's conversation with Secretary, US Government has
made decision which we hoped would be both understood and
not misunderstood. I had been informed by several high

117 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
