Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Furthermore, the enemy is undertaking fewer large scale offensive
“operations in recent months and concentrating his small scale attacks,
ambushes, and harassments against easier targets (troops in the field
and isolated military posts). This indicates a possible regression to
activities characteristic of earlier stag2s of guerrilla warfare, is
-inconsistent with large numbers of battalions and even divisions, and
may reflect an increasing inability to conduct large scale operations
without incurring unacceptably high casualties. ‘The VC/NVA have not
won a significant large scale military victory in several months. There
is every reason to be on guard, as General Westmoreland is, but there is
no reason to believe that we need to increase our planned deployment of
large units to prevent such victories in the future.

fhe Interdiction Campaign. The VC force has reportedly increased
by 20 battalions (from 7li to Ol) since last December, NVA by 43 (from
43 to 66) during the same period. The NVA represented only 25,600 of
249,700 (10%) last December, ineveacing to 45,600 of 277,000 (16% in
October. The weekly rate of accepted infiltration has been amout LENS
in 1966 compared to 945 in hth quarter 1965 and 510 for all of 1965.
MACV has recently reported that infiltration may have been as high as
1630 per week in 1966. The NVA units, equipped almost exclusively with
Chinese and Russian weapons, have a much greater requirement for infil-
trated ammunition and supplies, thus increasing their dependence on the
logistics network flowing from NVN to SVN.

Air Interdiction. The use of air power to interdict enemy infiltration
and supply has been very great by any standard. Attack sorties in Laos and
NVN have risen from 4750 per month at the end of last year to 9100 in Ist
quarter of this year and to 10,600 and 12,900 in subsequent quarters. The
interdiction campaign has absorbed most of the increase in deployed attack-
capable aircraft in the past years.

A substantial air interdiction campaign is clearly necessary and worth-
while. In addition to putting a ceiling on the size of the force that can
be supported, it yields three significant military effects. First, it ef-
fectively harasses and delays truck movements down through the southern
panhandles of NVN and Laos, though it has no effect on troops infiltrating
on foot over trails that are virtually invisible from the air. Our ex-

_ perience shows that daytime armed reconnaissance above some minimum sortie
rate makes it prohibitively expensive to the enemy to attempt daylight
movement of vehicles, and so forces him to night movement. Second, des-
truction of bridges and cratering of roads forces the enemy to deploy repair
erews, equipment, and porters to repair or bypass the damage. Third, attacks
on vehicles, parks, and rest camps destroy some vehicles with their cargoes
and inflict casualties. Moreover, our bombing campaign may produce a bene-
ficial effect on U.S. and SVN morale by making NVN pay a price for its
aggression and by showing that we sre doing what we can to interdict the
enemy. But at the scale we are now operating, I believe our bombing is
yielding very small marginal returns, not worth the cost in pilot lives
and aircraft.

mae TOP SECRET - Sensitive
