Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"A few years ago the nations of free Asia lay under the shadow of
Communist China. They faced a common threat, but not in unity. They
were still caught up in their old disputes and dangerous confrontations.
They were ripe for aggression.

"Now that picture is changing. Shielded by the courage of the
South Vietnamese, the.peoples of free Asia today are driving toward
economic and social development in a new spirit of regional cooperation.

"Ail you have to do is look at that map and you will see inde-
pendence growing, thriving, blossoming, and blooming.

"They are convinced that the Vietnamese people and their allies
are going to stand firm against the conqueror, or against aggression.

"Our fighting in Viet-Nam, therefore, is buying time not only for
South Viet-Nam, but it is buying time for a new and a vital, growing
Asia to emerge and develop additional strength.

"Tr South Viet-Nam were to collapse under Communist pressure from
the North, the progress in the rest of Asia would be greatly endangered.
And don't you forget that!

"The third reason is: What happens in South Viet-Nam will determine--
yes, it will determine--whether ambitious and aggressive nations can use
guerrilla warfare to conquer their weaker neighbors.

"Tt will determine whether might makes right.

"Now I do not know of a single more important reason for our
presence than this.

"We are fighting in South Viet-Nam a different kind of war than we
have ever known in the past.”

et oe

"TP by such methods the agents of one nation can go out and hold
and seize power where turbulent change is occurring in another nation,
our hope for peace and order will suffer a crushing blow all over the
world. It will be an invitation to the would-be conqueror to keep on
marching. That is why the problem of guerrilla warfare--the problem
of Viet-Nam--is a critical threat to peace not just in South Viet-Nen,
but in all of this world in which we live."

We Ae | Ee,

D-86
