Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to the damage we inflict, and growing. Probably the government of NVN has
assurances that the USSR and/or China will assist the rebuilding of its»
economy after the war, end hence its concern about the damage being inflicted
may be moderated by long-range favorable expectations. Specifically:

i. As of July 1966 the U.S. bombing of North Vietnam had had no measureble
direct effect on Hanoi's ability to mount and support militery operations
in the South at the current level.

é. Since the initiation of the Rolling Thunder program the Gamage to
facilities and equipment in North Vietnam has been more than offset by the
increased flow of military and economic aid, largely from the USSR and
Communist China,

3. The aspects of the basic situation that have enabled Hanoi to continue
its support of military operations in the South and to neutralize the impact
.of U.S. bombing by passing the economic costs to other Communist countries:
are not likely to be eltered by reducing the Bresey geographic constraints,
minin= He iphone end thea princinal harbors in North Vietna um, increasing the
nusder of armed 7 wise expanding the U.S. air
offensive along the lines now contemplated in military recomaendations and
planning studies.

Ssconnaissence sorties and otneryv

h, While conceptually it is reasonable to assume that some limit may be
imposed on the scale of military activity that Hanoi can maintain in the
South by continuing the Rolling Thunder program at the present, or some
higher level of effort, there appears to be no basis- for defining that
limit in concrete terms jor. for concluding that the present scale of VC/NVN
activities in the field have approached that limit.

.

>. The indirect effects of the bombing on the will of the North Vietnamese
to continue fi SBVaDe and on their leaders! appraisal of the prospective gains
and costs of maintaining the present policy have not shown themselves in eny
tengible way. Purtherno re, we have not discovered any basis for concluding
thet the indirect punitive effects of bombing will prove decisive in these

respe Cts.

91 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
