Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

{ Ol.
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

e-eany of the above locations have good areas for

training of Vietnamese forces, if this were to be a

mission of the U.S, forces,
° *

In the available papers, no one at this time talked about using
American units to directly fight the Viet Cong. Rather it was mainly
in terms of relieving Vietnamese units to undertake offensive action.
We can only guess what people were really thinking. As the training-
the-Vietnamese rationale seems essentially a device for getting Diem
to accept the units, the non-combatant role for U.S. troops may have
peen (and probably was in the minds of at least some of the planners)
mainly a device for calming those members of the Administration who
were reluctant to involve American units in fighting the Viet Cong.
Certainly in hindsight, it seems most unrealistic to suppose that
American combat units could have been stationed in a center of Viet
Cong activity (a number of papers postulate the insurgents were
attempting to establish a "liberated area” in the high plateau, which
was the principal locale discussed) without themselves becoming involved
in the fighting.

Lansdale concluded his memo by reminding Gilpatric that Diem was
sending Thuan ("Secretary of Security, Defense, Interior, etc.") to
Washington to deliver his letter on Vietnam's "definitive military needs,"
Lansdale recommended that Gilpatric take up the question of whether Diem
would accept U.S. troops with Thuan, “With conerete information, you
will then have a firm position for further decisions."

But apparently someone did not want to wait for Thuan. For on May 27,
Nolting reported that he had brought up the question of what Diem meant in
his conversation with Johnson directly with Diem, and that Diem did not
then want U.S. combat units "for this or any other reason." 10

Nevertheless, on June 9, Diem signed the letter to Kennedy that, as
quoted above, asked for:

e.oselected elements of the American Armed Forces —
to establish training centers for the Vietnamese Armed
FOPCEB,, <0 .<.0

@ move which Diem stated:

e«eowould serve the dual purpose of providing an ex-
pression of the United States' determination to halt the
tide of communist aggression and of preparing our forces
in the minimum of time. ob

This certainly sounded very much like the recommendation of the Task
Force draft, or McGarr's later expanded version of that proposal; par-
ticularly since Diem explicitly stated that he had McGarr's advice in

66
; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
