Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

association formed will be in accord with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations dealing with regional arrange-
ments.

"b. The United States should act to develop and strengthen
the security of the area from Communist external aggression or
internal subversion. These steps should take into account any
benefits to the security of Asia which may flow from the develop-
ment of one or more regional groupings. The United States on its
own initiative should now:

(1) ‘Improve the United States position with respect
to Japan, the Ryukyus and the Philippines.

'(2) Scrutinize closely the development of threats
from Communist aggression, direct or indirect, and be prepared to
help within our means to meet such threats by providing political,
economic, and military assistance and advice where clearly needed
to supplement the resistance of the other governments in and out
of the area which are more directly concerned.

(3) Develop cooperative measures through multi-
lateral or bilateral arrangements to combat Communist internal
subversion.

(4) Appraise the desirability and the means of
developing in Asia some form of collective security arrangements,
bearing in mind the following considerations:

(a) The reluctance of India at this time to
join in any anti-Communist security pact and the influence this
will have among the other nations of Asia.

(b) The necessity of assuming that any collec-
tive security arrangements which might be developed be based on r
the principle of mutual aid and on a demonstrated desire and
ability to share in the burden by all the participating states.

(c) The necessity of assuring that any such
security arrangements would be consonant with the purposes of
any regional association which may be formed in accordance with
paragraph 3-a above.

(ad) The necessity of assuring that any such
security arrangement would be in conformity with the provisions
of Article 51 of the Charter relating to individual and collec-
tive self-defense.

"ce, The United States should encourage the creation of
an atmosphere favorable to economic recovery and development in
non-Communist Asia, and to the revival of trade along multi-
lateral, non-discriminatory lines. The economic policies of the

A-57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
