Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘ “
4 i)

qne reason for lic Leilure of the reneh renresentutive,
General nllessandri, to “articipute in the Japanese “surrender
cerenonics at Hanoi was the display of the Annomites of all
United Nations flags except’ thut of tae french at tne place
of tne ceremony. The annsmites refused to display the |french
flag on the grounds that the French had collaborated with the
Japanese in Indochina and the Chinese authnowities supoorted
the 4nnamites in the contention. This feeling against the \
French was seen in monster mass meetings held frequently in
Hanoi, Lue annamites having taken over sll administration ©
buildings and public unilities in that area. They placarded -
the city with signs and slogans, such as those reading "xill
the french"" ~- some of them in snzlish for the eyes of Americans.

~The Freneh con, of course, return to Indochina bit it
will be a mistake unless they are prepared to reentcr in
strength sufficicnt to overpower the Annamite resistance in
snort order. Jr the frenen attenpt to return to Indochina
without overwhelming forces ond impressive air supzgert, the
strugsle will be long and bloody. The ‘innamites have only
ligut arms - rifles, carbines oad hand grenades » and could
not stand up against heavy weapons, These have been pro-
vided them by the Americans as well as by the Japanese, the
American arms havin, been siven for use against the Japannse
prior to the latter's surrender. Yrouble at present is con-
fined larsely to the Hanoi-iiaiphong aud Vinh-liue areas with
tie .aigon" arca somewhnet better because of the presence of
Jar;e numbers of British troops, Laos and Cambodia are
practically frec of Anmimite influence.

The Chinese Cecupation Forces have been circunspect and
have compelled the annsmites in some cases, at Anerican” ~~
sussestion, to releise.arencl politital prisoners, They have
eiven no arms to thé aunonites, being interested” in obtaining
as wony as possible for tuemselves. Tne Chinese have, however,
now brougat in their own Annamite puppet, one Nsu Yen Hai Tan,
who is & member of the Annamite Revolutiohary League spon-
sored by the Kuomintang in Uhina. He is said to have been an
exile in China for the past twenbty-fy—" rears. He is associ-
ated with the independence movement, as 18 his party, but
has no place in the Government.

i

—
—.,/ -

Colonel Nordlinger, the sourcs of no:-— —/ th forssoings

—

information, states tuot he is proceeding to Washi icton

shortly and that ne will call at the Vepartnent in connection

with the delivery of Ho Chi Minh's letter to the Secretury of
State,

Respectfully yours,
ee (hed. e EM sip Fas

I ah as eee
Fhili’p LD. \Sprouse
American Vonsul

fnelosures:
C-78
