Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Tite Be THE ROLE AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE STATE OF VIETNAM
SUMMARY

One principal controversy over the Geneva Accords of 1954 stems from
the view that Vietnam under the Bao Dai regime was actually still a French
colony, and hence was obligated by the agreements reached by France at
Geneva. Specifically, it is argued, Article 27 of the agreement signed
py the French fixed responsibility for observance on the signatory govern-
ments "and their successors." The answer to the charge that the State of
Vietnam thereby became a guarantor of the Accords is partly a matter-of
international law -- a contentious point of law, given the relatively
new phenomenon of former colonial states assuming full sovereignty. But
it is also a matter of fact and of declaratory policy. In fact, the GVN
was an independent state before the Accords were signed, and was treated
as a separate state throughout the conference. It signed nothing at
Geneva. To the contrary, in its declarations it clearly repudiated the
Accords, and declined to accept any responsibility for observing or en-
forcing them.

The GVN had been given full independence from France on 4: June 195,
and was accepted as an equal by the other governments at Geneva. There-
fore, the GVN was not automatically obligated by the July agreements
between the Viet Minh and France. From the beginning of the conference,
the GVN interests clashed with French desires. The French wanted to end
the Indochina fighting even if disengagement entailed serious concessions
to the Viet Minh. Hard-line GVN counterproposals, running against the
prevailing spirit of compromise, were rejected by both the communist powers
and the West. The final wording of the agreement on the cessation of
hostilities was drawn up as the French and the Viet Minh would have it.

The U.S., intent on promoting some constructive outcome of the conference,
offered little support to the GVN. The U.S. did refuse to act on France's
behalf to pressure the GVN, and did urge the French to be more receptive
to the GVN delegates. But since U.K. and French delegates were ready to
make substantial accommodations with the communists to achieve a quick end
to the fighting, and with little U.S. backing, the GVN negotiating position
was foredoomed (Tab 1).

France, the dominant Western power in the disputed area, and the Viet
Minh were the designated executors of the Accords. Neither the armistice
agreement nor other aspects of the settlement were practicable without
DRV and French compliance. The GVN delegates at Geneva were emphatic in
their repeated refusal to accept GVN responsibility for accords signed
by France, especially with reference to partition and elections. No pre-
cipitate withdrawal of Prench military and diplomatic power from Vietnam
was foreseen, so that the Accords embodied the anomaly of ignoring the
on ye GVN, even with respect to enforcing the Accords on its territory

Tab 2).

B-1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
