§0

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

the Middle East -- the lands of the rising peoples. Their revolution is
the gréstest in human history. They seek an end to injustice, tyranny,
and exploitation. More than an end, they seek a beginning.

"And theirs is a revolution which we would support regardless of the
Cold War, end regardless of which political or economic route they should
choose to freedom.
_ "For the adversaries of freedom did not create the revolution; nor did
they create the conditions which compel it. But they are seeking to ride
the crest of its wave -- to capture it for themselves.

"yet their aggression is more often concealed than open. They have
fired: no missiles; and their troops are seldom seen. They send arms,
agitators, aid, technicians and propagenda to every troubled area. But
where fighting is required, it is usually done by others -- by guerrillas
striking at night, by assassins striking alone -- assassins who have taken
the lives of four thousand civil officers in the last twelve months in
Vietnam alone -- by subversive and saboteurs and insurrectionists, who in
some cases control whole areas inside of independent nations.

“With these formidable weapons, the adversaries of freedom plan to con-
solidate their territory -- to exploit, to control, and finally to destroy
the hopes of the world's newest nations; and they have ambition to do it
before the end of this decade. It is a contest of will and purpose as
well as force and violence -- a battle for minds and souls as well as lives
and territory. And in that contest, we cannot stand aside.

"We stand, as we have always stood from our earliest beginnings, for
the independence and equality of all nations. This nation was born of
revolution and raised in freedom. And we do not intend to leave an open
rosd for despotisn.

"There is no single simple policy which meets this challenge. Experi-
ence has taught us that no one nation has the power or the wisdom to solve
all the problems of the world or manage its revolutionary tides -- that
extending our commitments does not always increase our security -- that
any initiative carries with it the risk of a temporary defeat -- that
nuclear weapons cannot prevent subversion -- that no free people can be
kept free without will and energy of their own -- "

12. President Kennedy's Address to the United Nations, September 25, 1961
Public Pape:'s of the Presidents, Kenne 1961 “ :

“Finally, as President of the United States, I consider it my duty to
report to this Assembly on two threats to the peace which are not on your
crowded agenda, but which causes us, and-most of you, the deepest concern.

G=12 *
