~~

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

VI. THE CORNER IS TURNED -- JANUARY-MARCH 1968

The Johnsen Administration began 1968 in a mood of cautious hope
about the course of the war. Within a month those hopes had been
completely dashed. In late January and early February, the Viet Cong
and their North Vietnamese supporters launched the massive Tet assault

on the cities and towns of South Vietnam and put the Johnson Administration

and the American public through a profound political catharsis on the
wisdom and purpose of the U.S. involvement in Vietnam and the soundness
of our policies for the conduct of the war. The crisis engendered the
most soul-searching debate within the Administration about what course to
take next in the whole history of the war. In the emotion laden atmos-
phere of those dark days, there were cries for large-scale escalation on
the one side and for significant retrenchment on the other. In the end
an equally difficult decision -- to stabilize the effort in the South

and de-escalate in the North -- was made. One of the inescapable con-
clusions of the Tet experience that helped to shape that decision was
that as an interdiction measure against the infiltration of men and
supplies, the bombing had been a near total failure. Moreover, it had
not succeeded in breaking Hanoi's will to continue the fight. The only
other major justification for continuing the bombing was its punitive
value, and that began to pale in comparison with the potential (newly
perceived by many) of its suspension for producing negotiations with the
DRV, or failing that a large propaganda windfall for the U.S. negotiating
position. The President's dramatic decision at the end of March capped a
jong month of debate. Adding force to the President's announcement of
the partial bombing halt was his own personal decision not to seek re-
election. :

A. The Crisis Begins

1. Public Diplomacy Gropes On

Following Ambassador Harriman's visit to Bucharest in
November 1967 the next move in the dialogue of the deaf between Hanoi
and Washington was a slightly new formulation of the North Vietnamese
position by Foreign Minister Trinh on December 29. Speaking at a
reception at the Mongolian Embassy he stated:

After the United States has ended the bombing and all
other acts of war, /North Vietnam/ will hold talks with
the Unitea States on questions concernel.

‘py shifting his tense from the "could" of his 28 January 1967 statement
to "will", Trinh had moved ‘his position just slightly closer to that of
the U.S. This statement was, no doubt, a part of a secret diplomatic
dialogue, possibly through the Rumanians, that must have continued into
the new year. The State Department readily acknowledged that Trinh's

11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
