Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in his weekly NODIS that while "pacification progress throughout the
rest of Vietnam was minimal at best, largely because of the political
climate...Some forward movement occurred in the Hop Tae effort growing
out of U.S. Mission discussions with the Prime Minister on September 25.
The number of operating checkpoints in the Hop Tac area increased
markedly; command areas were strengthened; available troop strength
increased." 4/ Minor statistical advances, taken out of context, were
continually being used in the above manner to prove overall progress.

The MACV Command History for 1964 reflects the official view: "At
the end of 1964, Hop Tac was one of the few pacification areas that
showed some success and greater promise." 5/ But subsequent events in
the area do not bear out this view. In February of 1966 for example --
18 months after the birth of Hop Tac -- when the Hop Tac area was desig-
nated as one of the four "National Priority Areas," the briefers were
unable to show Ambassadors Lodge and Porter any progress in the preced-
ing year. They could not even produce a plan for the coming year.
Originally Hop Tac was focused on cleaning out the nearest YC base
areas, but by February of 1966 ~-- with the GVN unable to stop the growing
VC build-up, the emphasis was "placed on lines of communications, with
special attention to be given vital installations including Bien Hoa and
Tan Son Nhut air bases and ammunition and gasoline depots." 6/ The best
the briefers could do, in the final briefing prior to the Honolulu
Conference,was to say that they hoped to pacify 72 hamlets in the entire
seven-province area, and "consolidate" 14) hamlets in Gia Dinh -- which
meant the hamlets ringing Saigon, including many which were really part
of the city. Lodge and Porter were told that day "there has been a
lessening of security in Hau Nghia and Gia Dinh provinces. RF and PF
units generally are not up to authorized strengths. The new cadre pro-
gram should be helpful in solving the problem of continued hamlet security
after pacification...The 1966 plan is not overly optimistic from a military
standpoint." 7/ (The memorandum recording of this meeting, made by a
member of General Lansdale's staff, shows as the only Ambassadorial gui-
dance after this sobering report: "Maps drawn to depict progress of
Rural Construction (Pacification) should show as the goal only that area
to be pacified during the year...The U.S. Mission manpower committee
should look into the use of refugees in the national labor foree.") 8/

The Vietnamese were cynical about Hop Tac; it was something, specu-
lation ran, that General Khanh had to do to keep the Americans happy, but
it was clearly an American show, clearly run by the United States, and
the Vietnamese were reluctant to give it meaningful support. It was one
of the first majcr programs with which the Unisved States became publicly
identified (since Diem had always kept the United States in as much of
a background role as possible -- and its shortcomings were in part derived
from this fact.

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
