Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C. Study Groups and Strategists: Summer 1966

In the aftermath of Honolulu, task forces and study groups were suddenly
. assembling, producing papers on priorities, on organization of the Mission,
on the role and mission of various forces. They were all manifestations

of the new mood that had come over the Mission and Washington on pacifi-
cation. The advocates of pacification -- with their widely differing view-
points -- all saw their chance again to put forward their own concepts

to a newly interested bureaucracy, starting with Komer and Porter.

The most important of the numerous studies were:

1. The Program for the Pacification and Long-Term Development of
South Vietnam (Short Title: PROVN) -- commissioned by the Army
Chief of Staff in July of 1965, completed and submitted in
March 1966;

2. The Priorities Task Force -- formed in Saigon in April 1966
by Deputy Ambassador Porter, completed in July 1966;

3. The Inter-Agency "Roles and Missions" Study Group -- formed
by Porter in July 1966, completed in August.

While the recommendations of these studies were never accepted in toto,
they all play key roles in the development of strategic thinking in Washing-
ton and Saigon during the latter part of 1966, and they continue to be in-
fluential today.

PROVIT -- As early as the summer of 1965, General Johnson saw the need.
to select a superior group of officers, and set them to work on a long-
term study of the problem in Vietnam. The study was intended for internal
Army use, and was for a while after its completion treated with such deli-
eacy that Army officers were forbidden even to discuss itsexistence outside
DOD, This was unfortunate, because in content it was far-ranging and thought-
ful, and set a precedent for responsible forward planning and analysis which
should be duplicated in other fields.

PROVN was charged with "developing new sources of action to be taken
in South Vietnam by the United States and its allies, which will, in con-
junction with current actions, modified as necessary, lead in due time
to successful accomplishment of U.S. aims and objectives." With this broad
mandate, PROVN staff spent eight months questioning returning officers from
Vietnam, studying the history of the country, drawing parallels with other
countries, analyzing the structure of the U.S. Mission; and making recom-
mendations. In the end, the PROVN team decided that there was "no unified
effective pattern" to the then-current efforts in Vietnam, and submitted
a broad. blueprint for action. Its thesis was simple:

"The situation in South Vietnam has seriously deteri-
orated. 1966 may well be the last chance to ensure eventual
success. ‘Victory’ can only be achieved through bringing

Th TOP SECRET - Sensitive
