—

Fe ———

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The U.S. effort was clearly aimed at spurring the practical
application of the “oil blot" analogy. ‘The effects, however, were
to demonstrate how difficult it was to translate simple counterinsurgent
theory into practice, how convoluted and personal were the ARVN lines
of influence, and how frustrating it was under these circumstances to
exercise influence by persuasion.

In Mey, the Prime Minister proposed organizational changes in
Hop Tac to return much of it to the operational control of the IIT
Corps commender. These changes were rejected by COMUSMACV, but he did
agree that the III Corps commander might be named chairman of the
Hop Tac Council. In June, before anything could be done on this pro-
posal, a coup with General Ky at its head returned the military to
power. By the summer of 1965, Hop Tac was being completely over-
shadowed by the build-wp of U.S. forces.

In September, Lodge returned to Vietnam for his second stint as
Ambassador. He immediately asked a U.S. Mission officer for a private
assessment of the Hop Tac program. The report frankly described Hop Tac
as & failure and stressed as reasons the unrealistic goals of the program,
the irrelevance of the concentric circle concept to actual areas of GVN
and VC strength, the fact that it was an American plan never really given
first priority by the Vietnamese, the area's political vulnerability to
fallout from Saigon political changes, and General Ky's lack of support
for it. The report recommended letting Hop Tac slowly die. On September
15, the Mission Council deliberated inconclusively on the fate of the
program:

General Westmoreland said that while Hop Tac could be
said only to have been about 50% successful, it had undoubtedly
averted a VC seige of Saigon. Ambassador Lodge then briefly
reviewed the original reasons for the emphasis placed on the
area surrounding Saigon and said that they were still valid,
primarily because of the heavy density of population. He noted,
however, lack of a clear commitment to Hop Tac on the part of
the GVN, possibly due to the fact that the Vietnamese consider
the program an American scheme. The view was also expressed
that the trouble may also lie in US/GVN differences over some
fundamental concepts in Hop Tac. 161/

By the end of 1965, the proposal for Hop Tac programs in I, II, and
IV Corps had refined itself into the scheme for National Priority Areas
that became the focus of attention in 1966. Hop Tac itself, in the
Saigon vicinity, continued on into 1966 to be finally phased out at the
end of the year and replaced by the III Corps R/D Council and a U.S.
military effort to protect the capital known as Operation FAIRFAX.

68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
