Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

First Bombing Pause. Pressure for some form of bombing halt
had mounted steadily throughout April and early May and, although
the President did not believe that such a gesture would evoke any
response from Hanoi he did order a brief halt effective May 13, "to
begin" as he expressed it "to clear a path either toward restoration
of peace or toward increased military action, depending on the reattion
of the Communists." The political purpose of the pause -- to test
Hanoi's reaction -- was kept under very tight wraps, and the project
was given the code name MAYFLOWER. A great effort was made to inform
Hanoi of the fact of the pause and of its political intent. Soviet
Ambassador Dobrynin was given an oral explanation by Secretary Rusk,
confirmed by a tough written statement, reasserting Rusk's public
position that the cessation of the DRV's attacks upon South Vietnam
yas the only road to peace and that the US would be watchful, during
the pause, for any signs of a reduction in such attacks. A similar
statement was sent to U.S. Ambassador Kohler in Moscow, for personal
transmittal to the DRV Ambassador there. Kohler, however, met with
refusal both from the DRV Ambassador to receive, and from the Soviet
Foreign Office to transmit, the message. A written note, sent to the
DRV embassy, was returned ostensibly unopened. Nevertheless, it is
quite clear that Hanoi was more than adequately advised of the
contents of the U.S. message through the various diplomatic channels
that were involved.

Given the "rather strenuous nature" of the U.S. note to Hanoi
and the briefness of the pause, it is hardly surprising that the
initiative encountered no receptivity from the Soviet government
and evoked no positive response from Hanoi. ‘The latter denounced
the bombing halt as "a worn out trick of deceit and threat Seren
and the former, in the person of Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko
in a conversation with Rusk in Vienna, branded the U.S. note to
Hanoi as "insulting".

Having thus been unmistakably rebuffed; the President ordered
the resumption of the bombing raids effective May 18. The entire
pause was handled with a minimum of public information, and no
announcement was made of the suspension or of the resumption. But
prime ministers or chiefs of state of a half dozen key friendly
governments were briefed fully after the event. A still somewhat
ambiguous diplomatic move was made by Hanoi in Paris on May 18, a
few hours after the bombing had been resumed, in which Mai Van Bo,
the DRV economic delegate there seemed to imply a significant
softening of Hanoi's position on the Four Points as "prior conditions.”
But subsequent attempts at clarification left that issue as ambiguous
as it had been before. 7

viii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
