Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

g0T
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Cc. The Year End View
1. Presidential Decisions

The President apparently did not react immediately to the
MeNemara recommendations, although he must have approved them in general.
He was at the time preparing for the Manila Conference to take place
October 23-25 and major decisions before would have been badly timed.
Thus, formal decisions on the McNamara recommendations, particularly
the troop level question would wait until he had returned and the elec-
tions were over. At Manila, the President worked hard to get the South
Vietnamese to make a greater commitment to the war and pressed them for
specific reforms. He also worked hard to get a generalized formulation
of allied objectives in the war and saw his efforts succeed in the agreed
communique. Its most important feature was an appeal to the North Viet-
namese for peace based on a commitment to withdraw forces within six
months after the end of the war. It contained, however, no direct refer-
ence to the air war.

While in Manila, the President and his advisors also con-

ferred with General Westmoreland. As McNaughton subsequently reported

to McNamara (who did not attend), Westmoreland opposed any curtailment

of the air war in the North, calling it “our only trump card." 66/

Unlike the Jason Study Group, Westmoreland felt the strikes had definite
military value in slowing the southward movement of supplies, diverting
DRV manpower and creating great costs to the North. Rather than stabilize
or de-escalate, Westmoreland advocated lifting the restrictions on the
program. Citing the high level of aircraft attrition on low priority
targets, he warned, "you are asking for a very bad political reaction." 67/
He recommended that strikes be carried out against the MIG airfields, the
missile assembly area, the truck maintenance facility, the Haiphong port
facilities, the twelve thermal power plants, and the steel plant. When
McNaughton pressed him on the question of whether the elimination of

these targets would have much payoff in reduced logistical support for the
Southern war, Westmoreland backed off stating, "I'm not responsible for
the bombing program. Admiral Sharp is. So I haven't spent much time on it.
But I asked a couple of my best officers to look into it, and they came

up with the recommendations I gave you." In any event, he opposed any
pause in.the bombing, contending that the DRV would just use it to
strengthen its air defenses and repair air fields. McNaughton reported
that WestmoreJand had repeated these views to the President in the presence
of Ky and Thieu at Johnson's request; moreover, he planned to forward

them to the President in a memo [not available/ at the request of Walt

Rostow.

As to the barrier, McNaughton reported that, "Westy seems
to be fighting the barrier less (although he obviously fears that it

is designed mainly to justify stopping RT [ROLLING THUNDER], at which

170 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
