Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

General Thieu concluded one of his regular discussions of the mili-
tary situation with General Westmoreland by making a few pronouncements
on political matters. Westmoreland stressed what was to become a per-
sistent American theme, the importance of unity in the GVN leadership.
Unebashedly Thien said that the key question was whether the Army would
stey in power and what power they would retain. 2h/

6. Pacification and the Shift of ARVN

Komer, in Washington, continued to prod the Mission to goad GVi\.
It seemed time to remind them, he thought, of their Manila promise to
give top priority to lend reform. Lodge was asked to press Ky for
vigorous application of existing laws. 25/

Continuing emphasis on pacification and increased impatience at the
lack of progress brought another reorganization of the US Mission effort.
To unify and streamline the civilian side, the Office of Civil Operations
(0CO) was established in late November under Deputy Ambassador Porter.

An OCO Director in Saigon and a single Director of Civil Affairs for each
of the four corps became responsible for the Mission's civil support of
Vietnamese Revolutionary Development. 26/ Within GVN General Theng not
only lasted beyond the originally envisaged six months but was elevated
to Commissioner-General for Revolutionary Development with supervision
over the Ministries of RD, Public Works, Agriculture, and Administration
(Interior). 27/ These changes seemed to enhance the chances for sub-
stantive improvements. Washington wired,

Why not approach Thang and after telling him about your
reorganization and new faces you plan to put in region
and then provinces, suggest he essay a shake-up too....
As I recall, around Tet GVN issues a new promotion list,
which usually also entails some joint shifts. This might
provide a good cover. 28/

The reply offered now femiliar themes as the reasons for inaction,

Specifically, if we were to give Thang a list of district
chiefs and ask that they be removed, we do not think any
significant change would result. In the past this tactic
has proved cumbersome, even counterproductive, and tends

to lead either to reshuffling of positions with little or

no positive end result or to the Asian deep freeze treat-
ment. -

-.-At times we will have to make our views known on par-
ticular personalities if we find an intolerable situation
in key leadership positions, as we have done in Long An
and the ARVN 25th Div. Basically, however, we will seek
to ayoid too deep en immersion in Vietnamese personalities,

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
