78:

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ix. THE TROOP ISSUE

fo return to a question of judgement, it is difficult to assess how
far this gradual hedging of proposals for very strong commitments to
Vietnam simply reflected a desire (very probably encouraged by the White
House) to leave the President freedom of action. To some extent it surely
reflects a growing hope that perhaps the Laos cease-fire would come off;
the country would not be flatly lost; and consequently, that the May 1
Defense draft, and even the May 3 State draft, reflected a somewhat panicky
overestimate of how far we needed to go to keep Southeast Asia from falling
apart. The two motives obviously overlapped.

There are indications that, as late as May 5, the estimate for saving
something out of Laos remained bleak. On May 4, after a visit to the
President, Senator Fulbright (who had opposed intervention in Laos along
with other Congressional leaders) announced fran the steps of the White

_House that he would support troop commitments to Thailand and Vietnam. An

NSC meeting the following day (May 5) was devoted to discussing steps to
reassure Vietnam and Thailand. Then in the afternoon, the President
announced Vice President Johnson's visit to Asia at a press conference,
which included this garbled exchange:

Q. Mr. President, there have been reports that you
would be prepared to send American forces into South
Vietnam if that became necessary to prevent Commu-
nist domination of that country. Could you tell us
whether that is correct, and also anything else you
have regarding plans for that country?

A. Well, we have had a group working in the govern-

ment and we have had a Security Council meeting about

the problems which are faced in Vietnam by the guerrillas
and by the barrage which the present government is being
subjected to. The problem of troops is a matter -- the
matter of what we are going to do to assist Vietnam to
obtain [retain?/ its independence is a matter under con-
sideration. There are a good many [issues?/ which I
think can most usefully wait until we have had emsulta-
tions with the government, which up to the present time
-- which will be one of the matters which Vice President
Johnson will deal with; the problem of consultations with
the Government of Vietnam as to what further steps could
most usefully be taken. 23/

On May 8, the reconstituted International Control Commission (estab-
lished by the Geneva Agreement of 1954) arrived in Laos, hoping to
supervise a cease-fire. The cease-fire had been agreed to in principle
by both sides as early as May 1. ‘The question was whether the Pathet Lao

ho TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
