Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

profitable, and the concurrent and sustained interdiction of imports
would become possible. 146/

A eryptic pencil note on copy 4 of this JCSM initialled
by McNaughton indicated, "all incorporated in my 6/3/67 draft," and
listed "Main issues" as "(1) Total pressure (2) pilot losses (3) U.S.
'failure’." 147/ It is hard to know exactly what this could mean
since the JCS position was certainly not being adopted by the Secretary.
Moreover, there is no record of a 3 June draft. We will discuss a later
draft below, but it does not endorse the JCS position.

The Secretary of the Navy responded to Secretary McNamara's
questions with an attempt to construct models of the alternative north and
south of 20° target systems and war game attacks against them. It con-
eluded that an interdiction effort in southern NVN concentrated on
specified areas where traffic was already constricted by the terrain would
be more effective than the current program, "but by an uncertain incre-
ment over an undefinable base." U.S, losses would be- lower initially,
but would rise in time because NVN could be expected to redeploy anti-
aireraft defenses south. The manpower strain on NVN would not be as
at present, however, with the cessation of attacks on the high-value
targets in the northern part of the country. 148/

The Navy analysis also concluded that a greater inter-
diction effort north of 20°, without closing the ports, could not be
carried out with available resources "in a manner producing results
better than the present effort." The program would create greater
demand for repair and bypass construction, but it was not clear that it
would have a major effect on NVN's capability to import goods and ship
them to SVN. This alternative would be the most expensive in U.S. air-
craft and aircrews and would provide the least return in reducing NVN
supplies to SVN. 149/

Closing the ports in addition to stepping up the armed
reconnaissance effort in northern NVN would have a substantial effect
on imports at first but in time NVN could switch to other LOCs. The
cost would be mainly in efficiency. Reducing imports below NVN's mini-
‘mun requirements was probably beyond the current capability of the

pombing campaign. 150/

The Air Force response to Secretary McNamara was given
on 3 June. Cutting back the bombing to below the 20th parallel would
permit NVN to increase the input of men and supplies at the top of the
Neunnel" with the same or less effort than it was now expending, and
would result in a greater inflow into SVN. U.S, losses might go dow
temporarily, put NVN would shift its anti-aircraft resources southward,
and losses would rise again. The cutback would reduce the risk of
Chinese or Soviet involvement and might conceivably even start a process

65 : TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
