Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Under these conditions, the bombing program would continue the pressure
and would remain available as a bargaining counter to get talks started (or to
trade off in talks). But, as in the case of a stabilized level of US ground
forces, the stabilization of ROLLING THUNDER would remove the prospect of ever-~

escalating bombing as a factor complicating our political posture.and ar
tracting from the main Jov of Lae als in South Vietnam. 5

At the proper time, as discussed on pages 6-7 below, I believe we should
consider terminating bombing in all of North Vietnam, or at least in the North-
east zones, for an indefinite period in connection with covert moves toward
peace.

d. Pursue a vigorous As mentioned above, the
pacification - (Revolutionary Development program “has been and is thorouchiy
stalled. The large-unit oper ations war, which we know best how to fight and
where we have had our successes, is largely irrelevant to pacification as long
as we do not lose it. By and large, the people in rural areas believe that the
GVN when it comes will not stay but that the VC will; that cooperation with the
GVN will be punished by the VC; that the GYN is really indifferent to the people's
welfare; that the low-level GVN are tools of the local rich; and that the GVN is
ridden with corruption.

Success in pacification denends on the interrelated functions of nrovidins
pniysieal Security, destroying the VC apoareatus, motivating the peoole vO cooperate
and establishing responsive local government. An obviously necessary but not
sufficient r requirement for success of the Revolutionary Development cadre and

police is vigorously conducted and adequately prolonged clearing operations by
military troops, who will "stay" in the area, who behave themselves decently
and who show some respect for the people.

This elemental requirement of pacification has been missing.

in almost no contested area designated for pacification in recent years
have ARVN forces actually "cleared and stayed" to a point where cadre teams, if
available, could have stayed overnight in hamlets and survived, let alone
accomplish their mission. VC units of company and even battalion size remain
in operation, and they are more than large enough to overrun anything the local
security forces can put up. a

Now that the threat of a Communist main-force military victory has been
thwarted by our emergency efforts, we must allocate far more attention and a
portion of the regular military forces (at least half of the ARVN and perhaps
a portion of the US forces) to the task of providing an active and permanent
security screen behind which the Revolutionary Development teams and police can
operate and behind which the political struggle with the VC infrastructure ean
take place.

The US cannot do. this pacification security job for the Vietnamese. Ail
we can do is "massage the heart." For one reason, it is known that we do not
intend to stay; if our efforts worked at all, it would merely postpone the
eventual confrontation of the VC and GYN infrestructures. The GVN must do the
job; and I am convinced that drastic reform is needed if the GVN is going to
be able to do it. .

85 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
