Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

V. PROGRAM 6

1, Emergency Augmentation

Thus, the year ended with the combat elements of Program 5 either
closing in Vietnam or on their way to Vietnam on an accelerated schedule.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff, however, could only promise that, even with
these deployments, the rate of progress in Vietnam would continue to be
slow in light of the continuing restrictions imposed on the conduct of
military operations. c

In his year-end assessment of the military situation, however,
COMUSMACV had a somewhat more optimistic outlook. He indicated that
the Program 5 deployments had "provided us with an increased force
structure and logistics base for offensive operations". The past year,
he indicated, had been marked by steady free world progress, a notice-
able deterioration of the enemy's combat effectiveness, and his loss of
control over large areas and population.

"During 1967, the enemy lost control of large sectors of
the population. He faces significant problems in the areas
of indigenous recruiting, morale, health and resources control.
Voids in VC ranks are being filled by regular NVA. Sea infiltra-
tion through the Market Time area has diminished to near-insignifica-
tion proportions. Interdiction of the enemy's logistics train
in Laos and NVN by our indispensable sir efforts has imposed
significant difficulties on him. In many areas the enemy has
been driven away from the population centers; in others he has
been compelled to disperse and evade contact, thus nullifying
much of his potential. The year ended with the enemy increasingly
resorting to desperation tactics in attempting to achieve military/
psychological victory; and he has experienced only failure in
these attempts. Enemy bases, with sparse exception, are no
longer safe havens and he has necessarily become increasingly
reliant on Cambodian and Laotian sanctuaries..."

"The friendly picture gives rise to optimism for increased
successes in 1968, In 1967, our logistics base and force
structure permitted us to assume a fully offensive posture...
A greatly improved intelligence system frequently enabled us
to concentrate our superior military assets in preempting enemy
military initiatives leading us to decisive accomplishments in
conventional engagements. Materiel and tactical innovations
have been further developed and employed: Long range recon-
naissance patrols, aerial reconnaissance sensors, new 0-2A
observation aircraft, Rome plows, 47 (Spooky) gunships, air-
mobile operations and the Mobile Riverine Force (MRF), to name

z TOP SECRET - Sensitive
