Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

the requirements of North Vietnam's advance towards
socialism." 174/

Honey deprecated contrary statements issued by Hanoi about the same

time -- e.g., that the NVA would "always stand ready by the side of

the CPR in its struggle to recover Quemoy and Matsu, and to liberate
Taiwan. . ." -= and thought that:

"It is very probable, although not a scrap of evidence
has so far come to light which would corroborate it, that
Ho Chi Minh was secretly reassuring the Soviet leaders,
explaining that North Vietnam was supporting China only
with empty words, while her actions proved that she had
not been taken in by Maoist innovations." 175/

D. S. Zagoria interpreted the DRV strategy debate as
less a dispute over external relations than over internal priorities:
"The crucial local issue has resolved around the relative priority to
be assigned to economic development of the North and struggle in the
South." He concluded that "pro-Soviet" view prevailed simply because
"between 1957 and 1960, northern leaders agreed on the need to concen~
trate on economic development." 176

Proponents of both interpretations conclude that Hanoi's
predilection for the USSR was ipso facto a deferral of support for
the insurgency in the South. But the evidence supports a third
interpretation. ‘It is quite possible that the DRV leaders sought and
won Soviet support because they found it impossible amicably to set
priorities between internal and external national objectives. It seems
evident that only the Soviets could offer the wherewithal to pursue
both sets of goals simultaneously, and it is possible that the lao
Dong leaders opted for "guns and butter" rather than "socialism in
one country." The apparent harmony among the pro-China and pro-Russia .
"factions" by early 1958 bespeaks such a compromise solution. Of course,
serious doubt remains whether the Soviets would have valued DRV fealty
high enough to pay the price, yet it seems that such could have been
the case. The new DRV-USSR understanding reached during 1957 definitely
included the extension of material aid which North Vietnam needed for
its economic advancement. It evidently also included Soviet concurrence
in a more adventuresome policy toward reunification. Whether or not
specific DRV advances upon South Vietnam were countenanced, it is
evident that the DRV leaders had obtained Soviet recognition that North
Vietnam's circumstances placed it outside the range of strategic and
doctrinal considerations which had lead Khrushchev, et al., into
"neaceful competition" and "peaceful coexistence."

52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
