Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was ready the 26th, following individual meetings between members and
Gilpatric and Lansdale. Present files do not show whether there was
another full meeting of the group before the first version of the report
(dated April 26) was sent to the President on the 27th.

Here are the opening sections, which introduce the list of proposed
actions which make up the program. 7/

A PROGRAM OF ACTION TO PREVENT COMMUNIST DOMINATION OF
SOUTH VIETNAM
APPRAISAL OF THE SITUATION

After meeting in Hanoi on 13 May 1959, the Central Committee
of the North Vietnamese Commmist Party publicly announced its
intention "to smash" the government of President Diem. Follow-
ing this decision, the Viet Cong have significantly increased
their program of infiltration, subversion, sabotage and assas-
sination designed to achieve this end.

At the North Vietnamese Communist Party Congress in September
1960, the earlier declaration of underground wer by the Party's
Control Committee was reaffirmed. This action by the Party
Congress took place only amonth after Kong Le's coup in Laos.
Scarcely two months later there was a military uprising in
Saigon. The turmoil created throughout the area by this rapid
succession of events provides an ideal environment for the Com-
munist "master plan" to take over all of Southeast Asia.

Since that time, as can be seen from the attached map, the
internal security situation in South Vietnam has become critical.
What amounts to a state of active guerrilla warfare now exists
throvghout the country. The nutiber of Viet Cong herd-core
Communists has increased from 00 in early 1960 to an estimated
12,000 today. The number of violent incidents per month now
averages 650. Casualties on both sides toteled more than 4500
during the first three months of this year. Fifty-eight percent
of the country is under some degree of Communist control, rang-
ing from harassment and night raids to almost complete adminis-
trative jurisdiction in the Communist "secure areas."

The Viet Cong over the past two years have succeeded in
stepping up the pace and intensity of their attacks to the point
where South Vietnam is nearing the decisive phase in its battle
for survival. If the situation continues to deteriorate, the
Communists will be able to press on to their strategic goal of
establishing a rival "National liberation Front" government in
one of these "secure areas" thereby plunging the nation into
open civil war. They have publicly announced that they will
"take over the country before the end of 1961."

2
> MOP SECRET - Sensitive
