Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive L>

VI. Analysis ; i p

This paper has raised basically two analytical questions. First, ,
what was the significance of the landing of the two Marine battalions
rather than other units, such as the 173rd Airborne? Second, what was
the mix of objectives behind the deployment, and did the deployment meet
these objectives?

The significance of putting the Marines into Da Nang turns on whether
this deployment was intended or was viewed (1) as the first elements in
a phased build-up of U.S. ground combat forces, or (2) as a one-shot re-
sponse to a peculiar security need at Da Nang. There is evidence for
both propositions.

There are two pieces of evidence in support of the phased build-up
proposition. First, no less than seven CINCPAC contingency plans treated
Da Nang as a base for U.S. Marine Corps activity, and at least two of
those plans provided for major Marine ground forces in the I Corps tacti-
cal zone of South Vietnam. Except for Phase II of OPLAN 32-64, however,
contingency plan build-ups of force were predicated on overt DRV or Chi-
nese Communist action. At the time of the initial landings, such overt
action was anticipated in the OPLAN but had not yet occurred. It was
a fact, on the other hand, that some sort of action was needed in the
South to halt the course of the insurgency there, and that two Marine >
BLT's would not do the trick.

The second piece of evidence was the last minute attempt by Ass't
Secretary of Defense McNaughton to substitute the 173rd Airborne for the
Marines, and CINCPAC's strong reaction against this attempt. The only
apparent rationale for the McNaughton move is as a blocking measure against
expected pressures for further build-ups as embodied in the contingency
plans. The substitution would have created planning tangles for the Chiefs
and CINCPAC and, therefore, would have delayed pressures for further de-
ployment pending the development of new plans. CINCPAC's vigorous response,
based on administrative and logistic arguments, coupled with concern for
the loss of an airmobile reserve force, persuaded Washington and thwarted
the McNaughton effort. It is interesting to note, in this regard, that
McNaughton, at least on the record, did not receive any support for his
attempt. Conceivably, Ambassador Taylor, who had expressed serious res-
ervations about the implications of the ground force deployment, could have
joined forces with McNaughton. Taylor's failure to do so was probably
based on the fact that he did not believe the pressures could be signi-
ficantly thwarted by the substitution, and that, therefore, it made much
more military sense to proceed as planned.

The evidence against the phased build-up proposition and for the

. one-shot-security hypothesis rests on one major document, and paradoxically,
on the absence of other documents. The major document is the McGeorge Bundy
Memorandum for the President of February 7, 1965. In this memorandum,

Bundy reviews the entire situation in Vietnam without any reference to
future ground force deployment -;- even though the request for the Marine

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
