Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

should be limited to reprisals (General Wheeler dis-
sented, stating that our losses might be higher in
the long run with such an approach).

(8) That the loss of South Vietnam would be more serious
than stated in Section II of the Working Group's
draft papers and that the Administration's assess-
ment should be revised at least in the direction of
the JCS viewpoint (George Ball argued against this

judgment). 115/

The context of the Principals' discussion of this last point
contained some significant expressions of opinion. Secretary Rusk stated
the viewpoint that the confidence of other nations in the United States
would be affected by the loss of South Vietnam despite their possible
indifference to the political struggle in Southeast Asia. He added that
if we did nothing to effect the course of events in Vietnam it would
have the effect of giving more to de Gaulle. However, Rusk did not accept
the Working Group's rationale that we would obtain international credit
merely for trying. In his view, the harder we tried and then failed, the
worse our situation would be. McGeorge Bundy disagreed with this last
point, except to acknowledge that to attempt something like Option B and
then quit would clearly be demaging. Secretary Mcilamara seemed to support
the (McGeorge) Bundy view, stating that "B" followed by failure would
clearly be worse then Option C followed by a compromise settlement.
George Ball expressed strong agreement with the last Rusk point, saying
that de Gaulle would portray us as being foolish and reiterating that the
damage to U.S. prestige would be worse if we tried either "B" or "C" and
failed. General Wheeler stated the opinion that to do little or nothing
at this point would be an act of bad faith. Mr. McCone pointed out a
perpetual dilemma if the Administration continued to act despite South
Vietnamese deterioration; hence, he urged great care. 16/

It is interesting to note the views and associations of the two
occasional dissenters in the series of consensus judgments rendered by
the Principals. General Wheeler, Chairman of the JCS, expressed view-
points consistent throughout with the recorded JCS views on future courses
of action. On the other hand, George Ball, Under Secretary of State, had
no obvious jurisdictional or institutionel influences to affect his judg-
ments. Nevertheless, known to Administration observers as "the devil's
advocate,” he had developed something of a reputation as an independent
thinker, At about the time of the Working Group deliberations, for
example, he developed a paper suggesting U.S. diplomatic strategy in the
event of an imminent GVN collapse. In it, he advocated working through
the U.K., who would in turn seek cooperation from the USSR, in arranging
an international conference (of smaller proportions than those at Geneva)
at which to work out a compromise political settlement for South Vietnem.
117/ In addition, Ball's prevalent occupation with European affairs may
have influenced him to view Southeast Asia as of lesser importance to the
U.S.. national interest.

~ ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
