Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"We are honoring a treaty which committed us to ‘act to meet the
common danger’ in the face of ‘aggression by means of armed attack' in
the treaty area. And this commitment is also being honored by Australia,
New Zealand, the Philippines, and Thailand--as well as by the remark-
able action of South Korea, which was not bound by treaty in this manner.

"We are also dealing with the gross and systematic violation of an
agreement, signed in 1962, which committed all parties, including Hanoi,
to withdraw their military forces from Laos; to refrain from reintro-
ducing such forces; and to refrain from using the territory of Iaos for
interference in the internal affairs of other countries.

"We are also encouraged by the efforts of the people of South Viet
Nam to make a transition to orderly constitutional government of the
kind which the ner of South Korea have pe with such notable
success since 1961

"And we are answering, as we have had to answer on other occasions,
the question: Are the word and commitment of the United States reliable?
For the United States cannot be faithful to its alliances in the Atlantic
and unfaithful to its alliances in the Pacific."

oe. ae

"But in the perspective I have presented tonight, what is old-
fashioned about Viet Nam is the effort by the leaders in Hanoi to make
their lifelong dream of achieving control over Southeast Asia come to
reality by the use of force.

"It is their concept of ‘wars of national liberation’ that is old-
fashioned. It is being overtaken not merely by the resistance of the
seven nations fighting there, but also by history and by increasingly
pervasive attitudes of pragmatism and moderation.

“History, I deeply believe, will show in Southeast Asia, as it has
displayed in many other parts of the world, that the international status
uo cannot be altered by use of external force. That demonstration is
costing the lives of many South Vietnamese, Americans, Koreans, Australians,
and others who understand the danger to them of permitting a change in the
territorial or political status quo by external violence -- who cherish
the right of self-determination for themselves and for others.

"Tf the argument I have laid before you is correct -- and if we
have the common vill to hold together ard get on with the job -- the
struggle | in Viet Nam might be the last great confrontation of the post-
war era.”

D-106
