Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The U.S. sought to create and employ policy instruments similar to those
it was bringing into play against the Soviets in Europe: collective
security organizations, economic aid, and military assistance. For
example, Congress, in the opening paragraphs of the law it passed in
1949 to establish the first comprehensive military assistance progran,
expressed itself "as favoring the creation by the free countries and

the free peoples of the Far East of a joint organization, consistent

with the Charter of the United Nations, to establish a program of self-
help and mutual cooperation designed to develop their economic and social
well-being, to safeguard basic rights and liberties, and to protect their
security and independence...." But, the negotiating of such an organiza-
tion among the disparate powers and political entities of the Far Fast was
inherently more complex a matter than the North Atlantic Treaty nations
had successfully faced. The U.S. decided that the impetus for collective
security in Asia should come from the Asians, but by late 1949, it also
recognized that action was necessary in Indochina. Thus, in the closing
_months of 1949, the course of U.S. policy was set to block further com-
munist expansion in Asia: by collective security if the Asians were
forthcoming; by collaboration with major European allies and commonwealth
nations, if possible; but bilaterally if necessary. On that policy course
lay the Korean War of 1950-1953, the forming of the Southeast Asia Treaty
Organization of 1954, and the progressively deepening U.S. involvement in
Vietnam.

January and February, 1950, were pivotal months. The French took
the first concrete steps toward transferring public administration to Bao
Dai's State of Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh denied the legitimacy of the latter,
proclaiming the DRV as the "only legal government of the Vietnam people,"
and was formally recognized by Peking and Moscow. On 29 January 1950,
the French National Assembly approved legislation granting autonomy to
the State of Vietnam. On February 1, 1950, Secretary of State Acheson
made the following public statement:

"The recognition by the Kremlin of Ho Chi Minh's communist
movement in Indochina comes as a surprise. The Soviet acknowl-
edgment of this movement should remove any illusions as to the ~
‘nationalist’ nature of Ho Chi Minh's aims and reveals Ho in
his true colors as the mortal enemy of native independence in
Indochina.

"Although timed in an effort to cloud the transfer of
sovereignty by France to the legal Governments of Laos, Cam~
bodia and Vietnam, we have every reason to believe that those
legal governments will proceed in their development toward
stable governments representing the true nationalist senti-
ments of more than 20 million peoples of Indochina.

"Brench action in transferring sovereignty to Vietnam,
laos and Cambodia has been in process for some time. Fol-
lowing French ratification, which is expected within a few
days, the way will be open for recognition of these legal

A-7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
