Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

resistance to Japan in Indo-China. The British may likewise

be expected to encourage this view. It seems to me that with-
out prejudicing in any way our position regarding the future _
of Indo-China we can combat this trend by making public our
desire to render such assistance as may be warranted by the
circumstances and by the plans to which we are already com-
mitted in the Pacific area. To this end I attach a draft of

a suggested statement for publication, subject to your approval,
by the State Department.

/s/ E.R. Stettinius, Jr.

Enclosures:
1. Proposed Statement.
2. Copy of telegram
from Ambassador Caffery
[not included here/

[Enclosure Bas
PROPOSED STATEMENT

The action of the Japanese Government in tearing away the
veil with which it for so long attempted to cloak its domination
of Indo-China is a direct consequence of the ever-mounting pres-
sure which our arms are applying to the Japanese Empire. It is
a link in the chain of events which began so disastrously in the
summer of 1941 with the Franco-Japanese agreement for the "common
defense" of Indo-China. It is clear that this latest step in
the Japanese program will in the long run prove to be of no avail.

The Provisional Government of the French Republic has requested
armed assistance for those who are resisting the Japanese forces r
in Indo-China. In accordance with its constant desire to aid all
those who are willing to take up arms against our common enemies,
this Government will do all it can to be of assistance in the
present situation, consistent with plans to which it is already
committed and with the operations now taking place in the Pacific.
It goes without saying that all this country's available resources
are being devoted to the defeat of our enemies and they will con-
tinue to be employed in the manner best calculated to hasten

their downfail.

A-17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
