Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

As early as the fall of 1955, limitations that later were
to loom large on his ability to attract subordinate leadership were
perceived:

" , . « His cabinet is composed primarily of loyal
technicians who lack political stature. Most well known
political figures of the pre-Diem period have been alienated
by Diem's unwillingness to trust them and by his insistence
that unduestioned acceptance of his leadership is the only
basis for cooperation. Diem has depended heavily on his
unpopular brothers for advice and entrusts them with positions
of great responsibility. His tendency toward ‘one man rule,'
his dependence on his brothers for advice, and his rejection of
Vietnamese leaders whom he does not trust, has denied his
Sher on many of the few trained administrators." (Ibid.,
pp+ 3-

As for the public, when he took office in July 1954, the
most significant political convictions of most South Vietnamese were
“antipathy for the French combined with a personal regard for Ho Chi
Minh as the symbol of Vietnamese Nationalism. ..." (Ibid., p. 2)

Diem's efforts to "galvanize mass popular support”
eoncentrated initially on "exploiting popular antipathy for Bao Dai
and the French" and subsequently on developing "strong anti-Communist
sentiment." (Ibid., p. +) Nevertheless, confronting a communist
regime in North Vietnam "possessing a far stronger Army, a more
experienced administration, greater cohesion of leadership and greater
drive than the government of South Vietnam," and led by Ho Chi Minh,
"Prenier Diem will almost certainly not agree to a test of relative
popular strength in national elections." (Ibid., pe 5)

Although no estimates in the 1955-1956 period assumed
the communists would open guerrilla operations immediately upon the
final frustration of their election hopes in July 1956, the estimates
recognized increasing pressures upon the communists for recourse to
violent methods of achieving their long-run objectives. The 19 October
1955 NIE held that:

" ,. . . They probably estimate that unless they
effectively challenge the position of the Diem government
the latter will gradually strengthen and stabilize its
position. Moreover, they have probably concluded that Diem
will not agree to elections or unification schemes which would
favor the Communists. Under these circumstances the chances
for a Communist take-over of the south by means short of open
force might decline. On the other hand, the Communists also
probably realize that the use of force against South Vietnam --

10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
