Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(2) Vietnam Planning

The JCS, in a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense
on 5 October, 1961, noted that although recommendations had been for-
warded on the subject of intervention in Southeast Asia, nothing had
been done. "The time is past," they stated, “when action short of inter-
vention could reverse the rapidly worsening situation." The JCS con-
sidered that "the execution of SEATO Plan 5, or a suitable variation
thereof" was the "military minimum commensurate with the situation." 66/
Defense replied on the same day, requesting JCS analysis of two concepts
for SEATO intervention in Vietnam:

"There appear to be two principal military possibilities.
One would involve the use of SHATO forces at the greatest
possible number of entry points along the whole of the South
Vietnamese border, probably excluding that part of the 17th
parallel now held in force by the Vietnamese Army itself. An
alternative possibility would be the use of SHATO forces to
eover solely the 17th parallel itself, which includes some
major infiltration routes, and thus to free the Vietnamese forces
now stationed there for engagement against the Viet Cong. Under
either possibility, planning should envisage maximum possible use
of the SEATO forces to establish effective communications in as
wide an area of Viet-Nam as possible, and to serve as a means
for introducing new techniques into the Vietnamese forces them-
selyes. The forces would, of course, be entitled to take all
necessary action for their own security, but would not (unless
the concept were later expanded) engage in offensive operations
against the Viet Cong that were not strictly necessary to their
own security. Your military recommendations for the refinement
of these guidelines into more precise rules of engagement should
be a part of your response." 67/

The JCS reply, on 9 October 1961, noted that the use of SEATO troops

all along the border was "not. feasible" because the VC could bypass such
forces or attack them piecemeal. Further, the concept of use of SEATO
troops at the 17th parallel was "“feasible....but militarily unsound"
because the area was not the VC main avenue of approach, and also because
the move could easily be interpreted as aggression against the DRV. The
JCS recommended, instead, that:

",..the over-all objective could best be served by the
implementation of SEATO Plan 5/61 or a variation thereof,
now." 68/

If this action could not be taken, the JCS continued, then the U.S. could
"provide a degree of assistance" to the GVN and could "free certain South
Vietnamese forces for offensive actions against the Viet Cong." No
action was taken to implement the SEATO plan.

A-30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
