Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Finally, the third thrust of the military discussions at Guam could
be detected in the military briefings which repeatedly stressed MACV's
alarm about the enemy campaigns unfolding in I CTZ. He believed that the
vc/NVA main force operations concentrated in the I CTZ area were part of
their initial attempt to seize the tactical initiative. Westmoreland was
more than ever impressed by the size and equipment of those enemy forces
in the area; in his eyes they posed a serious threat to U.S. operations
not only in I CTZ but all of SVN. The General also saw opportunity beckon,
for here the decisive battles would be fought -- present and portended
combat in I CTZ had become the schwerpunkt. 13/

The record of what additional views were exchanged between COMUSMACV
and the Washington leaders remains unclear. One can speculate that
Westmoreland surely indicated he might require more troops, but he probably
did not use any but round numbers, if he used them at all. At one point
in John McNaughton's notes the notation "100,000 more troops to VN?" is
listed under "Dirties," or unpleasant subjects for consideration, but other
than that no formal record of force level discussions remains. 4/

Guam 1967, was attacked in the press as a political jaunt that
impressed few and exhausted many. Symbolic as it may have been, it hardly
seemed worth a trip to the distant Pacific to introduce some new ambassadors
and award some air crew medals in the rain. 15/ The rapid transit through
time zones and wearing nature of the discussions generated little enthusiasm
among the official entourage, a malaise reflected throughout the newspaper
and official accounts of the trip. 16/ ‘The mood of optimism about the
ground war situation and the general low pressure aspect of the military
side of the Guam Conference did little to prepare the decision-makers for
the MACV-CINCPAC force requests which broke in late March. ’

2. The MACV Request: "Essential" Looks Like "Optimun"

On 18 March, General Westmoreland submitted his analysis of current
MACV force requirements projected through FY 68. This request was to
furnish the base line for all further force deployment calculations during
the Program 5 period. In preface to his specific request, COMUSMACV
reviewed his earlier CY 67 requirement which asked for 124 maneuver bat-
talions with their necessary combat and combat service support, a total
' strength of 555,741. This figure was the maximum figure requested during
the Program 4 deliberations. The approved Program | package included only
470,366 and was considerably below the MACV request, a fact which led to
the series of reclamas described in Section II. Westmoreland related that
MACV-CINCPAC had not strongly objected earlier to the 470,000 man ceiling
because of adverse piaster impact and the realities of service capabilities,
but, subsequent reassessment of the situation had indicated clearly to him
that the Program 4 force, although enabling U.S. force to gain the initi-
ative did not “permit sustained operations of the scope and intensity
required to avoid an unreasonably protracted war." 17/

ea TOP SECRET - Sensitive
