Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

at?

as TOP SECRET = Sensitive

initial objective was to stabilize the situation around Saigon and
protect the capital, then extend the zone of security in an ever
widening ring around the city. MACV appointed Colonel Jasper J. Wilson
to head the effort and by September 1964 9 plan had been produced and
the Vietnamese reluctantly induced to set up a special council to
coordinate the miltiple commands operating in the area. The plan
created four roughly concentric zones around the capital, each to be
successively cleared and secured, working from the "inside of the
doughnut out." Conceptually, three phases were involved in each zone:
first, search and destroy missions to eliminate main force units; then
a clearing phase using primarily squad and platoon size forces in patrols
and ambushes; and finally, the securing phase in which ARVN turned over
responsibilities for security in a zone to RF/PF and national police and
in which heavy emphasis was to be laid on positive rural economic and
social development efforts.

Hop Tac was launched on 12 September 1964, with a sweep through
Gia Dinh Province to the west and southvwest of Saigon by the ARVN 5lst
Regiment. The mission was eborted the following dey, however, by with-
drawal of the forces to participate in a coup. Nevertheless, organizational
efforts continued and more ARVN forces were concentrated in the Hop Tac
area. A special survey of the area by USOM, USIS, and MACV in October
revealed that little real progress was being made. In spite of the lack
of any visible evidence of genuine momentum, the Ambassador and MACV
continued to be encouraged by the modest statistical progress of Hop Tac
at a time when nearly every other activity in the country looked blacker
and blacker. The 1964 MACV Command History reflects the official view:
"At the end of 1964, Hop Tac was one of the few pacification areas that
showed some success and greater promise." 160/

Whether in response to Hop Tac or not, the VC substantially increased
their forces in the Hop Tac area in the first six months of 1965. MACV
estimated the growth at 65 percent and also noted that the new troops
were frequently equipped with Chinese weapons. This growth in enemy
strength in turn prompted some redeployment of RVNAF to strengthen capa-
bilities in the Capital Military Region. In February, 1965, just at
the time the U.S. was initiating the sustained bombing of North Vietnam
and beginning the first Marine combat deployments in the South, COMUSMACV
asked the I and IV Corps senior advisors to review current programs and
to develop Hop Tac-like plans for their respective areas as a basis
for discussion with their counterparts. Generel Westmoreland hoped to
concentrate the available resources of each Corps into its most critical
areas at a time when VC activity and successes were continually mounting
and enemy control of the country increasing dangerously. Again, the
operative concept was to be the oil blot. By April General Westmoreland
had convinced Minister of the Armed Forces Minh to ask each of the ARVN
Corps Commanders (except III Corps, in whose area Hop Tac was being
conducted) to draw up similar plens for their own areas of responsibility.

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
