Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

between North and South at the 1/th parallel was transformed into one
of the more forbidding frontiers of the world. A mass displacement

of nearly 5% of the population disrupted the polity and heightened
tensions in both North and South. And both the Democratic Government
of Vietnam (DRV) in the North, and the Government of Vietnam (GVN) in
the South armed, with foreign aid, for what each perceived as a coming
struggle over reunification. Some of the main roots of the present
eonflict run to these failures of Geneva.

B. The Partition of Vietnam
1. Provisions for Unifying Vietnam

The sole formal instrument of the Geneva Conference was the
document signed by the military commanders of the two hostile forces
termed "Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities in Viet-Nem," dealing
largely with the disengagement and regroupment of military forces. 4/
Article 1) of the Agreement contained one brief -- but fateful allusion --
to a future political solution: 5/

"Article lla. Pending the general elections which will
bring about the unification of Vietnam, the conduct of civil
administration in each regrouping zone shall be in the hands
of the party whose forces are to be regrouped there in virtue
of the present agreement...."

A more general expression of the intent of the conferees was the un-
signed "Final Declaration of the Geneva Conference," by which the
Conference "takes note" of the aforementioned Agreement and several
declarations by represented nations and: 6/

",..recognizes that the essential purpose of the agree-
ment relating to Vietnam is to settle military questions
with a view to ending hostilities and that the military
demarcation line is provisional and should not in any way
be interpreted as constituting a political or territorial
boundary...declares that, so far as Vietnam is concerned,
the settlement of political problems, effected on the basis
of respect for the principles of independence, unity, and
territorial integrity, shall permit the Vietnamese people
to enjoy the fundamental freedoms, guaranteed by democratic
institutions established as a result of free general elec-
tions by secret ballot. In order to insure that sufficient
progress in the restoration of peace has been made, and that
all the necessary conditions obtain for free expression of
the national will, general elections shall be held in July,
1956, under the supervision of an international commission
composed of representatives of the member States of the
International Supervisory Commission, referred to in the
agreement on the cessation of hostilities. Consultations

2 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
