Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"In the four priority areas are 192 hamlets, including
238,600 people, to be secured by the end of 1966. But GVN
efforts are not limited to these four priority areas. An
effort is underway which aims to raise the percentage of the
whole country which is pacified by about 14%; i.e., from the
current figure of about 52% to about 66% by the end of the
year..." * 1/

After the statements of Lodge and Westmoreland (who discussed only
military matters), the President said:

"I hope that out of this conference we will return with
clear views in our own minds as to how we can apply more mili-
tary pressure and do it better, how we can build democracy in
Vietnam and what steps must be taken to do it better, how we
can search for peace in the world, honorable and just peace,
and do it better.

"If we can do the first, namely, develop better methods
for defeating the Viet Cong and better methods for developing
a democracy, I have no doubt but that the third will be much
easier to do because you can bargain much better from strength
than you can from weakness." 3/

* On March 4, 1966, Lodge transmitted the text and charts of this brief-
ing to Secretary McNamara and apparently at the same time to the White
House, at the request of Jack Valenti. Lodge wrote:

"Dear Bob:

"At the request of Jack Valenti, I have put together a
pook containing the text and maps used in my presentation at
the Honolulu Conference. It is intended to serve as a current
indicator of pacification progress being made within the 1966
National Priority Areas...

"I think I should call attention to the fact that for Ameri-
cans, it is natural to set goals and then work to achieve them
by a specific date.

"This, however, is not the traditional Vietnamese way.
While they Have set a goal of 190 hamlets in the four priority
areas, my guess would be that by the end of 1966, they may
heve achieved somewhat more than this, but not necessarily the
ones which are listed here. In fact, if they ran into unexpectedly
heavy opposition in one place and find a particularly good and
unexpected opportunity elsewhere, they probably ought to change
the plan..." 2/

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
