14.

15.

16.

lire

18.

19.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

President Truman informs Hurley (China) that it was agreed

at Potsdam to divide Indochina at latitude 16° north for
operational purposes: the south going to Southeast Asia

Command (SPAC) and the north going to the China theater.

Hurley is urged to get Chiang Kai-shek's concurrence.

Truman telegram to Hurley from Berlin, 1 August 1945. ........ . eb

William J, Donovan, Director of the Office of Strategic
Services (OSS), reports on the French attitude toward
the Indochina Provisional Government to the Secretary

of State. A French committee was to negotiate with
Annamite leaders on terns favorable to Indochinas the
French were to act as advisors to the Indochina Pro-
visional Govermment with the power to sign treaties

for France. Annamite leaders, however, expressed the de-
Sire to have status as an American protectorate, exclud-
ing both French and Chinese occupation. ‘Threats of
violence over @ French reoccupation were made. Memoran-
dum by Donovan for Secretary of State, 22 August 1945......... 45

Dean Acheson, Acting Secretary of State, reasserts U.S.

policy toward French control of Indochina to the Chargé

in China (Robertson). The U.S, neither opposed nor

assisted re-establishment of French control in Indo-

china, Robertson was told. ‘The U.S. “willingness” to

see French control is based on the future outcome of

French claims of popular support. Acheson 1622 to

Robertion, 5 Cctoben 1G45.. oo... cupancieaes vewaroeesaereeesesr NO

Caffery (Paris) informs Secretary of State of the

Franco-British agreement on Indochina which recog-

nizes the French Civil Administration as sole author-

ity in Indochina south of the 16th parallel. Caffery

6006 to Secretary of State, 12 October 1945... .seeesecense. UG

Caffery reports that de Gaulle rejected announcing a

far-reaching, progressive policy designed to give

Indochinese greater authority, representation, and

responsibility in government under the pretext of

the state of disorder which prevailed in Indochina.

De Gavlle felt that "no such policy could be imple-

mented pending restoration of French euthority.”

Caffery 6857 to Secretary of State, 28 November 1945. ........ 50

19h6

Matthews requests direction from Acheson on transfer

of Lend-Lease vehicles from the British to the French

in Indochina, Acheson replies that President Truman

thought the U.S. should egree to the transfer. Acheson-

Matthews notes, 18 January LOW6. .....cseeeweene Ft A, Le nee WEES

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
AUP OhU Rt = ESS
