Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

seen as a.useful negotiating intermediary. The UN wes viewed as present-
ing a special problem because of the approaching annual issue of Conmmmist
Chinese membership. For this reason the Working Group felt that it would
_ not provide an effective negotiating forum until late February ox March
1965, although it acknowledged the necessity of presenting the U.S. case
before the Security Council. In view of these considerations the Working
Group viewed it most desirable to yield to the expected pressures for a
Geneva conference -- but only efter conducting "a number of military
actions ageinst the DRY." 8/

d. Perceived Reactions to Options. The Working Group evaluated
the relative advantages and disadvantates of the three options and con-
cluded that Option C provided the most promising course of action. The
evaluation was based on three general criteria; (1) likely reactions of
allied and non-aligned foreign govermnents; (2) reactions within South
Vietnam; and (3) effectiveness in bringing desired responses from the
Communist government. With respect to the first, the group reported:

"Option A would cause no adverse reactions but if it failed
it would leave a considerable after-taste of U.S. failure and
ineptitude; Option B would run major risks of sharply expressed
condemnation, which would be erased only if the course of action
succeeded quite clearly and in reasonable time; Option C would
probably be in between in both respects."

With respect to the remaining criteria, Option A seemed likely to achieve
little more than buying some time, and in some’ respects it appeared
counterproductive. While Option B was viewed as standing "a greater
chance than either of the other two of attaining our objectives," it

also was seen as running "considerably higher risks of major military
conflict with Hanoi and possibly Communist China.” On balance, Option C
was considered "more contollable and less risky of major military action"
than "B" and more likely "to achieve at least part of our objectives" than

Mh W 85/

The Working Group reported that Option A appeared to offer "little
hope of getting Hanoi out or an independent South Vietnam re-established."
It was recognized that the actions included in this option could not
physically affect the extent of infiltration from the North and would not
be likely to affect Hanoi's determination to continue its policies. At
best, the group believed, "they might...keep the DRV from engaging in
further spectaculars, and thus keep the scale of the conflict in the south
within some limits." However, Option A was conceded little chance of con-
tributing to en improved GVN, in the short period of additional time its
effects might possibly make available. The group recognized sagging morale
apd doubts concerning U.S, intentions as the "most immediate problem" in
South Vietnam. Several members felt that without further U.S. actions,
political collapse was imminent -- that to add only reprisals for VC
spectaculars might lift morale immediately thereafter, as in the case of

Se TOP SECRET - Sensitive
