Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET + Sensitive

had been helped in this endeavor by Bao Dai and French colonial admin-
istrators. The Binh Xuyen controlled prostitution and gambling in

Cholon and the Saigon-Cholon police force -- reportedly because Bay Vien
paid Bao Dai some 40 million piasters for these privileges. 4s/ still-
dissident sect leaders such as Ba Cut, whose 5000 Hoa Hao adherents
denounced Geneva and refused cooperation with Diem, and Frenchmen opposed
to Diem abetted Binh Xuyen intrigues against the government.

3. French Laxity Demands Strong U.S. Programs

More than the Vietnamese power struggles and Diem's inability
to consolidate his rule, French activities during the autumn of 195) gal-
vanized the United States. From acquiescence to U.S. demands in September,
American policy makers felt France had moved toward opposition to U.S.
demands by November. That this assessment of French actions was either
objective or fair is questionable.

a. The Washington Conference, September, 1954

After Franco-American discussions in Washington in late
September -- the first in a progression of monthly meetings on Vietnam --
the United States seemed to have scored highest. France promised to
support Diem, to grant independence to Vietnam quickly. 46/ The transfer
of financial, administrative, economic and other functions to the Viet-
namese had begun and would be completed by December 1954. That France
balked at U.S. demands for an immediate grant of independence outside of
the French Union is not surprising: French cultural, economic and polit-
ical interests in Vietnam were still strong; the Frenchman's belief in the
validity of the French Union was deep. No French government dared defy
public opinion by seeming to hasten the end of the French Union. 47/
France felt the U.S. had an "almost psychological attachment to 'inde-
pendence’ without giving sufficient thought and attention to the practical
problems and risks involved." 48/

Secondly, the U.S. had been able to defer a commitment
to finance the French Expeditionary Corps in Vietnam although an indication
that aid would be resumed, if not resumption itself, had been the first
order of French business at the Washington Conference. 49/ France agreed
to maintain the Corps in Vietnam but was told no aid figures would be
available until December. 50/

Both France and the U.S. thought their respective economic
aims had been won. France objected strongly to the idea of direct Ameri-
can aid to Vietnam on the grounds that it violated the Geneva Accords,
would needlessly provoke Communist China, promote graft and corruption in
Vietnam, and intensify the political struggle. Plus, "past (French)
sacrifices on behalf of Vietnam and their obligation as a member of the
French Union" made French supervision of aid essential. 57/ ‘To France,

a compromise agreement drafted by Walter Bedell Smith meant the U.S.

Wy TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ES
