Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

obtained from the French Headquarters by ways more or less devious. It
is also interesting to note that throughout last year, French officials
stridently denied that they intended to enclose Vietnam in a framework

of directly administered French territories.

External Relations

Vietnam or the individual three Kys: are flatly denied any foreign
representation as such. It or they will have the right to participate
in the representation of the French Union particularly in the surround-
ing countries where it or they have economic and cultural interests to
defend. But Vietnamese diplomats will represent regardless of their
grade, only the interests of the French Union.

Army

The States will have only armed forces which will be integrated into
the single army of the French Union. The army of the “etat libre” of
March 6 has thus disappeared although in time of peace the police forces
of the associated states of Indo China will assure "internal order".

Commissioners

The Commissioners of the Republic will be attached to the local
government. According to MICHEL, he or they will have only a very small
staff: a political, economic, and possibly a cultural adviser or coun-
sellor. His or their task will be to protect French interests. His
position as defined is very nebulous but it will develop great strength
as the defender of French interests. It offers such possibilities that
no attempt can yet be made to evaluate its workings.

CONCLUSION

The position taken in the speech is the -logical development of French
policy in Indo China. As France's military strength improved with willing-
ness to make concessions diminished. Before French troops were in place
in Tonkin, France was willing to concede recognition of Vietnam as an
"etat libre", having its own government, parliement, army and finances.

By the Modus Vivendi of September 14 France was demanding much strengthened
Federation with control of customs of primary importance. It was on the
willingness of the French to enforce this customs control that the Haiphong
incident of November 21 developed, It was from the desire of the French

to reduce the Vietname Government to impotence that the French counter-
position of November 23 with its famous ultimatum was taken.

At the present time, there are only two reasons for France to make
any concessions whatsoever; world opinion (to which the Indochinese French

have always been more or less immune - note the pre-war opium monopoly)
and the fact that they are faced with armed resistance,

~

a

109
