Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

On 8 July 1959, the United States armed forces sustained the first
combat deaths in the war: two U.S. servicemen were killed bya |
terrorist bomb inside a U.S. compound at Bien Hoa. Other Viet Cong
terrorist activities mounted to new levels of intensity. In the
fall of 1959, as recounted above, communist guerrillas began to
attack openly units of the Army of Vietnam, and to occupy province
and district capitals for short periods. 193/ On 12 September 1959,
Premier Pham Van Dong told the French Consul in Hanoi, that: —

"You must remember, we will be in Saigon tomorrow,
we will be in Saigon tomorrow." 194/

In November, 1959, Pham Van Dong twice told Canadian ICC Commissioner
Ericksen-Brown that "we will drive the Americans in the sea" -- state-
ments deemed significant enough by the Lao Dong hierarchy to elicit a
visit from General Giap to "reassure" Ericksen-Brown of the DRV's
peaceful intent. 195/

But the U.S. and Diem were both inured to threatening
communist invective; what should have been more ominous was the DRV's
willingness to act, first evident in Laos.

b. DRV Intervention in laos

During the First Indochina War, 1945-1954, a nominally |
independent national movement developed in laos, the paramilitary
Pathet Lao, and its political arm, the Lao Fatherland Front (Neo Tao
Hak Xat). 196/ It was quite clear, however, that the Viet Minh -- and
the lao Dong Party -- dominated the Resistance in Iaos; in fact, the
Viet Minh negotiated the Geneva settlement on behalf of its Laotian
allies. After the Accords were signed, some Iaotians were regrouped
to North Vietnam itself, and like the South Vietnamese, were formed
into NVA units. In 1954-1955, the DRV openly assisted the Pathet Lao
in consolidating political and military strength in Phong Saly and
Sam Neua, two provinces on Laos' northeast border with North Vietnam,
designated as regroupment zones by the Geneva Agreements. 197/ U.S.
intelligence obtained evidence that DRV cadres remained in these
provinces following regroupment, some as advisors, but some occupying
key political and administrative positions in the Pathet Lao and Neo
Iao Hak Xat. Captured documents indicate that a North Vietnamese head-
quarters for this effort was set up in Laos, with the following missions
assigned from Hanoi:

(1) implementation of the truce and the political
struggle;

(2) establishnent and training of the Laotian
(Communist) Party;

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
