Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Those followers of communism desirous of continuing their
theoretical studies will affiliate with the Indochina Association
of Marxist Studies.

CENTRAL COMMITTEE INDOCHINA COMMUNIST PARTY
November 11, 1945" 47/

The dissolution of the ICP was opposed by Tran Van Giauv and others from
Cochinchina, where the ICP rather than the Viet Minh, as such, had con-
stituted the primary political organization among the people, but Ho's
views prevailed.

Evidently Ho was also compelled by the opposition's constant demands
for representation in the government to schedule national elections for
January, 1946. However, fearful of Viet Minh control of the polls, and
respectful of its popular strength, the VNQDD and the Dong Minh Hoi on
23 December, 1945, negotiated with the Viet Minh an agreement to seat,
irrespective of the vote, 50 VNQDD and 20 Dong Minh Hoi delegates among
some 300-360 members of the National Assembly. 48/ the elections were
held as scheduled, openly in Tonkin and Annam, and clandestinely in
Cochinchina .

The chief of the American 0.5.8. group in Hanoi from 22 August to
12 December, 1945, in a debriefing in the Department of State on 30 Janu-
ary 1916, Segevibed the political situation in North Vietnam as follows:

"General Gallagher pointed out that little love was lost
between the Chinese and the French; that the presence of the
American group in Hanoi restrained anti-French Chinese action;
and that he himself had influenced General Iu Han (Commanding
General of Chinese armed forces in Indochina) to bring Sainteny
and Ho Chi Minh together and confront both with a strong direc-
tive that order must be maintained. The existence of a vacuum in
the north with neither French nor Chinese troops present would
be extremely dangerous, for the Annamese would react strongly
against all French in the area, who would be helpless in protecting
themselves. To take over successfully, the French would need a
sufficient force to cover the whole north. One or two modern
French divisions could, in General Gallagher's opinion, defeat
the Annamese.

"In response to the question whether the French could do more
than take key cities, he admitted that the Annamese would take to
the hills and continue guerrilla warfare. Even in Saigon, he
pointed out, things are far from peaceful despite British and
French claims to the contrary. Establishment of French control
could be speeded up if they were able to make large-scale air
drops throughout the north. The Annamese, however, are well
organized and, so far as small arms go, are quite well armed,
although they have no navy, shore batteries and probably little
artillery.

TOP SECRET -— Sensitive
Bel3 ea
