Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of failure to increase, although not by as much. The probability that
the war would end inconclusively was expected by McNaughton to shrink
dramatically after the first year. In concluding his memorandum,
McNaughton observed that the U.S. might decide at any time in mid-course
to try for a compromise solution to the conflict. Such an option, while
not assigned a probability of achievement, was defined as a situation in,
which the VC remained armed and in defense of areas they controlled in
the country, the NLF was represented in the sii and the GVN agreed to
Keep hands off the VC areas.

Neither the President nor the Secretary of Defense is on record
in 1965. with expectations as to the duration of the war or the impact of
the 44 battalions. It looks as though they both were prepared for the
moment to go along with General Westmoreland's predictions about the
course of the war. The decision not to call up the Reserves, which was
made some time during the week just prior to the President's press con-
ference of 28 July, indicated that the President expected the war to last
in Vietnam well beyond a year. No doubt the Secretary of Defense told
him that without a declaration of national emergency -- a move the Presi-
dent found politically unpalatable -- the Reserves as an asset would be
fully expended in one year, leaving the military establismnent in worse
shape than before if the war still continued.

The final element in the expectations matrix was provided by the
NIB in a SNIE issued on 23 July entitled "Communist and Free World Re-
actions to a Possible U.S. Course of Action." The analysis was predicated
on the following proposed action:

(1) The U.S. would increase its cee in SVN to 175,000 by
1 November ,

(2) 225,000 U.S. Reserves would be called up,
(3) 20,000 tours of duty per month would be extended,

(4) The regular strength of the U.S. Armed Forces would be
increased by 400,000 over the next year, and

(5) U.S. draft calls would be doubled.
In conjunction with the above, the U.S. would also make public statements
reiterating its objectives and its readiness to negotiate. The forces
going to Vietnem would be deployed so as not to threaten the 17th parallel.
Also considered was a possible step-up of U.S. air activity against the
DRV land lines of communication with China.

In reaction to the above, the Communists would probably see the

U.S. moves as indication that the U.S. held little hope of negotiation.
They would probably expect some increase in Us/3ra Country forces anyway

121 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
