Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

inerease over-all attack effectiveness. As radar bombing/
pathfinder capabilities are expanded and techniques per-
fected, the opportunity to employ additional strike
forces effectively in sustained operations will improve
significantly. 55/

These problems did not deter them from recommending the approval of three
additional tactical fighter squadrons (to be based at Nam Phong, Thailand)
for the war in the North. 56/ ‘The concept of operations under which
these and other CINCPAC assigned aircraft were to operate was little more
than a restatement of the goals set down the previous fall. The purpose
was, "To make it as difficult and costly as possible for NVN to continue
effective support of the VC and to cause NVN to cease direction of the

VC insurgency." ST As usual, however, there was no effort to relate
requested forces to the achievement of the desired goals, which were to
stand throughout the war as wishes not objectives against which one
effectively programmed forces.

On the same day the JCS endorsed Westy's force proposals
CINCPAC's planes finally broke through the cloud cover and attacked the
two thermal power generating facilities in Haiphone. The raids made
world headlines. Two days later the specific go-ahead was given from
Washington for strikes on the MIG airfields and on April 24th they too
came under attack. At this point, with the JCS endorsement cf Westmoreland's
troop requests, a major debate over future Vietnam policy, in all its
aspects, began within the Johnson Administration. It would continue
through the month of May and into June, not finally being resolved until
after McNamara's trip to Vietnam in July and the Presidential decisions
on Program #5. But even while this major policy review was gearing up,
the impetus for the salami-slice escalation of our assault on North Viet-
nam's industrial base produced yet another ROLLING THUNDER program. RYT 56,
whose principle new target was the thermal power plant located only 1 mile
north of the center of Hanoi, became operational May 2. On May 5, at
McNamara's request, General Wheeler sent the President a memo outlining
the rationale behind the attack on the entire North Vietnamese power grid.
In his words,

As you know, the objective of our air attacks on the
thermal electric power system in North Vietnam was not...to
turn the lights off in major population centers, but were [sic]
designed to deprive the enemy of a basic power source needed
to operate certain war supporting facilities and industries.
You will recall that nine thermal power plants were tied
together, principally through the Hanoi Transformer Station,
in an electric power grid in the industrial and population
complex in northeastern North Vietnam....These nine thermal
power plants provided electric power needed to operate a
cement plant, a steel plant, a chemical plant, a fertilizer
plant, 2 machine tool plant, an explosives plant, a textile
plant; the ports of Haiphong and Hon Gai, major military
installations such es airfields, ete. The power grid

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
