Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the French government and the French people:

"Once again, we declare solemnly that the Vietnamese
people desire only unity and independence in the French
Union, and we pledge ourselves to respect French economic
and cultural interests....If France would but say the word
to cease hostility immediately, so many lives and so much
property would be saved and friendship and confidence would
be regained." 53,

But the French displayed little interest in negotiations. Premier
Ramadier stated in March, 1947, that:

"We must protect the life and possessions of Frenchmen,
of foreigners, of our Indochinese friends who have confidence
in French liberty. It is necessary that we disengage our garri-
sons, re-establish essential communications, assure the safety
of populations which have taken refuge with us. That we have
done.” 5h/

Ramadier and his ministers spoke repeatedly in the spring of 1947 of an
imminent end to the "military phase" of the crisis, and of the beginning
of a “constructive phase," in which presumably economic and political
assistance would supplant the military instrument; but in what was to
become a pattern of expectation and frustration, the Fourth Republic
discovered that its military forces were incapable of controlling even
the principal lines of communication in Vietnam, and that the military
solution severely taxed the full resources of the French Union. In
March, 1947 an additional division of troops for the French Expeditionary
Corps, dispatched to Vietnam per General Leclerec's recommendation, had
to be diverted en route to quell an insurgency in Madagascar.

By the summer of 1947, the French Government was aware that the
situation in Indochina was at an impasse. Having failed in its attempt
to force a military decision, it turned to a political solution, as
suggested by General Leclerc. But again the ideas of Admiral d'Argenlieu
weighed heavily. In January, 1947, d'Argenlieu wrote that:

"Tf we examine the problem basically, we are led to inquire
whether the political form unquestionably capable of benefiting
from the political prestige of legitimacy is not the traditional
monarchic institution, the very one that existed before the
Japanese surrender....The return of the Emperor [Bao Dai/ would
probably reassure all those who, having opposed the Viet Minh,
fear they will be accused of treason." 55

Tt was with Bao Dai, not Ho Chi Minh, that the French elected to nego-
tiate for a political settlement with Vietnamese Nationalists.

A-35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
