Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

events in Vietnam in the past, and can be expected to do so
again. Extensive press criticism, at this juncture, could
be disastrous." 16/

On January 1, 1964, there were 15,914 U.S, military personnel
in South Vietnam. Fewer than 2,000 of these were advisors to RVNAF, but
the advisor structure extended down to ARVN line battalions, and advisors
accompanied conbat units on operations. 17/ The MAP budget for South
Vietnam in FY 1964 was $175 million, although it was expected that an
additional $12.5 millicn would be required before the end of the year, 18/

In summary, the USG's decisions near the end of 1963 started
modest changes in our Vietnam programs. Program levels held even, and
earlier hopes of immediate phasedown faded. The USG moved toward more
involvement in Vietnamese day-to-day administration, particularly at the
province level. The move was gentle, and stopped far short of a takeover;
nothing of the sort was contemplated at that time. The USG was sceptical
of GVN's leadership and administration at all levels, and continued to
offer extensive and detailed advice, but had no drastie policy changes
in mind.

2. The First Minh Government Goes Down, January, 1964

The year began with increasing Vietnamese criticism of the Minh
government. It had done little to gain popularity in the country, and
felt the sting of accusations of discrimination from both Buddhists and
Catholics. Buddhists attacked Prime Minister Tho, who was Vice President
under Diem. Catholics accused the GVN of having gone too far to placate
the Buddhists in reaction to repressions under Diem. There were also
accusations of secret negotiations with the French to neutralize South
Vietnam. 19/

A spate of news stories about U.S. advisor disgust over ARVN's
timid attitude toward combat provoked a. cable from State to Saigon asking
the Ambassador to prevent such stories in the future. (This standard
phrase meant to tell the advisors to stop talking to the press.) ‘Thus
the Department aligned itself with Lodge's view of bad press stories,
which emphasized news silence rather than corrective action. 20/

The Lodge idea of making politicians owt of the menbers of the
Military Revolutionary Council translated into a plan for them to send
out carefully watched political action teams. (He also suggested ways
for the generals to improve their speech-making style.) For example, he
proposed there should be three teams of eight men each in each district
of Long An Province. He pressed the MRC to produce @ program along these
lines with priority attention to security. “The workers would be tech-
nically government employees, but most of the work they will do would be
what we would call political work." On the U.S. role, he said, "U.S.
personnel should inspect, without looking as though they were doing it,
and see to it that a very high standard is set." 21/

. 5 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
