Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

referred to above tied in the nine individual thermal
electric power plants and permitted the Jorth Vietnamese
to switch kilowattage as required among the several con-
sumers. All of the factories and facilities listed above
eontribute in one way or another and in varying degrees
to the war effort in North Vietnam. For example, the
steel plant fabricated POL tanks to supplement or replace
fixed POL storage, metal pontoons for the construction
of floating bridges, metal barges to augment infiltration
capacity, etc.; the cement plant produced some 600,000
metric tons of cement annually which has been used in the
rehabilitation of lines of communication. 58

Wheeler went on to describe the “specific military benefits" derived
from the attacks on the two Haiphong power plants,

The two power plants in Haiphong had a total capacity
of 17,000 kilowatts, some 9 per cent of the pre-strike
national electric power capacity. Between them they
supplied power for the cement plant, a chemical plant,

Kien An airfield, Cat Bi airfield, the naval base and

repair facilities, the Haiphong shipyard repair facili-

ties and the electric power to operate the equipment in

the port itself. In addition, the electric power generated
by these two plants could be diverted through the electric
grid, mentioned above, to other metropolitan and industrial
areas through the Hanoi transformer station. All of the
aforementioned industrial, repair, airbase, and port facili-
ties contribute to the North Vietnamese war effort and, in
their totality, this support is substantial. 59/

Striking the newly approved Hanoi power plant would derive the following
additional military advantages, Wheeler argued:

The Hanoi Thermal Power Plant has a 32,500 kilowatt
capacity comprising 17 per cent of the pre-strike electric
power production. Major facilities which would be affected
by its destruction are the Hanoi Port Facility, the Hanoi
Supply Depot, a machine tool plant, a rubber plant, a lead
pattery plant, the Van Dien Vehicle Repair Depot, an inter-
national talecommunications site, an inlernational radio trans-
mitter receiver site, the Bac Mai airfield, and the national
military defense command center. All of these facilities
contribute substantially to the North Vietnamese war effort.

In addition, it should be noted a 35-kilovolt direct transmission
line runs from the Hanoi Thermal Power Plant to Haiphong and
Nam Dinh. We believe that, since the two Haiphong Thermal

19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
