Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Iv. Cc. ll. TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The United States Re-Emphasizes Pacification - 1965 to Present
An Examination of a Major Trend in our Effort

SUMMARY

By the summer of 1967, pacification had become a major ingredient
of American strategy in Vietnam, growing steadily in importance and the
amount of resources devoted to it. The U.S. Mission in Vietnam had been
reorganized three times in 15 months and each reorganization had been
designed primarily to improve the management of the pacification effort
and raise its priority within our overall effort.

Pacification -- or as it is sometimes called by Americans, Revolu-
tionary Development (RD) -- had staged a comeback in priority from the
days in 1964 and 1965 when it was a program with little emphasis,
guidance, or support. It has by now almost equalled in priority for the
Americans the original priority given the Strategic Hamlet program in
1962-1963, although the Vietnamese have not yet convinced many people
that they attach the same importance to it as we do.

This study traces the climb in pacification's importance during the
last two years, until it reached its present level of importance, with
further growth likely.

This study concentrates on American decisions, American discussions,
American papers. It will be clear to the reader that, if this version
of events is accurate, the Vietnamese played a secondary role in the
move to re-emphasize pacification. It is the contention of this paper
that this was indeed the case, and that the Americans were the prime
movers. in the series of events which led to the re-emphasis of pacifica-
tion. This study does not cover many important events, particularly the
progress of the field effort, the CIA-backed PAT /Cadre program, and GVN
activity.

The process by which the American government came to increase its
support for pacification is disorderly and haphazard. Individuals like
Ambassador Lodge and General Walt and Robert Komer, seem in retrospect
to have played important roles, but to each participant in a story still
unfolding, the sequence may look different. Therefore, it is quite
possible that things didn't quite happen the way they are described here,
and someone else, whose actions are not adequetely described in the files
available for this study, was equally important.

Nor was there anything resembling a conspiracy involved. Indeed,
the proponents of what is called so loosely in this paper "pacification"
were often in such violent disagreement as to what pacification meant

at TOP SECRET - Sensitive
