Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

ecifically, changes mater rially the United States should seek ,
Sp ; t] 2 j
to dissuade the French from referring the Indochina question to)
the United Nations.

ited States=sponsored resolution, ;
adopted by the Oa Assembly /
ould a situation develop in Indo- |
china in a manner Similar to that in Korea in which United Na- ;
tions forces were required, the United States would then prob-
ably be morally obliga ited to contribute its armed forces ae 3
ienated for service on behalf of the United Nations. It is, i
therefore, in the interests of the United States to take such |
action in Indochina as would forestall the need for the General
Assembly to invoke the provisions of the resolution, "Uniting

for Peace",

\g. Inasmuch a
"Uniting for Peace!
of the United Natio

4

5, The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend the following long-term
stectives for Indochina:

a. United States security interests demand that this gov-
ernment, by all means short of the actual employment of United
States military forces, seek to prevent the further spread of
communism in Southeast Asia generally and, in particular, in
French Indochina.

bo. The United States should seek to insure the establish-
ment of such conditions in Indochina that no foreign armed
forces will be required for the maintenance of internal security.

ce, The United States should continue to press the French
to carry out in letter and in spirit the program referred to in
paragraph 4-c-(2)-(a) above, providing for the eventual self-
Aad ead of Indochina either within or outside of the French
inion.

ad. The United See should continue to favor the entry of
the three Associated States of Indochina into the United Naticns.

e. The United States should encourage the-establishment of
an appropriate form of regional security “arrangement embracing
Indochine and the other countries of Sovtheast Asia under Art-
icles 51 and 52 of the United Nations Charter,

3

anaes ) _ OP SECRET
L403
