Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and supported Communist conspiracy. The test of

all U.S. decisions and actions in this area should
be the effectiveness of their contribution to this
purpose. 59/ :

In contrast to this, the statement of "U.S. Objectives in South
Vietnam" in NSAM 288 was considerably more extensive and more central
to U.S. security interests:

We seek an independent non-Communist South
Vietnam. We do not require that it serve as a
Western base or as a member of a Western alli-

ance. South Vietnam mast be free, however, to
accept outside assistance as required to main-
tain its security. This assistance should be
able to take the form not only of economic
and social measures but also police and military
help to root out and control insurgent elements.

Unless we can achieve this objective in
South Vietnam, almost all of Southeast Asia
will probably fall under Communist dominance
(all of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia), accom-
modate to Communism so as to remove effective U.S.
and anti-Conmunist influence (Burma), or fall
under the domination of forces not now explicitly
Communist but likely then to become so (Indonesia
taking over Malaysia). Thailand might hold for
a period without help, but would be under grave
pressure. Hven the Philippines would become shaky,
and the threat to India on the West, Australia
and New Zealand to the South, and Taiwan, Korea,
and Japan to the North and East would be greatly
increased.

All of these consequences would probably
have been true even if the U.S. had not since
1954, and especially since 1961, become so
heavily engaged in South Vietnam. However, that
fact accentuates the impact of a Commmist South
Vietnam not only in Asia but in the rest of the
world, where the South Vietnam conflict is
regarded as a test case of U.S. capacity to help
a nation to meet the Communist "war of liberation."

Thus, purely in terms of foreign policy, the
stakes are high... 60/

The argument in the next to last paragraph of NSAM 288 that "all
these consequences would probably have been true even if the U.S. had
not since 1954, and especially since 1961, become so heavily engaged
in SVN" is clearly debatable. But the logic that the increasing U.S.

bz TOP SECRET - Sensitive
