Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B. NSC Meetings of 1-2 April 1965

On the 17th of March, General Westmoreland sought Ambassador
Taylor's concurrence in a proposal to deploy an additional USMC BLT to
Phu Bai near Hue on the northern coast in I Corps. Westmoreland wanted
to cut down some of the density of aircraft at Da Nang by moving heli-
copters to the strip at Phu Bai. The Marine BLT was needed to protect
that strip. 39/ Taylor cabled to Washington: (EMBTEL 3003, 18 Mar 65).

"General Westmoreland has just sought my concurrence in
his recommendation for the landing of the Third BLT of the
9th MEB at Phu Bai for the purpose of protecting the 8th RRU
and the air strip there. He intends to move helicopters from
Da Nang to the strip and thereby reduce field congestion at
Da Nang. Because of the military advantages of thus rounding
out the MEB, I have no reluctance in egreeing to the merit
of his recommendation which, of course, should receive the
concurrence of the GVN after that of Washington.

"This proposal for introducing the BLT is a reminder of
the strong likelihood of additional requests for increases
in U.S. ground combat forces in SVN. Such requests may come
from the U.S. side, from the GVN side or from both. All of
us here are keenly aware of the GVN trained military manpower
shortage which will exist throughout 1965 and which probably
can be rectified only in part by an accelerated mobilization.
We will soon have to decide whether to try to get by with
inadequate indigenous forces or to supplement them with Third
Country troops, largely if not exclusively U.S. This matter
was discussed with General Johnson during his recent visit
who no doubt has raised it following his return to Washing-
ton. This message examines the pros and cons of such an
action -- specifically defined as the introduction of a U.S.
division (appropriately modified) into SVN.

"The purpose of introducing of a division would be pri-
marily to relieve the present shortage of ARVN units either
by replacing ARVN in the defense of key installations or by
engaging in active operations against the VC in cmjunction
with ARVN. Such a reinforcement would allow a strengthening
of military efforts in the I and II Corps areas where the
Situation is deteriorating and would give a boost to GVN
morale, military and civilian. Likewise, it should end any
talk of a possible U.S. withdrawal and ccnvince Hanoi of the

_ depth of our resolve to see this thing through to a success-
' ful conclusion.

"This statement of the purpose of introducing a U.S.

division is, in effect, a tabulation of the arguments in
favor of so doing. However, there are counter arguments

56 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
