Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

CAs Sie THE ATTEMPT TO ORGANIZE “UNITED ACTION"

1. The Berlin Conference of 195)

: Negotiations for a political settlement of the French-Viet Minh
' war were practically assured when it was decided at the Big Four meeting
in Berlin in February 1954 that the Indochina question would be added to
the agenda of an upcoming international conference at Geneva which was to
discuss primarily a settlement of the Korean War. The period between the
Berlin and Geneva conferences (i.e., between February and May 1954)
unexpectedly witnessed a denouement of the Indochina drama with the siege
and fall of Dien Bien Phu, the U.S. decision not to intervene, and the
unsuccessful U.S. attempt to rally its allies together in order to form
a collective force in pursuance of "united action."

ae Viet Minh Strategy and French Attitudes

The half-year before the Berlin Foreign Ministers conference
of February 1954 saw both a marked step up of Viet Minh military activity
and the presentation of a peace feeler from Ho Chi Minh. The Vietnam
Peoples Army (VPA) began to change its strategy against the French from
guerrilla activities tc conventional battle deployments. This was accom-
panied by an increase in the amount of Chinese military assistance, no
doubt facilitated by the end of armed conflict in Korea. Thus, the Viet
Minh appeared to be showing a newly found strength and confidence, although
at the time the French refused to recognize this either publicly or to
themselves.

Meanwhile, Ho Chi Minh put out a peace feeler in late
November 1953 in reply to a questionnaire submitted by a correspondent
for the Swedish newspaper Expressen. The one pre-condition set by Ho for
negotiations was French recognition of Vietnamese independence. In subse-
quent weeks, the peace feeler was repeated on several occasions, but each
time it failed to indicate the place at which talks might be held, nor did
it propose a scope for the talks. 1/

Nothing resulted directly from these peace feelers, but
indirectly they added to the mounting public and political sentiment in
France for an end to the seemingly interminable and costly war. The
armistice agreement negotiated at Panmunjom in duly 1953 served as an
example which many Frenchmen hoped could be followed in the negotiation
of a cease-fire with the DRV. A widespread disenchantment with the
Indochina war pervaded France. This was reflected in public statements
by Prime Minister Laniel that Paris would be satisfied with an "honorable
solution" to the war.

The French then adopted a policy toward the war of "keep
fighting -- seek talking.” There was en increase in French military
activity and confidence stimulated by the Navarre Plan, but this was
offset by a growth in the size and influence of the peace faction in

B-17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
