Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

MOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Tonkin Gulf reprisals, but would not have lasting effect. At best,
under "A," it was believed that the gradual deterioration in the country-
side of South Vietnam would continue. 86/

Although the Working Group viewed a decision to continue Option A
indefinitely as ruling out either "B" or "C," it did suggest the possi-
bility of extending "A" to its limits and gradually phasing into opera-
tions like those in Option C. It was suggested that aa might, over
tinle, generate "favorable, or at least not unfavorable, domestic and
internstional reaction which along with the increasing cost of gradual
disruption in North Vietnam might cause Hanoi to slow down its infiltra-
tion. However, the result of this process, at best, would be a gradual
improvement of the U.S. position without advancement toward a, meaningful
settlement. 87/ Lacking a deliberate attempt to phase into something
like "C," Option A was viewed as "an indefinite course of action." As
such, its "sole advantages” were seen as:

"(a) defeat would be clearly due to GYI failure, and
we ourselves would be less implicated than if we tried
Option B or Option C, and failed;

"(b) the most likely result would be a Vietnsmese-
negotiated deal, under which an eventually unified
Communist Vietnam would reassert its traditional hos-
tility to Communist China and limit its own ambitions
to Laos and Cambodia.” 88/

The group's assessment went on to indicate that should this occur, Thai-
land would likely conclude that “we simply could not be counted on, and
would accommodate somehow to Communist China even without any marked
military move by Communist China." 89/

The Working Group reported that the actions in Option B offered
a number of unique advantages relative to the other options:

"1. Option B probably stands a greater chance than
either of the other two of attaining our objectives
vis-a-vis Hanoi and a settlement in South Vietnam.

"@. Our display of real muscle in action would un-
doubtedly have a salutary effect on the morale of the
rest of non-Communist Asia.

"3. The course of military events vis-a-vis Communist
China might give us a defensible case to destroy the Chinese

ae = “ “7 tt
Communist nuclear production capability." 90/

However Option B was also seen to present some unique problens
and to possibly leed to some undesirable results. For example, most of

+ 28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
