Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV.B Evolution ofthe War (26 Vols.) 
Counterinsurgency: The Kennedy Commitments, 1961-
1963 (5 Vols.) 
4. Phased Withdrawal of U.S. Forces in Vietnam, 1962-64 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
EVOLUT ION or 'rIIE HAR 
PHASED vlI'l'I-IDRAWlIL OF U. S. FORCES 
Foreword 
This monograph traces planning for cutting back numbers of U.S. 
military personnel in Vietnam. 
- Summary and Analysis 
- Chronology 
- Table of Contents and Outline 
- Footnotes 
0295 
Sec Def CO~ ~ • X---------------
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
\. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
SUMMARY 
A formal planning and budgetary process for the phased withdrawal 
of U.S. forces from Vietnam was begun amid the euphoria and optimism of' 
July 1962, and was ended in the pessimism of March 1964. Initially, t he 
specific objectives were : 
(1) to draw d01Vll U.S. military personnel then 
engaged in advisory, training , and support efforts from a FY 64 peak of 
12,000 to a FY 68 bottoming out of 1,500 (just HQ, MAAG); and (2) to re-
duce MAP from a FY 64 peak of $180 million to a FY 69 base of $40 .8 million . 
South Vietnamese forces were to be trained to perform all the functions then 
being carried out by U. S. personnel. 
What the U.S .G. was a.ctually trying 
to accomplish during this period can be described in either or both of 
two ways : 
(1) a r eal desire and attempt to extricate the U.S. from direct 
military involvement in the war and to make it a war which the GVN would 
have to l earn to vrin, and (2) straight-forward contingency planning and 
the use of a political-managerial t echniq.,ue to SlOV1 down pressures for 
greater U. S. inputs. 
A blend of the vTish embodied in the first explana-
tion and the hard-headedness of the second seems plausible . 
Needless to say, the phase-out never came to pass . 
The Diem coup 
with the resulting political instability and deterioration of the military 
situation soon vTere to lead U. S. decision-makers to set aside this planning 
process . 
An ostensible cut-back of 1000 men did take place in December 
1963, but this was essentially an accounting exercise -- cmd the U. S. 
force level prior to the reduction had already reached 16,732 in October 
1963· 
By December 1964, U.S . strength had risen to 23,000 and further 
deployments were on the ,'lay . 
l1hat, then, did the whole phased-withdrawal exercise accomplish? 
It may have impeded. demands for mor e men and money, but this is doubtful . 
If the optlifiistic reports on the situation in SVN were to be believed, 
and they apparently were, little more would have been req.,uested . It may 
have frightened the GVN, but it did not induce Diem or his successors to 
reform the political apparatus or make RVNAF fight harder . It may have 
contributed, hOvTever, to public charges about the Administration ' s credi-
bility and over-opti.mism about the end of the conflict. 
Despi te the care-
fully worded vJhite House announcement of the phase-out policy on October 2, 
1963, tentative Johnson Administration judgments came to be regarded by 
the public as' firm predictions. 
While this announcement made clear that 
t'he U. S. effort would continue "until the insu.r.gency has been suppressed 
or until the national security forces of the GVN are capable of suppressing 
it," the public tended to focus on the prognosis ,vhich follovTed -- "Secretary 
McNamara and General Taylor r eported their judgment that the major part 
of the U. S. military task can be completed by the end of 1965 .... " In 
. i 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
August 1964, Mr . McNamara further explained the policy: 
"We have said --
as a matter of fact , I say today -- as our training missions are completed , 
vre will bring back the training forces ." 
Quite apart from what was actually accomplished by the phase-out 
policy and the costs in terms of domestic political perceptions of Adminis -
tration statements on Vietnam, there are some important lessons to be 
learned from this exercise . 
What was the U.S. rationale behind the policy? 
Was it sound, feasible , and consistent with statements of national objec-
tives? 
By what policy and programmatic means were we trying to bring 
about the desired results? Were these , in fact , the most appropriate 
and effective vehicles? 
How did the intelligence and r eporting system 
in Vietnam help or hinder policy formulation? 
Why was not the Diem coup 
in its darkening aftermath grasped as the opportunity to r e-examine policy 
and unambiguously to decide to phase out, or to do whatever was deemed 
necessary? 
. 
The rationale behind the phased withdrawal policy '-las by and l arge 
internally consistent and sensibl e . 
To put Vietnam in the perspective of other U. S. 
world interests . 
Vietnam, at this time, \'las not 
the focal point of attention in Washington; Berlin 
and Cuba were . 
Part of this exercise \Vas to make 
clear that U.S. interests in Europe and i n the 
western hemisphere came first . 
Even i n terms of 
Southeast Asia itself, Laos , not Vietnam, was the 
central concern . 
So, the phase-out policy made 
the kind of sense that goes along with the struc-
turing of priorities. 
To avoid an open- ended Asian mainl and land war . 
Even though violated by U.S. i nvolvement in the 
Korean war, this was a central tenet of U.S. 
national security policy and domestic politics . 
The notion of the bottomless Asian pit, the 
difference in outlook about a human life, were 
well under stood . 
To plan for the contingency that events might force 
withdrawal upon us. 
Seen i n this light, the planning 
process was prudential preparation . 
To treat the insurgency as fundamentally a Vietnamese 
matter, best solved by the Vietnamese themselves . 
Most U.S. deci.sion-makers had well-developed doubts 
about the efficacy of using "vlhi te faced" soldiers 
to fight Asians . 
This view was invariably coupl ed 
publicly and privately loTi th statements like this 
one made by Secretary McNamara : 
"I personally 
ii-
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
believe that this is a war that the Vietnamese must 
fight ... I don't believe we can take on that combat task 
for them. 
I do believe we can carry out training . 
We 
can provide advice and logistical assistance ." 
To increase the pressure on the GVN to make the necessary 
reforms and to make RVNAF fight harder by making the 
extent and future of U,S, support a little more tenuous. 
This was explicitly stated in State's instructions to 
Ambassador Lodge on how to handle the White House state-
ment of October, 1963 : 
"Actions are designed to indi-
cate to Diem Government our displeasure at its political 
policies and activities and to create significant uncer-
tainty in that government and in key Vietnamese groups 
as to future intentions of United States ." In other 
words, phased wi thdra"ral was thought of as a bargaining 
counter with the GVN. 
To put the lid on inevitable bureaucratic and political 
pressures for increased U.S, involvement and inputs into 
Vietnam. It was to be expected and anticipated that 
those intimately involved in the Vietnam problem vlOuld 
be wanting more U,S. resources to handle that problem . 
Pressures for greater effort, it was reasoned, eventu-
ally would come into play unless counteracted . 
What 
Secretary McNamara did "ras to force all theater justi-
fications for force build-ups into tension "rith long-
term phase-down plans . 
On 21 December, 1963, in a memo 
to the President after the Diem coup, Mr . McNamara urged 
holding the line: 
"u. S. resources and personnel caml0t 
usefully be substantially increased . .. . " 
To deal vrith international and domestic criticism and 
pressures . 
While Vietnam was not a front burner item, 
there were those who already had begun to question and 
offer non-consensus alternatives. 
During 1963, for 
example, both General de Gaulle and Senator Mansfield 
were s·trongly urging the neutralization of Vietnam. 
It is difficult to sort out the relative importance of these varying 
rationales ; all were important . 
Paramount perhaps, were the desires to 
limit U.S. involvement, and to put pressur~ on the GVN for greater efforts . 
And, the rationa)es were all consistent with one another . 
But they did not 
appear as being wholly consistent with other statements of our national objec-
tives in Southeast Asia. 
For exam~le on July 17, 1963, President Kennedy 
' d 
"w 
.1=' 
, 
sal : 
e are not going to withdraw from Lbringing about a stable govern-
ment there, carrying on a struggle to maintain its national independencB· 
In my opinion, for us to withdraw from that effort vrould mean a collapse 
not only of South Vietnam, but Southeast Asia ." 
He added : 
"We can think 
of Vietnam as a piece of strategic real estate . 
It's on the corner of main-
land Asia, across the East-West,trade routes, and in a position that would 
iii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
make it an excellent base for further Communist aggression against the 
rest of free Asia. " 
In a September 9, 1963 intervieH, the President stated : 
"I believe r the domino theory '7. I think that the struggle i s close 
enough. 
China is so large, looms up high just beyond the frontiers, that 
i f South Vietnam went , it would not only give them an improved geograp0ic 
position for a guerrilla assault on Malaya, but i-TOuld also give the im-
pression that the wave of the future in Southeast Asia was China and the 
Communists." 
One could argue that such an unequivocally strong statement 
of strategic importance would not be consistent i'lith any sort of phase-
out proposal short of a clear-cut victory over the cornmunists . 
Despite 
the caveats about it being essentially a South Vietnamese struggle, President 
Kennedy ' s statements were very strong . 
And, insofar as the U.S . was inter-
ested in greater leverage on the GVN, these statements tended to reduce 
U. S. bargaining pow'er because of the explicit and vital nature of the 
commitment . 
The rationales behind the phased ,vithdrawal.policy were incorporated 
into a formal progra..rrnning and planning process that began in July 1962 
and ended on 27 March 196~
. 
It was at the Honolulu Conference on 23 July 
1962, the same day that the 14-nation neutralization declaration on Laos 
was formally signed, that the.Secretary of Defense on guidance from the 
President put the planning machine in motion . 
Noting that "tremendous 
progress" had been made in South Vietnam and that it might be difficult 
to retain public support for U. S. operations in Vietnarn i ndefinitely, 
Mr . McNamara directed that a comprehensive long range program be developed 
for building up SVN military capability and for phasing-out the U. S. role . 
He asked that the planners assume that it would require approximately three 
years, that is, the end of J-965 , for the RVNAF to be trained to the point 
that it could cope vlith the VC . 
On 26 July, the JCS formally directed 
CINCPAC to develop a Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam (CPSVN) in accor-
dance with the Secretary ' s directives . 
Thus began an intricate, involved 
and sometimes arbitrary bargaining process, involving mainly MACV, the 
Joint Staff, and ISA . 
There were hlO main pegs that persisted throughout 
this process : 
MAP planning for the support and build-up of RVNAF, and 
dralv-downs on U. S. advisory and training personnel. 
The first COMUSY~CV CPSVN was floated on 19 January 1963 · It envisioned 
MAP for FY 1963-1964 at a total of $405 million . 
The total for FY 1965-
1968 was $673 million . 
The RVNAF force level 'was to peak in FY 64 at 
458,000 men . 
U.S. personnel in SVN were to drop from a high of 12.2 thou-
sand in FY 65 to 5 . 9 thousand in FY 66, bottoming out in FY 68 at 1.5 
thousand (Hq MAAG ). 
No sooner was this first CPSVN cranked into the policy 
machinery than it conflicted with similar OSD/ISA planning . 
This conflict 
between lSA/OSD guidance and COMUSMACV/Joint Staff planning was to be 
continued throughout the life of the CPSVN. 
Secretary McNamara opposed General Harkins version of the plan for 
a variety of reasons : 
(1) it programmed too many RVNAF than were train-
able and supportable; (2) it involved weaponry that vas too sophisticated; 
(3) it did not fully take account of the fact that if the insurgency came 
into control in FY 65 as anticipated, the U.S . }fJAP investment thereafter 
iv 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
), •. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
should be held at no more than $50 million per year; (4) the U.S . phase-
out was too slow, and the RVNAF training had to be speeded up. 
In other 
words, Mr. McNamara wanted both a more rapid U.S. withdrawal of personnel, 
and a faster reduction in U.S . military/economic support . 
The Secretary's views prevailed. 
The emhodiment of Mr . McNamara ' s 
desire to quicken the pace of phase-out plannin~ was embodied first in a 
Model M plan prepared by the JCS and later in what came to be ce.lled the 
Accelerated Model Plan of the CPSVN. 
The Accelerated Plan provided for 
a rapid phase -out of the bulk of U. S. military personnel. It also pro-
vided for building up GVN forces at a faster pace , but at a more reduced 
scale . 
~1AP costs for FY 1965-1969 totaled $399 .4 million, or nearly $300 
million Imver than the original projection . 
All of this planning began to take on a kind of absurd quality as 
the situation in Vietnam deteriorated drastically and visibly . 
Strangely, 
as a result of the public White House promise in October and the power of 
the wheels set in motion, the U.S . did effect a 1000 man withdrawal i n 
December of 1963. 
All the planning for phase-out, however, was either 
ignored or caught up in the new thinking of January to March 1964 that 
preceded NSA11288 . 
The thrust of this document was that greater U.S. 
support was needed in SVN. 
Mr . McNamara identified these measures as 
those that "will involve a limited increase in U.S. personnel and in 
direct Defense Department costs. " 
He added : 
"More significantly they 
involve significant increases in Military Assistance Program costs .... ," 
plus "additional U. S. economic aid to support the increased GVN budget ." 
On 27 March 1964, CINCPAC was instructed not to t ake any further action 
on the Accelerated Plan. 
Quickly, requests for more U. S. personnel poured 
into Washington . 
The planning process was over, but not forgotten . 
Secretary McNamara stated in his August 1964- testimony on the Tonkin Gulf 
crisis that even tode.y "if our training missions are completed, we will 
bring back the training forces ." 
While the phase-out policy was overtaken by the sinking after-effects 
of the Diem coup, it is important to understand that the vehicles chosen 
to effect that policy - - MAP planning, RVNAF and U. S. force levels --
were the right ones. - They Ivere programmatic and, therefore, concrete and 
visible. 
No better way could have been found to convince those in our 
own government and the l eaders of the GVN that we were serious about limit-
ing the U. S. commitment and thrmving the burden onto the South Vietnamese 
themselves . 
The public announcement of the policy, on October 2, 1963, 
after the McNa...rnara-Taylor trip to Vietnam was also a wise choice . 
Even 
though this announcement may have contributed to the so- called "credibility 
gap, " publication was a necessity: 
Without it, the formal and classified 
planning procesG would have seemed to be not.hing more than a drill . 
While the choice of means was appropriate for getting a handle on 
the problem, it proceeded from some be.sic unrealities . 
First, only the 
most Mic8.\vberesque predictions could have l ed decision-makers in Washing-
ton to believe that the fight age.inst the guerrillas "lYould have clearly 
turned the corner by FY 65 . 
Other nations ' experience in internal "Tar-
fare pointed plainly in the other direction . 
with. more propitious 
v 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
circumstances, e.g. isolation from sanctuaries, the Philippine and Malayan 
insurgencies each took the better part of a dozen years to bring to an 
end . 
Second, there I-vas an unrealistic contradiction within the CPSVN it-
self. 
As directed by Secretary McNamara, U. S. MAP was to decrease as -
RVNAF increased . 
In practical terms, MAP costs should have been programmed 
to increase as the South Vietnamese Army increased, and as they themselves 
began to bear most of the burden. 
The desire to keep MAP costs down after 
FY 65 could, at best, be perceived as a budgeting or programgnrumick not a 
serious pOlicy. 
Three, the political situation in South Vietnam itself should ha.ve 
prompted more realistic contingency plans against failure of the Vietnamese, . 
in order to give the U. S. some options other than what appeared as precipi-
tous withdrawal . 
The intelligence and reporting systems for Vietnam during 
this period must bear a principal responsibility for the unfounded opti-
mism of U.S. policy. 
Except for some very tenuous caveats, the picture 
was repeatedly painted in terms of progress and success . 
In the July 1962 Honolulu Conference the tone was set. 
Secretary 
McNamara asked COMUSMACV how long it would take before the VC could be ex-
pected to be eliminated as a significant force . 
In r eply, COMUSMACV esti-
mated about one year from the time RVNAF and other forces became fully 
operational and began to press the VC in all areas . 
Mr . McNamara 'ilaS told 
and believed that there had been "tremendous progress" in the past six 
months. 
This theme was re-echoed in April of 1963 by' COMUSMACV and by 
the intelligence community thx'ough an NIE. 
All the statistics and evalu-
ations pointed to GVN improvement. 
While noting general progress, the 
NIE stated that th~ situation remains flexible . 
Even as late as July 
1963 a rosy picture was being painted by DIA and SACSA. 
The first sug-
gestion of a contrary evaluation within the bureaucracy came from INR. 
Noting disquieting statistical trends since July, an unpopular INR memo 
stated that the "pattern showed steady decline over a period of more than 
three months duration ." It was greeted with a storm of disagreement, 
and in the end was disregarded . 
The first, more balanced evaluation came with the McNamara-Taylor 
trip report late in September and October, 1963. 
While it called the 
political situation "deeply seriOUS, " even this report was basically opti-
mistic .about the situation, and saw little danger of the political crisis 
affecting the prosecution of the lvar. 
Not until after the Diem coup, the assassination of President Kennedy, 
and the December Vietnam trip of Secretary McNamara 'ilaS the Vietnam si tua-
tion accurately assessed . 
In Secretary MCNamara ' s December memo to the 
President, after his trip, he wrote : 
"The situation is very disturbing. 
Current trends, unless reversed in the next 2-3 months, 'iTill lead to a 
neutralization at best and more likely to a communist- controlled state. " 
One of the most serious deficiencies he found VlaS a "grave reporting vleak-
ness on the U. S. side ." 
Mr . McNamara ' s judgment, apparently, was not 
vi 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1· 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
predominant . 
He noted in the concluding paragraph of his memo that he 
tlmay be overly pessimistic, inasmuch as the ambassador, COMUSMACV, and 
General Minh v,ere not discouraged and look forward to significant improve-
ments in January.tI 
By 6 March 1964 when another major Secret~ry of Defense Conference 
convened at CINCPAC Headquarters, the consensus Has the the military situa-
tion was definitely deteriorating. 
The issue was no longer whether there 
was or Has not satisfactory progress; the question vTaS how much of a set-
back had there been and what "ivas needed to make up for it . 
Mr . McNamara 
observed that attention should nOi,r be focused on near term objectives 
of providing for necessary greater U. S. support . It was finally agreed 
that the insurgency could be expected to go beyond 1965 . 
The intelligence and reporting problem during this period cannot be 
explained ai"8,Y. 
In behalf of the evaluators and assessors, it can be 
argued that their reporting up until the Diem coup had some basis in fact . 
The situation may not have been too bad until December 1963 . Honest and 
trained men in Vietnam looking at the problems ,,,ere reporting what they 
believed reality to be . 
In retrospect , they were not only wrong, but more 
importantly, they were influential . 
The Washington decision-makers could 
not help but be guided by these continued reports of progress . 
Phased witbdrawal vlaS a good policy tbat was being reasonably well 
executed . 
In the way of our Vietnam involvement , it "ioTaS overtaken by 
events . 
Not borne of deep conviction in the necessity for a U. S. with-
drawal or in the necessity of forcing the GVN to truly carry the load , 
i t Has bound to be submerged in the rush of events . 
A policy more deter 
mined might have used the pretext and the fact of the Diem coup and its 
aftermath as r eason to push for the continu8,tion of withdravlal. 
Instead, 
the instability and fear of collapse resulting from the Diem coup brought 
the U. S. to a decision for greater commitment . 
vii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
() 
:r: 
::c o 
Z o 5 
C> 
-< 
Date 
23 Jul 62 
23 Jul 62 
26 Jul 62 
14 Aug 62 
Oct-No,' 
1962 
26 Nov 62 
7 Dec 62 
19 Jan 63 
22 J an 63 
25 Jan 63 
T Mar 63 
20 Mar 63 
17 Apr 63 
6 ~Iay 63 
3 May 63 
8 May 63 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - SensH1 ve 
PHASED WTIKDRt}lAL OF U. S. FORCES : 1962-1964 
Event or 
Doctmlcnt 
Geneva Accords on Laos 
Sixth Secrctary of 
Derense Conference, 
Honolulu 
JCS Mcssage to CINCPAC , 
26231SZ 
CINCPAC Message to ~:ACV , 
140428z 
GVN National Campaign 
Plan developed 
Military Reorgan1zation 
Decreed 
First Draft of C~0~ 
Complet ed 
~!ACV Letter to ClNCPAC, 
3010 Scr 0021 
OSD(ISA) Hessage to 
CINCPAC , 222243Z 
cn;CPAC Letter to JCS, 
3010, Ser 0079 
JC SM 190-63 
USMACV "Summ.Ty of 
Highlight. , 1 Feb 62-
7 Feb 63" 
lilE 53-63 
Sevent.h SeeDer Honolulu 
Conference 
Buddhist Crisis Begins 
1';(0 SecDef ~!emore.nda 
for ASD/ISA 
Description 
14-r,ation declaration on the neutrality of Laos. 
Called to exruni:.e present and f'uture developme!.ts in South 
Vietnam -
..... hich looked gOOd . 
Nr. l-1cIJ8li.ara initiated irr:medi -
ate plrumjr..g for the phase- out of U. S. military involve:men ·. 
by 1965 and developlr.ent of a progrmn to build a GV~ n:Hilary 
capability st.rong enough to take over fUll defense respor..si -
bilities by 1965 . 
CINCPAC "" as formally instructed to develop C! "Comprehensive 
Plan for South Vietnam" 
(CPSV~) 1n line ", lth instructioIls 
given at iiof,Oltdll. 
MACV .... ·as d irecled to dra .... \Ap a CPSV;; des igr.cJ t.o ensure G"'lN 
milita.ry end para-military strength commensurate .... 1 th it; 
sovereign respo!,sibilit1.es. 
The CPSV'!; \HlS to assume the 
insurgency .... ·ould be ur.der control in three years . that ex -
t ensive US support would be available during the three-year 
period: that those items essential to development of ~~ ul: 
RVNAF ~p_pab' lity ... ould be (large 1y) available tt.rougb tile 
mill tar)" assJ stance progra."II (V.AP) . 
In add! tier. to the CPSVi\' , 1-{ACV prepared B....-: outl ine for all inte-
grated, nationdde offensive military campaign to destroy the 
i nsurgency lilld restore GV1. con!..rol in Sot:.th Vjetnli1D. . 
':'he con-
c.ept .... as adopted by the GVN in !\ovember. 
Diem ordered realignment 0:' Ir,jlltary chair. of coronar.d , 
r eor£aJ~l ­
zation of RVi~AF establl shment of four CTZ ' s and a joint 
Operations Cent~r to centralize control over current Jf.ilitary 
operations. 
(JOC becBlne operat ional on ?O !!ecembe r 1962 . ) 
CI~CPAC disapproved first draft becau'e of high costs and 
inadequate t.rainir.g pro·.risions. 
~'.ACV submitted a rev1sed CPSVN . 
Extended through IT 1963 and 
concurred in by the !..mbassador , i t 
called for GV:: mi Ii tary 
forces to peak at 45Q ,000 in i'Y 1964 (RV:\tJ' strength Io"ouU be 
230 , 900 in FY 19611) ; cost prOjected over sIx years "'odd total 
$97'3 million . 
MAP- Vietnam dollar guidellnesi6sued . 
Cell1 ngs considerably 
different fran: and lo .... er thBJI those in CPS',:,. 
Approved the CPS\-:; , s upported and jus t i f ied t~c higher MJ;P 
costs proj ected by It . 
JCS recon:mended SeeDef approve the CPSVij; supporting the higher 
MAP costs , jCS proposed CPSV;. be the basis for revis io:l of 
IT 1964 MAP ar.d developrr.ent of FY 1965- 69 progr8Jr.s . 
Reported conti:mine;,gro .... ing R'fj~AF effectiveness, increased 
GV:-' strength eco"omically and poll tlcally . 
The strategiC 
hamlet prograrr, looked espec I ally good . 
!I.ACY forecast .... 1 nni ng 
the milltary phase if! 1963 -- barr lrlg "great.ly ir.creased " VC 
reinforcement and resupply . 
Although "fragile ," the situation in SV:. did not nppea:' se rious ; 
general pr'ogress "'-as reported in most areas. 
Called to review the CPS-V; . . 
Large l y be cause of prevailir:s 
optimism over Vietnam , Nr. Mc:;emara fou[,d the CPSV:, (l.s sistance 
too costly, the planned ... ithd:a ... ·al of US forces too s1m,' and 
RV,.A[ developrr.ec l m1 sdJ rected . 
C1[~; forcel> fired on \t{orshipers celebrating Buddha. ' s birthday 
(several killed , more ... ounded) for roo good cause. 
LO:'".g sta:Jd -
ing a.ntipathy toward GV:; quI ckly turr:ed jntc e.ctive opposition . 
First : Directed Jo1nt ISA/JCS 
development of plans to re-
place US forces W'ith GY!; troo?s 
as soon as possibl e £'J.d to plan 
the withdra"al of 1, 000 US 
troops by the end of 1963· 
TOP SECRf;r' - Sen_sit i ve 
a 
Second: Requested the OffIce , 
L 1 !'ecll"l:' of ~: i 1 i tp.r:. 
Assist.ar~ce . I SA , "corr:pletely 
re'Jork." the MAP nr0G.ram 
reccm:n:.er.1cd in the CPSV:'i lU':d 
sub::Jt nc" "uidellnes by 
1 BeptMnhE"r. 
The Sec'retary 
felt CPSv], total s '''ere too 
high (e.g. , expendiLures pro-
posed for F";s 1965-W could be 
cut by ~,2 70 ~ll11ion in his vI ew) 
9 ~ay 63 
11 ~:ay 63 
17 May 63 
29 May 63 
16 J= 63 
17 Jul 63 
1'3 Jul 63 
4 ~.ug 63 
14 Aug 63 
20 Aug 63 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
JCS Message 9820 to 
CI;,CPAC 
Cr:;CPAC Letter to JCS , 
3010 Ser ool.47-63 
ASD/IS.t.. r.:emore.ndtJL for 
the Secretary 
OSD I ffiA lo\.essaee to 
CI;,C PAC , 291752~: 
CV::- Buddhist Truce 
(State .~irgr!ll!l ;.-7'31 
to ~bassy Saigon , 
l() June) 
OIA Intelligence 
Summary 
CLCPAC-prcposed MAP 
program submitted to 
JCS 
OIA Intelligence 
Bulletic-
SACSA Memoro.nd\ll1l 
for the Secretary 
Oi~ declared ~artial 
law; ordered a~tacks 
on Buddhist pa;;odas 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Di rected Cr;;CPAC to revise the 
CPSV:i and program the ... ith-
drawnl of 1,000 men by the end 
of 1963. 
Force reduction "'as 
to be by US units (not indi-
viduals); units were to be 
r eplaced by specially trained 
RV:;AF units. 
lIithdra ... al plans 
'Were to be contingent upon 
cant inued progress in the 
counterinsurgency campaign. 
Cr::CPAC recOl!lJ1lended some changes , 
then approved MACV 's revision of 
the CPSVN and the lIoACY plan for 
withd.rawal of 1,000 men . 
As 
i nstructed , those 1 , 000 men were 
drawn lrom logistic and service 
support slots; actual operations 
would be unaffected by their ab-
sence . 
ISA's proposed MAP-Vietnam 
program based on the Secre-
tary's instructions 
was 
r ejected. as still too high. 
CHICPAC wns directed to 
develop three alternative 
MAP plans for FYs 1965-69 
based on these levels: 
$535 M (CPSVN recommendation) 
$450 M (Compromise ) 
$365 M (SecDef goal) 
I'M for FY 1964 had been set 
at $180 l~ . 
Reflected temporary and tenuous abatement of GVN-Buddbi.t hostili -
ties ... hich flared up in Hay. 
The truce was repudiated almost 
immediately by both sides. 
Budd.hist alienation from the GVN 
polari zed; hostilities spread. 
Reported the mil itary situation was unaffected by the political 
cr l slsj ~ 
prospects for continued counterinsurgency progress 
were "certainly betterll "than in 1962; VC activity was reduced 
but VC capability essentially unimpaired. 
c n,CPAC suggeGted. mill tary 
.. ssistance programs at tile 
three levels set by the JCS 
but recommended adoption of 
a fourth Plan developed by 
CI NCPAC. 
"Plan J" totalled 
$450.9 M over t he five-year 
period. 
Rather suddenly , Viet Cong offensive actions were reported bigh 
for the third consecutive .eel<; the mplication wa. that the VC 
were capitalizing on the political crisis and might step up the 
insurgency . 
Discounted the importance of increased. VC activity; the compara-
tive magnitude of attocks "as 10\1; deve l opments did not yet seem 
salient or lasting. 
This decree plUB repressive meru;ures against the Budd.bists 
shattered hopes of reconciliation, and irrevocably isolated 
the Diem government . 
TOP SECRET - Scneitl ·:·, 
b 
I.A 
20 Aug 63 
21 Aug 63 
27 Aug 63 
30 Aug 63 
3 Sep 63 
5 Sep 63 
6 Sep 63 
11 Sep 63 
21 Sep 63 
27 Sep 63 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
JCSM 629-63 
Direct(,r, DIA Memo-
randum for SeeDer 
JCSM 640-63 
OSD/rSA Memorandum 
for the Secretary 
SeeDer Memorandum to 
CJCS 
ASD/rSA ~!emorahdum to 
the Secretary 
SecDef Memorandum 
f or CJCS 
CJCS Memorandum for 
SecDef 
Presidential Memoran-
dum for the SecDef 
ASD/rSA (ODMA) "MAP 
Vietn :m: Manpower and 
Financial Summary" 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Recommend SeeDef approve the 
CI ~.CPAC/MACV proposed pIal, for 
1 ,OOO-rnan ,dt.hdrawal in t hree 
to four increments for planning 
purposes only; recommei'!ded 
final decisio:1 on wlthdra',;al 
be delayed until October . 
Estimated that Diem's acts \o,'i!l have "serious repercussions" 
throughout SV:,: foresaw more coup and counter- coup activi ty. 
But reJX)rted mili tary operations 'oIerc so far unaffected by 
these events. 
JCS added yet a fifth 
"~Iodel ~~ .. Plan to Cr:;CPAC ' s 
four alternative l·tA P levels. 
Providl ng for higher force 
l eve Is termed nece::sary by 
the JCS, the Mode l 
~I total 
"'as close to $1'00 M. 
JCS 
reconunended the Model ~ 
Plan be approved . 
Recorr.mended approval of ~CSM 
629-63 . 
But noced many ""-" i ts " 
to be withdrawn "'ere ad hoc 
creatior s of expendable support. 
personnel, cautioned t ha!.. public 
renctioll to "phony" .. dthdra1,:al 
would ue darnagJng : s uggested 
actual strength and nut.hori zed 
cellir.g levels be publici zed 
and monitored. 
Approved JCSl~ - 6? 9- 63. 
Adv i sed 
JCS against creatIng special 
uni t.s as a means to cut back 
unnecessary personnel : re-
quested the proj ected :;S 
strength fi gures through 1903 . 
Forwarded the mi litary 
s trenGth figures (August 
t hru Decemoer) to SeeDe f; 
e.:I'lised that the 1 ,000-
man vit hdra .... a) .... ould be 
counted against the peak 
October strength (16,732) . 
Fi rst increment was sched-
uled for wlthdn"al in 
November , the rest in 
December . 
Cor,curred In JCS 
re c~e:1 -
datton with minor reserva-
tions that the Model M 
Pl8..'i for ml) i t.nry ass is-
tBllce to SV~. be appro·:ed. 
Approved Model M Plan as 
t he bas I s for FY 65-69 
HAP planning; ad'dsed that 
~S materiel turned over t.o 
RVi~ fi..? mu st be char ged to 
and absorbed by the aL:.thor -
ized Model M Plan ceilings . 
Directed Mci:amara and Taylor (CJCS) to personally ' assess the 
critical situation In SV:: -- both political and military; to 
determine what GV:i action .... as required f or chnnge and what t he 
US s hould do t.o produce such acti on. 
TOl' SECRET - Sens it I\'e 
c 
Approved ~ttJ' total s re-
f l e cted the Model M Plan: 
FY 1961, 
: 
180 . 6 M 
FY 1965 - 69: 
211. 6 M 
Total: 
392 . 2 H 
The GVN force l evels pro-
posed vere substantially 
bel"" those o f the J a.nuary 
CPSV:; (from a peak strength 
i n FY 1964 of 442 , 500 , 
Ie'reis were to fall to 
120 , 200 i n n 1969) . 
" 
:/1 
26 Sep -
2 Oct 63 
2 Oct 63 
5 Oct 63 
11 Oct 63 
22 Oct (3 
ov 63 
20 :;ov 63 
22 i;ov 63 
26 :.ov 63 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
SeeDef 'ercs t-~iss 10.1 
to South Vietnam 
Mc:, B..'T,ara- f aylor Brlef-
i~£ for the President , 
and later, the :;SC 
Mc.::a.-narn-Taylor !T.et 
"l th Preside!!t and 
:.SC 
State Department 
I:,R Memo RFE-90 
Di em Goverronent 
Overthrm.~ 
All-agency Co~ference 
o n Vietnrur., Honolulu 
President Kennedy 
Assass inated 
SeeDef fJ.emorandUlD. 
for the President 
TOP SF-CRE! - Sensitive 
Posi t.i ve detai led evidence presented 1n numerous briefings indi-
cated cond! tions ,",'ere good and would impro·re. 
Hence , the Secre-
tary ordered acceleration of the plBP~ed ~ . S. force phase-out .• 
Concluded the ~ilitary campaign has made great progress and con-
tinues to progress, but warned that further Diem-Nhu repression 
could chll...'lge the "present favorable mlll tary trends." 
The Preside:1t approved the military rec=endations made by the 
Secretary and Chairman: 
that ~:.ACV and Diem review changes necessary to canplete 
the military carr-paign In I , II, ~"d III Corps by the end 
of 1961j, in IV Corps by 1965 : 
that a training program be established to enable RVNAF 
to take ov~r military functions from the US by the end 
of 1965 whe~ the bulk of US personnel could be ~ith ­
drawn: 
that DOD infonnally anr.ounce plans to withdra" 1,000 
men by the end of 1963. 
ho furthcr reductions in US strcngth would be made until re-
quirements of lhe 196h campal gn ""ere clear . 
Approved the ml1"tary recar.:mendations contained in the Mcl'iamara-
1'f::lylor Report..; d1.rected no fonr.al announcereent be made of 
implementation of plans to ~ithdraw 1, OOC men by the end of 
1963. 
.. 
Assessed trends since ":u1y 1963 as evidence of an tmfavorable 
s hift in military balance. 
(This was one of the first indica-
tions that all ~a" not as rosy as V~CV et al had l ed MD~nmara 
and Taylor to believe . ) 
-
-
The feared political chaos, civil war and collapse of the war 
did not material1 ze immed iately ; US C-ovcrncent was uncertain 
as to what the new circumstances ~eant
. 
General Minh headed 
the junta responsible for the coup. 
Ambassador Lodge assessed prospects as hopeful; recOlronended 
US continue the policy of eventual mil: tary withdra'Ral from 
SV:~" said annou:1ced 1,OOO-rnan withdra .... al v as having Bulutory 
effects. 
MACV agreed. 
In this light, officials agreed that 
the Accelerated Plan ( speed-up of force wHhdraw"l by six 
months directed by Mc;:amara in October) s hould be maintained . 
MC;:a.'T,ara "anted MAP spending held close to 050 ' s $175.5 million 
ceiling (because of acceleratlon , a IT 64 MAP of $197 . 7 million 
l ooked posslble) . 
One result: 
US Government policies in general were maintained 
for the sake of contlnuity, to allov the n~. administration 
time to settle and adjust. 
TWs tendency to reinforce exist-
ing policies arbitrarily, just to keep t hem gOing, extended 
the phase-out , withdrawal and ~tAP concepts - - probably for too 
l ong . 
Calling GYX political stability vital to t he liar and calling 
attention to G\'!\ fi n8.llctal straits, the Secretary said the 
US must be prepared to increase aid to Saigon . 
Funding vell 
above current ~-1AP plans .... as envisaged . 
President Johnson approved recommendations to continue current 
policy tovard Vietnam put forward At the 20 November Honolulu 
meeting: reaffl rmed US objectives on withdrawnl . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
d 
f 
I/!. 
3 Dec 63 
5 Dec 63 
11 Dec 63 
13 Dec 63 
30 Jan 64 
10, 11, 11" 
1'1 Feb 64 
6 Mar 64 
'\-16 
Mar EIJ 
16 Mar 64 
17 Mar (4 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Director , Fnr East 
Region/rSA Memoran-
dum for the ASD/rSA 
CI);CPAC Message to JCS 
Director , DIA Memorandum 
for the Secretary 
Second Coup in Salgon 
Deputy Director , CIA 
Mereorandn for SeeDer, 
SecState, ~ ~ 
Elghth SecDef Conference 
on Vietn8{!l, Honolulu 
McNlllIlara/Taylor Trip 
to Vietnam 
SecDef Memorandum for 
. the P"esident: "Report 
on Trip to Vietnam" 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In response to the President's wish for a reappraisal of "v'iet-
nam de .... elopments, for a "fresh new look" at the pro: 1 err. , 
second - echelon leaders outllned a broad i nterdepartrr.ental 
"Review of the South Vietne.m Situation ." 
'!"his sys len:atic 
effort did not cullLinate 11'1 hIgh level nat.ional reassessment or 
specIfic policy rc-orient.aLior. . 
Submitted the Accelerated Model Plan version of crsv., . 
From 
a total of 15,200 in 1'":' 1901" US military strer.gth i" Vietr.am 
would drop to 11, 500 in IT 1965 (vice 13,100 rccOli!!llended by 
the Model II, Plan). to about 3, 200 in IT 1906 and 2 ,('00 in 
Fl' 19(,7 . 
GV:; force levels were a bit lower but G V~: force 
build-up a bit faster than recon:rr.ended by the Model M Pla:l. 
uAP costs for roS 1905-1969 totalled $399.11 million (vice 
$392.2 million Q"der Mode l M pIa") . 
Thp eti .1ust€'d year-end strenGth figure ... ·as 1 5 , ~94
. 
Althl,)ug~l 
1,000 men were tech:licnlly ... ithdra .... n , nO actual reducti o n ut' 
US strength was achieved. 
The December figure was not 1,000 
less than the peak October leve1. 
Reported the VC "ad impro',ed combat effecU-;eness ar.d force 
posture during ]963 , t.ha:' ';C capability .... as unimpaired . 
(Quite a dlfferc"t p icture had been painted by SACSA In late 
October: "An Q',rerview of the Vietnam '''ar , 1900-1963," per -
sonally directed to the Secretary , ... ·a:; a glo .... ir.g account of 
steady mllltar'y progress .) 
General Minh ' s military regime 'lins replaced by a jur.ta headed 
by General Khan" . 
Suspicious of progress reports, CIA sent a specJa.l group to 
"look at" South Vietnam. 
Its indeper:denL evaluation rc· ... ealed 
a serious o.nd steadi ly deter10rnLing GV~; si Luation. 
V ictco!:g 
gains and , signifJcantly, the quality and quantity of VC arms 
had increased. 
The Strnte£ic Han:let Progrrun was "at v: rtual 
standstill." 
The insurgency tide seemed to be "goi.!Jg agair. st.. 
GVN
II in all four Corps. 
Participants agreed that the milltary situation was definitely 
deteriorating, that insurt:ency ... ·o"Jld pl'obably cor.tir.ue beY0:1d 
1965 , that. the !;S must lmmediat.ely dctennine _hat had to be 
done to make up for the setback ( s) . 
Personally confinned the gra'llty of the Vietnam situa~jon
. 
Mr. 
MC~jn."'Dara report ed the sit.uation 'Was "unquest.ionabl y" "'orse 
than in September. 
(RV:'AF desertion rates were up: GV:, mili -
tary posi t.ion 'Was ..... eak and the Vietcong . \,rith increased :,v:. 
Support, was stro;, £: . ) 
CO:lcluding that mOre US s upport ... ·as 
necessary, t.he Secreto.ry made twelve reco:rm.endat.ions. 
These 
i ncluded: 
~ o re economic assist.ance, military t.rai ning, equipment 
and advisory aSGist.ance , as needed. 
Continued high-level US overflights of G'/?i borders: 
authori:>ation for "hol pursuit" a.nd ground operati.ons 
in Laos. 
Prepare to initiate - on 72 hours' notice· Laos and 
Cambodia 90rder control operations 8.!!d ret.aUatory actio:'.s 
against :,ort:l Vietr.Ml. 
Make plans to inj Uat.e - on 30 days ' notice -
8. "progran: 
of Graduated Overt. Military Pressures" against r-iorth 
Vietnam. 
Mr . MC::8r.!ara called the p0licy of reducing existing :.JS person:1el 
where South Vietnamese could assume their f\J.nct.lons "still sound" 
but said no major reductions could be expected in the near future. 
He felt [;S training personnel could be s ubstantially reduced 
before the end of 1905 . 
The President. appro"led the twelve recommendat ions presented by 
Mr. 
MC~;BJllo.ra and directed all agenci es concerned to carry theIt 
out pramptly. 
'lOF SECnC7I' - Sens itive 
'.:", 
27 Mar 64 
6 ~I .y 64 
1-2 ~un 64 
25 Jun 64 
4 Jul 64 
15 Ju1 61, 
17 Ju1 64 
21 Ju1 61, 
Dec 64 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
OSD Message 96302'3 
to Cri.CPAC 
Cr::CPAC ~:essage to 
fo'.ACV ( 0621457,) 
Special Meetir.g on 
Southeast ASia, 
Honolulu 
II.ACV Message 325310 
to JCS 
CI~.CPAC "~essae;e to 
JCS (01,2320Z) 
Saigon EMBTEL 
l O~ 
MACV Hessage 61'10 to 
CIi;CPAC (161oJ.5Z) 
EMBTEL 
( 171210:-:) 
State 205 to Saigon 
Further increases 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Formally suspended five-year MAP program planning until further 
notice: said the previous plans for phasing down US and GI'iI' 
forces was superseded by the pol icy of providing South Vietnam 
assist8Jlce and support as long as required to bring aggression 
and terrorism under control (as per ~SAM 233) . 
Indicated grolo'ing US military cOIIJIlitment: thi s 1500-man aug-
mentation r aised the total authorized level to 17 ,000 . 
Calld i n part to examine the GVI: National Campaign Pl an -- ;:hiGh ;:as 
failing. 
The conferees agreed to increase Rv:.lAF effectiveness by 
extending and int ensifying the liS advisory effort as ~IACV 
recommended. 
Fonnal W,CY r equest for 900 additional advisory personnel. 
His 
justification for advisors at the battalion level and for D:i.ore 
advisors at di.strict and sector levels was included. 
Also, 80 
US:~ advisors were requested to establi sh a Junk Force and other 
lI"ari tirr.e counter insurgency measures . 
CI:;CPAC rccOlllJl1ended approval of the MACV proposal for intensi-
fication of US advisory efforts. 
Ambassador 1aylor r eported that revised VC strength estimates 
now put the enemy force between 2'3 , 000 and 34,000. ,0 cause 
for alarm, he said the ne'" estimate did demonstrate the magni-
tude of the problem end t he need to raise the l eve l of US/GVJ( 
efforts . 
Taylor thoughta US strength increase to 21,000 by 
t he end of the year ;;oul d be sufficient. 
MACV requested 3,200 personnel to support t he expansion (by 900) 
of US advisory efforts - - or I, , 200 more men over the next nine 
months . 
Ambassador Taylor concurred in ~~CVIS proposed i ncrease , recom-
mended prompt approval and action. 
Reported Presidential approval (at the 21 J uly NSC meeting) of 
t he MACV deployment package . 
Total US strength was 23, 000: further deployments were on t.he 
way . 
TOP SEcif,:"!' - oensitive 
f 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET- SGnsitive 
PB..ASED WITIiDJ:\AWAL OF U. S. FORCES 
TABLE OF' COFJTENTS and OU~'Lr:l\1E 
Introduction . . 
The Secretary of Defense Honolulu Decj.sions of July 1962 
National Campaign Plan 
Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam 
Secretary of Defense Honolulu Decisions of l~ay 1963. 
MAP Planning 
1000-Man Withdrmml. • 
The Buddhist Crisis. . . 
McNamara-Taylor Mission to South Vietnam) October 1963 
The rTovember Coup and OverthrOi{ of DieHl . 
Assassination of President Kennedy 
Accelerated Model Plan of the CPSVN. 
The 1000-I'lan Wi thdrm-ra1 of December 1963 
The Vietnam Situation Horsens ..
• ...• 
Demise of the CPSVN . 
Build-Up of the U. S. Force Commitment • 
postscript to Withdra'iral Planning . . 
FIGURES 
1. 
CPSVN - Total U. S. Supported Forces. 
2 . 
CPSV'N - Forecast of Phase-Out of U.S . F'or·ces .• 
3. 
CPSVN - Phase Dmm of U.S. Forces 
4. 
CPSVN - Ph8se DOim of GVN Forces. 
5. 
CPSVN - W\P Cost. . . 
g 
1 
3 
5 
6 
12 
13 
15 
16 
18 
24 
25 
26 
30 
30 
37 
. 37 
39 
8 
10 
27 
28 
. 29 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV. B. 4. 
INTRODUCTION 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
PHASED WITHDRAWAL OF U.S. FORCES 
1962-1964 
From mid-1962 to early 1964 the U. S. government went through a formal 
planning process, ostensibly designed to disengage the U. S. from direct and 
large-scale military involvement in Vietnam. 
In retrospect, this experi-
ence falls into place as a more or l ess isolated episode of secondary im-
portance; eventually abortive, it had little impact on the evolution of the 
Vietnam war . It does, however , serve as a vehicle for understanding one 
long phase of the war and the U.S. role in it. 
The genesis l ay in a conjuncture of circumstances during the first 
half of 1962 that prompted the U. S. to shift its Vietnam perspective 
from the hitherto restricted one of largely tactical responses to current, 
localized, and situational requirements, to fitting these to more strate-
giC and purposeful long-range courses of action. 
The expanded perspective 
was programmatic in outlook, and oriented toward specific goals -- end 
the ins1Jxgency and withdraw militarily from Vietnam. 
At the outset, the motivation for the idea of ph3.sed withdrawal of 
U.S. forces was threefold: 
in part, the belief that developments in Viet-
nam itself were going v1ell; in part, doubt over the efficacy of us ing U. S. 
forces in an internal war; and in part, the demands of other crises in the 
world that were more important to Washington than Vietnam. 
In the course 
of materializing into policy and assuming form as plans, these premises were 
transformed into conclusions, desiderata institutionalized as objectives, 
and wish took on the character and force of imperative . 
For example, in March 1962, Secretary McNamara testified before Con-
gress that he was "optimistic" over prospects for U. S. success in aiding 
Vietnam, and "encouraged 8,t the progress the South Vietnamese are making ." 
He expressed conviction that the U. S. would attain its objectives there . 
But he emphasized that the U. S. strategy \Vas to avoid participating directly 
in the war Ivhile seeking an early military conclusion: y 
"I would say definitely we are approaching it from the 
point of vie"" of trying to clean it up, and t erminating sub-
version, covert aggression, and combat operations .. . . 
" ... We are wise to carryon the operations against the 
Communists in that area by assisting native forces rather than 
by using U. S. forces for combat . 
1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
16, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"Not only does that release U.S. forces for use elsewhere 
in the world or for stationing in the United States, but also 
it is probably the most effective way to combat the Communist 
subversion a :"1d covert aggression . 
To introduce white forces --
U.S. forces - - in l arge numbers the:re today, while it might 
' have an initial favorable military impact would almost certainly 
lead to adverse political and in the long run adverse military 
operations . 
And therefore, we think the program we are carrying 
out is the most effective one and certainly it is directed toward 
t ermination of operations as rapidly as possible ." 
In late spring of 1962, the military situation in South Vietnam showed 
hopeful signs of at last having turned a corner. 
The various programs 
under way, initiated the previous fall as a r esult of decisions in NSAM 
No . lll,appeared to be bearing out the basic soundness of the nevl approach . 
Assessments and evaluations being reported from the field i ndicated a 
pattern of progress on a broad front , and their consistency through time 
r einforced the impression . 
By mid-year the prospects looked bright . 
Continuing favorable developments now held forth the promise of eventual 
success, and to many the end of the insurgency seemed in sight . 
This 
optimism was not without the recognition that there were unsolved politi-
cal problems and serious soft spots in certain areas of the military 
effort. 
But U. S. leadership, both on the scene in Vietnam as well as in 
Washington, w'as confident and cautiously optimistic. 
In some quarters, 
even a measure of euphoria obtained . 
At the same time, events outside Vietna.rn, some of them ostensibly 
unrelated, were asserting a direct and immedia,te r el evance for U. S. policy 
and strategy in Vietnam. 
As competing priorities, they far overshadowed 
Vietnam. 
In the l arger scheme of things, an indefinite military commit-
ment in Southeast Asia 'was bei ng relegated perforce to a parenthetical. 
diversion the nation could then ill afford. 
More central i ssues in Berlin, 
Cuba , and in Laos were at stake, perhaps even to the extent of survival. 
Looming foremost was the Berlin problem. 
Fraught with grave over-
tones of potential nuclear confrontation with the USSR, it reached crisis 
proportions in the spring of 1962 over the air corridor issue , and after 
a temporary lull, flared anevl in early summer . 
By the first of July it 
was again as tense as ever . 
U.S. res erv~s had been recalled to active 
duty, additional forces were deployed to Europe, and domestic Civil Defense 
activities , including shelter construction programs , were accelerated . 
The burgeoning Cuba problem too was taking on a pressing urgency by 
virtue of both its proximity and grovring magnitude . 
The Castro aspects 
alone "lere becoming more than a vexing l ocal ized embarrassment . 
Given 
the volatile Caribbean political climate, Cuban inspired mischief could 
r aise tensions to the flash point momentarily . 
Moreover , by early smrrmer 
of 1962 increasing evidence of Soviet ma.chinations to exploit Cuba mili-
tarily was rapidly adding an alarming strategic dimension . 
Though the 
2 
TOP SECRET - Sensitjve 
17. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
nature and full significance of these l atter developments would not be 
revealed until the climactic Cuban Missile Crisis a few months later, the 
U.S. was already apprehensive of serious danger on its very doors~ep . 
Official interpretive evaluations at the time saw' an intimate causal nexus 
between Berlin and Cuba. 
Finally, another set of factors altering the strategic configuration 
in Southeast Asia and affecting the U. S. position there also came to a 
head in mid-summer of 1962 . 
These were developments regarding Laos, 'which 
impinged upon and helped reshape the U.S . relationshipto"rard Vietnam. 
In the fall of 1961 and through the spring of 1962 the U.S., its objec-
tives frustrated in Laos, had decided to salvage as much as possible by 
settling for neutralization . After lengthy and complex diplomatic maneuver-
ing, this was essentially achieved by early summer . 
On 23 July 1962 the 
l~- nation declaration and protocol on the neutrality of Laos was signed 
formally, ending the 15-month Geneva Conference on IJaos. 
The outcome 
had at once the effect of extricating the U.S. from one insoluble dilemma 
and serving as a stark object lesson for another . 
The Laos settlement 
now both allo"red the U. S. a free hand to concentrate on Vietnam and pro-
vided the incentive and determination to bring to a close its military 
cowaitment there as well -- but this time successftllly. 
It was in this spirit and context that the U.S. decided to pursue 
actively the policy objective of divesting itself of direct military involve-
ment of U.S. personnel in the Vietnam insurgency . 
The aim was to create 
militarily favorable conditions so that further U.S. military involvement 
would no l onger be needed . 
To this end , two prerequisites had to be satis-
fied: 
bringing the insurgency effectively under control; and simultaneously, 
developing a mil itarily viable South Vietnam capable of carrying its own 
defense burden "\vithout U.S. mil itary help. 
In phase with the progress 
toward both these goals, there then could be proportionate reductions in 
U.S. forces. 
THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE HONOLULU DECISIONS OF JULY 1962 ?J 
In July 1962, as the prospect of the neutralization of Laos by the 
Geneva Conference became i~minent , policy attention deliberately turned 
tow'ard the remaining Vietnam probl em. 
At the behest of the President, 
the Secretary of Defense undertook to reexamine the situation there and 
address himself to its futur e -- vd th a view to assuring that it be brought 
to a successful conclusion within a reasonable time . 
Accordingly, he 
called a full-dress conference on Vietnam at CINCPAC Headquarters in Hawaii. 
On 23 July, the same day that the 1.4-nation neutralization declaration 
on Laos was formally signed in Geneva, the Sixth Secretary of Defense 
Conference convened in Honolulu . 
The series of briefings .and progress reports presented at the con-
ference depicted a generally favorable situation . 
Things were steadily 
3 . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
J ~, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
improving and promised to continue. 
Most programs underway were moving 
forward, as the statistical indicators clearly demonstrated . 
Those 
directly related to prosecution of the counterinsurgency effort shoived 
measurable advances being made toward winning the war . 
Programs for ex-
panding and improving RVNAF capability were likewise coming along well, 
and in most cases, were ahead of schedule . 
Confidence and optimism pre-
wikd. 
. 
I 
' d 
Mr 
"
d" 
mpresse, 
. McNamara acknowledged that the tremen ous progress 
in the past six months was gratif'ying . 
He noted, hOI'lever, that these 
achievements had been the result of short-term ad hoc actions on a crash 
basis. 
What was needed now was to conceive a long-range concerted pro 
gram of systematic measures for training and equipping the RVNAF and for 
phasing out major U.S. advisory and logistic support activities . 
The 
Secretary then asked how long a period it would take before the VC could 
be expected to be eliminated as a significant force . 
COMUSMACV, in reply 
to the direct question, estimated about one year from the time the RV~~F, 
the Civil Guard, and the Self-Defense Corps became fully operational and 
began to press the VC in all areas. 
The Secretary said that a conservative view had to be taken B,nd to 
assume it would take three years instead of one, that is, by the latter 
part of 1965 · 
He observed that it might be difficult to retain public 
support for U.S. operations in Vietnam indefinitely. 
Political pressures 
would build up as losses continued . 
Therefore, he concluded, planning 
must be undertaken now and a program devised to phase out U.S . military 
involvement . 
He, therefore, directed that a comprehensive long-range 
program be developed for building up South Vietnamese military capability 
for taking over defense responsibilities and phasing out the U. S. role, 
assuming that it would require approximately three years (end 1965 ) for 
the RVNAF to be trained to the point that they could cope with the VC. 
The program was to include training requirements, equipment requirements, 
U.S. advisory requirements, and U. S. units . 
For the record, the formulation of the decisions made and the direc-
ti ves for action to be t aken resulting from the Conference was as follOl'lS: 
a. 
Prepare plans for the gradual scaling down of USMACV 
during the next 3-year period, elj~inating U.S. units 
and detachments as Vietnamese were trained to perform 
their functions . 
b. 
Prepare programs with the objective of glvlng South 
Vietnam an adeque.te military capahili ty without the 
need for special U. S. military assistance, to include 
(1) a long-range training program to establish an 
officer corps able to manage GVN military operations, 
and (2) a long-range program and requirements to provide 
the necessary materiel to make possible a turnover to 
RVNAF three y'ears from July 1962 . 
4' 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The U. S. Military Assistance Advisory Group, Vietnam, had been 
augmented in 1961 by aviation) communicatiOns) and intellj.gence units) 
as well as by Special Forces and other advisers. 
The Secretary of 
Defense plainly intended that plans be devised for terminating the 
mission of the auwnenting units. 
Three days later on 26 July, the JCS formally directed CINCPAC 
to develop a Comprehensive Pls.n for South Vietnam (CPSVN) in accordance 
with the Secretary 's decisions of 23 July. 3/ 
CINCPAC) in turn, so 
instructed COMUSJvrACV on 14 August, at the same time furnishing addi-
tional guidance and terms of reference elaborating on the original SecDef 
decisions at Honolulu and the JCS directive. 
The stated objective of the 
CPSVN was given as: 
Develop a capability ivithin mi.lHary and para-mHitary 
forces of the GVN by the end of CY 65 that wi.ll help the GVN 
to achieve the strength necessary to exercise permanent and 
continued sovereignty over that part of Vietnam. vrhich lies 
below the demarcation line without the need for continued U.S. 
special military assistance. 
Development of the plan Has to be based on the following assump-
tions: 
' 
a. 
b. 
c. 
The insurgency will be under control at the end of three 
years (end of CY 65). 
Extensive U.S. support vri.ll continue to be required during 
the three year period, both to bring the insurgency under 
control and to prepare GVN forces for early take-over of 
U.S. activities. 
Previous MAP funding ceilings for SVN are not _a
4
P;plicable. 
Program those items essential to do this job. 
/ 
NATIONAL C.AJ.v1PAIGN PLAN 
Planning, in tvo complementary modes) got unden18Y immediately. 
Concurrently with development of the unilateral U.S. CPSVN, USMACV 
planners prepared a concept and proposed outline of a GVN National Cam-
paign Plan (NCP ) for launching an integrated nation-ivide campaign of 
offensive military operations to eliminate the insurgency and restore 
the country to GVN control. A central purpose was to reorganize and 
redispose the VNAF and streamline the chain of command, in order to 
improve responsiveness) coordination, and general effectiveness of the 
military effort against the VC. 
Greater authority would be centralized 
in the Vietnamese Joint General Staff (JGS)j Corps Tactical Zones (CTZs ) 
v(ould be increased from three to four; and each CTZ would have its m-ffi 
direct air and naval support. 
5 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Over and above organizational considerations, the NCP provided for 
systematic intensification of aggressive operations in all CTZs to keep 
the VC off balance, while simultaneously conducting clear and hold opera-
tions in support of the expanding Strategic Hamlet Program. 
Priority 
of military tasks \-las first to concentrate bn areas north of Saigon, 
then gradually shift toward the south to Saigon and the Delta. 2/ 
The proposed NCP "\oTas submitted to the GVN in October and a month 
later was adopted in concept and outline . 
On 26 November, President Diem 
promulgated the necessary j~plementing decrees and directives to effect 
the r eorganization of the SVN armed forces and realign the chain of com-
mand. 
An integrated Joint Operations Center (JOC ) was also established and 
became operational on 20 December, with representation from JGS and its 
counterpart in US~ACV to centralize control over current operations . 
The 
following J anuary the draft of a detailed implementing plan for the NCP 
itself was completed and subsequently approved. ~I 
COMPREHENSIVE PL.lI.N FOR SOUTH VIETNAM 
Meanwhile, the first cut at the CPSVN "\oTaS also completed by the MACV 
planners. 
It was forwarded to CINCPAC on 7 December, but CINCPAC, upon 
revievTing the proposed plan, considered it infeasible because of the high 
costs involved and the marginal capacity of the RVNAF to train the neces-
sary personnel in the required skills vTithin the time frame specified. 
As 
a result of CINCPAC I S reaction to the initial versj.on, the CPSVN was revised 
and resubmitted by COMU~ffiCV on 19 January 1963. 7/ 
The new CPSVN covered 
the period IT 1963-1963. 
In transmittj_ng it; CO.tviU~ffiCV r ecommended that 
future Military Assistance Programs (MAPs ) be keyed therefore to the CPSVN. 
He also indicated that the CPSVN had been coordinated "\OTith the Ambassador, 
who concurred in it . Q/ 
Force l evels laid out in the CPSVN provided for total personnel 
i ncreases reaching a peak of 458,000 (regular and para-military) i n FY 6l.~, 
with RVNAF manning strength raised from 215,000 to a peak of 230,000 in 
the same IT period and remaining on that plateau t hereafter . 
Order of 
magnitude costs ( in $ millions ) of the CPSVN would come to: 
IT 61-1-
FY 66 
FY 68 
TOTAL 
218 
153 
138 
113 
978 
CINCPAC approved the CPSVN as submitted and sent it on to the JCS. 
However) in the interim, OSD had issued dollar guidelines for MAP planning 
for Vietnam. 
The ceilings indicated therein were significantly at variance 
wi,th the costing figures employed by MACV in devel oping the CPSVN. 2/ 
When 
CINCPAC forwarded the plan) therefore, he went to considerable lengths to 
explain the discrepancies and to support and j ustify the higher costs. 
Comparison of the DOD dollar guidelines .Tith the CPSVN, proj ected through 
IT 69, shm-led a net difference of approximately 66 million dollars, with 
6 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the preponderance of the increase occurring in FY @~ . 10/ 
Most of 
this difference was accounted for by additional Packing-Crating-Handling-
Transportation (PCHI') costs associated with the CPSVN but not accommodated 
in the DOD guideline figures. 
The body of the CPSVN laid out the costs in relation to the DOD 
dollar guidelines) as follows: 
CPSVN -
DOD DOLLAR GUIDELINES COST COMPARISON ($ millions ) 
FY @~ FY 65 
FY 66 
FY 67 
FY(J3 
FY 69 
TOTAL 
218 
138 lb9 
113 
110 ---
CPSVN* 
153 . 
901 
DOD Guidelines 
160 
165 
160 
150 
140 
122 
897 
Difference 
+5E 
-12 
-22 
+19 
-27 
-12 
~ 
PCHI' Added 
+11 
+11 
+11 
+11 
+10 
+8 
+62 
Difference 
+69 
-1 
-11 
+30 
-17 
-=4 
"+bb 
*Excludes PCHI'. 
The rationale offered vTaS that) in order to prosecute the counter-insurgency 
to a successflLl conclusion) 'l-Thile at the same time building up GVN capability 
to allov7 early withdrmral of U.S. forces ) the major costs of the program had 
to be compressed into the FY 63·-65 time frame) with a particular increase in 
FY 64 and another folloVling U.S. withdrawal in FY 67. 11/ 
But clearly most 
of the greater cost throughout the period reflected PCFf. 
The pattern of force levels for all South Vietnamese forces that the 
CPSVN provided for, including the separate non-MAP funded Civilian Irregu-
lar Defense Group, is shovn in Figure 1. 
7 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRNf - Sensitive 
600r-----------.-----------,-----------~------------------~--~~~--~--, 
ClOG -Civilian Irregular Defense Graup 
.!8 
c 
5l 
:> a 
-£ 
550 
500 
~ 300 
:r: 
G 
Z 
UJ 
cr: 
I-
V1 
12-9-68-1 
FIGURE 1 
(Nan-NIAP funded) 
SOC - Self-Defense Carps 
CG 
- Civil Guard 
RVNAF-Republic af Vietnam Armed Farces 
PARAMI LlTARY JU NK FORCE 
1965 
1966 
FISCAL YEAR 
CPSVN - Total U. S. Supported Forces (U) 
8 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Since the ultimate objective of the CPSVN 'Ias early wUhdra\val of 
U.S. special military assistance) the plan provided for phasing out U.S. 
advisory forces. 
The affected ma jor commands of USlf~CV that would largely 
not be required after FY 66 were: 
1 . 
The U.S. Marine Element which provided helicopter trans-
portation support. 
2. 
The 2d Air Division vhich provided the USAF portion of the 
special military assistance support perforraed in SVN. 
This 
support · included "Farmgate" (Fighter)) "Mule Train" (Trans-
portation ), and "Able Mable" ( Reconnaissance ) . 
It also 
provided USAF administration and logistical support for USAF 
personnel and equipment engaged in special military assistance 
to SVN. 
3· 
U.S. Army Support Group Vietnam (USASGV) which provided the 
U.S. Army portion of the special militaTy assistance support 
for SVN (except that performed by ~AAG and Headquarters MACV)) 
including helicopter and fixed ving air transportati on) signal 
corr®unications) and special forces . 
It also provided U. S. 
administrative and logistical support for assigned and attached 
personnel and equipment engaged in the special military assistance. 
4. 
Headquarters Support Activity Saigon ( HSAS ) ,Ihich provided 
administrative support to the U.S. Headquarters and other U.S. 
government sponsored agencies and activities located in Saigon. 
5· 
MAAG Vietnam vould have Us strength reduced by one-half after 
FY 65· 
Only 1) 500 ~AAG personnel "Jere to remain in country 
after FY t8. 
The target scbedule for U.S. force withdrawal) as then forecast) is 
contained in Figure 2. 12/ 
9 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
ORGANIZATION 
HQ USMACV 
HQ MAAG 
2D AI R DIV 
USASG (V) 
USMC HELICOPTER UNIT 
HSAS 
TOTAL 
12-9-68-2 
FIGURE 2 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(thousands ) 
FY63 
FY64 
FY65 
FY66 
FY67 
.3 
.4 
.4 
.1 
.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
1.7 
1.6 
2.2 
2.3 
2.3 
l.i 
.0 
5.1 
5.5 
5.5 
2.7 
.0 
.5 
.5 
.5 
.0 
.0 
.5 
.5 
.5 
.3 
.0 
11:6 
12.2 
12.2 
5.9 
1.6 
CPSV N - Forecast of Phase-Out of U.S. Forces (U) 
FY68 
.0 
1.5 
.0 
.0 
.0 
.0 
1.5 
10 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
On 7 March 1963) the JCS accepted the MACV CPSVN in toto and for-
warded it to the Secretary of Defense . 
They rec~Mlended approval) and 
proposed that it be the basis for both revising the FY 64 MAP and develop-
ment of the FY 65-69 l<IAPs. 
They requested an early decision on the CPSVN 
because the greatest increase lolOUld occur in the FY 64 1Y1AP. 
The JCS fully 
supported the higher costs of the CPSVN above the DOD dollar guidelines. 13/ 
In OSD, the proposed CPSVN underwent staffing revi evl in ISA MA Plans 
and elsei-There. 
Draft responses to the JCS ,·rere prepared and then with-
drawn. 
Secretary McNamara was not satisfied vrith either the high funding 
level s or the adequacy of the plan regarding exactly hoVl the RVN forces 
were to take over from the U.S. to effect the desired phase-out of the 
U. S. military commitment. 
In mid-April he decided to l{ithhold action 
pending full revievr of the CPSVN at another Honolulu conference vlhich he 
expressly scheduled for that purpose for 6 May. 
Meantime, the various OSD 
agencies concerned were instructed to prepare detailed analyses and back-
ground studies for him. 14/ 
The main focus of interest of the Secretary of Defense 'ioTaS on the policy 
objective behind the CPSVN) namely) to reduce systematically the scale of 
U.S. involvement until phased out completely. 
Hovrever) the beginnings of 
a counter-current l-rere already evident. 
New demands for increases all 
around 'Jere to overvrhelm the phasing out objective. 
Ad hoc requirements 
for more U.S. forces l{ere being generated piecemeal, each in its molD right 
sufficiently reasonable and so honored. 
This current) counter-current 
dynamic can be illustrated well by Mr. McNamara's decisions of late March. 
As part of the Secretary's policy of demanding strict accounting and tight 
control on authorized U.S. in-country strength ceilings, he asked for the 
latest reading on projected U.S. military strength to be reached in Vietnam. 
He was reassured by the Chairman, JCS) that the estimated peak vTOuld not 
exceed 15)@~O personnel. 
Yet) on this very same day) the Secretary approved 
a substantial force augmentat ion) requested earlier) for FARMGATE and air-
lift support, involving III additional aircraft and a total of approximately 
1475 additional personnel. 15/ 
Other similar special requirements and ad 
hoc approvals soon were to follm-r. 
Assessments of continuing favorable developments in the improving 
Vietnam situation in the spring of 1963 seemed to warrant more than ever 
going ahead with the planned phase out. 
The general tenor of appra isals 
at the USMACV level l{ere that the RVNAF had regained the initiative from 
the VC and that the GVN position had improved militarily, economically, 
and politically. 
Evaluations expressed in the "Summary of Highlights" 
covering the first year of MACV's existence cited in detail the record of 
the increasing scale, frequency, and effectiveness of RVNAF operations) 
vThile those of the VC vTere declining. 
Casua l ty ratios favored RVNAF by 
more than two to one, and the balance of vreapons captured vs weapons lost 
had also shHted to the GVN s i de. 
Cited as perhaps the most significant 
progress ioTaS the Strategic Hamlet Program. 
The . future looked even brighter) 
e.g., " .. . barring greatly increased resupply and reinforcement of the Viet 
Cong by i nfiltration, the military phase of the war can be virtually von 
in 1963. II 16/ 
. 
11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Other evaluations) though more conservative) still tended to corr-
oborate this optimism. 
NIE 53-63) issued 17 April 1963) found no particular 
deterioration or serious problems in the military situation in South Viet-
nam; on the contrary) it Sal, some noticeable improvements and gent;ral 
progress over the past year. 
The worst that it could say was that the 
situation "remains fragile." 17/ 
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE HONOLULU DECISIONS OF MAY 1963. 
At the 6 May Honolulu Conference) briefj.ng reports again confirmed 
gratifying progress in the military situation. Addressing the CPSVN) 
Mr. McNamara questioned the need for more Vietnamese forces in FY 6f3 
(22~ .~. 
thousand ) than the present l evel of 215 thousand. 
His reasoning was that 
a poor nation of 12 million like Vietnam could not support that many men 
under arms. 
Qualitatively) furthermore) the planned evolution of V~ffiF 
seemed overambitious in terms of sophisticated veaponry such as fighter 
aircraft. 
In SUill) the Secretary felt the CPSVN assumed an unrealistically 
high force level for the SVN military establismlent and assigned it equip-
ment that vas both unduly complicated to operate and expensive to procure 
and maintain. 
Based on these considerations) the Secretary of Defense concluded that) 
if the insurgency came under control in FY 65 as anticipated) the U.S. MAP 
investment in SVN thereafter should not be more than at the rate of about 
$50 million per year. 
In his view) thus) the $573 million MAP proposed in 
the CPSVN for the period FY 65 through FY 6f3 was at least $270 million higher 
than an acceptable program. 
With regard to phasing out U.S. forces) the Secretary of Defense stated 
that the pace contemplated in the CPSVN was too slov. 
He .-ranted it revised 
to accompli sh a more rapid withdral,al by accelerating training programs in 
order to speed up r eplacement of U.S. units by GVN units as fast as possible. 
'mile recognizing that the build-up of RVNAF vas inherently a slm, process) 
he stressed that in the instance of some U.S. units which had been in SVN 
since 1961) it "rould be possible more rapidly to transfer functions to Viet-
namese . 
Specifically toward this end) he decided that 1)000 UoS. military 
personnel should be vlithdrmm from South Vietnam by the end of CY 63 and 
directed that concrete plans be so dravn up. 18/ 
On r eturning to 'vashington the Secretary of Defense instructed the 
ASD( ISA) on 8 May to develop) in coordination vith the Joint Staff) a plan 
for replacing U.S. forces currently deployed in Vietnam vith indigenous SVN 
forces as rapidly as possible) and particularly) to prepare a plan for with-
drmring 1) 000 U. S. troops before the end of 1965. 
In another memorandum 
the same day to the ASD( ISA) regarding the VlAP) he noted that "the plan 
needs to be completely reworked." 
He therefore instructed ISA also to 
develop anew) ImTer .1I'1AP for Vietnam for the period FY 65 through 69) 
requesting that the ISA recommendations be submitted by the first of 
September . 19/ 
12 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A day l ater, on 9 May, the JCS formally directed CINCPAC to tals.:e 
the necessary actions resulting from the Honolulu Conference and revise 
the CPSVN. 
Guidance and terms of reference were provided reflecting the 
Secretary of Defense reactions and specifying the decisions reached . 
Singled out especially "lTaS the requirement for U.S. force withdravral. 
The . JCS directive read: 
As a matter of urgency a plan for the vlithdraval of about 
1,000 U.S. troops before the end of the year should be developed 
based upon the assumption that the progress of the counter-
insurgency campaign "lwuld "lTarrant such a move. 
Plans should be 
based upon withdraval of US Q~its ( as opposed to individuals ) 
by replacing them llith selected and specially trained RVNAF units. 20/ 
COMUSo/JACV in turn "lTaS tasked to draft the revised CPSVN and prepare a 
plan for the 1000-man r eduction . 
CINCPAC, after some changes and revisions, 
concurred in the proposed plans and forwarded them to the JCS on 11 May. 
The revised outline CPSVN nOvl provided for the follo"l-Ting SVN force levels 
( in' thousands ) : 
FY64 
FY 65 
FY 66 
FY 67 
FY63 
FY 69 
Total Military 
and Para-military 
447.4 
445.5 
362 · 9 
317·1 
263.8 
211~. 7 
MAP levels provided for .rere as follows ( in $ millions ): 
FY64 
FY 65 
. FY 66 
FY 67 
FY 63 
FY 69 
Grand Total 
-
178·9 
149·0 
130·3 
120.4 
100·5 
85.0 
764.1 
The proposed plan for vi thdra"l-ral of the first increment of U. S. forces, in 
compliance with instructions, emphasized Units rather than individuals, but 
the list of so-called "units " scheduled to be included vere all smaller than 
company size. 
All Services vTere represented. 
The criter ia employed, also 
based on earlier guidance, were to select most of the personnel from service 
support and logistics skills most easily spared and whose release "lwuld have 
l east effect on operations. 
The total came to 1,003 U.S. military personnel 
to be withdravm from South Vietnam by the end of December 1963. 21/ 
lflAP PL.4NNING 
ISA meamr-hHe developed tentative dollar guidelines for MAP planning 
for Vietnam. 
Thp first cut, based on the Secretary of Defense ' s 0I-lD sug-
gested total for the FY 65-69 period, was rejected by the Secretary of 
Defense as too high and returned, "I{ith various desired reductions entered 
by t he Secretary of Defense. 22/ 
Reconciling the MAP vrith the CPSVN 
proved to be a difficult problem. 
As CPSVN 
succeeded, it Ivas logical 
that MAP vould have to increase; yet CPSVN tried to cut back lflAP as .Tell. 
For instance, the contemplated phase-out of U.S. artillery-spotter aircraft 
SQuadrons entailed an add-on to MAP to accoJIl.modate the sQuadron ' s eQuip-
ment and maintenance after transf~rral to the Vietnamese. 
13 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Tmlard the end of May the MAP dollar ceiling for FY 64 vTaS estab-
lished at $180 million. 
But for the period after FY 64 both the MAP 
and the CPSVN were far from being settled. 
On 29 May CINCPAC was directed 
to develop three alternative plans in comparative terms based on the fol-
lowing total dollar levels for the FY 65-69 period: 
a. 
$585 million (derived from the current proposed CPSVN). 
b. 
$~· 50 million (compromise ) . 
c. 
$365 million (SecDef goal). 
Funding guidelines for each of the three versions were provided as follmls: 
Plan ($ millions) 
FY 65 
FY 66 
FY 67 
FytJ3 
FY 62 
---
585 
150 
130 
120 
100 
85 
450 
150 
.120 
70 
60 
50 
365 
125 
90 
50 
50 
50 
Implied vTaS that a choice ivould be made somevThere with:in this range. 23/ 
A new) complex MAP-CPSVN planning cycle vTaS thus set i n motion that 
would not fully run its course for almost a year longer. 
CINCPAC responded 
by preparing the comparative analysis of the alternative MAP levels) as 
instructed) but bes.ides the three plans required) introduced a fourth ver-
sion developed by the Joint Staff and identified as "Plan J)" which fell 
mid-range and came to $450.9 million. 
Submitted to the JCS on 18 July) 
the four plans i·rere reviewed at l ength) with the upshot that the JCS added 
a fifth plan identified as the "Model M Plan) " the total cost of ifhich fell 
closer to the bottom-range figure but still came to $400 million. 
It pro-
vided for higher force levels deemed necessary during the critical period 
FY 65 and FY 66) and thus go above the Secretary of Defense desired ceiling 
of $365 million. 
The breakout of the Model M Plan was as fol10vTs : 
FY 65 
FY 66 
IY 67 
FY tJ3 
FY 69 
SVN military strength 
. 
. 
(thousands ) 
225·5 
225·5 
148.8 
122.0 
121.2 
MAP costs ($ millions ) 
145 ·2 
117·2 
51.2 
45·1 
41·3 
All five plans vTere fonrarded by the JCS on 27 August) with the recornmenda-
tj.on that the Secretary of Defense approve the Model M Plan. 24/ 
ISA concurred in the JCS recofimendation with certain minor reserva-
tions) 25/ 
and on 6 September) the Secretary of Defense accordingly 
approvedthe Model M Plan as a basis for development of the FY 65-69 MAPs . 
However) the Secretary at the same time advised the JCS that U.S. materiel 
turned over to SVN units vTOuld henceforth be charged to the MAP. 
Such costs 
14 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
therefore would have to be absorbed Ivithin the authorized Model Plan ceilings . 26/ 
Nonetheless, there "Tere still further refinements made. 
As finally 
published, the approved lfUW reflecting the Model M Plan version of the 
CPSVN provided for the follmling SVN active military strength lev1=ls ( in 
thousands) : 
FY64 
ARVN 
207.5 
Total (All Services 
442.5 
regular and para-military ) 
FY 65 
201·3 
437.0 
FY 66 
177·5 
340.2 
Costing levels vere as follows ( in $ millions ) : 
FY64 
180.6 
FY 66 
107·7 
FY 67 
46.2 
FYffi 
FY 67 
121~. 5 
142 . 1 
FYffi 
101~ .8 
122.2 
Tota l 
392. 2 
FY 69 
103·9 
120 . 2 
This final product represented a radical reduction in both force l evels and 
financial investment after FY 66, consistent vith the Administration's 
original policy goal of ending the var and the U. S • militar y involvement 
by December 1965. 27/ " 
1000-t1AN WITHDRAvlAL PL.AN 
Meanwhile, planning for the 1000-man withdraval directed by the 
Secretary of Defense on 6 May was split off from the CPSVN proper and 
the MAP, and was being treated as a separat e entity. 
On 20 August, the 
JCS, concurring in the proposed plan developed by COMUSMACV and CINCPAC, 
forwarded it to the Secretary of Defense . 
They recommended approva l at 
this time for planning purposes onlyj final decision I'T8S to depend upon 
circumstances as they developed. 
The JCS also seconded CINCPAC's added 
proposal to withdravl the 1000 troops in three or four increments, rather 
than all at one time . 
The reasons given ,vere that this would be more 
practical and efficient for the U. S.) would minimize the impact on on-going 
military operational activities vithin South Vietnam, and vould afford the 
opportunity for "nei-Ts prominence and coverage over an extended period of 
time ." 28/ 
I SA, ",ith certain reservations) recommended approval of the vithdravral 
plan submitted by JCS. 
ISA pointed out to the Secretary of Defense that the 
plan as it stood would not drmv all of the 1000 troops from U.S . units that 
vTere to be relieved by adequately trained SVN units, as had been intended. 
Many of the so- called "units" designated therein actually "Tere not bona 
f~de existing units but vere specially formed "service support units" made 
up of random individuals most easily spared throughout USMACV . 
ISA cau-
tioned that the arbitrary creation of such ad hoc "units " solely for the 
purpose of the vithdra"ral might bacJ:J'ire in press reaction . 
ISA also recom-
mended) in order to shov cred.ibly that the final year-end. U. S. in-country 
15 
TOP SECREr -
SensitJve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
strength had dropped by 1000 from peak strength, that U.S. military 
strength figures in Vietnam be made public, and that the actual strength 
as well as the authorized ceilings at any given time be carefully moni-
tored to insure that the desired reductions 1-rere indeed achieved. 29/ 
A few days later the Secretary of Defense approved the 1000-man with-
drawal plan fOri-larded in JCSM-629-63 as recommended. 
He agreed, how"ever, 
'-lith ISA and advised the JCS against creating special units if their only 
purpose was to be a holding unit as a vehicle for withdrawal of individuals. 
He also requested that he be provided 1-lith a projection of U.S. military 
strength in South Vietnam, by month, for the period September through 
December 1963. 30/ 
" 
. 
The following 1-reek the Chairman, JCS, responded to the Secretary of 
Defense's request and furnished the following proj ection of end-of-month 
U.S. military strengths in South Vietnam: 
August 
16,201 
Sept emb er- -
16,483 
October 
16,732 
November 
16,456 
December 
15,732 
It was noted that the planned 1000-man vlithdrawal would represent a reduc-
tion based on the October peak strength . 
The first increment of 276 
personnel vlould be 1-Tithdra1-rn during November arid the remaining increments 
in December. 31/ 
ThiS, as it turned out, i-laS destined to be changed 
somel-lhat before the withdrmml was executed. 
THE BUDDHIST CRISIS 
vlhile the CPSVN-JVlAP and "I{ithdrawal planning 1-Tere going on, significant 
developments altering the character of the entire situation to which the 
planning effort i·ras addressed--in fact threatening to invalidate the very 
premises from which the planning sprung--were occurring within South Vietnam. 
The Buddhist crisis was rocking the foundations of what precarious political 
stability the Diem government enjoyed and there "lms grOi-ling concern about 
its effect on the prosecution of the war against the VC and on improve-
ments of RVNAF. 
A series of incidents beginning early in May revealed the deep divisions 
behleen militant Buddhist factions, who purported to speak for the bulk of 
the South Vietnamese population, and the Government . 
lack of popular support 
for the Diem regime had nOll turned to open opposition. 
As passions flared 
16 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
,31. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and Buddhist activism '\Vas met with increasingly severe countermeasures} 
violence spread and grew more serious. A tenuous truce was reached briefly 
behreen Buddhist leaders and the GVN on 10 June (formally signed on 16 June ) 
i n a mutual effort to reduce tensions--but proved short-lived. 
Almost 
immediately the actions of both sides repudiated the agreements. 32/ 
The U.S . began to be apprehensive about the possible consequences of 
the Diem government falling as the result of a coup. 
By early July} the 
cris i s was recognized as serious at the highest levels of the U.S. Govern-
ment. 33/ 
Through mid-July assessments remained reasonably reassuring. 
There 
was little evidence of impact on the military sector . 
In fact} indications 
pointed to the military situation continuing to improve. 
DIA reported on 
17 July that the general level of VC-initiated actions during the first 
six months of 1963 was considerably Im.;rer than for the same period the 
year before. 
Battal:Lon and company-size attacks 1-rere at about half the 
1962 level. 
It was noted} hm.;rever} that despite reduced activity} VC 
capability remained essentially unimpaj.red. 
Regarding the progress of 
South Vietnamese counterinsurgency efforts} the DIA evaluation was cau-
tiously optimistic: 
though there was still a long \-ray to go} GVN prospects 
Irare certainly better than they ,-rere one year ago . Ir 34/ 
Quite abruptl~} a disturbing element began to emerge. 
Little more 
than hro ,.;reeks l ater} the DIA Intelli gence Bulletin of 4 August r eported 
a significant increase in the level of VC offensive act ions . 
Moreover} 
t he rate ,.;ras high for the third week in a row since mid-July . 35/ 
The 
clear implication I.?S that the VC at last were taking advantage of the 
opportunity presented by the Buddhist crisis. It had been expected--
and feared--that they ,vould seek to hasten pol itical collapse and exploit 
"rhatever military vulnerabilities there vere . 
The U. S. was thus j ustifi-
ably concerned lest the recent revived VC aggressiveness be the opening 
phase of a stepped up insurgency. 
Within ten days of thj.s DIA report} 
hm-rever} a reevaluation of the significance to be attached to the increased 
rate of enemy actions allayed fears somevrhat. 
On 14 August} SACSA} r eporting 
to t he Secretary of Defense} discounted the upsurge in VC activity over the 
past month. 
Its magnitude} comparatively} was below the average of the 
preceding year and fell far short of the previous high . 
In this perspective} 
SACSA sal. no cause to read undue implications into developments that vere 
as yet neither particularly salient nor of long duration. 36/ 
The political crisis meam.hile took a turn for the worse . 
President 
Diem} in an attempt to regain control} declared martial la'\V on 20 August . 
The decree Has accompanied by forcible entry into pagodas and mass arrests 
of Buddhist leaders and laity} and was immediately followed by a series of 
preemptory repressive measures . 
Any hope of reconciliation "ras nOiv sbattered) 
and the Diem government vas irrevocably i solated. 
17 
TOP SECRET .- Sens Hive 
(II' 
,.,;,L , 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The Director) DIA) in a special report to the Secretary of Defense) 
expressed concern that the declaration of martial law "will have serious 
repercussions throughout the country." 
He foresaw further coup or counter-
coup activity in the making) though for the time being the military had . 
effectively assumed full control. 
So far) he saw little military effect 
on the war effort; relatively few troops had been withdrmm from nonna1 
missions. 37/ At an August 31 review' of the problem for Vice President 
Johnson) Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary McNamara agreed that U.S. 
planning had to be based on tlVO principles--that the U. S. "rould not pull 
out of Vietnam until the Har were Vlon) and that it would not participate 
in a coup d'etat against Diem. 38/ 
For the next month) as the precarious political situation balanced on 
the brink of imminent disaster) U. S. anxieties mounted. 
The Administration 
was confronted by a dilemma. 
It was helpless to ameliorate conditions as 
long as Diem remained in pOi·rer--nor did it want to . approve and support such 
a regime . 
Yet at the same time) it was equally helpless to encouxage a 
change of government--there was no feasible replacement anywhere on the 
South Vietnamese political horizon. 
The upshot "ras an ambivalent policy 
of watchful waiting toward the GVN) while the main preoccupation and focus 
of attention "ras on the conduct of the South Vietnamese military forces 
and the progress of the counterinsurgency programs. 
These still remained 
the first order of business. 
~ 
McNAMARA-TAYLOR MISSION TO SOUTH VIETNAM) oc'rOBER 1963 
By the middle of September) the President "18S deeply concerned over 
the critical political situation) but more importantly) over its effect 
on the war. 
A decision juncture had been reached. 
At issue was the U.S. 
military commitment in South Vietnam; a redirection of U.S. policy and 
objectives might be required. 
On 21 September) the President directed 
the Secretary of Defense) in company I{ith the Chairman) JCS) to proceed 
to South Vietnam for a personal examination of the military aspects of the 
situation. 
The President gave as the purpose of the trip ". . . my desire 
to have the best possib1e on-the-spot appraisal of the military and para-
military effort to defeat the Viet Cong." 
He stated that there had been) 
at least until recently) "heartening results) " but that political deteriora-
tion since May had raised serious questions about the continued effective-
ness of these efforts and the prospects for success . 
The President) there-
fore) needed an assessment of the present situation) and if the McNamara-
Taylor prognosis were not hopeful) they were to recommend needed actions . 
by the SVN and steps the U.S. should take to bring about those actions. 39/ 
The Secretary of Defense and the CJCS) accompanied by a team of civ-
i~ian and military assistants to help in the survey) arrived in South Vietnam 
on 26 September and returned to Washington on 2 October. 
During their visit) 
detailed data "rere compiled for them) presentations prepared) extensive 
briefings given) conferences convened) and consultations held. 
Emerging 
from the investigations and appraisals vas a body of positive evidence 
18 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
3~ . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
indicating that conditions were good and prospects improving . 
In fact, 
in the course of these reassurances, the Secretary of Defense decided to 
order a speed up of the planned program for release of U.S. forces. 
In 
guidance furnished at the time, he directed t hat the projected schedules 
for force reduction provided for in the currently approved Model M Plan 
version of the GPSVN be accelerated by approx:iJnately six months . 
Accord-
ingly, necessary planning revisions were undertaken immediately on a 
priority basis . 
In contrast to the generally favorable military situation, hOlvever, 
there were grave misgivings about the political state of affairs. 
Earlier, 
a draft text of a proposed l etter from the President of the United States 
to President Diem of the RVN had been fonrarded by cable to the Secretary 
of Defense and the Ambassador, vlith a request for their reaction and com·· 
ments. 
President Kennedy himself' thought the l etter too extreme, and 
iIould reluctantly resort to it only if the situation was found so serious 
that such direct US Presidential pressu:re was necessary. 
The text of the 
proposed l etter vTaS characterized by harsh, blunt candor. 
In effect it 
laid dmm 8n ultimatum: 
unless the GVN changed the repressive policies, 
methods , and actions practiced by some individual officials and gained for 
itself a broad base of popular political support, the United States might 
have to consider disassociating itself from the Diem Govermuent, and fur-
ther US SUP:flort of Vietnam might become impossible . 
The Secretary of 
Defense and the Al1lbassador prOmT)tly responded idth a strong r ecorrnnendation 
against transmitting the proposed letter . 
Both agreed that the situation 
vas indeed very serious, but that it Has not likely to be influenced by 
" 
such a letter to Diem.* 
The proposed Presidential letter was not s ent . 
Instead, many of 
t he points "-Tere conveyed in conversations vTith Diem, ·)H.· and, just before 
t he departure of the McNamara-Taylor Mission from Vietnam, another letter 
to President Diem was c omj)osed and. sent j.n i ts place . 
The ne'l-! vers ion 
vras not only much so:fter in tone and more circumspect but i'Tent out over 
the signature of General Taylor as Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff . 
The 
l etter vas dated 1 October 1963, but '\oJas delivered on 2 October, i-Tith the 
approval of the Secretary of Defense and with the concurrence of the US 
Ambassador to Vietnam ( Lodge ). 
In this letter the CJCS offered his personal, professional comments 
on the military Situation, in response to Diem I s earlier expressed 
interest in receiving the.'1l. 
After acknm'Tl edging the encouraging mili-
tary progress over the preceding ti-TO years, the CJCS stated, !fIt was not 
until the recent political disturbances beginning in May and continuing 
through August and beyond that I personally had any doubt as to the 
ult:iJ:nate succe~lS of our campaign against the Viet Cong .!f 
He then addecl: 
7(. 
Msg State 4"Tb to Saigon, 24 Sep 63, TOP SEC.REI' EYES ONLY for MtJ1lASSADOR 
LODGE and SECRETARY IvIcl\TAHARA; MSG Saigon 593 t o State , 24 Scp 63) 
TOP SEeBEr 
EYES ONLY for PRESIDENT FRCM McNj\MARA. 
*,X· Airgram, Saigon A-2L~4 to State, 3 Oct 63, Subj : 
"McNam.ara-Taylor Mission 
Bemo of Conversation 'iTith Pr ~s ident Diem, Sep 29, 1963) " SECRET. 
19 
TOP S~CR£~.- Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1'OP SECR1"T - Sensitive 
"Nml, as Secretary McNamara h8S told you) a serious doubt 
hangs over our hopes for the future . 
Can vre win together in 
the face of the reaction to the measures taken by your Govern-
ment against the Buddhists and the students? 
As a military man 
I would say that VIe can Hin providing there are no further 
political setbacks . 
The military indicators are still generally 
favorable and can be made more so by actions readily within the 
pOiTer of your Government . 
If you will allmr me) I would mention 
a fe,·r of the military actions -which I believe necessary for this 
improvement. II 
The Chairman noted that though the military situation in I) II) and 
III Corps· areas V!as generally good, some of the hard-core war zones of 
t he Viet Cong remained virtually untouched . 
There ,rere not enough offensive 
actions against the enemy in the field and', in his opinion) t he full poten-
tial of the military units Has not being exploited, for 
11 ••
• only a ruthless) 
tireless offensive can \Tin the ..rar . " 
The principal military problems) he pointed out) "('Tere noV! in the 
Delta, and the time had. . come to concentrate efforts there . 
An over-
haul of the Strategic Hamlet Program WBS needed . 
For it to succeed) 
there must be a related clear-.ynd .. hold campaign by the combat units 
of IV Corps) and the tactics should be oriented to the \Vatenvsys that 
were a natural char'scteristic of the region. 
Furthennore) infantry 
line units vTOuld have to operate at full strength, 
'l-Tithout divc:r.sion 
of combat pOller to rear echelon functions. 
The CJCS suggested that this 
latter problem Has the case in ARVN generally, 'Thich President Diem 
might vlant to examine closely. 
Finally he summed up vhat \Vas intended as the statement of the US 
position: 
" In clOSing, Mr . President, may I give you my most impor-
t ant overall impression? 
Up to now) the battle against the 
Viet Cong has seemed endless; no one has been ,Tilling to set 
a date for its successful conclusion . 
After talking to scores 
of officers, Vietnamese and .American) I am convinced that the 
Viet Cong insurgency in the north and center can be reduced to 
little more than sporadic incidents by the end of 1964. 
The 
Delta ,vill take longer but should be completed by the end of 
1965. 
But for these predictions to be valid, certain conditions 
must be met . 
Your Government shoul d be prepared to energize all 
agencies, military and civil, to a higher output of activity than 
up to nov . 
Ineffective c ormnanders and province officials must 
be replaced as soon as identified . 
Finally) there should be a 
r estoration of domestic tranquility on the homefront if political 
t ensions are to be allayed and external criticism is to abate . 
Conditions are need.ed for the creation of an atmosphere conducive 
t o an effective campaign directed at the objective, vital to both 
20 
TOP SECRET ., Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IDP SECRET .. Sensitive 
of us, of defeating the Viet Cong and of restoring peace to 
your community. ",)<-
The results of the survey conducted by the McNamara-Taylor nlission 
"Tere consolidated into a lengthy, formal report to the President con-· 
taining specific findings, general evaluations, and reco~nendations
. 
The 
substance of the report Has presented in an hour-long, oral briefing to 
the President immediately upon the return of the mission on the morning 
of 2 October . 
Attending the briefing ,vere the Under Secretary of State, 
the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, the Director of the 
CIA, and the Special Assistant to the President for National Security 
Affairs. 
Follmling the personal report, the President called for a 
special meeting of the full National Security Council, which was held 
from six to seven that same evening . 
The l'lcNamara-Taylor RelJOrt generally Vlas opt:iJuistic about the military 
situation and S8'i! little direct effect of the poiitical crisis on the 
prosecl).tion of the II81' . 
Their conclusions, inter alia, were that despite 
serious political tensions and the increasing unpopularity of the Diem-Nhu 
regime, liThe military campaign has made great progress and continues to 
progress. II 
GVJ.'J military officers, though hostile to the government and 
its repressive policies) continued to perfol~ their military duties in the 
larger cause of fighting the Viet Cong enemy. 
This reassuring evaluatj.on, 
hOI-rever, "TaS caveated to the effect that " . . . further repressive actions 
by Di em and N'nu could change the present favorable military trends. II 
Specific findings in their appraisal of the military situation bore 
out the general evaluation . 
In the body of the report they stated : 
"'i'lith allOlvances for all ll..l1certainties, it is oue firm con-
clusion that the (fIJN military program has made great progress in 
the last year and a half, and that the progress has continued at 
a fairly steady rate in the past six months even through the 
peri od of greatest political unrest i n Saigon . 
The tactics and 
t echniques employed by the Vietnamese under U. S . monitorship are 
sound and give promise of ultimate victory ." 
Ex-pecially notevTortby, in their vie"l, ,.ras the progress clearly bei ng 
achieved in the northern areas (I and II Corps ). 
Their apprai sal of the 
pr ogress of the Strategic Hamlet Program \Vas also largely favorable. 
In 
both connections , they cited the effect i veness of the U. S . military advisory 
and support effort . 
Included among their military recommendations 1-7ere: 
a . 
General Harkins j}50flflJSfflACY] revie\V vi th Diem the military 
changes necessary to complete the military campaign in the 
]\Tol'thern and Centr~l areas ( I , II, I II Corps ) by the end of 
1964, . and in the Delta ( IV Corps ) by the end of 1965. 
b . 
A program be established to train Vi etnamese so that essential 
functions nov -perfonned by U 0 S. military personnel can be 
. 
-. 
. 
~~~~L~·t-r--C~J·-CS~~(~T-a-y~l-o-r) to President Diem of RVN, 1 Oct 63 (delivered 
2 Oct 63 ), TOP SECRErr'. 
21 
TOP SECRET .. 'Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.carried out by Vietnamese by the end of' 1965. 
It should be 
possible to withdra'il the bulk of U. S. personnel by that time. 
c. 
In accordance vlith the program to train progressively Viet-
namese to take over military functions, the Defense Department 
should announce in the near future presently prepared plans to 
withdraw 1000 U.S. military personnel by the end of 1963. 
This 
action rhould be explained in 101-1 key as an initial step in a 
long-term program to replace U. S. personnell'lith trained Viet-
namese vithout impairment of the war effort. 
Germane to the above recommendations, however, it was stated elsevrhere 
in the report, "No further reductions should be made until the requirements 
of the 1964 campaign become firm." L~O/ 
FollOl'ling the NSC meeting of2 October, the White House issued a 
formal public announcement of the major policy aspects of the McNamara-
Taylor Mission Report. 
The "'hite House statement is reproduced below. 
U.S. POLICY ON VIET-NAM: 
WHITE HOUSE STATEME~~, OCTOBER 2, 1963 41/ 
Secretary /of Defense Robert S. 7 McNamara and General ffiaxwell D.:...7 
Taylor reported to the President this morning and to the National 
Security Council this afternoon. 
Their report included a number of 
classified findings and rdcommendations which will be the subject 
of further review and action. 
Their basic presentation was endorsed 
by all members of the Security Council and the following statement 
of United States policy "\oTaS approved by the President on the basis 
of recommendations received from them and from Ambassador /Henry 
Cabo~7 Lodge. 
-
1. 
The security of South Viet-Nam is a major interest of the 
United States as other free nations. 
We "\orill adhere to our policy 
of working with the people and Government of South Viet-Nam to deny 
this country to communism and to suppress the externally stimulated 
and supported insurgency of the Viet Cong as promptly as possible. 
Effective performance in this undertakj.ng is the central objective 
of our policy in South Viet-Nam. 
2. 
The military program in South Viet-Nam has made progress and 
is sound in principle, though improvements are being energetically 
sought. 
3. 
Major U. S. assistance in support of this military effort is 
needed only until the insurgency has been suppressed or until the 
national se~urity forces of the Government of SouthViet-Nam are 
capable of suppressing it. 
Secretary McNamara and General Taylor reported their judgment 
that the major part of the U.S. military task can be completed by the 
end of 1965, although there may be a continuing requirement for a 
limit ed nQmber of U.S. trainins personnel. 
They reported that by 
the end of this year, the U.S. program for training Vietnamese should 
22 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
have progressed to the point where 1,000 U.S. military personnel. 
assigned to South Viet-Nam can be withdrawn. 
4. 
The political situation in South Viet-Nam remains deeply 
serious.. 
The United States had made clear its continuing opposition 
to any repressive actions in South Viet-Nam. 
While such actions have 
not yet significantly affected the military effort, they could do so 
in the future. 
5· 
It r emains the policy of the United States, in South Viet-
Nam as in other parts of the ""orld, to support the efforts of the 
people of that country to defeat aggression and to build a peaceful 
and free society. 
Considerable emphasis was given to the ~Vhite House statement, and to the 
McNamara-Taylor Mission generally, in news media. 
Played up particularly 
was the U. S. force vTithdrawal, especially the prospective 1000-man reduction. 
Three days later, on 5 October, in another meeting with the President, 
followed by another NSC meeting, the McNamara-~laylor recommendations them-
selves were addressed. 
The President "approved the milHary recommendations 
contained in the report." The President also directed) in line with their 
suggestion, that no formal announcement be made of the i.mplementation of 
plans to withdravl 1000 U. S. military personnel from South Vietnam by the 
end of 1963. 42/ 
The effect of the McNamara-Taylor mission) thus) was to revalidate 
the existing U.S. policy position regarding Vietnam. 
Reaffirmed were the 
military objectives, courses of action, and programs essentially as they 
vlere laid out by the Secretary of Defense at the Honolulu Conference over 
a year earlier on 23 July 1962. 
The underlying premises and soundness 
of the rationale seemed more cogent than ever. 
In fact, a new impetus 
vlBS thereby given to pursuing the same goals vith even greater thrust and 
purpose . 
Such an outcome could have been forecast, as noted earlier, 
,·rhen Mr. McNamara set in motj.on another CPSVN planning cycle to revise 
the Model M Plan and develop an accelerated plan to Hi thdraw U. S. forces. 
Part of the motivation behind the stress placed on U.S. force with-
dravral, . and particularly the seemingly arbitrary desire to effect the 1000-
man reduction by the end of 1963, apparently was as a signal to influence 
both the North Vietnamese and the South Vietnamese and set the stage for 
possible l ater steps that vould help bring the Jnsurgency to an end. 
With 
r egard to the SVN) the demonstration of determination to pullout U.S. 
forces was intended to induce the South Vietnamese to increase the effective-
ness of their military effort . 43/ 
Staters instructions to Ambassador 
Lodge resulting from NSC actionon the McNamara-Taylor mission indicated 
that : 
"Actions are designed to indicate to Diem Government our dis-
pleasure at its political p.olicies and activities and to create 
significant uncertainty in t hat government and in key Vietnamese 
groups as to future intentions of United States. 
At same time, 
actions are designed to have at most slight impact on military or 
23 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
counterinsurgency effort against Viet Cong, at least in 
short term. . . . 'I 41!-/ 
\-lith respect to HanOi, it might present an opportunity for a demarche--
exploiting vithdrm'Tal of U. S. forces fTOm. South Vietnam by a specified 
date as exchange for North Vietnam ' s abandoning its aggression against 
South Vietn!3m . 
But events 'Ifere already conspiring otherw-ise, and 'I-[ould 
soon frustrate such expectations and intentions as developed. 
The 
internal SVN situation 'i-TaS about to lmdergo rapid tTansfo:cmation . 
By late October, there '\-TaS increasing skepticism in so::ne quarters 
about the military situation in South Vietnam. 
L'1deed, it lIas beginnj_ng 
to be suspected that reports of pTogress by U. S. military sources actu-
ally cloaked a situation that 'l-laS not only bleak, but deteriorating. 
A 
State Department intelligence evaluation of 22 October shOl·red markedly 
pessLmistic statistical trends since July 1963, in most areas of enemy-
friendly Telative progress measurement, indicating an unfavorable shift in 
the military balance . 
Hbat '\Vas disquieting 'l-TaS that the pattern shOl-Ted 
steady decline over a peTiod of more than three months ' duration . ~· 5/ 
Circulation of the I NR evaluation occasioned controversy and no little 
recrimination. 
Substantive differences' degenerated into a procedural issue . 
The outcome \-Tas a personal memorandu..'ll from the Secretary of State to the 
Secretary of Defense on 8 November, amounting to an apolog,y fOT the incident. 
The Secretary of State stated in regard to Il\JR ' s RFE-90 of 22 October : 
" ... . it is not the policy of the State Department to issue 
military appraisals 'IJithout seeking the vievs of the Defense 
'Department. 
I have requested that any memoranda given inter-
departmental circulation 'I{hich include military appraisals be 
coordinated 'l-ri th your Department. II 46/ 
TIlE NOVEiYIBER COUP AND OVERTHROW OF DIEM 
On 1 November, the politica l situation fell apart . 
The l ong-anticipated 
coup occurred. 
The Diem regime was overthrmm, and both Diem and Nhu '\Vere 
assassinated . 
A military junta of politically inexperienced generals took 
over the government as their successors . 
The significance of the great change, for good or i ll, vas not readily 
apparent . 
Over the next three 'I{eeks the feared political chaos , civi l '\Var, 
and col lapse of the var effort fol lowing a coup did not seem to be mater-
i alizing . 
For the United States, the important question Has "That did the 
nevr circumstances mean militarily for existing policy and plans oriented to 
bringing the j_nsurgency under control and to phas:Lng out US force commitments. 
On 20 Nov~ili er , at the. President ' s direction, a special all -agencies 
conference on Vietnam vas convened in Honolulu for a "full-scale reviev" 
i n depth of all aspects of the situation and to reassess U. S. plans and 
policies in the political, military, economic and information fi elds 
since the change of government . 
Attending'l-Tere SOille l.f5 s enior U.S . 
officials, military and civilian, inclti.ding: 
t he Secretary of State , 
Secrcta:r.·y of Defense, Special Assistant to the Pre sident for National 
24 
TOP SEC REI' .. Sensitive 
~ '1> 
;; •. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Security Affairs, Chairman, JCS, Director of CIA, CINCPAC, Ambassador to 
to Vietnam, and COlvIDSfllACV. 
Ambassador Lodge assessed the prospects for 
Vietnam as hopeful. 
In his estimation the nevr government llas not vithout 
promise . 
Vietnamese military leadership appeaY'ed to be united and deter-
mined to step up the war effort . 
The Ambassador advocated continuing to 
pursue the goal of setting dates for phasing ou~ U.S. activities and 
turning them over to the Vietnamese, and he volunteered that the announced 
vTithdrawal of 1000 troops by the end of 1963 was alY'eady having a salutary 
affect . 
COlviTJSNACV agreed with the Ambassador that the conduct of the Far 
against the VC was coming along satisfactorily . 
Admitting that the VC-
incidents rate shot up 300 to ~-OO percent after the coup , he noted that 
since 6 November, hm-lever, it had dropped dovm to "normal" and remained 
so to the present. Military operational statistics nov generally shm-led 
a more or less favorable balance . 
In short, the briefings and assessments 
received at the conference constituted "an encouraging outlook for the 
principle objec;tive of joint U. S. - Vietnamese policy in South Vietnam-·-the 
successful prosecution of the Vlar against the Viet Cong communists. " 
More-
over, "excellent "lOrking relations bet'l{een U. S . officials and the members 
of the new Vietnamese government " had been estabIished. 
All plans for the 
UoS. phasing out vTere to go ahead as scheduled. 
In this light t0e U. S • military plans and progrB.ll1s for Vietnam uere 
addressed . 
The revision of the Iviodel 1,,'1 Plan of the CPSVN, ordered by 
the Secretary of Defense during his last visit to Vietnam in October "TaS 
progressing apace and the finished Accelerated Plan vas expected to be 
fon-larded shortly . 
It vlOuld cost $6.4 million more than the Model Plan, 
ho'"ever . 
Indications "rere that the IT. ~- 11.AP would also cost more because 
of the acceleration--to a total now of $187.5 million . 
The Secretary of 
Defense made it clear that he felt that the proposed CINCPAC MAP could be 
cut back and directed that the program be revie'ded to refine it and cut 
costs to stay as close as possible to the OSD ceiling of $175.5 million . 
He "ioTaS e'lually emphatic, hO'tTever, that while he would not tolerate fat or 
i nefficiency in the program he vTaS prepared to provide 'Ivhatever funds 
might be re'luired under M...AP to support the GVN. 
In fact, he observed 
that the GVN \-las already running into "tremendous financial deficits, " 
and opined that neither AID nor MAP had budgeted enough to provide for 
the emergencies Fhich were likely to arise during 19~
. 47/ 
ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT KEN1~DY 
On 22 November 1963, President Kennedy vTaS assassi nated . 
The con-
se'luences ,.;ere to set an institutional fY'eeze on the direction and momentum 
of U. S. Vietnam policy. Universally opeY'ative vTaS a desire to avoid change 
of any kind dill ing the c:citical interregnum :&eriod of the nevl Johnson 
Administration. 
Both the President and the governmental establisl1ment 
consciously strove for continuity, \-Tith respect to Vietnam no less than 
i n other areas. 
In Vietnam this continuity meant that the phase-out 
concept, the CPSVN 'l-Tithdrawal plan, and the MAP programs probably survived 
b eyond the pOint they might have othervTise. 
25 
TOP SECRET -
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR1~ - Sensitive 
The i mmediate Johnson stamp on the Kennedy policy came on 26 November . 
At a NSC meeting convened to consider the ,results of the 20 November' 
Honolulu Conference, the President "reaffirmed that U.S. objectives ,{ith 
respect to "\.,rithdYav!al of U.S. military personnel remain as stated in the 
White House statement of October 2, 1963 . II 
1~8 / 
The only hint that some-
thing might be different from on-going planscame in a Secretary of Defense 
memo for the President thJee days prior to this NSC meeting. 
In that memo, 
Mr. McNamara said that the nel-T South Vietnamese government "\Vas confront ed 
by serious financial problems, and that the U.S. must be prepared to 
raise planned MAP levels. 
~9/ 
In early December, the President began to have, if not second thoughts, 
at least a sense of uBeasiness about Vietnam. 
In discussions with his 
advisors, he set in motion "\{hat he hoped "[ould be a major policy review, 
fully staffed j,n depth, by Administration principals. 
The President "lvanted 
"a fresh new look taken " at the Fhole problelli. 
In preparation for such a 
basi c reappraisal; an interdepartmental meeting of second-echelon principals 
accordingly convened on 3 December and laid out a broad outline of basic 
topics to be addressed and staff papers to be developed by various.depart-
ments and agencies . 50/ 
This attempt at a systematic and comprehensive 
r eexamination, hOl{ever, did not culminate in a fundamental national reassess --
ment. 
ACCELERATED NiODEL PLAN OF THE CPSVN 
\V:i.th no i ndication of policy change in the offing, U.S. military plan-
ning thus ,vent fOTImrd 'ivith hardly a break in stride . 
On 5 December 
CINCPAC submitted the Accelerated Model Plan to the JCS. 
It was the 
r evision to the Model M Plan version of the CPSVN that the Secretary of 
Defense had ordered during his early October visit t o Vietnam. 
The 
Accelerated Plan provided for more rapid phase-out of the bulk of U.S . 
military personnel and uBits and a decrease i n the r esidual strength 
r emaining thereafter (see Figure 3). 
It also provided for building up 
GVN forces at a faster pace but on a more reduced scale, then cutting 
back from t he peak sooner and leveling out somevrhat lower ( see Figure 4). 
MAP costs for the FY 1965-69 period would be a little higher than the 
$392 .2 million under the l'lIodel M Plan, coming to $399 .4 million in the 
Accelerated Plan ( see Fib~re 5). 51/ 
26 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
16,------------------------------------------------------------------, 
15 
14 
13 
12 
11 
10 
-g 
9 
&l 
::J o 
-£ 
I 
8 
I-
<.9 
Z 
UJ 
~ 7 
Vl 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
12-9-68-3 
MACV AND SPECIAL 
ASSISTAI'4CE UN ITS 
(FY66 AND AFTER 
LEVEL AT 36 PERSONNEL) 
STARCOM 
AND RRU 
MAAG AND 
SUPPORT 
AP - ACCELERATED PLAN 
MP - MODEL PLAN 
/(C-123 SQUADRON: TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
1966 
1967 
1968 
END FISCAL YEAR 
FIGUR E 3 (5). Comprehensive Plan South Vietnam (CPSVN) 
Phase Down of U.S . Forces (U) 
1969 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
55°r-----------------------------------------·--------------------------i 
500 
450 
400 
350 
~ 
~ 300 
:> o 
-£ 
~ 
::r: 
G 
Z 250 
UJ 
0< 
t;; 
100 
12-9-68-4 
1965 
1966 
1967 
END FISCAL YEAR 
CIVILIAN IRREGULAR 
DEFENSE GROUPS 
JUNK SAILORS 
SELF-DEFENSE CORPS 
CIVIL GUARD 
REGULAR 
ARMED FORCES 
MP - MODEL PLAN 
AP - ACCELERATED PLAN 
1968 
FIGURE 4 (5). Comprehensive Plan Vietnam (CPSVN) 
Phase Down of GVN Forces (U) 
~ 
.. 
c 
.~ 
·E 
I-
V> 
0 v 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1~r---------------------------------~---------------------------------' 
180 
~ 
ACCELERATED PLAN 
[i:::::t:II MODEL PLAN 
170 
160 
150 
140 
130 
110 
100 
90 
80 
70 
50 
40 
20 
10 
12-9-68-5 
FIGURE 5 (5). Comprehensive Plan Vietnam (CP5VN) MAP Cost (U) 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
THE 1000-MAN WITHDRAI"AL OF DECEMBER 1963 
During the month of December, the planned 1000-man reduction was 
executed. 
It proved essentially an accounting exercise . 
Technically, 
more than a thousand U.S. personnel did leave, but many of these were part 
of the normal turnover cycle, inasmuch as rotation policy alone, not to 
mention medical evacuation or administrative reasons, resulted in an 
average rate of well over a thousand returnees per month. 
Though the 
replacement pipeline IoTas slOl·red somevrhat, year-end total in-country strength 
nevertheless vTaS close to 16,000. 52/ 
This did not even represent a 
decline of 1000 from the October peak of 16,732 . 
1'hat the avm-red goal of 1000 would not be reached had in fact been 
anticipated and acknmrledged before mid-December . 
Despite close monitoring 
of authorized ceilings and actual strengths, the force level kept rising. 
On 11 December, for example, the estimate of projected year-end U.S. 
strength in Vietnam had to be revised upward to reflect additional deploy-
ments approved since September. 
The adjusted figure now came to 15,894, 
a net increase of 162 over the. earlier estimate . 
This new strength ceiling 
was 'ioJ'hat would be left after the 1000-man vrithdravral then in progress vras 
completed. 53/ 
THE VIETNAM SITUATION WORSENS 
In December conflicting estimates of the situation in Vietnam indi-
cated that the bright hopes and predictions of the past vrere increasingly 
less than realistic. 
A McNamara memo to the President ,vritten follOl'Ting 
a trip to Vietnam of 21 December, was laden \oJ'ith gloom. 54/ 
He wrote: 
liThe situation is very disturbing . 
Current trends, unless reversed in 
t he next 2-3 months, I·rill lead to neutralization at best and more likely 
. to a cormnunist-controlled state . 11 
He went on to note that lithe ne'ioJ' govern-
ment is the greatest source of concern, " and that "it is indecisive and 
drifting." The Country Team, he added, "lacks leadership, and has been 
poorly informed." 
One of the most serious deficiencies he found .TaS a 
IIgrave reporting ,.,eakness " on the U.S. side . 
"Viet Cong progress has been 
great during the period since the coup, with my best guess being that the 
situation has in fact been deteriorating i n the countryside since July to 
a far greater extent than "e realize because of our undue dependence on 
distorted Vietnamese reporting ." Mr . McNamara clearly concluded that none 
of these conditions could be reversed by the influx of more American 
personnel, nor did he even mention that the U.S. could continue to withdraw 
troops at all or as scheduled . 
His proposal Has to hold the l ine : 
"u. S. 
resources and personnel," he said, "cannot usefully be substantially 
i ncreased . • . 7 " 
although he did announce his intention to increase staffs 
lito sizes that will give us a reliable, independent U.S. appraisal of the 
status of operations." 
In h:i,s concluding paragraph, hOl.rever, the Secretary 
of Defense admitted that his OHn estimate IImay be overly pessimistic," inas-
much as the Ambassador, COYIUSMACV, and General Minh ,.,ere not discouraged 
and looked fonrard to significant jJnprovements in January . ',24/ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive 
Vestiges of optimism still persisted in one degree or another in 
some quarters. 
The earlier sense of confidence that had been established 
was deep-rooted and not easily shaken. 
A retrospective evaluation of 
the Vietnam situdtion ostensibly covering the period 1960 through 1963, 
prepared by SACSA (General Krulak) is indicative. 
Although intended as 
a broad overview (and so called), and though actually cut off as of some-
time in Odober 1963, it I·Tas forwarded in late October or November directly 
to the Secretary of Defense. 
The SACSA report presented nothing l ess 
than a gloving account of steady progress across the board in the mili-
tary situation. Significantly, it contained no hint that the rate of 
progress possibly might have temporarily slol{ed somewhat in the second 
half of 1963, despite the fact that it expressly treated events as late 
as October. 55/ 
Yet by this tj~e , other evaluations giving a quite 
different picture were al ready asserting themselves. 
Near the close of 
1963 the Director, DIA, reported to the Secretary of Defense that year-
end reviei{ and reassessment of the enemy situation revealed VC capabilities 
had not been impaired Over the past year. 
On the contrary, the VC had in 
many regards improved in combat effectiveness and nmT enjoyed a generally 
improved force posture for insurgency. 56/ 
Hopeful bias alone does not explain the endurance of past firmly 
rooted optimism-- such as the SACSA overvie,\{. 
The difference between 
those who stressed the positive and those who saw decline vlaS, in part, 
the product of vieHing the situation in greater or shorter time frames. 
Those \'Tho applied a macroscopic perspective, believed--and not vlithout 
certain logic--that current unfavorable reports io/'ere, at vlorse, a temporary 
l apse in t he larger curve of progress over the years. ,Those who took spot 
checks tended to be more impressed by the immediate situation, and at 
this time, the immediate situation was critical. 
The feelj_ngs of this 
latter group ilere buttressed vThen on 30 January another coup, this time 
largely bloodless, ousted the ruling Minh government . 
It was a factional 
power struggle in which one military group r eplaced another, this time 
with General Khanh emerging as Premier . 
The latest development held 
forth little promise of giving the country the political stability so 
desperately needed in the midst of a '\-rar for survival. 
The event vlould 
prove only symptomatic as part of a sequence of similar government up-
heavals that were to follml. 
In the U.S., the coincidence of domestic tragedy and patent i nstability 
in Vietnam evoked a chorus urging a Laos-like resolution of the Vietnam 
conflict. 
In late August, 1963, President de Gaulle had issued a policy 
statement on Vietnam vThich was subsequently officially interpreted as a 
proposal for "i,r.dependence and neutrality" for Vietnam--meaning eventual 
U.S. withdrawal. 
In the aftermath of the assassinations, speculation turned 
i ncreasingly to this solution . 
For exam.ple, Senator Mansfield '\-Trote to 
Pres i dent Jor...nson to propose a division of Vietnam beti{een the GVN and the 
Viet Cong, coupled vlith a U.S. withdl"avral. 
In early J'anuary, 1964, Secre-
tary McNamara furnished. the President the following counters to Senator 
Mansfield 1 s arguments: 
31 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I (fb i 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"l. 
\tie should certainly stress that the war is essentially 
a Vietnamese responsibility) and this we have repeatedly do~e) 
particu~arly in our announced policy on U.S. troop vithdrawal . 
At the same time Ive cannot disengage U.S. prestige to any sig-
nificant degree . ... 
"2. 
The security situation is serious) but we can still \olin) 
even on present ground rules •... 
"3. . .. . Any deal either to divide the present territory of 
South Vietnam or to Ineutralize I South Vietnam would inevitably 
mean a ne,,, government in Saigon that would in short order become 
Communist-dominated . 
"4. 
The consequences of a Communi st-dondnated South Vietnam 
are extremely serious both for the rest of Southeast Asia and 
for the U.S. position in the rest of Asia and indeed in other 
key areas of the I-lorld .... 
"5. 
Thus) the stakes in preserving an anti-Communist South 
Vietnam are so high that) in our judgment ) we must go on bending 
every effort to win .... And) I am confident that the American people 
are by and large in favor of a policy of firmness and strength in 
such situations." 57/ 
Secretary McNamara in his testimony before Congress on the fiscal 
year 1965 budget in early February) 1961i·) declined to link the previously 
planned U. S. withdrmvals 'ivith either "pessirllism" or "optimism" regarding 
events in Vietnam) saying simply that the withdrawals had all along been 
conditioned upon Vietna~mese capability to assume full r esponsibility from 
the U.S. trainers) and that there would be a "substantial reduction in 
our force as 'ile train them. II 
Further: 
"Last falL .. I 'iJasn It as optimistic perhaps about the course 
of the \olar as I vas about being able to bring back our personnel 
in certain numbers by the end of last year and also in increments 
betveen then and the end of 1965. 
"I still am hopeful of doing that. 
We' did) of course) bring 
back 1)000 men toward the latter part of last year. 
I am hopeful 
\ore can bring back additional numbers of men later this year and 
certa inly next year. 
I say this because I personally believe 
that this is a vaY' that the Vietnamese must fight ... I don It believe 
vre can take on that combat task for them. 
I do believe "-Ie can 
carry out training. 
We can provide- advice and logistical assistance. 
"But after all) the training) by the very nature of the vlork) 
comes to an end at a certa in paint. 
We vTill have started this 
expanded training and carried it out for a period of 4 years) by 
the end of next year. 
vie started at the end of 1961. 
The end 
of next ,year will have been .4 years later and certainly 'vTe should 
32 
'I'OP SECRET , -
Sensitive 
'{ I' 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
have completed the majority of the training task by that time. 
This, in General Taylor's vie"T and mine, is what ,{e should be 
able to do. 
If we do, 'rle should bring our men back. 
"I don ' t believe we should leave our men there to substitute 
for Vietnamese men ,{ho are qualified to carry out the task, and 
this is really the heart of our proposal. 
I think it I-laS a sound 
proposal then and I think so noVT •• •• " 
Unsureness about the actual state of affaiNs in Washington spread 
eventually to the highest levels of government, and prompted the dis-
patching to South Vietnam in early February of a CIA "Special CAS Group" 
for an independent evaluation of the military situation. 
A series of 
four reports, dated 10, 11, 14 and 18 February 19611-, were produced, each 
transmitted by the Deputy Director, CIA, to the Secretary of Defense, 
Secretary of State, and others as soon as it came out. 
Instead of finding 
progress, these reported a serious and steadily deteriorating situation. 
Cited vere VC gains in the past several months, and particularly noted VTas 
that VC arms were increasing in quantity and quality. 
As for the Strategic 
Hamlet Program, they found it "at present at virtual standstill. " 
The 
Special CAS Group ' s concluding appraisal vas pessimistic: 
"Tide of 
insurgency in all four corps areas appears to be going against GVN." 58/ 
COMUSMACV (who had no prior knovledge of the Special CAS Group ' s reports ) 
took issue vlith the Group's findings} contesting less the data used than 
the conclusions, especially the "personal" evaluational opinions as to 
degree of deterioration. 
He suggested that in the future such reports 
be first coordinated before being dispatched. 59/ 
On 6 March a major Secretary of Defense Conference again convened at 
CINCPAC headquarters for a broad reassessment. 
The consensus was that the 
military situation was definitely deteriorating. 
No longer was the issue 
'rlhether it vas progressing satisfactorily or not. 
The question now ioTaS 
how much of a setback had there been and what was needed to make up for it. 
An opinion shared by many ,{as that the insurgency could be expected to go 
beyond 1965. 
This general reorientation of perspective was reflected in 
the Secretary of Defense ' s observation that attention should be focused on 
the near-term objectives of providing the greater U.S. support that would 
be necessary, and suspending for the time being consideration of longer-
range concerns such as 5-year MAP projections. 60/ 
The visit to Vietnam 
on 8 March corroborated the gravity of the im:mediate problems at hand. 
FollOl.,ring his return from Vietnam, Mr. McNamara, on 16 March, sub 
mitted to the President a formal report. 
In it the Secretary of Defense 
acknowledged, "The situation has unquestionably been grmling 'rlOrse, at 
l east since September." 
RVNAF desertion rates were i ncreas.ing, and the GVN 
military position generally 'rTaS "Teakening noticeably. 
The VC position, on 
the other hand, shoved signs of improving. 
He referred pointedly to the 
increase in North Vietnamese support. 
The conclusion was that greater 
U 0 So support ,vas needed. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In describing vThat I-TaS required to improve the situation in South 
Vietnam) Mr. McNamara identified measures that uwill involve? limited 
increase in U,S. personnel and in direct Defense Department costs. 
More 
significantly they involve significant increases in Military Assistance 
Program costS ... , )fI plus fladditional U.S. economic aid to support the 
increased GVN budget. II 
The estimated additional annual MAP costs 'dould 
come to between $30 and $40 million each year) plus a one-time additional 
cost of $20 million for military equipment. 
In the recommendation section 
of the report) the Secretary listed the following 12 items: 
1. 
To make it clear that \ire are prepared to furnish assistance 
and support to South Vietnam for as long as it takes to bring 
the insurgency under control. 
2. 
To make it clear that we fully support the Khanh government 
and are opposed to any further coups. 
3. 
To support a Program for National Mobilization ( including a 
national service law) to put South Vietnam on a war footing. 
4 . 
To assist the Vietnamese to increase the armed forces (regular 
plus paramilitary ) by at least 50)000 men. 
5 · 
To assist the Vietnamese to create a greatly enlarged Civil 
Administrative Corps for vTOrk at province) district and hamlet 
levels. 
6. 
To assist the Vietnamese to improve and reorganize the para-
military forces and to increase their compensation. 
7. 
To assist the Vietnamese to create an offensive guerrilla force. 
8 . 
To provide the Vietnamese Air Force 25 A-IH aircraft in exchange 
f or the present T-28s. 
9. 
To provide the Vietnamese army additional M-113 armored personnel 
carriers (w'ithdrawing the M-114s there ), additional river boats) 
and approximately $5-10 million of other additional material . 
10. 
To announce publicly the Fertilizer Program and to expand it 
with a vieH l{ithin tyro years to trebling the amount of fertilizer 
made ayailable . 
11. 
To authorize continued high-level U. S. overflights of South 
Vietnam ' s borders and to authorize !thot pursuit U and South Viet-
namese ground operations over the Laotian line for the purpose 
of border· control. 
More ambitious operations into Laos involving 
units beyond battalion size should be authorized only with the 
approval of Souvanna Phouma. 
Operations across the Cambodian 
border should depend on the state of relations with Cambodia . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
12. 
To prepare immediately to be in a position on 72 hours' 
notice to initiate the full range of Laotian and Cambodian 
"Border Control" actions ( beyond those authorized in paragraph 
11 above ) and the "Retaliatory Actions" against North Vietnam, 
and to be in a position on 30 days' notice to initiate the 
. 
program of "Graduated Overt Mllitary Pressure" against North 
Vietnam . 
As for the future of the phased-withdraval plans, the Secretary of 
Defense's report contained the following: 
"The U.S. policy of reducing existing personnel Vlhere South 
Vietnamese are in a position to assume the functions i s still sound. 
Its application vill not lead to any major reductions in the near 
future, but adherence to this policy as such has a sound effect in 
portraying to the U. S. and the ,,[orld that we continue to regard 
the "Tar as a conflict the South Vietnamese must Vlin and take ultimate 
responsibility for. 
Substantial reductions in the numbers or" U.S. 
military training personnel should be possible before the end of 
1965· 
HOVlever, the U. S. 'should continue to reiterate that it ,,[ill 
provide all the assistance and advice required to do the job r egard-
less of hOi·' long it takes." 61/ 
By formal decision at the NSC session of 17 March, the President 
approved the Secretary of Defense r eport of 16 March 1964 and directed all 
agencies to carry out the 12 recommendations contained therein. 62/ 
A 
vlhite House statement, reproduced below, was issued the same day. 
JMMEDIATE RELEASE 
March 17, 1964 
Office of the I,fuite House Press Secretary 
THE WHITE HOUSE 
Secretary McNamara and General Taylor, folloVling their 
initial oral report of Friday, today reported fully to President 
Johnson and the m6nbers of the National Security Council. 
The 
report covered the situation in South Vietn~l, the measures being 
taken by General Khanh and his government, and the need for United 
States assistance to supplement and support these measures. 
There 
vas also discussion of the continuing support and direction of the 
Viet Cong insurgency from North Vietnam. 
At the close of the meeting the President accepted the report 
and its printipal recommendations, "lhich had the support of the 
National Security Council and Ambassador Lodge. 
Comparing the situation to last October, "\oThen Secretary McNamara 
and General Taylor last reported fully on it, there have unques-
tionably been setbacks . 
The Viet Cong have taken maximum advantage 
of t"TO ~hanges of government, and 0f more long-standing difficulties, 
35 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
including a serious "\oreakness and over-extension vhich had developed 
in the basically sound hamlet program. 
The supply of arms and 
cadres from the north has continued; careful and sophisticated 
control of 'Tiet Cong operations has been gpparent; and evidence 
that such control is centered in Hanoi is clear and ~~istakable. 
To meet the situation, General Khanh and his government are 
acting vigorously and effectively. 
They have produced a sound 
central plan for the prosecution of the var, recognizing to a far 
greater degree than before the crucial role of economic and social, 
as veIl as military, action to ensure that areas cleared of the 
Viet Cong survive and prosper in freedom. 
To carry out this plan, General Khanh re~uires the full enlistment 
of the people of South Vietnam, partly to augment the strength of his 
anti-guerrilla forces, but particularly to provide the administrators, 
health Horl~ers, teachers and others "\orho must follOl-r up in cleared 
areas. 
To meet this need, and to provide a more e~uitable and 
common basis of service, General Khanh has informed us that he 
proposes in the near future to put into effect ' a National Mobilization 
Plan that Ivill provide conditions and terms of service :in appropriate 
jobs for all able-bodied South Vietnamese beti,een certain ages. 
In addition, steps are re~uired to bring up to re~uired levels 
the pay and status of the paramilitary forces and to create a highly 
tra :ined guerrilla force that can beat the Viet Cong on its own ground. 
Finally, limited but significant additional e~uipment is proposed 
for the air forces, the river navy, and the mobile forces. 
In short, where the South Vietnamese Government now has the 
pOl,er to clear any part of its territory, Genera l Khanh' s ne"\Ol 
program is designed to clear and to hold, step by step and province 
by province. 
This program will involve substantial increases in cost to the 
South Vietnamese economy, which in turn depends heavily on United 
States economic aid. 
Additional, though less substantial, military 
assistance funds are also needed, and increased United States 
training activity both on the civil and military side. 
The policy 
should cont:inue of withdrawing United States personnel where their 
roles can be assumed by South Vietnamese and of sending additional 
men if they are needed. 
It "\olill r emain the policy of the United 
States to furnish assistance and support to South Vietnam for as 
long as it is re~uired to bring Ccrmnunist aggression and terrorism 
under control. 
Secretary McNamara and General Taylor reported their overall 
conclusion that "\-lith continued vigorous l eadership from General 
Khanh and his gover nment, and the carrying out of these steps, the 
situation can be significantly lifiproved in the coming months. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
5'\ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DEMISE OF THE CPSVN 
Before the month of March '\Vas over the CPSVN, as ,Jell as the MAP 
planning that had been such an integral part of it, finally received the 
coup de grace. 
Sacrificed to the UoS. desire "to make it clear that '\Ve 
fully support" the GVN, they '\Vere fonnally terminated, for the record, on 
27 March in the OSD message reproduced below: 
FROM: 
OSD WASH DC 
DEF 963028 
Date: 27 March 196L~ 
(Col. Iv. J. Yates ) 
TO: 
CINCPAC 
REFS: 
a. 
CINCPAC 110626z Mar 64 
b. 
DEF 959615 DTG 132352Z Mar e~ 
1. 
As indicated .in ref. b., ceiling for Vietnam FY 66 MAP is 
$143.0 million against $143.1 million for FY 65 . 
Requirements 
above ~hese program levels should be identified as separate packages . 
2. 
Submission of five-year programs FY 66-70 for Vietnam is 
suspended until further notice . 
Your best est:i.mates of FY 66 
requirements are necessary inasmuch line detail as feasible by 
1 Jul 64 in order that (a ) the Military Departments can revievr 
for pricing, lead time, availabilities, and prepare for procure-
ment action and (b ) requirements can be processed within DoD, 
State/AID and BoB for budget/Congressional Presentation purposes. 
3. 
Preyious guidance re Model Plan projection for phasedown of 
U.S. forces and GVN forces is superseded. 
Policy is as announced 
by White House 17 Mar 61.,.: 
Quote The policy should continue of 
.rithdrmTing U.S. personnel where their roles can be assumed by 
South Vietnamese and of sending additional men i f they are needed. 
It .rill remain the policy of the U.S. to furnish assistance and 
support of South Vietnam for as long as is required to bring 
Communist aggression and terrorism under control . 
Unquote . 
4. 
No further action required or being taken here relative to 
accelerated model plan. 
Thus ended dejure the policy of phase out and vrithdrawal and all the 
pl ans and programs oriented to it. Shortly, they '\Vould be cancelled out 
de facto. 
BUILD-UP OF THE DoS. FORCE COMMI'I'MENT 
Soon the whole evolutionary direction of the U.S. military commit-
ment began to change. 
Rather than diminishing, the magnitude rose there-
after. 
In early May the approved U.S. military strength ceiling for South 
Vietnam '\Vas raised by more than 1500 so that total in-country authorization 
came to over 17,000. 
Further increases were in sight. 63/ 
As the mili-
tary situation in Vietnam failed to shm-1 signs of amerliorating, pressures 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
37 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET .. Sensitive 
began to develop in late spring for an even more significant increase in 
UoS. forces. 
A special meeting on Southeast Asia was called at PACOM Headquarters 
in Honolulu for 1-2 June because of the unsatisfactory progress in execu-
tion of the National Pacification Plan. 
There) COMUSMACV proposed extending 
and intensifying the U.S. advisory effort in order to improve the operational 
effectiveness of the VNAF performance generally. 
The idea ioTaS discussed 
and supported in principle) and a staff ,lorking paper outlining the concept 
was prepared by the conferees. 
Near the end of June ) COMUSMACV submitted 
to JCS (info CINCPAC) DOD) State) White House) his formal proposal recom-
mending enlargement of the advisory assistance program. 
He reiterated) and 
offered further justification for) the need to augment the current advisory 
detachments at the battalion l evel and to extend the advisory effort at both 
the district and sector levels. 
His detailed breakout of primary personnel 
requirements came to a total of 900 more advisors. as the net in-country 
increase) but conceded that additional administrative and logistic support 
requirements would be substantial and would be submitted separately. 
Also) 
approximately 80 additional U.S. Navy advisors ,{QuId be reCl.uested) in con-
nection with recommendations mtade earlier in the flBucklev Report" for a 
Junk Force and other measures to counter infiltration by sea. 
CINCPAC 
indicated concurrence and recommended approval of the proposal on 4 July. 64/ 
In the middle of July) the nevi U. S. Ambassador to Vietnam) General 
MaxVlell Taylor) sent an evaluation of the military situation to the Secre-
tary of State) Secretary of Defense) and JCS that lent strong support to 
COMUSMACV 's proposal. 
The Ambassador advised that forraal estimates of 
regular VC strength in South Vietnam had been revised and nmi .. Tere raised 
to between 28)000 and 34)000. 
He explained that this did not reflect a 
sudden dramatic increase) but had been suspected for the past two or three 
years) though confirmatory evidence had become available only in the l ast 
few months. 
There was thus no occasion for alanll) but the new estimate 
emphasized the growing magnitude of the problem and the need to increase 
the l evel of U.S./GVN efforts. 
Therefore) additional requirements were 
being fonnulated) including U.S, military personnel requirements) to support 
U.S. plans during the ensuing months to cope ,-lith the ne" lLl1derstanding of 
the r ealities of the situation. 
He forecast an increase in U.S. military 
strength to around 21)000 over the next six-month period to meet proj ected 
needs. 65/ 
Immediately the size of the estimated force requirements connected 
with the proposed expansion of the advisory effort began to climb. 
On 
16 July COMOStvLACV submitted the support requirements associated .. ,ith the 
program . 
For th(' next year he Vlould need) over and above the original 
900 additional advisors requested) more than 3200 other personnel) for a 
total gross military strength increase of about 4200. 66/ 
The Ambassador 
in Saigon concurred in COMUSlvlACV's pfoposedincrease inU.S. military 
strength by 4200 over the next nine months) bringing the total in~country 
to nearly 22)000) and he urged prompt action. 
The Secretary of State also 
recommended approval) as did CINCPAC and JCS) and on 20 July) at the JCS-
SecDef meeting) overall support was given to the COMUSMACV requested 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
deployment package. 
The following day, at the NSC meeting of 21 July, 
the President gave it final approval, though that action was not included 
in the NSAM issued the next day. 67/ 
As eventually refined, the total force increment actually came to 
over 4900 u.s. personnel. 
In addition, other requirements not directly 
related to the advisory effort itself were being generated and met inde-
pendently. 
By the close of 1964 the year-end U.S. in-country strength 
figure had climbed to approximately 23,000 personnel and further authorized 
deployments were under way or in preparation. 
The actual effect of "phased withdrawals" was minimal. 
Though 1,000 
spaces among the personnel authorized MACV vTere eliminated in 1963, add-ons 
overtook cut-backs. 
As an example, U.S. Army strength in Vietnam--the bulk 
of the advisory effort--vras allocated as follows: 
PERCENTAGE OF U.S. ARMY STRENGTH IN VIETNAM fBI 
Total Army 
Hq & Spt 
Aviation Communica-
Special Other 
Strength 
Units 
Units 
tion Units Forces Advisers 
Nov 63 
10,000 
17 
35 
15 
6 
27 
Mar 64 
10,000 
19 
34 
13 
7 
27 
Nov 6'+ 
14,000 
28 
30 
12 
8 
22 
POSTSCRIPT TO HITHDRAHAL PLANNING 
The official termination of formal planning tmrards withdravlal by 
no means ended its attraction as one issue in the grmTing public debate 
over Vietnam policy. 
In August, 1964, the Tonkin Gulf crisis brought 
Congressmen back in perplexity to Secretary McNamara's statements on with-
dra;.rals, and elicited the following exchange: 
" . .. LSecretary McNamara, you7 have again always indicated that 
you hoped that by the end of this year there ;.rould have been a sub-
stantial reduction .... \{here we had a planned reduction of the 
number of troops, and what appeared to be a ;.rithdrawal of the United 
States from the area, then this attack comes, "lvhich would put us 
finnly in the area, or at least change our mind. 
The ;.rhole thing, 
to me, is completely, at least, not understanding. 
SECRETARY McNAVLARA: 
"The · period, December 1961, through the 
summer of 1963 was a period of great progress within South Vietnam, 
in countering the effort of the Viet Cong to overthro;.r that govern-
ment. 
However, starting in May, 1963, you ;.rill r ecall, a series 
of religious riots developed, controversy 'within the country devel-
oped, lead.ing eventually upon November 2nd to the overthro;.r of the 
Diem government . 
Prior to that time in September, 1963, General 
39 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREl' - Sensitive 
Taylor and I had advised and visited that country. 
At that time) 
the progress of the counter insurgency effort was so great it 
appeared that ,ve "lould be able to withdrav much of our training 
forc e by the end of 1965, and not 1964, and .le would -- we so stated 
upon our return. 
But follOlving that -- and I should also mention 
that in that same statement, vre made in September, 1963, vre pointed 
out the very serious nature of the political difficulties that were 
building up i n South Vietnam, because of the conf lict between the 
Buddhists and the CatholiCS, and the government. 
"In any event, as I say, in November, 1963, the government was 
overthrmrn. 
There vTaS another change of government January 30th, 
and this completely changed the outlook and the political instability 
that followed the tvro coups has given the Viet Cong an opportunity 
to take advantage of the political and military weakness. 
They have 
taken advantage of H. It is now necessary to add further U. S. mil-
itary assistance to counter that Viet Cong offensive .... 
"We have never made the statement since September, 1963, that ive 
believed .le could bring the bulk of the training forces out by the 
end of 1965, because the actions in November and January made it 
quite clear that would not be possible . 
"We have said -- as a matter of fact, I say today - - as our 
training missions are cOIllpleted, we will bring back the training 
forces . 
I think this is only good sense, and good judgment. 
We 
have certain trainj.ng missions that I hope .le can complete this 
year, and others next year, and the forces associated vrith those 
miss ions should be brought back. 
"We have forces there training the Vietnamese to fly spotter 
aircraft, for artillery spotting purposes. 
I am very hopeful 
that we can bring the U.S. forces out as the Vietnamese acquire 
that capability. 
"On the other hand, the Vietnamese quite clearly need addi-
tional assistance in training for counter guerrilla operations, 
because of the increased guerrilla activities of the Viet Cong, 
and we are sending additional special forces to Vietnam for that 
purpose . 
"There :vill be a flml in both directions, but I am certain in 
the next several months the net flow will be strongly tOlvard South 
Vietnam. " 69/ 
After Tonkin Gulf, the policy objective of gradual disengagement 
from Vietnam was no longer relevant. 
The hope, as .lell as the concept 
of phase out and .rithdrawal, dwindled, since such ivithdrawal was now seen 
as tantamount to surrendering SVN to Hanoi . 
The issue for the future 
would no longer be wi thdraiVal s, but what additional U.S. forces i{QuId be 
required to stem the tide--and hOiv fast they would have to be thrown into 
action. 
40 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV. B. 4. 
FOOTNOTES 
2. 
3· 
4. 
5· 
6. 
7· 
S. 
9· 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13· 
14. 
15· 
16. 
17· 
lS. 
Secretary of Defense McNamara, testimony ~efore the U.S. Congress, 
House Committee on Appropriations, March 16, 1962. 
ClNCPAC Ltr 3010 Ser 000223 to SecDef 26 July 1962, "Record of the 
LSixt'E.7 Secretary of Defense Conference held 23 July 1962 at Head-
quarters, Commander in Chief Pacific (U)," Enc1. "Summary Record 
of Conference" (S). 
. 
Msg JCS 5455 to cmCPAC 26231SZ July 1962, SECREI'· 
Msg CINCPAC to COMUSMACV 14042SZ August 1962, SECRET. 
Hq USMACV "Summary of Highlights S Feb 1962-7 Feb 1963," 20 March 
1963, TOP SECRET ; 
SACSA, OJCS, "An Overview of the Vietnam War (1960-
63)," 16 January 1961.~, SECRET. 
Ibid. 
Ibid. 
Ltr COMUSMACV MACJ5 to CINCPAC 3010 Ser 0021 "Comprehensive Plan for 
South Vietnam," 19 January 1963, SECRET. 
Msg OSD (ISA) DEF 923923 to CINCPAC 222243Z January 1963, SECRET. 
Ltr CINCPAC 3010 to J·CS Ser 0079, 25 January 1963, SECRET. 
CPSVN, encl to CINCPAC Ltr 3010 to JCS Ser 0079, 25 January 1963, 
SECRET. 
Ibid. 
Memo JCSM-1S0-63 for SeeDef 7 March 1963, SECRET. 
Memo for Record, MA Planning Div, OASD (lSA), 25 May 1963, SECRET . 
Memo CM-439-63 for SecDef, 26 March 1963, CONFIDENTIALj Memo, SecDef 
for CJCS, 26 March 1963, SECRET. 
USMACV "SUIllIl1ary of Highlights S Feb 1962-7 Feb 1963," 20 March 1963, 
TOP SECREI'. 
NIE 53-63, 12 April 1963, SECRET. 
CINCPAC Ltr Ser 000223 to SecDef "Su..ITlluary Report on Secretary of 
Defense Conference; Honolulu, 6 May 1963 (u)," 7 May 1963, TOP SECHET. 
41. 
TOP SECRET - Sensit.ive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
19. 
Two memos SecDef for AsstSecDef (lSA ), both 8 May 1963, both SECRET. 
20. 
Msg JCS 9820 to CINCPAC 091805Z May 1963, SECRET. 
21. 
CINCPAC Ltr 3010 Ser 00447-63 to JCS, 11 May 1963, SECRET. 
22. 
AsstSecDef ( ISA ) Memo for SecDef 1-2346:)/63, 17 May 1963 (v.rith hand-
written marginal notations by SecDef on original copy), SECRET. 
23. 
Msg DEF 928638 from OASD (lSA ) to CINCPA'C 291752Z May 1963, SECRET. 
24. 
Memo JCSM-640- 63 for SecDef, ·27 August 1963, SECRET. 
25. 
Memo AsstSecDef (lSA) for SecDef, 1-23369/63, 5 September 1963, SECRET. 
26. 
Memo SecDef for CJCS, 6 September 1963, SECRET. 
27. 
OASD( ISA )OWlA 1-24609/63, MAP Vietnam, IIMilitary Manpower, II 16 September 
1963, and IIFinancial Summary, II 27 September 1963, both SECRET. 
28. 
Memo JCSM-629-63 for SecDef, 20 August 1963, SECRET. 
29. 
Memo AsstSecDef (ISA) for SecDef, 1-26:)04/63, 30 August 1963, SECRET. 
30. 
Memo SecDef for CJCS, 3 September 1963, SECRET. 
31. 
Memo CJCS for SecDef, 11 September 1963, SECRET. 
32. 
Airgram A-781, State to AmEmbassy Saigon et al, 10 June 1963, 
CONFIDENTIAL. 
33. 
State Dept Memo of Conversation, Under SecState, U.S. Ambassador to 
Vietnam, et al, 5 J'uly 1963, SECRETj 
State Dept Memo for Record, 
IIBriefing for the President, " 4 July 1963, TOP SECRET EYES ONLY. 
34. 
DLA Intelligence Summary Supplement (RVN), 17 July 1963, SECRET. 
35. 
DIA Intelligence Bulletin, 4 August 1963, SECRET. 
36. 
Informal memo SACSA for Secretary of Defense, 14 August 1963, SECRET. 
37. 
Director, DLA, memo for Secretary of Defense, S-18548/p-3, 21 August 
1963, SECRET. 
38. 
SACSA, IIRemarks at a Meeting on Vietnam ,-lith Vice President Johnson, 
Secretary Rusk, et al, at the Department of State, 31 August 1963, 
Summarized by General Krulak. II 
39. 
Memo President for the Secretary of Defense, 21 September 1963, trans-
mitted as attachment to vfuite House memo McGeorge Bundy for Secretary 
of Defense, 21 September 1963, TOP' SECRET. 
~1-2 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
..;) /. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
40. 
Joint Memo, SecDef-CJCS for President, 'Report of McNamara-Taylor 
Mission to South Vietnam," 2 October 1963 (TOP SECRET). 
41 . 
Department of State Bulletin, October 21, 1963, p. 623 · 
42 . 
NSAM 263, 11 October 1963, TOP SECRET EYES ONLY . 
43. 
This expl anation, retrospectively developed by General Maxwell Taylor 
during an intervieH on 18 January 1968, Has one of the primary 
reasons operative at the time. 
44. 
State 534 to Saigon of 5 October 1963. 
45. 
Dept of State INR Research Memo, RFE-90, 22 October 1963. 
46. 
Memo SecState for SecDef, 8 November 1963, SECRET . 
47. 
CINCPAC Ltr 3010 Ser 001218 to SecDef "Record of the Special Meeting 
on the Republic of Vietnam, held 20 November 1963 at Headquarters 
CINCPAC ... ," 22 November .1963, SECRET . 
48. 
NSAM 273, 26 November 1963, TOP SECRET. 
49. 
Memo SecDef for President, 23 November 1963, SECRET . 
50. 
Dir FERISA Memo for AsstSecDef (ISA), "RevieH of t he South Vietnam 
Situation," 3 December 1963. 
51. 
Tab 14 "Accelerated Model Plan (CPSVN)," Back Up Book Saigon Trip 
18- 20 December 1963, prepared by OSD for SecDef . 
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE. 
52. 
NOTE: 
U.S. in-country strength figures for Vietnam vary Hidely 
depending on source. 
Discrepancies are accounted for by different 
standards for computing total according to a~ministrative criteria, 
such as distinctions in personnel assignment category, e .g., J oint 
Table of Distribution (JTD), Permanent Change of Stati on (PCS), 
Temporary Duty (TDY), replacement and rotational pipelines, etc . 
53. 
CM-I079-63 for SecDef, 11 December 1963, SECRET: 
Msg JCS 3944 to 
CINCPAC 112148z December 1963. 
54. 
Memo SecDef for the President, 21 December 1963, SECRET. 
55. 
SACSA "An Overvie,ol of the Vietnam Wa r (1960- 63)," no date (OSD 
han~vlritten entry on coversheet giving file date as 16 January 1961-~) 
SECRET . 
Provided to SecDef f'or use in his Decem.ber trip to SVN). 
56. 
Dir DIA Memo for SecDef'S-18982/P-3, 13 December 1963 SECRET . 
57. 
Memorandu.m for the President from Secretary McNamara, dated 7 January 
1964, subject: 
"Comment on Memoranda by Senator Mansfield. " 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
59· 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63· 
64. 
66. 
67· 
63 . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DepDir CIA Memos for SecState, SecDef, et al, 10, 11, 14, 18 February 
. 1964, SECRET . 
Msgs JCS 731! CJCS to COMUSJYlACV, 18 February 1964 (S); COMUSMACV MAC 
610 to CJCS, 19 February 1964 (TS); COMUSMACV MAC 665 to CJCS, 
21 February 1964 (1'S). 
Msg ClNCPAC to ASD (lSA) 110626/ZMarch 19@+, TOP SECRET. 
Memo SecDef for the President, 16 March 1964. 
NSAM 288, 17 March 1964, SECRET. 
Msg ClNCPAC to CO~IDSMACV 062145Z May 1964, SECRET. 
Working Paper, Special Meeting on Southeast Asia, HQ. PACOM, 1-2 June 
1964, Extension of U.S. Advisory Assistance in RVN, 2 June 1964, SECRET; 
Msg CO~SMACV MACJ 325380 to JCS, info DOD, State (Sullivan), White 
House (Forrestal ), Cm-CPAC, DA, 250005Z June 1964, SECRET; Msg COmISMACV 
MACJ 325580 to ClNCPAC info JCS 272357Z June 1964, SECRET; Msg CINCPAC 
to JCS 042320Z July 1964, SECRET. 
Msg AmErobassy Saigon 108 to SecState (Taylor to Rusk and McNamara ) 
info JCS and Cm-CPAC 150900Z July 1965, SECRET. 
Msg COMuSMACV to Cm-CPAC JYlACJ-31 6180 161045Z July 1964, SECRET. 
Msg AmEmbassy Saigon to SecState info vlhite House, DOD, JCS, ClNCPAC 
171210Z July 1964, SECRET; Msg CINCPAC to JCS 200036z July 1964, 
SECRET; Msg SecState 205 to AmErobassy Saigon 21 July 1964, TOP SECRET; 
Msg JCS 7492 to ClNCPAC 211917Z July 19@+, SECRET. 
Department of the Army, Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for 
Operations, Periodic Report, Subj ect: 
Southeast Asia Military Forces 
(CFP-ODCSOPS-7), various dates. 
Secretary of Defense McNamara, Testimony Before the House Committee 
on Foreign Affairs on the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, August 6, 1964 
(Executive Session). 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
