Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

* : . . . -# $
Ssoam 2 TOP SECRET :
SECURITY INFORMATION

d. The firmness of support of our principal allies
for our global ee generally and these courses of
action in particular

3. The military action, as proposed in NSC 124, would be
limited as to its: objectives, but it would not be subject to
any geographic restrictions with respect to Communist China.
In this connection, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that
any new communist aggression in Asia undoubtedly would stem
from a deliberate design, in the formulation of which the
possibility of counteraction by the United States against
the source of eggression would, in all probability, have
been considered.

4, The making of such a decision now or in the eventuel-
ity of overt aggression by Communist China against a country
of Southeast Asia is complicated by, emong other things, the
/ following:

&. Whether or not the United Netions would be
Willing to call upon its members to engage in hostilities
with Communist Chine;

b. Whether or not the member nations of the United
Netions would be willing to engage in military action
against aggression by Communist China in Southeast Asia;

c¢. Whether or not the United Kingdom and France would
be willing to engage directly in military action against
Communist “China itself, other than action limited to the
area of and/or the approaches to the lend battle with the
ageressor forces;

gad. The ability and the willingness of the United
States to take the military actions involved including
,enilateral action against Communist China itself, in
“event of Communist Chinese military aggression in the
countries of Southeast Asie. Such actions would call for
considerable increase aver current military production
rates with a corresponding curtailment of the production
of goods for the civilian economy; until increased U.S.
production is achieved, these actions would reduce the
military assistance programs to other nations, es-
yvecially those in hign vriority.

e. ° The possible effect upon United States alliances
in Europe and upon the United Nations organization itself
if the United States Government should consider it neces-
sery, in its own interests, to take militery action uni-
laterally against Communist China; and

TOP SECRET

LET -
