Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

UNRESOLVED ISSUERS

At the beginning of 1966, three important issues concerning the
pacification effort were unresolved. Each of these issues was tenta-
tively resolved during late 1966 or in 1967 -- in the sense that
decisions were made rather than that these decisions were final. The
remainder of 1967 and early 1968 (until the Tet offensive) constituted
@ period of consolidation and refinement based on limited experimentation.
The shock caused by the Tet offensive then brought to the fore new ques-
tions of RVNAF effectiveness and of U.S.-RVNAF roles and missions.

The first of the unresolved issues in 1966 was that of which U.S,
agency or group should take the lead in coordinating pacification programs,
The role which RVNAF should assume in support of pacification was the
second unresolved issue. Finally, the extent to which the U.S. should
be willing to exert leverage in order to influence pacification activities
was also unresolved at the beginning of 1966.

The following account of the decisions addressed to these three
issues may seem to suggest that a master list of problems was somehow
approached as part of an orderly, comprehensive, logical process. This
is not, of course, the way it happened. The policy process was confusing
and the policymakers were occasionally confused. Decisions were made in
the reflection of both U.S, and South Vietnamese domestic pressures and
in the shadow of an on-going war. They were affected by personalities
on all sides and involved no small amount of bureaucratic in-fightine.
The account that follows attempts to reorder and to explain this evolu-
tion, not to recreate it.

WHO SHALL LEAD?

The "reemphasis on pacification," as another study in this series
aptly names it, may conveniently be dated from the Honolulu Conference
of February 1966.* With the build-up of U.S. combat forces proceeding
rapidly and with expectations high that 1966 would see the U.S. take the
offensive, policy attention returned to address the "other war" in which
the object was to provide rural security followed by steps to improve
living levels and establish a link between the GVN and its populace.
President Johnson made it clear in his informal remarks to the conferees
at Honolulu that he wanted concrete results to follow the splendid
phrases of the U.S.-GVN communique:

Preserve this communique, because it is one we don't
want to forget. It will be a kind of bible that we are
going to follow. When we come back here 90 days from now,
or six months from now, we are going to start out to the

* Task Force Paper, Evolution of the War: Reemphasis on Pacification,

1965-1967, Part IT.

7a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
