Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

forced the diversion of “skilled manpower and scarce resources" from
productive uses to the restoration of damaged facilities and/or their
dispersal and relocation; and so on.

In terms of specific target categories, the appraisals reported
results like the following:

Power plants. 6 small plants struck, only 2 of them
in the main power grid. Loss resulted in local power
shortages and reduction in power available for irri-
gation but did not reduce the power supply for the
Hanoi/Haiphong area.

POL storage. 4 installations destroyed, about 17 per-
cent of NVN's total bulk storage capacity. Economic
effect not significant, since neither industry nor
agriculture is large user and makeshift storage and
distribution procedures will do.

Manufacturing. 2 facilities hit, 1 explosive plant

and 1 textile plant, the latter by mistake. Loss of
explosives plant of little consequence since China
furnished virtually all the explosives required. Damage
to textile plant not extensive.

Bridges. 30 highway and 6 railroad bridges on JCS list
destroyed or damaged, plus several hundred lesser bridges
hit on armed reconnaissance missions. NVN has generally
not made a major reconstruction effort, usually putting
fords, ferries, and pontoon bridges into service instead.
Damage has neither stopped nor curtailed movement of
military supplies.

Railroad yards. 3 hit, containing about 10 percent of
NVN's total railroad cargo-handling capacity. Has not
significantly hampered the operations of the major
portions of the rail network.

Ports. 2 small maritime ports hit, at Vinh and Thanh Hoa
in the south, with only 5 percent of the country's mari-
time cargo-handling capacity. Impact on economy minor.

Locks. Of 91 known locks and dams in NVN, only 8 targeted
as significant to inland waterways, flood control, or
irrigation. Only 1 hit, heavily damaged.

Transport equipment. Destroyed or damaged 12 locomo-
tives, 819 freight cars, 805 trucks, 109 ferries, 750

- 53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
