Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

So Washington officials talked about the lack of a sense of urgency
in the Mission in Vietnam, and the Americans in Saigon talked about the
dream world that Washington lived in, and the Americans in the provinces
talked about the lack of understanding of the Americans in Saigon who had
never seen the real war. Washington was dissatisfied with the progress
in Vietnam, and since it could not influence the real obstacle, the
Vietnamese, except through the American Mission, it deliberately put extra
heat on the Mission. At least one high official involved in this period
in Washington felt that it was a necessary and deliberate charade, and
that only by overdoing its representations to the Mission could Washington
assure that some fraction of its desires got through. More than one high-
yanking official in Saigon felt that the only way to handle Washington
was to hold ont to them promises of progress and generally calm the hone
front down, or else run the risk of inflaming Washington and bringing
still more reorganization down upon the Mission's head.

Rather than try to apportion responsibility for this sorry state of
affairs, it would be useful to see the situation as the by-product of
tensions produced by the Viet Cong strategy of survival and counter-
punching at GVN weak spots, and the GVN's inability to be as good as we
dream they should be. The United States could perhaps live with these
problems in an age in which communications were not instantaneous, and
publicity not so unrelenting.

Beyond this broad philosophical point, however, the fact is that
the Mission in Vietnam was badly organized to conduct almost any kind
of large and complex operation, let alone a war. Thus Washington was
right to reorganize the Mission, and Saigon's reaction to each reorganiza-
tion inevitably suggested that still more was needed.

Beyond that, the Mission in Vietnam did not have the full confidence
of the Washington bureaucracy and Porter still lacked Lodge's full
support.

a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
