Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The Acting Seerctury of State to the Ambassador in France (Caffery)

4
Wasntxorox, May 5, 19-—noon.

1949, Following telegrmi dated May 8 received from the Secretary
at Saw Francisco,’ is repeated for your information.
— poe
"The Vuited Nations Conference on Tatecnotional Orennizatiow met at Ban
Francisco frone Apr 25 to Tune 2 Wa,

“Phe subject of Indo-China came arp ina recent conversation I had
with Bidault 7 and Bonnet. The‘latter temarked that although the

* Georges Bidault, French 2 fipister for Foreign Affairs:

French Government interprets Mr Welles’ statement of 1942 * cou-
cerning the restoration’ of French sov Eesieuty over the French Eva-

= Por text af note. ate) April 15, ini, from Aciing Secretary of State Sim-
ner Wells to Atnhassidor Gaston Houry-Thiye, seo Morcign Nelations, 1942, vol. 11,
p. 01, or Dep ariinent of State Galietin, April 18, Te, pean.
pire as including Tndo-China, the press continues to imply that a
speci jaLstatus will be reserved for this colonial area. Tt was made
quite “clear to Bidault that the record is entirely ihnoeent of any
official statement of this government questioning, even by impliea-
tion, French sovereignty over Indo-China. Certain elements of
{American public opinion, however, condemned French goverimen-
tal policies and practices in Indo-China. Bidault seemed relived
and has no doube cabled Paris that he received renewed assurances of
our recognition of French sovereignty over that area.”

Grew
i ay i Ar Fi

F Paar y ial A Ais

T1001 TE W.7 eats ’
Memorandum by the . foitag Secretary of State to President Tranan

Wasitsoron, May 16, 1945
With respect to General de Gaulle’s message of May 15 * concerning

“Annex to this moenmoraindnin,
his extreme desire to have French forces participate in the fight of
American forces in the decisive campaign against Japan,,a copy of
which is enclosed, the following considerations ave olfered for possible
use in your conversation with the French Foreign Minister and Gen-

eral Juin * now scheduled for tomorrew, May 17, for Mr, Bidault,

* Gen. Alphonse Pierre Juin, French Chief of General Staii.
and May 18 for General Juin.

"The question of the participation of both French military and naval
farees ty the Far Hast w Wils raised by the Chief of the french Naval
Mission in the United. States = on Marvel 20. When the Joint Chiets

= Ndin. Haxvniand Feanrd.
of Staff referred the matter to the Department for an expression of
a that neceptance of the

+ yiows the: Secretar ¥ ol State replied ou PW ah i]
proposils in prince iple was consilered to be desirable from the point
of view of veiations with the Freich Provisional Govermnent, subject
of course to military retivements in the theatre of operations. It is
understood tint fro 1} the witlitary: pont of vie w the use of French
forces in that theutre lms veh uively ‘little if ay “value. Until fivther

N22 RTT Thode te A
VIN 3 AEN 2S

el
