tAS

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(4) The continued loss of LOCs, food-producing areas,
and population to Viet Cong control.

(5) The lack of a viable politico/economic structure
in- the RVI.

(6) The threat of CHICOM intervention or aggression in
Southeast .Asia and elsewhere in the Western Pacific.

c. The basic military tasks, of equal priority, are:

(1) To cause the DRV to cease its direction and support
of the Viet Cong insurgency.

(2) To defeat the Viet Cong and to extend GVN control
over all of the RVN.

(3) To deter Communist China from direct intervention
and to defeat such intervention if it occurs.

d. The US basic strategy for accomplishing the above tasks
should be; to intensify military pressure on the DRV by air and
haval power; to destroy significant DRV military targets, includ-
ing the base of supplies; to interdict supporting LOCs in the DRV;
to interdict the infiltration and supply routes into the RVN; to
improve the combat effectiveness of the RVNAF; to build and pro-
tect bases; to reduce enemy reinforcements; to defeat the Viet
Cong, in concert with RVN and third country forces; and to main-
tain adequate forces in the Western Pacific and elsewhere in
readiness to deter and to deal with CHICOM aggression. By
aggressive and sustained exploitation of superior military force,
the United States/Government of Vietnam would seize and hold the
initiative in both the DRV and RVN, keeping the DRV, the Viet
Cong, and the PL/VM at a disadvantage, progressively destroying
the DRV war-supporting power and defeating the Viet Cong. ‘The
physical capability of the DRV to move men and supplies through
the Lao Corridor, down the coastline, across the DMZ, and through
Cambodia must be reduced to the maximm practical extent by land,
naval, and air actions in these areas and against infiltration-
connected targets. Finally, included within the basic US mili-
tary strategy must be a buildup in Thailand to ensure attainment
of the proper US-Thai posture to deter CHICOM aggression and to
facilitate placing US forces in an advantageous logistic position
if such agrression occurs. 20/

It continued:

---dn order to gain the offensive and to seize and hold the
initiative.in the RVN, a major effort must be made not only

VW . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
