[oe

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The impression the "Evaluation" paper gives is more easily summarized
than its details. For the impression is clearly one of urgency combined
with optimism. Essentially, it says South Vietnam is in serious trouble;
major interests of the United States are at stake; but if the U.S. promptly
and energetically takes up the challenge, a victory can be had without a
U.S. take-over of the war.

For example:

Despite the intellectuals who sit on the side lines and complain;
despite serious dissidence among the Montagnards, the sects, and
certain old Viet Minh areas; despite the apathy and fear of the Viet-
Cong in the countryside, the atmosphere in South Vietnam is, on
balance, one of frustrated energy rather than passive acceptance of
inevitable defeat. ;

It cannot be emphasized too strongly, however, that time has
nearly run out for converting these assets into the bases for vic-
tory. Diem himself--and all concerned with the fate of the country
--are looking to American guidance and aid to achieve a turning
point in Vietnam's affairs. From all quarters in Southeast Asia
the message on Vietnam is the same: vigorous American action is
needed to buy time for Vietnam to mobilize and organize its real
assets; but the time for such a turn around has nearly run out.

And if Vietnam goes, it will be exceedingly difficult if not in-
possible to hold Southeast Asia. What will be lost is not merely
a crucial piece of real estate, but the faith that the U.S. has the
will and the capacity to deal with the Communist offensive in that

area. 21/

The report, drawing on the appendices, includes 4a wide range of pro-
posals. But the major emphasis, very emphatically, is on two ideas:
First, there must be a firm, unambiguous military commitment to remove
doubts about U.S. resolve arising out of the Laos negotiations; second,
there is great emphasis on the idea that the Diem regime's own evident
weaknesses--from "the famous problem of Diem as administrator” to the
Army's lack of offensive spirit--could be cured if enough dedicated Ameri-
cans, Civilian and military, became involved in South Vietnam to show the
South Vietnamese, at all levels, how to get on and win the war. The
much-urged military Task Force, for example, was mainly to serve the first
purpose, but partly also to serve the second:"the presence of American
military forces in the [£1o0a/ area should also give us an opportunity
to work intensively with the civil guards and with other local military
elements and to explore the possibility of suffusing them with an offen-
sive spirit and tactics."22/

Here are a few extracts which give the flavor of the discussion:

101
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
