[50

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

' TOP SECRET - Sensitive

possible requirements and conditions for its use and subsequent modi-
fications made with experience.

In addition to the logistical component, it will be necessary to include

some combat troops for the protection of logistical operations and the
defense of the area occupied by U.S. forces. Any troops coming to VN
may expect to take casualties.

Needless to say, this kind of task force will exercise little direct
influence on the campaign against the V.C. It will, however, give a
much needed shot in the arm to national morale, particularly if com-
bined with other actions showing that a more effective working
relationship in the common cause has been established between the
GVN and the U.S. 18/

FROM THE PHILIPPINES

EYES ONLY FOR THE PRESIDENT FROM GENERAL TAYLOR

le Transmitted herewith are a summary of the fundamental conclusions
of my group and my personal recommendations in response to the letter
of the President to me dated 13 October 1961. * * * * * * *

Be It is concluded that:

ae Communist strategy aims to gain control of Southeast Asia by
methods of subversion and guerrilla war which by-pass conventional U.S.
and indigenous strength on the ground. The interim Communist goal --
en route to total take-over -- appears to be a neutral Southeast Asia,
detached from U.S. protection. This strategy is well on the way to
success in Vietnam.

be In Vietnam (and Southeast Asia) there is a double crisis in
confidence: doubt that U.S. is determined to save Southeast Asia;
doubt that Diem's methods can frustrate and defeat Commmist purposes
and methods, The Vietnamese (and Southeast Asians) will undoubtedly
draw -- rightly or wrongly -- definitive conclusions in coming weeks
and months concerning the probable outcome and will adjust their be-
havior accordingly. What the U.S. does or fails to do will be deci-
sive to the end result.

e. Aside from the morale factor, the Vietnamese Government is
caught in interlocking circles of bad tactics and bad administrative
arrangements which pin their forces on the defensive in ways which
permit a relatively small Viet-Cong force (about one-tenth the size
of the GVN regulars) to create conditions of frustration end terror
certain to lead to a political crisis, if a positive turning point is

95.
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
