Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the regional commanders under the Chief of Staff, and com-
bined the office of Province Chief (usually a military man
in any event) and local field commander. But the Province
Chiefs still were personally responsible to Diem, and
could appeal directly to him outside the nominal chain of
command. Diem's reform, consequently, turned out to be
essentially meaningless. His reluctance to move on this
issue was not surprising. After all, the division and con-
fusion of military authority served a real purpose for a
ruler like Diem, with no broad base of support: it less-
ened. the chance of a coup that would throw him out.

[The overall plan issue, on which not even a paper agree-
ment was reached during the period covered by this account,
was really an argument over strategy. It has a familiar
ring. .

fdiem seemed oriented very much towards maintaining at
least the pretense of control over all of South Vietnam. Con-
sequently, he favored maintaining military outposts (and
concentrating the population in Agrovilles, the predecessors
of the strategic hamlets) along "lines of strength" (gener-
ally main roads) which stretched throughout the country. To
assert at least nominal control over the countryside between
these lines of strength, the military forces would period-
ically organize a sweep. Incontrast to this, the American
plan stressed what MAAG called a "net and spear” concept.
Small units would scour the jungles beyond the pacified area.
When this “net" found an enemy unit, they would call in
reserves (the spear) for a concentrated attempt to destroy
the unit. As new areas were thus cleared, the net would be
pushed further out into previously uncontested areas. It is
not clear how well refined either concept was, or (with hind-
sight) whether the American plan was really a great deal more
realistic than Diem's. But the American interest in getting
Diem to agree to a plan does seem to have been primarily
oriented to getting him to agree to some systematic proce-
dure for using forces to clear areas of VC control, instead
of tying up most of his forces defending fixed installations,
with periodic uneventful sweeps through the hinterland. / 3/

On the civil side, the stress in the CIP was on trying to shore
up the regime's support within the cities by such steps as bringing
opposition leaders into the government, and giving the National Assembly
the power to investigate charges of mismanagement and corruption in the
executive.

The Plan also called for "civic action" and other steps to in-
erease the change of winning positive loyalty from the peasants. h/

aie TOP SECRET - Sensitive
