Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

seem to believe that SVN is near collapse and show no
signs of being interested in settling for less than a
complete cake-over. ay

Faced with this gloomy situation, the leading question on
the U.S. agenda for Vietnam was a further major escalation of troop
commitments, together with a call-up of reserves, extension of mili-
tary tours, and a general expansion of the armed forces.

The question of intensifying the air war against the North
was a subsidiary issue, but it was related to the troop question in
several ways. The military view, as reflected in JCS proposals and
proposals from the field, was that the war should be intensified on
all fronts, in the North no less than in the South. There was polit-
ical merit in this view as well, since it was difficult to publicly
justify sending in masses of troops to slug it out on the ground
without at least trying to see whether stronger pressures against
NVN would help. On the other hand, there was continued high-level
interest in preventing a crisis atmosphere from developing, and in
avoiding any over-reaction by NVN and its allies, so that a simul-
taneous escalation in both the North and the South needed to be
handled with care. The bombing of the North, coupled with the deploy-
ment of substantial forces should not look like an effort to soften
up NVN for an invasion.

During the last days of June with U.S. air operations
against North Vietnam well into their fifth month, with U.S. forces
in South Vietnam embarking for the first time upon major ground
combat operations, and with the President near a decision that would
inerease American troop strength in Vietnam from 70,000 to over
200,000, Under-Secretary of State George Ball sent to his colleagues
among the small group of Vietnam "principals" in Washington a memoran-
dum warning that the United States was poised on the brink of a military
and political disaster. 2/ Neither through expanded bombing of the
North nor through a substantial increase in U.S. forces in the South
would the United States be likely to achieve its objectives, Ball
argued. Instead of escalation, he urged, "we should undertake either
‘ to extricate ourselves or to reduce our defense perimeters in South
Viet-Nam to accord with the capabilities of a limited US deployment."

“This is our last clear chance to make this decision," the
Se  -  *- ooOeoererere=O0 0 —S~$S$ssmpsSssSs$sss00 0000 yyy
Under-Secretary asserted. And in a separate memorandum to the President,

he explained why:

The decision you face now, therefore, is crucial.
Once large numbers of US troops are committed to direct
combat they will begin to take heavy casualties in a

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
