Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Division Into Three Parties And For the Change in the Party Name," the
document states that the Communist Party would continue to promote reyo-
lution throughout Southeast Asia as it had in the past, and stressed its
essential unity despite outward appearances;

"The creation of a separate party for each of the three
Nations does not prejudice the revolutionary movement in
Indochina.

"(a) In 1930, we recommended the creation of an Indo-
chinese Communist Party, not only because Vietnam, Cambodia,
and Laos suffered under the same yoke of domination and had the
same enemy, but also because at that time only the Revolutionary
Movement in Vietnam was in a state of development, while it was
still weak in Cambodia and Laos. If at that time there had not
been one Communist Party for the three countries, the ereation of
a Communist and revolutionary movement in Cambodia and Laos would
certainly have been retarded.

"Today, however, the situation has changed. The Cambodian
and Iaotian peoples are rising to oppose the French and obtain
their independence. Communist Party sections exist in Cambodia
and Laos and are beginning to grow. Cambodia and Iaos already
have a united Liberation Front (Issarak in Cambodia; Issara in
Iaos). Cambodia has a National Liberation Committee; Laos a
Resistance Government, etc....Within these organizations there
are already groups of faithful Communists who act as Delegations
to the Indochinese Communist Party from which they receive direc-
tives. For that reason, the creation of a separate Communist
Party for the working class of Vietnam does not risk weakening
the leadership of the revolutionary movements in Cambodia and Laos
or the carrying out of Marxist-Lenin propaganda action. In addi-
tion, the Vietnamese Party reserves the right to supervise the
activities of its brother Parties in Cambodia and laos.

"(b) Each Nation - Vietnam, Cambodia and laos, has its own
Party, but unity of leadership and action remain between the
three Parties. There are several means of unifying the leader-
ship and action. For example, the Central Executive Committee
of the Vietnamese Workers Party has designated a Cambodian and
a Iaotian bureau charged with assisting the revolutionary move-~
ments in these countries. It organizes periodic assemblies of
the three parties in order to discuss questions of common interest;
it works towards the creation of a Vietnamese-Khmer-Laotian United
Front.

"(c) Militerily Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos constitute a
combat zone; Vietnam has substantially assisted Cambodia and Laos

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
