Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(much less any debate) on these questions. General Taylor's report of
his mission to Saigon implies an unambiguous convergence of interests
between the advisors and the advised. All that was needed was greater
competence. More U.S. advisors at more places working on problems of
Vietnamese training and operations could not but have an overall bene~
ficial effect.

It is necessary to surmise the expectations in the policymakers
minds of just how this would come about. First, they seem to have
expected the increased U.S. advisory presence to lead directly to
increased RVNAF competence in technical and tactical areas. Basic
military skills -- how to move, shoot, and communicate -~ could be
improved and the improvements sustained by a continuing U.S. presence
at many Operational levels. Second, the U.S. policymakers could receive
reports from an omnipresent U.S. 'network!! which would permit them to
become better informed about what was really taking place in Vietnam,
not only with respect to VC activity but with reference to ARVN plans,
operations, and problems as well. Finally, the U.S. expected to realize
increased influence within RVNAF from the presence of advisors. (And it
expected, as NSAM 111 made clear, to realize increased influence with
GVN in exchange for increasing its visible commitment to South Vietnamese
independence.)

Increased influence can, of course, be gained in many ways. Uass
advisors could, by example, promote more aggressive Vietnamese leader~
ship and improved standards of conduct. A well-coordinated advisory
network could exert persuasive pressure throughout RVNAF to adopt certain
policies or practices. And the U.S. providers of the material resources
could, if they wished, keep a tight hand on the spigot and control the
flow. They could exert influence negatively. The U.S. was anxious to
avoid this last-mentioned approach to increased influence. "Leverage,"
as it is now comnonly known, was a subject rarely discussed, much less
practiced. The "limited partnership'' finessed the whole issue of sanc-
tions by assuming (or hoping or pretending, one cannot know which) that
no problem existed.

PACIFICATION AND STRATEGIC HAMLETS

The process of countering insurgency, most commonly called pacifi-
cation, received a great amount of attention and publicity at the same
time the U.S. was increasing its field advisors with ARVN from a handful
to over 3,000. Earlier, in 1960, the USMAAG had pressed upon the GVN a
national Counterinsurgency Plan for Vietnam (CIP) which was really an
organizational blueprint for reordering the GVN-RVNAF lines of command
to permit effective action. The nub of the problem was that the politi-~
cal leaders in rural areas (Province and District Chiefs -~ almost all
military officers) were responsible to Saigon directly while RVNAF had
a separate chain of command. In 1961, the MAAG presented its complemen
tary Geographically Phased Plan which specified the relative priority
for clearing out the VC, holding, then building GVN at the "rice roots."

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
