Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

his own comments on McCone's views. Raborn's comments, circulated to
Secretaries Rusk and McNemara on May 6, included the following:

Our limited bombing of the North end our present ground-
force build-up in the South are not likely to exert sufficient
pressure on the enemy to cause him to meet our present terms
in the foreseeable future. I note very recent evidence which
suggests thet our military pressures are becoming somewhat more
damaging to the enemy within South Vietnam, but I em inclined
to doubt that this demage is increasing at a rate which will
bring him quickly to the conference table.

With particular reference to McCone'’s recommendation that the US
edd much heavier air action against the North to its planned combat
force deployment to the South, Reborn indicated his agreement, and
expressed his belief that such an action would have the following con~-
secuences:

The DRV is, in my view, unlikely to engage in meaningful
discussions at any time in coming months until US air attacks
have begun to demage or destroy its principal economic and
military targets. I thus concur with the USIB's judgment of
18 February 1965, thet, given such US punishment, the enemy
would be "somewhat more likely" to decide to make some effort
to secure a respite, rather than to intensify the struggle
further and accept the consequent risks.

And then he added the following advice:

Insofar as possible, we should try to manage any program of
expanded bombings in ways which (1) would leave the DRV en oppor-
tunity to explore negotiations without complete loss of face,

(2) would not preclude any Soviet pressures on Hanoi to keep the
war from expanding, and (3) would not suddenly produce extreme
world pressures against us. In this connection, the timing and
circumstances in which the bombings were extended northward could
be of critical importance, particularly in light of the fact that
there have been some indications of differing views between Moscow,
Peiping, and Hanoi. For example, it would probably be advantageous
to expand bombings after, not before, some major new VC move

(e.g., obvious concentration for imminent attack on Da Nang or
Kontum) and after, not before, any current possibilities of serious
negotistions have been fully tested. And such bombings should not
be so regular as to leave no interval for the Communists to make
concessions with some grace, Indeed, we should keep in mind the
possibility of a pause at some approvriate time, which could serve
to test the Communist intentions and to exploit any differences
on their side. Emphasis supplied

LOGON T= : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
