Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Thailand and to remain there until further orders. These forces are to
help ensure the territorial integrity of this peaceful country.

"Phe dispatch of United States forces to Thailand was considered
desirable because of recent attacks in Laos by Communist forces, and
the subsequent movement of Communist military units toward the border

of Thailand. - .

"\ threat to Thailand is of grave concern to the United States. I
have, therefore, ordered certain additional American military forces into
Thailand in order that we may be in a position to fulfill speedily our 3
obligations under the Manila Pact of 1954, a defense agreement which was
approved overwhelmingly by the U.S. Senate, and to which the Secretary of

State and Foreign Minister of Thailand referred in their joint statement
of March 6, 1962. We are in consultation with SEATO Goverrments on the
situation.

"Tt emphasize that this is a defensive act on the part of the United
States and wholly consistent with the United Nations Charter which
specifically recognizes that nations have an inherent right to take
collective measures for self-defense. In the spirit of that Charter,

T have directed that the Secretary General of the United Nations be in-
formed of the actions that we are taking.

"There is no change in our policy toward Laos, which continues to
be the re-establishment of an effective cease- fire and prompt hegotia-
tions for a government of national union."

23.- President Kennedy's News Conference, May 17, 1962, Public Papers of
the Presidents, Kennedy, 1962, p. 402:

"No Further Breach in Taos

"Q: Mr. President, could you bring us up. to date on the Laotian
situation since the dispatch of our troops in Thailand? Specifically, do
you feel that we have increased the chances of our getting caught in a
Communist shooting war in Southeast Asia?

"THE PRESIDENT: We are continuing to hope that there will be a
national government or national union, which has been our policy, as you
know, for a year. We are going into Thailand, at the decision of the
Thai government, our own decision to provide for the defense of Thailand.
The latest information indicates no further breach of the cease-fire.

We also have indications that the three princes will engage in conversation
shortly. I hope they will produce a government. That is our object. I
have already indicated the great hazards of a shooting war in Asia. In
Asia, it is our object to bring about a diplomatic solution which will make
the chances of such a war far less likely.

C-21
