HS

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

the good life. The United States wishes to continue to assist and to
be a loyal and trusted friend of Viet-Nam.

"Our policies in Viet-Nem may be simply stated as follows:

"To support a friendly non-Communist government in Viet-Nam and to
help it diminish and eventuelly eradicate Communist subversion and
influence. .

"To help the Government of Viet-Nem establish the forces neces-
sary for internal security.

"To encourage support for Free Viet-Nam by the non-Communist world.

"To aid in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of a country and
people ravaged by 8 ruinous years of civil and international war.

“Our efforts are directed first of all toward helping to sustain
the internal security forces consisting of a regular army of about
150,000 men, a mobile civil guard of some 45,000, and local defense
units which are being formed to give protection against subversion on
the village level. We are providing budgetary support and equipment for
these forces and have a mission assisting the training of the army. We
are also helping to organize, train, and equip the Vietnamese police
force. The refugees who have fled to South Viet-Nam to escape the Viet
Minh are being resettled on productive lands with the assistance of funds
made available by our aid program. In various ways our aid program also
provides assistance to the Vietnamese Government designed to strengthen
the economy and provide a better future for the common people of the
country. The Vietnamese are increasingly giving attention to the basic
development of the Vietnamese economy and to projects that may contri-
bute directly to that goal. We give our aid and counsel to this program
only as freely invited.

"T do not wish to minimize the magnitude of the task that still
remains and of the problems that still confront this staunch and valiant
member of the free world fighting for its independence on the threshold
of the Communist heartland of Asia.

"The Communist conspiracy continues to threaten Free Viet-Nam.
With monstrous effrontery, the Communist conspirators at Hanoi accuse
Free Viet-Nem and its friends of violating the armistice provisions which
the Vietnamese and their friends, including ourselves, have scrupulously
respected despite the fact that neither the Vietnamese nor ourselves
signed the Geneve Accords while they, the Communists who have solemnly
underteken to be bound by these provisions, have violated them in the
most blatant fashion.

"The facts are that while on the one hand the military potential
of Free Viet-Nem has been drastically reduced by the withdrawal of
nearly 200,000 members of the French Expeditionary Corps and by the
reduction of the Vietnamese Army by more than 50,000 from the time of
the armistice, to the present as well as by the outshipment from Viet-Nam

B-30
