Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Both the tenor of the thinking and the policies that emerged from the
meetings of early December are reflected in the draft instructions from the
President to Ambassador Taylor possibly written by Taylor himself, These
were first drawm up on 30 November 1964, revised on 2 December and used at
the meeting of the principals on 3 December.

During the recent review in Washington of the situation in South
Vietnam, it was clearly established that the unsatisfactory
progress being made in the pacification of the VCO was the result
of two primary causes from which many secondary causes stemmed;
first, the governmental instability in Saigon and the second, the
continued reinforcement and direction of the VC by the North Viet-
namese government, To change the downward trend of events, it
will be necessary to deal adequately with both of these factors,

It is clear however that these factors are not of equal importance.
There must be a stable, effective government to conduct a campaign
against the VC even if the aid of North Vietnam for the VC should
end. While the elimination of North Vietnamese intervention will
raise morale on our side and make it easier for the government to
function, it will not in itself end the war against the VC. It is
rather an important contributory factor to the creation of conditions
favoring a successful campaign against the VC within South Vietnam.
Since action against North Vietnam is contributory, not central, we
should not incur the risks which are inherent in expansion of hos-
tilities until there is a government in Saigon capable of handling
the serious problems involved in such an expansion and of exploiting
the favorable effects which may be anticipated from an end of
support and direction by North Vietnam.

It is this consideration which has borne heavily on the recent delib-
erations in Washington and has conditioned the conelusions reached,
There have been many expressions of admiration for the courage being
shown by the Huong government which has the complete support of the
U.S. government in its resistance to the minority pressures which
are attempting to drag it down. However, the difficulties which it
is facing raise inevitable questions as to its capacity and readiness
to discharge the responsibilities which it would incur if some of

the new measures under consideration were taken,

There are certain minimum criteria of performance in South Vietnam
which must be met before any new measures against North Vietnam
would be either justified or practicable, At a minimum the govern-
ment should be able to speak for and to its people who will need
guidance and leadership throughout. the coming critical period. It
should be capable of maintaining law and order in its principal.

100
. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
