Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

4), It is important to the United States that the mainland
states of Southeast Asia remain under non-communist control and
continue to improve their internal conditions. These states are
valuable to the free world because of their strategic position,
abundant natural resources, including strategic materials in short
supply in the United States, and their large population. Moreover,
these states, if adequately developed and organized, could serve to
protect and contribute ‘to the economic progress and military de-
fense of the Pacific off-shore islands from Japan to New Zealand.
Communist control of both China and Southeast Asia would place Japan
in a dangerously vulnerable position and therefore seriously affect
the entire security position of the United States in the Pacific.
The fall of the mainland states would result in changing the status
of the off-shore island chain from supporting bases to front line
positions. Further, it would tend to isolate these base areas from
each other, requiring a review of our entire strategic deployment:
of forces. Communist domination of the area would alleviate con-
siderably the food problem of China and make available to the USSR
considerable quantities of strategically important materials,

42, In the absence of overt Chinese Communist aggression in
Southeast Asia, the general problems facing the United States in
this area are: the real threat of Chinese Communist invasion and
subversion, the political instability and weak leadership of the
non-communist governments, the low standards of living and under-
developed resources of the peoples of the area, the prevailing pre-
judice ageinst colonialism and Western "interference" and the in-
sensitivity to the danger of communist imperialism. Further acts
of communist aggression in Southeast Asia can be expected to stimu-
late resistance on the part of countries which have thus far failed
to take a positive stand, ‘

43, Therefore, the general objectives of the United States in
Southeast Asia are: (a) to contribute to the will and ability of
all countries in the region to resist communism from within end
without, and (b) to aid in the political, economic and social ad-
vancement of the eres. For this purpose, the United States has
developed support programs to strengthen the governments’ adminis-
trative and military capabilities, to improve living standards, to
encourage pro-Western alignments, and to stave off communist inter-

vention.

uh, Chinese Communist conquest of Indochina, Thailand and
Burma, by military force and internal subversion, would seriously
threaten the critical security interests of the United States,
However, in the event of overt Chinese aggression, it is not now in
the over-all security interests of the United States to commit any
United States armed forces to the defense of the mainland states of
Southeast Asia, Therefore, the United States cannot guarantee the

NSC 48/5 TOP SECRET
bls
