Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Ka

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

paper was addressed, or who saw it. But it comprises perhaps the most
effective political case that could have been made for the bombing
program in early 1966, by @ writer who was intimately involved with
every detail of the program and who was fully aware of all its limita-.
tions. As such its most important sections are worth extensive quota-
tion here. They were the following:

3. Purposes of the program of bombing the North. The

purposes of the bombing are mainly:
a. TO interdict infiltration.

b. To bring about negotiations (by indirect third-
party pressure flowing from fear of escalation
and by direct pressure on Hanoi).

ec. To provide a bargaining counter in negotiations
(or in a tacit "minuet").

d. To sustain GVN and US morale.

Short of drastic action against the North Vietnamese popula-
tion (and query even then), the program probably cannot be
expected directly or indirectly to persuade Hanoi to come to
the table or to settle either (1) while Le Duan and other
militants are in ascendance in the politburo or (2) while

the North thinks it can win in the South. The only ques-
tions are two: (3) Can the program be expected to reduce
(not just increase the cost of) DRV aid to the South below
what it would otherwise be -- and hopefully to put a ceiling
on it -- so that we can achieve a military victory or, short
of that, so that their failure in the South will cause them
to lose confidence in victory there? (Our World War II
experience indicates that only at that time can the squeeze
on the North be expected to be a bargaining counter). And
(4) is the political situation (vis a vis the "hard-liners"
at home, in the GVN and elsewhere) such that the bombing
must be carried on for morale reasons? (The negative morale
effect of now stopping bombing North Vietnam could be substan-
tial, but it need not be considered unless the interdiction

reason fails.)

hh. Analysis of past interdiction efforts. The program
so far has not successfully interdicted infiltration of men
: and materiel into South Vietnam (although it may have caused
the North to concentrate its logistic resources on the trail,
to the advantage of our efforts in support of Souvanna).
Despite our armed reconnaissance efforts and strikes on rail-
roads, bridges, storage centers, training bases and other key

al TOP SECRET - Sensitive
