Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(TS

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

----Military operations against North Vietnam and
operations in South Vietnam are of transcendent importance.
Operations elsewhere are complementary supporting under-
takings. Priority and emphasis should be accorded in
consideration of the forces and resources available to
implement the strategy dictated by our objectives. 4g/

To some extent, the vehemence of CINCPAC's reaction must
have stemmed from the fact that he and General Westmoreland had just
completed a paper exercise in which they had struggled to articulate
a strategic concept for the conduct of the war to achieve U.S. objec-
tives as they understood them. This effort had been linked to the
consideration of CY 1967 force requirements for the war, the definition
of which required some strategie concept to serve as a guide. With
respect to the war in the North, CINCPAC's final "Military Strategy
to Accomplish United States Objectives for Vietnam," stated:

In the North - Take the war to the enemy by unremitting
but selective application of United States air and naval
power. Military installations and those industrial facili-
ties that generate support for the aggression will be
attacked. Movement within, into and out of North Vietnam
will be impeded. The enemy will be denied the great psycho-
logical and material advantage of conducting an aggression
from a sanctuary. This relentless application of force is
designed progressively to curtail North Vietnam's war-
making capacity. It seeks to force upon him major replenish-
ment, repair and construction efforts. North Vietnamese
support and direction of the Pathet Lao and the insurgency
in Thailand will be impaired. The movement of men and material
through Laos and over all land and water lines of communica-
tions into South Vietnam will be disrupted. Hanoi's capability
to support military operations in South Vietnam and to direct
those operations will be progressively reduced. 50/

With this formulation of intent for the air war, it is not surprising
that the barrier proposal should have been anathema to CINCPAC.

McNamara, however, proceeded to implement the barrier pro-
posal in spite of CINCPAC's condemnation and the Chiefs' cool reaction.
On September 15 he appointed It. General Alfred Starbird to head Joint
Task Force 728 within DDR&E as manager for the project. S1/ The Joint
Task Force was eventually given the cover name Defense Communications
Planning Group to protect the sensitivity of the project. Plans for
implementing the barrier were pushed ahead speedily. Early in October,
just prior to the Secretary's trip, General Starbird made a visit to
Vietnam to study the problem on the ground and begin to set the adminis-
trative wheels in motion. In spite of the fact that McNamara was

161 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
