o 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
'" 
m 
'" 
m 
Z 
I 
~ 
g:J 
l> 
o 
'" 
z 
;;J 
~ 
o z 
13 
• 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
EISENHOHER ADHINISTRATION 
SUMMARY 
President Eisenhower took office in the context of negotiations 
for.R settlement in Korea and the portending defeat in France in Indo-
china. 
His Administration early faced the crisis surrounding the Geneva 
Conference of 1954, in which direct U.S. intervention in Vietnam ,,:as a 
distinct prospect. Having pressed diplomatically for a constructive 
outcome at Geneva, the United States threw its support behind Ngo Dinh 
Diem and the Government of Vietnam. 
With U.S. support, that government, 
despite a series of severe tests, succeeded in consolidating itself and 
making signi:ficant progress . 
U.S. justification .for its policy to\fard 
Vietnam in this period included the following : 
a . . The "domino principle" : 
the loss of Vietnam, the most vulner-
able state of Southeast Asia, would imperil the other nations of the 
region, and ultimately lead to a seriously weakened U.S. strategic 
position. 
Vietnam was a key to continued free world access to the 
human and material resources of Southeast Asia. 
b . 
Communist China was pursuing an expansionist foreign policy 
relying upon subversive aggression, as well as armaments . 
China thus 
continued to reflect the unchanging Soviet objective of conquest of the 
world, and both had manifest designs on Southeast Asia. 
c . 
The United States proposed, through its aid programs , t o help 
the small and weak nations contiguous with communist powers to maintain 
their freedom and independence lest aggression and expansion be en-
couraged, and the \"'Orld moved thereby toward a. tbird ,,:orld ,·!ar . 
d. 
In the words of PJ.·esident Eisenhower, "ive gave militarJ and 
econoMic assistance to the Republic of Vietnam. 
vIe entered into a 
treaty -- the Southeast Asia Security Treaty - - which plainly warned 
that an armed attack against this area ... ,ould endanger our own peace and 
safety and that ... re ",-auld act accordingly. " 
e . 
U.S. aid for Vietnam -- economic and military -- has made 
possible not only its survival, but also genuine progress toward a 
stable society, a modern economy, and internal and external security . 
B 
l'f 
• 
V. B. 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
JUSTIFICATION OF THE liAR -- RJBLIC STATEl-lENTS 
EISENHOltlER ADl'{[NISTRl\.TION 
CONTENTS 
1 . 
Ei senhower cites the interrelationship of Southeast Asian 
nations, their natural r esources and strategic locations 
as justifying U.S. concerns (4 August 1953).. . .................... 
B-4 
2 . Joint Franco-American communique citing agreement whereby 
U.S. increases its aid to France in prosecution of its efforts 
against Viet Minh (30 September 1953) ..•• · ........... ........... . . 
B- 5 
3. 
Eisenhower emphasizes support of French is to avoid the tragedy 
of U.S. getting involved on large scale in Southeast Asia 
(10 February 1954) .... . ..... . .. . .. ... . . .. . .. .. ... ... .... ....... .. . 
B- 5 
4. 
Secretary of State presents a most revealing assessment of 
administration' s thinking on Indochina and the threat of Red 
China . 
He cites exp~nsion of communist domination, the in-
creased dangers to other nee.rby countries , the loss of food 
supply to Japan and India, the strategic location of Indochina 
and the military bases as paramount concerns (29 March 1954 ).. . . .. 
B-6 
5. Alfred l~ Sesne Jenkins (Orficer in Charge, Chinese Political 
Affairs) discusses Chinese Communist regime and its relation-
ship to Soviet Union (2 April 1954)... .. ... .. .. ... ... ............. 
B-9 
6. 
President states "fe.lling domino" principle loses people and 
strategic resources to communism and threatens Australia in 
comments on i mportance of Indochina to free world. 
He responds 
to Sen. John Kennedy ' s expressed position on a guarantee of 
independence needed to justify U. S. effort (7 April 1954) ......... 
B- IO 
7. 
Under Secretary Smith indicates vital basic reason for 
Indochina ' s importance i s communist expansion, and reiterates 
"domino" theory and strategic r esources (19 April 1954)........... 
B-12 
8 . 
Secretary of State Dulles r eports on London- Paris conversations 
on free world interests; advocates collective defense for 
Indochina as U. S. solution to communist threat (19 April 1954). ... 
B-l3 
9 . 
State Department comments on a speech by Vice President Nixon 
by r eferring to stated U. S. policy of lIunited action" 
(17 April 195!') . . ... ........ . .. ... .. , ............ . ............... . 
B-1 
B-14 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
10. 
Dulles sumrr~rizes U.S. position on Indochina in light of 
Geneva : 
comounization of the civil war; U.S. intervention; 
French arcistice; collective security; possibility of U. S. 
i ntervention (7 May 1954) . " . ............ '" . . . . . .... . ... .. . .. . .. 
B-15 
11. 
Eisenhower assesses progress at the Geneva Conference; cites 
'plans for collective security arrangement in Southeast Asia 
(5 /·lay 1954). .................... . ........ . ............ . ..... . .. . 
B-16 
12 . 
Eisenhower r eaffirms his "domino" concerns in r esponse to 
press questioning (12 May 1954) . . . ................. . ............. 
B-18 
13. 
Secretary of State Dulles analyzes developments to date in 
Indochina; he discusseS the conditions under which U.S. would 
intervene directly (11 June 1954) .. . .... .. . ......... . ..... ...... . 
B-18 
14. 
Eisenhower states U. S. position on Geneva Accords 
(2l July 1954) . .. .. . . . ... . . .. .. . . . . . ... . . . .. . . .. . .. ... .. . ... . . . .. 
B-20 
15. 
Text of the declaration (21 July 1954) ..... . ..................... 
B-23 
16. U. S. -French communique announcing desire to aid directly 
the newly independent states of Cambodia, Laos , and Vietnam 
(29 September 1954) ........ . .......... . ..... . ....... . . . .......... 
B-25 
11. Eisenhower informs President of Vietnam's Council that aid 
"rill be conditioned on his government ' s giving the U.S. 
"assurance as to standard of perf'ormance" (23 October 1954) . .. . .. 
B-26 
18. 
Eisenhower notes but questions the moderation in Soviet policy; 
r efers to Diem ' s successes in South Vietnam (21 April 1956) ...... 
B-2? 
19· Assistant Secretary of State Robertson r estates American 
policy in Vietnam at a time of relative stability (1 June 1956) .• 
20 . 
Eisenho'.ler emphasizes role of' aid program in achieving Asian 
goals ; cites susceptibility o~ underdeveloped nations to 
B-28 
communist probings (21 May 1957) ....... .. ...... .. .... . . . ....... . . 
B-32 
21. 
Eisenhovier just1~ies foreign aid to American people as 
necessary for U.S. security ; cites its "returns" in Vietnam. 
(211(ay 1957) .. ....... ..... .. ....... . .. . ................. . .. . ... . 
B-33 
22 . 
Eisenhmler reports to the nation on the Rcd Chinese shelling 
of Quemoy; r elates U.S. security interests to Formosa ; cites 
lesson of Munich and the oilite.nt ste.te:lents of Chinese Com-
munists as requiring a firm U.S. stand (11 September 1958) ... .... 
B-35 
B-2 
23 · 
24. 
25· 
26. 
27· 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
Eisenhower attempts at news cop~erence to put communist 
aggression in perspective (1 October 1958) ... . .. .... . . .......... . 
Eisenhower in special message to Congress discusses co~unist 
threat to developing nations and need for U.S. aid to maintain 
collective defense (13 l-Ia.rcb 1959) . .... . ..... . .•..... . .. ... ..... 
EisenhOi'ler discusses importance of Vietnam to free world ; he 
ShOrlS specifically how its econooy compliments Japan I S 
(4 April 1959) ...•........ . . .. ........ .. . . .. . .......... . .. .. .... 
Eisenhm'ler stresses threat posed by economic and military 
power of China and Russia in defense of foreign aid 
(16 February 1960) . ... . ................ . ...•........ . . . ... .. .•.. 
Eisenhower reminds Diem of the responsibility that the 
Vietnamese people bave in safeguarding their independence 
(22 October 1960) . .. .. ..... . .... . .... . .....• ... .... .... ...... . .. 
B-3 
B- 42 
B- 43 
B- 46 
B- 51 
B-52 
17 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 I I 
B. 
Eisenho"Ter Administration 
1. 
President Eisenhower ' s Remarks at Governors ' Conference, August 4, 
1953, Public Pa~e rs of the Presidents, 1953, p. 540 : 
* * * 
. "I could go on enumerating every kind of problem that comes before 
us daily. 
Let us take , though, for example , one simple problem in the 
foreign field. 
You have seen the war in Indochina described variousl y 
as an Qutgrolyth of French colonialism and its French refusal to treat 
indigenous populations decently . 
You find it again described as a ",ar 
between the communists and the other elements in southeast Asia. 
But 
you have a confused idea of where it is l ocated -- Laos , or Cambodia, 
or S ia~, or any of the other countries that are involved. 
You don ' t 
}mOl" , really, why we are so concerned with the far-off southeast corner 
of Asia. 
"Why is it? 
Now, first of all, the last great population remalnlng 
in Asia that has not become dominated by the Kremlin, of course , is the 
sub-continent of India, including the Pakistan government . 
Here are 
350 million people still free . 
Now let us assume that we lose Indochina. 
If Indochina goes, several things happen right away. 
The l1alayan penin-
sula, the last little bit of the end hanging on dOlm there, would be 
scarcely defensible -- and tin and tungsten that y,:e so greatly value from 
that area would cease cOming. 
But all India vould be outflanked. 
Burma 
woul d certainly, in its weakene:d condition, be no defense . 
NOll, India is 
surrounded on that side by the Communist empire . 
Iran on its left is in 
a weakened condition. 
I believe I read in the paper this morning that 
Nossadegh I s move to\.ard getting rid of his parliament has been supported 
and"of course he was in that move supported by the Tudeh, which is the 
Communist Party of Iran. 
All of that \ieakening position around there is 
very ominous for the United States, because finally if we lost all that , 
how would the free world hold the rich empiFe of Indonesia? So you see, 
somewhere along the line , this must be blocked. 
It must be blocked now. 
That is lThat the French are doing. 
"So, when the United States votes $400 million to help that war, 
we are not voting for a giveaway program. 
We are voting for the cheapest 
way that we can to prevent the occurrence of somethipg that would be of 
the most terrible significance for the United States of America - - our 
security, our power and ability to get certain things ~e need from the 
riches of the Indonesian territory, and from southeast Asia. " 
* 
+;. * 
2. 
Joint Franco-Atterican Communique , Addltionai United States Aid for 
France and Indochin:a., September 30, 1.953. Department of State 
Bulletin, Octobe!' 12, 1953. P . 486 : 
B-4 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 20 11 
"The forces of France end the Associated States in Indochina have 
for 8 years been engaged in a bitter struggle to prevent the engulfment 
of Southeast Asia by the forces of international communism. 
The heroic 
efforts and sacrifices of these French Union allies in assuring the 
l iberty of the neli end independent states of Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam 
has earned the anmarati on and support of the f ree world. 
In recognition 
of the French Union effort the United States Government has in the past 
furnished aid of various kinds t o the Governments of France and the 
Associated States to assist in bringing the long struggle to an early 
and victorious conclusion. 
"The French Government is firmly resolved to carry out in full its 
declaration of July 3, 1953, by which is announced its intention of 
perfecting the independence of the three Associated States in Indochina, 
through negotiations with the Associated States . 
"Tbe Governments of France and the United States have nO\1 agreed 
that, in support of plans of the French GoverpJnent for the intensified 
prosecution of the war against the Viet Minh, the United States will make 
available to the French Government prior to December 31, 1954 additional 
financial resources not to exceed $385 million. 
This aid is in addition 
to funds already earmarked by the United States for aid to France and 
the Associated States . 
"The French Government is determined to ma..."!{e every effort to break 
up and destroy the regular enemy forces in Indochina. 
Toward this end 
the government intends to carry through, in close cooperation Hith the 
Cambodian, Laotian, and Vietnamese Governments, the plans for increasing 
the Associated States forces while increasing temporarily French forces 
to levels considered necessary to assure the success of existing military 
plans. 
The additional United States aid is designed to help make it 
possible to achieve these objectives with maximum speed and effectiveness . 
liThe increased french effort in Indochina will not entail any basic 
or permanent alteration of the French Government's plens and programs 
for its NATO forces . n 
3. 
President Eisenhower ' s News Conference Februer 10 1 
4 Public 
Paper s of the Presidents, 195 , p . 253: 
* * * 
tlQ. 
Daniel.Shorr, CBS Radio: 
t·1r . President, should your remarks on 
Indochina be con~trued as meaning that you are determined not · to become 
involved or, perhaps , more deeply involved in the .... /ar in Indochina, regard-
l ess of hm·, that war may go? 
"THE PRESIDE!rr. 
"'lell, I 2Ill not going to try to predict the drift of 
world events nm" and the course of world events over the next months . 
I 
say that I cannot conceive of a greater tragedy for America than to get 
heavily involved no~" in an all- out ~"ar in any of those regions , particularly 
y.'ith large units . 
B-5 
19 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"So what we are doing is supporting the Vietnamese and the French 
in their conduct of that war; because, as \1e see it, it is a case of 
independent and free nations operating against the encroachment of 
communism. " 
4. 
Address b Secreta 
Dulles before the Overseas Press Club of America 
at New York Cit on !-1arch 2 
1 
The Threat of a Red Asia. 
De art-
ment of State Bulletin. April 12, 195 ; p. 539 : 
"This provides a timely occasion for outlining the administration' s 
thinking about two related matters -- Indochina and the Chinese Communist 
regine . 
"Indochina is important for many reasons . First, and always first , 
are the hunan values . 
About 30 million people are seeking for themselves 
the dignity of self- government. 
Until a few years ago, they formed merely 
a French dependency. 
NOi", their three political units -- Viet- Nero, Laos , 
and Cambodia - - are exercising a considerable measure of independent 
political authority ~fithin the French Union. 
Each of the three is not .. 
recognized by the United States and by more than 30 other nations . 
They 
signed the Japanese peace treaty with us . 
Their independence is not yet 
complete. 
But the French Government last July declared its intention to 
complete that independence, and negotiations to consummate that pledge 
are actively under way. 
"The United States is ",atching this development with close attention 
and great sympathy. 
He do not forget that we were a colony that won its 
f reedom. 
We have sponsored in the Fhllippines a conspicuously successful 
develop~ent of political independence . 
We feel a sense of kinship with 
those everyv.'here who yearn for freedom. 
"The Communists are attempting to prevent the crderly development of 
independence and to confuse the issue before the " .. orld. 
The Communists 
have , in these matters , a regular line which Stalin laid down in 1924. 
"The schell'.e is to whip up the spirit of nationalism so that it 
becomes violent . 
That is done by professional agitators . 
Then the 
violence is enlarged by Communist military and technical leadership and 
the provision of military supplies . 
In these '1lays , international com-
munism gets a stranglehold on the people and it uses that power to 
' amalgamate ' the peoples into the Soviet orbit . 
'" Ana1gamation ' is Lenin 1 s and Stalin' s word to describe their process . 
" 'Ama1.gamation I is now being attempted in Indochina under the ostensible 
leadership of Ho Chi Minh . 
He was indoctrinated in Moscow. 
He became an 
associate of the Russian, Bor-odin, when the latter was organizing the Chinese 
Communist Party which was to bring China into the Soviet orbit . 
Then Ho 
transferred his activities to Indochina. 
B-6 
::"0 
• 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"12:lose fighting under the banner of Ho Chi Minh hsve largely 
been trained and equipped in Communist China . 
They are supplied with 
ar tillery and ammunition through the Soviet- Chinese Communist bloc . 
Captured materiel shows that much of it was fabricated by the Skoda 
l-lunition Works in Czechoslovakia and transported across Russia and 
Siberia and then sent through China into Viet··Nam. 
l-111itary supplies 
for the Communist armies have been pouring into Viet-Nam at a steadily 
incr easing rate . 
"Military and technical guidance is supplied by an estimated 
2, 000 Communist Chinese . 
'Ihey function with the forces of Ho Chi Minh 
in key positions -- in staff sections of the High Command, at the 
division level, and in specialized units such as signal, engineer, 
artillery, and transportation. 
"In the present stage, the Communists in Indochina use nationaJ.-
istic anti-French slogans to 'Hin local support . 
But if they achieved 
military or political success, it is certain that they would subject 
the people to a cruel Communist dictatorship taking its orders from 
Peiping and Mosco' •• 
"The tragedy vTould not stop there . If the Communist forces lvon 
uncontested control over Indochina or any substantial part thereof, 
they would surely resume the same pattern of aggression against other 
free peoples in the area. 
"The propagandists of Red China and Russia make it apparent that 
the purpose is to dominate all of Southeast Asia. 
"Southeast Asia is the so-called ' rice bowl ' which helps to feed 
the densely populated region that extends from I ndia to Japan. 
I t is 
r ich in many raw materials, such as tin, oil, rubber, and iron are. 
I t offers industrial Japan potentially important markets and sources of 
ral" materials . 
"The area has great strategic value. 
Southeast Asia is astride 
the most direct and best- developed sea and air routes between the Pacific 
and South Asia. It has major naval and eir bases . 
Communist control of 
Southeast Asia would carry a grave threat to the Philippines, Australia, 
and New Zealand, with whom we have treaties of mutual assistance. The 
enti re Western Pacific area, including the so- called ' offshore isl and 
chain,' would be strategi cally endangered. 
"President Eisenho".-er appraised the situation last Wednesday 
(t.iarch 24) when he said that the area is of ' +,ranscendent importance. ' 
"The United States has shmm in many ways its sympathy for the 
gaJJ.ant struggle being ,,'aged in Indochina by French forces and those of 
the Associated States . 
Congress has enabled us to provide material aid 
t o the established governments and their peoples . 
Also, our di plomacy 
has sought to deter Communist China from open aggression in that area • 
B-7 
• 
21 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3,3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"President Eisenho ..... er: in his address of April 16, 1953, explained 
that a Korean armistice would be a fraud if it merely released aggressive 
armies for attack eIsel/here. 
I said last SepteI!iber that if Red China 
sent its o~n army into Indochina, that would result in grave conse-
quences which might not be confined to I ndochina. 
,rRecent statements have been designed to impress upon potential 
aggressors that aggression might lead to action at places and by means 
of free- world choosing, so that aggression would cost more than it 
could gain. 
"The Chinese ConmtU!lists have, in fact, avoided the direct use of 
their mm Red armies in open aggression against Indochina. 
They have, 
however, largely stepped up their support of the aggression in that area. 
I ndeed, they promote that aggression by all means short of open invasion. 
"Under all the circumstances it seems desirable to clarify further 
the United States position. 
IIUnder the conditions of today, the imposition on Southeast Asia 
of the political system of Communist Russia and its Chinese Communist 
aJ.ly, by whatever means, 'muld be a grave threat to the whole free com-
munity. 
The United States feels tbat that possibility should not be 
passively accepted but should be met by united action. 
This might involve 
serious risks . 
But these risks are far less than those that will face us 
a few years from now if we dare not be resolute today. 
liThe free nations want peace . 
However, peace is not had merely by 
wanting it . 
Peace has to be worked for and planned for . 
Sometimes it 
is necessary to take risks to win peace just as it is necessary in war 
to take risks to '-fin victory. The chances for peace are' usually bettered 
by letting a potential aggressor know in advance where his aggression 
could lead him. 
"I hope that these statements which I make here tonight will serve 
the cause of peace. 
"Let me noy/ discuss our political relations with Red China, taking 
first the matter of recognition • 
. "The United States does not recognize the Chinese Communist regime. 
Tbat is well known. 
But the reasons seem not so well known. 
Some think 
that there are no reasons and that we are actuated purely by emotion. 
Your Government believes that its position is soberly rational. 
1tLet me first recall that diplomatic recognition is a voluntary 
act. 
One count~- has no right to demand ~ecognition by another. 
Generally, it is useful that'there should be diplomatic intercourse 
between those who exercise de fecto governmental authority, and it is 
well established that recognition does not imply moral approval. 
B-8 
12 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"President Monroe, in his famous message to Congress, denounced 
the expansionist and despotic system of Czarist Russia and its allies. 
But be said that it \oiould nevertheless be our policy I to consider the 
government de facto as the legitimate government for us .' That has 
indeed been the general United States policy, and I believe that it is 
a sound general policy. 
However, where it does not serve our interests, 
we are free to vary f!om it . 
If In relation to Communist China, we are forced to take account of 
the fact that the Chinese Communist regime has been consistently and 
viciously hostile to the United States . 
If A typical Chinese Communist pamphlet reads : 
' We lfust Hate America, 
because She is the Chinese People ' s Implacable Enemy. I 
' He Hust Despise 
America because it is a Corrupt Imperialist Nation, the World Center of 
Reaction and Decadency. ' 
'We t-iust I..ook down upon America because She is 
a Paper Tiger and Entirely Vulnerable to Defeat . ' 
!lBy print, by radio, by drama, by pictures, with all the propaganda 
skills ,~hich connnunism has devised, such themes are propagated by the 
Red rulers . 
They vent their hatred by barbarous acts , such as seizures 
and imprisonments of Americans . 
"Those responsible for United States policy must ask and anS\Oler 
'Hill it help our country if, by recognition, ""e give increased prestige 
and influence to a regime that actively attacks our vital interests? ' 
I can find only the ans .. :er: 
' No. ,II 
* * * 
5. 
Address by Alfred Ie Sesne Jenkins, Officer in Charge, Chinese 
Political Affairs , before the American Acade~v of Political and 
Social Science 
Philadel hie Pa. 
Present United States Polic 
Tmlerd China A ril 2 
1 
De artment of State Bulletin 
April 26 , 195 ,p. 
2 : 
"In recent years ,1e have often beard it said that more heat than 
light has been cast on the China question. 
I am not surprised at the 
beat, nor do I object to it, provided there is also sufficient light . 
The fate of one-fourth of the world' s population is not a matter ",hicb 
. can be taken lightly, and the addition of China ' s vast material and 
manpm'ler resources to the Soviet bloc is a matter involving not only the 
security interests of the United States but those of the entire free 
world. 
I do not'see how one can help feeling strongly about these 
matters . 
We need not apologize that our thinking about China is charged 
with feeling. 
National policies are an expression of national interests 
concerning \olhich there is naturally I:lllch feeling, and our policies are 
an expression both of what \Oie are and of what ",e \oj-ant . 
We are a nation 
of free peoples . 
He want to rem3.in free to pursue in peace our proper 
national destiny, and we want the same freedom and rights for others. 
B-9 
23 
. I 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
"We do not believe that the Chinese Cormnunist regime represents the 
will of the people it controls . 
First capitalizing on the natural desire 
of the Chinese people to enjoy full recognition and respect for their 
inmortance in the world community) the regime then proceeded by its 
l l~an-to-one - side ' policy to betray the powerful Chinese longings' to 
stand up straight . It has folloHed slavishly ·.he leadership of the 
Soviet Union and attempted to emulate it in all its ways . ''lith the aid 
of thousands of Soviet advisers it has set about methodically to change 
the entire fabric of traditional Chinese culture, substituting com-
munism 's materialistic, atheistic doctrines ,.,.herein the state is the 
be-all and end-all and the individual its pawn . 
liThe regilne at first attracted considerable support, principally 
through its sponsorship of a land redistribution program, but is DOW , 
after establishment of the prerequisite pOlice-state controls, taking 
the land a't!ay from the O'.mers in the seme collectivization process which 
is familiar in other Communist countries and which invariably has 
brought suffering in its wake . 
China ' s much advertised 'New Democracy ' 
is of course in reality 'old communism . ' 
"From its inception the regime has proclaimed a 'lean-to-one-
side' policy in foreign affairs , and has left no doubt about its dedica-
tion to the proposition of ·world Communist revolution under the leader-
ship of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics . '1hile its 'leaning-to-
one-side ' has not brought it to the position of complete 'prostration-
to-one-side' characteristic of the Eastern European Soviet satellites , 
there is not the slightest evidence that this indicates any separatist 
t endencies . 
The difference in status of Peiping in its relationship 
with Hoscow (as distinguished from that of the Eastern European satel-
lites) is rather due chiefly to its having come to pO\,ler without benefit , 
except in 1·1anchuria, of Soviet Army occupation; to the prestige of Mao 
Tse-tung, arising from his long history of l eadership of Chinese com-
munism and his literary contributions to theoretical communism; to 
China ' s assumption of the role of leadership ...• II 
* * * 
6. 
President EisenhoHer ' s News Conference . Anril 7 , 1954 , Public 
Papers of the Presidents, 1954, p . 382: 
* * * 
" Q •. Robert Richards, Copley Press : 
Mr . President, vlould you mind 
commenting on the strategic importance of Indochina to the free v;orld? 
I think there har been, across the count~, so~e lack of understanding 
on just what it means to us . 
"THE PRESTI>EIrr . 
general ~'hen you talk 
You hav.e, of course, 
about such things . 
both the specific and the 
"First of all, you have the specific value of a locality in its 
production of materials that the world needs . 
B-10 
?l! . 
• T . 
• 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlivc Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"Then you have the possibility that many human beings pass under 
a dictatorship that is inimical to the free world. 
"Finally, you have broader considerations that might follow what 
you ~ould call the ' falling domino' principle . 
You have a row of 
dominoes set up, you knock over the first one, and what will happen to 
the last one is the certainty that it '>"ill go over very quickly . 
So you 
could have a beginnin of a disintegration that would bave the roost 
profound influences . 
"Now , \11 th 
particular area 
very important . 
and so on . 
respect to the first one} t\fO of the i terns from this 
that the ,,'orid uses are tin and tungsten . 
They are 
There are others, of course, the rubber plantations 
"Then with respect to more people passing under this domination, 
Asia, after all, has already lost some 450 million of its peoples to 
the Communist dictatorship, and we simply can't afford greater losses . 
"But when we come to the possible sequence of events , the loss of 
Indochina, of Burma, of Thailand, of the Peninsula, and Indonesia 
f ollowing, nm .... you begin to talk about areas that not only multiply the 
disadvantages that you would suffer through loss of materials, sources 
of materials, but now you are talking really about millions and millions 
and millions of people . 
"Finally, the geographical position achieved thereby does many 
things . It turns the so-called island defensive chain of Japan, Formosa, 
of the Philippines and to the south' .... ard; it moves in to threaten 
Australia and Ne,,· Zealand . 
nIt ta.l{es away, in its economic aspects , that region that Japan 
must have as a trading area or Japan, in turn, will have only one pl ace 
in the world to go -- that is, toward the Communist areas in order to 
live . 
"So, the possible consequences of the loss are just incalculable 
to t he free world . " 
* * * 
"Q. 
Robert G. Spivack, New York Post : 
Hr . President, do you 
agree with Senator Kennedy that independence must be guaranteed the 
people of I ndochina in order to justify an all-out eff ort there? 
liTHE PRESIDENT . 
\{ell, I don ' t knov;, of course , exactly in what 
wB:y a Senator "'as talking about this thing. 
TIl will say this : 
for many years , in taLl{ing to different 
countries, different governments , I have tried to insist on this 
urincinle : 
no outside country can come in and be really helpful 
~ess- it is dOing something that the local people went . 
B-ll 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
"Now, let me call your attention to this independence theory. 
Senator Lodge, on my instructions, stood up in the United Netions and 
offered one country independen'ce if they would just simply pass a 
r esolution saying they \vanted it, or at least said, ' I would work for 
it. ' 
They didn ' t accept it . 
~o I can't say that the associated states 
want independence in the sense that the United States is independent . 
I do not know what they want . 
"I do say this; 
the aspiretions of those peopl e must be met, 
otherwise there is in the l ong run no final answer to the problem. 
"Q. 
J oseph Dear, Capital Times ; 
Do you favor bringing this 
I ndochina situation before the United Nations? 
liTHE PRESIDENT . 
I really can ' t say . 
I wOuldn ' t want to comment 
at too great a length at this moment , but I do believe this : 
this is 
the kind of thing that must not be handled by one.nation trying to act 
alone ." 
7. 
* * * 
Remarks Made by Under Secretary Smith in Answer to Questions 
Prepared for Use on "The American Heekh over the CBS Television 
Network A ril 11 1 54 
on the 1m ortance of Indochina De artment 
of State Bulletin, April 19, 195 ,p . 
9: 
IlQ. 
rlby is Indochina important to Americans? 
"NR. St-IITH : 
For one vital basic and two speci al additional 
reasons . 
I n the first place, t he vital basic question is : 
Shall we 
or can the free world allow its position anywhere and par.ticularly in 
Asia to be eroded piece by piece? Can we allow, dare we permit , expansion 
of COffimunist Chinese control further into Asia? Propagandists of the 
Soviet Uni on and of Communist China have made it clear that their purpose 
is to dominate all of Southeast Asia. 
Remember that this region helps 
to feed an tmmense population . It stretches all the way' from India to 
J apan . It's a region that is rich in raw materials , full of tin, oil, 
rubber , iron are . 
"No .. ;, from the strategic point of view, it lies across the most 
direct sea and air route between the Pacific and South Asia. 
There are 
major naval e.nd air bases located in the area. 
Communist control of 
Southeast Asia woul.d threaten the Philippines, Australia, and New Zea-
land directly , ..... ould threaten t-Ialaya; it v,ould have a very profound 
effect upo~ the economy of other countrips in the area, even as far as 
J apen. 
"Q. 
The President ) at his ne''''s conference on April 7, described 
the process of Co~unist conquest as the ' falling domino ' principle . 
I s 
that a good description of the threat in Southeast Asia? 
B-12 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
"l>IR . SMITH: 
Yes, it is . If Indochina is lost to the Communists, 
Burma is threatened, Thailand is threatened, the ~!alay Peninsula is 
exposed, Indonesia is subject to the gravest danger, and, in addition to 
these countries and their possible loss , there is the possible loss of 
food source . 
I have already mentioned the strategic raw materials , the 
bases in the area' and, 'tlhile they are of enormous importance , the most 
important thing of all is the possible loss of millions and millions 
of people ''''ho ,'fould disappear behind the Iron Curtain. 
There are enough 
millions behind the Iron Curtain now . 
So what ' s at stake in Indochina? 
It is the human freedom of the masses of people for all that enormous 
area of the world ." 
* * * 
8 . 
Statement b Secretar Dulles Made at Au us 
Geor ia A ril 19 
195 , on Conversations in London and Paris Concerning Indochina, 
Department of State Bulletin, May 3, 1954, p . 668: 
"I have reported to President Eisenho"rer on my recent trip to 
London and PariS , where I discussed the position in Indochina. 
"I fOlmd in both Capitals recognition that the armed Communist 
threat endangered vital free world interest and made it appropriate that 
the free nations most immediately concerned should explore the possibility 
of establishing a collective defense . 
This same recognition had already 
been expressed by other nations of the Southeast Asian area. 
"The Communists in Viet-Nam, spurred on by Red China, have acted 
on the assumption that a quick, easy victory at Dien-Bien-Phu would open 
the door to a rapid Communist advance to domination of the entire South-
east Asian area. 
They concluded they were justified in r ecklessly 
squandering the lives of their subjects to conquer this strongpoint so 
as to confront the Geneva Conf'erence with what could be portrayed as 
both a military and political victory for communism. 
liThe gall ant defenders of Dien-Bien-Phu have done their part to 
assure a frustration of the Communist strategy . 
They have taken a toll 
such that , from a military standpoint, the attackers already lost more 
t han they could win . 
From a political standpoint , the defenders of 
Dien-Bien-Phu have dramatized the struggle for freedom so that the free 
world sees more clearly than ever before the issues that are at stake 
and once again is drawing closer together in unity of purpose . 
"The Commlmi~t rulers 8.l·e learning again that the ,,,rill of the free 
is not broken by 'riolence or intimi dation . 
liThe brutal Soviet conquest of Czechoslovakia did not disintegrate 
the will of the \~est . 
It led to t he formation of the North Atls.ntic 
Treaty alliance . 
"The violent conquest of the China mainland followed by the Korean 
aggression did not paralyze the w}ll of the free nations . It l ed to a 
B-13 
I 
• 
Declassified per E.xecutive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
series of Pacific mutual security pacts and to the creation under the 
North Atlantic Treaty of a po'.,'erful defensive force - in-being . 
liThe violent battles not-l being waged in Viet -Ne.m and the armed 
aggressions against Laos and Cambodia are not creating ~~y spirit of 
defeatism. 
On tbe contrary, they are rousing the free nations to measures 
",'hieh we hope ""ill be sufficiently timely and vigorous to preserve these 
vital areas from Communist domination . 
. "In t his course lies the best hope of achieving at Geneva the 
r estoration of peace with freedom and justice." 
9· 
* * * 
Statement by J mneson Parker, Department Press Officer , Hade to 
Corres ondents A ril 17 1954 on U.S. Policy Toward Indochina 
Department of State Bulletin, April 2 , 195 ,p. 
23: 
"Certain remarks with regard to United States policy toward Indo-
china have been attributed to e high Government official L¥ice President 
Nixo£!. 
The contents of the speech referred to and questions and 
answers "'hich follO'lled were off the record, but a complete report of the 
speech has been made available to the State Department . 
"The speech enunciated no new United States policy with regard to 
I ndochina. 
I t expressed full agreement with and support for the pol icy 
with respect to Indochina previously enunciated by the President and 
t he Secretary of State . 
"That policy ~vas authoritatively set forth by the Secretary of 
State in his speech of March 29, 1954, in which he said: 
'Under the conditions of today, the impositi on on Southeast 
Asia of the political system of Communist Russia and its Chinese Com-
munist ally, by whatever means , ,,!ould be a grave threat to the "'hole 
free community. 
The United States feels tbat that possibility should 
not be passively accepted but should be met by united action . 
This 
might involve serious risks . 
But these risks are far less than those 
that will face us a fe'" years from now if ',:e dare not be resolute today . I 
"In regard to a hypothetical question as to whether United States 
forces should be sent to Indochina in the event of Fpench withdrawal, 
t he high Government official categorically rejected the premise of 
possible French withdrawal . 
Insofar as the use of United States forces 
in I ndochi.l1.a '.-Tas concerned, he was stating a cl1urse of possible action 
which he was personally prepared to support under a highly unlikely 
hypothesis . 
tIThe answer to the question correctly emphasized the fe.ct that the 
interests of the United States an,d other free nations are vitally 
B-14 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
involved with the interests of France and the Associated states in 
resisting CO!nmlUlist domination of Indochina. " 
10. 
Address by Secretary Dulles Delivered to the Nation over Radio and 
Television, I·jay 7, 1954, The Issues at Ge,eva, Department of State 
Bulletin, 1·lay 17, 1954, p . 740 end p . 744: 
* * * 
"Let me turn nOif to the problem of Southeast Asia . 
In that great 
peninsula a'ld the islands to the south live nearly 200 million people 
in 7 states -- Burma; the three states of Indochina -- Laos , Cambodia, 
and Viet -N8I:l; Thailand; Malaya; and Indonesia. 
Communist conquest of 
this area would seriously imperil the free world position in the Western 
Pacific . 
It would , among other things, endanger the Philippines, 
Australia, and New Zealand, with all of which the. United States has 
mutual-security treaties. It .... ·ould deprive Japan of iJnportant foreign 
markets und sources of food and rau materials . 
"In Viet-Nam, one of the three Indochinese states, war has been 
going on since 1946 . 
When it began , Indochina Has a French colony just 
liberated fro~ Japanese occupation . 
The war started priJnarily as a war 
for independence . 
Hhat started as a civil ,,,,ar has now been taken over 
by international communism for its own purposes . 
Ho Chi Minh, the 
Communist leader in Viet-Nam, was trained in t-ioscow and got his first 
revolutionary e)C1Jerience in China . " 
* * 
ie· 
"In Indochina, the situation is far more complex . 
The present 
conditions there do not provide a suitable basis for the United States 
t o participate ~ith its armed forces . 
"The situation may perhaps be clarified as a result of the Geneva. 
Conference . 
The French have stated their desire for an armistice on 
honorable terms and under proper safeguards . 
If they can conclude a 
settlement on terms which do not endanger the freedom of the peoples of 
Viet-Nam, this would be a real·contribution to the cause of peace in 
Southeast Asia . 
But we would be gravely concerned i f an armistice or 
cease-fire were reached at Geneva "'hich would provide a road to a Com-
munist takeover a'ld further aggression . 
If this occurs , or if hos -
t ilities continue, then the need -,-Till be even more urgent to create the 
conditions for united action in defense of the area . 
"I n making cOlllIlli tments '\,lhich might involve the use of armed f'orce , 
the Congress is a f'ull partner . 
Only the Congress can declare .... 'ar . 
President Eisenhower has repeatedly emphasized that he ~rould not take 
military action in Indochina ',.;i thout the support of Congress . 
Further-
more , he has made clear that he would not seek that .unless , in his 
opinion, there ,,{ould be an adequate collective effort based on genuine 
mutuality of purpose in defending vital interests . 
B-15 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 I I 
"A great effort is being J:1ade by Cormnunist propaganda to portray 
i t as something evil if Asia joins with the nations of the Americas and 
Europe to get assistance which will help the peoples of Asia to secure 
their liberty. 
These Communist nations have, in this connection , 
adopted the slogan ' Asia for the Asians . ' 
"The Japanese war lords adopted a similar slogan when they sought 
to subject Asia to the~r despotic rule . 
The similar theme of ' Europe 
for the Europeans I 
..... 'as adopted by Mr . 1101otov at the Berlin Conference 
when he proposed that the Europeans should seek security by arrangements 
which would send the Unitett states back home . 
"Great despotic powers have always known that they could impose 
their will and gain their conquests if the free nations stand apart and 
none helps the other . 
"It should be observed that the Soviet Communist aggression in 
Europe took place only against countries which had no collective security 
arrangements . 
Since the organization of the NOrth Atlantic Treaty, 
there has been no successful aggression in Europe , 
"Of course , it is of the utmost importance that the United States 
participation in creating collective security in Asia should be on a 
basis ' ..... hich recognizes fully the aspirations and cultures of the Asian 
peoples . 
We have a material and industrial strength which they l ack and 
which is an essential ingredient of security . 
Also they have cultural 
and spiritual values of their o ..... ·n which make them our equals by every 
moral standard . 
"The United States , as the first colony of modern history to win 
independence for itself, instinctively shares the aspirations for 
liberty of all dependent and colonial peopl es . 
We .... /ant to help, not 
hinder the spread of l iberty. 
"We do not seek to perpetuate t~estern coloniaJ.1sm and we find even 
more intolerable the new imperialist colonialism of c~Jmunism . 
IIThat is the spirit that animates us . If 'We remain true to t hat 
spirit, we can face the future ~.;ith confidence that ".-e shall be in 
harmony with t hose moral forces ,·!bich ultimately prevail. It 
11. 
President EisenhO\-:er ' s News Conference l-ia 
5 1954 Public 
Papers of the Presidents, 195 ,p . 
51: 
* * * 
"United States foreign policy has consistently suPP!?rted the 
principles on which .. 'as fotmded the United Nations . 
The basic expression 
of this policy ,las the Vendenberg resol1.\tion in 1948 . 
The United states 
believes in assuring the peace and integrity of nations through collective 
B-16 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
action and, in pursuance of the United Nations principle , has entered 
into regional security agre~~ents with other nations . 
Examples are the 
Inter-American Agreement , the NATO Agreement , and numerous pacts in the 
Pacific . 
These arrangements are invariably to assure the peaceful 
security of the contracting nations and to prevent likelihood of attack ; 
they are not arrMgements designed primarily f')r waging war . 
"The Geneva conference , now 9 da.ys old , has produced no surprises . 
The expressed fears of some have proved unfounded . 
"It has not been a ' Five-Po .. :er ' conference as the Soviet Union 
tried to make it . 
"It has not involved establishing express or implied diplomatic 
recognition by the United States of the Chinese Communist aggressors . 
"The Korean phase of the conference has been organized . 
Here the 
Communists came up with a scheme for Korean unification which was a 
Chinese copy of the Soviet scheme for the unification of Germany. 
Under 
their proposal no election mea.sures could be taken without Communist 
consent, and there could be no impartial supervision of the election 
conditions or of the voting. 
"This scheme was rejected for Germany. 
Secretary Dulles tells me 
that is equally unacceptable to the Republic of Korea and to the 
United Nations members which took part in the Korean war under the 
United Nations Command now represented at Geneva. 
"The Indochina phase of the conference is in process of being 
organized and the issues have not yet been clarified. 
In this matter 
a large measure of initiative rests viith the governments of France , 
Viet-Nam, Laos , and Cambodia, ""hich are the countries most directly 
concerned . 
"Meanwhile , plans are proceeding for the realization of' a Southeast 
Asia security arrangement . 
This was publicly suggested by Secretary 
Dulles in his address of March 29 . 
Of course , our principal allies 
were advised in advance . This proposal of the Secretary of Stat e was 
not a ne ..... ' one ; it was merely reaffirmation of the principles that have 
consistently guided our post-i ... ar foreign policy and a reminder to 
interested Asia~ friends that the United states was prepared to join 
with others in the application of these principles to tbe threatened 
area. Nost of the free nations of the area and others directly con-
cerned have shmm affinnative interest , and the conversations are 
actively proceed Lng. 
"Obviously, it • .... as ne'Fer expected tbat this collective security 
arrangement would spring into existence overnight . 
There are too many 
important problems to be resolved. 
But there is a general sense of 
urgency. 
The fact that such an organization is in the process of forma-
tion could have en important bearing upon what happens at Geneva during 
the Indochina phase of the conference . 
B-17 
31 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
liThe countries of the area are now thinking in constructive 
terms , i.hich include the indispensable concept of collective security . 
Progress in this matter has been considerable, and I am convinced that 
further progress will continue to be made .
1I 
* * * 
12. 
President Eisenhower ' s News Conference Ma 12 154 Public 
Papers of the Presidents, 195 ,p . 
73 : 
* * 
-II" 
"Q. 
George Herman, CBS Radio : 
V~ . President, since we seem to be 
going into the past , a fe .... 1 \-reeks ago you told us of your theory of 
dominoes about Indochina, the neck of the bottle --
liTHE PRESIDEHT . 
Yes . 
'q. Mr . Herman: 
Since the fall of Dien Bien Phu, there has been a 
certain runount of talk of doing without Indochina. 
Hould you tell us 
your administration ' s position; is it still indispensable to the defense 
of southeast Asia? 
liTHE PRESIDEnT . 
Again I forget ""'hether it was before this body I 
talked about the cork and the bottle . 
Well , it is very important , and 
t he great idea of setting up an organism is so as to defeat the domino 
result . 
Hhen, each standing alone, one falls , it has the effect on the 
next , and finally the whole row is down . 
you are trying, through a 
unifying influence, to build that row of dominoes so they can stand the 
f all of one , if necessary . 
IINow, " so far as I am concerned, I don ' t think the free world ought 
t o write off Indochina . 
I think we ought to all look at this thing with 
some optimism and some determination . 
I repeat that long faces and 
defeatism don 't win battles . " 
* * * 
13 . 
Address by the Secretary of State, June 11, 1954, (Excerpt) The 
Threat of Direct Chinese Comnunist Intervention in Indochina, 
Department of State Bulletin, June 28 , 1954, p . 971: 
"At"the moment, I ndochina is t he area where interne.tional communism 
nost vigorously seeks expansion under the leadership of Ho Chi l4inh . 
Last year Pl'esidE':l.t Eisenhov:er , in his great ' Chance for Peace ' addres-i , 
said that ' aggression i n Korea and Southeast Asia are threats to the 
\-Thole free COlr.!!l\l!lity to be met by \l!lited action . ' 
But the French wer e 
t hen opposed to il'hat they called I internationalizing ' the, .rar . 
They 
preferred to treat it as a civil war of rebellion . 
HOl-/eyer , on July 3 , 
1953, the French" Government mede a public declaration of independence 
for the three Associated States , and in September it adopted the so-called 
B-18 
32. 
Navarre 
forces . 
plan . 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
plan, which 
The United 
contemplated a rapid buildup of national native 
States then agreed to underwrite the costs of this 
"But last winter the fighting ... ·as intensified and the long strain 
began to tell in terms of the attitude of the French people toward a 
war then in its eighth year . 
Last J.1arch, after the siege of Dien-Bien-
Phu had begun, I rene,Jed President Eisenho,,:er ' s proposal that ... 'e seek 
conditions which would permit a united defense for the area. 
I went to 
Europe on this mission, and it seemed that there was agreement on our 
proposal . 
But when we moved to translate that proposal into reality, 
some of the parties held back because they had concluded that any steps 
to create a united defense should await the results of the Geneva Con-
ference. 
"Meanwhile, the burdens of a collective defense in Indochina have 
mounted . 
The Communists have practiced dilatory negotiating at Geneva, 
while intensifying their fighting in Indochina . 
The French and national 
forces feel the strain of mounting enemy power on their front and of 
political uncertainty at their r ear . 
I told the Senate Foreign Rela-
tions Committee last 'I1eek that the situation is grave but by no means 
hopeless . 
The future depends largely on decisions awaited at Paris, 
London, and Geneva . 
"The situation in Indochina is not that of open military aggression 
by the Chinese Communist regime. 
Thus, in Indochina, the problem is 
one of restoring tranquillity in an area where disturbances are fomented 
fram Communist China, but where there is no open invasion by Communist 
China. 
This task of pacifica.tion, in our opinion, cannot be successfully 
met merely by unilateral armed intervention . 
Some other conditions need 
to be established. 
Throughout these Indochina developments , the United 
States has held to a stable and consistent course and has made clear the 
conditions which, in its opinion, might justify intervention. 
These 
conditions were and are (1) an invitation from the present lawful 
authorities ; (2) clear assurance of complete independence to Laos , Cam-
bodia, and Viet-Nam; (3) evidence of concern by the United Natiorls ; 
(4) a joining in the collective effort of some of the other nations of 
the area; and (5) assurance that France will not itself ... rithdra\1 from 
t he battle unt il it is vron . 
IIOnly if these conditions were realized could the President and the 
Congress be justified in asking the American peopl e to make the sacri-
fices incident to comnitting our Nation, wit h others , to using force t o 
help to restore peace in the area. 
IIAnother problem night, however, arise . If the Chinese Communist 
r egime ,,,ere to show in Indochina or else ... ·here that it is determined to 
pursue the path of overt military aggression , then the situation " .. auld 
be different and another i ssue would emerge . That contingency has 
already been referred to publicly by the President and myself . 
The 
B-19 
33 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
President, in his April 16 , 1953, address, and I myself, in en address 
of September 2, 1953, made clear that the United states .,ould take a 
grave vie'y of any future overt military Chinese Communist aggression in 
relation to the Pacific or Southeast Asia area. 
Such an aggression 
would threaten isla~d and peninsular positions which secure the United 
States and its aJlies . 
"If such overt military aggression occurred, that would be a 
deliberate threat to the United States itself. 
The United States would 
of course invoke the processes of the United Nations and consult with 
its allies . 
But we could not escape ultimate responsibility for deci-
sions closely touching our own security and self-defense . 
"There are some, particularly abroad, who seem to assume that the 
attitude of the United States flm'fs from a desire for a general war 
with Com."D.unist China. That is clearly false . If ,",'e had wanted such a 
war, it could easily have been based on the presence of Chinese aggres-
sors in Korea. 
But last July, in spite of difficulties '.yhich at times 
seemed insuperable, lye concluded a Korean 8.l'1ll.istice ''lith COlllI!lunist 
China. 
Hmr could it be more surely demonstrated that we have both the 
'""ill to make peace and the competence to make peace? 
"Your Government ,·rants peace, and the American people want peace . 
But should there ever be openly launched an attack that the American 
people uould clearly recognize as a threat to our own security, then 
the right of self-preservation would demand that we -- regardless of any 
other count~y -- meet the issue squarely. 
"It is the task of statesmanship to seek peace and deter war, .... rhile 
at the same time praserving vital national interests. Under present 
conditions that dual result is not easy to achieve, and it cannot be 
achieved at all unless your Government is backed by a people who are 
.... rilling, if need be, to sacrifice to preserve their vi tal interests . 
ItAt the Geneva Conference I said: 
'Peace is always easy to achieve 
by surrender.' Your Government does not propose to buy peace at that 
price . 
We do not believe that the Amer ica~ people want peace at that 
price . 
So long as that is our national '\'rill, and so long as that will 
be backed by a capacity for effective action, our Nation c~~ face the 
future with that calm confidence which is the due of those who, in a 
troubled .:orld, hold fast that which is good . If 
14. President Eisenho.rer ' s News Conference, July 21, 1954, Public 
Papers of tr~ Presidents, 1954, p . 642 : 
* * * 
rtffieadini/ I am glad, of course, that agreement has been reached 
at Geneva to stop the bloodshed in Indochina. 
The United States has not 
B-20 
• 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
been a belligerent in the war in which thousands of brave men, "rhile 
defending freedom, heve died during the pest 1 years . 
"The primary responsibility for the settlement in Indochina rested 
with those nations \lhich participated in the fighting . 
"Our role at Geneva has been at all times to try to be helpful 
where desired, and to ·aid France and Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nan , to 
obtain a just and honorable settlement which will take into account the 
needs of the interested people . 
"Accordingly, the United States has not itself been a party to or 
bound by the decisions taken by the conference, but it is our hope that 
i t will lead to the establishment of peace consistent wi th the r ights 
and needs of the countries concerned . 
The agreement contains features 
which we do not like, but a great deal depends on how t hey work in 
practice . 
"The United States is issuing at Geneva a statement to the effect 
t hat it is not prepared to join in the conference declaration but , as 
l oyal members of the United Nations, we also say that in compli ance 
with the obligations and principles contained in article II of the 
United Nations Charter, the United States will not use force to disturb 
t he settlement . 
We also say that any reneual of Communist aggression 
would be vie'''ed by us as a matter of grave concern. 
"As evidence of our resolve to assist Cambodia and Laos to play . 
their parts in full independence and sovereignty, in the peaceful com-
munity of free nations, " .. e are requesting the agreement of the govern=nents 
of Cambodia and Laos to our appointment of an ambassador or minister to 
be r esident at their respective capitals . 
We already have a Chief of 
J.1issian at Saigon , the capital of Viet-Nan, and this embassy will , of 
course, be maintained. 
"The United States is actively pursuing discussions with other f r ee 
nations "with a view to the rapid organization of a coll ecti ve defense 
in southeast Asia in order to prevent further direct or indirect Com-
munist aggression in that general area . 
ffinds readini/" 
* * * 
" Q. 
Mrs . May Craig, Maine Papers : 
J.lr . President , President Rhee 
of Korea will be here soon . 
Do you regard the partition of Korea as 
permanent, short of war, and are you including, planning to i nclude , 
Kor ea and Free C'1ina in any kind of a southeast Asi a pact? 
"THE PRESIDENT . 
Well, of course , Korea is not in southeast Asia. 
"Already we have , you kno"" 
a treaty of mutual defense wi th Korea . 
I t has been enacted, it has been approved , by the Senate . 
B- 21 . 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"NO\OT , as I Wlderstand it, when the Korean war started, the purpose 
o~ the United Nations was to prevent any advance by ~orce into South 
Korea; they did do that. 
"I know of no one that has ever proposed that we go to war to ~ree 
Ndrth Korea. 
liAs it is, it is 'an unsatis~actory situation, exactly as exists in 
Germany, and now apparently is going to exist in part of I ndochina. 
"These are very Wlsatisfactory situations and, to my mind, will 
always give reason ~or aggravating situations that are di~~icult , at 
best . 
But there is no thought on the part of any o~ us to start an 
aggressive move ~or the freeing of that country." 
* * * 
"I have never felt that , except through these satellite excursions , 
that the COI:ll1lunist "..arld wants any \far at this time ; in other words , I 
don ' t believe they ~ould deliberately challenge us , challenge the free 
world, to a war of exhaustion . 
"So the problem, no rl.atter whether you happen to be ~ighting in 
one of these areas , remains the same . 
The loss of great areas through 
propaganda and deceit and subversion and coup d ' etat , and every means 
available to a secret, well-financed conspiracy, they are all there . 
I personally think that if there is one good that can come out of this 
v,'hole southeast Asian experience , it is this : to get the ~ree world to 
looking ~acts in the face , and to seeing what we must do, what we should 
do, what sacrifices we are ready to make, in order to preserve the 
esse~t ials o~ our system. 
"I think that when the freedom of a man in Viet-Nam or in China 
is taken away from him, I think our freedom has lost a little. 
I just 
don ' t believe that we can continue to exist in the world, geographically 
isolated as we are , 
i~ we just don ' t 
~ind a concerted, positive plan of 
keeping these free nat i ons so tightly bound together that none of them 
will give up; and if they are not ,·reakened internally by these other 
methods, I just don ' t believe they will give up . 
I believe ~e can hold 
them. 
"Q . 
Robert E. Clark, International News Service'; 
r,ir . President, 
along that line, a number of Congressmen today are branding the Geneva 
settlement as appeasement . 
Do you think there are any elements of 
appeasement in the cease-fire agreement? 
"THE PRESIDENT . 
Well, I hesitate, Nr . Clark, to use such ."ords , as 
I have told you so often . 
I find that so many v,"ords mean so many different 
things to different people . 
I would say this , as I said in my statement : 
this agreement , in certain of its features , is not satisfactory to us . 
It is not "'hat we .... ould have liked to have had • 
B-22 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"But I don ' t knov, when I em put up against it at this moment , to 
find an alternative, to say "hat "Ie would or could do . 
Then if I have 
no better plan, I em not going to criticize what they have done ." 
15· 
* * * 
Final Declaration of Geneva Conference, July 21, 1954, Ic/43 Rev. 2, 
July 21, 1954, Qpiginal: French: 
"Final declaration, dated July 21, 1954, of the Geneva Conference 
on the problem of restoring peace in Indo-China, in "'hich tbe repre-
sentatives of Cambodia, the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, France, 
Laos, the People ' s Republic of China, the state of Viet-Nam, the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom, and the United 
states of America took part . 
"1. 
The Conference ta.ltes note of the agreements ending hostilities 
in Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam and organizing international control and 
the supervision of the execution of the provisions of these agreements . 
"2. 
The Conference expresses satisfaction at the ending of hos-
tilities in Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Na"ll; the Conference expresses its 
conviction that the execution of the provisions set out in the present 
declaration and in the agreements on tbe cessation of hostilities will 
pe-rmit Cambodia; Laos and Viet-Nan henceforth to play their paxt , in 
full independence and sovereignty, in the peaceful community of nations . 
"3. 
The Conference taltes note of the declarations made by the 
Governments of Cambodia and of Laos of their intention to adopt measures 
permitting all citizens to take their place in the national community, 
in particular by participating in the next general elections , "'bich, in 
conformity with the constitution of each of these countries , shall take 
place in the course of the year 1955 , by secret ballot and in conditions 
of respect for fundamental freedoms . 
"4. 
The Conference takes note of the clauses in the agreement on 
the cessation of hostilities in Viet-Nam prohibiting the introduction 
into Viet-Nam of foreign troops and military personnel as well as of 
all kinds of arms and munitions . 
The Conference also takes note of t he 
declarations made by the Governments of Cembodia and Laos of their 
resolution not to request foreign aid, whether in war material, in 
personnel or in instructors except for the purpose of the effective 
defence of their territory and, in the case of Laos , to the extent 
defined by the agreements on the cessation of hostilities in Laos . 
"5 . 
The Conference te..l(;es note of the clauses in the agreement on 
the cessation of hostilities in Viet-rram to the effect that no military 
base under the control of a foreign State may be established in the 
r egrouping zones of the tuo parties, the latter baving the obligation 
to see that the zones allotted to them shall not constitute part of 
B-23 
• 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 20 11 
any military alliance and shall not be utilized for the resumption of 
hostilities or i n the service of an aggressive policy. 
The Conference 
also ta~es note of the declarations of the Governments of Cambodia and 
Laos to the effect that they will not join in any agreement with other 
States if this agreement includes the obligation to participate in a 
military alliance not in conformity "rith the p-inciples of the Charter 
of the United Nations or, in the ca.se of Leos, ""ith the principles of' 
the agreement on the eessation of hostilities in Laos or, so long as 
their security is not threatened, the obligation to establish bases on 
Cambodian or Laotian territory for the military forces of foreign 
Powers . 
"6. 
The Conference recognizes that the essential purpose of the 
agreement relating to Viet-Nam is to settle military questions with a 
view to ending hostilities and that the military demarcation line is 
provisional and should not in any 'Nay be interpreted as const! tuting a 
political or territorial boundary . 
The Conference expresses its con-
viction that the execution of the provisions set out in the present 
declaration and in the agreement on the cessation of hostilities creates 
the necessary basis for the achievement in the near "fUture of a political 
settlement in Viet-Nan . 
"7 . 
The Conference declares that , so far as Viet-Nam is concerned, 
the settlement of political problems , effected on the basis of respect 
for the principles of independence, unity and territorial integrity, shall 
permit the Viet-Namese people to enjoy the fundamental freedoms, guar-
anteed by democratic institutions established as a result of free general 
elections by secret ballot . 
In order to ensure tbat sufficient progress 
in the restoration of peace has been made, and that all the necessary 
conditions obtain for free expression of the national will, general 
elections shall be held in July 1956, under the supervision of an inter-
national commission composed of representatives of the 14er:lber States of 
the International Supervisory COmI!lission , referred to in the agreement 
on the cessation of hostilities . 
Consultations vill be held on this 
subject between the conpetent representative authorities of the t wo 
zones from 20 July 1955 om-Tards . 
. 
"8 . 
The provisions of the agreements on the cessat ion of hostilities 
intended to ensure the protection of individuals and of property must be 
most strictly applied and must, in particular, allow everyone in Viet-
Nam to decide freely in which zone he wishes to live . 
119. 
The competent representative authorities of the Northern and 
Southern zones of Viet-Nam-, as well as the authorities of Laos and 
Cambodia, ~ust n)t permit any individual or c~llective reprisals 
a.gainst persons ~..tho have collaborated in any way ',rith one of the parties 
dwing the ;iar, or against members of such persons ' families . 
"10 . The Conference takes note of the declaration of the Government 
of the French .Republic to the effect that it is ready to ... :ithdrb.w its 
troops from the territory of Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam. at the request 
B-24 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
of the governments concerned and within periods which shall be fixed 
by agreement between the parties except in the cases where , by agree-
ment between the t\\·o parties, a certain number of French troops shall 
remain at specified points and for a specified time . 
"11. The Conference takes note of the declaration of the French 
Government to the effect that for the settlement of all the problems 
connected with the re ~ establishment and consolidation of peace in Cam-
bodia, Laos and Viet-Nam, the French Government "\lill proceed from the 
principle of respect for the independence and sovereignty, unity and 
territorial integrity of Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam. 
"12. In their relations with Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam, each 
member of the Geneva Conference undertakes to respect the sovereignty, 
the independence, the unity and the territorial integrity of the above-
mentioned states , and to refrain from any interference in their internal 
affairs . 
"13. The members of the Conference agree to consult one another on 
any question which may be referred to them by the International Super-
visory Commission in order to study such measures as may prove necessary 
to ensure that the agreements on the cessation of hostilities in Cam-
bodia, Laos and Viet-Nero are respected. " 
16. Direct Aid to the Associated states : CommR~ique Regarding Franco-
American Conversations, September 29, 1954, Department of State 
Bulletin, October 11, 1954, p . 534 : 
"Representatives of the two Governments have had very frank and 
useful taLlts ""hich have shown the community of their vie,!,s , and are 
in full agreement on the objectives to be attained . 
"The conclusion of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty 
in Manila on September 8, 1954, has provided a firmer basis th8n hereto-
fore to assist the free nations of Asia in developing and maintaining 
t heir independence and security . 
The representatives of France and the 
United states wish to reaffirm the support of their Governments for the 
principles of self-government , independence) justice and liberty pro-
claimed by the Pacific Charter in Manila on September 8, 1954. 
liThe representatives of France and the United states reaffirm the 
intention of their governments to support the complete independence 
of Cambodia, Laos, and Viet-Nam. 
Both France and the United States 
will continue to assist Cambodia, Laos , and Vjet-Nam in their efforts 
to safeguard their freedom and independence and to advance the welfare 
of tbeir peoples . 
In this spirit France and the United States are 
assisting" the Government of Viet-Nero in the r esettlecent of the Viet-
namese who have of tbeir own free ..,-'ill moved to free Viet-Nam and 1<1bo 
already nUI:\ber some 300,000 . 
B- 25 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 2011 
"In order to contribute to the security of the area pending the 
further development of national forces for this purpose, the representa-
tives of France indicated that France is prepared to retain forces of 
its Expeditionary Corps, in agreement with the government concern~d, 
within the limits permitted under the Geneva agreements and to an extent 
to be determined . 
The United States will consider the question of 
financial assistance for the Expeditionary Corps in these circumstances 
in addition to support for the forces of each of the three Associated 
States . 
These questions vitally affect each of the three Associated 
states and are being fully discussed with them. 
"The channel for French and United States economic aid, budgetary 
support, and other assistance to each of the Associated States will be 
·direct to that state . 
The United States representatives will begin 
discussions soon with the respective governments of the Associated 
States regarding direct aid. 
The methods for efficient coordination 
of lTench and United States aid programs to each of the three Associated 
States are under consideration and will be developed in discussions with 
each of these states . 
"After the bilateral taL';,;.s, the chiefs of diplomatic missions in 
Washington of Cambodia, Laos and Viet Nam were invited to a final 
meeting to have an exchange of views and information on these matters . 
The representatives of all five countries are in complete agreement on 
the objectives of peace and freedom to be achieved in Indochina. " 
17. 
Aid to the State of Viet-Ne.m.: t-lessage from the President of the 
United States to the President of the Council of Ministers of 
Viet-Nam, October 23, 1954 , Department of State Bulletin, 
November 15, 1954, pp. 735-736: 
"Dear loU- . President : 
I have been follmdng with great interest 
the course of developments in Viet-Nam, particularly since the conclu-
sion of the conference at Geneva. 
The implications of the agreement 
concerning Viet-Nero have caused grave concern regarding the future of a 
country temporarily divided by an artificial military grouping, weakened 
by a long and exhausting 'liar and faced with enemies without and by their 
subversive collaborators within. 
"Your recent requests for aid to assist in the fonnidable project 
of the movement of several hundred thousand loyal Vietnamese citizens 
away from. areas ""hieh are passing under a de facto rule and political 
ideology which they abhor , are being fulfilled . 
I am glad that the 
United states is able to assist in this ~urnani~arian effort . 
"\fe have been exploring ways ao.d means to permit our aid to Viet-
Nan to be more effective and to make a greater contribution to the 
welfare and stability of the Government of Viet-Nam. 
I am, accordingly, 
instructing the American Ambassador to Viet-N2lll to examine with you in 
your ca?8.city as Chief of Gover~~ent , how an intelligent program of 
B-26 
liD 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
American aid given directly to your Government can serve to assist 
Viet-Nero in its present hour of trial, provided that your Government 
is prepared to give assurances as to the standards of perfonmance it 
would be able to meintain in the event such aid were supplied . 
liThe purpose of this offer is to assist the Government of Viet-Nero 
in developing and maintaining a strong, viable state , capable of resist-
ing attempted subversion or aggression thrqugh military means. 11 
* * * 
18. Address by President EisenhovTer before the American Societ of 
Ne\fS aner Editors Anril 21 1 
Public Fe ers of the Presidents 
195 ,p. 17 and p . 
23 : 
* * * 
"The ideas of freedom are at work, even where they are Officially 
rejected . 
As we know, Lenin and his successors, true to Communist 
doctrine, based t he Soyiet State on the denial of these ideas . 
Yet the 
new Soviet rulers who took over three years ago have had to reckon with 
the force of these ideas, both at home and abroad. 
liThe situation the new regime inherited from the dead Stalin 
apparently caused it to reappraise many of his mistakes . 
"Having lived under his one-man rule, they have espoused the con-
cept of ' collective ' dictatorship . 
But dictatorship it still remains . 
They have denounced Stalin for some of the more flagrant excesses of 
his brutal rule. But the individual citizen still lacks the most 
elementary safeguards of a free society . 
The desire for a better life 
is still being sacrificed to the insatiable demands of the state . 
"In foreign affairs , the new regime has seemingly moderated the 
policy of violence and hostility which has caused the ~ree nations to 
band together to de~end their independence and liberties . 
For the 
present, at least , it relies more on political and economic means to 
spread its influence abroad . 
I n the last year , i t has embarked upon a 
campaign of lending and trade agreements directed especially to~ard 
the netdy-developing cotultries. 
"It is still too early to assess in any final way yfhether the 
Soviet r egime wishes to provide a real basis for stable and enduring 
relations . .. 
* * * 
"For example, why was there such a sudden change in the Soviet 
policy? Their basic aim is to conquer the world, through' world revolu-
tion if possible , but in any '.jay. 
Anyone that has read any of their 
books knows that their doctrine is lies, deceit , subversion, war if 
necessary, but in any Hay : conqu~r the world . 
And that has not changed . 
8- 27 
Ifl 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"But they changed their policies ver"J markedly . 
They were depend-
ing on force and the threat of force only. 
And suddenly they have gone 
into an entirely different attitude . 
They are going into the economic 
end political'fields a.'1d are really wearing smiles around the ... ·or;td 
instead of some of the bitter faces to which we have become accustomed. 
"Now any time a policy is winning end the people are conpletely 
satisfied with it , you don ' t change . 
You change policies that markedly, 
you destroy old idols as they have been busy dOing, only ,,,hen you think 
a great cha~ge is necessary. 
So I think we can take some comfort ; at 
least we can give careful consideration to the very fact they had to 
change their policies . 
"And I think the whole free world is trying to test and determine 
the sincerity of that plan, in order that the free nations themselves , 
i n pursuing their own policies, will make certain that they are not 
·surprised in eny place . 
"We look at some of' the advances we think they have made, but let 
us remember: they did not conquer Korea, which they announced they were 
going to do . 
They were stopped finally in the northern part of Vietnam; 
and Diem, the leader of the Southern Vietnamese , is dOing splendidly 
and a much better figure in that field than anyone even dared to hope . 
"The I ranian situation which only a few short years ago looked 
so desperate that each morning we thought we would wake up and read in 
our newspapers that l·!ossadegh had let them under the Iron Curtain, has 
not become satisfactory1 but that crisis has passed and it is much 
better." 
* * * 
19. United states Polic with Res ect to Viet-Nam: Address b the 
Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Aff'airs this address 
by Assistant Secretary of State Robertson restated Acerican policy 
and was delivered at a time of relative stability in South Viet-Nam) , 
Weshin on June 1 
1956 Department of State Bulletin, June 11 
195 , pp. 972-97 : 
"This past March, I had the pleasure of accompanying t he Secretary 
of State on his visit to Saigon ' ..... here we conversed with President Diem 
on the present and .future problems of Viet-Nam . 
I ",jas struck, as so many 
other recent observers have been , at the progress Free Viet-Nam has made 
in a fe''/' short months to\.lard stability, security, and strength . 
President 
Diem seeoed to r rflect this progress in ~is ow~ person . 
On the occasion 
of' our earlier visit some 15 oonths ago , he seemed tense and gravely con-
cerned about the problems facing Viet-Nam. 
This time he was reposed, 
poised, and appeared confident of the .future of his country. 
"Among the factors that explain the remarkable .rise of Free Viet-
Nem from the shambles created by 8 years of murderous civil and inter-
national war , the division of the country at Geneva and the continuing 
B-28 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
menace of predatory communism, there is in the first place the dedica-
t i on, courage, and resourcefulness of President Diem himself . 
I n him, 
his country has found a truly worthy leader whose integrity and devotion 
to his country' s welfare have become generally recognized aDong his 
people . 
Asia has given us in President Diem another great figure , and 
t he entire free ,,;orld has become the richer for his example of determina-
tion and moral fortitude . 
There is no more dramatic exacple of this 
fortitude tban Presid~nt Diem' s decisions during the tense and vital days 
of the battle against the parasitic politico-religious sects in the city 
of Saigon in the spring of 1955. 
These decisions were to resist tbe 
multiple pressures to compromise that were building up around him, and 
to struggle to the victorious end for the sake of a j ust cause . 
The 
free world o"/es him a debt of gra.titude for his determined stand at that 
fat eful hour . 
trConsider Viet-Nero at three stages in its r ecent history: 
"First, in mid-1954 , partiti oned by fiat of the great powers against 
the will of the Vietnamese people, devoid of governmental machinery or 
military strength, drifting without leadership end without hope in the 
backwash of the defeat administered by the combined "eight of Communi st-
impressed i nfantry al1.d of Chinese and Russian arms . 
"Secondly, in early 1955, faced with the military and subversive 
threat of the Communists north of the 17th paral lel, confronted with 
internal strif e , its government challenged by the armed , self- seeking 
poli tico- rel igious sects, its anmy barely reformed and of uncertain 
l oyalty, assailed from within by the most difficult problems , including 
that of having to absorb the sudden influx of three-quarters of a mil-
lion refugees who would rather leave their ancestral lands and homes 
t han suffer l ife under Communist tyranny: 
"And finally Viet-Nam today, in mid-1956, progressing rapidly to 
t he establishment of democratic institutions by elective processes , its 
people resuming peaceful pursuits , its army growing in effectiveness , 
sense of mission, and morale , the puppet Vietnamese politicians dis-
cr edited, the refugees wel l on the vlay to permanent resettlement , the 
countryside generally orderly and calm, the predatory sects eliminated 
and their venal leaders exiled or destroyed. 
t1Perhaps no more eloquent testimony to the new st ate of aff airs in 
Viet-Nam could be cited than the voi ce of the peopl e t hemselves as 
expressed in their free election of last t-farch. 
At that time the last 
possible questio~ as to t he feel ing of the people was erased by an over-
whelming majorit ~' for President Diem' s leadership . 
The fact that the 
Viet Minh , ... as uneble to carry out its open t hreats to sabotage t hese 
elections is impressive evidence of the stability and prestige of t he 
government . 
"The Uni ted States is proud to be on the side of the effort of the 
Vietnamese people under President Diem to establ ish f r eedom, peace , and 
. B- 29 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
the good life . 
The United States wishes to continue to assist and to 
be a loyal and trusted friend of Viet-Nero. 
"Our policies in Viet-r;am may be simply stated as follows : 
"To support a friendly Don-Com.unist government in Viet-Nam and to 
help it diminish and eventually eradicate Communist subversion and 
influence. 
liTo help the Government of Viet-Ne.m establish the forces neces-
sary for internal security. 
"To encourage support for Free Viet-Nam by the non-Communist world. 
liTo aid in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of a country and 
people ravaged by 8 ruinous years of civil and international "'lar . 
IIOur efforts are directed first of aJ.l toward helping to sustain 
the internal security forces consisting of a regular army of about 
150,000 men, a mobile civil guard of some 45,000, and local defense 
units which are being formed to give protection against subversion on 
the village level . 
We are providing budgetary support and equipment for 
these forces and have a mission assisting the training of the army. 
We 
are also helping to organize, train, and equip the Vietnamese police 
force . 
The refugees ... rho have fled to South Viet-Nam to escape the Viet 
Minh are being resettled on productive lands with the assistance of funds 
made available by our aid program. 
In various ways our aid program also 
provides assistance to the Vietnamese Government designed to strengthen 
the economy and provide a better future for the comnon people of tne 
country . 
The Vietnamese are increasingly giving attention to the basic 
development of the Vietnamese economy and to projects that may contri-
bute directly to that goal . 
We give our aid and counsel to this program 
only as freely invited. 
III do not wish to minimize the magnitude of the task that still 
remains and of the problems that still confront this sta1L~ch and valiant 
member of the free world fighting for its independence on the threshold 
of the Communist heartland of Asia. 
"The Communist conspiracy continues to threaten Free Viet-Nam. 
With monstrous effrontery, the Communist conspirators at Hanoi accuse 
Free Viet-Nem and its friends of violating the armistice provisions ",.hlch 
the Vietnamese ~~d their friends, including ourselves , have scrupulously 
respected despite the fact that neither the Vietnamese nor ourselves 
signed the Genev£. Accords while they, th~ Comnl'mists who have solemnly 
undertaken to be bound by these provisions , have violated them in the 
most blatant fashion . 
liThe facts are that while on the one hand the nilitary potentie.l 
of Free Viet-Nem has been drastically reduced by the '....tthdra ... ral of 
nearly 200,000 members of the French EA~editionary Corps and by the 
reduction of the Vietnamese Army by more than 50 ,000 from the time of 
the armistice to the uresent as .. ;ell as by the out shipment from Viet-Nam 
. 
-
B-30 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
since the cessetion of hostilities of over $200 million worth of war 
equipment, we have on the other hand reports of steady constant growth 
of tbe wanmaking potential of the Communists north of the 17th parallel . 
. "Our reports reveal that in complete disregard of its obligations, 
the Viet J>1inb have imported voluminous quantities of arms across the 
Sino- Viet Minh border and have imported a constant stream of Chinese 
Communist ~ilitary personnel to work on railroads, to rebuild roads, to 
establish airports, and to work on other projects contributing to the 
growth of the military potential of the zone under Communist occupation . 
"As so eloquently stated by tbe British Government in a diplomatic 
note released to the press end sent to f40scow in April of this year, 
and I quote : 
'The Viet Minh army bas been so greatly strengthened by the 
embodiu~nt and re- equipment of irregular forces that instead of the 7 
Viet Minh divisions in existence in July 1954 there ere no .... no less than 
20 . 
This striking contrast between massive military expansion in the 
'-
North and the withdrawal and reduction of military forces in tbe South 
speaks for itself . I 
"By lies, propaganda, force, and deceit, the Communists in Hanoi 
\{ould undermine Free Viet-rTam, whose fall they have been unable to secure 
by their maneuverings on the diplomatic front . 
These people, whose crimes 
against suffering humanity are so vividly described in the book by Lt. 
Dooley wbo addressed you this morning, have sold their country to Feiping. 
They have sbamelessly followed all the devious Zigzags of the Cammunist-
bloc line so that their alliance with Communist China and the Soviet Union 
is firmly consolidated. 
These are the people who are now inviting Presi-
dent Diem to join them in a coalition government to be set up through 
so-called 'free elections . I 
"President Diem and the Government of Free Viet- Nam reaffirmed on 
April 6 of this year and on other occasions their desire to seek the re-
unification of Viet- Nam by peaceful means . 
In this goal, we support them 
fully. 
We hope and pray that the partition of Viet- Nam, imposed egainst 
the will of the Vietnamese people, will speedily come to an end . 
For our 
part we believe in free elections, and we support President Diem fully in 
his position that if elections are to be held, there first must be condi-
tions which preclude intimidation or coercion of the electorate . 
Unless 
such conditions exist there can be no free choice . 
''May those l e·aders of the north in whom the spirit of true patriotism 
still survives realize the futility of the Communist efforts to subvert 
Free Viet- Kao by force or guile . 
!-~ay they force the abandonment of these 
efforts and bring about the peaceful de~obilization of the large standing 
armies of the Viet Minh . 
r-1ay they, above all, return to ·the just cause of 
all those who want to reunify their country in peace and independence and 
for the good of ell the people of Viet-Nem. n 
B-31 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
20 . 
Special Message to the Congress on the I·tutua1 Security Programs, 
May 21, 1957, Public Papers of' the Presidents--Eisenhoiler, 1957, 
p . 373· 
* * * 
"First i s defense assistance-- our and other free nations I cammoll 
effort to counter the. Soviet-Chinese military power and their drive to 
dominate the world . 
That pO'.ler continues to gro' ..... --in armaments, in 
nuclear capability, in its economic base . 
The Communist goal of con-
quering the world has never changed . 
"For our nation alone to undertake to withstand and turn beck Com-
munist imperi alism would impose colossal defense spending on our people . 
It would ultimately cost us our freedom . 
"For other free nations to attempt individually to counter this 
menace would be impossible . 
"We in our 0;.;0 interest, and other free nations in their own 
interest, have therefore joined i n the buildi ng and maintenance of a 
system of collective security in ~'h1ch the effort of each nati on 
strengthens all. 
Today that system has become the keystone of our 
ovo and their security in a tense and uncertain world ." 
* 
-l(- * 
"The second major element of' our mutual security programs is eco-
nomic development assistance and technical cooperation. 
"This part of' the programs helps less developed countries make the 
social end political progress needed to preserve their independence . 
Unless t hese peoples can hope for reasonable economic advance, the dan-
ger will be acute that their governments will be subverted by Communism. 
liTo millions of people close to the Soviet and Chinese Communist 
borders political freedom is still new . 
To many it must still prove its 
worth. 
To survive it must show the way to another and equally essential 
freedom--freedom from the poverty and hopelessness i n which these peoples 
have lived for centuries . 
With their new freedom their desire end their 
determination to develop their economies ere i ntense . 
They are fixed upon 
raising their standards of' living. 
Yet they l ack suffi cient resources . 
Their need f'or help is desperate--both for technical know-how and capital. 
"!.ecking outsi de help these ne· ... nations cannot advance economically 
as t hey must t o .maintain their independence . 
~neir moderate leaders must 
be able to obtain sufficient help from the free world to offer convincing 
hope of progress . 
Otherwise their peoples will surely turn elsewhere . 
Extre:nist elements would then seize po .... er, .... ·hip up national hatreds end 
incite civil dissension and strife . 
The danger would be grave that these 
free govern.rnents .... 'ould disappear . 
Instability and threats to peace "auld 
result . 
In our closely-knit world, such events would deeply concern and 
potentially endanger our 0';10 people . 
B-32 
• 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
liThe help toward economic development that we provide these countries 
is a means to forestall such crises . 
Our assistance is thus insurance 
against rising tensions and increased dangers of war, and against defense 
costs that would skyrocket here at home should tragedy befall these strug-
gling peoples. 
"These revolutionary developments in di stant parts of the world ar e 
borne on the crest of the wave sent out a century and a half ago by the 
example of our avo successful struggle for freedom . 
The determination of 
the people of these nations to better their lot and to preserve their 
newly gained liberty awakens memories of our own noblest traditions . 
Our 
helping hand in their struggle is dictated by more than our own self-
i nterest . 
It is also a mirror of the character and highest i deals of the 
people who have built and preserved thi s nation . " 
* * * 
11m the many unstable regions of the world, Ccmmun1st power is today 
probing constantly. 
Every weakness of free nat i ons is being exploited in 
every possible way. 
It i s inevitable that ve shall have to deal with such 
critical situations in the future. 
In America !s own interest, we must 
stand ready to furnish special assistance when threatened disaster abroad 
foretells danger to our own vital concerns . " 
* * * 
21. 
* * * 
"The common label of 'foreign aid ' is gravely misleading--for it 
inspires a picture of bounty for f oreign countries at the expense of our 
own . 
No misconception could be further from reality. 
These programs 
serve our own basic national and personal i nterests . 
"They do this both immediately and lastingly. 
!'In the long term, the ending or the weakening .of these programs 
would vastly increase the risk of future war. 
"And--in the immediate sense--it would impose upon us additiona l 
defense expenditures many times greater than the cost of mutual security 
today. 
"This evening it is my purpose to give you incontestable proof of 
these assertions • 
B-33 
I 
I 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"We have, during this century, twice spent our blood and OUI 
treasure ~ighting in Europe--and twice in Asia . 
We ~ought because we 
saw--too late to prevent war--that our own peace and security were 
imperilled, by the urgent danger--or the ruthless conquest--of other 
lands . 
"We have gained wisdom from that suf~ering . 
We knQi.r, and the 
world knows, that the ' American people will fight hostile and aggres-
sive despotisms when their force is thrown against the barriers o~ 
freedom, when they seek to gain the high ground o~ power from which to 
destroy us. 
But we also know that to fight is the most costly way to 
keep America secure and free. 
Even an America victorious 1n atomic war 
could 'scarcely escape disastrous destruction of her cities and a fear-
ful loss of life . 
Victory itself could be agony . 
"Plainly, we must seek less tragic, less costly ways to defend 
ourselves , 
We must recognize that whenever any country falls under 
the domination of Communism, the strength of the Free World- -and of 
America--is by that amount weakened and Communism strengthened , If 
this process, through our neglect or indifference, should proceed un-
checked, our continent would be gradually encircled . 
Our safety depends 
upon recognition of the fact that the Communist design for such encir-
clement must be stopped before it gains momentum--before it is again too 
late to save the peace . 
ltThis recognition dictates two tesks . 
We must maintain a common 
worldwide defense against the menace of International C~Jnunism . 
And 
we must demonstrate and spread the blessings of liberty--to be cher-
ished by those vho enjoy these blessings 1 to be sought by those no· ... 
denied them. 
"This is not a neW' policy nor a partisan pOlicy. 
lIThis is a policy for America that begen ten years ago when a 
Democratic President and a Republican Congress united in an historic 
declaration. 
They then declared that the independence and survival of 
two countries menaced by Communist aggression--Greece and Turkey--vere 
so important to the security o£ America that we would give them mili-
tary and economic aid. 
lIThet policy saved thOse nations . 
And it did so without the cost 
of American lives . 
nThat policy has since been extended to all critical areas of' the 
world . It reco~Jizes thet America cannot exis~ as an island of freedoa 
in a surrounding sea o£ Corrmunism. 
It is expressed concretely by mutual 
security treaties embracing 42 other nations . 
And these treati es re£lect 
a solemn £inding by the President and by the Senate that .our OWl'! peace 
would be endangered if any of these countries were conquered by Inter-
national Communism. 
~8 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 633 J 6. By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"The lesson of' the defense of Greece end Turkey ten years ago 
has since been repeated in the saving of other lands and peoples . 
A recent example 1s the Southeast Asian country of Viet- Nan, whose 
President has just visited us as our honored guest . 
"Tw'o years ago 1~ appeared that all Southeast Asia might be over-
run by the f orces of International Communism. 
The freedom and security 
of nations for which \o'e had fought throughout ~lorld War II and the 
Koreen War again stood in denger. 
Tne people of Viet- Nam responded 
bravely- -under steadfast leadership . 
"But bravery alone could not have prevailed. 
nWe gave military and economic assistance to the Republic of Viet-
Nam. 
We entered into a treaty--the Southeast Asia Security Treaty--
which plainly warned that an armed attack against this area would endanger 
our oyn peace and safety, and that we would act accordingly. 
Thus Viet-
Nam has been saved for freedom . 
"This is one of the nations where we have been spending the largest 
amounts of so-called 'foreign aid.' What could be plainer than the fact 
that this aid has served not only the safety of another nation--but also 
the security of our ~Jn . 
"The issue, then, is solemn and serious and clear . 
IIWhen our young men ;..rere dying in the Argonne in 1918 and on the 
beaches of Normandy and in the t-lestern Pacific in 1944 and at Pusan 
i n 1950- -and when the battlefields of Europe and Africa and Asia were 
stre~ with billions of dollars worth of American military equipment, 
representing the toil and the skills of millions of workers--no one for 
an instant doubted the need and the rightness of this sacr ifice of bl ood 
and labor and treasure . 
"Precisely the same needs and purposes are served by Our lo1utual 
Security programs today--;..rhether these operate on a military or an 
economic front . 
For on -both fronts they are truly defense programs ." 
* * * 
22 . 
Radio and Television Re ort to the American People Re ardin the 
Situation in the Formosa Straits, September II, 19 
~e 
Presidents- - Eisenhower, 1958, p . 694. 
Public Papers 
''My Friends : 
"Tonight I want to talk to you about the situation, dangerous to 
peace, which bas developed in the Formosa Straits, in the Far East. 
My 
purpose is to give you i ts basic facts and then my conclusions as to 
. B-35 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
our nation's proper course o~ action . 
"To begin, let us remember that traditionally this country and 
its government have always been passionately devoted to peace with 
honor, as they ale now. 
We shall never resort to force in settlement 
of differences except when compelled to do so to defense against aggres-
sion and to protect our vital interests . 
IIThis means that, in our view, negotiations and conciliation should 
never be abandoned in favor of force and strife . 
While we shall never 
timidly retreat before the threat of armed aggression, we would welcome 
in the pr esent circumstances negotiations that could have a fruitful 
result in preserving the peace of the Formosa area and reaching a solu-
tion that could be acceptable to all parties concerned including, of 
course, our ally, the Republic of China. 
nOn the morning of' August 23rd the Chinese Communists opened e 
severe bombardment of Quemoy, an island in the Formosa Straits off the 
China Coast . 
Another island in the seme area, Matsu, was also attacked . 
These two islands have always been a pert of Free China- - never under 
Communist control . 
"This bombardment of Quemoy has been going on almost continuously 
ever since . 
Also Chinese Communists have been using their naval craft 
to try to break up the supplying of Quemoy, with its 125, 000 people . 
Their normal source of supply is by sea from Formosa , where the govern-
ment of Free China is now located . 
"Chinese Ccramunists say that they will capture Quemoy. 
So far 
they have not actually attempted a landing, but their bombardment has 
caused great damage . 
Over 1, 000 people have been killed or wounded. 
In large part these are civilians . 
"This is a tragic affair . 
naked force should be used for 
It is shocking that in this day and age 
such aggressive purposes . 
"But this 1s not the first time that the Chinese Communists have 
acted in this way. 
"In 1950 they attacked and tried to conquer the Republic of' Korea . 
At that time President Truman announced the intention of protecting 
Formosa, the pri~c1pel area still held by Free China, because of' the 
belief that FOrR~sa's safety was vital to the security of the United 
States and the free world . 
Our govenunent has adhered finnly ever since 
1950 to that policy. 
"In 1953 and 1954 the Chinese Connnunists took an active part in 
the war 1n Indo- China against Viet Ham. 
B-36 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"In the fall of 1954 they attacked Q,uemoy and Matsu, the same two 
i slands they are attacking now. 
They broke off that attack when, i n 
January 1955, the Congress and I agreed that ~e should firmly support 
Free China . 
"Since then, for .about four years, Chinese Communists have not 
used force for aggressive purposes. 
We have achieved an armistice in 
Korea which stopped the fighting there in 1953. There is a 1954 armis-
tice in Viet Nam; and since 1955 there has been quiet in the Formosa 
Straits area . 
We had hoped that the Chinese Communists were becoming 
peacefUl--but it seems not . 
"So the world is again faced \lith the problem of armed aggression. 
Powerful dictatorships are attacki ng an exposed, but free, area . 
"What should 'We do? 
"Shall we take the position that, submitting to threat, it is 
better to surrender pieces of free territory in the hope that this 
will satisfy the appetite of the aggressor and we shall have peace? 
liDo we not stiD. remember that the name of 'Munich I symbolizes a 
vain hope of appeasing dictators ? 
"At that time, the policy of' appeasement was tried and it failed. 
Prior to the second VTorld War, f.1ussolini seized Ethiopia . 
In the Far 
East, Japanese 'Warlords were grebbing Manchuria by f'orce . 
Hitler sent 
his armed forces into the Rhineland in violation of the Versailles 
Treaty. 
Then he annexed little Austria . 
When he got away with that, 
he next turned to Czechoslavakia and began taking it, bit by bit . 
"In the f ace of ell these attacks on freedom by the dictators, the 
po'W'erf'ul democracies stood aside . 
It seemed that Ethiopia and l-Ianchuria 
were too far away and too unimportant to f ight about . 
In Europe, appease-
ment was looked upon as the way to peace . 
The democracies felt that if 
they tried to stop what was going on, that would mean war . 
But because 
of' these repeated retreats, war came just the same . 
"If the democracies had stood firm at the beginning, almost surely 
ther e ~ould have been no World War . 
Instead they gave such an appearance 
of' weakness and timidity that aggressive rulers were encouraged to over-
run one country after another. 
In the end the democracies sew t hat their 
very survival ~as at stake . 
They had no alternative but to turn and fight 
in ~hBt proved to be the most terrible war that the world has ever known . 
"I know something about that war, and I never want to see that his-
tory repeated. 
But, my fellow Americans, it certainly cSn be r epeated 
if the peace- loving democratic nations again fearfully practice a policy 
of standing idly by while big aggressors use armed force to conquer the 
small and ~eak. 
B-31 
) 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 633 16. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
ULet us suppo",e that the Chinese Ca .. '1r.':unists conquer Quemoy. 
~lould 
tllat be the end of the story? iTe knoW" that it would not be the end of 
the story . 
History teaches that ",hen powerful despots can gain s.'Y.!I.e-
thing through aggression, they try, by the sa!:',e =:ethods, to gaUl ),:ore 
and more and more . 
. 
"Also, 'tie have mOre to guide us then the teachings of history. 
~le have the statcments, the boastingsJ of the Chinese Cormnunists them-
selves . 
They frankly say that their present military efrort is part of 
a progr:-:.m to conquer Fornosa . 
flIt is as certain 8S can be that the shooting which the Chinese 
Communists started on August 23rd had as its purpose not ju~t the taking 
of the island of' Quemoy. 
It is part or what is indeed an ambitious plan 
of armed conquest. 
UThis plan would liquidate all of the free world positions in the 
Hestern Pacific area and bring them under captive government.s -.,bieh would 
be hostile to the United States and the free world . 
Thus the Chinese 
and Russian Corinnunists would come to dominate at least the rlestern half 
of the nOll friendly Pacilic Ocean. 
USo, aggression by ruthless despots again imposes a clear danger 
to the United states and to the free world . 
IIIn this eff'ort the Chinese Ccm:munists and the Soviet Union appear 
to be working hand :in hand . 
last l·\onday I received a long letter on 
this subject from Prime l-1inister Khrushchev. 
He warned the United States 
against helping its allies in the \-lestern Pacific . 
He seid that we should 
not support the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea . 
He con-
tended that we should desert them, return all of our naval forces to our 
ho:ne bases, and leave our friends in the Far East to face, al9ne, the 
combined military power of the Soviet Union and C~unist China . 
llDees Mr. Khrushchev think tp-st we have so soon forgotten Korea ? 
III must say to you very frankly and soberly, my friends, the'United 
States cannot accept the result that the Oow~unists seck . 
Neither can 
ve show, notT} a weakness of purpose--a tinidity- -which would surely lea~ 
them to move more aggressively aga i nst us and our friends in the Western 
Pacific area . 
nIf the Chinese Cornmunists have decided to risk a war, i t 1s not 
because Quemoy iJself is so valuable to them . 
They have been getting 
along without Quemoy ever sinee they seized the China mainland nine years 
ago. 
nIT they have nm, decided to rie:.k a war, it can only be because 
they, and their Soviet allies , have decided to find'out wbether threat-
ening .... ar is a policy fron:. -..rhich they can make big gains . 
B-38 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"If that is their decision, then a Western Pacific r·iunich would 
not buy us pCllce or f.;ecurity . 
It 1,'ou1d encourage the aggressors . It 
would dismay our £rlcnds and allies there . 
If history teaches any-
thing, appease.'nent would rr.ake it Dare likely that we ",auld have to 
fight a major war . 
"Congress has made clear its recognition that the security of 
the Hestern Pacific is vital to the security of' the United States 
end that we should be firm , 
The Senate has ratified, by o'ferwhelming 
vote, securi ty treaties with the Republic of China covering Formosa 
and the Pescador€s, and elsa the Republic of' Korea . 
He have a mutual 
security treaty with the Republic of the Philippines, which could be 
next in line ror conquest if Formosa rell into hos~ile hands . 
These 
treaties commit the United states to the defense of the treaty areas . 
In addition, there is a Joint Resolution which the Congress passed in 
January 1955 dealing specifically ~Tith Formose and the offshore i slands 
of Free China in the Formosa straits . 
fiAt that time the situation was similar to what it is today . 
"Congress then voted the President authority to employ the armed 
forces of the United States for the defense not only of Formosa but 
of related positions such as Queooy end ~atsu , if I believed their 
defense to be appropriate in assuring the defense of Formosa . 
"I might add that the mandate f'rom the Congress was given by an 
almost unanimous bipartisan vote . 
llToday, the Chinese Comnl1.mists announce, repeatedly and officially, 
that their military operations against Quenoy are preliminary to attack 
on Fornosa , 
So it is clear that the Formosa Straits Resolution of 1955 
applies to the present situation . 
"If the present bombardment and harassment of Quemoy should be 
converted i nto a major assault, with which the local defenders could 
not cope, then He would be co,.)pelled to face precisely the situation 
that Congress visualized in 1955 . 
III have repeatedly sought to make clear our position in this matter 
so thst there would not be danger of' Communist miscalculation . 
The 
. 
Secretary of State on September fourth made a stateMent to the same 
end. 
This statement could not, of' course) cover every contingency. 
Indeed, I interppet the Joint Resolution as requiring me not to make 
absolute advanCE co~mitments, but to use ny juigment according to the 
cirCUMstances of the t~e . 
But the statement d i d carry a clesr mean-
ing to the Chinese C~E.unists and to the Soviet Union . 
There will be 
no retrest i n the fece of srrned aggressior., which is part and parcel 
of a continuing program of using armed f'orce to conquer ne' .... regions . 
B-39 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"I do not believe that the United States can be either lured or 
frightened into appease~ent. 
I believe that in taking the position of 
opposing aggression by force, I am taking the only position which is 
cor.sistent with the vital interests of the United States, and, indeed 
with the peace of the world . 
co~e 
"Some misguided 
excited about . 
Nam, about Lebanon . 
persons hove said that Quemoy is nothing to 
They said the same about South Korea - -about 
be-
Viet 
"Now I assure you that no Anerican boy will be asked by me to 
~igbt just for Quemoy. 
But those who make up our armed forces--and 
I believe the ~nericen people as a whole--do stand reedy to defend the 
principle thnt armed force shell not be used for aggressive. purposes . 
"Upon observance of' that principle depends e lasting and just 
peace . 
It is that same principle that protects the Hestern Pacific 
free world positions as \rell as the security of our hO:,jeland . 
If '.Ie 
are not ready to defend this principle, then indeed tragedy after 
tragedy ~ould befall us. 
"But there is a far better "ay than resort to force to settle 
these differences , and there is some hope that such a better way may 
be followed . 
"That is the \/ay of negotiation . 
, 
"That way is open and prepared because in 1955 arrangements were 
made between the United States and the Chinese Corrmunists that an 
Ambassador on each side ....,ould be authoriZed to discuss at Geneva cer-
tain probl~us or cn~on concern . 
These included the matter of releaGe 
of American civilians L~prisoned in C~unist China, and such questions 
as the renunciation JJf force in the Formosa area . . There have been 73 
meetings since August 1955. 
"Hhen our Ambassador, '''he waS' conducting these negotiations , was 
recently transferred to another post, \,'e named 65 successor r,ir . Beam, our 
Ambassador to poland . 
The Chinese Communists were notified accordingly' 
the latter part of July, but there \lSS no response . 
"The Secretary of State, in his September fourth 'statement, referred 
to these. Genevo negotietions . 
'I',::> days later, t·:r . Chou En-ls i, the Pre-
reier of the Peop~es l Republi c of Chin~, propos~d that these talks should 
be resua:.ed 
I in the interests of peace . I 
This was followed up on September 
eighth by Hr. 1·180 Tse-tung, the Chain,sn of the Peoples I Republic of 
Chine . 
He pro:'lptly welco."Jed 'this prospect and instructed our A.'nbassador 
at Hersa" to be ready ir .... ;ediEtely to resu:::te these talks . 
~{e expect that 
the talks will begin upon the return to Harsa·,r of the Chi nese Cotnr:nlllist 
/:.rr,basssdor ~iho bas been in Peipine . 
fil 
so. 
Declassified per E.xecuti vc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
ItPerhaps our sun;gestion rr:.8y be bearing fruit . 
He devoutly hope 
"Katurally, the United States will adhere to the position it 
first took in 1955} that ile will not in these talks be a party to any 
arrangements whi~h would prejudice rights of our ally, the Republic 
of China . 
rrWe know by hard experiences that the Chinese Comm.unist leaders 
are i ndeed militant and aggressive. 
But we cannot believe that they 
.... auld nO':-1 persi st in a course of military 3ggression .. thich would 
threaten ",orld peace, with all that would be involved . 
tole believe 
that diplor.~cy can ond should find a way out . 
There are measures that 
can be taken to assure that these offshO're islands >fill not be a thorn 
in the siee of peace . 
We believe that arrangcwents are urgently re-
quired to' stop gun fire and to pave the way to a peaceful solution . 
"If the bilateral talks bet· .... een lunbass&dors do not fully succeed, 
t here is still the hope that the United Nations could exert a peaceful 
i nfluence on the situatiO'n . 
"In 1955 the hO'stilities of the Chinese Communists in the FO'nnosa 
area were brought before the United Nations Security Council , 
But the 
Chinese Cor~unists rejected its jurisdictian . 
They said that they were 
entitled to Formasa end the offshore islands and that if they used 
arr.ed forces to get ther.l, that .. ;as purely a 
I civil w8r, I and the'l; the 
Unit.ed f:ations had no right to concel'n itself'. 
"They claimed also that the attack by the Communist North Kareans 
on South Korea was "civil '1ar, I and that the United Katians, and the 
United States; 
~lere ' aggressors ' because they helped South Karea . 
They 
said the same abaut their' attack an Viet Nem. 
"I feel sure thet these pretexts will never deceive 0'1' contral 
... 'orld apinion . 
The .fact i s th9t Commu..'1ist Chinese hastilities in the 
Formasa Straits area dO' endanger warld pe&ce. 
I do not believe that 
any rulers, however aggressive they may be, will flout efforts to find 
a peaceful and honorable salutian" whether 'ii! be by direct negatiatians 
or through the United Natians . 
"J,1y friends , \Ie are confronted · .... ith a seriO'us situatian . 
But i t 
is t ypical of the security :probl err.s of the world today . 
PO'..rerful and 
aggressive farces are constently probing, naw here, now there, to see 
whether the free ';Torld is t/~akening . 
In the face of this, there are 
no easy choices oVfillable . 
It is misleading f~r anyane to 1rr.ply that 
there are . 
"Hawever, the present situatian, thaugh serious) is 'by no lneans 
desperate or hopeless . 
"Thel'e is not going to be any appeE.s~ment . 
:'5 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 633 J 6. By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"I believe that there 1s not going to be any \o!er . 
"But there r.mat be sober realization by the American people that 
our legitimate purposes are again being tested by those who threaten 
peace and freedo..1 everY' . .fhere . 
llThis has not be~n the first test for us and for the free world . 
Probably it will not be the lest . 
But as we meet esch test with courage 
Bnd unitY1 w'e contribute to the safety Bnd the honor of our beloved 
lend- -and to the cause of a just and lasting peace . 11 
23 · 
The President I s Ne',fs Conference of Oct::>ber 1, 1958, Public Papers 
of' the PrBsidcnts--Eisenhol.'er, 1958, p. 715. 
* * 
i(-
liTHE PRESIDEIll!. 
\/ell, sir, all I can tell you about that is that 
I conceive of no possible solution that we haven 't studied, pondered, 
discussed \rith others in the very great hope that a peaceful solution 
can come about . 
"As you uell know, the basic issue, as we see it, is to avoid 
retreat in the face of force, not to resort to force to resolve these 
questions in the international world . 
And we believe if we are not 
faithful to that principle in th~ long run we are goi ng to suiTer . 
"Now, Mr . Dulles, 'Who had a very long conference yesterday worn-
i ng and almost solely on this subject, did one thing that I would 
cOllmlcnd to ell of you: 
he quoted paragraphs, t".o paragraphs I thin.1t, 
from Hr. Speak ' s speech recently in the United l;ations, where I·fr . Spaak 
said: 
' The whole free ",;"orld must realize that it is not Quemoy and the 
Matsus that we are talking about, lore are talking about the Communists I 
constant, unrelenting pressure against the free ... ·orld, against all of 
it . ' 
"As e matter of fact , a magazine just/ I guess, out last evening, 
U.S . News end World Report, gives quite a detailed and documented story 
of Communist aggression and activities in 72 countri es . 
'. 
"I cQnll':lend that to your reading, because we are" very apt, by 
focusing our eyes on some geographical point, to neglect the great 
principles for which a countl-f such as ours has stood, for all these 
years, ana. for 'i.hich Hestern civilization has largely stood . 
"So, I should say, we want to get these things in perspective. 
B-42 
Sb 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
IINo .... , you mentioned the question of it would be foolish for 
them keeping larne forces there for a long time . 
II I believe, as B soldier, that -.laS not a good thing to do, to 
have all these troops there. 
But, remember, we have dif'ferences 
~ith our allies all OVEr the world . 
They ere family differences , and 
sorr.et~_es they are ac~te; but, by end large, the reason we cell i t 
Ifree world ' is because e9ch nation in it wants to remain independent 
under its own governnent and not under some dictatorial form of govern-
ment . 
So, to the basic ideals, all of us must subscribe . 
UQ. Peter Lisagor, Chicago Daily l;ews ; 
In the light of l.rr . 
Speak ' s statement, can you tell us whet your view is of why so ~ny 
of our allies fail to see this point you have just made? 
UTHE PRESIDE1iT. 
~lell, it I S a very difficult- thing, and of' 
course an ens;,er is speculative. 
But when we go back to the 1·1an-
churisn incident of 1931, when ,<re go back to Hitler ' s marching into 
the Rhineland, when tw take his taking over the Sudetenland and the 
Anschluss ... ,ith Austria by forc"e, when finally he took over all of 
Czechoslova:;:ia, where \-laS the point to stop this thing bef'ore it got 
into a great major war? 
"Hhy did not public opinion see this thing happening? 
" Ncr-.{, in hindsight, most of us have conder'.ned these failures very 
bitterly, going right back to 1931 in l·ianchuria . 
I don't know why the 
hU'llan is so constructed that he believes that possibly there is an 
easier solutiot1-- that you can by feeding aggression a little bit, a 
teaspoonful of something, that he won 't see that they are going to 
demand the whole quart . 
"I don rt knmr any real anslter to that thing; it is puzzling. 
And J of course, for those who have to carry responsibili ty, it i s a 
very heavy weight on their e:.pirits and minds; there is no question about 
that . 
But there it is. " 
* * * 
24 . 
Special !·1essage to the Congress on the Mutual Security Program, 
March 13J 1959, Public Papers of the Presidents-- Eisenhm,er, 1959, 
p . 256. 
* 
f,-
i(. 
"I believe that these events of' the past year and the stern, in-
deed harsh, realities of the world of' today and the years ahead demon-
strate the inportance of the t·1utual Security Pl'ogram to the security 
B-43 
:.,1 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
of the United StEotes . 
I think four such realities stand out . 
rrFirst, the United St6tCS and the entire free 'World are con-
fronted by tbe military might of the Soviet Union, Cor.::munist China, 
and their satelHtes. 
These nations of the CO!1'Inunist Bloc now main-
tain ~-lell-cquipped standing ermies totaline more than 6,500,000 men 
formed in some 400 divisions. 
They are deployed along the borders of 
our allies and friends from the northern shores of Europe to the 
Mediterranean See, around throueh the 14iddle East and Far East to 
Korea . 
These forces are backed by an air fleet of' 25, 000 planes in 
operational units, and many more not in such units . 
They, in turn, 
are supported by nuclear weapons and missiles . 
On the seas around 
this land mass is a large nevy with several hundred submarines . 
rrSecond, the world is in a great epoch of seething change . 
Hithin little more then a decade a Horld-\dde political revolution 
has swept whole nations--2l of them--with three- quarters of a billion 
people, D fourth of the · .. ·orld' s population, frOI'1 colonial stetus to 
independence- -and others are pressing just behind . 
The industrial 
revolution, \lith its sharp rise i n living standards, uas acco!,1panied 
by ouch tunnoil in the Hestern Horld . 
A simileI' movement is now 
beginning to sweep Africa, Asia, and South America . 
A neYer end 
even more striking revolution in medicine, nutrition, and sanitation 
is increasing the energies and lengthening the lives of people in the 
most remote areDS . 
As a result of lo"'ered infant mortality, l onger 
lives, and the accelerating conquest of famine, there is undervrey a 
population explosion so incredibly great that in little more tban 
another generation the population of the world is expected to double . 
Asia alone is expected to have one billion more people than the entire 
'vlorld has today . 
Throughout vast areas there i s a surging social up-
heaval in \,'hich, overnight, the responsibilities of self-governm,ent 
are being undertaken by hundreds of millions , women ere asstL"ling new 
places in public life, old faLlily patterns are being destroyed snd 
new ones uneasily established. 
In the early years of independence, 
the people of the new nations are fired with a zealous nationalism 
which, unless channelled tOvrard productive purposes, could Iced to 
harmful develo~~ents
. 
Transcending all thi~ there is the ecc~panying 
universal determination to achieve a better life . 
lIThird, there is loose in the world B fanatic conspiracy, Inter-
nationDl Com.lIunism, .... hose leaders have in tva score years seized 
control of all or parts of 17 countries, with nearly one billion 
people, over 8 
t~ird of th~ total population of the earth. 
The center 
of this conspirar:y, Soviet Russia , has by the ~rir.unest determination 
and harshest of l~earlS reised itself to be the second military and 
econ~ic power in the world today . 
Its leaders never lose the oppor-
tunity to declare their determir.ation to beco~e the first with all 
possible speed . 
B-44 
• 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
liThe other great Cor..:flunist pO>ier, Red China, is notT in the 
early stages of its social and economic revolution . 
Its leaders are 
sho'dng tbe same ruthless driv~ for pO<fer snd to this end are str iving 
f or ever increasing econottic output . 
They see.!!l not to cere that the 
results- -ubich thus far have been considerable in materialistic ter.::.s- -
are built upon the crushed spirits and the brOken bOOies of thei r 
people , 
l1The fact that the Soviet Union has just come through a great 
revolutionary process to a position of enormous power and t hat t he 
ilorld ' s uost populous nation, China) i s in the course of tremendous 
change et the very time tthen so large e part of the free world i s in 
the flux of revolutionary move~.~ents , provides Comnunistl with \;het it 
sees as its golden opportunity. 
B,y the saITte token freedom is faced 
Hith difficulties of unprecedented scope and severitY- -3nd opportunity 
as ',lell. 
I1Communism exploits 
by every possible llieans . 
the pattern of progress, 
way to freedom fro::1 ' .. that 
of the future . 
the opportunity to intensi fy world unrest 
At the sane tir.le CO:;:""':l.UDisI:l masquerades as 
as the path to econorJic equality, as the 
it calls 
I ~lestern imperialism') as the ,{ave 
"For the free "orld there is the challenge to convince a b i llion 
people in the less developed areas that there is a "lay of life by 
...-hich thEY can have bread and the ballot, a better livelihood end t he 
r i ght to choose the ~eans or-their livelihood, social change and 
social justi ce--in short, progress and liberty. 
The dignity of man 
is at stake . 
"Coillll'lunism is determi ned to .. rin this contest- -freedom must ,be 
just as dedicated or the strug~le could finally go against us . 
Though 
no shot ~,ould have been f'ired, f'reedom and democracy \lould have lost . 
"This battle is nml j oined . 
The next decllde ... ,ill forecast i ts 
outeon:e . 
"The fourth reality i s that the military posit ion end economi c 
pro:Jperity of the United State£; ere i nterdependent ili th those of the 
rest of the free world . 
"As I shall outline' !l:ore fully b eloH, our mili t ary st rategy i s 
pert of a cor.linon defense effort invol ving rr..any nat ions . 
The defense 
of the f rEe ',lOrJ i is strengthened and prOgl'esE' towa!d a more stable 
peace is advanced by the fact that po:,"erful free , ... orld forces ar e 
established on tcrritor,f adjoining the areas of Communist po:;er . 
The 
deterrent pO'lier of oU!' 8 ir EI!1c' nav!.l forces Dnd our interoediate range 
mi ssile is L~terially increased by the availability of bases in friendly 
countries abroad . 
9-45 
;Yf 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 II 
"Moreover the military strength of our country and the needs 
of our industry cannot be supplied from our own resources . 
Such 
basic necessities as iron ore, bauxite for aluminum, rr.anganese, 
natural rubber, tin, and zr.eny other materials acutely important to 
our mi litary and industrial strength ere ei ther not produced in our 
own country or are not produced in su~ficicnt quantities to meet 
our needs . 
This is an additional reason why 'He must belp to remain 
free the nations '"hieh supply these resources . " 
* * * 
"TwO fundamental purposes of our collective defense effort are 
t o prevent general war and to deter Communist local aggression . 
"We knO'.{ the enormous and grO'tling Communist potential to launch 
a ~rar of nuclear destruction and their willingness to use this power 
as a threat to the free world . 
He know also that even local aggressions, 
unless checked, could absorb nation after nation into the Communist 
orbit-- or could f'lElme i nto uorld war . 
liThe protection of the free world against the threat or the 
reality of Soviet nuclear aggression or local attack rests on the 
co~non defense eff'ort established under our collective security agree-
ments . 
The protective power of our strategic Air Conmmnd Bnd Ollr 
Daval air uni ts i s assured even greater strength not only by the 
availability of bases abroad but also by the early ';larning facilities, 
the defensive installations, and the logistic support installations 
rrEintained on the soil of these and other allies and friends for our 
common protection . 
liThe strategy of general defense is made stronger and of' local 
def'ense is made possible by the powerful defensive forces which our 
allies in Europe, in the Middle East, and the li'ar East have raised 
and naintain on the soil of their hn~elands , on the borders of the 
Communist world . " 
* * 
.j(. 
25· Address at the Gettysburg College Convocation: 
The Importance of 
Understencing, April 4, 1959, Public Papers of the Presidents--
Ei senho~ler 1 1959, p . 310. 
* * 
if 
til shall not atte:r:.pt to talk to you about education, but I shell 
speak of one vital purpose of' education--the development of under-
standing--understanding, so that we may use with SO::lle measure of wisdom 
the kno>11edge we n:.ay have acquired, whether in school or out . 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 2011 
"For no matter hO'.I much intellectual luggage we carry aroWld 
in our heads, it becomes valuable only if we kno,' how to use the 
information--only if we are able to relate one fact of a problem to 
the others do we truly understand them . 
"This is my subject today--the need for greeter individual 
and collective understsnding of some of the international facts of 
t oday I s life. 
\ole need to understand our country I s purpose and role 
in strengthening the 'dorld I S free nations which, with us, see our 
concepts of freedom and human di gnity threatened by atheistic dicta-
torship. 
"If' through education--no matter how acquired- - people develop 
understanding of basic issues, and so can distinguish between the 
common, long-tero good of all, on the one hand, and convenient but 
shortsighted expediency on the other, they will support poliCies 
under which the nation will prosper . 
And if· people should ever lack 
the discernment to understand, or the character to rise above their 
emn seli'ish short- term interests, free government would become well 
nigh impossible to sustain . 
Sucb a government would be reduced to 
nothing more than a device ,",bieh seeks merely to Bcco:nmodate itself 
and the country ' s good to the bitter tugs- of- war of conflicting pres-
Sill'e groups . 
Disaster could eventually result . 
"Though the subject I have assigned myself' is neither abstruse 
nor particularly difficult to co~prehend , its importance to our 
national and individual lives is such that failure to marshal, to 
organ i ze , and to analyze the facts pertaining to it could have for 
all of us consequences of the most serious character . 
~oJe must study, 
think, and decide on the governmental program that we t erm 'Mutual 
Security. I 
liThe true need and value of this program will be recognized by 
our people only if they can answer this question: 
' ~ 
should America , 
at heavy end ~ediete sacrifice to herself, assist many other nations , 
particularly the less developed ones, in achieving greater moral, 
eco ~ 
nanic , and military strength? ' 
"i.fhet are the facts? 
"The first and most important fact i s the implacabl e and fre -
quently expresse~ purpose of imperialistic communism to promote world 
r evolution, 
destr~J freedn1, end communize the world . 
lilts methods are ail- inclusive, ranging through the use of propa -
ganda , political subversion, econor:lic penetration, and tJ:le use or the 
threat of force . 
B-47 
rot 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3,3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
liThe second fact is that our country i s today spending en aggre-
gate of 6bout 47 billion dollars annually for the single purpose of 
preserving the nation ' s position and security in the world , 
This 
includes the costs of the Defense Department, the production of nuclear 
weapons, end mutual security, 
All three are mutually supporting and 
ere blended into one program for our safety. 
The size of this cost 
conveys so,-neth1ng of the entire program ! 5 importance- -to the world and, 
indeed, to each of us. 
"And when I think of this importance to us, think of it in this 
one materiel figure , this cost annuelly for every single man, woman, 
and child of the entire nation is about 275 dollars a year . 
"The next fact \Ie note is that since the Communist target is the 
world, every nation is comprehended in their campaign for d~~ination
, 
The weak and the most exposed stand in the most immediate danger . 
"Another f'act, that we ignore to our peril, is that if aggression 
or subversion against the we9ker of the free nations should achieve 
successive victories, communism would step-by-step overcome once free 
areas . 
The danger, even to the strongest, ,",auld become increasingly 
menacing . 
"Clearly, the sell- interest of each free nation impels it to 
resist the loss to imperialistic can~unism of the f'reedam and inde~ 
pendence of any other nation . 
"Freedom is tr\lly indivisible . 
"To apply some of these truths to a particular case, let us con-
Sider, briefly, the country of Viet-Nero, and the importance to us of' 
the security aFd progress of' that country. 
"It is located, flS you knOil, in the southeastern corner of Asia, 
exactly bal:f\lay round the ,",orld from Gettysburg College . 
"Viet- I{an is a country divided into two .parts--like Korea and · 
Gennany. 
The southern half, with its twelve m'illion people, is f'ree, 
but poor . 
It is an under- developed country~-it s econ~ is weak- -
average individual income being less than $200 a year , 
The northern 
half has been turned over to communism . 
A l ine of demarcat i on running 
along the 17th perellcl separates the tT,tO , 
To the north of' this line 
stand several Cor,imunist divisions . 
'l'hese facts pose to South Viet-tram 
two great tasks : 
self'- defense and economic gro'o ... th . 
HUnderstandably, the people of Viet - !:am ·..rant to make their country 
a thriving, self-sut'i"icient I:lember of the fa~ily of' nations . 
This means 
econo~dc expansion . 
B-48 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"For Viet- l:So ' s economic gro;.rth, the acquisition of' capital is 
vitally necessary. 
:Uow, the nation could create the capital needed 
for growth by stealing from the already meager rice bowls of its people 
and regimenting them into work battalions . 
This enslavement is the 
commune system--adopted by the new overlords of Red China . 
It would 
mean, of course, the loss of freedom within the country without any 
hostile outside actiorr 1,rhatsocver, 
"Another way for Viet- r~.sm to get the necessary capital 1s through 
private investments from the outSide, Bnd through governmental loans 
and, where necessary, grants from other and more fortunately situated 
nations . 
"In 
solved, 
either of these ways the economic problem of' Viet- Nero 
But only the second way can preserve freedom . 
could be 
"And there is still the other of Viet-Naro' s great problems-- hoi., 
to support tbe military forces it needs without crushing its econony . 
"Because of the proximity· of large Communist militBt'Y i'ormations 
in the I'rorlb, Free Viet- Nam must maintain substantial numbers of men 
under arms . 
Moreover, while the government has shovn real progress in 
cleaning out Communist guerrillas, those remaining continue to be a 
disruptive influence i n the nation ' s life . 
"Unassisted, Viet- Nem cannot at this tine produce and support the 
military formations essential to it, or, equally important, the morale- -
the hope, the confidence, the pride--necessal'Y to meet the dual threat 
of aggression from without and subversion within its borders . 
"still another fact! 
St.rategically, South Viet-Nam ' s captUre by 
the COl1i.l1lunists would bring their power several hundred miles into a 
hitherto free region. 
The renainulg countries in Southeast Asia would 
be menaced by a great flanking movement . 
The f'reedon of twelve million 
people would be lost ~.ediately, and that of 150 million others in ad-
j acent lands .... ould be seriously endangered . 
The loss of South Viet- Nam 
would set in moti on a crumbling process that could, as it progressed, 
have grave consequences for us and for freedom: 
IIViet- Nam must have a r easonable degree of sefety now- -both for her 
people and for her property. 
Because of these facts, mili tar,y as well 
as economic belp is currently needed in Viet-Nam. 
"We reach tne inescapable conclusiun thai our own nation3l interests 
demand same belp from us in sust9ining in Viet- Nam the morale, the ecO-
nomic progress, and the military strength necessary t o its continued 
~~istence in freedom . 
B-49 
~3 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 2011 
trViet - ~ram is just one example. 
One- third of' the world IS people 
face a similar challenge . 
All througb Africa and Southern Asia people 
struggle to preser'le liberty and improve their standards of living, to 
maintain their dignity as hu:nans . 
It is imperative that they succe:ed . 
"But some uninformed .Americans believe that ,.,re should turn our 
backs on these people, our friends . 
Our costs and taxes are very real, 
while the difficulties o£ other peoples often seem remote from us . 
"But the costs of continuous neglect of these problems would be far 
more than we must now bear--indeed more than we could afford. 
The added 
costs i-lould be paid not only in vastly increased outlays of' money, but 
in larger drafts of our youth i nto the Military Estsblishment, and in 
terms of increased danger to our own security and prosperity . 
"No matter what areas of Federal spending must be curtailed--and 
some should-- our safety comes first . 
Since that safety is necessarily 
based upon a sound end thriving economy, its protection must equally 
engage our earnest attention . 
"As a different kind of example of free nation interdependence, there 
is Japen, where very different problems exist--but problems equally vital 
to the security of the free world. 
Japan is an essential counterweight 
to COlllmunist strength in Asia . 
Her industrial po· .... er is the heart of any 
collective effort to defend the Far East against aggression . 
"Her more than 90 million people occupy a country where the arable 
land is no more than that of California . 
MOTe than perhaps ony othe.r indus-
trial nation, Japan must export to live. last year she bad a trade~deficit . 
At one time she had e thriving trade with Asia, particularly with her near-
est neighbors . 
N:uch of it is gone. 
Her problems grow more grave . 
"For Japan there must be more free \.,rorld outlets for her products . 
She does not want to be compelled to became dependent as a last resort 
upon the Communist empire . 
Should she ever be forced to that extremity, 
the blo;( to f'ree world security i-lould be i ncalculablej at the least it 
would mean for all other free nations greater· sacrifice, greeter danger, 
and l essened econo."'l1ic strength . 
. 
IIWhat happens depends largely on "to,hat the free world nations can, 
and will, do . 
"Upon us--u~on you here--in this audience· - rests a heavy responsi-
bility . 
He must weigh the facts , fit them into place, and decide on our 
course of action . 
lIFor a cOWltry as large, 8S industrious, and as progressive as 
J apan to ex:ist T,rith the help of grant aid by others, presents no satis-
factory solution . 
Ful~hermore, for us, the cost would be, over the long 
B-50 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
term, increasingly heavy . 
Trade is the key to a durable Japanese eco-
nOOly . 
"One of Japan's greatest opportunities for increased trade lies 
in a free and developing Southeast Asi a . 
So we see that the two prob-
l ems I have beer, discussing are two parts of b single one--the great 
need in Japan is for raw materials; in Southern Asia it is for manu-
f actured goods . 
The t wo regions complement each other markedly. 
So, 
by strengthening Viet- Nam and helping insure the safety of the South 
Pacific lmd Southeast ASia, 
\'Te gradually develop the great trade poten-
tial between this regi on, rich in natural resources, and highly indus-
trialized Japan to the benefit of both. 
In this way freedom in the 
~lestern Pacific will be greatly strengthened and the interests of the 
\lhole free world advanced . 
But such a basic :Improvement can come about 
only gradually . 
Japan must have additional trade outlets now . 
These 
can be provided if each of the industrialized nations in the West does 
its part in liberalizing trade relations with Japan . II 
* * 
-*. 
26. 
ecial Message to the Con ress on the Mutual Security Program, 
Febru9ry 1 § 19 
1963, p . 17 . 
} Public Papers of the Presidents--Eisenhover, 
* * * 
tiThe Mutuel Security Program is e program essential to peace . 
The 
accomplisbrrients of the Nutual Security Program in helping to meet the 
many challenges i n the mid-20th Century place i t among the foremost of 
the great programs of American history. 
Hithout them the map of the 
world would be vastly different today , 
The l>1utual Securit.y Program' and 
its predecessors have been an indispensable contributor to the present 
f act that Greece, Turkey, Iran, Laos, Vietnam, Korea and Taiwan, and 
many nat ions of Hestern Europe, to mention only part, r emain the home 
of free men . 
"While over t he past year the Soviet Union has expressed an inter-
est in measures to reduce the common peril of ,,'ar, and while its r ecent 
deport~ent and pronouncement suggest the possible opening of a somewhat 
l ess strained period in oUr relationships, the menace of Communist 
imperialisu nevertheless still remains . 
The military power of the Sovi et 
Union continues to gro·... . 
Increasingly kportant to "free world interests 
is the Tate of growth of both military and economic power in Communist 
China , 
Evidence that this enormous power bloc remains dedicated to the 
extension of Co,JInunist control over all peopll.!s everyWhere' i s found in 
Tibet, the Taiwan Straits, in 130s ond along the Indian border . 
U In the face of this ever-present CO:i!l11unist threat, we must, i n our 
O\m i nterest as ',Jell as that of the other members of the free world com-
munity, continue our program of military assistance through the various 
B-51 
I 
I 
I 
I 
r 
Declassified l>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Dale: 201 1 
mutual security arrengenents we have established . 
Under these arrange-
ments each nation b~s responsibilties, commensurate with its capabili-
ties, to p8rticipate in the development and maintenance of defensive 
strength. 
There i s also increasing ability of other free world nations 
to share the burden of this con:mon defense. 
110bvi ously, no ot)e nation alone could bear the cost of derending al l 
the free world . 
Likewise, i t would be impossible for many free nations 
l ong to survive if forced to act separately and alone . 
The crumbling of 
the weaker ones would obviously and increasingly multiply the t hreat s t o 
those remaining free, even the very strongest . 
"Col lective security is not only sensible--it 1s essenti al." 
* * * 
27· 
U. S. Sends Greetin s to Viet - I~3t:l on Anniversary of Inde endence, 
~~ite liouse Press Release dated October 25, 19 
, Department · of 
state Bulletin 
liThe Hh1te House on October 25 ~ade public the follo~ing message 
from President Eisenho\Ter to i:go Dinh Diem, President of the Republic 
of Viet- fl'snJ . 
"OCTOBER 22, 1960 
"DEAR 1-lR . PRESIDEfI·;T: 
t-iy countrymen end I are proud to convey our 
good \rishes to you and to the citizens of V1et- Nam on the rifth anni-
versary or the bilt~ of the Republic of Viet-Nam . 
IIHe have watched the courage and daring with which you and the 
Vietnamese people attained independence in e situati on so perilous that 
many thought it hopeless . 
lie have admired the rapidity ,Yith which 
chaos yielded to order and progress replaced despa ir . 
tinuri ng the years of your independence it has been refreshing for 
us to observe how clearly the Government and the citizens of Viet- Nem 
have faced the fact that the greatest danger .to their independence was 
Communism. 
You and your countrymen have used your strength wel l in 
accepting the double chalienge of building your country and reSi sting 
Co~nunist imperialism. 
In five short years since the rounding of the 
Republic, the Vi etnamese people have developed their country i n almost 
every sector . 
I was particularly iI'lpressed by one example . 
I em i nrOlTJed 
that last year over 1, 200,000 Vietna,!1eee children ..... ere able to go to 
e l e~entery school; three times as neny as ..... ere enrolled five years earli er . 
This is certainly a heartening development f or Viet- Nam ' s future . 
At the 
sarroe time Viet- Nem I s abi lity to defend itself f'rom the Communists has 
gro:m im:r.ecsurably since its successful struggle to become an independent 
Republic . 
B- 52 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"Viet - r~ar.t ' s very success as well ss i ts potential \o:ealth and its 
strategic location have led the Communists of Hanoi, goaded by the 
bitt erness of their failure to ensleve all Viet- Nem, to use increasing 
violence in their attempts to destroy your country ' s freedom . 
"This grave threet, added to the strains ·and fat i gues of the l ong 
struggle to achieve add strengthen indepenc.ence, must be a bur den t hat 
would cause moments of tension and concern i n almost any human heart . 
Yet from long observation I sense hOi-! deeply the Vietnamese value their 
cOlmtry ' s independence and strength and r know ho'N' .. ell you used your 
boldness '.!hen you led your countrymen in ttinnlng it . 
I also knoy that 
your determination has been a vital factor in guarding that independence 
whi le steadily advancing the economic development of your country . 
I am 
confident that these same qualiti es of determination and boldness will 
meet t he rene,;,ed threat as · .... ell as the needs end desires of your country-
men f or further progress on all fronts . 
"Although the ma i n responsibili ty for guarding that i ndependence 
yill ah;ays, as it has in the past, belong to the Vietnamese people end 
their governr.ent, I 
~· .. ant to assure you that for so long as our strength 
can be usef ul, the United states will continue to assi st Viet- Nsm in the 
d i fficult yet hopeful struggle aheed . 
"Sincerely, 
"DiHGHI' D. ElSEN1{();-lER . " 
B-53 
