Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

more and with some GVN progress along specified lines, to enter a second

phase program consisting “principally of progressively more serious air

strikes," as in Option C. 4o/ Again, the U.S. focus was on the air war,
not on the ground.

B. The Focus of the Joint Chiefs of Staf*

In forwarding on 11 February 1965 their proposed program for the
first eight weeks of military actions against North Vietnam, the JCS
told the Secretary of Defense that their plan called primarily for air-
strikes but also included the collateral deployment of a MEB to Da Nang
and an Army Brigade to Thailand. 41/ Neither of these deployments were
for purposes of counterinsurgency but rather were intended to deter any
overt DRV/Chicom retaliation and to put us in a better posture in case
the deterrent failed. The JCS forwarded this proposal to the Secretary
again on } March 1965, still without mention of the possibility of ground
combat action against the Viet Cong. 42/ ‘The first proposal from the
JCS that U.S. troop units be sent to SVN for active operations against the
Viet Cong came on 20 March 1965, well after the landing of the Marines at
Da Nang. 43/ That the JCS were considering such a proposal before the
Marines were landed is indicated obliquely in Chairman Wheeler's cover
letter to the Secretary of Defense of 1 March 1965, under which he for-
warded the JSOP-70 and in which he said: "In arriving at the proposed
force levels the present situation in Southeast Asia was only indirectly
considered, and had little, if any, influence upon the JSOP-70 force
levels. This is pointed out to identify a specific problem area that
requires a near term and long term solution. By separate action the JCS
are addressing the problem and will provide you with their views on this
subject." 4/ While the Marines were landing at Da Nang, a key man from
the Washington scene was a visitor in Saigon. Although his visit was
unconnected with the Marine landings per se, his actions. on return to
Washington provided a fair measure of the attitudes prevalent in the
U.S. community in Vietnam at that juncture.

General Johnson, Chief of Staff of the Army, was in Vietnam from the
Sth through the 12th of March 1965. He was given a thorough briefing on
the situation by General Westmoreland and other members of the United
States mission, and he brought back to Washington detailed situation
reports prepared by MACV and the Ambassador. The view from Saigon, as
reflected in those reports, was very grave indeed. A succinct summation
of the views of the entire U.S. Mission Council in Saigon appeared in the
Ambassador's Sitrep forwarded to the State Department on 11 March 1965:

"Unless (and this is primary), NVN support is checked,
GVN military and paramilitary resources increased, pacifica-
tion goals and concepts refined, administrative efficiency

' improved, and an adequate political-psychological base

ereated, there is little likelihood of stemming the tide of .
the VC insurgency. Only U.S, resources can provide the
pressures on NVN necessary to check Hanoi's support, al-
though some measure of SVN armed forces participation will
be required for psychological reasons; the other measures
and programs required to stem the tide of VC insurgency

15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
