Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Second, a victory for the Communists in South Viet-Nam will be
followed by new ambitions in Asia. “.

"The Communists have taught us that aggression is like hunger:
It obeys no law but its own appetite. For this reason they have
gambled heavily on success in the South.

"The leaders of free Asian nations know this better than anyone.
If South Viet-Nam falls, then they are the next targets. North Viet-
Nam's effort to impose its own system on South Viet-Nam is a new form
of colonialism. The free nations of Asia want it stopped now. Many
of them are standing there by our side, helping us stop them now.

"Third, a Communist victory in South Viet-Nam would inspire new
aggression in the rest of the world.

"Listen to me while I repeat the words of North Viet-Nam's top
military commander. I want you to hear what he says:

"The war has become (in his words) the model of the national
liberation movement of our time. If the special warfare that the
United States imperialists are testing in South Viet-Nam is overcome,
then it can be defeated anywhere in the world.'

; "et me repeat to you those last words: '...it can be defeated
' anywhere in the world.‘

"Now what he really means is this: If guerrilla warfare succeeds
in Asia, it can succeed in Africa. It can succeed in Latin America.
It can succeed anywhere in the world.”

. * * *
5{- Address by President Johnson before the Navy League at Manchester,
N.H., August 20, 1966, "Our Objective in Vietnam"; Department of
State Bulletin, September 1@, 1966, p. 30.
 &

",.»But I think most Americans want to know why Viet-Nam is important.

"T think they know that communism must be halted in Viet-Nam, as it
was halted in Western Europe and in Greece and Turkey and Korea and the
Caribbean, if it is determined to swallow up free peoples and spread its
influence in that area trying to take freedom away from people who do
want to select their own leaders for themselves.

"T think that our people know that if aggression succeeds there,
when it has failed in other places in the world, a harsh blow would be

.

D-88
