Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

better results. Their report was submitted in mid-December 1967 and
was probably the most categorical rejection of bombing as a tool of our
policy in Southeast Asia to be made before or since by an official or
semi-official group. The study was done for McNamara and closely held
after completion. It was completed after his decision to leave the
Pentagon, but it was a powerful confirmation of the positions on the
bombing that he had taken in the internal councils of the government
over the preceding year.

The study evaluated the bombing in terms of its achievement
of the objectives that Secretary Mcilamara had defined for it:

Secretary McNamara on August 25, 1967 restated the
objectives of the bombing campaign in North Vietnam. These
objectives are:

1. fo reduce the flow and/or to increase the cost of
the continued infiltration of men and supplies from North
to South Vietnam.

2. To raise the morale of the South Vietnamese people
who, at the time the bombing started, were under severe
military pressure.

3. To make clear to the North Vietnamese political
Jeadership that so long as they continued their aggression
against the South, they would have to pay a price in the
North. 56/

Taking up the first of these stated objectives, the JASON
study reached an emphatically negative conclusion about the results from
ROLLING THUNDER:

As of October 1967, the U.S. bombing of North Vietnam
has had no measurable effect on Hanoi's ability to mount
and support military operations in the South. North Vietnam
supports operations in the South mainly by functioning as
a logistic funnel and providing a source of manpower, from
an economy in which manpower has been widely under-utilized.
Most of the essential military supplies that the VC/NVA forces
jin the South require from external sources are provided
by the USSR, Eastern Europe, and Communist China. Further-
more, the volume of such supplies is so low that only a
small fraction of the capacity of North Vietnam's flexible
transportation network is required to maintain that flow.

In the face of Rolling Thunder strikes on NVN, the
pombing of infiltration routes in Laos, the U.S. naval
operations along the Vietnamese coast, and the tactical

123 TOP Stee - Sensitive
