Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

REPORT BY COMBINED CHIEFS: OF STAFF

gperations in Southeast Asia Command

12. We have discussed the instructions that should be issued to
‘ko Supreme Allied Commander, Southeast Asin, and have agreed
spon. the ferms of the directive in Appendix GA Sia!

prallocation of Areas and Command in the South west Pacific and South-

east Asia Areas

13. We have agreed in principle that that part of the Southwest
Pacifie Area lying south of the boundary described in Appendix “C”
should pass from United States to British command as soon as pos-
ible. The British Chiefs of Staff have undertaken to obtain the
egreoment of the Australian, New Zealand, and Dutch Governments
io these proposals and to investigate and report the earliest practicable
date on Which the transfer can be effected.

14. We consider it desirable that initially Admiral Mountbatten
sontrol operations undertaken in southern Indo-China since these
are more closely related to those of Southeast Asia Command than
to those of the China Theater. We are agreed that the best arrange-
nent would be to include that portion of Indo-China lying south
of latitude 16° north in Southeast Asia Command. This arrangement
sould continue General Wedemeyer’s control of that part of Indo-
China which covers the flank of projected Chinese operations in
China, and would enable Admiral Mountbatten to prepare the ground
in the southern half of Indo-China where any initial operations by
him would develop.

We recommend that an approach to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek‘
be made by our two governments to secure his agreement to this
srrangement.

At a later date it may prove to be desirable to place all or part of
the remainder of Indo-China within the sphere of operations of the
Southeast Asia Command.

French and Dutch Participation in the War

15. We have considered the arrangements which can be made for
French and Dutch participation in the war against Japan and our
conclusions are es follows:—

a. While it is at present jimpracticable due chiefly to logistical
difficulties for French or Netherlands armed forces to take a major
sart in the immediate operations in the Far Kast, the provision of such
assistance which may be synchronized with operations will be taken

‘ato account. The use of such forces will depend solely on military
‘onsiderations. French or Netherlands forces so accepted must
sperate under the complete control of the commander in chief
concerned.

LEA C, §, 900/2 reads: “an approach to the Generalissimo’
: [No. 1281]
