Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

[Bt this point, Theng launched into a lengthy explana-
tion of what he meant by a new society. In a vague
discussion, he described the social, economic, and .
political attributes of the new society, all of which
were general and idealized statauecey

Point No. 3: The clear and realistic policy of the govern-
ment contributing to a better life in a new society I just
mentioned should be widely known among the population and
the cadres...

Point No. 4: Rural pacification operations will open
lasting peace if the enemy infrastructure is destroyed

and permanently followed up, our own infrastructure created
and supported by the people...All provinces have promised
to the government that 75 percent of the following facts
maybe can be accomplished by the lst of January 1967:

"Pacification of 963 new hamlets; pacification of 1,083
existing hamlets; building of 2251 classrooms; 913 kilometers
of roads; 128 bridges; 57 dams; and 119 kilometers of canals
«»-While we have selected four areas of priority, the pacifi-
cation operation has been pushed forward as usual, but with
less efforts...

"Rural pacification will be a long-term operation. We
have modest and practical, rather than spectacular, goals for

1966..." 6/

After General Thang*s remarks, the plenary session records show
repeated references to the pacification effort, although there is con-
fusion as to what it means. General Thieu made additional summary
remarks on pacification, then Minister Ton gave a briefing on the econo-
mic situation, followed by David Bell on the same subject.

The next dey, February 8, the working groups presented their findings
to the President. First, Secretary Rusk and Foreign Minister Do discussed —
the session on negotiations. Then General Thang and Secretary Freeman
reported on their session on rural construction. The details of the
working groups session itself are covered below, but in plenary. Thang
emphasized the following points:

Our future should be developed mainly in four priority

areas...Handicraft should be introducel and developed

in those areas also...Rural electrification should be
; developed and the number of generators increased in

1967...

39 ' TOP SECRET - Sensitive
