Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Bien Hoa area, on both banks of the river Dong Nai. A
French convoy has been attacked on the road between Bien Hoa
and Tan Uyen where a land mine had been laid by the rebels.

'In the (Baclo) area, northwest of Saigon, a number of
pirates have been captured in the course of a clean-up raid.
Among the captured men are five Japanese deserters. The dead
bodies of three Japanese, including an officer, have been
found at the point where the operation was carried out.

'A French detachment was ambushed at (San Jay), south
Annam. The detachment, nevertheless, succeeded in carrying
out its mission. Several aggressions by rebel parties are
reported along the coastal road.'" 31

Violence abated in South Vietnam somewhat as Franco-DRV negotia-
tions proceeded in spring, 1946, but in the meantime, French forces
moved into further confrontation with Vietnamese "rebels" in Tonkin.
In February, 1946, a French task force prepared to force landings at
Haiphong, but was forestalled by diplomatic, maneuver. A Franco-
Chinese agreement of 28 February 1946 provided that the Chinese would
turn over their responsibilities in northern Indochina to the French
on 31 March 1916. 32/_

On March 6, 1946, a French-DRV accord was reached in the following
terms; 33/

"]. The French Government recognizes the Vietnamese
Republic as a Free State having its own Government, its
own Parliament, its own Army and its own Finances, forming
part of the Indochinese Federation and of the French Union.
In that which concerns the reuniting of the three “Annamite
Regions" [Cochinchina, Annam, Tonkin/ the French Government
pledges itself to ratify the decisions taken by the populations
consulted by referendum.

"2. The Vietnamese Government declares itself ready io
welcome amicably the French Army when, conforming to inter-
national agreements, it relieves the Chinese Troops. A
Supplementary Accord, attached to the present Preliminary
Agreement, will establish the means by which the relief
operations will be carried out.

"3- The stipulations formulated above will immediately
enter into force. Immediately after the exchange of signatures,
each of the High Contracting Parties will take all measures
necessary to stop hostilities in the field, to maintain the
troops in their respective positions, and to create the favor-
able atmosphere necessary to the immediate opening of friendly

A-25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
