Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B. District Advisors and the Beef-Up of
Battalion Advisory Tears

The initial U.S. reaction to the Diem coup was thus one of modest
optimism. Even given the U.S. disappointment at the death of the Ngo
brothers the fact remained that the new regime in the Saigon saddle
was expected to be more responsive to U.S. advice than the previous
government had been. It was necessary that GVN programs be redirected
into more realistic channels, that the efficiency of operations be
increased, that additional steps be taken to seal the infiltration
routes through Laos, and thet the U.S. reaffirm its commitment to GVN
in a eredible way. The key to success-~the pacification process-~had
already been discovered; the task was one of skillful, sustained execu-
tion.

Each of these points was addressed by National Security Action
Memorandum 273, approved 26 November 1963. ‘The immediate cause for
NSAM 273 was the assassination of President Kennedy four days earlier;
newly~installed President Johnson needed to reaffirm or modify the policy
lines pursued by his predecessor. President Johnson quickly chose to
reaffirm the Kennedy policies. Emphasis should be placed, the document
stated, on the Mekong Delta area, but not only in militery terms. Polit-
ical, economic, social, educational, and informational activities must
also be pushed: "We should seek to turn the tide not only of battle
put of belief...." 88/ Military operations should be initiated, under
close political control, up to within fifty kilometers inside of 1aos.
U.S. assistance programs should be mintained at levels at least equal
to those wnder the Diem government so that the new GVN would not be
tempted to regard the U.S. as seeking to disengage. 89

The same document also revalidated the planned phased withdrawal
of U.S. forces announced publicly in broad terms by President Kennedy
shortly before his death:

The objective of the United States with respect to the
withdrawal of U.S. military personnel remains as stated in
the White House statement of October 2, 1963. 90/

No new programs were proposed or endorsed, no increases in the level or
nature of U.S. assistance suggested or foreseen. The emphasis Was on
persvading the new government in Saigon to do well those things which
the fallen government was considered to have done poorly.

OPTIMISM TURNS T0 FRUSTRATION

This attitude of cautious optimism changed gradually by the early
summer of 1964 to one of deepening gloom. Wo radical shift marked this

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
