Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

Til. PROBABLE EFFECTS OF THE EXECUTION OF
JOINT MILITARY COUNTERMEASURES

Reaction of the Chinese Commuris! ard Soviet Governments*

13. If the Chinese Communists undertook an identifiable
military intervention in Southeast Asia despite a joint warning
against such a move, Chinese Communis! planning unquestionably
would have considered the likelihood of Western counteraction
and would have been coordinated with the USSR. It is possible
that such an intervention might be undertaken in the belief
that the warning was a bluff, or at least that the countermeasures
would be confined to the area of the aggression. In this case
the execution of forceful military countermeasures might induce
the Communis!s to seek a seitlement, It appears far more
likely, however, that such ar intervention would be undertaken
in full recognition of the risks involved. Under these circum-
stances, the immediate reaction to such military counteraction
would provably be an atternpt tc accelerate Chinese Communist
military operations, The Chisese Commurisis would probably
attempt to extend their operations to other paris of Southeast
Asia and, having already accepied the danger of expanded
hostilities, they might well intensify operations in Korea
and seize Hong Kong ard Macao, Highest priority would be
given, however, to the defense of Communist China.

14, Chinese Communist defiance of a joint warning
would almost! certainly involve the prior consent of the
USSR. The degree of Soviet aid to Communist China would
depend upon (a) the nature, scope, and degree of success of
the Western counteraction, and (b) the degree to which the
existence of the Peiping regime seemed to be jeopardized.

* §-20: ‘The Probable Consequences of Ceriain Possible
US Courses of Action with Respect to Communist China and

Korea’ treats most of the material discussed in this section
in more deiail. :

TOP SECRET
Leh
