Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

it not been for U.S. aid, many of the refugees might never have reached
the South, and without U.S. aid there, many might have perished. The

U.S. Navy moved 310,848 persons in its "Operation Exodus." The $93 million
the GVN received from the U.S. comprised 97% of the funds it dispensed
for these purposes, nearly $100 per refugee in a country with a lower
national income per capita. 62/ This official aid, plus substantial
assistance from American charities, combined with a remarkably energetic
and imaginative Vietnamese administration, succeeded by 1957 in providing
decent habitation and livelihood for all but a few of the refugees -- a
genuinely laudable accomplishment, which must stand with the defeat of the
sects among Diem's crowning achievements. 63/

Because of the GVN's undertakings for the refugees, the
Geneva "regroupment" turned out, at least initially, very much to its
advantage: it gained nearly 1 million loyal citizens adamantly opposed
to reunification were it to mean their return to DRV rule, whose recounted
experiences with the Viet Minh buttressed the moral fiber of the South.
Here were whole communities largely dependent on the GVN, untouched by
the armed religious sects, and hostile to the Viet Minh, from which Diem
could recruit reliable political and military cadres. Here were masses
disposed to follow Diem uncritically, easily manipulated for political
purposes by Diem or his family. Here, for aid-dispensing Americans, were
Vietnamese whose needs were basic, and who proved capable of absorbing
simple, quick-return, highly visible forms of assistance.

> The GVN began to politicize the refugee eommunities almost
immediately. For example, in July, 1955, when the DRV appealed to Diem
to commence consultation towards the plebescite, an apparently well-
directed mob of refugees attacked the hotel quarters of the ICC. oh/
Some 20,000 of the refugees were moved together to a sparsely settled
tract in the Mekong Delta of 100,000 acres, which was cleared, plowed
and irrigated with substantial American technical assistance and 100
tractors; this, the Cai San project, became a showcase of American aid
for visitors. 65/ In a much smaller, yet perhaps more significant
instance, the GVN formed small, black-pajamaed "civic action" cadres for
the purpose of building communications between Saigon and the villages;
although the original idea had been to use Saigon bureaucrats, these
failed to volunteer, and the bulk of the teams were eventually manned by
northern refugees. 66/ later, refugee communities were transplanted to
the frontiers to enhance both the local economy and security there. 6t/
The GVN was not ungrateful, and eventually the preferred positions in the
Army and the bureaucracy began to be filled with refugee Catholics and
other northerners.

In the long run, however, Diem squandered the advantsge the
Geneva regroupment brought him. His policies kept the refugees an unas-
similated, special interest group, which produced further distortions in
an already stressed polity. They in turn projected in rural areas an
unfavorable image of the GVN, which probably figured in its eventual
rejection by most Cochinchinese and non-Catholic Annamites: a goverment

15 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
