Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"A year later, he reaffirmed that:

‘We are not going to withdraw from that effort. In my opin-
ion, for us to withdraw from that effort would mean a collapse not
only of South Viet-Nem, but Southeast Asia. So we are going to stay
there.'

"This is not simply an American viewpoint, I would have you legis-
lative leaders know. I am going to call the roll now of those who live
in that part of the world--in the great arc of Asian and Pacific nations--
and who bear the responsibility for leading their people and the responsi-
bility for the fate of their people.

‘"The President of the Philippines had this to say:

'Viet-Nam is the focus of attention now....It may happen to
Thailand or the Philippines, or anywhere, wherever there is misery,
disease, ignorance....For you to renounce your position of leadership
in Asia is to allow the Red Chinese to gobble up all of Asia.'

"The Foreign Minister of Thailand said;

' /The American/ decision will go down in history as the move
that prevented the world from having to face another major conflagration.’

"The Prime Minister of Australia said:

‘We are there because while Communist aggression persists the
whole of Southeast Asia is threatened.'

"president Park of Korea said:

'For the first time in our history, we decided to dispatch our
combat troops overseas...because in our belief any aggression against
the Republic of Viet-Nam represented a direct and grave menace against
the security and peace of free Asia, and therefore directly jeopardized
the very security and freedom of our own people.'

"The Prime Minister of Malaysia warned his people that if the
United States pulled out of South Viet-Nam, it would go to the Commun-
ists, and after that, it would only be a matter of time until they moved
against neighboring states.

"The Prime Minister of New Zealand said:
'We can thank God that America at least regards aggression in

Asia with the same concern as it regards Rees CBR +Or in Europe--and is
prepared to back up its concern with action.
