Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a prohibition on the use of either zone for the resumption of hostili-
ties or to ‘further an aggressive policy.’ From the beginning, North
Viet-Nam violated the Geneva accords through a systematic effort to gain
control of South Viet-Nam by force. In the light of these progressive
North Vietnamese violations, the introduction into South Viet-Nam begin-
ning in late 1961 of substantial United States military equipment and ~-
personnel, to assist fn the defense of the South, was fully Justified; —
substantial breach of an international agreement by one side permits
the other side to suspend performance of corresponding obligations under
the agreement. South Viet-Nam was justified in refusing to implement
the provisions of the Geneva accords calling for reunification through
free elections throughout Viet-Nam since the Communist regime in North
Viet-Nam created conditions in the North that made free elections entirely
impossible. ,
"The President of the United States has full authority to commit
United States forces in the collective defense of South Viet-Nam. This
authority stems from the constitutional powers of the President. However,
it is not necessary to rely on the Constitution alone as the source of
the President's authority, since the SEATO treaty--advised and consented
to by the Senate and forming part of the law of the land--sets forth ‘
a United States commitment to defend South Viet-Nam against armed attack,
and since the Congress--in the joint resolution of August 10, 1964, and
in authorization and appropriations acts for support of the U.S. military
effort in Viet-Nam--has given its approval and support to the President's
actions. United States actions in Viet-Nam, taken by the President and
approved by the Congress, do not require any declaration of war, as shown
by a long line of precedents for the use of United States armed forces
abroad in the absence of any congressional declaration of war."

45. Address by Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg, U.S. Representative to
the United Nations, Before the Pilgrim Society at London, England

America: and Britain:

on March 19 Unity of Purpose ; Depart-
ment of State Bulletin, April 4, 1966, p. 539.

¥ * *

"The most unspoken and unuttered--almost concealed--thought of some
in the fight against the American involvement in Southeast Asia is:
First, America cannot win the war in South Viet-Nem; second, while
South Viet-Nam or, indeed, Southeast Asia may be important to American
interests, these areas are not crucial to those interests. Therefore,
since we cannot win in a war theater where the territory is peripheral
+o American interests, let us retreat, let us withdraw with no further
nonsense.

"In my view, the complete answer is that there would be no greater
danger to world peace than to start segregating mankind and the countries

D-71
