Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

5

one who is really a spokesman for the administration and seek eau
pose any restriction on that witness in regard to anything that 18
Says in that executive session in respect to his right to make any COE
ment after the mecting is over or release any statement he wants to
make after the meeting is over. ae

Speaking hypothetically, although the Secretary has made very
clear his willingness to obliee you, Tam not talking about his willing-
ness. to oblige but I am talking about what I consider to be a Meet)
very important basie procedural right of the administration witness
uncer the separation powers doctrine. I shave never transgressed upon
it knowingly, and I am not going to let the administration at any Bue
transgress upon our corresponding right under the same doctrine.
Therefore, I think we ought to deal with each other on the basis that
we know what these respective rights are and seek to place no restric-
tion on each other. That is my point. ee

I took the same position, von wi]] recall, in the MacArthur hearings
when there was an attempt, in my judgment, on the part of the com-
mittee then to infringe the rights of the administration under the doc-
trine there. I take the same position this morning.

enator Wicikextooprr, Mx. Chairman.
‘he Cuaimaray. Senator Hickenlooper.

RESPONSIBILITY FOR RELEASING A SVYATEMENT

Senator Hicxnsrooren. I think we have a rather complicated situ-
ation here which is not necessarily one under the control of the See
tary or of the committee. It may be more under the control of the
committee than of the Secretary. [ Naas

I would say that the Secretary has no right whatsoever under our
procedure to release a transcri pt of this record where members ues-
tion the Secretary and answers come in. On the other hand, I woulc say
this, that the res ponsibility of releasing a statement on the sole respon-
sibility of the Seareiany or any other administrative official ‘is the
tesponsibility of that official of that department. J am not so sure ~
can control it. We can control what we release. I think it is a matter o
somo kind of an understandine, : 3.

I am thoroughly sympathetic with what you have said, Mr. er
man, about piccemneal releases of these things. I hate to read abou
them even though they have not been released—I hate to read os
them in Time magazine or the New York Times or other papers of that
kind, where we have to get some of our information from there. ne
makes us quite restless but apparently there hheaes we can doa oe
1f, and sometimes what goes on in this committee at least seems EO =
approximative in some of those news releases of certain columnists
and so on. :

So it is a problem that has its various facets, But so far asa straight

‘statement of the speeeny I would say that we have no authority to

inhibit him from a straig at statement he wants to make to the bs -
on his own res donsibility without regard to questions or GDSWEFS: OF
what anyone else has said, because when that occurs, then there is *
dual responsibility there, not only on the questioner but the Secretary,
and I hope we can control that. : .

But I do not know; it is'a very difficult thing, and J am thoroughly
sympathetic with the piecemeal
