Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

policy is now developed, we face the grave danger that Pleiku, like the
Gulf of Tonkin, may be a short-run stimulant and a long-term depressant.
We therefore recommend that the necessary preparations be made for con-
tinuing reprisals. The major necessary steps to be taken appear to us
to be the following:

"(1) We should complete the evacuation of dependents.

"2) We should quietly start the necessary westward deploy-
ments of back-up contingency forces.

™%3) We should develop and refine a running catalogue of Viet
Cong offenses which can be published regularly and related clearly to
our own reprisals. Such a catalogue should perhaps build on the founda-
tion of an initial White Paper.

"(4) We -should initiate joint planning with the GVN on both the
civil and military level. Specifically, we should give a clear and
strong signal to those now forming a government that we will be ready
for this policy when they are. A :

"(5) We should develop the necessary public and diplomatic state-
ments to accompany the initiation and continuation of this program.

"(6) We should insure that a reprisal program is matched by
renewed public commitment to our family of programs in the South, so
that the central importance of the southern struggle may never be neg-
lected.

"(7) We should plan quiet diplomatic communications of the
precise meaning of what we are and are not doing, to Hanoi, to Peking
and to Moscow.

"(8) We should be prepared to defend and to justify this new
policy by concentrating attention in every forum upon its cause -- the
aggression in the South. :

"(9) We should accept discussion on these terms in any fori,
but we should not now accept the idea of negotiations of any sort except
on the basis of a stand down of Viet Cong violence. A program of sus-.
tained reprisal, with its direct link to Hanoi's continuing aggressive
actions in the South will not involve us in nearly the level of inter-
nationel recrimination which would be precipitated by a go-North program
which was not so’connected. For this reason the international pressures
for negotiation should be quite manageable.”

B. The Teylor Conception of "Graduated Reprisals"

At about the same time that the McGeorge Bundy memorandum was
being submitted to the President, Ambassador Taylor, in a cable from

.

39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
