November 5, 1945:

November 8, 195:

November 23, 1945:

November 26, 1945:

January 18, 1946:

February 16, 1946:

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Page
Despatch, Philip D. Sprouse, U.S. Consul,
Kunming, to Secretary of State. Incloses
22 October letter of Ho, surveys situation
in Vietnam based on reports of Colonel

Nordlinger, USA, and reports Ho and Bao
Dai attempt to visit Chiang Kai-shek.......+++0+++C-76

U.S. Embassy, Chungking summarizes Ho Chi

Minh letter addressed to President Truman

and Chiang Kai-shek underscoring French loss '

of sovereignty, DRV acquisition of same, and
aggression by French to regain it. Asserts

Freneh bear onus of resuming war of aggression

daeRe AGG cnc te eevee area e wet Wietee pre's migiaeitp ae tras AER

Telegram from U.S. Embassy, Chungking, para-

phrases letters from Ho Chi Minh to President

Truman and Director General of UNRRA, des-

eribing famine in North Vietnam, and appeal-

Ingat ORO MeL OR: once eee yc ws eUisth alty eure ana eee

Despatch from U.S. Embassy, Chungking, in-

closing Ho's letter of 1 November; letter of

28 October from Ho to ChiargKai-shek urging

Chiang to stop the British-French-Japanese

action in Cochinchina; and an undated tele-

gram to the Secretary of State protesting

that France did not have the right to speak

for Vietnam in international councils, and

appealing to all free nations of the world

to stop conflict in South Vietnam.........00. 3 ¢ aap OHO9

Telegram from U.S. Embassy, Chungking, dated
13 February 1946, paraphrasing letter from

Ho to President Truman, dated 18 January 1946,
reminding that peace is indivisible and re-
questing President's intervention for immedi-
ate resolution of Vietnam issue. Telegram
describes identical letter to General Marshall,

_ Same date...... Cra cauio ian ao ere Caner seeee 0-93

Letter signed by Ho Chi Minh to President of

the U.S. cites the principles supported by

the U.S. before, during and after the war,

and in the UN, to call for U.S. aid to Viet-

nam in the face of French aggression. Ho

asks what has been granted the Philippines --

"like the Philippines our goal is full inde-

pendence and full cooperation with the

THEE THEY TAR cur ciyysiata.a civ iene # field e paislew vaigtemaeeeees oe

C-64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
