Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

United States, having failed to interest Britain in united action prior
to the start of the Geneva Conference, determined to plunge ahead with-
out British participation as a sine qua non. But, the caveat to the
French grew in importance. Conditions which had been given the French
before the fall of Dien Bien Phu were now augmented, most importantly
by a greater detailing of the process the French government would have
to go through before the U.S. would consider intervention.

hk, French Use Threat of U.S. Intervention at Geneva
a. French Do Not Intend to Request U.S. Involvement

Even while the French pondered the conditions, urged their
refinement and redefinition to suit French policies, and insisted in
the end that they saw no political obstacles separating the U.S. and
France, Washington foresaw that the French were very unlikely to for-
ward a request for U.S, involvement. Having learned something from
the futile diplomatic bargaining in April, Department of State repre-
sentatives in Paris and Washington saw that what the French wanted was
not the military but the political benefits of U.S. involvement; and
they thought they could get them by bringing into the open the fact
that the U.S. and France were negotiating active American participation
in the fighting. Thus, Dillon correctly assessed in mid-May that French
inquiries about U.S. conditions for intervention represented a "wish to
use possibility of our intervention primarily to strengthen their hand
at Geneva." 35/ Dillon's sensitivity to the French position was proven
accurate by Bidault's memorandum to the President: France would, in
reality, only call on the United States if an “honorable" settlement
could, clearly not be obtained at Geneva, for only under that circum-
stance could the National Assembly be persuaded that the Laniel govern-
ment had done everything possible to achieve peace.

b. French Bring Out Possible U.S. United Action as a Lever
in Bargaining

Our recognition of the game the French were playing did not
keep us from posing intervention as an alternative for them; but by
adhering tenaciously to the seven conditions, the U.S, ruled out either
precipitous American action or an open-ended commitment to be used or
rejected by Paris. "We cannot grant French an indefinite option on us
without regard to intervening deterioration” of the military situation,
Dulles wrote 8 June. 36/ As much as the Administration wanted to avoid
@ sell-out at Geneva, it was aware that events in Indochina might pre-
elude effective action even if the French suddenly decided they wanted
U.S. support.

Ce United Action is an Alternative But Not a Subverting Force
The United: States, then, did not propose united action

with the intention of subverting the Conference. Instead, united action
was offered. as a palliative if the Conference should become an exercise

A-25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
