Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SSCRET - Sensitive

VIII. AN INCONCLUSIVE SUMMARY

The dominant U.S. view has been that the Strategic Hamlet Program
failed because of over-expansion and the establishment of hamlets in
basically insecure areas. 107/ Thet there was overexpansion and the
establishment of many poorly defended hamlets is not questioned. This
contributed, beyond doubt, to the failure of the program. But this view
finesses the problem of the process for which the strategic hamlets were
put the tangible symbol. ‘The present analysis has sought to emphasize
poth the essentially political nature of the objective of the Strategic
Hamlet Program and the political nature of the context in which the
process evolved -- of expectations, bargaining, and attempts to exert
influence on other participants in policy formulation and implementation.
In this context it is the U.S. inability to exert leverage on President
Diem (or Diem's inability to reform) that emerges as the principal cause
of failure.

Yet, both of these attempts to pinpoint the reasons why the
strategic hamlet program did not succeed fail to get at another whole
issue: the validity of that body of writings which one may call the
theory and doctrine of counterinsurgency. Neither the military nor
the political aspects of this doctrine can be upheld (or proved felse)
by an examination of the Strategic Hamlet Program. Quite aside from
whether or not Diem was able to broaden the program's appeal to the
peasantry, what would have occurred had he made 2 determined and
sustained effort to do so? Would this have led in some more-or-less
direct way to stability or to even greater dissatisfaction? We simply
do not know. The question is as unanswerable as whether the appetite
grows with the eating or is satisfied by it. The contention here is
that cleims of mismanagement are not sufficient to conclude that better
management would necessarily have produced the desired results.

In the military sphere the unanswerable questions are different.
It is said that the military phase of the Strategic Hamlet Program
progressed reasonably well in many areas; the failure was in the political
end of the process. But did the military actions succeed? Might failures
to develop adecuate intelligence and to weed out VC infrastructure in
these hemlets not as easily be attributable to the fact that the
inhabitants knew they were not really safe from VC intimidation and
reprisals? Does the analogy to an "oil spot" have operational meaning
when small bands can carry out hit and run raids or when many small
pands can concentrate in one location and achieve surprise? Where is
the key to this vicious circle -- or is there a key?

In conelusion, while the abortive Strategic Hamlet Program of
1961-1963 may teach one something, the available record does not permit
one to conclude either that the program fell because of the failure of
a given phase or that other phases were, in fact, adequete to the
challenge. One may say that the program was doomed by poor execution
and by the inability of the Ngo family to reform coupled with the in-
ability of the U.S. to induce them to reform. The evidence does not
warrant one to proceed further.

36

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
