Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A number of contributory reasons can be cited for the failure of the
Strategic Hamlet Program. Over-expansion of construction and poor
quality of defenses forms one category. This reason concentrates only
on the initial phase of the program, however. While valid, it does little
+o explain why the entire program collapsed rather than only some hamlets
within it. Rural antagonisms which identified the program with its
sponsors in the central government are more suggestive of the besis for
the complete collapse as Diem and Nhu departed the scene. The reasons
why they departed are traceable in part to the different expectations
which combined in the apparent consensus at the program's beginning: to
Diem's insistence on material assistance and independence, to U.S. willing-
ness to provide assistance only if its advice was heeded, and to the
failure to resolve this question either by persuasion or leverage.

Having said this, it does not automatically follow that the program
would have succeeded even if Diem had met U.S. demands for change. To
point to the causes of failure is one thing; to assume that changes of
style would have led to success is cuite another. It may well be that
the program was doomed from the outset because of peasant resistance to
measures which changed the pattern of rural life -~ whether aimed at
security or control. It might have been possible, on the other hand, for
a well-executed program eventually to have achieved some measure of success.
The early demise of the program does not permit a conclusive evaluation.

‘The weight of evidence suggests that the Strategic Hamlet Progrem was

fatally flawed in its conception by the unintended consequence of alienat-
ing many of those whose loyalty it aimed to win.

This inconclusive finding, in turn, suggests that the sequential
phases embodied in the doctrine of counterinsurgency may slight same
very important problem areas. The evidence is not sufficient for an
indictment; still less is one able to validate the counterinsurgent doc-
trine with reference to a program that failed. The only verdict that
may be given at this time with respect to the wlidity of the doctrine is
thet used by Scots courts -- "case not proved."

Vv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
