Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

victory as determination to take some new military commitments such
as air strikes against the Viet Cong in the Laos corridor; while Lodge
defined victory as willingness to make punitive air strikes against
North Vietnam. "The significant fact...was that they /both Westmore-
land and Lodge/ looked toward some American decision to undertake a
commitment which the Vietnamese would interpret as a willingness to
raise the military ante and eschew negotiations begun from a position
of weakness," Although Khanh had had some success, Vietnamese morale
was still not good and needed leadership had not been displayed.

If we can obtain a breakthrough in the mutual commit-
ment of the U.S, in Vietnam to a confident sense of victory,
we believe that we can introduce this sort of executive
involvement into the Vietnamese structure.... No one....can
define with precision just how that breakthrough can be
established. It could come from the external actions of the
U.S., internal leadership in Vietnam, or from an act of

irreversible commitment by the United States. 10

The “logic” of this seemed to be that Khanh had not been able to
provide the necessary leadership, despite all the aid and support the
U.S. had given. No level of mere aid, advice, and support short of
full participation could be expected to supply this deficiency, be-
eause Khanh would remain discouraged and defeated until he was given
full assurance of victory. He would not be able to feel that
assurance of victory until the U.S. committed itself to full partici-
pation in the struggle, even to the extent of co-belligerency, If the
U.S. could commit itself in this way, the U.S. determination would
somehow be transfused into the GVN, ‘The problem before the assembled
U.S. policy-makers, therefore, was to find some means of breakthrough
into an irreversible commitment of the U.S.

The actions contemplated in this memorandum were not finally
decided upon at this juncture, as we know. But we were gravitating
inexorably in that direction in response to forces already at work,
and over which we had ceased to have much real control. The situa-
tion in Vietnam had so developed, by this time, that by common consent
the success of our programs in Vietnam--and indeed of our whole policy
there, with which we had publicly and repeatedly associated our
national prestige--depended upon the stability of the GVN. Conditions
being what they were, the GVN equated, for the future to which plans
and actions applied, with the Khanh regime. We were therefore almost
as dependent wpon Khanh as he was beholden to us. Circumstances had
thus forced us into a situation wherein the most immediate and press-
ing goal of-our programs in Vietnam was recognized to be using our
resources and prestige to perpetuate a regime that we knew was only
one faction--opposed by other factions--and without any broad base of
popular support, We were aware of that weakness, and fully intended,
whenever it was expedient, to find ways to broaden that basis of
popular support. But that was something that could be--and indeed had

8}.
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
