ent]

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(2) Demonstrating U.S. ability to provide
support which will enable indigenous non-Communist elements
to cope with "wars of national liberation" and, hence,

(3) Demonstrating the sterile futility of
the militant and aggressive expansionist policy advocated by
the present rulers of Communist China.

b. Aiding the development of a non-Communist
political structure within South Vietnam capable of extending
its writ over most of the country and acquiring sufficient
internal strength and self-generated momentum to be able to
survive without the support of U.S. combat forces whenever North
Vietnam ceases its present campaign of intensive military
pressure.

To adopt this option, Carver reasoned, required, on the
political side, work with all non-Communist Vietnamese factions "to
insure that the transition to civilian rule is as orderly as possible
and effected with a minimum disruption of current programs." The United
States would have to make plain in Saigon that continued support was
"contingent upon some modicum of responsible political behavior" and
would have to "initiate the Vietnamese in the techniques of developing
political institutions such as constitutions and parties." An "intensive
endeavor at provincial and district levels" would have to complement
efforts in the capital.

On the military side, Carver judged the demands of Option A
to be as follows:

a. Current U.S. force deployments in Vietnam will have
to be maintained and additional deployments already authorized
should be made.

bd. Efforts to hamper Communist use of Laos as a corridor
for infiltrating troops and supplies into South Vietnam should
be continued and in some respects intensified. There should be
further employment of B-52's against selected choke points
yulnerable to this type of attack. Additional programs should
be developed to make our interdiction attacks more effective.

ec. The aerial pressure campaign on North Vietnam should
be sustained for both military and psychological purposes.
Attacks should not be mounted against population centers such
as Hanoi or Haiphong, but major POL storage depots should be
destroyed and, probably, Haiphong harbor should be mined.

gh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
