Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

AGAINST a bombing pause, fewer new arguments were
adduced. Those which we have seen, however, were restated with
greater force. Thus it was noted that while Hanoi had said it
could never "negotiate" so long as the bombing continued, it had
given no sign whatsoever that even with a complete cessation (this,
the paper pointed out, and not a "pause," was what the DRV really
insisted upon) it would be led to "meaningful" negotiations or to
de-escalatory actions. It might, for example, offer to enter into
negotiations on condition that the bombing not be resumed and/or
that the NLF be seated at the conference on a basis of full equality
with the GVN. Both of these conditions would be clearly unaccept-
able to the U.S., which would run the danger of having to resume
bombing in the face of what major sectors of domestic and international
opinion would regard as a "reasonable" Hanoi offer: "In other words,
instead of improving our present peace-seeking posture, we could actu-
ally end up by damaging it severely." And in doing so, the U.S. would
"lose the one card that we have which offers any hope of a settlement
that does more than reflect the balance of forces on the ground in
the South." (Here, it may be noted, was the ultimate claim that
could be made for the bombing program in the face of criticism that
it had failed to achieve its objective of interdicting the flow of
men and materials to the South.)

To these arguments , essentially restatements of ones
we have previously seen, were added:

--"There is a danger that, in spite of any steps we may
take to offset it, Hanoi may misread a pause at this
time as indicating that we are giving way to inter-
national pressures to stop the bombing of North Vietnam
and that our resolve with respect to South Vietnam is
thus weakening." This danger had recently increased,
the paper noted, because of peace demonstrations in the
United States and the first heavy American casualties
in South Vietnam. :

.-Just as a pause would make it more difficult to cope
with the domestic "doves," so it would the "hawks"
as well: "Pressure from the Rivers/Nixon sector to
hit Hanoi and Haiphong hard might also increase very

LL

sharply..--

-"Tp a ‘pause’ were in fact to lead to negotiations

(with or without resumed bonbing), we would then have
continuing serious problems in maintaining South Viet-
namese stability. We must also recognize that, although
we ourselves have some fairly good initial ideas of the
positions we would take, we have not been able to go over
the ground with the GVN or to get beyond general proposi-
tions on some of which we and they might well disagree."

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
