Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

problem has become much more serious than the Civil Guard can
manage, thereby requiring a disproportionately large RVNAP
commitment, which has further resulted in 4 serious weakening
of the RVNAF capability for defense against inbernaa/external
[Sic] or overt attack in force. Rotation within RVNAF and Civil
Guard cannot be accomplished regularly. Many units have been
On operations for a year or more without relief, because RVNAF
strength is insufficient to permit an adequate rotation policy
and to conduct adequate border and coastal surveillance. Many
troops are battle weary, in a state of low morale, and in need
of recuperation and training. Notwithstanding the above
deficiencies, GVN plans have recently been developed for the
RVNAF Command Control and logistic structure which upon
implementation, possibly in the near future, should correct
major deficiencies if adequate military strength is provided.

"The complete divorce of command control from logistics
support in the field has resulted in a lethargic and cumbersome
requisitioning and supply system. ..- -

"The current military intelligence capability of the RVNAF
is inadequate to support the critical intelligence requirements
of all echelons of the armed forces. - «+ >

The economic health of the country, though not robust,
has been improving rapidly. In the future, if current economic
trends continue and the economy is not further disrupted by
adverse security developments, the economy will be able, insofar
as physical wealth is concerned, to provide for the consumption
needs of a growing population and at the same time to finance a
steadily increasing proportion of local military costs and could
under favorable conditions meet essentially all these GOSTSa «) 6) ©

Assumptions;

(1) That the greatest immediate threat to the continued
existence of the Republic of Viet-Nam is posed by the steady
expansion of guerrilla warfare by the Vietnamese Communists,
with the Mekong Delta as a political and military base.

(2) That North Viet-Nam has the capability of supporting
guerrilla operations in SVN by infiltrating regular forces and
eadres to strengthen locally recruited elements. (Guerrilla
forces have increased from 3,500 to an ARVN estimate of 9,800
during 1960.)

(3) That at the present time the Diem Government offers
the best hope for defeating the Viet Cong threat.

89 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
