Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. Events Make the Geneva Conference Inevitable
ae. U.S. Plans Initial Geneva Position

Assured that the French would not cease fire prior to the
conference, Washington forged ahead in late April and early May in
search of a policy that would guide the American delegation. The
National Security Council, less than a week before the opening con-
ference session, carefully examined American alternatives. _7/ The
NSC urged the President not to join the Geneva deliberations without
assurance from France that it was not preparing to negatiate the
surrender of Indochina. Again, the Korean example was foremost: Com-
minist tactics, the NSC said, will likely resemble those at Panmunjom:
a cease-fire with lack of compliance by the communists because of in-
effective supervision, a wilting French position before the communists’
typical dilatory tactics, all resulting in the French accepting almost
any terms.

b. NSC Recommends Strong U.S. Stand

The NSC, therefore, decided that the French had to be
pressured into adopting a strong posture in the face of probable com-
munist intransigence. The NSC urged a policy of informing Paris that
its acquiescence in a communist takeover of Indochina would bear not
only on France's future position in the Far East, but also on its status
as one of the Big Three; that abandonment of Indochina would grievously
affect both France's position in North Africa and Franco-U.S. relations
in that region; that U.S. aid to France would automatically cease wpon
Paris' conclusion of an unsatisfactory settlement; and, finally, that
communist domination of Indochina would be of such serious strategic
harm to U.S. interests as to produce "consequences in Europe as well
as elsewhere /without/...apparent limitation." In addition, the NSC
recommended that the U.S. determine iumediately whether the Associated
States should be approached with a view to continuing the anti-Viet
Minh struggle in some other form, including unilateral U.S. involvement
"if necessary."

e. Dulles Announces Possibility of U.S. Disassociation

The NSC's adamant attitude was reflected in Dulles' extreme
pessimism over the prospects for any meaningful progress in talks with
the conmunists. At Geneva on April 25, the Secretary said that the
solution of the Indochina problem was the primary responsibility of
France, the non-Communist Vietnamese, and_the Viet Minh. The U.S.
would not normally expect to "interpose /its/ veto" except "where we
felt that the issues involved had a pretty demonstrable interest to
the United States itself." And he went on to say that if highly disad-
vantageous solutions were proposed at the conference which the U.S.
could not_prevent, "we would probably want to disassociate ourselves
from it /the Conference/." _8/

A-8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
