Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

these threats, and usually the odds were judged to be against his
surmounting either in the long run.

However, U.S. estimates in the immediate aftermath of
Geneva held that a forceful direct communist challenge was unlikely
through 1956. Diem was expected to enjoy a respite in which he could
deal with other internal opposition, and shore up his government.
Most estimates then concluded that the principal reason why the com-
munists were unlikely to make an open challenge during that period
was the very likelihood that Diem would prove unable to consolidate
his power, and that South Vietnam would fall to the communists in
the general elections scheduled for 1956, if not as a result of
earlier internal turmoil. Thus, a National Intelligence Estimate of
3 August 1954 (NIE 63-5-54, p. 1) stated:

"We believe that the Communists will not give up their
objective of securing control of all Indochina but will,
without violating the armistice to the extent of launching an
armed invasion to the south or west, pursue their objective
by political, psychological, and paramilitary means."

"Although it is possible that the French and Vietnamese,
even with firm support from the U.S. and other powers, may be
able to establish a strong regime in South Vietnam, we believe
that the chances for this development are poor and, moreover,
that the situation is more likely to continue to deteriorate
progressively over the next year. . . +"

In the light of the lessons of the first Indochinese
War, the possibility of meeting the longer term challenge from the
communists was seen as requiring not only the establishment of an
efficient government in South Vietnam (thus circumventing the short-
term tendencies toward chaos in the south), but a government under
"strong Nationalist leadership," that could enlist the loyalty and
active participation of the people in a united struggle against com-
munist forces. This, in turn, at that time, was seen to depend on
swift, firm, French action to back such leadership. But such a
change in French policy appeared unlikely. (Ibid., Dp. 6)

"On the basis of the evidence we have at this early date,
however, we believe that a favorable development of the
situation in South Vietnam is unlikely. Unless Mendes-France
is able to overcome the force of French traditional interests
and emotions which have in the past governed the implementa-
tion of policy in Indochina, we do not believe there will be
the dramatic transformation in French policy necessary to win
the active loyalty and support of the local population for a
South Vietnam Government. ..." ©

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
