Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

restored to South Vietnam. The second significant development also
occurred on the 18th when General Westmoreland sent CINCPAC a long
‘eable requesting additional forces. 49/ His reduest amounted to little
more than a restatement of the force requirements that had been rejected
in November 1966 when Program #4 was approved. The proposal must have
hung over the conference and been discussed during it by the Principles
even though no time had been available before their departure for 4
detailed analysis. ;

The bombing program and the progress of the anti-infiltration
barrier were also items on the Guam agenda but did not occupy much time
since other questions were more pressing. Some handwritten "press sug-
gestions" which McNaughton prepared for McNemara reflect the prevalent
Guam concern with the war in the South. McNaughton'’s first point (origi-
nally numbered #; but renumbered 1 in red pen) was, "Constant Strategy:

A. Destroy Main Forces B. Provide Security C. Improve lot of people

D. Press NVN (RT) E. Settle." 50/ As if to emphasize the preoccupation
with the war in the South, the Joint Communique made no mention of the
air war. But, if ROLLING THUNDER was only fourth priority in our "Constant
Strategy," the Guam Conference nevertheless produced approval for two
significant new targets -- the Haiphong thermal power plants. They
were added to the authorized targets of RT 54 on March 22. A related
action also announced on March 22 after discussion and Presidential
approval at Guam was the decision to assign B-52s conducting ARC LIGHT
strikes in North and South Vietnam to bases in Thailand as the JCS had
long been recommending. Slowly the air war was inching its way up the
escalatory ladder.

During the Guam Conference one of the more unusual, unex~
pected and inexplicable developments of the entire Vietnam war occurred.
Hanoi, for reasons still unclear, decided to make public the exchange
of letters between President Johnson and Ho during the Tet truce. The
North Vietnamese Foreign Ministry released the texts of the two letters
to the press on March 21 while the President, his advisers and the South
Vietnamese leadership were all closeted in Guam reviewing the progress
of the war. Hanoi must have calculated that it would embarrass the
President, make the South Vietnamese suspicious of U.S, intentions, and
enhance their own peaceful image. By admitting past contacts with the
U.S., however, the DRV assumed some of the direct responsibility for the
failure of peace efforts. Moreover, the President's letter was concili-
atory and forthcoming whereas Ho's was cold and uncompromising. In any
ease, the disclosure did the President no ret.l harm with public opinion,
a miscalculation which must have disappointed Hanoi greatly. After their
return to Washington McNaughton sent McNamara a memo with some State
Department observations on Other aspects of the disclosure;

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
