Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"By 1960 the situation had so deteriorated that it seemed possible
the Viet Cong would be able to establish a territorial base in South
Viet-Nem, the next step in the Mao formula for a successful ‘national
liberation movement.’ At this point, President Kennedy sent General
Maxwell Taylor to South Viet-Nam to confer with the Vietnamese Govern-
ment and to observe the situation for himself. General Taylor reported
that the Vietnamese people retained the will to fight communism and that,
given more extensive Support, had a chance to defeat the Viet Cong.

"While this support has come predominantly from the United States, +
a number of other countries have provided significant support, moral and
material.

"The first requirement of the struggle today is to pull the teeth of
the Viet Cong terrorist campaign. This can best be done not so much by
killing the terrorists but by depriving them of the opportunity to coerce
the farmers into providing supplies and recruits. This can only be done
by providing practical protection to the farming population. The technique
which has been adopted to achieve this protection is the construction of
fortified villages, called strategic hamlets. This technique was used
successfully in Malaya against the Communist movement there. The same
concept had been applied successfully in the late 1790's by the Manchu
dynasty of China against the White Lotus sect, a fanatical group whose
use of terror resembled closely the methods of the present-day Viet Cong."

ee

"Phe struggle in Viet-Nam gains the headlines in today's newspapers.
But throughout Asia, new nations, in varying degrees, are facing the
challenge of creating progressive, yet stable, societies in a world of
uncertainty. American policy aims to provide our experience, our enthusi-
asm, and, insofar as our resources permit, our material aid to this great
enterprise of nation building.”

cui Math | ah

"Thirdly, while we are combating Communist imperialism in all its
forms, we must remember that it is not enough to be against something and
that in the last analysis success depends upon our ability to build, to
construct, to contribute to man's spiritual and material welfare. We are
cooperating with many free peoples in great efforts at nation building,
while the Communists try to tear down, in order to impose their hold and
their system on the world.

"Fourthly, tuere is a larger need for tolerance in international life.
Happily there is a growing understanding among us of the diverse ways by
which different peoples seek to obtain happiness and security in a troubled
world. In passing I also wish to observe that, remembering our own un-
finished business in fulfilling the ideals of the American Constitution, .
