Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

10, Adverse international reaction to escala-
tion and to what would appear to be signifi-
cant US move towards a friendly occupation
of the country. 35/

Compared to this course the option of maintaining current force
levels possessed the twin advantages of avoiding all of those which we
just listed, plus it could improve the negotiating environment if some
progress were made without an expansion of forces. The disadvantages
of this course were also twofold: Hanoi could be encouraged by forces
levelling off and the possible bad effect on morale of U.S. and allied
forces.

To these original two options Katzenbach added what he called
two middle strategies. Each one of these would incur some of the
advantages and disadvantages of the two which we just listed above, but
to obvious lesser greater degrees. The first "middle" strategy was to
add 30,000 troops. This would not necessitate a Reserve call-up. The
second was to add enough U.S. forces to "operate effectively against
provincial main force units and to reinforce I Corps and the DMZ area." 36/
This he estimated would include a Reserve call-up.

The overall recommendation he made in this regard was, first, in
the South, to emphasize the war of attrition and to do this by adding
30,000 troops. The complete set of recommendations which followed read:

a. Add 30,000 more troops, in small increments,
over the next 18 months. This would show Hanoi
and our own forces that we are not levelling
off, and yet we would not appear impatient or
run into the risks and dangers which attend i
force increases. Continue to try to get as
many more third country forces as possible.

b.. Make a major effort to get the South Vietnamese
more fully involved and effective. A crucial
question. (Separate paper with recommendations --
advisers, joint command, threats, etc.) Tell the
GVN early in 1968 that we plan to start with-
drawing troops at the end of 1968, or earlier if
possible, in view of progress in the "big war”.
Pacification will be up to them.

e. Use the great bulk of US forces for search and
destroy rather than pacification--thus playing
for a break in morale. Emphasize combat units
rather than engineers. leave all but the upper
Delta to the Vietnamese.

187 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
