Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

north of the DMZ and the enemy had responded with heavy mortar attacks

on friendly positions throughout the PRAIRIE operations area. Operation
DE SOTO designed to clear and secure the Sa Huyen salt flats prior to the
April harvest had been termed "successful." Operation PERSHING in northern
Binh Dinh continued as part of an extensive allied effort to break the
enemy hold in the area.

The lst Cavalry Division participated in OPERATION THAYER II, south-
west of Bong Son in II Corps area. This clearing operation netted 228
enemy killed before it was terminated in mid-February. Across the Corps
Tactical Zone in Pleiku Province, OPERATION SAM HOUSTON operating on the
border between Pleiku and Kontum Provinces was countering increasing
enemy forces at the egress of their Highland border sanctuaries. In III
Corps the most significant operation was JUNCTION CITY, the largest opera-
tion of the war, initiated in 22 February with an airborne assault into
the long time enemy sanctuaries in northern Tay Ninh Province. Another
major offensive into War Zone C, OPERATION GADSTON began on 2 February but
achieved relatively insignificant results. FAIRFAX, on the outskirts of
Saigon, continued to screen that city and secondarily to conduct US-ARVN
buddy system operations concentrating on civic action during the day and
conducting extensive patrols and anbushes during the night. (See Figure
2, Monthly Evalu@tion (February 1967) map.)

In March the tempo of the war increased partially in reaction to
the burgeoning infiltration in I Corps Tactical Zone. South of the DMZ,
Marines continued to conduct counter infiltration operations with PRAIRIE
II and PRAIRIE III, operations characterized by bloody assaults designed
to retain control of key terrain features dominating infiltration. corri-
dors leading down from the North. In the western highlands of II Corps,
U.S. forces in OPERATION SAM HOUSTON were experiencing frequent heavy
ground clashes with enemy units which sortied out of their sanctuaries
and attempted to operate in Pleiku and Southern Kontum Provinces. JUNCTION
CITY continuing in III Corps experienced heavier contact in War Zone C,
while FATRFAX and other screening operations were regarded as successful
on the strength of a steady decline in enemy initiated incidents on the
outskirts of the city. ARVN divisions continued to operate in IV Corps but
there are no large operations reported. (See Figure 3, Monthly Evaluation
(March 1967) map.)

The first major operational dislocation of U.S. forces to the north
occurred in early April when TASK FORCE OREGON (a provisional division)
was created and moved north into Quang Ngai Province thereby releasing
Marine units for operations further north in the vicinity of the DMz.
Some of the bitterest fighting of the war occurred in late April near
Khe Sanh in western Quang Tri Province, coming as a direct result of the
USMC strategy of fighting for control and holding of key terrain commanding
infiltration routes. The Marines were engaged in a series of sharp and

90 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
