Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

U.S.-GVN RELATIONS: JUNE 1965 - FALL 1967

SUMMARY and ANALYSIS

By the summer of 1965, the war in Vietnam had dramatically changed
its complexion from the previous two years. More and more, with U.S.
combat forces pouring into SVN and Rolling Thunder underway, it looked
like the U.S. against the DRV. ‘The war was no longer being fought with
U.S. advice and aid alone; there was now & massive U.S. presence. While
official documents still repeated the credo that it was, in the last
analysis, a struggle for the GVN to win or lose, the focus of U.S. con-
cern shifted. As the U.S. role increased and then predominated, the

need for GVN effectiveness in the now and short-run received less attention.:

The U.S, would take care of the war now--defeat the enemy main forces and
destroy Hanoi’s will to persist--then, the GVN could and would reform and
resuscitate itself. Only after the immediate security threat to the GVN
was blunted and forced to subside did we expect our South Vietnamese ally
to improve its performance on @11 fronts. Until then and in order to get -
to that point, the U.S. would concentrate on what it could do.

This view--a massive U.S. effort in the short-run leading to and
enabling a GVN effort in the long-run--set the tone and content of U.5S.-
GVN relations. In policy terms, it meant caution in the use of U.S.
leverage. There seemed to be no compelling requirement to be tough with
Saigon; it would only prematurely rock the boat. To press for efficiency
would be likely, it was reasoned, to generate instability. Our objective
became simple: if we could not expect more GVN efficiency, we could at
least get & more stable and legitimate GVN. Nation-building was the key
phrase. This required a constitution and free elections. Moreover, if we
could not have the reality, we would start with appearances. U.S. influ-
ence was successfully directed at developing 4 democratic GVN in forn.
Beginning in September 1966, a series of free elections were held, first
for a Constituent Assembly and later for village officials, the Presidency,
House and Senate.

U.8.-GVN relations from June of 1965 to 1968, then, have to be under-
stood in terms of the new parameters of the war. Before this date, our
overriding objective had to be and was governmental stability. After the
Diem coup, the GVN underwent six changes in leadership in the space of
one and a half years. From June 1965 on, there was relative stability.
Ky and Thieu, while challenged, proved strong enough to keep their power
and position. In putting down the Struggle Movement (following General
qhi's dismissal by Ky) in the first half of 1966, and then delivering on
the September, 1966 election, GVN effectively discredited the militant
Buddhist leadership and for the time being ended its threat to political
stability. Concern about possible nenutralism or anarchy, which had been

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
