Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
VI.C Settlement of the Conflict (6 Vols.) 
Histories of Contacts (4 Vols.) 
3. Moscow-London Track 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
L 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
VI. c. 3. 
VI . 
SETrU10.E[\rl' CE' THE CONFLICT 
c. 
Histories of Contacts 
3. 
S1.UlfloHer 
. 0295 
Slea Dei' Cont Nr. X--.... -:r ... -------~ 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
. SUNFLOWER 
This study has three parts: 
(1) 
a very brief list 
of the most important dates in SunflovTer ; (2) 
an analytic 
discussion of the major questions vThich arose; and ( 3) 
a 
detailed chronology of events and communications. 
Part 2 
is keyed to Part 3) using dates to indicate the source 
material on vThich the discuss ion is based . 
TOP SECRET - NODI S 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Part I; Principal Dates 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Jan. 5 
Jan. 10 
J an . 17 
Jan. 20 
Jan. 27 
Jan. 28 
Jan. 31 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Part I 
Principal Dates During Sunflower 
(January-April 1967 ) 
Embassy Warsaw is told to cease contacts on negotiations with 
the Poles; Embassy Moscow is told to attempt deliver a message 
directly to the DRV Embassy, proposing confidential US-DRY 
exchanges "about the possibilities of achieving a peaceful 
settlement" in Vietnam. 
The message is passed in Moscow. 
The DRV Embassy in Moscow seeks clarification: 
~mat i s meant 
by "secure arrangements? " 
~mat is the US position on settle-
ment terms? 
T'ne US replies that its posHlon on settlement vrould be the 
appropriate topic for tvro-way discussions , and suggests possi-
ble subject heading's for such talks. 
"Secure" means that no 
other parties ,wuld be informed . 
'I'he DRV replies with an Aide-Memoire denouncing US aggression 
and stating that "The unconditional cessation (of US attacks 
on the North ) being materialized , the DRV could then exchange 
vievTs wj_th US concerning the place or date for contact" as 
proposed by the US message of Janl1ary 10. 
Burchett ' s intervievT vlith Trinh is broadcast by Hanoi, saying 
that "it is only after the uncondHional cessation (of US 
attacks on the North ) ... that there could be talks." 
T'ne US replies in writing, objecting to the broadcast of the 
"essence " of the confidential cominunication to it, offering 
to discuss mutual de-escalation or to hold secret talks on 
settlement t erms before finding a formula for stoppi.ng the 
bombing. 
Feb. 6 
Kosygin arri ves in London for a week 's visit. 
He and the 
British immediately turn to the :prospects for negotiations 
on Vietnam. 
Feb. 8 
President Johnson's letter to Ho) proposing mutual de-
escalatj_on, is delivered i n Mascolo] . 
Feb. 7-13 
An intense round of UK-USSR talks occurs in London. 
The 
British ",ork closely with US representatives on the scene. 
There are nwnerous communications bet"Teen London and Washing-
ton, on the one side , and betvTeen London 'and Mosco", and 
London and Hanoi on the Cormuunist side . 
The US advances 
various de-escalatory proposals, none of'which is accepted. 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Feb. 13 
Feb. 15 
Mar. 21 
Apr. 6 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
The combing of the DRV, which had :)een suspended for the 
Tet truce and the balance of Kosygin's visit to London, 
is resumed immediately after his departure. 
Ho replies to the President, rejecting his proposal and 
re-iterating the Trinh formula about talks. 
The DRV 
terminates the contacts betvTeen Thlbassies in MoscovT. 
The DRV broadcasts the Johnson-Ho letter exchange. 
Embassy MOSCOl'T delivers another note to the DRV Embassy 
proposing that contacts be resUJ.'Ued. 
It is returned the 
same day, opened but marked "unacceptable ." 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
7 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Part II: Discussion 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODrS 
I. 
How Sunflower Came to Focus on De-Escalation 
At Polish insistence, the Marigold exchanges ( roughly June-
December 1966 ) tended to focus on possible terms for a final ' 
settlement in Vietnam. 
The US had preferred, and several times 
proposed, mutual de-escalation as the first issue for considera-
t ion, on the grounds that this would produce a favorable atmos-
phere in which to discuss final settlement terms . 
The Pol es 
resisted this approach, arguing that the Vietnamese Communists 
vi ew'ed de-escalation as preserving the SVN status quo, "Thich they 
were fighting precisely to change . 
It would be easier to bring 
t he DRV to the conference table , they argued , by first addressing 
the new status quo. 
With the collapse of Marigold in December 1966, SunfloYTer 
became the primary vehicle for US negotiating efforts , as the US 
attempted to deal directly with the DRV . 
Gronouski was instructed 
to take no further initiative in Wars a", . 
(Marigold 1/ 6/67) 
Guthrie "\-Tas instructed to seek direct contact with the DRV Embassy 
in Mosco"" 
proposing the establishment of "compl etely secure 
arrangements for exchangj,ng communications " bet"Teen the two govern-
ments in "any capj,tal where we both maintaj,n posts . " 
The proposed 
subject matter was extrernely broad, tithe possib:i.lities of achieving 
a peaceful settlement of the Vietna..'Tlese dispute . It 
Discussions 
could have begun '\-lith settlement terms or de- escalation . 
(1/ 5/67) 
This message,"Tas passed on January 10. (1/ 10/(;7) 
The DRV responded first informally by asking "clarification" 
of the US position on terms of settlement . 
(1/17/ 67 ) 
On January 
20, we replied that the DRV already had considerable information 
on the US position; further elaboration should now occur through 
t he t"io-way discussions we ;,Tere proposing. 
Illustrative agenda 
t opics were suggested. (1/17/ 67, 1/20/67) 
The DRV then replied formally on January 27 in a stiffly 'l-Torded 
Aide-Memoire which (1) denounced the US for "intensifyj_ng the 'l-Ta1' in 
South Vietnam and escalating the bombing of North Vietnam"; (2 ) 
:ddicul ed US proposals for "condj.tional suspension of bombi ng" and 
"conditional 'l-Tithdral-Tal of troops " as schemes to prolong US domi-
nance of SVN; (3) insisted that the US "recognize the 4 poi nt stand 
of the DRV' and the 5 point statement of the NLF" if i t "re,ally 
',Tants peace and seeks a political solution" ; and (1+ ) demanded the 
unconditional end of attacks on the DRV as the condition for the 
contacts proposed by the US note of January 10. (1/27/ 67 ) 
Tne last point contained the obstacle to the further develop-
ment of Sunflo.rer. 
Tne operational passage reads ( in Hanoi r s 
"unofficial translation" into English ): 
"'llie unconditional cessa-
tion of bombing and all oiher acts of war against the DRV being 
1 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
'i 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
materialized, the DRV could then exchange views with the US con-
cerning the place or date for contact behleen the t1-l0 parties as 
the USG proposed in its message handed over on January 10, 1967." 
On the follow'ing day, January 28, the DRV Foreign Minister, 
Trinh, made a parallel statement in an "interview" with Burchett . 
As broadcast by Hanoi in English, he said, "It is only after the 
unconditional cessation of US bombing and all other acts of 1-lar 
against the DRV that there cou~d be talks between the DRV and the 
US . " 
(1/28/67) 
There are several notable features of the DRV response : 
--It gives nothing al'lay with respect to terms for closing 
out the war. 
These remain US recognition of the DRV 4 points , etc. 
--It identifies a new stage in the negotiating process-"talks" 
(Trinh) or the "exchange (of) views with the US concerning the place 
or date for contact" 
(Aide-Memoire )--which is different from, and 
hence undoubtedly less than, a ful1fledged negotiation. 
--It makes "unconditional cessatj,on" of attacks on the DRV a 
prior condition for even this level of contact. 
- -The language of the Aide-Memoire, a private communication, 
holds forth greater promise that contact would indeed follow the 
cessation of attacks on the North than does Trinh speaking publicly, 
but even it is not without 'ambiguity . 
Washington is given very little 
notion of what it would get in exchange for a bombing cessation. l 
As compared with Marigold, this surely amounted to a major 
hardening of the DRV position on the matter of establishing contact 
with the US . 
At the same time, by making its position public, Hanoi 
added to the considerable pressure already felt by the US to push 
toward negotiations . 
Although the Trinh interview, the Salisbury 
visit to NVN, and the diplomatic campaign being vraged by the Poles 1-Tere 
all designed to increase US embarrassment over the outcome of :Marigold, 
they could also be interpreted as reflecting grO'tling DRV dj.scomfort 
under the impact of the bombing. 
It seemed possible, therefore, that 
Ha.noi 1-ras more desirous than forrnerly of getting the bombing stopped 
and perhaps even of negotiating an acceptable end to the war . 
The problem for Washington was demonstrating its responsiveness 
to any opportunity to negotiate a settlement, without throwing away 
its blue crip, the bombing campaign . 
Ou,,:, solution I-TaS to ask again 
for military reciprocity as well as talks in exchange for a bombing 
halt . 
IOn February 6, Kosygin told Wilson in London ·that he had just been 
in direct contact with Hanoj. and could confirm that Hanoi would talk 
if the bombing stopped. 
(2/6/67 ). 
2 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
(0 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
----
In one sense, then, Sunflower may have seemed a step backward 
from Marigold , in that it focused on conditions for starting talks 
to the exclusion of further consideration of settlement terms. 
On 
the other hand, it tur ned attention back to de-escalation, the US 
preferred topic. 
It should be noted, hO'i-lever, that the U.S. alone was hot 
responsible for turning the play back to military reciprocity and 
de-escalation. 
Hanoi's January 27 message and January 28 Trinh state-
ment were as much, if not more, the cause of the shift. 
The U.S. mes-
sage of January 10 was so general as to alloH Hanoi to respond either 
with settlement t erms or de-escalatory proposals. 
The fact that Hanoi 
chose the l atter , probably recognizing that neither side was prepared 
to make further military concessions at this point, may indicate that 
North Vietnam was not anxious for or desirous of talks or negotiations 
except on its O'im terms in the first part of 1967. 
The U. S. seemed to understand the SunflO'iver contacts in just this 
light . 
Referring to the Trinh statement and SunflO'lver, one of the 
U.S. principals wI'ote : 
"Yet it may not be enough to say that Ha,noi has simply 
been engaged in this public campaign. 
In order to make its 
olm position effective, Hanoi has had to weaken and almost 
to eliminate its previous stress on the four points and 
recognition of the IlliF. 
Its propaganda. suggests that it 
has been somel-That pressed to explain this shift to its own 
people and the NLF. 
In short , Hanoi took some risks and 
perhaps, 'in the eyes of its people, made a significant change 
in its position. 
"Against this background, Hanoi's rejection of our pro-
posal, on February 14, was hard.1y surprising. 
As we lr,ne\v 
at the time , the proposa.l was extremely unfavorable to them 
although also the only one we could have made in this area. 
Moreover, Hanoi had only five days to weigh this concrete 
proposal, and had to do so under 'I-That may ,ve1l ha.ve been 
the worst possible circumstances from their standpoint --
with the high probability of our resumption hanging over them. 
In other ,'lOrds , the firm and sharp l'ej ection was almost what 
we had to expect at this stage. It vTas not a clear indicator 
that Hanoi is dug in." 
In short, neither side expected to enter talks at this time. 
3 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
/I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
II. 
IIUnconditional ll and "Permanent" 
There is, and perhaps will always remain, some confusion as to 
.lhether Hanoi's condition for talks during Sunflo.ler was an lIuncondi-
tional" or a "permanent and unconditional ll cessation of the attacks 
on NVN.l 
In trying to sort out this question, it is useful to 
distinguish four kinds of DRV demands: 
(1) Demands .lith nothing offered in exchange . 
These reflect 
ultimate DRV objectives , no doubt, but they are non-operational , in 
that there is no consequence for non-compliance , no r eward for com-
pliance. 
As they are essentially statements of principle, they are 
the toughest of all . 
(2) Demands posed as conditions for "establishing peace." 
Here, peace is the quid pro quo. 
It wouJd . be a Jarge re"rard if 
earned, but it is a long vlay off because so many steps must be taken 
first. 
Tnese rank second in toughness, therefore. 
(3) Demands posed .to provide a "basis for negotiations . 1I 
( 4) Demands posed as conditions for "talks. It 
From the Trinh 
intervievl on, these became the operatioJ:1...al eJements in the exchanges. 
Sometimes more than one kind of demand is posed in the same 
docL~ent or statement , with the result that varying degrees of tough-
ness are reflected in different connections. 
--The DRV Aide-Memoire demanded US recognition of the DRV 4 
points, etc., "if the US really wants peace" (1/2'7/ 67, para C); blit 
i t demanded the "unconditional cessation" ( not "permanent and un-
conditional" ) of attacks on the DRV in exchange for talks. (1/27/ 67, 
para D.) 
--T'ne Trinh intervj.ew demanded at one point that US attacks 
"stop definitively and unconditionally," offering nothing in exchange 
(1/30/67, response to question 2); but it said at another that "only 
after the unconditional cessation of the bombing . . . could there be 
talks." (1/30/ 67) response to question 3) 
(Emphas i s supplied) 
--Ho Chi Minh ' s February 15 letter to the President contains 
parallel formulations : 
for the "restoration of peace ll attacks "must 
stop definitively and unconditionally ,1I the US must recognize the 
NLF, etc ; 1mt it is "only after unconditional cessation ... that 
the DRV and the US could enter into talks." (1/15/ 67, para F. ) . . 
In Hots February 13 l etter to the Pope, he says the US must "end ' 
unconditionally and definitively the bombing •.. , withdraw from SVN 
lIn some texts, especially DRV traDslations into English) the term 
"definitive" is used instead of "permanent." The meaning is almost 
certainly the same , both terms being English equi valents of the French 
"defini ti ve . " 
4 
TOP SECR~r - NODIS 
/2 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
. .. , recognize the NLFSV . . . . 
Only in such conditions can 
r eal peace be restored in Vietnam ." 
(2/13/ 6, ) 
Comparing this with 
Trinhts statement, l~i Van Bo explained to the New York Times that 
Ho t s. "message referred to the terms of a settlement and not to the 
process of getting peace talks started . 
Therefore it did not con-
stitute a change over the Vietnamese position." (2/23/6, ) Bo vrent 
on to make clear that he and the Times correspondent vrere having a 
"conversation," not an "interview ." 
For an "intervievr ," he "Tould 
have insisted on "Tritten questions and vrould have gi ven written ' 
anS'·lers. 
The point here is the emphasis l aid on textual precision. 
Bo complained that neither President Johnson nor Secretary Rusk had 
ever quoted Trinh ts statement fully or 'accurately , proof, he said , 
of bad faith since Hanoi I s real position i-laS fully kno"Tn and under-
stood in Wash ington . 
Bo may ~ell have been vrrong about Washi ngton's understanding . 
Unfortunately, he did not spell out the distortions he thought had 
occurred . 
Unfortunately, too, his "conversation" added to the 
ambiguity, since he is described (but not quoted) as arguing that 
"any cessati on of bombing that "ms not clearly labeled lpermanent 
and unconditi onal I "70uld l eave the 'threat of bombing I in tact and 
thus would constitu-te an unacceptable interference ",j.th the negotia-
tion." Since he had not ans",ered in vrrj.ting, it i s not clear if he 
i ntentionally introduced a ne"T formulation or if the Times synthe-
sized his vie .. 7s in a .my he vrould not have done . 
None of the official DRV texts examined for this study (letters 
from Ho , "intervie\oTs " with DRV offic:ials, Hanoi broadcasts, Aides-
Memoire, etc. ) demand a "permanent" halt to the attacks as a condition 
for talks. 
~ese materials c;jer the . period J:nuary-A~r~l 196, : It 
seems most l 1.Kely, therefore, that thJ.s ",as nov a condl tlon durlng 
the period in vrhich Sunflovrer vras active . 
Inexplicably, the U.S. did not seem alive to the distinctions 
being made by Hanoi . 
He persisted in reading the terms as demanding 
both t:unconditional and permanent ." 
We also sho.·red no a,·rareness of 
the difference betvleen fltalks ,fI "negotiations,t: and "settlement ll 
or IIpeace. " 
Whether having been alert to these distinctions vlOuld 
have a l tered our behavior is problematical. 
5 
TO}' SECRET - NODIS 
13 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
III. Reciprocity 
Whether or not the DRV was demanding a "permanent " halt in the 
bombing) it is entirely clear that their demand from January 27 on 
vTaS for an "1L'1conditional" one. 
Hanoi was explicitly refusing the 
milita~J reciprocity the US had repeatedly asked for if the bomb~ng 
were to stop. 
At the very outset of Sunflower) then) the issue vTaS 
firmly joined between the tvTO sides on this matter. 
DRV intransigence may have received some encouragement from our 
unilateral suspension of bombing within 10 miles of Hanoi's center 
on December 24) 1966. 
From the Communist vantage point) this may 
have appeared as a response to pressures on the US generated by the 
collapse of :t<larj.gold) the Salisbury reportage) messages from U Thant 
and the Pope, etc. If we would give this much to keep the prospects 
of US-DRY contacts alive) perhaps we 
cou~d be made to give much more . 
On the other hand ) we had indicated at the outset that our action 
l{aS t aken unilaterally) but in the hope of seeing a reciprocal gesture 
from the other s ide . 
Harriman made clear to Dobrynin on January 17 
that we did not feel bound to maintain the sanctuary indefinitely in 
the absence of some response from Hanoi. 
The r esponse ) when it came ) had a little carrot) "there could be 
talks)" and a lot of stick) "there would be no reciprocity . " 
Our 
response vTaS to probe for concealed reciprocity. 
Perhaps the other 
side would give something in exchange ) if not forced to do so openly . 
One point should be made clear -- the DRV has never stated that 
it would not reciprocate militarily at some future point . 
Hanoi ioTas 
stating simply that it \lOuld not reciprocate prior to or in exchange 
for a U. S. bombing cessation. 
Its objective seems to have been (and 
still is) to remove the bombings as a "blue chip . " 
From our vantage point , we were vlOrking two different strategies. 
The first strategy wa,s that we vlould not stop the bombing in exchange 
for talks alone; there had to be reciprocity, preferably a DRV infiltra-
tion stoppage. 
The second strategy was to circumvent the reciprocity 
issue entirely and to concentrate on getting "discussions " started 
'vrithout any de-escalatory act by either side . 
This was embodied in 
the statement that the U.S . was prepared for "unconditional discus-
sions" at any time. 
6 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
(if 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
NODIS 
.IV. 
Specific US Proposals for De-Escalation 
I-lhen SunflmTer .Tent active) early in January) the US· already 
had several de-escalato~J proposals outstanding. 
During Sunflower) 
several more vlere made. 
Earlier Proposals 
(1) 
Goldberg's UN Speech . 
(September 22) 1966) 
The US 
offered "to order a cessation of all bombing of NVN--the moment 
vle are assured ) privately or otherwise) that this step will be 
answered promptly by a corresponding and appropriate de-escalation 
on the other side ." 
(lI.arigold) 9/22/66) 
This proposal invited 
the DRV to suggest its own matching action--which would have to be 
accepted by) or renegotiated .'ith) the US ., 
Upon agreement) the US 
step would be taken first. 
The offer .TaS repeated in more general terms on December 31) 
when Goldberg -wrote U Tnant) ".Te are ready to order a prior end to 
all bombing of North Vietnam the moment there is an assurance) 
pri vate or othervrise) that there 'Iwuld be a reciprocal response 
tOvTard peace from North Vietnam." Goldberg specified that he was 
r eaffirming his September offer and indicated that the NVN response 
should be "tangible." 
HO'Hever) this time he did not use the terms 
"promptly" and Ilcorresponding and appropriate de-escalation." 
(12/31/66) Carefully read, the proposal was unchanged ) but an 
impression of greater liberality on the US side may have been given . 
(2 ) 
Phase A-Phase B. 
This "Tas an elaboration of the Goldberg 
proposal sent on a highly confidential basis to the DRV in November 
1966) via the Poles and quite independently via the British (Hilson 
and Ermm ) by way of the Russians. 
It was intended as a face.-saving 
package) "which in its totality represented 'Ivhat both vle and Hanoi 
would agree to as a reasonable measure of mutual de-escalation) but 
whi.ch '.vQuld have hro separate phases in its execution. 
Phase A 
would -be a bOt'Ubing suspension) .Thile Phase B) which would follow 
after some adequate period) 'Iwuld see the execution of all the 
other agreed de-escalatory actions . 
Hanoi's actions taken in Phase 
B vould appea.r to be in r esponse to our actions in Pha.se B rather 
than to the bombing suspension. " 
(Marigold 11/13/66) 11/16/66 ) 
'll}:!,e steps to be taken by both sides in Phase B 'I·Tere aga.in left open 
for discussion with the DRV. 
( 3) 
The Hanoi Sanctuary : 
On December 21f) 1966) we informed 
the DRV via the Poles that US aLe strikes .lithin 10 nautical mi:J-es 
of the center of Hanoi ,'Tould be stopped and that the US would be 
impressed by some reciprocal de-escalatory step on the Communist 
side . 
(Marigold 12/21f/66) 
lie suggested the cessation of VC 
t errorist activity .,ithin 10 miles of 'Saigon ' s center 'as such a 
step and set up a vTatch in Saigon to see if' the other side responded. 
No po.sitive response ) verbal or de-escalatory vlaS forthcoming. 
7 
TOP SECRET -NODIS 
IS-
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Subsequent Proposals 
As SunflQYTer unfolded.) the earlier proposals were re-iterated 
and some new ones advanced : 
(4) Expanding on the Hanoi Sanctuary. 
On J anuary 31) the 
US through secret channels drew DRV attention to the bombi ng 
sanctuary around Hanoi and offered litO . implement additional measures 
to de-escalate the bombing of the North to create conditions con-
ducive to the success of talks with the DRV. 
We ) of course) would 
be impressed ",ith similar acts of restraint on the part of the DRV) II 
"mich) if forthcoming ) need not be publicized. 
(1/31/67 ) This 
l eaves i t to the DRV to suggest reciprocal acts and suggests that 
the US would be willing to act first . 
( In this note) we al so urged 
the DRV again to consider the Phase A-Phase B f ormula .) 
(5) President JohnsonTs February 3 Press Conference. 
In 
response to a question asking IIwhat kind of other steps the other 
side should take for this suspension of bombing) II the President 
responded) IIJust almost any step. .... We vould be glad to 
explore any reciprocal act:lon that they or any of their spokesmen 
"TOuld care to suggest. II 
The language j.s forthcoming in tone) but 
makes no cormnitment to do more than lIexplore ll suggestions of the 
other side. 
(Marigold 2/ 3/67 ) 
( 6) 
Baggs-Ashraore. 
On February 5) Harry Ashmore vrote Ho Chi 
Minh ) conveying a message he had drafted "rith State I s cooperation. 
He described US officials as interested lIin your suggestion to us 
that pri vate talks could begin provided the US stopped bombing your 
country and ceased introducing additional US troops into Vietnam . 
They expressed the opinion that some reciprocal restraint to indicate 
that neither side intended to use the occasion of the talks for 
military advantage "TOuld provide tangible evidence of the good faith 
of all parties in the prospects for a negotiated settl ement.
1I 
The 
l etter then asked Ho to respond to this point . 
(2/5/67 ) 'l'hus it 
offered no US action until Hanoi I s reciprocation "laS i ndicated) nor 
did it specify US vill ingness to stop the bombing first . 
The recip-
rocal act vIaS to be a IItangibl e evidence of good faith) II but one 
sufficient in magnitude to indicate that neith~r side intended to 
gain a military advantage . 
(7) President Johnson t s Letter to ·Hilson. 
On February 6 or 7) 
the President "T.'cote confidentially to I-Tilson that we planned lito 
inform Hanoi that if they "rill agree to an assured stoppage of 
i p..f'iltration into SVN) "7e vill stop the bombing of NVN and stop 
further augmentation of US forces in SVTlT. II 
This ylaS based on the 
understanding that a bombing suspension yTaS unacceptable to Hanoi 
and the US had to lIaccept an unconditional and permanent cessation 
of bombing. II 
It is not really explicit about which side is to act 
first) though it may have read to· Wilson) vTho had previously passed 
8 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
the Phase A-Phase B proposal , as if we i.;auld step bombing i-lhen the 
other side "agreed ll to stop infiltration. 
(8 ) 
President Johnson1s Letter to Ho . 
On February 8 , the 
President sent a cOYl..fidential letter to lIo in which he offered to 
stop bombing the DRV and stop augmenting US forces in SVN lias soon 
as I am assured that infiltration into SVN by land and by sea has 
stopped. II 
This , for the first time , spelled out a measure of 
reciprocity the US i-lould cons ider acceptable . 
As with the l etter 
to Wilson, this proposal was based on the understanding that Hanoi 
re~uired a permanent and unconditional end to attacks before talks. 
As compared i-lith earlier US proposals , it clearly r eversed the order 
of events : 
infiltration would stop first, then the US i-Tould stop 
bombing and augmenting force levels. 
Embassy Moscow was instructed 
to deliver this message on February 7, but i-TaS unable to do so until 
the 8th . 
The date of its drafting is not available in the materia)..s 
used for this study. 
(9) Revised 14 Points. 
On February 9, Secretary Rusk drew 
attention to a nei-lly annotated statement of the US 14 Points For 
Peace , of which the fourteenth i ncluded the folloi-ling : 
l'We are 
prepared to order a cessation of all bombing of NVN) the moment we 
are assured--privately or otherYlise--that this step will be answered 
promptly by a corresponding and appropriate de-escalation of the 
other side . (2/9/6'7) 
Here; again) the US offers to act first and 
t he nature of the reciprocal action i.s left open. 
(10) 
Goldberg1s Howard University Speech. 
On February 10) 
Goldberg stated ) liThe Uni.ted States remains prepared to take the 
first step and order a cessation of all bombing of NVN the moment 
i-le are assul'ed , privately or othendse , that this step will be 
ansi-Tered promptly by a tangibl e r esponse toward peace from IITVN. II 
(2/10/67 ) 
. 
(11) 
US Vers ion of Bri.tish Proposal. 
Late on February 10, t he 
British passed Kosygin a draft proposal, cleared by Washington. 
It 
i ndicated that the US would order a cessati.on of bombing as soon as 
l~ was assured that infiltratien had stepped; within a few days, the 
US would stop further augmenting its force in SVN. 
The deal was to 
be communicated confidentially to Hanoi, and DRV acceptance could be 
kept secret as well . 
(2/12/67 ) 
(12) 
EKtension of Tet Truce. 
Late on February 12, the President 
wired 1-lilsen, authorizing him to approacL Kosygin i-Tith thi s proposal: 
IIIf you can get a North Vietnamese assurance--·coilli11Unicated either 
direct to the US or th:r'ough you--before 10:00 a.m. British time tomOrrOi-l 
that all movement of troops and supplies into SVN will stop at that 
t ime) I i-rill get an assurance from the US that they will not r esume 
bombing NVN from that time . 
Of course the US build-up would also then 
stop within a matter of days ." (2/12/ 67 ) 
9 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODrS 
As the US had already stopped bombing for Tet) the sequence .. Tould 
in effect be: US bombing halt; DRV infiltration halt; US build-up 
halt. 
At British request) the time limit was later extended by six 
hours) to 4 p.m. British time. 
EVen"Tith this) the time allowed for 
a DRV response was short) and the problem of actually stopping the 
movement of men and supplies in that period would have been sub- . 
stantial. 
10 
TOP SECRET - NODrS 
Proposal 
Date 
l. Goldberg's UN Speech 
9/22/66 
2. 
Phase A-
mid-Nov. 66 
Phase B 
3· 
Hanoi Sanctuary 
12/24/66 
4. 
Expanding on Hanoi 
1/31/67 
Sanctuary 
5. 
President's Press 
2/3/67 
I-' 
Conference 
I-' 
6. 
Baggs-Ashmore 
2/5/67 
7· 
President's Letter 
2/7/67 
to liilson 
8. 
Preside~t's Letter 
2/8/67 
to Ho 
9· 
Revised 14 points 
2/9/67 
10. 
Goldberg's Howard 
2/10/67 
Speech 
ll. US Version of British 2/10/67 
Proposal 
12. 
Tet Truce Extension 
2/12/67 
0-,;:, 
TOP SECRb.. - NODIS 
US De-Escalatory Proposals 
Channel 
Parties 
Public or 
Confidential 
Public Pronouncement 
Poles 
Confidential 
Poles 
Confidential 
US-DRY 
Confidential 
Public Pronouncement 
Asb.>nore 
Confidential 
Letter to Ho 
UK 
CO!1..f'idential 
US-DRY 
Confidential 
Public Pronouncement 
Public Pronouncement 
UK-USSR 
Confidential 
UK-USSR 
Confidential 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Sequence of Steps 
First 
Second 
-----
US stops bombing 
US stops bombing 
US had already 
stopped bombing 
near Hanoi 
US extends bombi!1~ 
sanctuary 
Corresponding, appropriate 
de-escalation of other side 
Both sides de-escalate fur-
ther after adequate period 
Some reciprocal step hoped 
for 
Similar act of restraint 
from other .side 
Sequence not specified 
Sequence not specified 
Sequence not specified 
DRV infiltration 
stops 
US stops bombing 
US stops bombing 
DRV infiltration 
stops. 
US bombing was 
already stopped 
US bombing & troop buildup 
stop 
Corresponding, appropriate 
de-escalation of other side 
Tangible response toward 
peace 
US bombing & troop buildup 
stop 
DRV infiltration to stop, 
followed by stop in US troop 
build-up 
Z 80 
>-OP5 
~ . [ 
(t 
'" 
() _ . 
.... :l 
Z 
('!) 
,... c.. 
3 "0 
CT~ 
~ tTl 
.. x 
z
~ 
8 E. 
< 
O\(t 
t:;o 
>-
..., 
0\0-
• 
(t 
t::O:' 
'< 
t.;.) 
.. Ul 
Z N 
~ ,0\ 
Cicn 
(t 
Ci~ 
p.; 
-. 
.... 0 
(t 
::l 
~~ 
O
t.;.) 
>-
''1 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
V. 
DRV Responses) Verbal and Military 
There are indications of varying firmness that all of these 
proposals vTere in fact conveyed to Hanol) though it is not clear 
how <luickly they all arrived. 
The DRV Embassy in Moscow confirmed 
prompt transnlission of all the co~munications passed to it) includ-
ing the President!s letter of February 8. 
On the other hand) Ho 
clainled to have received the letter only on February 10. 
Kosygin 
indicated that he was in <luick co~mlmication with DRV authorities 
(a matter of hours for a message and reply ) during his London visit 
(see e.g.) 2/6/67).1 As the deadline for ending the Tet truce 
approached on February 13) tlpresident!s Ciphertl telegrams were sent 
from the Soviet delegation in London to Moscow) Kosygin spoke with 
Brezh~ev about the proposals by telephone) and the DRV Embassy in 
Moscow transmitted) then received) cipher messages from Hanoi. 
(2/13/67 ) 
In its Aide-Memoire to the US on January 27 and the Trinh inter-
vie,'l of January 28, the DRV finnly rejected reciprocity in the matter 
of de-escalation. 
No further direct communication with the US was 
made by Hanoi until Ho !s letter to President Johnson of February 15) 
whj.ch repeated the Tri:nh formula in rejecting reciprocity. 
In 
accompanying oral remarks) the DRV Charge also said he could no 
longer meet ",ith US representatives in MOSCO'Vl . 
At 3:32 p.m. Br'itish tinle, February 13) just 28 mj.nutes before 
the expiration of the deadline on the US proposal for using the T'et 
truce to begin de-escalation) Hanoi broadcast a letter from Ho to 
the Pope. 
Ho was sharp in tone) denouncing US aggression and demand-
ing an unconditional and definitive cessation of all attacks on the 
DRV, US vlithdrm·lal from SVN and recognition of the NLF as the con-
di tj,ons for "peace ." 
He did not refer to conditions for "talks ." 
(2/13/67 ) 
Carefully read) therefore) the letter did not address the 
<luestion of mutual de-escalation) as a fj.rst step toward negotiations. 
However) i ts timing and tone gave the inlpression of a rebuff to US 
proposals. 
. 
Earlier) the DRV had pOSitioned two divisions within or just 
north of the DMZ. 
During the last week of January and the fj.rst·· 
Vleek of February, an additional division vTaS believed to have moved 
south. Hith the Tet truce) the movement of supplies southvrard 
behleen the 19th and 17th parallels in the DRV increased sharply, 
to a rate about double that of the C'nri;:tmas tl'uce and several times 
that of non-truce periods . 
Thus throughout the first vleeks of Sun-
flOi-ler, the Communists seemed increasingly to be positioning them·· 
selves to undertake combat operatj.ons at a substantially increased 
level. 
(2/9/67 ) 
lAccording toa ,forthcoming CIA study, only 2 of the 14 DRV Politburo 
members VTere knoi-!n to 'be in HanQi in. early February ~ 
'£"10 h~d. gone 
to Peking. 
Posslbly some 'Here also In Moscoi-T) to tlghL.en llalson 
with the Russians during Kosygin 1s London visit. 
12 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
1D 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
US sensitivity to this deployment increased as the talks in 
London proceeded and the possibility that the other side might 
actually accept a proposal for a bombing halt gre'l'l more vivid. 
This threat was emphasized by US officials, in explaining our 
sudden reluctance to agree firmly to a permanent bombing cessa-
tion "rhich '\'Tould be followed only after some interval by a halt 
to infiltration. 
The DRV divisions might be committed during 
such an interval, without technically violating the agreement. 
It is not at all clear what the other side hoped to accom-
plish by this tactic. 
The deployments Y,rere occurring throughout 
January and early February, and the other side was aware, through 
our public statements, that we kne'lv of them. 
They certainly 
worked against any possibility that we ivould finally accede to a 
truly unconditional cessation of attacks on the North. It even 
made more difficult the much l esser task of inducing us to stop 
bombing first on the assurance of e, subsequent--probably ill-
defined--reciprocal restraint from the other side. It 'Ivas vlell 
designed , on the other hand, to produce the result which actually 
followed : 
no agreement on de-escalation, but a sharp upsurge in 
the fighting instead. 
On this reading, Hanoi preferred the svTOrd to the conference 
t able, except if it could get talks 'on its ,own terms. 
Insofar 
as Hanoi believed that its terms vlere not buyable by the U. S. , 
the Trinh intervievl et al seems to signal less an attempt t.o get 
the bombing stopped and70r to talk than to find a more effective 
political posture from. which to continue prosecuting the war. 
To 
put it another ,'lay, the Trinh intervie"r may mark DRV discourage-
ment about 'I'linning its objectives via negotiations and an increased 
reliance on fighting and propaganda. 
Hanoi may well have been 
moved to,vard this posture by the following factors in combination; 
(1) The relatively to'ugh stance revealed by the US during Me.rigold, 
to,vard both settlement terms and the circumstances under vlhich "le 
were ,villing to start talks; (2) 1'he sensitivity to criticism, 
leveled either against our desire for negotiations or the bombing 
campaign against the North, revealed by the US after the Marigold 
contact aborted and Salisbury visited the DRV; and (3) The repeated 
urging of the DRV's European supporters to adopt a more forthcoming 
attitude to'l'lard negotiations. 
An alternative interpretation has been advoanced, however, by 
the Soviets. 
On February 17, Zinchuk told Bundy tha.t Hanoi had 
noted repeated statements by us that we had underte.ken the bombing 
in order to get Hanoi to talk. 
Hence, Ha'1oi had supposed that its 
Burchett interview position of 'Ivillingness to talk if ,ve sto'pped the 
bombing ,'ras a direct (and presUlnably acceptable ) r esponse to our own 
position. 
This explanation does not take explicit account of the 
DRV build-up around the DMZ nor conjecture as to the use that y,lould 
have been made of these forces in the event of an lillconditional halt 
in our bombing and US-DRV talks. 
13 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
2/. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
VI. 
The British Role 
The eagerness of the British leaders to participate with maximum 
personal visibility in bringing peace to Vietnam--in early February 
alone 'Hilson proposed travelling personally both to \-lashington and 
Hanoi--was sometimes embarrassing to the US, which greatly preferred 
confidential dealings with a minimum of participants . 
(2/11/ 67, 
2/12/67, 2/13/67) 
At the time of Sunflower, we had direct contact 
with the DRV in Moscow and needed no intermediary to make our views 
knovm in Hanoi. 
On the other hand, the domestic political value to 
Wilson and Brown of such a role and the importance of their support 
for US policies not only in Vietnam, but elSel{here too) made the US 
willing to bring the British into negotiation efforts . 
Furthermore; 
Kosygj.nts visit to London in early February made British participation 
inevitable. 
Kosygin and I-Tilson would discuss Vietnam and issue state-
ments on it with or without a US input. 
If we stood aloof from it) 
the results could be harmful to the US. 
And the possibility that 
Kosygin could use Soviet influence in Hanoi introduced an element of 
potential value, not available in direct US-DRV exchanges. 
Looking back on it, there seems little doubt that bringing the 
British in was to US advantage. 
But there vTere adverse consequences 
along the way: 
--Wilson made references, in Parliament and to the press, not 
well veiled at all, to the transactions of Marigold and Sunflower . 
(2/8/67, 2/14/67) 
While these ,-Tere not critical of the US, they 
gave those not previously informed reason to believe that something 
of substance had been afoot on the negotiations front. 
This vTaS 
alarming to the GVN and Troop Contributing Nations . 
It gave a peg 
on vihich to hang other tendentious accounts of .{hat ffreally " happened 
in these episodes. 
And it seemed to contradict the President, who on 
February 3 had said he had seen no action by the other side that he 
could interpret as "a serious effort to either go to a conference table 
or to bring the war to an end ." 
(IvT..arigold 2/3/67) 
--The battle of the tenses brought additional friction to the 
US-UK relationship, including emotional personal communications between 
Wilson and the President, Brovm and the US Ambassador, etc., in which 
the British leaders claimed to have been put in "a hell of a situation" 
and questioned US intentions and consistency of policy in the search 
for a negotiated settlement. 
Thj.s subject seems of sufficient impor-
tance to be treated separately . 
(See the next section.) 
14 
TOP SECREr - NODIS 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
VII. 
The Battle of the Tenses 
By the end of January 1961, the US had outstanding at least 
four de-escal atory proposals to the DRV, calling for the US to stop 
bombing as the first step . 
( See Section IV) 
The most detailed of 
these , the Phase A-Phase B proposal, actually emphasized this 
aspect as a face-saving device for the DRV, which woul d not then be 
forced openly to acknowledge reciprocity. 
This proposal had been 
passed via the British in mid-·November 1966, and they were thoroughly 
f amiliar vrith it. When the President wrote to Ho, however, on Febru-
ary 8, he offered to stop bombing only "as soon as I am assur ed that 
infiltration into SVN by l and and by sea has stopped." 
(Emphasis 
supplied .) 
The DRV had been assured that-our contact with them 
would be kept entirely confidential, and no copy of the l etter to . 
Ho was gi ven the British, nor, apparently, to the US r epresentatives 
in London. 
In the President ' s l etter to Hilson (February 6 or 1) the 
question of which side would act first was not made explicit . 
Its 
l anguage , therefore , vTaS equally consistent with the Phase A- Phase 
B proposal or '\<lith the letter to Hei. 
As soon as Kosygin arrived in London (February 6), he launched 
into discussions of Vietnam and China . 
Ivilson responded by spelling 
out the Phase A- Phase B formula in detail . 
(2/ 6/61) 
\-Then Kosygin 
f ailed to show interest, Wilson repeated the proposal on February 7 
in even greater detail, giving i t to Kosygin in vlriting and coming 
down repeatedly on the willingness of the US to act first. (2/7/67) 
--"They (the US) recognize the need for a first and visibl e 
step . 
They further r ecognize that this step must mean the cessation 
of the bombing . 
This I believe they 'tiill do . . . ." 
__ If Because the USG know that the second stages will follow, they 
will therefore be able first to stop the bombing , . 
tt 
So much for Phase A. 
~lilson structured the remainder of the ' 
President 's proposal into a concrete version of Phase B. 
__ If The US are willing t o stop the build-up of their forces in 
the South if they are assured that the movement of North Vietnamese 
forces from the North to the South will stop at the same time. 
Essentiall y therefore the two stages are kept apart.
1f 
--"But because the USG know that the second stages will follow, 
they will therefore be able first to stop the bombing . 
11 
The British felt encouraged by I(osygin' s apparent interest and 
surmised t hat he had not understood the proposal when put to him by 
15 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Brown the previous November. 
They gave us a copy of the text 
passed to Kosygin, and it vTa.s cabled that ni ght to Washington. 
Thus precisely as the President's lette:r to Ho vlaS author-
ized for delivery in Moscow, the British vTere proposing a differ-
ent se~uence of the same actions to Kosygin in London. 
Tneir 
idea was to incorporate the proposition into a joint statement by 
the UK and USSR, as co-chairmen of the 1954 Geneva Conference. 
A 
draft of such a statement was submitted to Washington, which 
approved it with some revision, then passed to the Russians. 
In 
the draft, hovTever, the se~uence of actions again became ambiguous, 
as so often happens with the use of the English future tense. 
(The co-chairmen were to ask assurances from the US that the bomb-
ing ''\-Till stop" j from NVN that the infiltration will stop" j and 
again from the US that the troop buld-up "Will stop.") (2/9/67 ) 
If the Russians demurred on the joint statement, the British 
intended to push again on the Phase A-Phase B formula. 
As Kosygin 
wanted to submit the latter to the DRV, the British gave it to him 
once again in "Triting on the evening of February 10. 
At last, 
however, their attention I-Tas dravm to the difference bet\·reen their 
se~uence and the one envisioned by the US in the President's letter 
to Ho. 
Late on the night of February 10) therefore, a reviseu 
version was handed Kosygin, with the comment that it had been 
authorized by the White House. 
T:.rle difference bet.!een the two 
Vel'S ions boiled dmm essentially to a change in tenses. 
The British 
version said) "The US will stop bombing NVN as soon as they are 
assured that :Lnfil tration from NVN to SVN vlill stop." 
The revised 
version changed the last two vlOrds to "has SJopped. I. 
(Emphasis 
supplied.) (2/12/67 repeats the relevant texts-:) 
Wilson and Brmm apparently took strong exception to the last 
minute change of tenses, arguing that it undercut their credibility 
as negotiators vis-a-vis the Russians and that they had based their 
formulation on familiar US positions (the revised 14 points, etc.)) 
clearing their drafts wi til the US as they "Tent along. 
(2/11/67) 
We replied along several lines : 
(1) 
The proposal no,., under 
discussion vlaS different than that in the 14 points because it 
offered additional US concessions: 
I'le would stop our troop build-up 
as well as the bombing, in return for the DRV concession. 
(2) 
'l1'ne 
Russians "Tere m.,are of the letter to Ho, hence they would have k...nown 
the se~uence re~uired by the US. 
The change in tense in the final 
draft) therefore, v70u~d not surprise them or :unpair Bl'itjsh credi-
b ility . 
( 3) 
The I:J'i A build-up around the DMZ posed a ne,v military 
Situation, in which we simply could not risk a major assault from 
the North in the interval between Phases A and B. 
(4) Finally, 
the DRV had had the Phase A-Phase B formula for several months 
without shm.;ing a "flicker of inte!,est." It was unlj.kely, there-
fore, that the matter of se~uence was critical. 
"Everyone seems 
16 
TOP SECRE~ - NODIS 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
to wish to negotiate except HanoL" (2/11/67, 2/12/67) 
These answers apparently did not entirely assuage British 
feelings . 
In March, they raised the question- again in a letter 
from Wilson to the President (3/16/67) and in conversation between 
BrOlm and Kaiser (3/21/67). 
They clearly hoped to continue a 
significant role as peacemakers and asked for reassurance on their 
understanding of current US positions, on avoiding similar "mis-
understandings" in the future, and on the continuing US desire for 
negotiations . 
Shortly after Kosygints London visit, Bundy asked Zinchuk in 
Washington whether the problem of tenses had thrOlm the Soviets offj 
Zinchuk said that it had not significantly disturbed them. (2/17/67) 
However, in Mosco"r, about the same time , Kosygin! s interpreter 
twitted Thompson about the episode, saying) "that was quite a switch 
you pulled on us in the text of your proposal." (2/17/67) 
It can be argued) how'ever , that the change in tens es vJaS more 
serious. It could have been used as ammunition "rithin the party 
presidium in Hanoi by those "rho believe the U. S. would not show 
"good faith" tow'ard any agreements reached. It could still be 
used as part of a public propaganda exercise. 
17 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
2S 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
VIII. 
The Soviet Role 
The British were first startled) then delighted) to find 
Kosygin eager to play in active role as intermediary between the US 
and Hanoi. 
Kosygin' s interest \-TaS conveyed to us) of course) by 
the British) and we had no independent reading on his attitude . . To 
some extent) their appraisal of his mood may have reflected their 
own great enthusiasm for the part. 
But even allm.ring for this) 
there was definitely a sharp change from previous Soviet reluctance 
to play the middleman) especially when subject to public exposure.l 
As already noted) Kosygin \-Tas several t:Lrnes in prompt) confidential 
communication with the DRV authorities during his stay in London. 
And he made a public statement expressing belief that the UK and 
USSR could make a "contribution to the settlement of the Vietnam 
issue on the basis of the Geneva agreement )" by virtue of their 
roles as Geneva co-chairmen. (2/8/67) 
vfuat produced this change in Soviet attitudes? Were they act-
ing on DRV behest? 
Or were they now .Tilling to put pressure on 
Hanoi in pursuit of interests of their OIm? 
Only a little light is shed on these questions by the materials 
relating to Kosygin's stay in London. 
He was apparently willing to 
transmit proposals for DRV consideration more or less uncritically. 
While he argued t.he general merits of the DRV's side of the .Tar, he 
did not trJ to bargain or alter specifics of the proposals trans-
mi tted to him. 
State noted with surprise) for example, that he agreed to forward 
the proposal for extending the Tet bo..rnbing pause .Tithout object:i.ng to 
the "Ultimatum" implied in it) as the Soviets had so often done ,in 
the past. (2/19/67) 
What is more striking is that he did not react 
adversely to the substance of the principal de-escalatory proposal 
under discussion--the termination of all DRV infiltration and supply 
into SVN in exchange for a US halt in attacks on the North and in 
troop level augm:;ntation. 
J<:ntirely apart from the sequencE;· in .Thich 
these steps were-taken: their long term result for the Comm~nists 
i{ould be extremely adverse militarily. 
Yet on Febru.ary 13; he was 
overheard (by telephone intercept) to tell Brezhnev of "a great possi-
bility of achieving the aim) if the Vietnamese \-Till understand the 
present situation that we have passed to them; they \-rill have to 
decide . 
All they need to do is to give a confidential declaration.
1I 
(2/13/67) 
1 In private dealirgp) however) the Russians apparently \-Tere not quite 
so aloof. 
This topic is treated in other studies of negotiating 
sequences. 
During Sunflower, too, there are cryptic allusions to 
earlier Soviet interventions. 
Tnus Kosygin·told Thompson on February 
18 that lIeven earlier than Sunflo·wer, the USSR had sought a political 
settlement." 
18 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Kosygin may not have understood the full import of the proposals 
he was transmitting. 
He may also have been quite willing to sub-
ordinate DRV interests to the Soviet desire to avoid further escala-
tion in Vip.tnam. 
Nonetheless) his lack of a critical) analytical) 
bargaining attitude toward the proposals he was transmitting to Hanoi 
suggests that he did not endorse them) but served as a more or less 
neutral agent of transnlission. 
His intermediation no doubt put the 
DRV under obligation to respond seriously and vTith full explanations 
of their decisions. 
This is a form of pressure) perhaps) but ' 
,not a strong one. ' 
Had he wished to invoke his full powers of per-
suasion) he should have tried for proposals he could support--or at 
least for terms which) with the least possible further modification) 
would seem palatable to Hanoi. 
In a retrospective discussion with Thompson in Moscow) Kosygin 
expressed a jaundiced view of the role of mediators) saying they . 
either complicated the problem or pretended they were doing something 
when in fact they ,{ere not. 
(2/18/67) 
He had stepped into this 
uncomfortable spot in London because "the Vietnamese had for the first 
time stated they (were) r eady to negotiate if the bombings were 
stopped unconditionally; thj,s was the first time they had done so and 
it was a public statement." This could mean that the Trinh statement 
had given him a green light that formerly vTaS lacking. 
Of course) 
as suggested earlj,er) the Trinh statement itself may have been issued 
in part as a result of Soviet pressures. 
But the general picture) 
though only faintly sketched in the materials at hand) is of con-
siderable Soviet deference to HanoiTs views on this critical matter. : 
Rapacki) visiting London on February 22) r eplied tersely but 
'. 
tartly to probing on this issue. 
Asked about Kosygin 1s influence in 
Hanoi ) Rapacki described it to Brown as "not less than yours." 
Asked 
which country) China or Russia) had greater influence over North 
Vietnam) Rapacki replied) "North Vietnam." 
(3/1/67) 
How much the Russians had hoped in fact to accomplish during 
Kosygints London trip is impossible to know. 
Tney apparently har~' 
bored few expectations after his return. 
Kosygin complained to 
Thompson about the "ultimatu.'lll1 l..YQplied in the final proposal he 
transmHted to Hanoi from London) saying that he knew H was hopeless 
the minute he read it. ' He said the Soviets were not confident that 
the US proposals had been serious) and that he could not venture to 
propose any:thing constructive at that time. l 
(2/17/67) 
lIn a remarkable aside) he recalled that he personally had been in 
Hanoi when the US began bombing the DRV. 
"Why did not the US turn 
to him at that time and explain to him its proble~s? 
11 he asked. 
What 
he would have done about them he left unsaid . 
The fact that he d1tTelt on the l1ultimatum) 11 with a deadline he 
could hardly hope to meet) rather than the terms of the US proposal...:-
which were adverse to the,CoIT®unists from a military point of view--
also suggests that he was as much aroused by his personal embarrass-
ment as by the US position with respect to settlement terms)'bargain-
ing toughness) etc. 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
19 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
When Bundy in~uired af Zinchuk as to' whether the Saviets had 
last credit. in Hanai as a result af their handling af the Landan 
visit, the reply ,,'as firmly negative. 
Zinchuk said that "Hanai 
cantinued to' laak to' the Saviets to' arrange a'settlement that would 
pratect their interests." (2/17/67) 
This reply is abviously self-
. serving. 
TO' the extent that it is true, it again suggests the 
Russians were restrained in their advacacy vis-a-vis Hanoi. 
NO' explanatian is really satisfactory far Soviet behaviar. 
The Kasygin-Brezhnev telephone canversatian is inexplicable. 
Saviet willingness to' transmit virtual ultimatums is anly slightly 
less inexplicable. 
The very fact af intermediatian, however, 
,vas impartant. 
No matter haw much the Saviets disassaciated 
themselves fram the U .• S. praposals, their willingness to' trans-
mit them was a farm af pressure on the DRV. 
TO' the extent that 
Sunflawer was a "seriaus" exchange , the Russians were prabably 
playing a 10'1'1 cast game for the breaks. 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
20 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
IX. 
A New Geneva Conference? 
Kosygin's public reference to the UK-USSR Geneva co-chairmanship 
aroused British hopes that the Russians would' join them in reconven-
ing a Conference along the lines of 1954. (2/8/ 67) When they asked 
him if his remarks i ndicated a willingness to proceed in that direc-
tion) he r eplied that this was "not exactly" "That he had meant to 
imply. 
III proceeded upon the assumption that the m9.in thing was for 
the UK and the Soviet Union to assist the two sides to meet together 
after the bombing stopped. 
After this has been done) there may be 
various proposals for movi.ng further. 
The Geneva Conference could be 
convened even "Tithout China.
1I 
(2/9/ 67, emphasis supplied.) 
He 
emphasized that it was important to lido first things first. II 
Noting the bombing pause that 'vould occur during Tet) Bro"m 
pressed him to think about asking the US not to resume and calling 
for a Geneva Conference to meet as soon as February 15. 
Kosygin said 
he would first want to knmT Hanoi I s vie"lS. 
A Geneva Conference would 
be a IIcomplicated issue.
1I 
China would create difficulties. 
IITnere 
are Chinese troops in North Vietnam." Tnere vas also a pro-Chinese 
faction in Hanoi. "I could send this to Hanoi ) 11 he said) IIbut I am 
concerned about the difficulties .!! 
He decided finally to "think it 
over" and asked to have a proposition from the British in writing . 
(2/9/ 67 ) 
In the end , this topic was dropped , with no indication 
from the Russians as to what response they recei ved from Hanoi-:"'if 
indeed they ever put the issue to Hanoi at all . 
. . 
21 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
X. 
The Shadow of China 
As vTith Marigold) the chronicle of SunflOl·Ter is peppered with 
emotional but extremely vague references to the role of the Chinese; 
their antagonism tOvTard a negotiated settlement in Vietnam) and 
their baleful influence on the decision making processes in Hanoi. 
The British found Kosygin in London "obsessed" with the Chinese and 
said he talked about them lithe way Pakistanis talk about Indians.
1I 
(2/6/67) 
. 
In his post mortem with Thompson in MoscO"\oT) Kosygin said his 
public endorsement of negotiations in London had provoked IIfury" in 
Peking) but that the Chinese had been the winners in the end when 
his efforts failed. 
Their assessment of the futility of negotiations 
had been given increased credibility j.n Hanoi. 
The Chinese vTanted 
the conflict to continue and expand . 
And they had aspirations in 
India) Pakistan, Thailand) the Philippines) etc. '(2/17/67) 
These remarks were obviously intended to put the US in a more 
conceSSionary frame of mind . 
HO"\olever ) at the end of the intervievT) 
Kosygin adverted to another topic) one that also arose during Mari-
gold; 
As Thompson turned the conversation away from Vietnam} Kosy-
gin interrupted to ask him directly "if the Chinese had approached 
the US re (the ) possibility of negotiations on Vietnam." 
Thompson 
conjectured aftenTard that he may have thought the Chinese encour-
aged the US to start negotiations knovTing they '"ould fail and thus 
lead to actions increaSing the likelihood of a US-Soviet confronta-' 
tion. 
(2/19/67 ) 
Tne ·fact that this question vTaS posed more than 
once and in quj.te different forms by Lel-Tandowski the previous fall) 
though} suggests deeper suspicions of a Sino-US understanding adverse 
to the interests of the Soviet Union and its followers. 
22 
TOP SECHET - NODIS 
hO 
J 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
XI. 
The End of Sunflower 
With the resumption of bombing on February 13, after the Tet 
Truce, it "laS relatively clear to all parties that talks were 
unlikely to occur. 
However, events played themselves out with some 
surprises. 
Ho ansvTered the President's letter with a brusque, if a,? yet un-
. published , rejection on February 15. In handing the reply to our DCM 
in Moscow, the DRV representative added several points orally: (1) 
The US w'as "obstinate" in continuing to advance conditions for stopping 
the bombing. 
(2) 
The US had used the Moscow contact to deceive public 
opinion into believing that secret negotiations were going on while the 
bombing continued. 
This may have been a reference to news leaks from 
London about Sunflower, or from Washington and many other points about 
Marigold. 
(3) 
The proposal for extending the Tet bombing halt was an 
ultimatmn. 
(4) 
The DRV wished no further contact in MOSCOlv. 
(2/15/67) 
The tone and substance of these cowmunications was frosty, but 
the fact that they had not been made public left the possibility that 
the rejection might not be final, as the Secretary remarked to Dobrynj.n 
on February 23. 
Even this slender hope was destroyed on March 15, 
h01vever, when Hanoi published the Johnson-Ho exchange of letters. 
Since the President's letter referred to possible future meetings 
. "in Moscow, ivhere contact.s have already occurred,!l Hanoi's publication 
of it confirmed to the worJ..d, including t.he Chinese and the Vietnamese 
Communists, that such contacts had indeed taken place. 
This is 
notable, in contrast with Hanoi's great insistence of secrecy in the 
opening phases of the Sunflower and its complaints about publicity 
"Then the Moscow contact ivas closed down. 
Hanoi's decision to publish the letters was undoubtedly based on 
the conviction that it 'I,'lOuld look appreciably more peace-loving than 
the U.S. 
Never having violated the secrecy of contacts before or since, 
Hanoi had to be sure of its ground and the costs in terms of future 
U.S. communications and the morale of its Oim people. 
Equally, if 
not more important, Hanoi could have calculated tha~ public disclosure 
of US-DRV contact could have made the GVN .leaders more than uneasy. 
The US tried nonetheless to keep the door to talks open and even 
to resume direct contacts through another letter'from the President to 
Ho, 
The message discussed the general benefits of' a peaceful solution, 
based on the 1954 and 1962 Geneva Accords, and urged the DRV to enter 
talks tOvTard that end. It made no specific proposals on de-escalation 
or settlement. terms. It \·las hand carried to the DRV Embassy in Moscow 
on April 6, but returned by the Vietnamese to the U.S. Embassy mail box 
on the same day i'Tith the original envelope having been opened, then 
marked "non conforme! Retour a l'expediteur." 
23 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
21 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Addendum: 
Hindsight on Marigold 
There were many allusions to Marigold during Sunflower, but only 
a modest amount of additional (often ambiguous) information: 
--On February 17, Zinchuk told Bundy tnat the Soviets had gone 
back over Marigold with Hanoi and ascertained firmly that it had 
been "willing to talk, in the sense of exchanging views." 
The con-
tact had been cancelled, he claimed, because of the December 13-14 
bombing of Hanoi. (2/17/67) 
--On February 23, Dobrynin told Rusk that the DRV Charge in 
Moscow came to the Soviet Foreign Ministry on December 15 to say 
that the DRV had instructed Rapacki to break off his talks with the 
US, "on the ground that the bombing just before that date meant the 
US thought it could pressure Hanoi to talk:" 
(2/23/67) 
--On December 23, Rapacki claimed to Brown that "after firm 
agreement on the original lO-point package, Lodge had consulted 
WaShington and then reneged by raising new (unspecified) questions 
and points of interpretations. 
Before the Poles had a chance to 
do anything with these the December 13-14 bombings occurred, killing 
the entire project." 
--On March 23,; Dobrynin told Bundy "that the Pol~s had given 
the Soviets an entirely different picture than the one we (the US) 
had presented of "Tho had taken the initiative for the Warsa"T con-
. tacts and by implication the statement of the US position. 
Tile 
inescapable :implication was that the Poles had represented to the 
Soviets that tre USG had initiated the Lewandmrski· channel and that 
the USG had either drafted or endorsed the Lewandowski formulation 
and urged that it be presentee. to Hanoi." Dobrynin reiterated that 
the "bombing of December 13-14 had caused clear Hanoi rejection of 
the vlarsaw meeting." 
24 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
(") 
:r: 
::0 
o 
2: 
o 
r-o 
C) 
-< 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' -
NOD IS 
January 1, 1967 - New York Times 
Special to The Nei-T York Times 
UNITED NATIONS,~y:;-Dec. 31 -
Follow~~g are the texts of a letter 
yesterday by Secretary General Thant to Arthur J. Goldberg, the chief 
United States delegate, and of Mr. Goldberg's reply today : 
Thant 's Letter 
Let me take this opportunity of reiterating my three .. point program, 
to which I still firmly adhere: 
1. 
The cessation of the bombing of North Vietnam; 
2. 
The scaling down of all military activities by all sides in 
South Vietnam; 
3. 
The willingness to enter into discussions with those who are 
actually fighting. 
I strongly believe that this three-pOint program, of which the 
cessation of the bombing of North Vietnam j_s the first and essential part, 
is necessary to create the possib ility of fruitful discussions leadi ng 
to a just and honorable settlement of the problem of Vietnam on the basis 
of the Geneva Agreements of 1954. 
I also wish to recaJ_l that in the course of the tl-renty-first session, 
in the debate of the General Asse..mbly; the majority of the delegations 
have endorsed the three-pOint program. 
Many more heads of delegations 
also specifically pleaded for the cessation of the bombing of North Viet-
nam. 
It seems to me that this is a very clear indication of the public 
opinion of the world at large on this issue . 
Goldberg's Letter 
We have carefully reflected on your ideas, expressed in your 
Dec. 30 letter anIon previous occasions, about the cessation of bomb-
ing of North Vietnam . • . . I wish to assure you categorically that my 
Government is prepared to t ake the first step toward peace : 
specifically, 
we are ready to order a prior end to all bombing of North.Vietnam the 
moment there is an assurance, private or otherwise, that there i-Tould be 
a reciprocal response tova:cd peace from North Vietnwn. 
I am, thus reaffirming herew.1.th an offer made before the General 
1 
'IIO? SECRET - NODIS 
I -
I' 
\ -
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr - l'JODIS 
Assembly-on Sept. 22 and again on Oct. 18. 
We hope and trust that you 
will use every means at your disposal to determine what tangible res-
ponse there would be from North Vietnam in the wake of such a prior 
step toward peace on our part. 
January 2, 1967 
BEHIND THE LINES-HANOI, By Harrison E. Salisbury 
(pp. 175-177) 
Chapter XVIII 
He (Pham Van Dong) then went into a discussion of the so-called 
"four pOints, II the four points which Hanoi said constituted the "basis 
for a settlement of the Vietnam question." 
There had been great controversy abroad about the significance of 
these four points. 
Were they to be considered pre-conditions for nego-
tiation? Must the United States accept them before Hanoi would agree 
to sit down at a conference table? 
The four points provided for (1) recognition of the peace, inde-
pendence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Vietnam and 
the withdrawal of United States troops; (2) the noninterference of out-
side povers in the two zones of Vietnam; (3) settlement of South Viet-
namese questions in accordance with the program of the National Liberation 
Front without foreign interference; and (4) peaceful reunification of 
. Vietnam, to be settled by the people of' both zones. 
The attitude of the United States was that Hanoi was attempting to 
impose terms for a settlement before a confer~nce, that the North Viet-
namese insisted that the four points must be accepted first and that 
this meant talk at the conference table would be largely meaningless. 
IIThese should not be considered I conditions, III Pham Van Dong nmr 
told me. 
"They are merely truths. 
The most simple thing is to recog-
nize our sovereignty and our independence. 
It involves only ~ecognizing 
'the points in the Geneva agreements." 
He said that the United States did not like to accept the four points 
and especially the third poLnt about South Vietnam but, he inSisted, we 
must come to a solution on the basis of the fo~r points. 
IlWhichever way you may go around, finally you must come to the four 
points, rr he said. 
There Vlerenot preconditions nor conditions for talks, 
he said, but "conditions for a valid settlement" 
conditions necessary 
to reach a settlement which could be enforced. 
'\fuen my dispatch reporting this discussion was published in The New 
York Times, it touched off a flurry of speculation, centering on the ---
2 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
,- ~ . 
I 
J 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
thought that Pharo Van Dong had modified in some way the position of the 
Hanoi regime on t he four points. 
This was not my understanding. 
I knew 
that on previous occasions the same interpretation had been presented by 
spokesmen for the North Vietnamese Government. 
They had contended from the start that these were not "preconditions." 
Hovever, the speculation. in the West reached such intensity that the 
Foreign Ministry called on me and said they 'I·rere going to issue a brief 
stat~nent to dampen this down. 
They were careful to note that the faulty 
interpretation was not mine but that of Western commentators. 
When this was done, the furor gradually died away because the essence 
of the situation was now clear. 
The four conditions did not have to be 
accepted before we sat down at the conference table, but they would be 
placed on the table as the key points of the settlement which was to be 
negotiated. 
To me the whole thing seemed to be a distinction without a 
real difference. 
I did not believe that Pham Van Dong meant that the four 
points were to be considered an agenda in the normal understanding of the 
term--four points which might be modified or compromised to meet the views 
of the two sides. 
I felt that he meant--as Hanoi had from the start--
that the settlement must be constructed on this framelwrk. 
Whether there would be any give on the Hanoi side was another matter. 
There might well be in the end. 
But certainly there VIas no indication of 
it in the words he spoke to me about the four pOints. 
He placed alongside his four points another one: 
that the United 
States halt unconditionally the bombing and all hostile activity against 
the North. 
So far as the United States vms concerned, he took the vie'lv that it 
was not really ready for discussions. 
It had not, in his view, given any 
Sign of goodwill, ffi'1d he felt this was essential if good-faith negotiations 
were to get under way. 
The pattern of American conduct, as he vie'l-red it, 
was to talk peace only to mask preparations for escalation. 
"Of course, tt he said, giving me a knmving look, "I understand this 
better than you because there are many things ' I can't tell you .. " 
January 3, 1967 
On January 3" the British Minister, Michael Ste'lvart, gave tlW cables 
to Assistant Secretary Bu..1'J.dy. 
The first cable, dated January 2, was from 
the UK Consul General Colvin in Hanoi stating that Harrison Salisbury told 
him the DRV had treated hlifi as an unofficial emissary (he was not) and had 
given him two clear impressions at ministerial level: 
(a) in return for 
the cessation of bombing and of troop increases, Hanoi would be prepared 
to make military concessions and would negotiate; (b) the DRV want urgently 
3 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
.. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
to discuss this with the USG on a clandestine basis but do not know how 
to arrange it. Salisbury, who was seeing Pham van Dong that afternoon, 
asked for advice. 
Colvin told him the proposed discussion could depend 
on his ability to provide the USG 'l-Tith reliable confirmation from the 
Prime Minister tbat concessions would include 8 halt to North Vietnamese 
infiltration of the South. 
Impressions were not en.ough. 
January 4, 1967 
On' the following day (Jan. 4), the UK Foreign Secretary instructed 
the UK Embassy to bring this cable to the Secretary's attention and to 
say that, if Salisbury is reporting faithfully, the North .Vietnamese are 
getting very close to the package that the Secretary authorized Brown to 
put to the Soviet leaders last November in Moscow. 
This being so, he said, 
we must take it seriously. British facilities were to be available for 
any communication the US wished to make to Hanoi. 
Furthermore, if the US 
wishes, Colvin could ask Salisbury to tell the DRV that British facilities 
are available as a secure channeJ. of communication if they wish to arrange 
clandestine discussions, now or vhen Salisbury has left. 
That evening, the Secretary gave the following message to the British 
Minister, Michael Stewart, for delivery to Foreign Secretary Brown: 
a. 
Ask Colvin to inform Salisbury that he, Colvin, has 
reported to his government--and they in turn to us--on Salisbury's 
conversat ions "at ministerial level". 
Colvin should t ell 
Salisbury that the USG would greatly appreciate a full account 
by Salisbury of any and all conversations bearing on the issues 
of negotiation, cessation of bombing, or any related matters, to 
be transmitted securely through Colvin's facilities. 
b. 
Colvin should also give SalisburJ a message from us 
that, if his conversations have fo]~O\{ed the line reported to 
Colvin, they could be of great importance. 
Hence, and having 
in mind Hanoi's concern for the Chinese Commu..l1ists in particular, 
Colvin should emphasize to Salisbury that any such conversations 
be conducted on a strictly clandestine basis. 
Ellen if nothing 
develops from such conversations, it could be importa~t to the 
success of possible future clandestine contacts that Salisbury's 
talks r emain secure. 
c. 
If in fact senior members of the Hanoi goverTh~ent have 
suggested) or should suggest, clandestine direct talks with the 
US, Salisbury is authorized by us to tell the North Vietnamese that 
he can convey this to us through the British secure channel, or 
that we 'trill be prepared to receive such message directly from 
the North Vietnamese through direct diplomatic contacts at any 
capital i-There .Te both maintain posts. 
Salisbury should convey to 
the North Vietnamese that we place the highest priority on finding 
a mutually agreeable, completely secure arrangement for exchanging 
communications Hith them, and 'tTe will attempt to meet any suggestions 
they have to offer to achieve this ·end. 
4 
TOP SEeREI' - NODIS 
g1 
( . 
t _ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. TOP SECRET - NODIS 
d. 
We are most grateful for the prompt British report 
and for the offer of their communications facilities. 
e. 
Thib message comes personally froQ the Secretary to 
George Brown. 
The Secretary is briefing Michael Stewart on a 
separate matter which may be relevant to the foregoing this 
evening. 
January 5, 1967 
On January 5, the British Minister gave us two cables from the UK 
Consul General in Hanoi, dated January 4. 
Colvin had met with Salisbury 
on the afternoon of January 4 who had made the following points: 
(a) he 
will report the essence of his four hour conversation with Pham van Dong 
only to the Secretary; (b) the Prime Minister had treated him as an actual 
or potential emissary; (c) he would not use the British cipher facilities; 
Cd) when asked if clandestine discussions had been suggested, he said this 
subject must be reserved for the Secretary; (e) his articles will not include 
reference to negotiations, etc., (f) he thought that the NVN Government 
"had gone further than even before, and if there ,",ere any receptivity in 
the US Administration there were grounds for further exploration;" (g) he 
said the results must not be exaggerated but he thought Colvin could be 
encouraged . 
However, he was concerned about the ability of the USG to 
keep the negotiations trLLly clandestine; and (h) he hoped to leave Hanoi 
on January T, arriving in Washington on J anuary 11. 
Colvin concluded that clandestine discussions had been discussed and . 
that Salisbury is sharply conscious of the need for clandestinity. 
At 
this point , Colvin had not been able to convey the Secretary's message 
(para. 3) to Salisbury. 
That afternoon Scotty Reston advised the Secretary that Salisbury 
had an 8,000 word memcon of his talk with Pharo van Dong which Reston does 
not knml ,",hether Salisbury will be allm,ed to bring out. 
Reston also 
stated that Salisbury had asked permiSSion to stay in Hanoi another five 
or six days but the status of his request was tUlk~own. 
On the same day, we instructed our Ambassadors in the posts where 
he is most likely to be seen first (a) to offer Salisbury our private 
cable facilities to report to us, and (b) to caution him strongly against 
divulging any North Vietnamese confidences until he has reported in full 
to us and we can gauge whether he has received significant signals (State's 
113504) . 
STATE 112967 (to Amembassy MOSCQ1;-r), TS/Nodis 
Ref: Moscow 2887 
You should seek appointment .directly with departing NVN Ambassador 
and deliver the following message: 
5 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
( 
( : 
,-
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
QUOTE: 
Although the USG has attempted to deliver the following 
message to the North Vietnamese authorities indirectly in the last few 
days, we would appr eciate it if he would make sure that those authori-
ties are informed directly by him upon his return to Hanoi as follows: 
The USG places the h ighest priority in finding a mutually agreeable, 
completely secure arrangements for exchanging communications with the 
government of the DRV about the possibilities of achieving a peaceful 
settlement of the Vietnamese dispute. 
If the DRV is willing to explore 
such possibilities with us we will attempt to meet any suggestion they 
have to offer regar ding the time and place of such discussions and we 
will be prepared to receive such information directly from the North 
Vietnamese through direct diplomatic contacts at any capital where we 
both maintain posts or otherwise. 
END QUOTE 
Slug any reply 
NODIS/SUNFLOWER 
THE SECRETARY. 
January 6, 1967 
MOSCOW 2916 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Rec'd 1341, 6 Jan 67 
Ref: 
State 112967 
1. After abortive attempt at noon, Akalovsky delivered "I-lith con-
siderable difficult y following letter to Hoang Man'ty, First Secretary 
DRV Embassy, at 3 p .m. today: 
A. 
BegLq quote. 
Dear Mr. Ambassador: 
I have been instructed 
to d.eliver to you personally a confidential message from my government. 
I am prepared to call on you for that purpose at your earliest convenience. 
Please let me knm.; when you would be available to receive me. 
Sincerely 
yours, JOm1 C. Guthrie, Charge D'Affaires Ad rnterim, United states of 
America. 
End Quote . 
2. 
Ty said he would deliver letter to Ambassador Kinh, but would not 
comment on mode of any reply. 
He did confirm Kinh leaving soon. 
3. If and when Kinh receives me, I intend harid him in \-Triting state-
ment beginning quot e the USGplaces . . . where we both maintain posts or 
otherwise end quote . 
And convey initial portion orally. 
lj.. 
Assume rlllh will wish to touch base \-lith Hanoi before receiving 
me and it therefore may be day or two before arlY reply received. 
GUTHRIE 
6 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
I -
\. . 
L, 
i 
I. 
j 
Janua!y 10, 1967 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
MOSCOW 2966 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Rec'd 1133, 10 Jan 67 
Ref: 
Moscow 2950 
1. 
• •. 1 met with DRV Minister-Counselor Le Cnang at 11 a.m. today, 
at DRV Embassy ••.• 
2 •••• 1 delivered message contained in State 112967 •••. 
3. 
. .• Le Chang then delivered brief tirade which struck me as 
pro forma, asserting that recent action by US show it continues intensify 
aggression in Vietnam and continues intensify its campaign of treachery 
and dupery regarding peace, and that it clear from everything there no 
good will on US part. . • • 
. 
5. 
As I was about to leave building, Le Chang came rurming after 
me and said he wanted make sure our meeting was confidential .••• 
GUTHRIE 
January 15, 1967 
The highlight of Salisbury's account to the Secretary concerned 
remarks by Pham Van Dong in response to his questions. 
Salisbury pressed 
hh~ to make some response if the US were to stop bombing and Pham Van 
Dong made four repl~es: 
a. 
Once the US had halted its air attacks on the North, 
lias _far as we are concerned we will take an appropriate stand." 
b. "If the US really wants ' a settlement, the first thing 
is to have good will. 
Of course we know what we should do if 
the UB shOl-lS good will. If they stop the whole war, we knml 'That 
we should do. 
If they stop doing harm to the North, we know 
what we should do." 
c. 
"The moment the US puts and end to the way, we will 
respect each other and settle every question." 
d~ With the cessation of hostilities, "we can speak about 
other things". 
After this, there "Till be no lack of generosity 
on our .part. n 
Our net judgment is that these statements are interesting mood music 
but do not get us very far. 
The first two statements are' replays of 
earlier statements to Sainteny and Petri. 
The latter two statements 
appear to be without substance. 
7 
TOP SEC~~ - NODIS 
r 
, 
i 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Salisbury's report contained three other interesting elements: 
(a) there is a deep conviction in Hanoi that our resolve will falter 
because of the cost of the struggle; (b) there is concern in Hanoi 
about the conseq,1.c.ences of the cri.sis in China; (c) Hanoi had two basic 
concerns about negotiations: 
(1) the Chicom pistol: in their back and 
(2) the possibility that the morale and discipline of the Northern forces 
and the Viet Cong would falter. 
He take the latter point seriously 
(Memorandum to the President, January 15). 
January 17, 1967 
MOSCOW 3066 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Rec'd 1015, 17 Jan 67 
Ref: 
Moscow 3061 
2. 
Le Chang said purpose of his asking for this meeting was to seek 
clarification certain points in U.S. Government's message DCM delivered 
to him January 10. 
For DRV Government to be able give message serious 
study, follo'l-Ting necessary: 
A. 
Explanation of specific meaning phrase "completely secure 
arrangement" in message; and 
B. 
Clarification U.S. position on settlement Vietnam problem. 
3· 
. he indicated some sense of urgency by ing,uiring whether 
response could be expected soon, even this week. • . 
THOMPSON. 
STATE 120058 (to Aroembassy MOSCOW), 
~I.'S/Nodis, Sent 2245, 17 Jan 67 
1. 
In conversation wHh Harriman last night, Dobrynin said he under-
stood that our order concerning bombing within ten nautics.l miles of the 
center of Hanoi still stood on an indefinHe basis. 
Harriman challenged 
this and said th&t while we were continuing th~ order for the present, we 
did not consider ourselves bound to do so indefinitely. 
DobrYl1in asked 
for clarification) stating that he believed Moscm'l understood it i..."1 this 
sense, based on Bundy disclosure to Zinchuk on December 27 of proposal 
made in 'VlarSal-l on December 24. 
(This of course was prior to negative 
response through Polish channel on December 29.) 
8 
TOP SECREr - NODIS 
Ij I 
"(I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
2. 
We are informing Dobrynin quietly here that negative response of 
December 29 in Warsaw necessarily meant that ile did not feel ourselves 
bound to maintain the order indefinitely. 
At the same time, we were con-
tinuing the order for the present and watching developments closely. 
3. 
Your instructions on Vietnam also discuss the possibility of 
secret talks with DRV and indicate we have had no reply. 
In light of 
latest developments, we believe you should say that we as yet have no 
clear indication of DRV willingness for such talks. 
We simply cannot 
guess whether DRV has informed Soviets of our message or their latest 
reply, and we believe it best to protect ourselves from any charge of 
disclosure to any party or government. 
If you think it wise, you might 
omit discussions of this point entirely while simply reiterating our 
willingness for direct secret talks. 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
STATE 120335 (to Amembassy MoscoW), TS/Nodis, Sent 2430, 17 Jan 67 
Ref: 
Moscow 3066 
Literally Eyes OI1~y for Ambassador and DCt4 
Following is to be held until an execute order is received: 
1. Guthrie should seek appointment soonest with DRV Charg~ to 
convey message below. 
2. Message is: 
a. 
By "completely secure arrangement" USG has in mind d.iscussions 
between DRV and US representatives that would. not repeat not be disclosed 
to any other government or party whatsoeveF unless by mutual agreement, 
and that would be subject to the strictest precautions against press or 
public inquiry. 
USG i.s able to a SSl.lre DRV that earlier message has not 
been disclosed to anyone • 
. b. 
lye believe DRV already has considerable information by both 
public and private means, of US position on settlement of Viet-Nam prob-
lem, and has also received formulations fr om others in contact with USG. 
USG for its part has studied public and private statements by DRV repre-
sentatives . 
lie b-2lieve discussions should seek to establish whether common 
ground now exists for an acceptable settlement. 
c. 
In discussions, USG would be prepared to con ~ ider any topic 
that DRV f el t should be included. 
For illustration, topics USG would be 
prepared to discuss would include following: 
9 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
I 
l . 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
(1) 
Arrangements for the reduction or the cessation of 
hostilities. 
(2) Essential elements of the Geneva Accords of 1954 and 
1962, including withdrmlal of any forces coming from outside 
South Viet-Nam and now present there. 
(3) Arrangements for a free determination by North Viet-Nam 
and South Viet-Nam on the issue of reunification. 
(4) 
Recognition of the independence and territorial integrity 
of North and South Viet-Nam, or of all Viet-Nam if the people 
should choose reunification. 
(5) 
The international posture of South Viet-Nam, including 
relationships with other nations. 
(6) Appropriate prov~s~ons relating to the internal political 
structure of South Viet-Nam, including freedom from reprisals and 
free political participation. 
(7) Appropriate objective means for insuring the integrity of 
all provisions agreed to. 
d. 
The topics thus listed could be considered in any order, and 
the USG would be prepared to consider any additional topics the DRV would 
propose. 
3. 
You should put these points in writing. 
In addition, you should 
note orally that while USG is prepared to conduct discussions under a 
completely secure arrangement at any place the DRV may .,ish) USG believ\ys 
there are many advantages in MOSCO.,. 
USG s enior representatives in Moscow 
are fully equipped and can be supported security and without personnel 
moves that might attract attention. 
We believe physical security in 
Moscow can be maintained subject to appropriate safeguards. 
4. 
As these instructions indicate) we believe our first response 
should be a listing of topics. 
However) we recognize possibility that 
.Guthrie might be probed further about substance of USG position. 
He 
should seek to avoid going beyond this) indicating that very purpose of 
discussions \fQuld be to develop positions on both sides. 
If but only if 
DRV Charge should refer to MARIGOLD ten points (which you have as attach-
ment to Dobrynin-Ru.sk memocon of January 5), Guthrie should be familiar 
with these and should respond that, as we believe has been ind.icated to 
m~v) 'de believe thi.s formulation would be satisfactory basis for more 
detailed discussion of the points contained therein. 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
10 
~'OP SECREI' - NODIS 
. ..,' 
I 
, " 
l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
STATE 120458 (to AmEmbassy MoscoW), TS/Nodis, Sent 0403, 18 Jan 67 
Ref: 
State 120335 
You may execute. 
RUSK (Drafted by Mr. Read). 
Janua~ 19, 1967 
MOSCOW 3089 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Rec'd 0957, 19 Jan 67 
Ref: 
State 120453 
2. 
Unless instructed to contrary, . DCM \vill touch very lightly on 
Moscow as site for discussions (para. 3 State 120335). 
Our movements 
and telephone calls are, of course, reported to KGB by chauffers and 
operators and it must be assumed that DRV Embassy is not secure from 
Soviet eavesdropping. 
It will also be almost impossible keep repeated 
calls at DRV Embassy from Western press representatives indefinitely. 
From DRV viewpoint, Moscow would be doubtful choice owing predictable 
ChiCom reaction. 
THOMPSON 
January 20, 1967 
MOSCOW 3126 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Rec'd 1713, 20 Jan 67 
Ref: 
Moscow 3089 
" 
4. 
Le Chang said would transmit our response to his government and 
would meet with us again after receiving further instructions. 
He did 
not probe further. 
: S 
5. 
Apart from important fact that Le Chang indicated dialogue would 
continue, believe his comportment during meetings may also be of sig-
. 
nificance. 
Except for his pro forma attack on US at initial meeting 
January 10 (Moscow 2966), he has refrained from making any acrimonious 
statements and his attitude at meetings, relaxed from outset, is now 
bordering on friendly; he is even willj.ng to be drawn into occasional 
small talk. 
As department will recall, this is in marked contrast with 
his attitude during one meeting he was willing have with Ambassador Kohler 
year ago. 
THOMPSON 
11 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
44-
.J 
. ' 
I 
I~ 
January 21, 1967 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
STATE 123196 (to Amembassy Moscow), S/Nodis 
Ref: 
Moscow 3126 
--"7"-------- --
-
1. 
We are a little disturbed at reported Guthrie statement that 
we felt agenda should be clear before talks commence. 
This is not 
repeat not our thought, as we ourselves might wish to add topics) and 
above all do not wish to get into any dispute on agenda ••.• 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
Janua~ 27) 1967 
MOSCOW 3218 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Rec'd 1503, 27 Jan 67 
Ref: 
Moscow 3194 
2 •.•• Le Chang said he has asked for meeting to deliver, for 
transmittal to US Govt, DRV Govt IS Aide-Memoire containing response to 
US Gove message given to himJ?nuary 10. 
A. 
The United States is intensifying the war in South Vietnam 
and escalating the bombing of North Vietnam. 
President Johnson has made 
clear his scheme to go on intensifying the wal' of aggression against Viet-
nam. 
But the Vietnamese people are determined to fight for their funda-
: 
mental national rights and the United States is doomed to dismal defeat. 
B. 
The United States talks peace but makes war. 
The conditions 
which the United States demands the Vie'tnamese people to accept are absurd 
and arrogant. 
"Conditional suspension of bombing", "conditional with-
drawal o.f troops" are in fact schemes ' to cling to South Vietnam, to turn 
South Vietnam into a new-type colony and a military base of the United 
States, to prolong indefinitely the partition of Vie!nam. 
C. 
The four-pOint stand of the Government of the Democratic 
Republic of Vietnam embodies the fundamental principles and the main provi-
sions of the 195!r Geneva agreements on Vietnarr.. 
It is the basis for the 
most correct political solution to the Vietnam prOblem. 
The Government of 
the Democratic Republic of Vietnam has declared that if the United States 
really wants peace and seeks a political solutj.on, it must recognize the 
four-point stand of the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam 
and the five-point statement of South Vietnam National Front for Liberation) 
the only genuine representative of the South Vietnamese people. 
12 
TOP SECRET - HODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
D. 
The Democratic Republic of Vietnam is an independent and 
sovereign country. 
The U.S. bombing of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam 
is a blatant act of aggression. 
The United States must end· immediately 
and unconditionaJ_ly the bombing and all other ~lcts of war against the 
Democratic Republic of Vietnam. 
That is th~ urgent'demand on the people 
of all countries, of all men of common sense throughout the world. 
The 
unconditional cessation of bombing and all other acts of war against the 
Democratic Republic of Vietnam being materialized, the Democratic Republic 
of Vietnam could then exchange views with the. United States concerning ·the 
place or date for contact between the two parties as the Government of the 
United States proposed in its message handed over on January 10, 1967. 
End text. 
5. Le Chang added that, as to US views--including several points--
. conveyed to him January 20, his side would comment on them "at appropriate 
time. " 
In response DCM r s query if he understood correctly that Aide-
Memoire is in response to January 10 message and that there no response yet 
to points contained January 20 paper, Le Chang said this understanding 
accurate and repeated that com..ments on latter paper would be made "at 
appropriate time." 
6. 
DClvi took this opportunity make point in para. 2 State 123196. 
Le Chang said he fully understood. 
7. 
Le Chang then said he wished stress certain points concerning 
"intensifica~ion of war with us. 11 
Asserting US continuing escalate war 
and commit "barbarous crimes 11 against Vietnamese people in both parts 
Vietnam, cited following examples recent IImost cerious escalation": 
A. 
Destruction of Ben Xue in SVNj 
B. 
uBarbarous murderstr in Iron Triangle; 
C. 
Bombings "densely populated 11 NVN areas of Viet Tri, Thai 
Nguyen, Ning Bing, and Thang Hoa. 
No signature (cable probably incomplete). 
STATE 127220 (to Amembassy MoscoW), TS/Nodis, Sent 2443, 27 Jan 67 
Ref: 
Moscmv 3218 
Secretary would appreciate receiving your views about DRV message 
in ref tel. 
Some of the questions about the message .,hich have been raised in 
our minds are as follows: 
. ' 
13 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
'-; 
11£ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE):' -
NOD IS 
(1) Are we now, in effect, facing the start of a dialogue with 
the other side staking out an opening. extreme position? 
(2) 
What inference do you draw from Charge's statement that com-
ments on January 20 paper would be made lIat appropriate time": - do you 
read this to mean that we will hear again from him in a few days or that 
their further response to January 20 message wD.l come only after cessa-
tion of bombing, etc.? 
(3) 
What is your reading of the evident concern indicated in para. 
4a and 7 of our lIintensificationll and "escalationll ? 
(Incidenta.lly, we 
have not been able to identify "Ben Xue" in para. 7(a) ) 
Do you have any indication of Soviet awareness of Guthrie/Charge 
talks? Is it safe to assume that Kosygin's reference to "latest (Vietnam) 
news not good" as reported Moscow 3213 preceded ref tel discussions and was 
not a veiled reference to latter? 
KATZEN~ACH (Drafted by B. H. Read: 
J. P. Walsh) 
January 28, 1967 
MOSCOW 3231. (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Rec'd 1051, 28 Jan 67 
Ref: 
State 127220 
1. 
DRV message strikes me as first round in oriental rug trading. 
Le Chang's emphasis on secrecy at each contact seems encouraging but you 
will note that text carefully drafted for possible publication. 
Suggest 
our reply should also be drafted with possible necessity of eventual 
publication in mind. 
2. Believe QTE appropriate time UNQTE means after cessation of 
bombing but this ploy gives them the possibility of contin .. uing the dialogue 
if we should break off talks or give completely negative reply their last 
message. 
3. 
Concern over escalation may indicate they are hurting and also 
may be effort to exploit experience of Warsaw talks to hold down our bombing 
activity. Possibility exists that they may be concerned that further 
escalation .rill bring strong internal pressure to call for vohmteers or 
other dangerous Doves on their part. 
At Guthr:Le ' s request, place names 
,{ere handed to him in writing. 
On reexamination appears to be Ben Xuc 
rpt Xuc. 
4. 
Do not believe Kosygin was making veiled reference to these dis-
cussions. 
We can be al~ost certain that Soviet chau~feurwould have 
reported Guthrie's visits to KGB. 
Suggest that at next meeting Guthrie 
might point out that fact of contacts almost certainly known to Soviets 
14 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
117 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
and ask whether if queried by them we could confirm we had been in contact 
but not inform them of substance of talks. 
5. 
Re future procedure following appear to be alternatives. 
A. 
Stop bombing DRV and press for prompt meeting or alternatively 
state we are doing so on assumption there will be prompt meeting and mutual 
de-escalation. 
B. 
State that as evidence of good faith we will confine bombing 
to infiltration routes in southern part of DRV and press for prompt meeting. 
C. 
Assuming foregoing not acceptable send carefully drafted writt'en 
reply which would leave us in good position if publication forced by them 
supplemented as necessary by oral remarks. 
Reply might be based on the 
fourteen points or Polish ten points. 
On bombing "\ore might say we deplore 
the loss of life on both sides but point out that use of violence is not 
one-sided and. we "TOuld welcome mutual cessation. 
D. 
Another possibility "lwuld be simply to go back with questions 
about paragraph C of their reply. 
What do they mean by "recognize" the four 
and five point statements. 
Are they asking for our capitulation? Although 
we have indicated ,ve are prepared to discuss their points we cannot agree 
that the NLF is QTE the only genuine representative of the South Vietnamese 
people UNQTE. 
THOMPSON 
Hanoi VNA International Service in English 0150 GJ'tlT 28 January 1967--B 
(FBIS, Far East, 30 January 1967) 
(~lext) Hanoi) 28 January--Nguyen Duy Trinh) DRV foreign minister) has 
granted an interview to Australian journalist Wilfred Burchett. 
Questions .. 
and answers follOY/: 
1. Question: 
Mr. tvtinister, what in your view are the most signifi-
cant recent developments in the Vietnam ,,'ar, and what are the prospects 
for the ~~ediate future? 
AnSl,rer: 
The U.S. imperialists are waging the most barbarous 
war of aggression agaLDst our country, threatening more and more seriously 
peace in southeast Asia and the world. 
But tLey have sustained heavy 
d~feats in South and in North Vietnam. 
The people of South Vietnam, 
fighting with great heroism) have foiled all their military plans in spite 
of the commitments of over 1 million U.S.) puppet} and satellite troops. 
The people of' North Vietnam have not been and .rill never be cOlved by the 
barbarous bombing raids of' the U.S. imperialists and have dealt them rrell-
deserved counterblows. 
15 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREl' -
NOD IS 
All Vietnamese people are resolutely fighting against 
the U.S. aggressors to defend their sacred national rights and fulfill 
their duty to the peoples of the friendly countries nmr struggling for 
their independence and freedom. 
The four-point stand of the DRV Govern-
ment is a stand of independence ahd peace) and it is the expression of 
the fundamental principles and the main provisions of the 1954 Geneva 
agreements on Vietnam. 
It is the basis for the most correct political 
solution to the Vietnam problem) a basis which fully meets the deep aspira-
tions of the Vietnamese people) and fully conforms to the spirit of the five-
point statement of the NFLSV) the only genuine representative of the people 
of South Vietnam. 
The peoples of the world) including very large sections 
of the population of the United States itself) more and more strongly 
support our just stand and demand ever more firmly that the U.S. imperialists 
stop their war of aggression in Vietnam and let the Vietnamese people set-
tle their own affairs themselves. 
The U.S. imperialists talk of peace negotiations) but they 
still show great obduracy. 
President Johnson recently stated with impudence 
that he will go on intensifying and expanding the war of aggression in an 
attempt to cling to the south and to prolong the partition of Vietnam. 
But 
however perfidious the maneuvers of the U.S. imperialists may be) the Viet-
namese people) united as one man and fearing neither hardships nor sacri-
fices) are determined to carTy .on their resistance war to the end to safe-
guard the independence and freedom of the fatherland) and contribute to 
the maintenance of peace in southeast Asia and the world. 
The Vietnamese people "ill win. 
The U.S. imperialist 
aggressors will be defeated. 
2. 
Question: 
In the face of documentary evidence and eyewitness 
reports from foreign witnesses) including American journalists) Washington 
continues to claim that U.S. aircraft have been striking only at military 
targets and not at civilian targets in North Vietnam. 
What are your views 
on this subject? 
. 
Answer: 
The DRV is an independent and sovereign country and the 
U.S. imperialists have absolutely no right to violate this independence 
and sovereignty. 
U.S. bombing of any point of its territory) whether a 
military or a civilian target) is a blatant act of aggression and an 
unpardonable crin:2. 
It is an undeniable fact i hat civilian targets in 
North Vietnam have been attacked. 
The 1 ~oples of the 1-Torld) including 
large sections of the American people) are strongly pTotesting against 
the U.S. imperialists' savage acts of aggression. 
The U.S. imperialists must stop definitively and uncon-
ditionally the bombing raids and all other acts of \Var against the DRV. 
16 
TOP SSCRET -
NODIS 
, 
L _ 
L 
I 
! -
L 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECHET - NODIS 
3. 
Question: 
The United States .has spoken of the need for dialog 
or contact between itself and the DRV. 
Would you com.rnent on this state-
ment? 
Answer: 
The United States has made s'C..ch statements, but in its 
deeds it has shovm the utmost obduracy and perfidy ahd continues the 
escalation, stepping up and expanding the aggressive war. If it really 
wants talks, it must first halt unconditionally the bombing raids and all 
other acts of war against the DRV. 
It is only after the unconditional 
cessation of U.S. bombing and all other acts of war against the DRV that 
there could be talks behreen the DRV and the United States. 
The four-point stand and the correct attitude of the 
DHV Government enjoy, we are sure, ever stronger approval and support 
from all peace loving and justice-loving peoples and governments in the 
world. If the United States refuses to listen to reason, it will further 
unmask itself as an obdurate aggressor. 
The Vietnamese people are deter-
mined to fight until total victory to defend the north, liberate the south, 
achieve the peaceful reunification of the fatherland, and contribute to the 
maintenance of peace in this area and in the world. 
January 30, 1967 
STATE 128175 (to Aroembassy Mos.cow & Saigon), SjNodis, Sent 0318, 31 Jan 67. 
For Ambassador from Secretary 
1. 
Separate circular from FBIS will contain key parts of Burchett 
interview with DRV Foreign Minister published Jan 28 and Nhan Dan corr.nnentary 
of Jan 29. 
We interpret these as all-out efforts to build up public pres: 
sures on us to stop bombing in return for talks. 
lie also note that Burchett 
interview substantially reduces link to acceptance of four points, although 
Nhan Dan commentary implies such link by quoting Eo letter of January 19.66. 
2. 
Apart from these public statements, we are repeating to all addres':' 
sees Cairo 4214 and New Delhi 10807. 
These report simultaneous DRVapproaches 
in Cairo and New Delhi, asking them to convey message to us 'ilhich both UAR . 
. and G01 have interpreted as message that Hanoi would be prepared to talk 
if we stopped bombing. 
You will note that Jndian message contains intriguing 
reference to absence of IIpublicly stated II conditions·, and 'ire will be seeking 
clarification through New Delhi. 
3. 
For Moscow: 
We believe this backgro'LIld is essential for any dis-
cussions of Vietnam you may have in next few days. 
If DRV is going all-
out to put pressure on us to stop bombing, 'iofe \olould expect Soviets to join 
in the cry on much more forceful basis than they have done in the past. 
You should counter by using our standard position ~rom Goldberg speech of 
September and our other exchanges 'Idth the Soviets. 
In addition, you should 
point to grave practical problem -- I-Thich we believe Soviets might actually 
17 
TOP SECHET - NODIS 
I . 
l 
.J 
r 
I i 
. ' 
J 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' 
NOD IS 
understand although not conceding it -- of situation in which we stop 
bombing, Hanoi continued its actions, and we were thus under great 
pressure to resume. If we stop bombing and the North Vietnamese make 
no overt albeit QDannounced reciprocal gesture it would be impossible to 
avoid widespread speculation and indeed an assumption~hat talks were in 
fact going on. 
This would jeopardize the secrecy which we and the DRV 
(and we assume the Soviets as well) feel would be necessary for the success 
·of at least the early stages of negotiation . . Aside from this, a situation 
in which the North Vietnamese continue their infiltration of men and 
materials southward while we are engaging in talks would produce the kind 
of tensions that would make any constructive steps toward a settlement 
difficult if not impossible . 
. 4. For Saigon: 
You should explain privately to Do (and Ky if you 
wish) that we see public statements as designed to put pressure on us and 
that we have had messages in Cairo and Ne~ Delhi along same lines. 
You 
should ask for Saigon reaction, while indicating that our position remains 
as stated by Goldberg. 
5. 
For London: 
This new series of moves by DRV, and our reactions 
to it, should be fully in hands of Wilson and Brown before Kosygin visit. 
We are considering message that would disclose Cairo and New Delhi approaches 
and coyer whole subject in detail, with suggestions on line British might 
take ,-lith Soviets. 
For time being, you should confine your discussion 
with British to their interpretation of Burchett interview and Nhan Dan 
commentary, ·without at this time going into Cairo and New Delhi. 
RUSK (Drafted by vT. P. Bundy) 
January 31, 1967 
STATE 128486 (to Amembassy MoscoW), TS/Nodis 
Ref: 
MOSCOW's 3218 and 323i 
• 
1. Guthrie should ask to see DRV Charge soonest to deliver following 
written message: 
a. 
The USG has carefully noted the DRV message of January 27 and 
'the accOmpanying remarks by the DRV Charg~. The USG has preserved the 
strictly confidential nature of these ex~hanges, but notes that the DRV 
has broadcast publicly the essence of the January 27 message and asked 
other governments to inform us that the DRV is prepared to enter negoti-
ations .,ith the USG vrhen bombing of North Viet .. Nam stops without stated 
conditions. 
The US has felt that it must give some response to third 
nations conveying messages from the DRV, and will be conveying such res-
ponses in the near future. 
We believe this essential in.order to protect 
the existence of this strictly confidential channel. 
We assume the DRV 
will treat third country channels in the same manner, but that strictly 
confidential statements will continue to be handled tITcough this channel. 
18 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 303 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. . .". ,:. ~i •. 
TOP SECREI' 
NOD IS 
b. 
The basic objective of the USG remains the holding of direct 
and private talks covering any elements that either side believes should be 
considered in reaching a peaceful solution to the Viet-Nam problem. 
For 
this purpose) the US would be prepared to include in these discussions the 
four-point position of the DRV or ap.y other matter the .DRV wishes to bring 
up. 
The US would welcome DRV comments on the US message of January 20. 
c. 
At the same time, the USG notes the concern of the DRV inodis-
cussing "intensification" or lIescalation" of the bombing of North Viet-Nam 
as presented in the January 27 aide-memoire and the oral remarks of the 
DRV Charge. 
We are ready to discuss this and related issues. 
But we remind 
the DRV that one step has already been taken by the USG to de-escalate the 
war in the North: 
for more than a month our planes have been ordered not 
to bomb within 10 nautical miles of Hanoi city center. 
We would like to 
avail ourselves of this direct private channel to inform the DRV that the 
USG would be prepared to iillplement additional measures to de-escalate the 
bombing of the North to create conditions conducive to the success of talks 
with the DRV. 
We, of course, would be impressed with similar acts of 
7estraint on the part of the DRV, and we can assure the DRV that any such 
acts on its part need not be made public. 
The favorable atmosphere which 
would result from these mutual steps tmrard peace would permit the US and 
DRV to take additional steps tmrard obtaining a peaceful solution. 
d. 
The USG is aware that the DRV is sensitive to any public link 
between a stopping of the bombing and reciprocal actions on Hanoi's part. 
In this connection, it should be observed that the cessation of bombing 
would l ead to a world-wide assumptj.on that talks \-rere under way and it would 
become increasingly difficult to hold discussions under conditions of secrecy. 
For this reason, we ° r emind the DRV of the USG suggestion that the stopping 
of the bombing might take place as a prior and ostensibly unilateral action. 
Before doing this we would want a private understanding with the DRV that 
additional subsequent steps wo~d be taken that would amount in the aggre-
gate to an equitable and reciprocal reduction of hostile action. 
The USG 
takes this opportunity to rene\-T this suggestion as one to which the DRV may 
wish to give serious consideration. 
e. 
Finally, the USG notes that the approaching TET period, during 
which both sides have announced cessations of militarj action, including 
the bombing of North Viet-Nam, may make the present occasion particularly 
. appropriate for discussions along the lines suggested above. 
In vie'w of 
the nearness of the TEl' period, the USG hopes that the DRV response to the 
foregOing will be made as soon as possible. 
2. 
Before tanding over the above written message and reading it for 
translation, Guthrie should note orally that the USG refutes categorically 
the charges about US actions and intentions concerning South Viet-Nam and 
the GVN contained in the DRV aide-memoire and oral r ~marks. However, in 
the interests of bringing about a constructive exchange of views, the USG 
will r efrain from a point-by-point refutation and proceed to our formal 
reply to the January 27 aide-memoire. 
19 
TOP SEClli,'r 
NOD IS 
S2. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr -
NOD IS 
3. Either at close, or at appropriate point in conversation, Guthrie 
, 
. 
should ask when DRV Charge expects new ambassador to arrive FYI: .Purpose 
of this inquiry is to suggest possible early appointment of representative 
qualified for more frank and direct discuss ions, if DRY desires. 
END FYI. 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
February I, 1967 
SAIGON 17053 (to SecState), S/Nodis, Sent 1000, 1 Feb 67; Rec'd 1052, 1 Feb 67. 
1. Pursuant to your 128175, I called Ky on Wednesday morning and cited 
the newspaper articles by Salisbury, Burchett, and in the Communist news-
paper Nhan Dan as T,rell as the messages in Cairo and New Delhi, all of them 
trying to get us to stop the bombing without any deescalation on their side. 
I asked Ky what he thought. 
2. 
Ky believes that "we are getting stronger everyday, and they are 
getting weaker every day - and they knmr it." They are hurt by the bombing, 
and by the tremendous military "meat-grinder" which devours the troops 
which they send into South Viet-Nam, in particular, he said, "our political 
progress is the worst thing for them". 
They knoV! that once a constitutional 
government is installed in Viet-Nam, he added, they will have no more chance. 
For that reason, Ky said, he had decided that the elections should be held 
three months after the promulgation of the constitution and not six months. 
5. 
Their difficulties were three times as great as ours, said Ky. 
It was important to elect a coqstitutional president as soon as possible 
for many reasons, including peace talks. Until there is an elected govern-
ment in Viet-Nam, it is very important to keep all peace overtures very 
quiet because news of them will affect the morale of the Vietn&~ese •... 
roWE 
STATE 129441 (to Aroembassy London), TS/Nodis, Sent 2229, 1 Feb 67 
Ref: 
Your 6167 
Chester Cooper will be in London to brief Brown and \oTilson on rele-
VAnt matters prior to the Kosygin visit •..• 
Michael Stewart brought over a message to Cooper fr~~ Brown dated 
30 January, the text of which follows: 
20 
TOP SECREr' 
NOD IS 
6"3 
I 
L. 
~ . 
, -
, 
, , t. 
r" 
I 
L. • 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
QTE Kosygin arrives on Monday, 6 February and we will be finalising 
the briefs at the end of this week. 
Could you please let me have as soon 
as possible aQy additional information on American thinking on Vietnam 
and in particular on where Thomson has got to i~ Moscow: 
I think the main point we should make with Kosygin is the need of -
some. private sign out of Hanoi during the TET truce, and we will there-
fore try to raise Vietnam with Kosygin at the earliest possible stage in 
the talks. 
I was interested in a recent report of Burchett's alleged conversa-
tion with Pham Van Dong (Pat Dean will shm{ you a copy of the report). 
Taken at face value this is an indicator that the North Vietnamese may be 
trying to get a message of some sort across. 
Even though this communist 
channel may be suspect, Burchett's statements seem hard enough to warrant 
examination. 
1;fuat do you think about this? It seems pretty relevant to 
what we say to Kosygin. 
UNQTE. 
RUSK (Drafted by C. L. Cooper) 
February: 2, 1967 
MOSCOI{ 3321 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1515, 2 Feb 67 j Rec' d 1624, 2 Feb 67. 
Ref: 
A. State 128486j 
B. Moscow 3295, para one P. 
3. 
DCM began by making orpl statement per para two ref State tel. 
Then handed Le Chang "rritten statement. 
9. 
Before parting, DCM inquired when new DRV ambassador expected to 
arrive. 
Le Chang said "in near future." 
10. 
During phone call this noon, Tu asked who would be coming, DCM 
or Ambassador. 
Made no further comment when told IlDCM" and subject did not 
arise during meeting. 
THOMPSON. 
USUN 3848 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 2318, 2 Feb 67, Rec'd 2414,.2 Feb 67 .. 
For President and Secretary from Goldberg. 
• • • approaches could represent either: 
21 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
r 
L. 
I. ' 
L • 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. " 
" .: ~ ....... 
~ , ... ..- - .. . .. ... . 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
(A) 
A sign of serious interest on Hanoi's part in beginning process 
toward reaching settlement or toward mutual abatement of the conflict; or 
(B) 
Part of an intensified propaganda effort to increase pressure of 
world and domestic opinion on US to end bombing. 
I consider it essential that, in reacting to these approaches, we 
follow course which does not exclude either . . • • 
With these purposes in mind, I wish to urge two additional steps to 
policy which has been approved for responding to Hanoi's direct approach: 
First: 
while this approach is being explored, and until it is ascer-
tained beyond reasonable doubt that it is not serious move on Hanoi's part, 
we should undertake no new or additional targeting for our bombing sorties 
in North Vietnam. 
Second: 
Following the TET cease-fire, we should reduce the bombing of 
North Vietnam by a small but significant amount, namely: 
suspend those 
bombing sorties which are directed against targets not related to North's 
infiltration of men and supplies into south. 
As I understand from Secy 
McNamara's statement to Cabinet on Feb 1, this would involve suspension of 
approximately five percent of present sorties in North. 
The principal advantages I see to these additional steps on our part 
are as follows: 
They offer something of substance to Hanoi iw~ediately 
and the prospect of something more in future; ' .' . . 
At same time, • . " 
On the one hand, we would be relatively free from charge that we had not 
responded affirmatively to Hanoi's approaches. 
Our public record on this 
score will need bolstering, for 'it appears the record is being rather badly 
clouded by Polj,sh version of · hO;'T our mJd-December bombings interfered with 
what they conceive to be a very promising chance of talks with Hanoi. 
On 
other hand, since reduction of bombing "wuld be relatively small and would 
not involve suspension of sorties directed against targets related to 
North Vietnamese infiltration, our action would not open us to charge of 
having placed in jeopardy status and security of our forces in south. 
GOLDBERG. 
February 3, 196~( 
STATE 131591 (to Amembassy Moscow), TS/Nodis) Sent 0329, 4 Feb 67. 
Ref: 
Moscow's 3321 
5. 
In conversation last evening with Kohler, Dobrynin showed con-
siderable interest in the Guthrie;Le ChaOg contacts. ' He indicated he had 
been informed of earlier meetings and that next move was up to us. 
RUSK (Drafted by L. Unger) 
22 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
.56" 
i , 
t_ 
,. 
t. . 
LJ 
February 4) 1967 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
: .. :' " . '- :.,'- ,' 
" 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
On February 4) the SUNFLOWER/PLUS series was established in a message 
to Thompson in Moscow (State 131(05)) informing him that consideration was 
being given to having Guthrie deliver to the DRV Charge at their next 
meeting a Presidential message to Ho Chi Minh. 
Thompson's views were 
re~uested on the text of an attached draft which he was informed was not 
cleared in text or principle. 
On the following day) Thompson submitted a somewhat negative view on 
the wisdom of the suggested action) although he did not feel strongly on 
the matter (Moscow's 3353). 
He felt (a) the draft letter merely raises the 
current exercise to a higher level; (b) personally addressing Ho might 
weaken his in-house position; (c) emphasis on TET might imply desperation 
on our partj (d) the letter should be held for use if an impasse is reachedj 
and (e) if the letter is to be used) some textual revision would be in order. 
STATE 131714 (to ..Amembassy Mowcow), TS/Nodis) Sent 2312) 4 Feb 67. 
You should inform DRV rep that Estabrook story came from Polish 
sources. 
RUSK (Drafted by L. Unger) 
LO~DON 0271 (to SecState)) TS/NQdis) Rec'd 0544) 5 Feb 67. 
For the Secretary and Harriman from Cooper 
1. With Ambassador Bruce met with Foreign Secretary .••. 
·3. 
With respect to the forthcomin~ Kosygin visit) 1 reminded Brown 
of the Rusk-Gromyko conversation many weeks ago) and noted that lye have 
not yet gotten a reply to the Secretary's ~uery as to what the Russians 
would do if there were a bombing cessation ..•• 1 suggested to Brown' 
that if the opportunity permitted) the British should press the Russians 
on both their short-run opportunities and respons ibilities to insure Hanoi 
against Chinese economic) political) or even military actions in the event 
Hanoi moved toward negotiations. 
In th'e longer te:rm the Russians had an 
opportunity (and indeed they seemed to recognize this themselves) to pursue 
policies in Asia which would be in tandem with our own and which wouId be 
of common benefit in reducing t ensions in that part of the wQrld. 
23 
TOP SECRET - NOD1S 
, 
J 
c_ 
I~ 
r-
I 
L. 
I 
( -
r -
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
~ . .: " ;",.~ ~ -
' .. :., .. ' ' ... . .. . ~ .. ~ '.-
~
. -
TOP SECRET .... NODIS 
6. 
I told Brown that the President and the Secretary were cognizant 
of the British desire to avoid a resumption of bombing while Kosygin was 
still here. 
I said that I could not give any unequivocal assurances on 
this, that much would depend on the behavior of the North Vietnamese during 
the four-day cessation. 
Obviously, if there were major North Vietnamese 
troops movements southward, we had primary responsibility to protect our 
own forces, . 
8. 
Brown is very concerned about the low-level of the group that 
Kosygin is bringing with him. 
Indeed he is worried in the light of this 
whether the Russians are ready to engage in serious talks on any subject. 
Although he was avare of Smirnovskyls statement that the Russians were 
interested in a peace settlement he had not studied it (later Wilson con-
fessed that he had not heard of it.) .... 
10. 
.• We had 
~
fifteen minutes alone with Brown and Wilson. 
I 
then told them of OLIT direct contact with the North Vietnamese. 
I pointed 
out that it was at a' low level, that it vas still very fragile, but that 
we were doing everything we could to keep it going. 
I stressed that thus 
far this private exchange had revealed a less forthc,oming position on the 
point of Hanoi than some people read into the various public statements 
that have been coming out of North Vietnam recently. 
I stressed that I 
could not tell them where the contact was going on, that ve were unaiorare 
of the extent to '-rhich the Soviets knew about it, and that we hoped that 
neither Brovm nor I-Tilson '-lOuld make any reference to this in their con-
versations with Kosygin. 
I showed Wilson the seven substantive points 
contained in our January 20 message and indicated that if the Russians 
raised any of these we would be perfectly prepared to see the British 
discuss them. . • • • 
BRLiCE 
LONDON 6272 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Recld 0549, 5 Feb 67. 
For the Secretary ,and Harriman from Cooper 
'. 
1. 
I have met with Murray at the Foreign Office to go over working 
on the brief for Brown and Wilson. 
The brief stresses the need for some 
meaningful action the President can point to in exchange for a bombing 
cessation. It remind the Russians that '¥re are conscious of Hanoi I s prob-
lems about making a public commitment and our readiness to get private 
assurances. 
BRUCE.' 
24 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
57 
,-
t 
l .... 
r -
I 
l. • 
I I 
t· . 
February 5, 1967 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
:.~:~
, .. ;.' .. 
~
~: ... , 
' --
. ~ 
" 
, ..... . 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
"Ashmore I s Letter to Hanoi Chief," The Washington Post, 18 September i967 
(Letter mailed Feb 5 by Ashmore) 
Following is the text of the letter by Harry S. Ashmore to President 
Ho Chi Minh: 
Dear Mr. President: 
Mr. William Baggs and I have made a full report to appropriate officials. 
of the United States Government on our recent conversation with you in 
Hanoi. 
Ambassador Luis Quintanilla has communicated his views to the U.S. 
Ambassador in Mexico City. 
The State Department has expressed itself as most grateful for your 
thoughtful approach to the possibility of an ultimate settlement of the 
hostilities between the United States and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. 
In our several discussions with senior officials of the State Depart-
ment they took occasion to reiterate points we believe are already known 
to you. 
They emphasized that the U.S. remains prepared for secret dis-
cussions at any time, without conditions, and that such discussions might 
cover the whole range of topics relevant to a peaceful settlement. 
They 
reiterated that the Geneva Accords might be the framework for a peaceful 
solution. 
They expressed particular interest in your suggestion to us that private 
talks could begin provided the U.S. stopped bombing your country, and ceased 
introducing additional U.S. troops into Vietnam. 
They expressed the opinion.· 
that some reciprocal restraint to indicate that neither side intended to use 
the occasion of the talks for military advantage would provide tangible 
evidence of the good faith of all parties in the prospects for a negotiated· 
settlement. 
In the light of these concerns, they expressed great interest in any 
clarification of this point that you might ,fish to prov.ide through a com-
munication to us. 
Speaking now wholly for ourselves, we believe the essential condition 
for productive talks is an arrangement' under which neither side stands to 
gain military advantage during the period of negotiation. 
To achieve this 
end it may be th~t preliminary secret discussions would be helpful to 
determine the outline of a possible peaceful settlement. 
As we see it, these are practical considerations that have nothing to 
do with questions of "face." There is no doubt in our minds that the 
American Government genuinely seeks peace. 
As private citizens, our sole 
concern is in facilitating a discussion that will bring all matters at 
issue to official consideration. 
It is in this sense that we convey these 
comments, and invite any reply y?u may Vish to make; which of course we 
would report to our Government in complete discretion. 
25 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
I. 
( '. 
1 
t , 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
May I take this occasion to renew our thanks for the courteous and 
considerate treatment we received in Hanoi throughout our visit an.d for 
the honor of our most useful conversation with you. 
If you feel that further personal conversation with Mr. Baggs and me 
is in order we would, of course, return to Hanoi at your convenience. 
HARRY S • . ASEMORE. 
February 6, 1967 
MOSCOW' 3375 (to SecState)' TS/Nodis, Sent 1500, 6 Feb 67, Rec' d 1609, 6 Feb 67. 
Ref: 
State 131591 
5. . ' ,' , DCM then referred to Estabrook Feb 5 Wash Post story of 
which he gave Le Chang brief oral summary based on STATE 131700. 
Said he 
mentioned story because he instructed tell Le Chang that story had come 
from Polish sources and that' U. S. Govt ~lill main~ain complete silence and 
ayoid corr~ent on it. 
6. . . . . Noting that both sides had been concerned to maintain their 
contact confidential and secret (Le Chang expressed full agreement with 
this), DCM said we concerned about certain aspects of this: 
(A) Soviets 
would know about his visits to DRV Embassy, e.g., his driver Soviet; and 
(B) It always possible Western correspondents might see him enter or leave 
DRV Enbassy and ask him what he doing here. If (B) should occur, he could 
not deny his visit, and problem would be how to respond to questions. 
One 
possibility would be to confirm'that contact had been established and refuse 
further comment. 
If we kept quiet, there might be implication that we dis-
cussing POWs. 
DCM said all this led him to ask if 'lie should arrange another 
meeting place. 
Should we ask Soviets to provide us a less conspicuous place? 
7 ..... Re place of meeting, Le Chang emphatically stated his view 
~as that we should not rpt not ask any third party to arrange for a change 
of venue, because of principle of confidentiality and secrecy he had men-
tioned. 
Also said he ~lanted reiterate that time or content of meetings 
should not rpt not be mentioned to anybody, including correspondents. 
As 
to how any possitle press query should be answ-;red, said he was sure that 
if this principle were abided by, many ways of responding could be fo~~d. 
In' response DCIvI's comment correspondents ,;vould indulge in guessing, Le 
Chang said if they yTanted to guess they could do so. 
THOMPSON. 
26 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
L 
L 
r-1 
I 
l..J 
L 
r) 
, , 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
• ' .. ~ '. ',' ~ .". 4: · 
, '" 
" .• '. '. _ " 
TOP SECRET ' - NODIS 
LONDON 6315 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 2100, 6 Feb 67; Rec'd 2215, 6 Feb 67. 
E. 
- ./ 
To Secretary' from Cooper 
2. 
PM had an hour or more private session with Kosygin. 
Kosygin 
emba~ked immediately on discussion of China and Vietnam. 
According to 
Wilson Kosygin "seemed obsessed" with China situation. 
Talked about 
Chinese "the way Pakistanis talk about Indians u •••• Kosygin said 
Chinese situation not likely to have immediate effect on North Vietnam 
but would have eventual influence. 
Kosygin worried about possibility of 
Chinese intervention especially if they "go beserk". 
The US was "helping 
to push Hanoi into the hands of Chinese". 
Stated that thousands of Chinese 
military in civilian clothes already in NVN. 
Kosygin admitted there were 
some differences within Hanoi regime but became evasive when pressed for 
details. 
He spoke "very warmly" of Ho and FonMin but Wilson thought was 
lukeivarm re Pham Van Dong. 
Kosygin agreed that need to make some progress toward peace during 
TET "very urgent". 
Agreed that both USSR and UK could. be "of assistance" 
in getting talks between "the principals" started. • . . 
• , .Wilson .•.. spelled out in detail' the Phase A 
formula, but got no flicker of interest . . • • 
Phase B 
Kosygin quoted from (and subsequently referred to) Burchett inter-
view as key to NVN readiness to negotiate. 
Kosygin evidenced mood of 
"great urgency" in plenary discussion. 
Referred again to TET as being 
"the big chance". 
Repeated on several occasions the point that "we can 
assist, but we (i.e. the USSR and the UK) cannot negotiate. 
The best 
way to do this is to get the US and the N'VN together". 
When Wilson asked Kosygin whether he could induce Hanoi to make unequiv-
ocal statement that they i{Quld enter negotiations if bombing stopped, 
Kosygin "squirmed" and sa.id he and the UK would have to rely on the Foreign 
Minister's statement as contained in the Burchett interview. 
In his sum-
mary remarks he said (direct quote from interpreters notes) "our NVN 
friend do not rule out a negotiated solution". 
The only Soviet suggestion for US-Sov action was· that Kosygin and 
Wilson jointly endorse the I~ position as contained in Burchett inter-
view in a private message to the President or publicly in the co~~unique. 
This is "unaccept<'.ble" to the British. 
But Bri:'ish ~eel this is Kosygin' s 
opening gambit and a more constructive position can be worked out. 
Kosygin did not rise to Wilson suggestion re some jointly ."orked out 
arrangement to move private US-NVN agreements to an international arrange-
ment. 
This could be worked on in due course. 
Important thing, according 
to Kosygin was that ther e should not be another Geneva conf "because of 
the Chinese ." 
27 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
( ., 
U 
I 
. 
. , 
, , , 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - NOD1S 
When Wilson was asked what suggestions UK had for immediate future, 
Wilson stressed need for Hanoi to "avoid provocation during TEl"! to which 
Brown added, "such as movement of troops through the DMZ". 
This was only , 
point at which, a'-:!cording to Wilson, situation "got hairy." Kosygin made 
much of US troop and ship movements. 
BRUCE. 
LONDON 6316 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 0122, 7 Feb 67; Rec!d 0148, 7 Feb 67 .. 
To Secretary from Cooper 
1. . . . . Kosygin wanted Wilson to use IThot linelT to President to 
tell President that, if bombing stopped, Hanoi would talk. 
Wilson 
refused, countering that all he had to go on was Kosygin's claim that 
NVN FonNin ,.,ras telling Burchett straight story. 
Kosygin then said he 
could go well beyond this. 
He (Kosygin) had been in direct contact with 
Hanoi since afternoon session, Hanoi confirmed readiness to talk. (I sug-
gested a technical check on Kosygints contact.) 
2. 
Kosygin then said that Wilson should send personal telegram to 
President. 
Wilson asked Kosygin if Kosygin would send a joint' telegram 
which said: 
ITNVN FonMin says he will negotiate in exchange for bombing 
cessation. 'I (Wilson) don 't know this man, but Kosygin does and Will, 
underwrite him. II 
Kosygin said that he ,.,rQuld table his own draf"1:; at next 
session (4 PM Tues). 
3. 
Wilson asked if Washington could provide alternative draft for 
him to table - a draft acceptable to Washington and one that Sovs would 
hopefully sign on to. 
Wilson (and more particularly Brown) also feel 
urgent need to get ITminimum reciprocal act II which US can accept. 
(We 
went through standard list re infiltration, truckS, etc.) 
I need what-
ever Wash can provide by 1300 London time. 
4. 
Wilson told me privately Kosygin said US was lIin contact II with 
Hanoi. 
5. Just got a call from Pallisep to say lfilson making perso~al call 
to President. 
BRUCE 
February 7, 1967 
'-
On February 7, Thompson was instructed to arrange delivery at once 
to the DRV Charge of a letter from the President to Ho Chi Minh (State's 
132608) • 
28 
TOP SECREl' - NOD1S 
• 
if 
( 
I 
,_ .. 
i L. . 
( 
I • 
\ 
I.J 
r-
" 
i 
! .J 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
LONDON 6321 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1125, 7 Feb; Rec'd 1159 7 Feb. 
For the Secretary and Harriman from Cooper 
2 .••.• I received the president's message to Wilson, and read 
substantial portions of it to Brown. 
Brown felt this would starch up 
Wilson and strengthen his hand in the afternoon's discussions. 
3. 
We then went on to discuss the US-USSR communi~ue. We explored 
a statement along these lines: 
A. Both sides (The British and the Soviets) 
agree that a settlement of the Vietnam war must be worked out as early as . 
possible. 
B. Both sides agree to do whatever they can jointly and indiv-
idually to assist such a settlement to come about. 
C. Both sides recognize 
that successful negotiations cannot take place unless bombing has stopped 
and mutual steps are taken toward further de-escalation (Phase A-Phase B). 
D. Both sides agree that they will maintain continual contact and discussion 
in connection with the Vietnam issue. 
4. 
Brown thinks that he can get Wilson on board on this and that there 
is a good possibility that the Russians would buy samething along these 
lines. 
BRUCE 
" 
STATE 132481 (to Amembassy London), TS/Nodis, Sent 1919, 7 Feb 67 
Literally Eyes Only for Ambassador and Cooper 
Following message has been sent to Prime Minister from the President 
via Wbj.te House channels: 
"For the Prime Minister from the President. 
"I am sending these thoughts to. you on the ~uestion posed as to 
whether the U.S. could stop the bombing of North Viet Nam in exchange 
for an indication that Hanoi would enter into talks without any ~ilitary 
acts of de-escalation on their side. 
"It is important to recall that the Poles said to us in the first 
part of December that Hanoi would be prepared to hold discussions with 
us on the basis of a Polish summary of what the Poles understood our posi-
tion to be. 
Discussion of mutual de-escalation, including a cessation of 
the bombing, would be a part of those talks. 
We promptly .agreed to such 
talks but found that Hanoi (so the Poles told us) was unwilling to proceed 
with such talks because of certain bombiqg actions which occurred on 13-14 
29 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
. ! I 
i 
r U 
, 
t .~ 
r--' 
I 
l , 
( -
i 
L 
,--
I 
J ' 
L.i 
r' 
\ 
) 
L.J 
, ., 
I 
1 .J 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
December. 
Although we had seen no real move toward talks before that 
date, we nevertheless removed that obstacle (if that was the obstacle) 
by informing Hanoi that we were refraining from bombing within a radius 
of 10 nautical miles of the center of Hanoi -- restrictions which have 
been in effect for more than a month. 
We took this action without condi-
tions but did state that we would be impressed by any corresponding action 
by Hanoi. 
This was an important military move on our part. 
We have seen 
neither a corresponding military step on their side nor a use of existing 
channels to get on with discussions. 
In contacts with Hanoi since December 23 
Hanoi has received messages from us but we have not had any replies from 
Hanoi on any points of substance. 
Indeed, the Burchett interview repre-
sents a step backward from Hanoi's position in December if the Poles were 
accurately reporting to us. 
"We have recently informed Hanoi directly that we would be prepared 
to take additional military measures of de-escalation similar to the 
limitation of bombing within the Hanoi perimeter, on similar terms. 
We 
have had no reply to that suggestion. 
"We are ready and willing to hold discussions with Hanoi through any 
feasible process -- publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. 
We 
are inclined to the vie\-! that better progress could be made if such talks 
were private and direct. 
"If we are asked to take military action on our side, we need to k.110W 
what the military consequences r/dll be, that is, what military action will 
be taken by the other side. 
We have noted that a suspension of the bombing 
has been termed by the other side as unacceptable and that we must accept 
an unconditional and permanent cessation of bombing. 
That makes it all 
the more necessalY to know what military action Hanoi would take if we in 
fact stopped the bombing. 
"We are prepared to take up with Hanoi steps of mutual de-escalation 
and are prepared to have the most private preliminary conversations with 
them on arrangements for serious discussions of a final settlement. 
"Specifically] we are prepared to and plan] through established 
~hannels] to inform Hanoi that if they will agree to an assured stoppage 
of infiltration into South Viet Naill] We will stop the bombing of North 
VietNam and stop further augmentation of U.S. forces in South Viet Naro. 
We would welcome your joint advocacy of this position. 
"Further, or alternatively] you should know we would recommend to 
th~ South Vietnamese military authorities that they discuss with North 
Vietnamese military authoriti~s a prolongation of the Tet ceasefire. 
"For your or,.Tn information] you should be aware of by feeling that, in 
all of our various contacts with Hanoi, we have had no impression from 
them as to the substance of the issues which must be resolved as a part 
of a peaceful settlement. 
They have received repeated statements from 
us about our views. 
They have reiterated their four points and the 
30 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
lJ 
i !.-J 
l , 
r . 
I 
I L 
fl 
I 
I.J 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
-': ." " .. ; ...• ,:-
," . , .... ..... ~ ", . 
TOP SECF~ - NODIS 
Liberation Front's five points with varying degree of vagueness as to 
their status, but they have not replied to our suggestions for a revision 
of pOint three of their four points or a readiness to hold preliminary 
discussions looking toward agreed points as a casis ~or negotiations. 
If In sum, I would suggest that you try to separate the political 
processes of discussion from military action. 
We will participate fully 
in any political process including discussions of de-escalation. 
We are 
prepared to move immediately on major steps of mutual de-escalation, as 
indicated above. 
What we cannot accept is the exchange of guarantee of 
a safe haven for North Viet Nam merely for discussions which thus far have 
no form or content, during \-Thich they could continue to expand their mil-
itary operations without limit. 
If I doubt very much that Kosygin expected to resolve this matter on 
his first evening in London and it would be helpful if you could fully 
explore just \-lhat Kosygin is willing or able to do. 
If he has counter-
proposals to my major suggestion of mutual military de-escalation, we 
will give them immediate attention. 
If If Kosygin is seriously worried about China, as he told you he was) 
we would hope that he would exert himself to help bring peace to Viet Nam 
and ailow North Viet Nam to participate in the peaceful development of 
Southeast Asia. 
"Finally, I would strongly urge that the two co-chairmen not suggest 
a stoppage of the bombing in exchange merely for talks, but, instead, 
appeal to Hanoi to consider seriously the reasonable proposals we are 
putting before them) which would take us not merely into negotiation but 
a long step towards peace itself." 
RUSK. 
(Text received from White House). 
LONDON 6360 (to SecState), TS/Nodis) Sent 2020) 7 Feb; Rec'd 2105) 7 Feb. 
For the Secretary and Harriman from Cooper 
2 ..•• , Kosygin did not table a draft message to the President 
as he said he would do. 
Rather) he gave a pro-forma restatement of his 
earlier position on importance of the Vietnamese statements to Burchett. 
3. 
Wilson r ead from his prepared briefing notes. 
The exposition of 
the Phase A - Phase B formula was changed from the version contained in my 
para 5 London 6329. 
It was felt that it would be worth spelling this out 
31 
TOP SECREE -
NODIS 
I .~ 
o 
r' 
I 
I L._ 
f . 
l.J 
r 
I 
, 
,~ 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
. -~ .. 
~ . :." 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
in the simplest possible terms. 
The final text follows: 
"Extract from statement by British Prime Minister at meeting with 
Mr. Kosygin on Fe'). 7, 1967. 
" • . • • I am now satisfied that the Americans would now be prepared 
to move to further actions to strengthen mutual confidence if they were 
able to secure some assurance that this move would be reCiprocated by the 
other side. 
For instance, I believe that they are now seeking to get word 
to Hanoi in the following lines. 
They recognize the need for a first and 
visible step. 
They further recognize that this step must mean the cessa-
tion of the bombing. 
This I believe they would do, and they recogn:lze that 
it must be presented as being done unconditionally. 
Therefore vIe have to 
use our ingenuity to divorce in presentation the stopping of ' the bombing 
from the consequential actions. 
Yet you and I know that the consequential 
actions are essential if we are to get the bombing stopped. 
"The consequential actions are as follows. 
The United States are 
willing to stop the build-up of their forces in the South if they are assured 
that the movement of North Vietnamese forces from the North to the South will 
stop at the same time . 
Essentially therefore the two stages are kept apart. 
But because the United States government knmT that the second stages will 
follm", they will therefore be able first to stop the bombing, even if there 
is a short period between the first stage and the actions to be taken by 
both sides in the second stage. 
There would be balanced concessions in 
the second stage; the first stage would be carried out by the United States 
alone; but the United States would only carry out the first stage because 
they would know that the second stage would follml within a short period 
of time. 
liThe entry of American reinforcements to Vietnam can be easily observed. 
Therefore there could be no doubt on the part of the North Vietnamese that 
the Americans were keeping their part of the bargain. 
liThe North Vietnamese action in the second stage would be seen as in 
response to the United States action in the second stage but it would be 
the result of a prior secret assurance.~ 
4. 
Kosygin showed considerable interest in this formulation.' 
He 
evidently had not understood it w'hen Brown presented it to him last Novem-
ber. 
He asked Wilson to repeat it and then asked Wilson to deliver the 
text to him in writing this evening. 
This has been done. ' The British are 
virtually certain that Kosygin is going to transmit this to Hanoi. 
They 
hope that on Thursday afternoon when taJ~s resume Kosygin will have a 
reply from Hanoi. 
BRUCE 
32 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
r-
I 
I I 
..... ~ 
, ,--
[i 
I ! 
u 
I ~ 
l 
, 
L.J 
L.J 
r ... , 
r-' 
I 
i : 
r ' 
I 
l ~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
February 8, 1967 
His Excellency 
, Ho Chi Minh 
President 
TOP SECF~ - NODIS 
Democratic Republic of Vietnam 
Dear Mr. President: 
I am writing to you in the hope that the conflict in Vietnam can be 
brought to an end. 
That conflict has already taken ,a heavy toll--in lives 
lost, in wounds inflicted, in property destroyed, and in simple human 
misery. If we fail to find a just and peaceful solution, history will 
judge us harshly. 
Therefore, I believe that we both have a heavy obligation to seek 
earnestly the path to peace. 
It is in response to that obligation that 
I am writing directly to you. 
We have tried over the past several years, in a variety of ways and 
through a number of channels, to convey to you and your colleagues our 
desire to achieve a peaceful settlement. 
For whatever reasons, these 
efforts have not achieved any results. 
It may be that our thoughts and yours, our attitudes and yours, have 
been distorted or misinterpreted as they passed through these various 
channels. 
Certainly that is always a danger in indirect communication. 
There is one good way to overcome this problem and to move forward 
in the search for a peacefQl settlement. 
That is for us to arrange for 
direct talks bet,feen trusted representatives in a secure setting and 
a~~y from the glare of publicity. 
Such talks should ~ot be used as a 
propaganda exercise but should be a serious effort to find. a workable and· 
mutually acceptable solution. 
L~ the past two weeks, I have noted public statements by repre-
sentatives of your government suggesting that you would be prepared to 
enter into direct bilateral talks with repr-esentatives of the US Govern-
ment, provided that we ceased "unconditionally" and permanently our 
"bombing operations against your country and all military actions 'against 
it. In the last day, serious and responsible parties have assured us 
indirectly that this is in fact your proposal. 
Let me frankly state that I see tyro great difficulties with this 
proposal. 
In view of your public pOSition, such action on our part would 
irievitably produce worldwide speculation that discussions were under way 
and would impair the privacy and secrecy of those discussions. 
Secondly, 
there would inevitably be grave concern on our part whether your govern-
ment would make use of such action by us to improve 'its military position. 
33 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
-
j 
I ,-
< , 
< 
, 
I : 
! ; 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
With these problems in mind, I am prepared to move even further 
towards an ending of hostilities than your Government has proposed in 
either public statements or through private diplomatic channels. 
I am 
prepared to order a cessation of bombing againpt your country and the 
stopping of further augmentation of US forces in South Viet-Nam as soon 
as I am assured that infiltration into South Viet-Nam by land and by sea 
has. stopped. 
These acts of restraint on both sides would, I believe, make 
it possible for us to conduct serious and private discussions leading 
toward an early peace. 
I make this proposal to you now with a specific sense of urgency 
arising from the imminent New Year holidays in Viet-Nam. 
If you are 
able to accept this proposal I see no reason why it could not take effect 
at the end of the New Year, or Tet, holidays. 
The proposal I have made 
would be greatly strengthened if your military authorities and those of 
the Government of South Viet-Nam could promptly negotiate an extension 
of the Tet truce. 
As to the site of the bilateral discussions I propose, there are 
several possibilities. 
We could, for example, have our representatives 
meet in Moscow vrhere contacts have already occurred. 
They could meet 
in some other country such as Burma. 
You may have other arrangements or 
sites in mind, and I would try to meet your suggestions. 
The important thing is to end a conflict that has brought burdens 
to both our peoples, and above all to the people of South Viet-Nam. 
If 
you have any thoughts about the actions I propose, it would be most 
important that I receive them as soon as possible. 
Sincerely, 
Lyndon B. Johnson 
On February 8, Cooper had separate me~tings with Brown and Wilson, 
the results of which indicated that Wilson would hew to our line on 
-bombing cessation UDndons 6321-6329). 
In addition; the framework of a 
final communique was discussed. 
Further guidance on this subject was 
provided in staters 132521 with particular emphasis .on the British not 
signing anything which calls for unilateral action by us. 
On the same day, Wilson responded toa parliamentary question on 
the MlilllGOLD subject by stating he had "all the details" on the December 
meetings which had been aborted by a "mutual understanding". 
Late that evening (Feb. 8) Ben Read telephoned Cooper and advised 
him that (1) we could not draw' conclusions from the single sentence on 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
C7 
'I' 
; i 
l~ 
} . 
j 
I 
r ' 
j 
t 
:~ 
! 1 
F
' 
i 
I 
1 
- 1 
, 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Geneva in Kosyginfs Guildhall address; (2) we would wish Wilson to probe 
Kosygin at the next morning's meeting; and (3) if the Soviets are serious 
on this issue, we would give urgent consideration to Brown's suggestion 
or any variant thereof. 
MOSCOW 3412 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1030, 8 Feb; Rec'd 1347, 8 Feb. 
Ref: 
Moscow 3404 
2. 
today. 
, Le Chang • . 
~ wished say that he could transmit message 
3. 
DCM said would report Le Chang's remarks to his Govt, and also 
expressed pleasure at fact President's message would be transmitted today. 
THOMPSON. 
London BBC Domestic Television Service in English l5l0Z 8 Feb 67 
(Kosygin speech at Lord Mayor's luncheon at the Guildhall in London on 
8 February 
••• ) 
Today the major factors of. international tension are the Vietnamese 
events and it is the US aggression which is th ere al, a:r;1d in effect the 
only, cause for the war in Vietnam. 
We may say that the United $tates was 
sowing the seeds of that .. :ar as far back as in 1954 when, In contrast to 
the Soviet Union" Britain, and several other countries, it attempted to 
prevent the r estoration of peace in Lldochina, and in the following years 
when it prevented universal Democratic elections as provided for by the 
Gene\~ agreements. 
Even then the United States began dictatorially to 
set up and replace, one after the other, the governm~nts in Saigon. 
The United Kingdom is a state whose voice is heeded by many 
and it is precisely for this reason that the Soviet government believes 
that today, as in 1954, Great Britain together ",ith the Soviet Union and 
other nations could make its contribution to the settlement of the Vietnam 
issue on the basis of the Geneva agreement, which must be implemented by 
the United Stat~. 
35 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
u 
L 
n 
I 
-
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
The first step in this direction should be the unconditional termina-
· tion of the U.S. bombing and of all other acts of aggression against the 
DRV, as was recently stated by the DRV Foreign Minister. 
This step is 
essential for talks to be held between the DRV and the United States. , " . 
LONDON 6399 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 0241, 9 Feb; Rec'd 0313, 9 Feb. 
For Secretary from Cooper. 
2, 
Brown. , , impressed with Kosygin statement in Guildhall speech 
today that " __ - the Soviet Govt considers now as in 1954, Great Britain 
jointly with Soviet Union and other countries, could make her contribution 
to the settlement of the VN question on the basis of the Geneva agreements 
which must be observed by USA, " 
3, 
Brown feels Sovs may be signalling a readiness to convene Geneva, 
Brovrn asked for draft written proposal. , • . , 
4. 
Gore Booth Murray and I went back to FonOff and prepared fol-
lowing (which they tillderstand very clearly that this does not have any 
official endorsement of USG despite my participation in drafting): 
QUOTE: 
The two co-chairmen will announce immediately that they: 
A. 
Invite the US to assure them that the bombing of NVN will stop';. 
B. 
Invite the North Vietnamese and the US to assure the co-
chainnen that they will take mutual and equivalent steps t'a halt the· 
augmentation of their forces inSVN. 
C. 
If all the foregoing assurances are promptly received the 
two co-chairmen will invite the members of· the 1954 Geneva conference to 
. reconvene in Geneva on 15 Feb to work out a settlement of the present 
conflict. UNQUOTE. 
5. 
If Sovs will not buy this, Brown will press them to endorse 
Phase A - Phase B formula as they formulated it yesterday. 
BRUCE 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
(9 
t), 
", 
I '.-
,-
I 
L 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
February 9, 1967 
LONDON 6406 (to SecState)} TS/Nodis, Sent 1222} 9 Feb; Rec'd 1258) 9 Feb. 
For Secretary and Harriman from Cooper 
3. Wilson and Brown (and also some old FonOff hands) are impressed 
with these aspects of conversations held thus far: 
A. 
Kosygin{s "obsession" with China and readiness to discuss 
this subject without apparent inhibition. 
B. 
Probably because of China} Kosygin's sense of urgency to 
move ahead on some formula (thus far) his own) for joint UK-Sov approach 
"to assist getting the US and DRV} "the two principals"} to settle the war. 
C. 
Kosygin's statements that he is in direct touch with Hanoi 
and his stat ed r eadiness to refer important new issues and approaches 
directly to Hanoi for consideration} e.g. the British version of Phase A-
Phase B. 
D. 
The low key} non-polemical tone of the talks on all. issues 
(Gore-Booth said l ast night t hat talks on bilateral issues are moving 
smoothly and "not badly!!). 
10. 
. I have gotten a call from the FonOff to the effect that 
Kosygin's answer to query re significance his stat ement on Geneva was 
suffiCiently forthc oming to have warranted vIilson commitment to provide 
Kosygin a proposition in writing "later in the day" about calling Geneva 
Conf presumably along lines of tr~e e 'part Draft I forwarded ~o Wash early 
this morning • . . . 
BRUCE 
LONDON 6411 (to SecState)} TS/Nodis} Sent 1439} 9 Febj Ree'd 1523} 9 Feb. 
Ref: ' 6406 
3.. 
. Brown then asked Kosygin whether his remarks about 
Geneva in his speech yesterday indicated the Russians were ready to 
" reconvene the Geneva Conference} even if the Chinese refused to attend. 
Kosygin replied this was "not exactly!! what he meant to imply. 
Kosygin} 
according to Murray's notes} said t hat in his speech yesterday "I pro-
ceeded upon the assumption that the main thing was for the UK and the 
37 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
I , 
L . 
i 
! 
I 
L 
I ' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
ToP SECRET - NODIS 
Sov Union to assist the two sides to meet together after the bombing stopped. 
After this has been done there may be various proposals for moving further. 
The Geneva Conf could be convened even without China. 
We need not insist 
on Chinese participation." 
(Kosygin then made several uncomplimentary 
references to the way the Chinese felt about diplomatic procedures and 
forms. ) 
Kosygin then went on to say that he "could not speak for Hanoi 
on this point". 
He emphasized that it was important to "do first things 
first. If we try to work out the tactics too early we might jeopardize 
everything. • • • We might raise other problems such as China and Laos 
{according to Murray this is the first time Laos has been mentioned in 
any of the conversations)." 
5. 
Brown then said that no bombing would be going on during TET. 
In 
light of this "thinking out loud," suppose the US should agree not to 
resume bombing, and both sides agreed to take mutual and equivalent steps 
would Kosygin then agree to call a Geneva Conf on 15 Feb? 
6. 
Kosygin said that he would first want to know Hanoi's views 
before he committed himself. 
He reminded Brovm that a Geneva Conf would 
be "a complicated issue"; 
China will create difficulties and "there are 
Chinese troops in North Vietnam". 
There is also a pro-Chinese faction 
in Hanoi that would' have to be dealt with. · Kosygin then asked "has this 
been discussed with the Americans?" 
Brown said that if Kosygin could 
deliver his friends in Hanoi the British would try to "deliver the Ameri-
cans." 
7. 
Kosygin responded "I could send this to Hanoi, but I am con-
cerned about the difficulties." He said he would like to IIthink it over,". 
and asked if he could have the.proposition in writing as early as possi-
ble today. 
Brown said he would do his best to get this to Kosygin later 
in the afternoon. 
8. 
The next meeting will be at 1030 tomorrow morning. 
At this 
session the British plan to point out that they have now delivered two 
solid propositions to the Russians and presumably Hanoi. 
One of these 
provides for a private series of negotiations, the other a public one, 
both involve mutual and equivalent steps of de-escalation. If Hanoi is 
serious about wanting to stop the war, the Russians have an obligation 
to provide Hanoi's reactions, and this should be done on an urgent basis. 
BRUCE 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
fl ' " 
J 
I 
• 
u 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
'TOP SECRET - NODIS 
STATE 133907 (to Amembassy London), TS/Nodis, Sent 1845, 9 Feb 67. 
, 2. As we believe we mave made clear to you, we have major doubts 
whether, if Hanoi in fact accepts the deal we have proposed, they will 
ask to have it nailed down in public through any announcement, and might 
have additional misgivings about the Soviets doing so in the light of 
whatever degree of concern they still have about Chicom reactions. 
We 
would suppose the latter factor would also operate strongly on the Soviets, 
since any public announcement would carry the unmistakeable flavor that' 
the Soviets had colluded with the US, through the UK, to put this deal 
across • . • • British should be left in no doubt that, while we are most 
grateful for their serious ,considered efforts, they may well have to 
accept results rather than overt British participa.tion in them. 
3. 
With this evaluation in mind, we have reviewed text in para 4 
of London 6399 and note that, like the British oral formula (London 6329, 
para 5), it speaks only of DRV stopping "augmentation of forces" in South 
Vietnam. 
This would leave >"ay open for DRV to continue to send equipment 
without restrictions and als o to send forces in the guise of rotation. 
Moreover, there would be no restraint whatsoever on political cadre and 
others who could be described as not technically uniformed "forces." In 
light of these objections, any specific formula along these lines which 
the British might put forwar d would have to be amended along follOldng 
lines: 
QTE. 
The two cochairmen will a~nounce immediately that they: 
a. Invite the US to assure them that the bombing of North 
Vietnam will stop; 
b. 
Invite the North Vietnamese to assure the cochairmen that 
infiltration into South Vietnam will stop, and invite the US to assure 
the cochairmen that it will stop further augmentation of US forces in 
South Vietnam. 
(FYI: 
These are the operative P9rts both of our own 
message to the British (State 132481) and of our message to Hanoi. 
End FYI). 
c. If all the foregoing assurances are promptly received, the 
two cochairmen will invite members of the 1954 Geneva Conference to recon-
vene in Geneva on 15 February to work out a settlement of the present 
conflict. 
END Q'I'E 
5. 
Seeing as we do these possibly serious difficulties with a precise 
formulation of the deal -- and doubting, as we do, that Hanoi will wish a 
really specific public announcement -- you should tell British that we 
ourselves would be much more inclined to have them table the more general 
Phase A/Phase B formula. 
RUSK (Drafted by W. p. Bundy) 
39 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
I j 
I i 
t . ~ 
I I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
LONDON 6429 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 2200, 9 Feb; Rec'd 2225, 9 Feb. 
Ref: 
State 133907 
1. Met with Murray FonOrf and dictated points A, B, and C para 3 
which then transcribed verbatim as British proposal. 
This sent to Brown 
at Buckingham Palace dinner for handing over to Kosygin. 
2. 
Also passed on, orally, to Murray our preference for their 
Phase A - Phase B formula and he in complete agreement. 
BRUCE 
STATE 134409 (to Amembassy Saigon & London), TS/Nodis, Sent 2427, 9 Feb. 
Saigon for Ambassador/London for Ambassador and Cooper 
1. 
Following is DoD suillmary of developments surrounding Tet truces, 
on which you should t ake actions indicated in succeeding paragraphs: 
a. 
North Vietnamese water-borne traffic along coast of North 
Vietnam between 19 degrees north l atitude and the nv.z (17 degrees north 
latitude ) totaled over 900 vessels of various types during the first 30 
hours of the Tet truce which, . . . : is more than double the logistic 
resupply traffic during the Christmas !~-hour truce. 
. 
b. 
The situation described above obviously cregtes a hazard to 
our forces which we cannot overlook. 
Moreover, it illustrates graphically 
why the USG cannot cease bombing operations against.North Vietnam in 
exchange for a promise to talk rather. than a substantial militar'y t:urtail-
ment on their part. 
c. ••.. Our intelligence sources reveal that the North 
. Vietnamese have been moving during the past t1W weeks an additional 
division from central North Vietnam southward, presumably to reinforce 
'the two North Vietnamese divisions which are already within or just north 
'of the DMZ. 
Additionally, our intelligence gives some reason to believe 
that the North Vietnamese' units in and near the DMZ are on the alert and 
positioned for renewal of combat operations and infiltration, possibly 
soon after the Tet truce expires. 
The substantial resupply efforts of the 
North Vietnamese support this evaluation. 
2. 
Saigon should coordinate with Mft.CV to make public material in 
para la above. •. • 
40 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
. { 
,. 
I 
I 
I 
J 
'-
I 
l....> 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
3. 
Ambassador Bruce and Cooper should bring this story to the 
attention of highest British levels . . • • In so doing, you should not 
repeat not suggest that we are not still wide open to the idea of con-
tinuing the Tet bombing suspension through the 7-day period or at least 
until Kosygin departs London. 
You shoUld emphasize, however, that we are 
seriously concerned about these developments and that final decision on 
such additional two- or three-day suspension does involve serious factors 
in light of this information, 
4. Wireless file is carrying full account of Secretary's press 
conference today, at which he made more generel statement about supply 
activity and rate of incidents. 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
Department of State, Public Information Bulletin, February 13, 1967. 
FOURTEEN POINTS FOR PEACE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA 
"Secretary Rusk on January 27* approved the release of the following 
elaboration of the Fourteen Points f or Peace in Southeast Asia, which 
were pr eviously made public by the Department of State on January 7, 1966. 
1. 
Tne Geneva 'Agreements of 1954 and 1962 are an adequate basis 
for peace in Southeast Asia. 
2. 
We would welcome a conference on Southeast Asia or any part 
thereof: 
We are ready to negotiate a settlement based on a strict 
observance of the 1954 and 1962 Geneva Agreements, vhich 
observance was called for in t he declaration on Viet-Nam of 
the meeting of the Warsaw Pact countries in Bucharest on · 
July 6, 1966. 
And we will support a reconvening of the 
Geneva Conference, or an Asian confc:rence, or any other 
generally acceptable forum. 
3. 
We would welcome "negotiations .Tithout preconditions" as called 
for by 17 nona lined nations in an appeal delivered to Secretary Rusk on 
April 1, 1965. 
4. 
We would welcome "unconditional discussions" as called for by 
President Johnson on April 7, 1965: 
-- If the other side will not come to a conference, we are 
prepared to engage in direct discussions or discussions 
through an intermediary. 
* At his February 9 Press Conference, Secretary Rusk drew attention to the 
revised 14 pOints, saying, "I am today making available pOints we made last 
year under 14 different headings--annotated to reflect developments in 1966." 
For this study, ther efore, the effective r elease date is t aken as February 9. 
41 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
r I t 
L 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
5. 
A cessation of hostilities could be the first order of business 
at a conference or could be the subject of preliminary discussions: 
We have attempted, many times, to engage the other side 
in a discussion of a mutual deescalation of the level of 
violence, and we remain prepared to engage in such a mutual 
deescalation. 
We stand ready to cooperate fully in getting discussions 
'which could lead to a cessation of hostilities started 
promptly and brought to a successful completion. 
6. 
Hanoi's four points could be discussed along with other points 
which others may wish to propose: 
We would be prepared to accept preliminary discussions to 
reach agreement on a set of points as a basis for negotiations. 
7. 
We want no u.s. bases in Southeast Asia: 
We are prepared to assist in the conversion of these bases 
for peaceful uses that will benefit the peoples of the 
entire area. 
8. 
We do not desire to retain U.S. troops in South Viet-Nam after 
peace is assured: 
We seek' no permanent military bases) no permanent establish-
ment of troops, no permanent alliances, no permanent American 
"presence" of any kind in South Viet-Nama 
We have pledged . in the Manila Communique that "Allied forces 
are in the Republic of V.ietnam because that cOQDtry'is the 
object of aggression and its government requested support in 
the resistance of its people· to aggression. 
They shall be 
withdrawn, after close consultation) as the other side with-. 
draws. its forces to the North) ceases infiltration, . and the 
level of violence thus subsides. 
Those forces will be with-
drawn as soon as possible and not later than six months after 
the above conditions have been fulfilled." 
9. 
We support free elections in South Viet-Nam to give the South 
Vietnamese a government of their 01-lTI choice. 
We support the development of broadly based democratic 
institutions in South Viet-Nama 
We do not seek to exclude any segment of the South Viet-
namese people from peaceful participation in their country's 
future. 
42 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
'fj-
• L. 
\ L. 
I 
I J 
. , 
I 
L 
, 
i 
t . 
r 
I 
I l 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
10. The question of reunification of Viet-Nam should be determined 
by the Vietnamese through their own free decision: 
It should not be decided by the use of force. 
We are fully prepared to support the decision of the Viet-
namese people. 
11. The countries of Southeast Asia can be nonalined or neutral 
if that be their option: 
We do not seek to impose a policy of alinement on South 
Viet-Nam . 
We support the neutrality policy of the Royal Government 
of Laos, and we support the neutrality and territorial 
integrity of Cambodia. 
12. 
We would much prefer to use our resources for the economic 
reconstruction of Southeast Asia than in war. 
If there is peace, North 
Viet-Nam could participate in a regional effort to which we would be pre-
pared to contribute at least one billion dollars: 
We support the growing efforst by the nations of the 
area to cooperate in the a~hievement of their economic 
and social goals. 
13. 
The President has said "The Viet Cong would have no difficulty 
in being represented and having their views presented if Hanoi for a moment 
decides she 1-rants to cease aggression • . And ! would not think that would 
be an insurmountable problem at all." 
14. 
We have said publicly and privately that we could stop the 
bombing of North Viet-Nam as a step toward peace although there has not 
,'" 
been the slightest hint or suggestion from the other side as to what they 
would do if the bombing stopped: 
We are prepared to order a cessation of all bombing of 
North Viet-Nam, the moment we are assured -- privately or 
otherwise -- that this step will be answered promptly by 
a corresponding and appropriate deescalation of the other 
side. 
He do not seek the unconditional surrender of North Viet-
Nam; what we do seek is to assure for the people of South 
Viet-Nam the right to decide their mm political destiny, 
free of force. 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
7£ 
I 
L 
r ' 
I~ 
-----
_._----
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
February 10, 1967 
New York Times, 12 February 1967 
Text-or-Goldberg's Howard University Speech 
Special to The New York Times 
Washington, Feb:-Ib-=-Following are excerpts from the text of an address 
on '~.America' s Peace Aims in Vietnam" delivered today at Howard University 
by Arthur J. Goldberg, chief United States representative at the United 
Nations: 
The United States remains prepared to take the first step 
and order a cessation of all bombing of North Vietnam the moment we are 
assured, privately or otherwise, that this step will be answered promptly 
by a tangible response toward peace from North Vietnam. 
Some analysts contend that our terms of settlement should be more 
precisely defined. 
But it is very difficult to be more precise in advance 
of negotiation, and particularly in light of the substantive ambiguities 
on the other side. 
But whatever questions may be raised, they should and 
can best be resolved in discussions between the parties who have the power 
to resolve them. 
For our part, we stand ready to negotiate in good faith 
unconditionally t o resolve all. outstanding questions. 
SAIGON 17769 (to SecState), TS/Nodis) Sent 0720) 10 Feb; Rec' d 0826, 10 F'eb. 
Ref: 
State 133834 
1. 
I believe it is necessary and prudent to inform Ky of message to 
Hanoi as soon as possible .•.• 
3. 
. . I will find it more difficult to explain the new el.ement 
introduced by our willingness to stop augmentation • . . • Information 
giving rationale re stopping augmentation would be most useful. 
7. 
Do you wish me to inform General Hestmoreland at the time Ky is 
told? 
WDGE. 
44 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
77 
L. 
r 
I 
\.~ 
. 
t , 
L. 
1 . 
I , 
l , 
,........ 
L 
r 
I 
[. 
" 
'--
. " 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
STATE 135513 (to Aroembassy Saigon), TS/Nodis 
Ref: 
State 133834; Saigon 17769 
2. 
We have provided British with text of proposal. 
They had 
already outlined a variation of it orally to Kosygin, who expressed 
interest today and asked for written text to forward at once to Hanoi. 
This has been provided and reads as below. 
You may convey to Ky orally 
as much of digest of proposal as you deem wise in view of great necessity 
for secrecy. 
' QTE A. 
The United States will order a cessation of bombing of 
North Vietnam as soon as they are assured that infiltration from North 
Vietnam to South Vietnam has stopped. 
This assurance can be communicated 
in secret if North Vietnam so wishes. 
B. 
Within a few days (with a period to be agreed with the two 
sides before the bombing stops) the United States will stop further aug-
menting their force in South Vietnam. 
The cessation of bombing of North 
Vietnam is an action which will be immediately apparent. 
This requires 
that the stoppage of infiltration become public very quick~y thereafter. 
If Hanoi is unwilling to announce the stoppage of infiltration, the United 
States must do so at the time it stops 'augmentation of US forces. 
In that 
case, Hanoi must not den;y it. 
C. 
Any assurances from Hanoi can reach the United States direct, 
or through Sovi.et channels, or through the Soviet and British Governments. 
This is for North Vietnam to decide. 
END QU~lE. 
3. 
In explaining about text, we believe British will have made clear 
that our stopping lIaugmenting lt would still permit. rotation and continued 
supply. 
Stoppage of infiltration defined as meaning that men and arms 
cannot move from DRV into South Vietnam. 
You should note also that wording 
of subpara A prec:ludes any sudden last-minute reinforcements after bombin~ 
has stopped. • 
4. 
. Deprived of additional men and of urgently needed equip-
ment from the North, we believe 'f:j'VA/VC forces would be significantly 
. weakened in concrete terms and would probably suffer serious adverse effects 
on theiT morale. If infiltration in fact ceases and' this word can be picked 
up by SVN and allied psychological warfare units) we believe there are big 
chances that Chieu Hoi and reconciliation programs would produce substan-
tially larger returns. 
In short, we think pr('posal is defensible and forth-
coming, if it should ever be surfaced, but at the same time clearly favorable 
in terms of its effect on the military and morale situation. . • . 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
r-
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECfu,~ - NODIS 
7. Quite frankly our present judgment is that these present moves 
will come to nothing, but in review·ing the history of World War II and 
post-war crises, many other such situations have come to an end faster 
than vre thought probable in advance and for reasons we did not fully compre-
hend until after the events •••• 
8. 
You may inform Westmoreland personally of this proposal, which 
is known here to General Wheeler. 
RUSK (Drafted by S. P. Bundy) 
LONDON 6456 (to SecState), -TS/Nodis, Sent 1700, 10 Febj Rec1d 1712, 10 Feb. 
Here is text of Phase A-Phase B formula which is to be sent to 
Kosygin at his request ASft~. 
Need guidance urgently. 
These steps are as follows:-
(A) 
The United States will stop bombing North Vietnam as soon as 
they are assured that infiltration from North Vietnam to South Vietnam 
will stop. 
This assurance can be corr~unicated in secret if North Vietnam 
so wishes. 
(B) 
Within a few days (with the period to be agreed between the two 
sides before the bombing stops) the United States will stop further aug-
menting their forces in South Vietna.'ll and North Vietnam will stop infil-
t .ration and movement of forces into the. South. 
(C) 
The cessation of bombing of North Vietnam and the cessation of 
build-up of United States forces in the South are actions "rhich will be 
immediately apparent. 
(D) 
A cessation of infiltration is more difficult for the world to 
obserVe . 
Nevertheless the United States vrill not demand any public state-
ment from North Vietnam. 
(.1:. ) 
Any secret assurances from Hanoi can reach the United States 
direct , or through Soviet channels, or through the Soviet and British 
governments. 
This is for North Vietnam to decide. 
BRUCE 
LONDON 6462 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1800, 10 Feb; Rec'd 1824, 10 Feb. 
For the Secretary from Cooper 
1. This morning's session ~as devoted primarily to Europe, but Wilson 
did take occasion to point out that he had submitted tyro proposals and 
46 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
r -
I I 
L 
f. 
t.-: 
L 
L..l 
r 1 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
'TOP SECREl' - NODIS 
Soviets had not replied as yet to either. 
Kosygin then indicated that 
he wanted to hear the Phase A - Phase B proposal once again, and having 
heard it he asked Wilson to put it in a form so that he could telegraph 
it as soon as possible, . • 
BRUCE. 
LONDON 6481 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 0205, 11 Feb; Rec'd 0251, 11 Feb. 
To Secretary from Bruce and Cooper 
1. White House version of message passed to Kosygin prior his departure 
for Scotland with this introductory statement: 
QTE. 
I have just received direct from the Wnite House the 
following message which they have asked me to pass to you. 
You may take 
this now as the authentic U.S. position on the subject I discussed with 
you, and on which I handed a note to you this evening. 
UNQTE 
2. Earlier British version had been given to Kosygin by Wilson when 
he saw him at Soviet reception earlier in evening. 
4. 
Cooper will go to Chequers (through back door) early Sunday 
afternoon and will be kept inf ormed course of discussions as they proceed. 
Please provide Cooper with name, of phone contact in event matters require 
immediate reporting or guidance on the spot .. 
BRUCE 
February 11, 1967 
B,ytelephone (Feb. 11) Cooper reported British concern about our 
insistence that our Phase A-B formulation (para. 55) specify that infil~ 
tration "has stopped", which they noted was different than the future 
tense employed in' the revised Point 14 release to the press on February 9. 
TOP SECREl' - NODIS 
1 L. 
1 
I 
1. 
r-
, 
I 
) 
I j 
I I 
U 
r 
.J 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
MOSCOW 3451 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1035, 11 Febj Rec'd 1111, 11 Feb. 
2. After thanking IDI for coming over, Le Chang said he wished inform 
bdmthat President's message to Ho Chi Minh delivered February 8 had been 
transmitted to .Hanoi. 
Ho Chi Minh had received message and reply would be 
forwarded later. 
3. 
In response DCM question when message received in Hanoi, Le Chang 
said it had been transmitted immediately. 
THOMPSON 
SAIGON 17822 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1200, 11 Feb; Recjd 1310, 11 Feb. 
1. Pursuant to your 135513, I called on Ky • • • • 
8. 
Our present judgment, I said, is that these moves will come to 
nothing, but in revievling ear:!5er crises, many other such situations have 
come to an end faster than we though-i:, probable in advance. 
There may be 
one chance in ten that the other side is in deeper trouble than we realized. 
10. 
Ky listened attentively, and, aft.er I had completed my state-
ment, asked what kind of guaraptees wou~d there be 
meaning what kind of 
an inspection system. 
11. 
I said that we were thinking of the ICC 
in the efficacy of 
which he expressed complete lack of confidence (as indeed do I). 
12. 
He then said that he was afraid that if we stopped the bombing 
no'W, based on their promise and they don't keep their promise, public 
opinion would make it extremely difficult for us to resume the bombing '. -. 
14. 
When 1 asked him whether he thought that they would accept our 
proposal, he first said that he did not think they would -- that there 
would be a loss of face for them in admitting that there ever had been a 
war. 
Then after some reflection, he said: 
"If I am Hanoi, I would say 
'yes'. 
They would gain something, we would gain nothing. 
It is a cer-
tainty that they will not stop infiltration no matter how much they 
promise to do so". • • • 
48 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
81 
r·. 
u 
L. 
(.-
I 
I ' 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
15. 
He felt that to try a thing like this now was premature. 
It 
was "too soon. 
It would be better to wait a fe1-T more · months. 
We would 
then be in a better position to see the situation more clearly. 
We 
should not stop just as our military campaign is getting results, and 
~s we are making progress politically." 
LODGE. 
LONDON 6487 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1227, 11 Feb; Rec'd 1250, 11 Feb. 
For Secretary from Cooper 
1. 
I have just been informed by the FonOff that the Pope sent a 
private message to the PM last night asking hLm to urge Kosygin that 
there be a joint endorsement in the communique of the Pope's recent 
message to the three ''1-Tarring parties." 
2. 
My FonOff source thinks this will be a non-starter. 
BRuCE. 
LONDON 6488 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1227, 11 Feb; Rec'd 1340, ~l Feb. 
For Secretary from Bruce and Cooper 
. . 
2. 
One of the "contingencies II which Wilson has particularly in mind 
rose from 1-That he describes as a "jocular exchange" between himself and 
Kosygin at the Soyj.et reception last night. 
If the two sides did not come 
to an'- agreement · Sunday night, Kosygin and Wilson thought that next step to 
. consider might be sending Gromyko and Brown to Washington and for Kosygin 
and Wilson to go to Hanoi. 
The Gromyko-Brmrn visit ,,,as apparently brushea. 
aside as a private joke: but the Kosygin-Wilson visit to Hanoi 1-TaS regarded, 
by Wilson if not by Kosygin, as a more serious possibility. 
3.. .. Wilson felt, however, that much would be gained if he made 
an offer to go to Hanoi ,,,ith or without Kosygin ..•. 
. 
BRUCE 
TOP SECRET -NODIS 
I _ 
r-I 
l j 
r- , 
I 
I 
-! 
\ 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
LONDON 6493 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1615, 11 Feb; Rec'd 1704, 11 Feb. 
Eyes only for Secretary from Bruce 
1. If Secretary agrees I would appreciate this message being passed 
to Secretary McNamara. 
2. 
I would not presume to comment on extent of the military disad-
vantage of our not renewing bombing in North Vietnam until Kosygin has left 
London. 
I do feel, however, absolutely compelled to express a personal 
opinion as to what I consider would be its adverse political effects at 
this time. 
3. 
As I understand it, a decision by the USG for such renewal has 
already been taken, but would it not be possible 'to postpone ensuinK 
action for the approximately thirty five hours; (reckoned in GMT) before 
Kosygin departs from here, and, during that period, to make no public 
declaration on the subject. 
4. 
My reasons are: 
A. 
Although there are no grounds for being more than lukewarmly 
optimistic over anything of substantial value emerging from the current 
talks, it is quite evident that Kosygin, within the limitations under which 
he operates, seems almost as desirous as ourselves to bring about a cessa-
tion of hostilities in Vietnam. 
During his stay today in Scotland, he may, 
be disturbed, and rendered even more suspicious than usual, over what will 
probably appear to him the discrepancies between our last statement of 
conditions delivered to him last night as he was boarding a train), and 
certain preceding ones notably point fourteen, in our list of fourteen, 
which he has. 
I believe his concern over the disruption of other Soviet 
foreign policies resulting from deep involvement in Vietnam, coupled with 
what has become an obseSSive, almost pathological distrust of the Chinese, 
incline him strongly in favor of using whatever influence he may possess 
in Hanoi to bring about negotiations between Ho and ourselves. 
B.Since renunciation of bombing of the North with reciprocal 
, ' 
" response from Hanoi has become almost everywhere a symbol of US seriousness 
in desiring a peaceful settlement, bombing as a term has taken on a polit"ical 
connotation independent of its military significance. 
C. 
I WOQld expect Kosygin, who has been acting in concert with 
Brezhnev, will not disclose his full hand until the meeting at Chequers 
tpmorrow evening. 
But if at that time it is evident that he does not 
have sufficient prestige to postpone even for the short time he will still 
be on British soil a resumption of the type of operation he has steadily 
inveighed against, I would guess that he will prove definitively intransi-
gent, and henceforth far more difficult to seek cooperation from. 
Then, 
too, his opinion of Wilson's credibility, already shaken by last night's 
imbroglio, may lead his Russian suspiciGusness into dark imaginings. 
50 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
iF 
lr 
I 
1 . 
I 
l~ 
• 
( . 
i L, 
!~ 
L. 
(-
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
D. 
It seems to me by refraining still for a matter of hours from 
punishing the North Vietnamese for a flagrant breach of the truce, we might, 
. though .re would have no assurance of it, succeed in not alienating the great 
potential usefulness of our uritil recently improbable ally. 
BRUCE. 
STATE 135627 (to Amembassy L~ndon), TS/Nodis, Sent 1908, 11 Feb. 
1. This responds to your telecons relaying message from Wilson about 
resumption of bombing. 
2! 
As you know, we did not want to make any commitments to extend the 
TET bombing stand-down. 
You also know that our basic position remains 
not to stop bombing in return for mere willingness to talk. 
3. 
Hmrever, we have great respect for your opinion and accept your 
recommendation not to conduct military actions against the North'QDtil 
Kosygin leaves. 
It must be absolutely clear to vlilson that we would then 
go ahead and that we will not consider a further deferral. 
4. 
Wilson should not refer to resumption of bombing on his own 
initiative. If Kosygin asks about it, we suggest that Wilson relay that 
he is not familiar ,-lith details of allied military plans but that US 
attitude on this point has been made clear. 
~ 
5. 
Wilson should be left in no doubt that we cannot prolong suspension 
of bombing in absence of finn word on infiltration. 
He should also know 
that when we say "stop infiltration" we mee.n "stop infiltration." We can-
not trade a horse for a rabbit ,and will,react to bad faith on this point~ 
We are losing lives today because such commitments in Laos Accords of 1962 
.were treated with contempt by Hanoi a~d Co-Chairmen and ICC could do 
nothing about it. 
6. 
About Hilson trip to Hanoi) we see little point in it. 
We thought 
two Co-Chairmen had concluded that best prospects lie in bilateral contact 
between US and Hanoi. 
Further, we could not become involved in a visit 
which would raise problem of another unrequited suspension of bombing. 
7. 
Wilson is of course already avarethat the South Vietnamese and 
we are resuming operations in the -South tomorr?w (112300 Zulu) and that 
we have been carrying on bombing operations ir Laos throughout. 
8. 
Septel will contain our comments on the question of tenses in our 
proposal. 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
51 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
87 
• 
I' 
Ii. 
l .... 
l J 
r -i 
'.-' 
I ' 
. 
~ 
\ 
' 
l , 
,-
\ .' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS ' 
STATE 135662 (to Amembassy London), TS/Nodis, Sent 2145, 11 Feb. 
For Ambassador and Cooper Only 
1. This responds to your report of British concern about our 
insistence that draft specify that infiltration "has stopped." 
We 
gather they are pointing to apparent inconsistency between this posi-
tion and the future tense employed in the revised point 14 released 
here Thursday. 
2. 
You should give them the following:. 
a. 
As previous message made clear, we face immediate specific 
problem of possible three divisions poised just north of DMZ. 
We must 
be irrposition to insist that these cannot be moved into SVN just before 
their undertaking takes effect • 
b. 
We recognize that revised point .14 spoke in future tense, but 
that formulation related to a different proposal, i.e., bombing cessation 
alone on our side, not bombing cessation plus troop augmentation which of 
course are two major commitments on our part. 
c. British should be aware (as we realize State 133834 did not 
make clear) that message conveyed to Hanoi vras in same terms as final 
corrected draft, i.e., that vre must be assured that llrt'iltration has 
stopped. 
In the last 24 hours, we have information that Soviets are avrare 
of contents of this message, presumably through their Hanoi contacts, so 
that change in tense in .final draft given to Soviets did not repeat not 
come as surprise to Soviets or Hanoi and cannot have impaired British 
credibility. 
d. 
In any event, our.position. on this point remains firm because 
of the special problem posed by the divisions north of the Dlf~. 
We very 
much doubt 'vhether Soviets or Hanoi vrill reject proposal for this reason. 
If they should come back on it, we would of course vrish to be infonned. 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
STATE 135675 (to Amembassy Saigon), T3/Nodis, Sent 2215, 11 Feb. 
Literally Eyes Only for Ambassador 
• 
1. 
We are sending you separate instruction to inform Ky that we 
have decided that we should refrain from bombing the North until Kosygin 
leaves London. 
In conveying' this to Ky, you should make clear that this 
decision was dictated solely by extreme British concern and vital impor-
tance of British support, . . . . 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
52 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
~. 
, 
. r . 
I 
f 1 U 
I--
I 
. 
j 
I 
l._ 
, . 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
STATE 135676 (to Amembassy Saigon), S/Nodis, Sent 2215, 11 Feb . 
' Eyes only Ambassadors 
1. 
Saigon, Bangkok and Vientiane are receiving military message 
directing that bombing and naval operations against North Viet-Nam not 
repeat not be resumed until after Kosygin leaves London. 
This decision 
• • • • constitutes a one-shot exception to our standing policy, . . • • 
Our policy on not repeat not stopping bombing {n return for talks remains 
unchanged. 
2. 
Saigon should inform GVN of this decision. 
We leave it to Bangkok . 
and Vientiane whether they think some notification would be desirable. 
4. 
Canberra, Wellington, Seoul and Manila may in their discretion 
arrange unobtrusive contacts • 
(Not signed - Drafted by W. P.- Bundy) 
• 
February 12, 1967 
Late on February 11, Bruce and Cooper reported that they had had 
a stormy session with Wilson and Brown (London's 6495), who were relieved 
that the bombing stand-down would continue while Kosygin was in Lcmdon 
but concerned that the bombing would begin immediately after his departure. 
A greater problem, however, was the change in tenses in respect to the 
stoppage of bombing. 
Their formulation of the paragraph was based on an 
earlier message passed to Kosygin on FebruarJ 7. 
nlis formulation was 
based on the last of the 14 Points. 
Since Washington raised no objection 
to this formulation earlier in'the week~ they assumed they were on safe 
ground. 
They now feel the ground has shifted under them. 
Furthermore, 
if we had passed the message directly "to Hanoi on February 7, in terms 
of the past tense, why did we not inform them of this? 
L'1 the early morning hours of February: 12, Wilson sent two messages 
by private wire to the President, outlining in the first the "hell of a 
" situation" he is in for his last day of talks with Kosygin and emphasizing 
his need to reestablish trust because not only will Kosygin have doubts 
about Wilson's credibility but, in addition, Kosygin will have lost credi-
bility in Hanoi and possibly among his colleagues. 
Wilson said he planned 
to tell Kosygin that the present situation ar~ses from deep US concern 
about the intensive North Vietnamese movements during the TET period. 
He 
f~lt he had to get Kosygin into as relaxed as possible posture and to tell 
him that the USSR-UK position must be not to concern themselves with mili-
tary activities but to concentrate on the longer term political situation. 
Wilson expressed considerable anguish about the shift in tense. 
He 
said he now realized Kosygin had bit on.February 10 because he realized 
53 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
.J 
r-
I l. 
f .' 
I 
I 
l 
.J 
\ . 
. " 
J 
l. • 
, 
i 
I 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Wilson ha.d given him a softer version than the message passed directly to 
Hanoi. 
Under the circumstances} Wilson felt he must stand by his.version • 
. If Kosygin accepted} he would have to press his line on the President. If 
it is impossible for the President to accept} vTilson felt he and the pre.si-
dent would have to reason together about the situation which would then 
arise. 
More generally} he hoped to get Kosygin into a position where he and 
Wilson accepted joint responsibility for trying to assist the parties con-
cerned in the fighting to reach agreement. 
This} he recognized} would be 
difficult particularly when the bombing restarts. 
He . hoped to nail Kosygin 
to a continuing acceptance of a joint role of lawyers representing respective 
clients who must try to get a settlement out of court} ad referendum to the 
two clients. 
In view of the "clear breakdown" in communications and under- ' 
standing during this week; Wilson felt he should meet with the President 
very soon. 
In his second message} Wilson described in detail the misunderstanding 
that had arisen about the tense used in the infiltration paragraph. 
At 0336} February 12} a direct response was sent by the President 
to Wilson (repeated to London as State's135718)} pointing out that the 
matter does not hang on the tense of verbs. 
Moscow had the Phase A-B 
formulation in November from George Brown. 
Hanoi had it from the Poles. 
Meanwhile} their build-up of forces has continued through three periods of 
no bombing (Christmas) New Year's and TET). 
We have heard. nothing from 
Hanoi} although many intermediaries have attempted to negotiate with us. 
We cannot stop the bombing while three or more divisions dash south from 
the ll~Z before Hanoi's promise to stop infiltration takes effect. 
We do 
not agree that our statement to Wilson on February 7 l,S inconsistent with 
either our message to Hanoi or our formula for Wils'on and Kosygin on 
February 10. 
We asked on February 7 for an "assured stoppage" of infil-
tration. 
In Wilson's version of the A-B formula it was transmuted into 
an assurance that infiltration' "Will stop". 
This is a quite different 
matter. 
We promptly recognized this a~d informed ~Qrke Trend by telephone 
that we would transmit our response shortly. 
The President emphasized 
that no formula can be satisfactory to us--and perhaps to Hanoi--unless 
there is clarity about two matters: 
a. the timing of a cessation of bombing} cessation of infil-
'tration, and no further augmentation of forcesj and 
b. 
how assurance in this matter of infiltration .lill be established. 
Wilson was ulso informed that Hanoi had received our message and has 
told us that a direct response would be forthcoming. 
The President empha-
sized the importance of the US and UK staying together and not permitting 
the other side to play one position off against another. 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
&J 
r, 
I i 
! 
W 
l. 
r-' 
\ 
I C-J 
( . 
( . 
L..; 
-, 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
The President· concluded with a statement of ~eep appreciation for 
Wilson's efforts, an affirmation of intent to express publicly our thanks, 
and a disavovral of the possibility of giving him a power of attorney. 
Wilson prompt ly responded by private wire, expressing full agreement 
about the grave danger of a PAVN rush southward if there is an interval 
of even two or three days between the stoppage of bombing and the stop-
page of infiltration. 
He said he had been considering an alternative way 
of securing the required guarantee, namely that the prior two-way assurance 
should contain a time-table if possible underwritten by or communicated 
through the Russians. 
\wat might be provided is that the US would agree . 
in advance to stop the bombing in return for Hanoi's prior assurance that 
they would st~p the infiltration, say six hours or less afterwards. 
He 
said he 1-TOuld try it as his idea on Kosygin if the atmosphere were right. 
Finally, the Pr~e Minister noted that there had been a misunderstanding as 
a result of his reference to a "power of attorney". 
Clearly, he said, 
. 
" 
that ~ould be out of the question. 
The key words, he added, were ad 
referendum" (reJ?eated to London as State's 135731). 
STATE 135718 (to Aroembassy London), TS/Nodis, Sent 0948, 12 Feb 67 
Literally Eyes Only for .Arnb Bruce and Cooper from Walt RostOl{ 
The following message was transmitted at 3:36 a.m. 12 Feb to Downing 
Street. 
I have carefully read and considered your t ... ro messages bearing on 
your talks later today with Kosygin. 
I would wish to leave the~e thoughts lvith you on the present position. 
'" 
I really do not believe that the matter hangs on the tense of verbs. 
Moscow had from George Brmm in Novemoer the Phase A - Phase B formulation. 
Hanoi also had i t from the .Poles. 
Hanoi has show~ no flicker of interest 
f'or more than t • .;o months. 
Meanw'hile their build-up continues and they 
have used 3 periods of no bombing (Christmas, New Year's and TET) for 
large scale movement and preparation of their forces for flLrther military 
action. 
I want to emphasize that we have had nothing yet from Hanoi. 
They 
receive our messages - but thus far it has been a one-way conversation. 
Many intermedial i es have attempted~ from time to time, to negotiate with 
us. 
Eversone seems to wish to negotiate except Hanoi. 
I wish someone 
would produce a real live North Vietnamese prepared to talk. 
Understandably your present preoccupation is Kosygin's attitude. 
But 
thus far, Kosygin has not transmitted one word from Hanoi except to endorse 
their Foreign ~linister' s interview with · Burchett in. his own press conference . 
55 
. T'OP SECRET - NODIS 
I 
I 
j 
I 
1 
! 
I 
1 
1 I 
! . 
r I 
I ~ 
_ J 
r'· 
, 
l. 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
From an operational point of view, we cannot stop the bombing while 
three (possibly four) divisions dash south from the DMZ before - underline. 
word their rpt their - promise is to take effect. 
I hope you will see 
the importance of this for the men out there who are doing the fighting. 
We do not accept the view that our statement to you of our position 
on February 7 is inconsistent with either our message to Hanoi or our 
formula for you and Kosygin of February 10. 
We asked on February 7 for 
an "assured stoppage" of infiltration. 
In your version of an A-B formula 
it was transmuted to an assurance that infiltration "will stop". 
This, 
in our view, is a quite different matter. 
We so recognized promptly on 
receipt of your formula and telephoned Burke Trend that we were drafting 
and would tra'nsmit our response shortly. 
The problem of substance is that no formula can be satisfactory to 
us - and perhaps to Hanoi - unless there is clarity about two matters: 
- The timing of a cessation of bombing, cessation of infiltration, 
and no further augmentation of forces. 
- How assurance in the matter of infiltration will be established, 
you have correctly pointed out that the cessation of bombing and the 
stoppage of augmentation by us will necessarily be public. 
I would not expect Kosygin to come in at Chequers with anything firm 
and definitive _by way of a positive response. 
III that case we can take 
stock and see where we go from here on the diplomatic tract. 
If he does 
respond positively and constructively, we can then proceed to the clarifi-
cations that both sides will surely require. 
Hanoi has received our messages and has just today informed us that 
a direct response to us from Hanoi wi~l be forthcoming. 
We suppose that 
we shall not hear from them until your talks are concluded. 
There is 
importance, then, in our staying together. 
We must not let them play one 
position off against another. 
Let me add that I much appreciate your dedicated effort during" this 
week - and will, of course, express publicly our thanks. 
I'm always glad 
to know that you are in my corner but I would have some difficulty, in view 
of my responsibilities and problems here, in giving·anyone a power of 
attorney. 
I hope for peace more than you can possibly know and will be 
much interested in what happens at Chequers. 
(Text received from White House) 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
I , ' 
1-
,-
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
STATE 135734 (to Amembassy Moscow), TS!Nodis, Sent 1815, 12 Feb 67. 
For Monday morning delivery to Ambassador unless instructed otherwise 
by SEPTEL. 
· 3. State of play in London is that British on Feb. 7 gave Kosygin 
as their own draft a summary of the proposal contained in the President's 
letter to Ho. 
However, unlike that letter, the British draft of that 
date clearly separated the stopping of the bombing from the actual stop-
ping of infiltration, although it required assurance of the latter before 
the former would be done. 
This differs from the President's letter to Ho, 
which of cou~se spoke of assurance that infiltration had stopped already. 
4. 
This difference has since caused difficulty with the British. 
On 
Feb. 10, Wilson repeated the substance of the British Feb. 7 version to 
Kosygin, who expressed real interest . . • . -- we corrected the British 
draft so that it insisted that we have assurance. that the infiltration had 
stopped. • . • the British. . . . caught Kosygin just as he took his train 
that evening, but it is pOSSible, indeed probable, that the earlier "Will 
stop" version was transmitted by the Soviets to Hanoi. 
-. . 
6. 
From your standpoint, the important thing is whether the Soviets 
may have been misled at any stage. 
From a direct Dobrynin reference with 
the Secretary on Fri.day evening, we now know that the Soviets are' familiar 
with the contents of the President's letter to Ho, and this direct state-
ment means that you can assume this in any conversations with the Soviets. 
In short, they knew our position very.shortly after the President's letter 
was delivered, and again had it in clear form when we cleared the authorized 
version for transmission to Kosygin on the evening of the lOth. 
At most, 
they may have been very briefly misled on the afternoon of the 10th . . • • 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
STATE 135735 (to Amembassy Moscmv), TS/JlTodis, Sent 1816, 12 Feb 67. 
For Monday morn~ng delivery to Ambassador L.ml ~ ss instructed otherwise 
by SEPTEL. 
. 
Relevant texts to go with our septel on dealings with the British 
are as follows: 
1. Oral text used by Wilson on Feb. 7: 
. 
QTE. 
I am now satisfied that the Americans would now be prepared 
57 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
to move to further actions to strengthen mutual confidence if they were 
able to secure some assurance that this move would be reciprocated by the 
other side. 
For instance, -I believe that they are now seeking tq get word 
to Hanoi on the following lines. 
They .-recognize the need for a first and 
visible step. 
They further recognize that this step must mean the cess~­
tion of the bombing. 
This I believe they would do, and they recognize that 
it must be presented as being done unconditionally. 
Therefore we have to 
use our ingenuity to divorce in presentation the stopping of the bombing 
from the conse~uential actions. 
Yet you and I know that the conse~uential 
actions are essential if we are to get the bombing stopped. 
The conse~uen~ial actions are as follows. 
The US are willing to stop 
the buildup of their forces in the South if they are assured that the move-
ment of North Vietnamese forces from the North to the South will stop at 
the same time. 
Essentially therefore the two stages are kept apart. 
But 
because the US Govt know' that the second stages will follow, they will' 
therefore be able first to stop the bombing, even if there is a short 
period between the first stage and the actions to be taken by both sides 
in the second stage. 
There would be balanced concessions in the second 
stagej the first stage would be carried out by the US alonej but the US 
would only carry out the first stage beca~se they would know that the 
second stage would follow within a short period of time. 
The entry of American reinforcements to Vietnam can be easily observed. 
Therefore there could be no doubt on the part of the North Vietnamese that 
the Americans were keeping their part of the bargain. 
The North Vietnamese 
action in the second stage would be seen as in response to the US action 
in the second stage but it would be the result of a prior secret assurance. 
END QTE. 
2. Original British written text of Feb: 10, ~iven the Soviets at 
the reception that eventing: 
QTE. (A) 
The US will stop bombing North.Vietnam as soon as they 
are assured that infiltration from North Vietnam to South Vietnam will 
stop. 
This assurance can be communicated in secret if North Vietnam so 
wishes. 
(B) 
Within a few days (with the period to be agreed between the 
two sides before the bombing stops) the US will stop further augmenting 
their forces in South Vietnam and North Vietnam will stop infiltration and 
movement of forces into the South. 
(C) 
Tl:e cessation of bombing of Nor+.h Vietnam and the cessation 
of build-up of US forces in the South are actions which will be immediately 
a1"lparent. 
(D) 
A cessation of infiltration is more difficult for the world 
to observe. 
Nevertheless the US will not demand any public statement from 
North Vietnam. 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
11 
1 
L j ' 
, ; 
, 
L. ... J 
-1 
tJ 
, 
J 
, 
1 
I 
, -
. , 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
(E) 
Any secret assurances from Hanoi can reach the US direct, 
or through Soviet channels, or through the Soviet and British Governments. 
This is for North Vietnam to decide. 
END QTE. 
3. 
Final version cleared by us and given to Kosygin late on the 
evening of Feb. 10: 
QTE. (A) 
The US will order a cessation of bombing of North Vietnam 
as soon as they are assured that infiltration from North Vietnam to South 
Vietnam has stopped. 
This assurance can be communicated in secret if 
North Vietnam so wishes. 
(B) 
Within a few days (with the period to be agreed with the 
two sides before the bombing stops) the US will stop further augmenting 
their force in South Vietnam. 
The cessation of bombing of North Vietnam 
is an action which will be immediately apparent. 
This requires that the 
stoppage of infiltration become public very qUickiy thereafter. If Hanoi 
is unwilling to announce the stoppage of infiltration, the US must do so 
at the same time it stops augmentation of US forces. 
In that case, Hanoi 
must not deny it. 
(C) 
Any assurances from Hanoi can reach the US direct, or through 
'Soviet channels, or through the Soviet and British Governments. 
This is 
for porth Vietnam to decide. 
END QTE. 
RUSK (Drafted by H. P. Bundy) 
STATE 135744 (to Amembassy Saigon), S/Nodis, Sent 2439, 12 Feb. 
EYes Only for Ambassador 
1. Situation in London. is that at his suggestion we have just author-
ized Hilson to tell Kosygin that if Hanoi accepts our proposal by 10 a.m. 
tomorrow London time we would continue bombing suspension. 
Requirement 
remains that Hanoi assure us that infiltration has ten stopped, with our 
cessation of augmentation to follow in a few days • 
. 2. Military orders have now gone out for operations to be planned 
for execution at 2400 February 13 your time, subject to final execute 
message to be sent at 2030 your time ...• 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. BLmdy) 
59 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
\. j 
L.-' 
r-.. 
I 
u 
r. 
r1. 
t_ 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
STATE 135748 ( to .Aro.embassy London), TS/Nodis} Sent 0205, 13 Feb 67. 
The following message from the President was sent this afternoon by 
private wire to the Prime Minister: 
BEGIN TEXT 
As I pointed out early this morning, the A-B offer has been out-
standing now for about three months. 
I gather from Cooper that as of 
the time you went into dinner tonigp.t, you had no reply from Kosygin. 
We have had no reply from Hanoi. 
Nevertheless} you have worked nobly this week to bring about what 
all humanity' wants: 
A decisive move towards peace. 
It is an effort that 
will be long remembered. 
I feel a responsibility to give you this further 
chance to make that effort bear fruit. 
We will go more than" half way. 
I am prepared to go the last mile in this weekts particular effort; although 
none of us can regard a failure tonight as the end of the. road. 
I must, of course} also bear in mind my responsibility to our men who 
are fighting there} to oUr allies} to the people of South Viet-Nam 'YTho 
are co~~ting on us to bring about an honorable peace consistent with our 
commitments to them. 
Therefore I agree with you that you should go forward and try once 
again with Kosygin saying to him: 
BEGIN QUOTE 
If you can get a North Vietnamese.assurance--cammunicated either 
direct to the United States or through you-~before 10:00 a.m. British 
time tomorrow that all movement of troops and supplies into South Viet-Nam 
will stop at that time} I wilr get an assurance from the US that they will 
not resume bombing of North Viet-Nam from that time. 
Of course the US 
build up would also then stop within a matter of days. 
This would then give you and me the opportunity to try to con-
solidate and build on ,.,hat has been achieved by bringing the parties 
together and promoting further balanced measures of deescalation. 
END 
QUOI'E 
With this deal conswnmated} we would, of course, be prepared to move 
promptly to a neutral spot to engage in unconditional negotiations designed 
to bring peace to the area. 
Herewith some further observations. 
It is significant that Kosygin reflects no further word from Hanoi. 
Our own private line 1dth Hanoi remains silent. Ac.tually, Kosygin may 
prefer that any final deal come bilaterally after he leaves London in 
view of his China problem. 
60 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
I 
I I 
I 
! I 
L 
L~ 
{-, 
L' 
I 
L, 
; , 
I 
I 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Presumably two co-chairmen would continue to be in touch with each 
other. It would be helpful if communique could express support of two 
co-chairmen for 1954 and 1962 accords and agreement that any differences 
arising out of these accords should be settled by peaceful means. 
END TEXT 
RUSK (Text from White House). 
STATE 135751 (to Amembassy London), S/Nodis, Sent 0210, ;LJFeb 67. 
We plan announcement tomorrow about noon EST as ' follows: 
BEGIN QUOTE 
As you know, the South Vietnamese Government announced on the 11th 
that its. forces and those of other nations assisting South Viet-Nam would 
resume normal operations during the day on February 12. This resumption 
was in accordance with the truce period announced by the South Vietnamese 
Government some weeks ago. 
As the South Vietnamese Government had made 
clear in early January and again last week, it was prepared to dis~uss 
extension of the truce period at any time. 
There was no response to this 
offer. 
During the Tet period, bombing and other military operations against 
North Viet-Nam were also suspended. 
This suspension was continued for 
short additional period in order to avoid any possibility that earlier 
resumption would be misconstrued in relation to Mr. Kosygints visit to 
London. 
Operations have no,v been resumed.' END QUOTE 
Press here is alreaciy printing large number of 
that continued suspension is due to Kosygin visit. 
eventually reach correct conclusion that we did not 
announcement of added suspension in order to avoid 
pressure on London decisions. 
RUSK (Drafted by J. P. Walsh) 
February 13, 1967 
speculative stories 
We ass~~e press will 
wish to make any 
im~lication of putting 
On February 13, Cooper reported that at 0955 London-time Wilson and 
Brown had queried Kosygin as to whether he had received an answer from 
Hanoi. 
Kosygin replied in the negative but said he was still trying 
( London r s 6498). 
On the same day, Cooper reported that he had been told in the Foreign 
Office that: 
(a) between 3:00 a.m. and 3:47 a.m. London-time (13 February), 
truee priority "President r s Ciph!=r" telegrams were sent from the Soviet 
61 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
I I I 
I ' 
f [: ' 
I --
Ii 
f I 
I 
I 
( I 
'1 • 
I 
t . 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET. - NODIS 
delegation in London to Moscow; (b) at 9:30 a.m. today according to a 
telephone intercept Kosygin called Breshnev and said "a great possi-
bility of achieving the aim, if the Vietnamese will understand the present 
situation that we have passed to them, they will have to decide. All 
they need to do. is to give a confidential declaration"; 
(c) Breshnev 
confirmed that Kosygin's telegram to the Vietnamese had been sent (London's 
6500). 
NSA also reported that the North Vietnamese transmitted a 201-group 
message from Hanoi to Moscow at 1609Z (1109 EST); also a 500-group message 
was transmitted to Hanoi from Moscow at 0820Z (0329) EST). 
Thompson was 
informed of these developments (State's 135853). 
STATE 135758 (to Amembassy London), TS/Nodis, Sent 0707, 13 Feb 67 
Literally EYes Only for. Amb Bruce from Walt Rostow 
The following was transmitted to 10 Downing Street at 130120 A.M. EST. 
We have considered the case for further delay to receive a message 
from Hanoi beyond 10:00 a.m. British time, which you suggested. 
I have gone LDto this with my senior advisers and, after carefully 
considering your suggestion, the problems you presented, and the problem 
here 
including the morale of our uniformed men -- we are extending the 
time by 6 hours. 
This is as long as we believe is advisable. 
I am sure you would want to know that our Joint Chiefs, CINCPAC, and 
General Westmoreland have unanimously opposed the Tet and other truces 
and extensions thereto -- not only on the grounds of troop morale but 
because of the cost in human lives. 
We will wait, then, for information 
that may be forthcoming until 11:00 a.m. Washington time --
. 1~:30 p.m. 
your time. Military operations against the North will be permitted to 
reSlUne between 11:00 a.m. and noon our time . 
In making this decision I bore in mind Moscmr's and Hanoi's problems 
of transmittal two ways. 
But I also was conscious of the fact that they 
. have had the possibility of responding to essentially this message for 
the 3 months since 'ife gave it to the Poles and you gave it to the Russians; 
and the 5 days since it was transmitted direct to Hanoi and also given by 
you to Kosygin. 
If there is any interest in some such A-B proposition, there has -
and still is - been ample time for them either to agree or to come back 
with a counter-proposal. 
Your gallant last minute effort -- which I consented to -- is one 
on which they must move . 
On receiving it they must be either ready to 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
, -
f 
r '. 
·1 ! 
f L 
, 
I. 
I i ' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
make a response or not. 
A few hours either way cannot be significant. 
Bear in mind that the offer for a reciprocal de-escalation has not been 
withdrawn. 
It can be accepted any moment they may desire to do so, even 
though operations are in effect. 
They could be suspended momentarily. 
The channels for discussions on these or other lines will remain open. 
Right now supplies and weapons are moving down from the North at a 
high rate. 
While bearing in mind the safety of more than a half million 
of our men, I feel I should, nevertheless, go as far as possible to meet 
your suggestion and, therefore, am .stretching the beginning of military 
operations by another 6 hours. 
Considering all the time and conversation that has gone on before; 
this allows added time for talk if they are really serious. 
I hope you have a good chance to catch up on sleep after this arduous 
and interesting week 'I-rhich, I am inclined to believe, will prove in the 
end to have been most constructive. 
KATZENBACH 
(Text received from White House) 
SAIGON 17875 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1100, 13 Feb, Rec'd 1202, 13 Feb. 
1. Pursuant to your 135744, I flew. to Dalat Monday afternoon and 
saw Ky. 
7. 
I said that many speculat:i.ve press stories were now appearing, 
adding that General Westmoreland and I had made (and vTould make) no com-
ment whatsoever about the matter before this statement is issued in 
Washington. 
I repeated that secrecy on this matter is of the highest 
importance. 
8. Finally I recalled his expression of concern Saturday regarding 
the effectiveness of the International ControlComm:i.ssion in verifying 
possible infiltration from the North. 
I said I would like to add to what 
I said then that in the unlikely event that Hanoi should take up the pro-
posal we would expect ourselves to conduct extensive reconnaissance. 
Our 
reconnaissance capabilities together with other intelligence operations 
in Laos should, I said, give us a virtual certainty of detecting any sub-
stantial North Vietnamese violations of an undertaking to stop infiltration. 
WDGE 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
, , . 
, j 
I 
{ 
I ( 
-~----
-
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
STATE 135799 (to Aruembassy London & Mosco",), TS/Nodis, Sent 1700, 13 Feb 67. 
3. 
For Moscow background, Wilson last night requested an additional 
24 hours of suspension, and we replied that we would extend only until 
1600 British time, which is of course 1100 our time. 
Time period was 
specifically conveyed to Kosygin by British this morning in London prior 
to Kosygin departure. 
Neither last night nor this morning, apparently, 
did Kosygin himself urge a longer period or object to the clearly implied 
time limit as in any sense ~n ultimatum. . • • 
4 ..... British must realize that Soviets went out on a very long 
limb, and that any exposure of serious discussions in fact carried on 
could do serious and indeed irreparable harm to future Soviet role. 
We 
are deeply concerned that circle of British privy . to discussions was not 
repeat not small, and that some among these may succumb to long-standing 
British temptation to indicate through the press or leak that British 
were playing a significant role • ,. • . It goes without saying that British 
silence is imperative whatever. they think of positions we put forward or 
timing of our resumption. 
KATZENBACH (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
LONDON 6516 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1735, 13 Feb; Rec'd 1909, 13 Feb. 
~es Only for .Secretary and Rostow from Coope~' 
1. Although some of the events of the past 24 hours have been over-
taken, and s ome other strain credulity, it mig)1.t be well to try to recon-
struct them for the record. 
2. 
As I indicated over the telephone to the Secretariat Duty Officer 
Sunday morning, the message from the President to the Prime Minister that 
had been just received in London seemed, on the basis of preliminary re-
'actions, to have cleared the air. 
(This was confirmed later in the day.) 
3. 
In the early afternoon, I met Palliser at Downing Street (back 
door), and was then hustled out to Chequers (tradesmen's entrance). 
I was 
instalJ.ed in the garret "prison room" (graced ')y Lady Mary Grey in 1565). 
7. After about an hour, Murray (FonOff) emerged with a draft com-
munique on Vietnam which the Sovs proposed as an alternative to the British 
draft. Murray and I re ~-rorded the Sov submission and \-lith one or two miniscule 
modifications, the Sovs bought the revised version -- an anodyne and not 
very nourishing document. 
64 
TOP SEC REI' - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
8. Murray left a copy of the message the PH had sent to Washington 
earlier in the day (I had not seen it until then). 
Hedging against the 
possibility of being queried later in the evening for a reaction to this, 
I called Washington (Read) and was informed tl13t the first para (which 
acknmTledged the danger to American Forces of the buildup North of the 
DMZ) had met with a favorable reception. 
Read was non-committal on the 
second para (i.e., Wilson's proposal for a telescoped time period between 
Phase A-Phase B), and I did not press him. 
However, I did suggest that 
the PM might, one last time, ,·Tarn Kosygin about the implications of the 
buildup North of the DMZ and see if he could get Kosygin to pass his own 
warning on to Hanoi. 
Read indicated this would do no harm. 
9. .... Kosygin expressed concern regarding British press reports 
(Henry Brandon in the Sunday Times was a good example) that the "Hawks" 
in vlashington were in the ascendancy. 
According ·to Kosygin, this vTOuld 
only re'sult in permitting the "Hawks" (i.e:, Chinese faction) in Hanoi 
to get a leg up on the "Soviet Wing". 
(Incidentally, Wilson said that 
Kosygin vas much more forthcoming about the "two factions" in Hanoi than 
he had been earlier in the week.) •..• 
10 ..... I suggested to Wilson that he might try to get Kosygin 
to press Hanoi to stand fast north of the DMZ. 
Wilson thougbtthis would 
be worth a try. 
We then worked out a somewhat broader formula which Trend, 
Palliser and I was later spelled out in writing and checked with Wilson, 
I then transmitted this by telephone to Read and by teletape to Rostow. 
Wilson said he would not submit this proposition until he had the President's 
Okay. 
11. 
Wilson obviously felt that even if Kosygin rejected the formula, 
he would be better off in the House of Commons for this last minute 
attempt. 
14. Wilson, Brow'n, Burke, Trend, palliser; Murray, Arnb Bruce, and I 
assembled at Downing Street shortly after midnight. 
Wils.on was delighted 
with the message he received from lolashington, and dashed out to Claridges 
with Brown and the interpreter at his heeJ.s . 
. 15. 
He returned at about 0215 t.o report that Kosygin had evidenced 
great interest in the proposal . 
Kosygin said he would transmit it to 
Hanoi but expressed concern about the brief time available before an 
answer vTaS expected. 
Wilson reported that Kocygin was in fact writing a 
message as he talked. 
(We have had later confirmation of this.) 
KAISER 
TOP SECREr - NODrs 
1 , 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
STATE 135973 (to Amembassy Buenos Aires ToSec), TS/Nodis, Sent 2141, 13 Feb. 
Amb. Dean delivered follmring personal message from Foreign Secre-
tary Brown to Secretary Rusk to the Acting Secretary at noon today. 
BEGJN 
TEXT of Message dated February 13: 
It has been a terrific week, and as I send this I still have my 
fingers crossed ,.;rith five hours to go to the deadline on Vietnam. 
I am 
deeply impressed by the length to which you have been willing to go to 
meet us, and I just want to say to you that I know how much you have been 
working on the side of the angels, as I have here, and I appreciate enor-
mously all you have done. 
Chet and David have both been invaluable. 
END TEXT 
KATZENBACH (Drafted by B. H. Read) 
STATE 138142 (to Amelllbassy Saigon), TS/Nodis, Sent 2258, 13 Feb 67. 
3. 
For disclosure to KY at your discretion and timing, fact is 
that we have not repeat not had any response Whatever from Hanoi. 
We 
interpret Hanoi broadcast repiy to the Pope, carried Hanoi Radio 1532Z 
on Feb 13, as a typical Hanoi method of signing off. 
This broadcast was 
made just a half-hour before the expiration of the time limit for response 
that we had given to Kosygin through the British. 
(FYI. 
Our plans had 
always run toward noon our time, but we formally extended the deadline to 
1100 our time at British request on Sunday 'night. 
End FYI). 
K4TZE1~CH(Drafted by W. P. BUndy) 
'Hanoi, VNA futernational Service in English 1642 GMT 13 Feb 67--B (FBIS, 
Far Ea$t, 14 February 1967). 
(Text) 'HanOi, 13 February--Pope Paul VI recently sent a message to 
President Ho Chi Minh, expressing the wish to see art early peaceful solu~ 
tion to the Vietnam problem. 
President La Chi Minh today sent a messaGe of reply to the Pope. 
Full 
text of the reply message reads: 
I wish to thank Your Holiness for his message of 8 February 1967. 
In 
his message, Your Holiness expressed the wish to see an early peaceful 
solution to the Vietnam question. 
66 
TOP SECFET - NODIS 
, .. 
I 
, 
r 
I, • 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Our people sincerely love peace in order to build our country in 
independence an freedom. 
However, the U.So imperialists have sent to 
South Vietnam half a million U.S. and satellite troops and used more than 
600,000 puppet troops to wage a war against our people. 
They have com-
mitted monstrous crimes. 
They have used the most barbarous arms, such 
as napalm, product's, and toxic gases, to massacre our compatriots and burn 
down our villages, pagodas, churches, hospitals, schools • • • . Their acts 
of aggression have grossly violated the 1954 Gnneva agreements on Vietnam 
and seriously menaced peace in Asia and the world. 
To defend their inde-
pendence and peace, the Vietnamese people are resolutely fighting against 
the aggressors. 
They are confident that justice will triumph. 
The U.S. 
imperialists must put an end to their aggression in Vietnam, end uncondi-
tionally and definitively the bombing and all other acts of war against 
the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, withdraw from South Vietnam all American 
and satellite troops, recognize the South Vietnam National Front for Liber-' 
ation, and let the Vietnamese people settle themselves their own affairs. 
Only in such conditions can real peace be restored in Vietnam. 
It is my hope that Your Holiness, in the name of humanity and justice, 
'-rill use his high influence to urge that the U. S. Government respect the 
national rights of the Vietnamese people, namely peace, independence, 
sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity as recognized by the 1954 
Geneva Agreements on Vietnam. 
With my high regards, Ho Chi Minh. 
February 14, 1967 
SAIGON 17949 (to SecState), TS/Nodi~" Sent 1050, 14 Feb; Rec'd 1302, 14 Feb. 
2. 
I wonder 
vThether it might not be of greater value to equate 
the cessation of bombing and non-augmentation of forces no~ only with infil-
tration but also with the ending of the assassination, torture, and kid-
napping of village and other local officials. 
9. 
D'Orlandi told me (septel) that he considers cessation of assass-
ination of local officials "much more feasible" than cessation of infil-
tration. 
LODGE 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
106 
I 
' 
, 
I 
L,_ 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREl' - NODIS 
LONDON 6543 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1053) 14 Feb; Rec'd 1259, 14 Feb. 
For Acting Secretary and Rostow from Kaiser and Cooper 
2. 
The mood of Wilson and the others was friendly, unders~anding, 
and cheerful. 
4. 
Wilson recognizes that he will have some difficult moments with 
his Party in Commons (indeed 100 Labor ~~s have already signed a petition 
against 'resumption of bombing) but he seems confident that in the light 
of everything that has taken place this past week he can deal with it. 
5. 
Wilson said he had given a background press conference to the 
lobby correspondents following his appearance in the House. 
He pointed out 
to them that Hanoi could have peace if they had shown any readiness to 
respond to the efforts that had been exerted to reach a settlement . 
This 
morning's London papers have taken this line and have given the US, the V~ 
and the Russians very high marks for their efforts. 
Hanoi is universally 
regarded as the villain in the piece . ••. 
KAISER 
BUENOS AIRES 3082 (to SecState), S/Nodis, Sent 1624, 14 Feb; Rec' d 1821, 14 feb. 
For Actin~ Secretary from Secretary 
. 
, 
Please pass to Pat Dean follow'ing for George Brmm from me: 
QTE 
Many thanks for your good message and) more particularly, for your 
extraordinary labors during the past week. 
I hope that the long and 
late hours invested in these pr0bes may stir some response from Hanoi 
even though lio's message to the Pope is not encouraging. 
I .las much 
interested in seeing that Kosygin at least seems to take their co-
chairman role ser:tously and reflected a desire to bring this ,var to a 
conclusion. 
My own guess is that the Russian position has in fact moved 
somewhat but they and we face the same difficulty in getting Hanoi to move) 
but we will do our best over here, both in the battle and on the diplo-
matic front. 
Again my '!arm thanks. 
UNQTE. 
RUSK 
TOP SECREl' - NODIS 
If) f 
( 
.-' 
l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
STATE 136999 (to J\membassy London), TS/Nodis, Sent 2415, 14 Feb 67. 
1. 
You should know that. both Michael Stewart, at our request, 
and later Walt Rostow have called Palliser to express our grave misgivings 
about extent of Wilson 'disclosure in House and particularly his statement 
that agreement appeared ' ''very near," that there was some secret plan, etc. 
2 •.•. , they have put us on the spot, since we had disclosed the 
whole proposal only to Ky personally, and had not told even such key allies 
repeat allies as the Australians and Koreans. 
3... • . . this ha s just got to stop repeat stop. 
KATZENBACH (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
February 15, 1967 
Letter to President Johnson from Ho Chi Minh. 
To His Excellency Mr. Lyndon B. Johnson, 
President, 
United States of America, 
Your Excellency: 
On February 10, 1967, I received your message. 
This is my reply. 
Vietnam is thousands of miles ' away from.the United States. 
The Vietnamese 
people have never done any harm to the United States. 
But contrary to the 
pledges made by its representative at the 1954 Geneva conference, the U.S. 
Gover[l..m.el'lt has ceaselessly int'ervened in Vietnam, it has unleashed and 
intensified the war of aggression in South V~etnam with a view to pro-
longing the partition of Vietnam and turning South Vietnam into a neo-
colony and a military base of the United States. 
For over two years now, 
the U.S. Government has, with its air and naval forces, ca~ried the war 
to the Democratic Republic of (North) Vietnam, an independent B.nd sovereign 
country. 
The U.S. Government has committed war crimes, crimes against peace and 
against mankind. 
In South Vietnam, half a million U.S. and satellite troops 
have resorted to the most inhuman weapons and the most barbarous methods of 
warfare, such a8 napalm, toxic chemicals and gasses, to massacre our com-
patriots, destroy crops, and raze villages to the ground. 
In North Vietnam, 
~housands of U.S. aircraft have dropped hundreds of thousands of tons of 
bombs, destroying to~ms, villages, factories, schools. 
In your message, 
you apparently deplore the sufferings and destruction in Vietnam. 
May I 
ask you: 
Who has perpetrated these monstrous crim~s? It is the United 
States and satellite troops. 
The U.S. Government is entirely responsible 
for the extremely serious situation in Vietnam. 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
f 
I 
{O'lv 
r 
I 
I 
1 
" 
L 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
The U.S. war of aggression against the Vietnamese people constitutes a 
challenge to the countries of the socialist camp, a threat to the national 
independence movement, and a serious danger to peace in Asia and the world. , 
The Vietnamese people deeply love independence, freedom and peace. 
But in 
the face of the U.S. aggression, they have riSen up, united as one man, 
fearless of sacrifices and hardships. 
They are determined .to carry on 
their resistance unti~ they have won genuine independence and freedom and 
true ·peace. 
Our just cause enjoys strong sympathy and support from the 
peoples of the whole world, including broad sections of the American people. 
The UoS. Government has unleashed the war of aggression in Vietnam. 
It 
must cease this aggression. 
That is the only .ray to the restoration of 
peace. 
The U.S. Government must stop definitively and unconditionally its 
bombing raids and all other acts of war against the Democratic Republic of 
Vietnam, withdraw from South Vietnam all U.S. and satellite troops, recog-
nize the South Vietnam National Front for Liberation, and let the Vietnamese 
people settle themselves their own affairs. 
Such is the basis (sic) content 
of the five-pOint stand of the government of the Democratic Republic of 
Vietnam, which embodies the essential principles and provisions of the 1954 
Geneva agreements on Vietnam, it is the basic (sic) of a correct political 
solution to the Vietnam problem. 
. 
In your message, you suggested direct talks bet.reen the Democratic Republic' 
of Vietnam and the United States. 
If the U.S. Gov~rr~ent really wants 
these talks, it must first of .all stop unconditionally its bombing raids' 
and all other acts of war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. 
It 
is only after the unconditional cessation of the U.S. bombing raids and 
all other acts of war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam that the 
Democratic Republic of Vietnam and the United States could enter into talks 
and discuss questions concerning the two' sides. 
The Vietnamese people will nev~r submit to force, they "'ill never accept 
talks under the threat of bombs. 
Our cause is absolutely just. It is to be hoped that the U.S. Government 
will act in accordance ",ith reason. 
Sincerely, 
Ho Chi Minh 
MOSCOW 3501 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 104~, 15 Febj Rec'd 1131: 15 Feb. 
Le Chang handed DCM at 1:00 p.m. Ho Chi Minh's reply to President's letter. 
Reply completely Qnyielding and in subsequent oral r emarks, Le Chang said 
he could no longer meet ,{ith US representatives in Hoscow. 
Text and full 
report folIo",. 
THOMPSON 
70 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
/03 
r-
1 
L 
r . 
\ 
'-
r 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
SAIGON 18022 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1130, 15 Feb; Rec'd 1359, 15 Feb. 
1. The decision authorizing me to tell Ky about the episode involving 
Wilson and Kosygin was unquestionably ~.ise. 
2. 
I also believe that it will save usa great deal of trouble in the 
end if we make it a practice to tell the GVN what we are planning to do 
ahead of time whenever it is likely that they will find out about it 
anyway. • •• 
4. 
There is a strong streak of fatalism in these people and if they 
feel they are left out of decisions which vitally affect them, they are 
quite capable of desperate action which l-lQuld be contrary to our interests. 
Also this capacity for desperate action is what under other circumstances 
makes them valuable as allies. 
IDDGE 
MOSCOW 3503 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1150, 15 Feb; Rec'd 1257, 15 Feb. 
Ref: 
Moscow 3501 
2. 
Le Chang handed DCM Ho Chi Minh's reply to President's message 
delivered FebruaTJ- 8, requesting that it be transmitted to President (septel). 
I.e Chang then made following additional oral statement: 
. 
A. 
Position and attitude of DRV Govt are very correct and seriOUS, 
and enjoy strong support of world public opinion) including American people. 
US, however, always obstinate and perfidious, and it continues advance 
conditions for cessation of bomoings. 
B. 
US had made use of DRV representative's reCelVlng US repre-
.sentative in Moscow to deceive public opinion that secret negotiations 
. 
going on while bombings continue. 
C. 
Lately) US extended so-called suspension of bombings during 
Tet. 
Less than two days later) bombings ,.ere :esumed on pretext that there 
had been no response from Hanoi. 
This'constitutes insolent ultimatum to 
compel Vietnamese people to accept unacceptable conditions. 
D; 
In such circumstances, DRV representative does not consider it 
possible receive US representative in Moscow on US proposal. 
Responsibility 
for this rests completely with us. 
71 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
t _ 
I . 
1 
._-
. L 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
3. After making sure he understood Le Chang's final statement 
correctly, DCM c?lled his attention to President's February 13 state-
. ment and cited sentence stating that door to peace is and will remain 
open and US prepared go more than half way to meet any equitable overture 
from other side. 
4. 
In response, Le Chang quoted final portion HO's message, begin-
ning with sentence stipulating cessation of bombings and all other acts 
of war against DRV as precondition if US really desires conversations. 
THOMPSON. 
STATE 137496 (to Amembassy Buenos Aires), TS/Nodis, Sent 1818, 15 Feb. 
We are sending to you by separate cables in this series following ' 
immediately after this one Ho Chi Minh's reply to the President and 
the report of the latest Guthrie conversation on Februart 15. 
Paragraph f of the Ho letter is clearly a combination of the formu-
lations used by-the DRV in HO's February 13 reply to the Pope and the 
Trinh January 28 interview with Burchett. 
He find it interesting that in 
this post resumption period DRV is adhering to the exact formula in the 
Trinh interview, I.e. "It is only after the unconditional halting of the 
American bombing and all other acts of war against the DRV that the DRV 
and the US could begin talks and discuss questions affecting the two 
parties." . 
The President is anxious 'to have a "stocktaking" with you on where 
we go from here, and I think he would like to be assured that you will be 
back in time for luncheon next ,Tuesday .••. 
KATZENBACH (Drafted by B. H. Read). 
72 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
r " 
i ' 
I 
I 
l _, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
February 16, 1967 
STATE 138755 (to Amembassy Moscow & Buenos Aires), TS/Nodis 
Ref: 
MoscOlO{ 3525 
2 ••.•• Here, "re are eyaluating the situation tomorrow and 
would much appreciate your over-all assessment of possible impact of 
last "reek I s events ' , To us it appears tentatively that ,the Soviets went 
quite far in even offering to present our proposal and the variant intro-
duced by the British with the highly specific time limit factor. 
(We 
were verJ struck at absence of any indication of Kosygin referring to its 
'Ultimatum flavor.) 
Moreover, if Soviets in fact urged acceptance of this 
proposition, they went even further. " Thus, unless they had some indication 
from Hanoi of possible give, we are inclined to wonder whether they may 
not have strained their credit very heavily indeed in Hanoi and caused 
Hanoi (or at least Chinese-oriented elements in it) to consider them a 
solid but compromise-minded friend. 
In these circumstances, our minds 
run to the thought that Hanoi may now be assessing its position in the 
most basic manner against this reading of Soviet policy, and might even 
be making a somewhat desperate appeal to the Chinese Communists to pull 
themselves together and give the kind of full support the Soviets are 
clearly not nmr inclined to give. 
In short, we believe possibilities of 
last week's developments could be very far reaching indeed. 
KATZEI'm .. 4CH (Drafted, by W. P. Bundy) 
February 17, 1967 
MOSCOW 3533 (to SecState), TshTOdis', Sent 0833, 17 Feb; Rec's 0909, 17 Feb. 
Ref: 
State 138755, 
2. 
At film showing at Embassy last night Sukhodrev, Kosygin's inter-
preter, ' who was present at all important conversations in London, remarked 
to me QTE that was quite a s .. ritch you pulled on us in the text of your 
proposal UNQTE obviously referring to the change in tenses ..•. 
4. Possibility open to Soviets to use excuse of Chaos in China to 
sl01o{ down deliveries to North Vietnam but I doubt that they ..,ill do this. 
THOIiJPSON 
73 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
\ -: 
(-
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
LONDON 6680 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1730, 17 Feb; Rec'd 2009, 17 Feb. 
Ref: 
State 136999 
1. 
I saw Michael Palliser today and conveyed the full substance of 
reftel. 
I emphasized the fact that Prime Minister's suggestion that there 
was "secret plan" and that peace was very near had put us on the spot with 
our allies and was causing us considerable embarrassment at home .•.• 
3. Palliser stated •..• It would have been difficult for the PM 
to make so effective a case for the US and British positions without saying 
the things he did in public. 
~alliser also recalled that the excellent 
British press on Tuesday, from the US point of view} was due largely to 
the Prime Minister's backgrounder the evening before .. 
6. 
Comment. 
While Palliser was obyiously genuine in expressing his 
understanding of the nature of our problems, he also made ,it clear that 
the PM was more bullish about the significance of last week than we were. 
Palliser stressed on several occasions the "dramatic" change in Kosygin's 
attitude in contrast to last July when the PM visited Moscow and even as 
late as November when Brown was there . . • . It is also the firm conviction 
of the British that Kosygin did transmit our last proposal to Hanoi and 
very possibly with the recommendation that "they give it serious cons'idera-
tion." 
KAISER 
STATE 139631 (to Amembassy Moscow & Buenos Aires), TS/Nodis, Sent 2333, 17 Feb. 
1. 
Bundy saw ZinchQ~ for private lunch today. 
Conversation made clear 
that Soviets were fully informed on Ho reply to us and on all our direct 
exchanges in Moscow, apparently in full detail .... 
3. 
Bundy then reviewed position we have taken on conditions for cessa-
tion of bombing, starting \·rith Goldberg speech of September and followed by 
presentation of Phase A/Phase B formula through Brovn to Soviets and simul-
taneously through LevlandmTski to Hanoi. 
He add.ed that in January we had 
noted Ho conversation, with Baggs and Ashmore j.n 'l-Thich Ho had referred to 
cessation of US reinforcement, in addition to bombing, "lhile of course 
insisting that Hanoi could noi reciprocate . . . • Thus, Hanoi had had a 
general proposal along these lines for three months and this specific ver-
sion on February 7 or 8. 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
/67 
,--
i 
L 
r-
I 
I , , 
'-' 
I 
~ 
i 
\ . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
6. 
Zinchuk then said that the Soviets were "disappointed" and "uneasy" 
at our resumption of bombing. 
He did not repeat not charge us with any 
breach of any undertaking in so doing, but did say that the combination 
of our December 13-14 bombings, causing Hanoi to reject the Warsaw proposal 
for quiet talks without condition, and our present action, bringing to an 
end for the time being any chance of a favorable Hanoi reply on the London 
proposal, had caused Moscow to wonder ,ihether it had become the basic US 
view that the military situation was steadily improving from our standpoint 
and that we therefore did not really want negotiations at the present time 
in the belief that the situation had become steadily more favorable to us. 
7. 
There was then a long specific discussion of the December events, 
in 'Iyhich Bundy noted that the original message from the Poles has been 
exceedingly vague and had never made clear to us what Zinchuk was now 
asserting--that Hanoi was definitely willing to talk .in the sense of ex-
changing vie.,s. 
Zinchuk responded that they had gone back over this with 
Hanoi and had ascertained firmly that this was the Hanoi position at that 
time. 
Secondly, Bundy noted that Rapacki' s behavior bet.·reen December 4 
and December 10 had been and remained inexplicable to USj 'lie had thought 
our position in mentioning the necessity for interpretation was entirely 
reasonable and simply could not understand why Rapacki had not gone ahead 
in that period but had on the contrary conveyed a negative Hanoi view to 
us as late as December 10. 
In short, Bundy argued that we had simply had 
a clear misunderstanding as to what Zinchuk now described as Hanoi's intent 
at that time. 
8. 
As to the London outcome, Zinchuk argued that Hanoi had noted 
repeated statements by us that we had uI1dertaken the banbing in order to 
get Hanoi to talk. 
Hence, Hanoi had supposed that its Burchett interview 
position of willingness to talk if .re stopped the bc:mbing was in direct 
. response to our own position. 
Bundy noted that all our statements on the 
purposes of the bombing had stressed its necessity in order to Cou.'1ter 
and impede infiltration above all, and had placed its relevance to negoti-
ation in a .much broader context than Zinchuk ~s summary of Hanoi's view 
would suggest. 
. 
12. 
As beb-reen these two approaches, Bundy said we 
sa~:J: some advantage 
in the latter. 
He pointed out that to take a dramatic series of actions 
envisaged in the London proposal would inevitably create a glare of publicity 
that might be unfavorable for subsequent talks. 
Was it not then wiser to 
talk quietly so that 'lye knew the outlines or' where we might come out before 
dramatic and visible actions were taken. 
13. 
Zinc huk noted both these avenues, but 'l-lent on to say that within 
the last 2-3 days the Soviets' had had a firm communication from Hanoi to the 
effect that they simply could not talk in any fashion as long as the bombing 
75 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
i" . 
.'. 
. r ~ 
L _ 
1... 
'- -
r 
,-
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
was not stopped. 
Zinchuk argued--in the only f'aintly coluratura passage 
of' the whole exchange--that Hanoi f'elt very strongly that it was inherently 
unequal f'or two competent nations to talk while one was hitting the other's 
territory but the other, by f'orce of' circumstances, was not hitting the 
f'irst. 
Hanoi f'elt that to talk in these circumstanc'es had the f'lavor of' 
capitulation. • 
'14. 
Bundy then asked whether Hanoi's message to the Soviets had con-
veyed any suggestion that Hanoi was displeased with the Soviet handling in 
London. 
In blunt terms, had the Soviets lost credit .in .Hanoi? 
Zinchuk 
promptly and apparently f'rankly replied that this had not repeat not been 
the case--that on the contrary Hanoi continued to look to the Soviets to 
arrange a settlement that would protect their interests, and the Soviet 
standing had progressively increased in Hanoi over the past several months. 
He cited the f'act that Hanoi had kept the Soviets f'ully inf'ormed on the 
direct US channel, and said that this shmved Hanoi's desire to deal with 
and through the Soviets. 
15. 
Bundy then asked whether the change of tenses between the British 
yersion of our proposal and our own f'inal version had in any way thrmm the 
Soviets of'f': 
he noted that 'our letter to rio had used the "has stopped" 
language, so that we did not repeat not suppose Hanoi had been misled. 
He explained that our reason for this language was our belief that tvo or 
three DRV divisions vere poised just north of the DMZ and might have been 
moved into South Viet-Nam before the cessation of' infiltration went into 
f'orce. 
Zinchuk expressed no surprise at this explanation, and said frankly 
that the change of' tenses had not significantly disturbed the Soviets . • • • 
17. 
Bundy then said that it seemed to us barely conceivable that 
Hanoi vlOuld conclude that ve now had in mind some sharp change in our 
' military operations or even some change in our objective vis-a-vis North 
Viet-Name ,While making clear that he could not exclude some additional 
actions on our part, Bundy said that he hoped Hanoi had no such view, since 
the US continued to have no intention of destroying North Viet-Nam or changing 
its path of action in any drastic f'ashion. 
180 • . • • the conversation moved to China. 
B1.mdy said that "re had no 
clear view, even among ourselves, as to whether a Mao or a Party victory 
would be better f'rom our standpoint, • . 
21. 
.•• Bundy's dominant impression 'ivas that it underscored increasing 
S~viet concern to f'ind a Viet-Nam settlement and their belief' that they had 
increasingly strong standing vlith Hanoi to achieve this. 
Zinchuk also re-
marked at one pOint that 'a "solid group" ;in the Hanoi leadership nov really 
\-l8nted peace. • • • 
KATZE.f\ll3.ACH (Drafted by W. p. Bundy) 
76 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
' .. J 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
STATE 140121 (to Amembassy Mowcow), TS/Nodis, 17 Feb 67. 
Buenos Aires for Secretary only repeat only 
Ref: 
State 139631 
1. 
In your conversation with Kosygin tomorrOVl, you should ra ise the 
subject of Vietnam. 
2. 
For your own information, you should know that the situation will 
be reviewed here next week in an effort to assess ",here .we are and what 
actions, political and military, seem most desirable. 
We will be consid-
ering a wide range of proposals, including significant additional actions 
against North Vietnam. 
These could include new targets for aerial bom-
bardment such as pmler stat ions, cement plant, etc., and mining of inland 
waterways and Haiphong harbor. 
Some targets could be, within 10-mile 
radius of Hanoi. 
Accordingly, nothing that you say to Kosygin should be 
open to interpretation which would foreclose any of these options. 
4. . • • . Since there was no response from Hanoi to 10-mile radius, 
we have not for some time regarded our prior statements in this connection 
as limitation on our freedom of action, although l-ie have not in fact bombed 
within the radius ... 
5 ••• '. you Hill note para 15 ref tel dealing with change of tenses, 
and same para dealing with position of 2 - 3 DRV divisj.ons 
KATZEl\TBACij (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
February 18, 1967 
MOSCOW 3562 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1737, 18 Feb; Recld 2108; 18 Feb. 
1. 
I broached Vietnam by saying . • • . we had had a very direct 
and negative reply to what yle believed was reasonable proposal. 
We did not 
knm-l if other side had been serious in starting discussions in first place 
• . . . In any event, people in Washington were pleased to see indication 
that USSR also wa'1ted to see problem settled. 
I said I did not know where 
we should go from here . . . . 
2. 
I then pointed out that during 4 or 5 day Tet holiday and estimated 
25,000 tons of supplies· had been sent south",ard, i.e., as many supplies 
had been shipped in 4· or 5 days as normally had been. sent in a month. 
Thus yTe wondered what the purpose of this exercise was • • . . 
77 
TOP SECRill' - NODIS 
. /lD 
, r 
\ 
I 
. 
L 
, 
r 
J 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
3. 
Kosygin said he wished make it clear he not authorized negotiate 
for North Vietnam and therefore could not say his remarks would repre-
sent Vietnamese point of view. 
He did not wish to mislead us. 
However, 
he could state his own views. 
His estimate of latest events was as follows: 
Vietnamese had for first time stated they ready negotiate if bombings were 
stopped unconditionally; this was first time they had done so and it was a 
public statement. 
When he came to England, he supported this proposal pub-
licly. 
He did it because he had good reason for taking such a step. 
Although 
he believed that mediators in this situation either complicated the problem 
or merely pretended they doing something, he took that step because he had 
seen a basis for US-Vietnamese talks. 
Wilson had been in touch with Washing-
ton but not on his, Kosygin's initiative. 
However, Wilson kept him informed 
and he was in touch with Hanoi. 
Then came latest message, which had nature 
of ultimatum. 
It said that if by such and such time, i.e., ten o'clock, 
Hanoi failed to do certain things, bombings would resume. 
Time given to 
Hanoi was very short--just a few hours--and situation was even more compli-
cated because of time difference between London and Hanoi. 
Thus there was 
no ,opportunity for Hanoi to consider message and conduct necessary consul-
tations. 
In fact, US received Ho Chi Minh's reply after bombings had already 
resumed. 
Kosygin continued that in his view US had made basic mistake. 
First, 
nothing ,\-Tould have happened if US had delayed bombings another three or four 
days. 
Second, US had couched its message in terms of an ultimatum. 
Third, 
US talked about 25,000 tons going to South--nature of which he did not know--
but US said nothing about its own reinforcements. 
During that period US 
had sent additional troops, had moved its naval vessels to North Vietnamese 
shores, and had increased number its aircraft carriers in area from three 
to five. 
US accusing other side of having sent 25,000 tons but US itself 
probably sent as much as 100,000 tons. 
In other words, US seems believe 
its infiltration is all right but infiltration by other side is not. 
Thus 
other side has no confidence in US intentions. Moreover, US seems discount 
China, which grave error. 
China wants continuation and expansion of con-
flict. 
In this connection, he .wished point out that his remarks in London 
that negotiations should take place had provoked fury in China. 
~~is was 
. anothe:r' proof of his step having been a deliberate and responsible one. 
Yet what he received from US was message that bombings would be resumed if 
something wasn't done by 10 o'clock. If US wanted to conduct bombings it 
was of course its own decision. 
Kosygin then said that he had also advanced 
that thought that infilt.ration by both sides should cease. 
He repeated that 
he did not understand how US could object to infiltration from North while 
continuing its own infiltration. After all, Vietnam. '\-las one cOlmtry and 
Vietnamese were one people, whereas US infiltration was of interventionist 
character. 
4. After reiteratL~g that he not authorized represent Vietnamese views 
and that his remarks reflected only Soviet views, Kosygin said Soviets not 
confident US proposal had been very serious. 
Confidence was most important 
in this situation. 
h~ile it perhaps inadvisable to rake up history, he 
wished recall that he, Chairman of USSR Council of Ministers, had been in 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
, . 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Hanoi when US started bombings. 
Wby did not US turn to him at that time 
and ·explain to him its problems? 
Another example of this need for confi-
dence was fact that despite fact US and USSR had .reached understanding 
to reduce their military expenditures US raised its budget without informing 
USSR. 
As for USSR, it kept its word; in any event, if it had deemed 
necessary to take certain steps it would have ~nformed other side. 
5 •..•. US was helping those forces by its actionsj US left USSR 
open vis-a-vis China, it also left North Vietnam open vis-a-vis China. 
Net result is that Chinese view has triumphed, and Chinese can now say 
that all those efforts were nothing but a masquerade. 
Thus problem was 
now to find way toward unconditional cessation of bombings so as to start 
negotiations. 
He wished to stress, however, that question was only of 
direct US-North Vietnam contact, for North Vietnam's prestige was involved 
here. 
In addition, he wanted to say frankly that no third party must 
seek gain advantage from its activities in this situation; much more impor-
tant thing was a stake here, i.e., search for peaceful settlement. 
As 
to how to proceed further, he did not know. 
Road he had conceived of had 
been disrupted by US ultimatum. 
Chinese now very happy for they seek 
increased tension and hope for US-Soviet confrontation. 
US assisting them 
and this alarming to USSR. 
Kosygin said he could not venture to propose 
anything constructive now. 
He had no basis for doing so and he did not wish 
to make unrealistic propositions. 
He had spoken very frankly with me--
as he would have not spoken with anyone else--because he knew that I would 
transmit his views only to President. 
5.(sic). After thanking Kosygin for his comments, I said I wished to 
make a few remarks of my own. 
I said I did not believe it justified com-
pare other side's infiltration with sending of our own reinforcements. 
For one thing, we were in South Vietnam at request SVN Govt. 
Moreover, our 
bombings were for purpose of impeding North Vietnamese supplies to South, 
whereas North Vietnamese couJ.d not stop our mm supplies. 
Thus stopping 
of our bombings gave advantage .to North Vietnamese. 
6. 
Kosygin interjected that this interesting reasoning, after all, 
NLF--which certalll1y more solid organization than US puppets in Saigon and 
which controlled three fourths of SVN territory--also asking North Vietnam 
for support. 
7. 
I continued we had told North Vietnam that if they stopped infil-
tration Vie would stop our reinforcements. 
Important point here was that 
North Vietnara should not gain any advantage. 
. 
8. 
Kosygin again interrupted by asserting US was .talking from posi-
tion of strength. 
11. 
I said • . . • if in face certain US steps, such as restriction 
79 
TOP SECREI' - NODIS 
III 
r ~ . 
I l 
r-
I 
I '-
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - .NODIS 
of bombings· around Hanoi, other side continued killing people, including 
Americans, in South, US would feel free take any action necessary. to stop 
infiltration • 
12. .• 
Kosygin said US must realize its bombings, defoliation, 
operations, etc., not successful. 
Thus US must look for constructive 
steps . . US must realize North Vietnam between hammer and anvil. 
It must 
look fOTIfard and also look back, for Chinese want to heat up situation. 
This was why he had made his statement in London. 
In fact, he could tell 
me that even earlier USSR had sought a political settlement. 
China, which 
strictly nationalistic, was expansionist aspirations in Asia, including 
such countries as India, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, etc. 
Thus US 
must keep this in mind--it must take account of these sharp corners in 
international situation. 
He continued that he knew that objectively we 
would agree there was no Saigon Govt even though we would of course never 
admit that. 
Saigon regime was sitting on island surrounded by sea of civil 
war. 
Its situation could be compared to that of Kolchak or Denikin during 
Russian civil war. . • • Of course, there was internal dissent in US over 
this problem. 
There were Goldwaters and .Nixons in US, but he was confident 
that they would not be supported by US people if a settlement were reached. 
He said he wished repeat that what should be looked for . were constructive 
steps, certainly not ultimata: 
US should not send messages stating that 
something should be done by ten o'clock for it would receive reply that 
would make it necessary start allover again . . . • 
14. . . . he wished to stress that USSR favored political rather than 
military solution. 
He emphasized, however, that this statement was 
strictly private and not for publication. . . • Referring again to message 
he had transmitted to Hanoi from London, he said he knew it was hopeless 
the minute he had read it. 
15. 
As Kosygin indicated he wished break off discussion on Vietnam, 
I raised another subject, leased line for our Embassy. 
However, after my 
initial remarks on this subject, Kosygin apologized and said he wished 
ask me a question relating to Vietnam. 
He then asked me directly if 
Chinese had approached US re possibility of negotiations on Vietnam • 
. When I said that to best of my knoVlledge they had not, he asked me if I 
was absolutely certain, noting that perhaps there vrere channels with which 
I not familiar. 
I told him I had seen all reports of our conversations 
with Chinese in ¥Tarsaw and could tell him that they did not amount to any-
thing; they cons~sted essentially of constant Chinese accusations of US 
for helping Taiwan, having aggressive designs, etc. 
16. 
Discussion then turned to leased line (septel). 
THCMPSON 
80 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
113 [' 
L .' 
I-
I 
l 
r' 
I 
I 
\ 
. I ~ 
I 
I 
l 
r ! 
. . r 
I 
" 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECBEr 
NODIS 
February 19, : 1967 
MOSCOW 3568 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1330, 19 Febj Rec'd 1334, 19 Feb. 
Ref: 
State 14012l 
2. 
So far as our bombing is concerned, ... I hope that following 
will be taken into consideration. 
Kosygin made quite a point of the 
shift in the Soviet position which he had publicly made clear in London. 
British Ambassador thinks Kosygin probably went considerably beyond any-
thing that had been agreed upon before he left Moscow and he is concerned 
that Kosygin may be in some trouble with his colleagues. 
Any early escala-
tion of our bombing pattern will make more difficult his getting support 
within the Soviet regime as well as any pressure Soviets may be willing to 
bring on Hanoi to work for a political settlement . 
4. 
Mining of Haiphong Harbor would provoke a strong reaction here and 
Soviets would certainly relate it to their relations with China. 
Kosygin's 
startling question to me about China shows depth of their suspicions. (r 
hope Dept can put me in position to give categoric answer should occasion 
arise.) 
They would consider that we are quite ,{tiling to make North Viet-
nam entirely dependent upon ChiComs with all which that would imply. 
8. 
Only explanation r can think of for Kosygin' s question about China 
is that he may have thought Chinese encouraged US to start negotiations 
knowing they would fail and that this would lead to actions increaSing like-
lihood of U.S.-Soviet confrontation. 
Might also be related to possibility 
that he was personally led to go out on a limb .••. 
.. 
THOl'vlPSON 
STATE 140351 (to Aruembassy MoscoW), TS/Nodis, Sent 2002, 19 Feb. 
3. . .. , you should know that Soviet people here and in New York 
have been nosing around quite a bit about our attitude toward Communist 
China, and at lower levels have expressed to private contacts suspicion 
(though possibly'for bait) that we were dealing covertly with Peking. 
Bu..'1dy mentioned 'Ghis to Zinchu."k in lunch talk Friday, and said in casual 
fashion that Soviets could hardly think we had capacity for such dealing 
even if we "ranted them. 
H01vever, this falls short of clear negativity 
you now suggest, which we shall consider further for possible additional 
talk by you with Kosygin. 
4 ..... it surprised us Sunday, and continues to surprise us, 
that Kosygin agreed to forward t'ne Sunday proposal without making the 
ultimatum objection to it, and this might fit with your conjecture that 
-' 
81 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
, 
" 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
he went out on a limb e-yen "lith his colleagues. 
KATZENBACH (Drafted by W. P. Bundy). 
February 20, 1967 
MOSCOW 3570 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 0920, 20 Feb; Rectd 1009, 20 Feb. 
Ref: 
State 140351 
2. 
My guess is that for the moment Soviets will do nothing except 
perhaps to express their disappointment to Hanoi and possibly take their 
time in sending by sea any Soviet supplies that Chinese may have delayed 
or prevented from going to rail or failed to supply themselves . . . . 
THOMPSON 
February 22, 1967 
New York 'I'imes, 23, 2h February 
In a conversation with New York Times' reporters on February 22, 
Y~I VAN BO said the recent Trinh statement on the possibility of negoti-
ations was an important gesture of good ' will tov18rd the United States. 
He 
repeated over and over aga in that the halt of US bombing had to be upennanent 
and unconditional!! because any ,cessation which was not clearly labeled 
"permanent and unconditional" would leave the "threat of bombing II intact and 
thus would constitute an unacceptable interference .-lith the negotiations. 
Asked how a distinction could be made between a temporary and a permanent 
halt to bombing) he replied the US would have to declare at the outset 
that the halt was "pennanent and unconditional." Bo said the Trinh offer 
constituted a basic change in DRVpolicy and added that the US demonstrated 
,bad faith in its response. 
He said the four points were "the most correct" 
solution to the Vietnam problem, and that the DRV regarded the NFLSV as 
the only "authentic representative" of the South Vietnamese people; thus 
peace could only come about if the US settled South Vietnamese problems 
with the Front. 
In a speech on February 24, Cambodia's Prince SIHANOUK 
stated Mai Van Bo had asked him to clarify tha'C "the only condition the 
DRV poses for eventual conversati ons between North Vietnam and the United 
States is a definitive and unconditional cessation of bombing of North 
Vietnam, because the North Vietnamese will not talk under duress. 
As for 
the American demand for reciprocity in de-escalation, Mai Van Bo gave me 
the following explauation: 
r it would be impossible 'for the Government of 
Hanoi to stop helping and aiding its brothers in the South who must liberate 
82 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
themselves from invasion and American occupation.'" 
During a television interview on February 22, AMBASSADOR HARRThiAN 
said "there's some indication that they're (Hanoi) coming around to a 
point where they may be willing to talk, and it looks at the moment as 
if it's more apt to be private discussions rather than something that 
would be public." Asked whether the US would be prepared to accept the 
Front as an equal in negotiations, he replied that should there be a 
formal public peace conference, "we will not, of course, accept them as 
a government" but "they could came . with Hanoi." 
In late February, Hanoi protested to the ICC about US artillery 
bombardment across the IMZ (called a "new and extremely serious step of 
war escalation"); on 1 March, Nnan Dan termed the Viet Cong attacks on 
Danang and movements of (North Vietnamese) guns south of the DMZ as 
"reasonable reciprocity" for the new escalation steps taken by the U.S. 
The 1TL.FSV representative to the DRV (28 February) called the IIJohnson 
clique'sll talk of pecce a IImere hoax ll and said the real US aim was to 
IIcling to South Vietnam at any cost and perpetually partition Vietnam. II 
_T_h_e _N_e_w X 
__ 
or __ k ~T_im~
e_s, Thursday, February 23, 1967 
HANOI OFFERS .ANEH TO Jon-r U.S~ IN TAIKS IF BO~lmING IS ENDED, by Henry Tanner 
(Special to The New York Times) 
PARIS, Feb. 22 - A spokesman for Hanoi reaffirmed today its offer to enter 
into talks with the United States if .American bombing attacks against North 
Vietnam \-.rere unconditionally and permanently halted. 
Mai Van Bo, the North Vietnamese representative in Paris, indicated 
that his Government's position on this pOint had not changed in spite of 
the resumption of American bombing Feb. 14 following a six-day suspension. 
Before his statement, there had been widespread speculation for seve:ral 
days that the North Vietnamese position had hardened after the resumption 
of the bombings and the failure of the mediation attfmpted in London by 
Prime Minister IVilson and the Soviet Premier, Aleksei N. Kosygin. 
The principal reason for this speculation was a message from President 
Ho Chi Minh to Pope Paul VI on Feb. 13 restating Hanoi's four-point demands, 
:i..ncluding withdra"Tal of American forces from Vietnam. 
President Ho Chi Minh, in his message to the Pope, phrased the demands 
as follows: 
TOP SECPillT - NODIS 
lib 
I 
t . 
\ 
l. 
j 
I 
i 
i 
I I \' 
L 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
"The U.S. imperialists must put an end to their aggression in Vietnam, 
end unconditionally and definitively the bombing and all other acts of 
war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, withdraw from South Vietnam 
all American and satellite troops, recognize the South Vietnam National 
Liberation Front and let the Vietnamese people themselves settle their 
own affairs." 
Mr. Bo said today that the President's message had referred to the 
terms of a settlement and not to the process of getting peace talks started. 
Therefore, he added, it did not constitute a change in the Vietnamese 
position. 
Mr. Bo repeated over and over that the halt of American bombing had 
to be "permanent and unconditional." 
He said the North Vietnamese would not talk "under bombs" or "the 
threat of bombs." 
He said that any cessation of bombing that was not 
clearly labeled "permanent and unconditional" would leave the "threat of 
bombing" intact and thus would constitute an unacceptable interference 
with the negotiation. 
Asked how a distinction could be made between a temporary and a 
permanent halt to bombing, he answered that the United States would have 
to declare at the outset that the halt 1-18S "permanent , and unconditional." 
Mr. Bo said that Hguyen Duy Trinh, the North Vietnamese Foreign 
Minister, made an important gesture of goodwill taward the United States 
in late January when he told Wilfred Burchett, an Australian correspondent, 
that talks between Washington and Hanoi would be possible if the bombing 
stopped. 
The North Vietnamese representative said that that had constituted a 
basic change in Hanoi's position. Earlier, he said his government's stand 
was that if the United States stopped bombing unconditionally, this new 
fact would be studied and that, if Hashington then proposed to negotiate, 
this proposal also would be studied. 
He asserted that neither President Johnson nor Secretary of State 
Dean Rusk had ever quoted ~IT. Trinh's statement fully or accurately. 
This, he added, i·Tas proof of bad faith since Hanoi I s real position 
was fully known and understood in Washington. 
He made it clear that this was a "conversation" and not an "interview." 
He said that for an interview he would have insisted on written questions 
and would have given written anSi·Ters. 
He asked that his remarks be reported 
fairly and correctly. 
84 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
; . 
I 
! , 
I 
I 
I 
I 
L., 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Mr. Bo indicated, but did not specifically say, that the four point 
program of Hanoi was subject to negotiation once United States-North 
Vietnamese talks had started. 
When asked whether the four pOints constituted absolute terms for a 
settlement or whether a compromise might be possible, he answered that 
he could not say what would happen in any talks since no talks were now 
taking place. 
Mr. Bo called the four points "the most correct" solution. 
Asked 
whether this could be translated into English as "the best II solution, he 
'said "no." 
It is "the most correct" solution, he declared, because it would assure 
the North Vietnamese people the full exercise of their national rights, 
real independence and lasting peace. 
Mr. Bo was asked about the third of the four pOints, vrhich calls for 
the settlement of the affairs of South Vietnam accord.ing to the program 
of the National Liberation Front. 
He said that the North Vietnamese Government regarded the National 
Liberation Front as the only "authentic representative" of the South Viet-
namese people. 
He said the program of the front was to give South Vietnam inde-
. pendence, democracy, peace and neutrality. 
He added that Hanoi supported 
this program and regarded all the problems of South Vietnam as the sole 
concern of the front. 
Th~refore, he stated, there could be peace only if the United States 
settled South Vietnamese problems with the front. 
February 23, 1967 
JCS 6957 (to CINCPACj info COMUSMACV), TS/LThIDIS. 
Subj: 
Employment of Artillery Fire 
1. 
You are authorized to conduct artillery fire from positions in 
SVN against valid military targets in Laos, in the DMZ both north and 
south of demarcation line, and in NVN north of U/~. 
2. 
State concurs. 
C. M. Gettys, Brig. Gen., USA 
(Drafted by VAdm Mustin; USN, Dir, J-3) . 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
tfg 
( -, 
L 
.-' .... 
r -
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
MOSCOH 3622 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1520, 23 Feb; Rec'd 1735, 23 Feb. 
Ref: 
Moscow 3563 
1. At no point did Kosygin mention necessity of US withdra'Ta1. 
This may not be particularly significant in view my having mentioned 
our public declaration of willingness withdraw under certain conditions, 
but it is interesting when taken in connection with his admonition we 
must not disCOQ~t Communist China and its expansionist ambitions in Asia, 
and more particularly his list of countries against which, he said, China 
harbors such ambitions. 
With exception India, all countries he mentioned 
have security arrangement with us. 
2. 
Kosygin's statement that we disagreed on whether there were one 
or two Vietnams appears a step backward. 
3. 
I believe this is not the first time Kosygin has mentioned that 
we started bombing North Vietnam without consulting hlruwhen he was in 
Hanoi. 
He brought this up in context of importance of mutual confidence. 
Implication is however that had we consulted him, Soviet Union would at 
that time have been willing to· do something about North Vietnamese inter-
vention in South. 
It might also indicate that purpose of Kosygin' s visit 
at that time was to damp down situation that was developing there. 
THOMPSON 
February 24, 1967 
STATE 143101 (to Aruembassy Moscow), TS/Nodis, Sent 1530, 24 Feb 67. 
Secretary saw Dobrynin February 23 to discuss Viet-Name 
4 •.... Hanoi had our 14 pOints, the Lewandowski 10-point draft, 
and at an earlier time we had proposed a possible revision of Hanoi's 
,third point along the lines of paragraph 5 of the Lewandowski draft. 
With 
such formulations, we could either start by stages of action, or could "go 
to the end and .Tork back." For example, the Secretary noted that Kosygin 
in London had expressed concern about the fate of the men fighting in the 
South if our London proposal had been accepted (calling for an end to infil- · 
tration of supplies as well as men). 
To deal with this problem, it might 
b~ possible to work out amnesty arrangements for the southerners fighting 
in the South and safe conduct for the northerners to return home, although 
we recognized that Hanoi might not wish to admit the presence of the latter. 
86 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
5 ..... The Secretary wondered whether there might be some signifi-
cance in the fact that Ho did not make his reply to the President public; 
did this mean that Hanoi's rejection of continued talks might not. be final? F 
. Dobrynin said he saw no connection. . . • 
6. . . . . The DRV Charge had given the Soviets the message that 
Hanoi felt that our resumption of bombing meant we were not repeat not 
interested in talks. 
Therefore, Hanoi was breaking off the MOSCOVl 
channel • • •• 
7. 
The Secretary then said that it was out of the question for us to 
stop bombing and see a completely nelV military situation develop without 
knovling at all what talks would produce. 
Dobrynin responded that we 
could try and asked what would we lose ..•• 
9. 
The Secretary reiterated that there were very important military 
considerations behind our position, and noted the massive re-supply that 
Hanoi had made during the TET period. 
Dobrynin objected that the US too 
had re-supplied its forces. 
He said that this really could not be the 
major point behind the US position, and that there must be something more 
(thiS presumably implying that the US was really resolved to get a mili-
ta~J solution). 
The Secretary quickly rejoined that we drew a distinction 
between our activity in support of South Viet-Nam and North Viet-Nam 
activity agaj.nst South Viet-Name 
Dobrynin said that the Soviets likewise 
made a distjnction, but not the same one we did. 
He added that our disagree-
ment on this had been fully discussed and further discussion would not lead 
anywhere. 
12 ••••• Dobrynin responded that Hanoi's objection to talking unless 
the bombing stopped was a major difficulty and a real one. 
He then recounted 
that on the 15th (apparently of December) the DRV Charge had come to the 
Soviet Foreign Ministry to tell the Soviets that they had told Rapacki to 
. break off his talks with us) on the ground that the US bombing ,just before 
that date meant the US thought it could pressure Hanoi to talk, and this 
they would not do. 
13. 
Dobrynin then went on that Hanoi (and by implication the Soviets 
as well) took an unfavorable view of our refusal to accept the 7-day TET 
truce period proposed by Hanoi. 
The Secretary said that we were bound to 
be influenced by how they would have used the longer period. 
Dobrynin 
argued that nonetheless the impression was left that the US wished a mil-
itary solution and not talks. 
He noted that Hanoi was angry on this 
point as .Tell • . . • 
87 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
I 
c •. 
f . 
I 
( 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
15. 
The Secretary then noted that Hanoi would not even tell us 
what the three divisions just north of the DMZ would do if the bombing 
stopped. 
Dobrynin queried whether the divisions were not fully north 
of the DMZ, and the Secretary responded that some elements were south 
of the DMZ, some were in the DMZ and some to the north. 
17. 
The Secretary then asked whether the appointment of a new DRV 
Ambassador in Moscow might make a difference to Hanoi's willingness to 
talk in some fashion. 
Dobrynin said that of course .an .Ambassador would 
have more authority than a Charg~, but the decisions I-Tould still be made 
in Hanoi and an Ambassador would be acting under instructions •• 
18. 
The Secreta~ then noted that Hors message to the Pope really 
asked for capitulation and US withdraval. 
Similarly, Mai Van Bo appeared 
to be referring again to our recognlzlng the NLF as the sole legitimate 
representative of the South. • . • 
21. 
The Secretary concluded that we continue to wish to stay closely 
in touch with the Soviets. 
He noted that there had once been a time 
when it had seemed clear that the Soviets did not wish to discuss the 
prOblem with us, referring to his talk with Kosygin in New Delhi. 
Dobryrlin 
agreed. 
NmT, it seemed clear that the Soviets were prepared to discuss the 
matter with us, and perhaps it would have helped if. we had been in touch 
with them on one or two specific occasions. 
The Secretary emphasized that 
we really did wish to see the conflict finished, and noted t hat a general 
feeling of impatience was our real problem, not the Vie"l-TS expressed by 
such people as Senator Ftubright. If the other side kept up and increased 
its military activities, as it appeared to be doing, it was inevitable 
that we ourselves would take action. 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
February 25, 1967 
LO~~ON 6893 (to SecState), S/Nodis, Sent 1348, 25 Feb; Recrd 1539, 25 Feb. 
2. . . . . Rostow read substance of STATE 143029 and explained back-
ground which l ed to Presidential decision to undertake this new series of 
actions. 
Brown took nevs calmly and left room to call Prime Minister so 
that he would not hear about artillery bombardment across DMZ over radio. 
Brown observed that since Kosygin departure, Vietnam issue had quieted down 
88 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
III 
r 
l 
I 
I, 
1 , 
' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET'- NODIS 
in UK, but he thought this nel{ action would be interpreted as "escalation" 
and could stir people up again -- not just left wingers, but also "soft" 
groups and elements in the center of Labor's political spectrum. 
4. 
Rostow also stated that the Russians now feel that negotiations 
will not come about through intercession of a mediator, but rather through 
direct contact betvTeen Hanoi and Washington. 
Rostow reminded Brown that 
the American Government and the American people were very conscious of 
the Korean experience when negotiations were carried on for two years while 
the fighting continued. 
During the tlw-year period, American casualties 
·more than doubled. 
We were determined to prevent that from happening again 
in Viet-Name 
Brown said in reply to this point that the important thing 
about Korea was that negotiations were going on. 
"Fighting while negoti-
ations were taking place was preferable to fighting without negotiations." 
KAISER 
March 1, 1967 
LONDON 6998 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1656, 1 Mar; Rec'd 1830, 1 Mar. 
1. 
Viet Nam was subject of two conversations with Rapacki during 
London visit. 
On first day (22nd) • . • • Thomson got strong impression 
Rapacki felt he had taken a personal risk in December project, had gotten 
burned, . • • . 
2. 
Rapacki version to Brown of December events was that after firm 
agreement on original la-point package, Lodge had consulted ylashington 
and then reneged by raising new (unspecified) questions and poi.nts of inter-
pretations . 
Before the Poles hqd chance to do anything with these the 
December 13-14 bombings occurred, killing entire project. 
3. 
Rapacki's general attitude was illustrated by two minor exchanges. 
When BrOim asked Rapacki's judgment on degree of Kosygin's quote authority 
unqte in Hanoi Rapacki replied quote not l ess than yours unquote and when 
Brown asked , .... hat country had more influence in Hanoi, China or Russia, 
Rapacki replied quote North Viet Nam unquote. 
4. 
In luncheon conversat :i,on between PM and Rapacki on 23rd Wilson 
opened vTith question of hmT the quote misunderstanding unquote of November-
December arose, observing that Lewandowski in Hanoi must have gone beyond 
'vThat Lodge had said. 
Rapacki replied vehemently that no misunderstanding 
was possible. 
Lewandmrski had gotten Lodge's approval of his written version 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
121 
, -
I 
~ 
,~ 
, , 
1 
I • 
r 
l , 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
of what Lodge had said. 
Only problem was bombing of Hanoi just before 
Warsaw talks of two principals scheduled to begin. 
In response to \-1ilson' s 
question as to why things 'Iolent wrong, Rapacki quote hinted unquote that 
sabotage by quote Saigon hawks unquote was responsible, referring again to 
December 13-14 bombings. 
When Wilson suggested failure of quote human 
communication unquote Rapacki again insisted tl:,ere had been no misunder-
standing or inaccuracy in transmission of messages. 
. 5. 
On Wilson's suggestion, Rapacki agreed a more detailed post mortem 
between British and Poles on the December affair would be useful. 
The . 
British Embassy \{arsaw had subsequently been informed Poles will give 
them a more detailed account of their version, 
~ though how specific and 
whether in wTiting is not clear. 
UK Ambassador Brimelow, who not well 
informed on Viet Nam issue, has been instructed only to listen and not talk. 
6. 
When Wilson referred to Harriman talks in Warsaw a year ago re 
possibility of misunderstanding Rapacki was equally categoric in inSisting 
there had been no misunderstanding or garble of Harriman suggestions 
declaring he had personally initialed written record of Harriman talks. 
7. 
Rapacki argued that Hanoi policy is not made in Peking but that as 
long as US bombing continues North Viet Nam has quote no liberty of either 
action or speech and unable to divulge its views even to its closest friends. 
Unquote. 
While taking usual hard line that cessatiDn .of bombing is ' essential 
pre-condition for any progress, Rapacki gave no hint of what might happen 
if bombing stopped. 
But he declared that if bombing continues, scale of 
hostilities will grow, and US will find itself involved in Laos, possibility 
also in Cambodia, Thailand and directly in North Viet Nam. 
He argued 
Chinese could not permit North Viet Nam to collapse and Soviets would not 
permit China to collapse. 
KAISER 
March 4, 1967 
MOSCOW 3756 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 0930, 4 Mar; Rec'd 1204, 4 Mar. 
2. 
Yesterday when discussing China with Kuznetsov he jokingly stated 
we should be well informed in view of our several hundred secret talks 
with Chicoms. 
A number of my diplomatic colleagues have mentioned Soviet 
suspicions of our relations with Chinese. 
THOMPSON 
90 
TOP SECREr -
NOD IS 
(1.5 
I 
f 
I , 
L 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NOD IS 
STATE 149089 (to Amembassy Moscow), TS/Nodis, 4 Mar 67. 
You are hereby authorized at your discretion to deny flatly that 
we had any approach from the Chic oms on negotiations with North Vietnam. 
RUSK (Drafted by J. P. Walsh) 
March 11, 1967 
STATE 153528 (to Amembassy MoscoW), TS/Nodis, Sent 0123, 12 March. 
Ref: 
Moscow's 3501 
1. 
We have transmitted to you USUN's 4318 in which Kulebiakin 
expressed view to Buffum and Finger that now is good time for talks between 
US and North Vietnam and that these could take place without stoppage of 
bombing. 
Moreover" fact that new DRV Ambassador Nguyen Tho Chan, has 
presented his credentials provides opportunity to try to establish the . 
direct line of communications between Ambassadors to which we had hoped 
the Guthrie-LeChang talks would lead. 
We realize that Le Chang's February 15 
statement appears to close door on further conversations and HO's message 
seems adamant on ruling out talks while bombing continues. 
Nevertheless, 
b earlier Guthrie-Le Cha.l1g conversations it seemed implicit that they 
were going through exercise which might be regarded as preparatory to 
direct contacts at Ambassadorial level when DRV Ambassador arrived on 
scene and Kulebiakin in WI has specifically suggested level of talks in 
MoscO\{ should be raised. 
Therefore, request you seek meeting with Chan 
and make following points: 
2. 
Basic message we would like to convey to Hanoi via Ambassador Chan 
is that we continue to favor prompt peaceful settlement and we remain 
persuaded that the shortest road is through direct talks between our repre-
sentatives. 
Would not appear from record that we and DRV disagree on this 
point but rather that we have been unable to fbd way of moving toward talks. 
3. 
You should point out that in the President's press conference of 
March 9 the President said in ansl-Ter to a question with respect to Quote 
.reciprocal action Unquote that he would be ready to entertain Quote just 
almost any reciprocal action on the part of North Vi:=tnam . . • We are 
prepared to discuss anything they are will.ing to discuss. 
Unquote. 
4. 
FYI We recognize that the new DRV Ambassador is probably lli"der 
instructions not to establish contact with you. at this time. 
Thus even 
if he provides an opportunity for a brief call,he is likely to reiterate 
the stand the Charge made to Guthrie at their last meeting. 
We recognize 
that we have to give the DRV Ambassador enough ammunition to warrant his 
requesting a change in instructions. 
For this reason you should emphasize 
that we are ready nOl-r, without preliminaries, to get down to serious sub-
stantive and entirely secret discussions' on all questions involved in a 
peaceful settlement itself, in order to.bring this matter to a prompt 
91 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
conclusion. 
We will provide further instructions along this line if your 
initial talk indicates the possibility of establishing a dialogue. 
RUSK (Drafted by Unger) 
March 13, 1967 
MOSCOW 3880 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 0930, 13 Mar, Recrd 1047, 13 Mar. 
Ref: 
State 153528 
2. 
In view our recent escalation bombing, this strikes me as a 
singularly inappropriate time make this approach. 
It will almost cer-
tainly be rebuffed by DRV who 'I-,ill not wish to give appearance of sub-
mitting to increased military pressure. 
More importantly believe our 
approach at this time will be interpreted by Soviets as cynically timed 
to insure refusal and merely build up our record of peace efforts. (I am 
inclined by skeptical Kulebiakin). 
Moreover, failure arrange discussion 
nO.T will make more difficult appioach at more opportune time. 
Nevertheless, 
will endeavor carry our instructions unless cancelled by department. 
THOMPSON 
STATE l51.f303 (to A'1lembassy Moscow'), TS/Nodis, 13 Mar 67. 
For the, Ambassador from the Secretary 
Despite your 3880 I believe that you should suggest to the DRV Ambassa-
dor that a private talk might be constructive. 
As far as r'ecent bombings are concerned, there is very little prospect 
that we will let up in bombing unless vre see some response through private 
contacts. 
We have been maintaining the ten nautical mile radius around 
JIanoi but cannot guarantee to do so indefinitely. 
. 
\ve, too, are inclined to be skeptical about Kulebiakin. 
The fact that 
he was accompanied on his second talk by another Russian and his greater 
detail of suggestion about procedure indicates the possibility that he was 
in fact acting under instructions. 
The immediate result might well be a preemptory refusal by the DRV 
Ambassador to talk but if he attributes his refusal to OQr bombing, we 
might as well follow through and tell him that we are prepared to discuss 
that problem. 
Given the potentialities which lie ahead, weare not indif-
ferent to establishing a record if that is all that Hanoi will permit. 
92 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
( 
l 
I 
L 
r . 
i l. 
r 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
I fully understand the considerations underlying your 3880 but 
believe you should y~oW that we do not see a better time, so far as 
. bombing is concerned, coming up in the near future unless we see some 
indication that the other side is prepared to do business. 
RUSK (Drafted by D. Rusk) 
March 16, 1967 
On March 16, Prime Minister Wilson sent a communica~lon to President 
Johnson (State I s 158462, March 20), recalling that he had been lvorried 
during the Kosygin visit about a misunderstanding with the USG vlhich had 
risen . 
He asked if Pat Dean could see the Presid~nt around April 1 to 
discuss this problem 'and to make sure that there is no question of a similar 
situation arising in the future. 
He also asked for confirmation that the 
message I-,hich the President had sent him to hand to Kosygin on the night 
of February 21 still represent~ the US position. 
Moscmr 3947 (to SecState)' TS/Nodis, Sent 1350, 16 Mar; Rec'd 1558, 16 Mar. 
Ref: 
State 154303 
1 .... Akalovsky reached Hoang Manh Tu by phone today at 11:45 
and conveyed my request for meeting ,vith DRV Ambassador . 
2. 
Tu said would check and asked Akalovsky call him again 
3. 
Tu •.• was in nlS office at 14:45. 
Said his Ambassador not 
available "for the moment If and therefore he could give no answer at this 
time. 
When asked if this meant answer could be expected later in day, Tu 
said Ambassador might not be available until Saturday: and suggested 
Akalovsky call him Saturday morning (March 18). 
4. 
It clear Ambassador Chan asked Hanoi for instructions. 
Noteworthy 
.is fact that , contrary to his past practice of calling back himself, Tu 
nml unwilling do so and asking Akalovsky call h:iJn. 
THCA\1PSON 
March 17, 1967 
STATE 157597 (to Ame.mbassy MoscoW), TS/Nodis, Sent 2258, 17 Mar. 
Ref: 
Moscow 3963 
. • . , .we now see some advantage in delaying your session with the 
93 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREf - NODIS 
DRV Ambassador for several days while developmen~s in connection with 
the U Thant initiative mature to the point where we know the nature of 
. our OIm response and perhaps that of Hanoi. 
Nonetheless, if Akalbvsky 
gets a calIon Saturday, March-18, and you have an appointment, the 
Secretary General's proposal might provide a useful opening gambit. 
We '{Quld suggest that you simply mention that we have gotten the pro-
posal from the Secretary General and you have been informed that Washing-
ton is studying it carefully. 
FYI. 
We have strong indications from Saigon that if anything more 
formal than the kind of talks you might be engaged in in Moscow were 
to take place the GVN would want to participate. 
RUSK (Drafted by C. L. Cooper) 
March 21, 1967 
MOSCOW 4020 (to SecState), TS/~odis, Sent 1134, 21 Mar; Rec'd 1251, 21 Mar. 
Ref: 
State 157597 
1. 
Having delayed contact with DRV Enbassy for several days per 
reftel, I had Akalovsky phone Hoang Manh today . • . . , latter said he 
had been authorized give following response . . . . 
2. 
At present, US carrying out every day nevT steps of grave escala-
tion of aggressive vrar against people of NVN. 
At same time, US is mounting 
a game of contacts with DRV reps in order to deceive world public opinion 
and to cover its criminal acts of war. 
In vie>;{ of this, DRV Ambassador 
in Moscow cannot receive US Ambassador. 
3· . 
T".tfCMPSO N 
(.-
. LONDON 7602 (to SecState), S/Nodis, Rec'd 1020, 21 Mar. 
For Walsh to hold for Secy return or relay as desired 
Ref: 
State 158462 
2 •.•• in my private talk with Brmm last night ... he made 
clear that vhat is stHl bothering Wilson and him is the change of tenses 
in the message ,o[e gave them on Friday, as compared to the A/B formula and 
the draft that they had made and of course actually gave the Russians on 
Friday witho~t our authority. 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
12"1 
r 
I l . 
-I 
I 
I 
J 
l.. 
,--
i l _ 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
3. 
I told Brown flatly that I . was absolutely sure this change 
of tenses had nothing i-rhatsoever to do i-7ith the outcome. • • • 
5 .... , Broi-m asked earnestly whether the President's attitude 
remained as he had stated it to Brown in October, that he was ready to 
seize even a 40 percent chance for peace. 
I did not try to gloss this 
remark, but did assure him categorically that the President was absolutely 
determined to follow any road that could lead to peace and that there had 
been no change whatever in this attitude. 
I noted that the Bunker appoint-
ment placed in Saigon our most experienced field negotiator, and that this 
was simply another evidence of our position. 
I do not think this got across, 
but it is apparent that Hilson and Brown do a lot of churning over the 
Kosygin visit and may still have some scars from our having given the 
Phase A/Phase B form~a to the Poles in November.without telling Brown. 
KAISER 
March 23, 1967 
MOSCOW 4069 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1530, 23 Marj Rec'd 1811, 23 Mar. 
Ref: 
State 149089 
During my calIon Gromyko today, I 
• said that my inquiry with 
Department confirms my response to Kosygin, 1. e., that there had been no 
such suggestions. 
THOMPSON 
March 24, 1967 
STATE 162643 (to Amembassy MOSCOl.r), TS/Nodis, Sent 2302, 24 Mar. 
Ref: 
State 143101 
In Bundy/Dobrynin conversation on evening March 23, following 
were highlight s : 
1. 
Dobrynin stuck throughout to same basic line as in ref tel, that 
Hanoi sjm.ply \-[ould not repeat not talk unless we stop the bombing. 
He 
repeated argumentation that Hanoi could not possibly accept our insistence 
on reciprocal action without accepting whole US view of nature of conflict-. 
95 
TOP SEC REI' - NODIS 
l_ 
r 
I 
L 
/ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
2. 
Conversation then got onto U Thant proposal, as to which 
Dobrynin had already indicated that Hanoi response would be negative. • 
3. 
Bundy then said that Hanoi revelation of letters continued to 
puzzle us very m,lch, as we had formed clear impression that if Hanoi 
ever wished to move seriously it would' do so in some secret and private 
manner. 
Hence we were genuinely distressed that Hanoi had damaged, if 
not destroyed, privacy of Moscow' channel. 
Dobrynin did not respond 
directly, and did not take possible occasion to indicate any hope Moscow 
channel could be resumed. . 
4. 
. Bundy noted that Hanoi had never responded to our January 
message, and that this had been one of major negative factors, together 
with lack of any response to President's letter, that had led us to go 
ahead with resumption on February 13. 
He stressed that discussion of 
January 20 topics need not be described as "talks" but could simply be 
exploratory "non-conversations.
1I 
If we were able to arrive at a clear 
picture of an agreed final settlement, question of more formal talks and 
even of stopping the bombing might take on different hue. 
Dobrynin 
obviously understood the point, but did not respond in any hopeful way. 
5. 
Bundy then remarked that if Hanoi were so insistent that we stop 
20 
the bombing before any talks could take place, it was hard to suppose that 
there could have been any substance to what the Poles told us in December 
about a willingness to meet in ';-Tarsa\.,r. 
Dobrynin shrugged this off with the 
perhaps revealing remark that Poles had given Soviets an entirely different 
pictlU'e than the one we had presented of who had taken the initiative for 
the Warsel.,r contacts and by implication the statement of US position. 
The 
inescapable implJcation ,\.,ras what Poles had represented to Soviets that USG 
had initiated LewandOl.,rski channel and that USG had either drafted or endorsed 
Lewandowski formulat ion and urged that it be presented to Hanoi. 
Bundy 
merely said Soviets knew facts as we clearly understood them. 
In this 
exchange, Dobrynin returned to theme that our bombing on December 2 and 4 
and thrown Rapacki off, and that bombing of December 13-14 had caused clear 
Hanoi rejection of' Warsaw meeting. . . 
6. 
L~ commenting on our February 13 resumption, Dobrynin did complain 
that we had not given additional time for Hanoi response . . . . our resump-
tion had given impression in Moscow that USG or some elements in it, were 
impatient and anxious to press forward ,.,rith military pressures. 
7. 
Dobrynin expressed hope that there would not be "dramatic develop-
ments II in USG actions aga inst NVN. . . 
8.. 
. Bundy noted that there now appeared to be at least temporary 
settling dmm in cultural revolution, perhaps related to need to concen-
trate on planting season. 
Dobrynin expressed strong agreement that latter 
was key f actor, and stated judgment that resumption of struggle highly 
likely in view of deep-seated views held by Mao personally. 
RUSK (Drafted by W. P. Bundy) 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
119 
( 
-. 
April 5, 1967 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
On April 5, Thompson .vas instructed to arrange delivery to the 
DRV mission by t:le means he deemed best suited to maximize the c.hances 
of early transmission to Hanoi of a letter dated April 6 from President 
Johnson to President Ho Chi Minh (State's 169339). 
The following pOints 
were made in the letter: 
(1) the President was disappointed that Ho did 
not feel able to respond positively to his letter of February 8; (2) we 
remain prepared to talk quietly with Ho' s representatives to establish 
the terms of a peaceful settlement and then bring the fighting to a stop; 
or we are prepared to undertake steps of mutual deescalation which might 
make it easier for discussions of a peaceful settlement to take place. 
Talks could take place in Moscow, Rangoon, or elsewhere; (3) it is clear 
that we must one day agree to reestablish and make effective the Geneva 
Accords of 1954 and 1962; let the people of SVN determine in peace the 
kind of government they want; let the peoples of North and South Viet-Nam 
detenaine peacefully whether and how they should unite; and permit the 
. peoples of SR4 to turn all their energies to their economic and social 
development; (4) the President and Ho will be judged in history by whether 
they worked to bring about this result sooner rather than later; (5) HO's 
views were invited ?n these matters. 
April 6, 1967 
MOSCOW 4284 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1353, 6 Apr; Rec'd 1521, 6 Apr. 
Ref: 
State 169339' . 
1. 
I had Akalovsky deliver president's message to DRV Embassy today. 
3. 
While there is good chance letter will be returned, hopei'ully DRV 
Ew~assy will make copy before doing so . 
THOHPSON. 
HOSCo\{ 4294 (to SecState)) TS/ Nodis) Sent 164 5, 6 Apr; Rec ' d 1808, 6 Apr. 
Ref: 
MOscow's 1284 
Presj.dent 's message returned by DRV Embassy . 
Orj.ginal envelope which 
had been opened, fOQDd in Rmbassy mail box at 1745 and bore following in 
French: 
"Non conforme! 
Retour a l'expediteur ." 
THOMPSON 
97 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
l30 
f ' 
1 _ 
April 10, 1967 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
STATE 172325 (to Amembassy Moscow), TS/Nodis, 10 Apr. 
Info: 
USDEL PUNTA DEL ESTE 
PUNTA: 
Eyes only for Secretary Rusk 
MOSCOI-J': 
For Ambassador Thompson Only 
Request you seek early appointment with Gromyko to make following 
points: 
•. r 
5. 
A few weeks ago Mr, Kulebiakin of USSR Mission in New York 
mentioned to a representative of our UN Mission that Mr'. Pham Van Dong 
would soon be in Moscow and suggested ~hat we might wish to contact him 
there. 
My Government is ready to establish such a contact . • . . 
6 .... , you would appreciate Gromyko's reaction to this proposal 
and most especially any assist9nce that he could render to facilitate 
confidential discussions with Mr. Pharo Van Dong or members of his party. 
KATZENR~CH (Drafted by C. L. Cooper) 
April 12, 1967 
Dept of State Memorandum of Conversation, 1815 12 Apr 67 
Place: 
SovJet Embassy, Washington, D.C. 
Participants: 
Soviet Ambassador Anatoliy F. DobrynJn 
Deputy Under Secretary Foy D. Kohler 
During my long luncheon conversation with Ambassador Dobrynin . • • . 
I asked him. about the reports of a new agreement between Moscow' and Peking 
to facilitate the transit of Soviet arms aid to North Viet-Nsm. 
I said that some of the present interpretations speculated 
. that the new arrangement was a precursor to a considerable increase in the 
quantity and quality of SovJet arms aid to North Viet-Nam. 
r hoped that 
this '\oras not the case because escalation on their side could only add to 
the pressures foJ;' further escalation on our side. 
He replied ' that in fact 
pressures on therJ. to increase their aid result-=d from our escalation. 
He 
knew that Moscow wanted to avoid any direct conflict with us in Viet-Nam 
and ,vas sure that care -would be exercised. 
On the other hand, he could 
not say categorically the Vietnamese were not even now asking for new 
quantities and forms of arms and that Moscow did not feei. under considerable 
pressure to provide them . 
. ' . I was sure the Pres.ident '.. . . did not want war to spread 
or any direct conflict to develop, 
However, he certainly could not feel 
TOP SECRET - NODrS 
13 \ 
! !' 
L 
r' 
! 
r 
I 
, 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODrs 
himself bound to any previous restraints so long as all his attempt t oo 
find a way to reduce the intensity of the battle or bring it to a peaceful 
conclusion had been rejected. 
(Initialed by Kohler) 
April 13, 1967 
MOSCOW 4378 (to SecState), TS/Nodis, Sent 1300, 13 Apr; Rec'd 1713, 13 Apr. 
Ref: 
State 172325 
, 
1. 
I met with Gromyko ten a.m. today and made presentation along 
lines ref tel. 
2~ Gromyko said Sovs "of. course" could not assume role of inter-
mediary between US and DRV and NLFSV, for reasons explained to US Govt on 
number of occasions. 
US should address itself to Vietnamese . re any matter 
it may wish discuss •.•. 
3 .... , Gromyko continued, there are ways of establishing US-DRY 
contact, and first prerequisite for this is unconditional cessation of 
bombings .•.. 
. 
' . 
. 6. 
I pointed out that we' prepared have . military actions and bombings 
as priority item for discussion with DRV, and that we also prepared have 
de-escalation even without any agreement. 
Yet whenever we had suspended 
bombings in part, other side had sought to use pause to increase its strength 
in south. 
All we want is assurance--not necessarily public--that this ",ould 
not.happen again. 
7. 
Gromyko pointed out. 
. US had begl~~ contact with DRV in 
Warsaw and elsewhere, but they had been stopped by US actions. 
THOMPSON 
!1:eril 20, 1967 
The exchange of views with BrOlm and his approaching visit to Moscow 
prompted Thompson to express his views on our negotiation posture (MoSCOl-T' s 
4491). 
He suggested that we ShQlcld consider whether in present circumstances 
99 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. TOP SECRET 
NODIS 
our continuing campaign of peace moves really serves to further the 
possibility of peace negotiations. 
He doubted that further initiatives, 
insofar as US public opiDion is concerned, could be helpful. 
Insofar as 
the Soviets are concerned, initiatives that haye little chance of success 
are positively harmful, particularly if we are trying to involve them. 
In respect to the DRV and NLF our continued peace moves must be counter-
productive by suggesting to them that we will not stay the course. 
On the 
other hand, Thompson did not think an escalation of bombing was the answer 
to the problem. 
He suggested that consideration be given to a Presidential 
statement listing all our recent moves combined with a resolute declaration 
that, . while we will always be prepared to move to the conference table, 
~ve 
have no course open to us but to step up our operations in SVN and to con-
tinue to use our bombers to hold dOvlD infiltration from the north. 
Against 
this background, Thompson suggested that Brovm should convey to the Soviets 
a sense of our determination to see this affair through rather than making 
peace noises when he visits Moscow. 
April 25, 1967 
MOSCOW 1~590 (to SecState), S/Nodis, Sent 1030, 25 Aprj Recld 1218, 25 Apr. 
2. 
Dobrynin remarked that he had known that his government felt 
strongly about Vietnam but had not realized how strongly until his consul-
tations here. 
THOMPSON 
BONN 12782 (to Secstate), S/Nodis, Sent 2123, 25 Aprj Recld 2259, 25 Apr. 
For the Acting Secretary from the Secretary 
Referring to the last sentence of Moscow I s 4590, you might wish to 
prepare a telegram for Thompson, asking him to have a further talk with 
Dobrynin to clarify the elementary situation on Viet-Nam. 
If the Soviet 
Union is concerned about the fact that a fellow Socialist country is 
being bombed by the US, there is no quarrel betl-leen Washington and MOSCOTtl 
on that point. 
This bombing could be stopped irrLmediately, as far as we 
are concerned. 
If, however, the Soviets are determined to support North 
Viet- Nam in a seizure of South Viet-Nam by force, we have a major issue 
with the Soviet Union. 
As lie see it, the Soviet Union does not have 
sufficient influence in Hanoi to cause Hanoi to take the steps vrhich would 
result in a complete cessation of US bombing of North Viet-Nam. 
Perhaps 
we should try to break through this fundamental policy point with the 
Soviets so that at least we and they can fully understand exactly where we 
are. 
McGHEE 
100 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
133 
r' 
I t .• 
r 
L 
I 
L 
May 15,1967 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
STATE 194946 (to Amembassy London), TS/Nodis, Sent 0200, 16 May. 
For the Ambassador from the Secretary 
Please pass the following message· from me to Foreign Secretary Brown. 
1. 
QUOTE. 
Dear George: 
We welcome your trip to Moscow and wish 
you well. 
I would like to pass along some views and a suggestion or two 
which might be of some use. • 
5. 
There is one central point which, if clearly accepted by the USSR, 
could move us a long way toward peace. 
We are prepared to recognize the 
interest of the Soviet Union in the safety of a Communist regime in North 
Viet-Nam. 
They must recognize our interest, confirmed by treaty, in the 
safety of South Viet-Nam and the ability of the South Vietnamese to have 
their OIm government. 
Surely, if we and the Soviets recognize each other's 
important interests here, we ought to find a way to pull North and South 
Viet-Nam apart militarily. 
6. 
We recognize that our· military actions against North Viet-Nam 
present many problems for the Soviet Government. 
We are prepared to cease 
such military actions at any time, but cannot do so without some serious 
military response on the part of the North Vietnamese . 
7. 
Perhaps you could press the Soviets as to what Hanoi's. reaction 
would be under any.of the following alternatives: 
(a) A combination of our stopping the bombing of North Viet-Nam, 
their stopping their i nfiltration and our stopping augmentation of forces. 
If the Russians have any variant or counterproposal on this formula, we 
would be glad to take a look at it.· 
(b) Pulling apart our opposing forces at the DMZ. 
This would 
be following up on our offer of April 19 which has been rej ected, but ,{hi.ch 
might l ead to some countersuggestion on the Russian side. 
(c) A partial suspension of bombing such as the 4-month stand-
dmTn in over 300 square miles around the center of Hanoi in exchange for 
some serious gesture of de-escalation in the South. 
We were disappointed 
that Hanoi showed no interest in this act of restraint, and no reciprocity, 
because we are ~repared to use this device on an expanding scale as a means 
of de- escalation. 
8. 
On the mil.itary side, we just cannot accept a permanent uncondi-
tional cessation of bombing in the North while they continue unabated 
ylith their armed a·ssaul.t on the South. 
'I'he large North Vietnamese forces 
101 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
l _ 
\ 
r 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
in and on both sides of the DMZ are at this moment heavily engaging our 
Marines in the border provinces of South Viet-Nam. 
They are firing 
artillery from well across the Seventeenth Parallel. 
We expect a major 
attack in the Central Highlands from forces now in refuge in Cambodia. 
9. 
Another issue that may well arise in your conversations is the 
matter of Laos •••• I have long felt that reconvening the 1962 Laos 
Conference might offer some opportunities for dealing with the problem 
of South Viet-Nam as well as Laos • . 
12 . 
• • Good Luck. 
Dean UNQUOTE 
RUSK (Drafted by C. L. Cooper) 
May 17, 1967 
STATE 196078 (to Amf'..mba.ssy London), TS/Nodis, Sent 2053, 17 May. 
Info: 
Amembassy Moscow 
Following message from Foreign Secretary Brown received by Secretary 
Rusk today transmitted for your infonnation: 
QTE 
My Dear Dean) 
In my judgment your alternative (b) - separation at the DMZ - is not 
a starter and I cannot at present see what sort Qfopportunity there might 
be to put it. Moreover, as it has already been r ejected, I doubt very 
strongly ,,,"hether the . Russians would want to use lt as a basls for any 
counter-suggestion . 
We may get to this sort of situation in the end, but 
not I believe at the present. 
This leaves me with (a) and (c). 
On both of these I really need to 
know your position in greater depth before I start talking to people in 
Moscmr. 
Your (a) is of course a compound of the el ements in the package which 
has had various shapes in the last six months. 
If your thinking is that 
all the elements must now be run together, I would judge that this shape 
of package will have absolutely no attraction for the Russians and that 
I would serve you ill by exposing i t in Moscow. 
But would I be right in 
r eading from the second sentence of your (a) that if the Russians were to 
revert to the original package which I put to Gromyko at your suggestion 
in November, then you "\{Quld stj.ll be in the market vrith it? .... If this 
is the case, I would certainly try hard to put it into a Russian mouth. 
102 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
On your (c) - partial suspension of bombing - I really need to know 
more. 
First, how would you envisage this developing in terms of a pro-
gressive expansion from the Hanoi area? Secondly, what sort of serious 
de-escalation in the south could you visualize at each stage? Also, 
what about Haiphong 'vhile H is still outside the expanding area? 
The 
North Vietnamese now seem to be as sensitive about this place as Hanoi 
itself. 
Yours, George, May 16, 1967 UNQTE 
RUSK (Drafted by B. H. Read) 
May 18, 1967 
STATE 196827 (to Aroembassy London), TS/Nodis, Sent 1614, 18 May. 
Info: 
Aruembassy Moscow 
Please deliver f'ollmving message from Secretary Rusk to Forei gn 
Secretary Brown: 
QUOTE: 
Dear George : 
I find it difficult to reply preci sely to the questions put in your 
message of May 16. 
\-.1'b.at 've really need is some indication that Hanoi is 
prepared to talk business . 
• no one has been able to tell us of any military move which 
North Viet-Nam is prepared to make if we take steps on your side to de-
escalate. . . • 
Is it not r eally better for you, with a briefcase full of interesting 
proposals on our side) to expl ore the situat i on witq the Sovi ets to find 
out i f there are any points a.nywhere on -which some 
pmgress might be made ? 
This you can do on your mm responsibility as Co-Chai rman . . 
I hope I do not appear to be unresponsive but I rather f eel that 
until we get some word from the North Vietnamese He are talking in a 
vacuum - a vacuum created by Hanoi. 
With warmest regards ) Sincerely) Dean . 
UNQUOTE. 
RUSK (Drafted by D. Rusk ) 
103 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
Ie 
, ' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. TOP SECRET - NODIS 
September 18, 1967 
"Chronology of Viet Peace Efforts," by Chalmers M. Roberts, The Washington 
Post, 18 September 1967. 
The record indicates that the Ashmore-Baggs peace ef fort ran afoul of 
a change in American policy whi ch occurred at the moment they were involved 
in Vietnam diplomacy. 
This is the record, as far as it is now known, of the pertinent events: 
December 4, 1966 - Poland reported to the United States that North 
Vietnam 'Has prepared to send a man to Warsaw to meet an American r epre-
sentative and to do so without demanding as a pre-condition an end to the 
American bombing of the North. 
American officials subsequently contended that independent checks 
showed this to be a Polish view, not that of North Vietnam . 
December 13 -1!~, 1966 - American planes raid near Hanoi. 
Poland later 
privately blamed the raids for ending chances for a meeting. 
After the 
raids Hanoi began to stress the demand t hat bombing must cease unconditionally 
before there could be talks. 
December 26 -
Janu~ry 6, 1967 - Harrison Salisbury of the New York 
Tirrles created a furor over dispatches from Hanoi pictu~'ing civilian destruc-
tion from the American raids. 
Officials here said,Hanoi had l et Salisbury 
in as part of a campaign to force an ~ld to t he bombing. 
Ash~ore and Baggs 
arrived in Hanoi the day Salisbury l eft . 
January 12, 196
r
( 
-
Ash~ore and Baggs met Ho Chi Minh who stressed an 
end to the bombing Ashmore now .Trites that "we had not brought back" from 
this intervi ew "any hard proposal" from Ho "beyond the reiteration of his 
unqualified commitment to enter into negotiations" if the U.S. halted the 
bombing . 
Ashmore r eported to State Department officials that he and Baggs felt 
that "Ho seemed prepared to cons ider a speciflc proposal based on a formula 
of mutual de-escalation" of the fight.ing . 
Early J anuary to earJ.y February-- The United States secretly sent four 
memoranda to Hanoi describing, officials say, possible methods of deescala-
tion . 
These me~sag e s , yet to be made public were handed by an American 
embassy official in MoscO\{ to a North Vietnarllp.se representative. 
January 27, 1967 - Hanoi's man in Moscow gave a reply to the American 
official. Later the State Department described the reply as "a diatribe 
against the United States." 
104 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
January 28, 1967 - North Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Duy Trinh 
in an interview with Australian Communist journalist Wilfred Burchett said 
that "it is only after the unconditional cessation of U.S. boinbing and all 
other acts of war against the DRV (North Vietnam) that there could be talks 
between the DRV and the U.S." 
February 2, 1967 - President Johnson prepared a letter to Ho in which 
he took up the Burchett interview points. 
Mr. Johnson said he would "order 
a cessation of bombing" and also halt "further augmentation of U.S. forces in 
South Vietnam as soon as I am assured that infiltration into South Vietnam 
by land and sea has stopped.
1I 
These "acts of restraint," he said, "would 
make possible serious private discussions." This letter, however, was not 
turned over to Hanoi's man in Moscow until Feb. 8 and the delay has never 
been explained. 
February 4, 1967 - Ashmore and Baggs met at the State Department with 
Undersecretary Nicholas deB. Katzenbach and other top officials but not 
including Secretary Dean Rusk. 
A letter from Ashmore to Ho was drafted with Assistant Secretary 
William P. Bundy, whose area includes Vietnam, as the chief department 
draftsman. 
The key sentence in the letter stated' that "senior officj_als" at 
State "expressed opinion that some reciprocal restraint" was necessary 
along with a halt to the bombing and an end to the influx of American 
troops if talks were to take place. 
February 5, 1967 - The draft l etter was .delivered to Ashmore at 
Fulbright's house. 
Ashmore mailed it that afternoon. 
The letter did not 
specify the "reCiprocal restraint" although the President: s letter of 
three days earlier had specified an end to North Vietnamese infiltration 
into the South. 
In additj_on, on the day (Feb .2) the Adm:Lnistration said the Presidential 
letter was drafted, Mr. Johnson told a press conference that "just almost 
any step" would be a suitable response from Hanoi. 
He also had said that 
"we would be glad to explore any reciprocal action." Sometime between 
Feb. 2 and 9 the official American terms were hardened. 
February 8, 1967 - Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygih, who was in London 
Feb. 6-12, said at a press conference that the Trinh interview with Burchett 
"boils down" to saying that if the U.S. unconditionally stopped the 
bombing, "'chen i ' !~ would be pOSSible" to open t alks. 
Kosygin thus publicly 
changed Trinh's crucial word "COUld" into "would." 
He was never contra-
dicted by Hanoi on this. 
Furthermore, Kosygin passed the "rord to "Vlashington, 
which had inquired as to when talks would begin, that they could start in 
three or four weeks. 
105 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
/ . 
r' 
I 
l 
.' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
February 9, 1967 - Secretary Rusk at a press conference which had 
been announced by the W'nite House, sai d that "for some time now there has 
been evident a systematic campaign by the Communist side to bring about 
an unconditional and permanent cessation of the bombing of North Vietnam 
without any corresponding military action on their side) in .exchange for 
the possibility of talks -- talks which are thus far formless and without 
content ." 
Rusk also distinguished between a "pause in the bombj_ng' (her e he seemed 
to indicate he would agree to a pause i n exchange for talkS) and a "permanent 
cessation ." 
For the l atter to take place) he said) "we must know the mili-
tary consequences." 
The U.S., he said) cannot stop the bombing without 
reciprocity for that would be "closing off one-half of the war while the 
rest of it goes on full forc e ." 
In short) Rusk was surfacing the centr al point of the President' s l etter 
to Ro) the contents of which were not made public until Hanoi broadcast it 
March 21. 
February. 10) 1967 -
Ho sai d he received the Johnson l etter on this 
day. 
Ashmore assumes it arrived before his own letter with the l ess specific 
r equest on the point of r eciprocity. 
During this period, February 8-14, tl:tere was a pause in the bombing 
over the Tet holiday in Vietnam) including a Presidentially ordered short 
extension. 
February 13) J-967 - Ho in a l etter to Pope Paul VI assailed the U.S. 
He coupled an unconditional end to the bombing with the withdrawal of 
American forces and the recogntion of the National Liberati on Front) the 
political arm of the Vietcong. 
In Washington thi s was taken as a reply 
to the President .
. Resumpt ion of the bombing was ordered. 
February 15) 1967 - Ho r eplied to the President in words similar 
to the Pope. 
"A l ittle l ater)" yTrites Ashmore, he and Baggs received a 
r eply to the Ashmore l etter saying there did not seem to be any point to 
their making a second visit to Hanoi. 
September 18, 1967 
"Text of State Department Comment on Peace Feeler) II The Ne.:::. York Times) 
Sept . 18) 1967. 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 18 - Following is the text of a statement issued by 
the State Department today regarding a report that President Johnson had 
undermined a peace approach to North Vietnam: 
vIe have had a numb er of i nquiries concerning news stori es published 
today, based on an article by Mr . Harry Ashmore in a publication of the 
Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions (C.S.D.I.). 
106 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
The facts concerning the department's contacts with Messrs. Ashmore 
and Baggs [William C. Baggs) editor of The Miami News7 are as follows: 
(1) 
During the summer of 1966) Mr. William Baggs told the department 
that C.S.D.1. .TaS planning a major conference in May of 1967 in Geneva) . to 
follOYT up on the first Pacem in Terris meet ing' held in Ne.T York in February 
of 1965. Mr. Baggs disclosed to us efforts that the center was making to 
invite North Vietnam to attend) and the department responded sympathetically 
to the idea of the conference and to these efforts. 
These initial contacts 
were with Mr. George Ball and Mr. William Bundy. 
The President and Secretary 
Rusk ,v-ere informed) and Mr. Ball was ekted to handle contacts with Mr. Baggs 
on behalf of the United States Government . 
(2) 
In mid-November and again in early December) Mr. Baggs was joined 
by Mr. Ashmore in calls at the department. 
In these calls) the progress 
of the conference plans was reviewed) and the two visitors indicated that they 
had a tentative invitation to go to Hanoi) with Mr. Luis Quintanilla of 
Mexico. 
Messrs. Baggs and Ashmore also suggested that) if they were able to 
conduct useful explorations of North Vietnamese views wards peace (sic). 
Mr. George Ball having then left the department) the primary responsibility 
for these conversations passed to his successor) Mr. Katzenbach) who kept 
the President and the Secretary of State informed as a matter of course. 
In these conversations) department representatives accepted the 
Baggs-Ashmore suggestions and undertook to cooperate fully. 
Accordingly) 
the position of the United States Government on key issues relating to 
peace was discussed at some length) so that Baggs and Ashmore couJ_d repre-
sent it accurately in Hanoi. 
(3) 
On Dec. 23) Baggs visited the department just .prior to the 
departure of the three-man group on Dec . 28. 
At that meeting) the basic 
understanding of the United States Government position was reaffirmed) and 
it was further agreed that Baggs and Ashmore would repoI~ confidentially 
what they were able to pick up in Hanoi. 
(4) Messrs. Baggs and Ashmore visited Hanoi from Jan. 6 to Jan. 14. 
They then returned to the U.S. and on Jan. 18 dictated for the department 
a full and confiden- ticular (sic) a conversation .Tith President Ho on 
Jan. 12. 
In this conversation) Ho had insisted that there could be no 
talks between the U.S. and Hanoi unless t he bombing were stopped) and 
unless also the U.S. stopped all reinforcements during the period of the 
talks. 
Ho was reported to be adamant against any reciprocal military 
restraint by North Vietnam. 
The record does not show that he solicited any 
U.S. Government r esponse to these r emarJ.<;.s . 
(5) 
Concurrently) prior to Jan. 18 on U.S. initiative and .Tithout any 
connection to the Baggs-Ashmore actions) U.S. Government representatives 
had established a direct channel for communication with North Vietnamese 
representatives in Moscmv. 
With the apparent agreement of both sides) 
107 
TOP SECRET - NODIS 
Ir 
I 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
this channel was being kept wholly confidential, and was therefore not 
revealed to Messrs. Baggs and Ashmore in their discussions at the depart-
ment. 
It is, of course, fundamental to the U.S. Government dealings with 
Messrs. Baggs and Ashmore that there exist ed at the time this direct and 
secret channel. 
Exchanges through this direct channel continued through 
January and early February and culminated in President Johnson 's l etter to 
President Ho of Feb. 8 (mistakenly stated by Mr. Ashmore as Feb . 2). 
As 
has been stated by r epr esentatives of the department, a wide variety of 
proposals was put before Hanoi in these Moscow contacts, without at any 
time producing any useful r esponse . 
(6) 
Toward the end of January, Messrs. Baggs and Ashmore returned to 
Washington and expressed to the department the strong hope that they 
could be given a message for transmission to Hanoi. 
The department decided 
that, while the direC.t channel in Moscmf was crucial and must at all costs 
be preserved, it vTOuld be useful to send a more general message through 
Messrs. Baggs and Ashmore, which would be consi stent with the important 
messages bei ng exchanged in Moscow . 
In view of this channel (of which 
Baggs-AsllJllore were Unal-Tare) there was some question as t o the further utility 
of detailed infoTWBl communi cations . 
It seemed clear fr om the account given by Messrs . Baggs and AsILTilore 
that their charJl.el of communication had been established with the primary 
purpose of exchanges concerning North Vietnamese attendance at the May 
conference . 
Nevertheless, Baggs and Ashmore said they could send any 
messages for Hanoi through the regular mail to a North Vietnamese repre-
sentative in Pnompehh, who in turn would relay it to a North Vietnamese 
official who had been the principal contact of Messrs . Baggs and Ashmore 
in Hanoi. 
Accordingly, the l etter now published by Mr . Ashmore worked 
out with the representatives of the depar tment , and authorized to be 
sent on Feb. 5. 
He were subsequently informed by Mr . Ashmore that this l etter 
reached Pnompenh on Feb. 15. 
(7) 
No use:ful purpose could be served by giving further details on 
what took place in the Moscm'T channel . 
We can say, however, that on Feb . 7, 
while that channel was still open and in operation, separate discussions 
. were initiated in London between Prime Minister Hilson and Premier Kosygin 
of the U.S.S.R. 
The combined reading of the Moscow channel and of these discussions 
l ed to the dispRtch on Feb. 8 of President Johnson's l etter to President Ho. 
This l etter was of course published unilaterally by Hanoi on March 21, and 
is a matt er of public record . 
It rested on, and ioTas of course read by Hanoi. 
in r elation to) the various proposal s that had been conveyed in the Moscow 
channel. There was no change of basic position whatever between Feb. 3 and 
Feb . 8, but President Johnson's letter did include a specific action pro-
posal that speaks for itself, as does the t one of his communication. 
lOS 
TOP SECRET -
NODIS 
! 
\ 
(If{ 
L ~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
NODIS 
(8) 
As already noted, Hanoi had not responded in any useful way to 
the variety of suggestions conveyed in the Moscow channel. 
Its sole and 
apparently final response was reflected on Feb. 13, in a letter by President 
Ho to P9pe Paul VI. 
This letter, in the words of one press account today, 
"coupled an uncOliditional end to the bombing with the withdrawal of American 
forces and the recognition of the National Liberation Front." 
On Feb. 15, 
President Ho replied formally to the President in similar terms. 
At the 
same time, Hanoi broke off the Moscow channel. 
(9) 
Hanoi's attitude remained negative throughout. 
The Baggs-Ashmore 
efforts were necessarily handled by the department with an eye to the direct 
and then-confidential channel that existed concurrently to Hanoi. 
The 
latter appeared to be by far the more reliable and secure method of ascer-
taining HanOi's views. 
(10) 
Finally, we note with regret that Mr. Ashmore is apparently 
ignorant of the subsequently published reports of the Moscow contacts, and 
of their confirmation by department representatives. 
We noted with still 
greater regret that at no time since has he consulted with the department in 
order to attempt to understand the interrelationship that necessarily obtained 
between the Moscow' channel and his own efforts . 
As this case shows, the 
Administration has been prepared at all times to cooperate with private 
individuals who may be in contact with Hanoi in any way, and who are prepared 
to act responsibly and discreetly . 
This policy continues, although it 
seems clear that the present disclosure \vill not reassure Hanoi that such 
private contacts will be kept secret. 
109 
T OF SECRET -
NOD IS 
