Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

spectacular bombing attack upon a significant target in the DRV outside
of the framework of ROLLING THUNDER. 109/ The plea, however, did not
fall on responsive ears. At this point, the President preferred to

. maneuver quietly to hely the nation get used to living with the Vietnam
crisis. He played down any drama intrinsic in Taylor's arrival by hav-
ing him attend briefings at the Pentagon and the State Department before .
_ calling at the White House; and he let it be known that the U.S. had no
intention of conducting any further specific reprisal raids against North
Vietnam in reply to the bombing of the embassy. Instead, he confined
himself to a public statement:

_ fhe terrorist outrage aimed at the American Embassy in
Saigon shows us once again whet the struggle in Viet-Nam is
about. This wanton act of ruthlessness has brought death
and serious injury to innocent Vietnamese citizens in the
street as well as to American and Vietnamese personnel on
duty." He added that the Embassy was "already back in
business," and that he would "at once request the Congress
for authority and funds for the immediate construction of
a@ new chancery.

After his first meeting with Taylor and other officials on March 31,
the President responded to press inquiries concerning dramatic new
developments by saying, "I know of no far-reaching strategy that is being
suggested or promulgated.” 4

But the President was being less than candid. The proposals that
were at that moment being promulgated, and on which he reached signifi-
eant decisions the following day, did involve a far-reaching strategy
change: acceptance of the concept of U.S, troops engaged in offensive
ground operations against Asian insurgents. This issue greatly over-
shadowed all other Vietnam questions then being reconsidered.

D. NSAM 328 -- Issues Posed and Decisions Made

The underlying question that was being posed for the President
at this time was well formulated by Assistant Defense Secretary John
McNaughton in a draft memorandum of March 24, entitled "Plan of Action
for South Vietnam." The key question, McNaughton thought, was:

Can the situation inside SVN be bottomed out (a) without

extreme measures against the DRV and/or (b) without deploy-

ment of large numbers of US (and other) combat troops inside

SVN?" And the answer, he believed, was “perhaps -- but

probably no. :

To get closer to an answer, McNaughton began by restating U.S. ob-
jectives in Vietnam, and by attempting to weigh these objectives by
their relative importance:

85 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
