Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Option A with resvect to the confidence and willingness to stand firm of
the nations in the next line of defense in Asia." 9h/

The reactions to "C" expected by the Working Group differed
from "B" primarily as a result of the U.S. negotiating posture. The
initial strikes acainst targets in North Vietnem were seen as a "first
break-point ," marking the beginning of major international pressures for
negotiation. Communist reactions to the early pressures were regarded
as little different fron "B." Some chance of a military response was
conceded, but it was thought more likely that the DRV would “hold firm
while stimulating condemnation of [the United States/ by world opinion,
end, if in negotiations, take a tough yosition." Under "C, however,
Our response would not hecessarily be an immediate increase in pressure.
If the GVN situation haa improved "we would try to capitalize on fit] n
«by pressing harder for acceptance of our initial negotiating position.
Barring success, the pressures would continue, end the Working Group
recognized that the likely dragging out of the wer at this point would
probably lead to a reswuption of deteriorating trends in South Vietnen.
It stated; "In this case, we would have to decide whether to intensify
our military actions, modify our negotiating positions or both. if
U.S. military measures were increased at this point it was expected thet
"there would be a progressively increasing chance of major Communist
military response," such ag those considered under "B," TF the U.S.
negotiating position were modified at this point, the group perceived
a "major problem, in that key nations on both sides would suspect that
we were getting ready for a way out." Therefore, it suggested that ‘
additional military actions, possibly including greater deployments to
Southeast Asia, would need to accompeny the modifying moves. 95/

The major disadvantages of Option ¢ acknowledged by the Working
Group was its tendency to "stretch-oub" the confrontation and expose
the United States to an increasing variety of pressures end criticism.
For exemple, the group acknowledged that GVN morale and effectiveness
were likely to suffer et several points in the course of the options:
(1) upon initial U.S. agreement to enter negotiations; (2) as it became
clear that the war was Grageing on; end (3) with modification of the
U.S. negotiating position, Tt also recognized several measures that
the Communists Misht teke during a prolonged, indecisive period to
reduce ow initial advantage: (1) improving air defenses in North
Vietnam; (2) deploying Chinese ground forces southward; and (3) hard-
ening their pPropagende. While increasing the enemy's public commitment
to its current line of policy, these measures would not serve as clear
acts of escalation, 96/

These difficulties and other uncertainties encompassed by
Option C illustrate the intensity with which most members of the NSC
Working Group wanted the United States to couple limited military con-
mitments with a negotiated settlement to relieve our position in Vietnam.
The fact that the group judged "CG" as preferable to "A" or "B," despite
its rather obvious inherent problems makes this evident. (One night also

30% TOP SECRET - Sensitive
