Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

$51G.00/S-246 : Telexram
The Ambassador in France (Cajfery) to the Secretary of State

Panis, Angust 2, 1946—6 p- in.
[Received $: 16 p.in.]

3801. Viet Nam delegation at Fontainebleau conference yesterday
broke off negotiations on ground that French have violated March 6
accord by convoking new conference at Dalat. Head of delegation
alleeed that French intend to use new Dalat conference (to which
Viet Nam was not invited) to engineer their own statute for Tndo-
Chinese federation and fo fix future of Cochin China and other areas
claimed by Viet Nam. He added that Fontainebleau conference is
not terminated but only suspended until French clear up this “equivo-
eal” situation. Delezation will remain at Fontaineblean for time
being and ts prepared to maintain contact with French delegates on’
unoflicial basis.

This decision has been received by press as a kind of bomb shell.
although reports had been eurrent that conference was entering a_
evitical stage and that he [7/70]. Chi Minh, would depart soon for
Indo-China. Press reaction has followed expected lines with left-
wing orsans justifying decision while right-wing and radical papers
accuse Viet Nam of blackmail and insist that Frence has perfect right
to consult other peoples of Indochina in parallel Dalat conference.

Radical -Lvore demands that France shall not “abdicate” in Indo-
china and adopts Epoque line in charging that “other imperialisms”
are utilizing Viet Nam for own purposes.

Monde insists that France is playing role of impartial arbiter and
must not retreat before ultimatum. Jfonde also takes off gloves with
respect to Ho Chi Minh, recalling that he was friend of Doriot and
that in 1945 he publicly expressed determination to “break off all re-
lations with French people”.

CONFIDES TIAL

CONFIDENTTAT,

Among defenders of Viet Nam Communist Zieneanité is most out-
spoken. Independent's Combut continues to stress “the flagrant dis-
sonance™ between Freneh statements in Paris and French policy in
Indochina which has recently amounted to a “provocation”, Combat
expects serious repercussions in Indochina.

Caught in the middle, both Socialists and MRP are embarrassed
and worried. Populaire blames Admiral d’Argenlien for unjusti-
fiable policy which must be repudiated by French Government.
L’Aube, on other hand, takes aggrieved [stand?] and insists Dalat
conference is entirely proper under March 6 accord.

Bandet, one of Foreign Office delegates at Fontainebleau, admits
siftation is serious but believes conference will resume in a weelk or
10 days. He insists new Dalat conference is only exploratory and
consultative. Bandet once again indicated French officials are not
particularly anxious to speed up work of Fontainebleau conference
and are quite willing for relations with Viet Nam to continue tnder
present agreement until the pacification of Tndoelina and particularly
Cochin China is completed. Me added that security situation in
Cochin China is more serious than French public is aware.

Sent Dept as 3501; Dept please repeat to Saigon; repeated London

Carrery

7h
