Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

COMUSMACV must identify weak RVNAF units. III Corps
need special study and preparation of revised contingency
plans. Priority on remanning, re-equipping and retraining
must be given to the RVMAF elite units (VNMC) which con-
stitute the general reserve. COMUSMACV must plan for the
use of this reserve and earmarked US units to defect VC
attack of week RVNAF units during the interim period.

RVNAF modernization should take precedence over equip-
ping all US forces except those deploying to the combat
zone. The remaining 82,000 M16 rifles must be delivered
ASAP. It is also in the US interest to equip the RF/PF
with Ml6s before equipping the US training base, which is
already programmed.

lastly, COMUSMACV must make decisions about what
missions RVNAF need not accomplish now. RVNAF is stretched
too thin given its past and expected missions. It alone
cannot protect the cities and hold the countryside where
it is still deployed. Decision is needed to permit the
build-up of weak units and better integrated use of US
and RVNAF against whatever enemy scenario develops, 38/

The paper entitled "Alternate Strategies" painted a bleak picture of
American failure in Vietnam:

We lost our offensive stance because we never achieved
the momentum essential for military victory. Search and
Destroy operations can't build this kind of momentum and
the RVNAF was not pushed hard enough. We became mesmerized
by statistics of known doubtful validity, choosing to place
our faith only in the ones that showed progress. We judged
the enemy's intentions rather than his capabilities because
we trusted captured documents too much. We were not alert
to the perils of time lag and spoofing. In short, our set-
backs were due to wishful thinking compounded by a massive
intelligence collection and/or evaluation failure.

Tndeed,. in examining U.S. objectives in SVN, the picture of failure was
manifest:

Since the original commitment of large US forces in 1965,
our stated objectives have been to:

(1) Make it as difficult and costly as possible for
NVM to continue effective support of the VC and cause NVN to

cease its direction of the VC insurgency.

(While we have raised the price to NVN of aggression and

27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
