Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.-ethe war in South Vietnam will be won
primarily through the South Vietnamese efforts;
it is a South Vietnamese war. It is a war of

' the counter guerrillas as against the guerrillas.
We are only assisting them through training and
logistical support.

We started the major program of assistance
in training and logistical support toward the
latter part of 1961. I think it is reasonable
to expect that after four years of such training
we should be able gradually to withdraw certain
of our training personnel.

Following this, Representative Stratton addressed an inquiry to the
Secretary:

Mr. Secretary, I am a little bit worried
about your statement in answer to Mr. Chamberlain,
that you still contemplate continuing withdrawal
of our forces from Vietnam, in line with your
previously announced plan. Isn't this a little
unrealistic, in view of the fact that when you
first made the announcement things were going 4
bit better than they appear to be going at the
Moment? And wouldn't you say that in the event
that things do not go as well as you hope they
will, that unquestionably we can't continue to
withdraw any more of our forces?

Secretary McNamara's reply:

No Sir, I would not. I don't believe that
we as a nation should assume the primary responsi-
bility for the war in South Vietnam. It is a
counter-guerrilla war, it is a war that can only
be won by the Vietnamese themselves. Our respon-
sibility is not to substitute ourselves for the
Vietnamese, but to train them to carry on the
operations that they themselves are capable of.

The theme was next picked up by Representative Kohelan. He said that
"One of the things that some of us are quite concerned about is this
constant tendency toward a sanguine approach to the problem of Southeast
Asia," He went on to recall that when he and other committee members
had been out to South Vietnam in November of 1962, when General Harkins
was saying the war would be won in 2 years and Admiral Felt said it
would be won in 3 years -- although Halberstam and other newsmen were
pessimistic at that time and now seemed, to Representative Kohelan, to
have been right.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

26
