Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

Bye Political.. Some political progress has
been made in Vietnam during the past year.
Premier Tam’s administration has enlisted
the cooperation of the strongly nationalist
Dai Viet leader Nguyen Huu Tri, and nation-
alist concern over Tam’s francophilia has to
some extent dissipated. Tam has also added
.to the political vitality. of Vietnam by holding
local elections in secure areas of. Vietnam.
Another Vietnamese program, undertaken
with US economic assistance, which involves
the relocation of scattered villages in the
deita into centralized and defensible sites may
be an important step toward the eventual

“pacification” of heavily infiltrated areas.”

The decisions of March 1953 to increase the
size of the Vietnamese National Army while
expanding the area of Vietnamese strategic
and operational responsibility, could also be
of major political significance.

18. Despite these advances, Vietnam still
acks the degree of political strength essential

_for the mobilization of the country’s resources.
Tam’s “action” program remains more shad-
‘ow than substance. Elected local councils
have no real power, promised land reform
and other social and economic reforms which
might generate popular support have not left
the planning stage, and the Vietnamese gov-
ernment is handicapped by incompetent cab-
inet ministers and the lack of competent
administrators. While Bao Dai refuses to
assume active direction of the affairs of state,
he remains hostile toward new leadership and
democratic activities.
19. Of more basic importance in the failure
of Vietnamese to rally to the Vietnamese gov-
ernment foliowing the French grant of inde-
pendence within the French Union in 1949
have been the following:

a: Many Vietnamese doubt the ability of
French Union forces to defeat the Viet Minh
and prefer to remain apart from the struggle.

b. The French Government has not dared
to promise complete national independence at
some future date, as demanded by the Viet-
namese, because of the fear that the French
national assembly would then refuse to sup-

. port a war in a “lost” portion of the French
Union.

c. The Vietnamese, despite many evolu-
tionary steps toward complete independence
since 1949, are generally inclined to believe
that the French intend to retain effective con-
trol over the affairs of Vietnam.

d. The nationalist appeal and military
prestige of the Viet Minh remains strong
among significant numbers of the Vietnamese. ?

20. In Cambodia, internal political strife has
weakened the government, dissident nation-
alist elements have continued to sap popular
loyalty to the throne, and the King is de-
manding greater independence from the
French in order to strengthen his political
position at home. Meanwhile, the 9,000 Viet
Minh combatants in Cambodia, while under
fairly constant attack by French and Cam-
bodian forces, are capable of exploiting dis-
orders which may develop.

21. Laotian stability has been upset by the
recent Viet Minh incursion. The Laotians
are generally hostile to the Viet Minh but are
unable to contribute a great deal to the de-
fense of their homeland. A small group of
pro-Communist Laotians returned to Laos
with the Viet Minh during the recent incur-
sion. It is led by a disaffected Laotian noble-
man, Prince Souphanouvong, and calls itself
the “Free Government of Pathet Lao” (Laos).

22. Meanwhile, the Viet Minh leadership, with
Chinese Communist material and advisory
assistance since 1949, has demonstrated the
necessary zeal, ruthlessness, and tenacity to
exploit to the maximum the limited resources
at their command. The Viet Minh have ex-
panded the area under their complete control
and their prestige has probably increased
throughout Indochina as a result of military
successes in northwest Tonkin and Laos.

23. In the areas of Viet Minh occupation,
Viet Minh control is believed to be effective,

. and minimum food requirements are being

met. Tne Viet Minh have taken on increas-
ingly the conventional characteristics of a
“Peoples Republic” and are now engaged in
programs to confiscate and redistribute land
and to eliminate “traitors” and “reaction- —
aries.” Although this departure from na-
tional front tactics has increased realization

SECRET

hS
