Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A second concept considered was salting ARVN forces with US leader-
ship in command positions. The analysis indicated that for political and
psychological reasons, it would probably be best to put two US officers
and three US NCO's in an instructor's role with each RF company rather
than in a command role. Command would be exercised by the RF company
commander but he would be required to follow the directions of the US .
training team leaders.

The conclusion reached was to continue the "salting" experiment with
expansion in view if the initial results were good. There is no evidence
that anything became of the experiment. 89/ bie tae h. PP

None of this seriously worried top RVNAF leadership; so they indulged
in more interesting international activities. [In May, talks started
between Lao and GYN military staffs./ The occasion was planning for
barrier extension westward, but Washington realized at once that there
was little the US could do to limit the contacts to that subject. 90/

(In July, it was discovered that GVN was using Chinat agents, disguised

so as to appear to be South Vietnamese with Nung ancestry, on covert
operations. JCS disapproved of the effort despite appeals from COMUSMACV.
The Chinats appeared to be the result of a secret bileteral agreement con-
cluded during 1966. 91/ In September, MACV reported that GVN had occupied
Pattle Islend in the Crescent Group about 170 miles south of Hainan with
the intention of constructing an airfield there. Because these islands are
already claimed by Communist and Nationalist Chinas and the Philippines as
well, MACV advised against US cooperation in the adventure. 92/']

15. The GVN Presidential Election

Pre-nomination maneuvering and legitimacy of the Presidential cam-
paign were the subjects which occupied American attention ebove all else.
The first task facing Ambassador Bunker es he arrived on station in April
was to oversee the delicate transition of GVN to a government based upon
a popular election recognized by the world to be fair.

Premier Ky was already openly acting like a Presidential candidate
in April. General Thieu was informed that the generals had endorsed Ky
while Thieu was absent from the scene recovering from an avpendectomy. 93/
That was not sufficient to scare Thieu from the race; so the US Mission
pecame increasingly worried that the Thieu-Ky competition threatened the
indispensable unity of the military. 94/ Dickering remained behind the
scenes until Ky formally announced his candidacy on May 12. 95/

sp TOP SECRET - Sensitive
