Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to replace the special mission personnel referred to above.
Implementation of the United States aid project for re-training

and re-equipping the Civil Guard has begun with the signing

of the ICA project agreement with the Vietnamese Government and

the despatch of ICA personnel to administer this project in

Saigon. In spite of substantial U.S. assistance, economic develop-
ment though progressing, is below that which is politically desirable."

c. Public Statements

Despite the increasingly pessimistic intelligence, however,
and despite the notations in NSC reports of formidable problems in Viet-
nam, the public statements of Administration spokesmen, through August
1959 presented a generally sanguine picture of U.S. programs there. For
example, in November, 1957, Ambassador Durbrow and General Williams
appeared before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Government
Operations and reported that Diem's government "had made remarkable
progress." However, they did report that "Communists and sect remnants
have regrouped and stepped up their terrorist activities in the past
several months, and the Communists are infiltrating down the sparsely
inhabited Meking Valley and are becoming fairly active, particularly
in the south. For this reason, /Dien/ still has to use considerable
number of his armed forces and a large number of his police force to
carry on pacification work. Because of the terrorist activities in the
fertile Delta area, the peasants, through fear or intimidation, cannot
till their fields properly and thus produce more rice and other exports....
The Ambassador stressed that Diem was aware of the problem -- indeed,
acutely aware -- but that he was impelled to defer all other considera-
tions to the creation of an environment of security. The Ambassador
quoted Diem as follows: "If we don't have assurances on the security
front, what good will it do to build up the economy only to have it
destroyed by Communist terrorists?" The Ambassador described Diem as
"a devoted, honest, hard-working, Nationalist with a fine understanding
of the internal political situation as well as the international political
picture, particularly in Asia; but in consideration of his preoccupation
of /security/ he moves slowly in these fields...-"

In March 1958 Admiral Felix B. Stump, USN, Commander in Chief,
Pacific, appeared before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations to
testify for the Mutual Security Act of 1958. Admiral Stump invited
one of his questioners on Vietnam to visit the country on the conviction
that “he would be astonished at the improvement that has taken place. It
has been beyond what would have been our wildest and most optimistic

* U.S. Congress, House, Foreign Aid Construction Projects, Committee on
Government Operations, 85th Congress, Second Session, (Washington:

GPO, 1958), 864-866.

32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
