Section 3.3
Declassified per Executive Order 13520,
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

- SECRET
jovemonts of partisons across the Syontior, art tha present Sismesc
fovermncans is mich less sympathetic tovards the large grcup of Vice
Binh rofugecs residing in »5ia>

55 WMalaya ~- With the outbreak of disorcors in Malaya last year
the Frone: foit that they could expect greater sympathy and cooperation
from the British authorities in Singapore, There have been a number of
Wisits back and forth of militery end civilian officials. The coneral
imoression is that tno French are mach more eager than the British.

G. iIrdoresia «= The French haye entre liy sympathized eee supported

tho Dutch in their difficulties in Indonesia. Tho recent polices action
has been enthusiastically approved, and the attitude of the United States
and Australia Sitreris attacked. There is ungoubtedly an undersurrent
of emvy and jealously o over the contrast between Dulch iwnilitary successes
and French faiiurcse

Yhe Vietnam poonie naturally sympathize wholehenrtcdly with
their Indoncsian fellow sufferers, anc the recent developments have
been given cs much prominence in the native press as censorship wouid

permit. The developments in the Sesurity Council have gonerally beon
grseted Wath disillubionment and a froaucnt venevion has beon that the
mistake of tho Indonesians was to pince tea much trust a the United

es]

G &
Nations an2 in the United States as the-leading momber of that orgeni-

zation. The H

Hew Delhi Confercuce created littie excite anaes ox enchusi-
astm, and the e¢trect Gt Com inist prop: pineatdlay WAS cacarly Wisiele I
certain articles denouncing ichru as a mombor of the impcrialist clan.
Disappointment ever the fact that Vietnam represcatatives were not
invitcd and that Infochina was not ciscussed was undoubtediy a factor

=
.
3
i

pry

ce
in the poor press reecived by the eerference.

7%. India - Tho considerable Indian minority, most of whom are
shop kecpors and money lenders, is tho most important factor in relotions
betvieen Indochine and India. The presence of a number of minor officials,
chiefly police, from Pondichery, also tenis to harm relations between
‘the Vietnamese ond Indians. Difficulties over the future of the French
territorics in India naturally gets much attontion in the French press.

t is not believed that an incependent Victnam will be enthusi-
estic about ac coapbing the leadership cf India in Southeast Asia. An
effort to play off tho Indian against the Chinese can be expected.

D. Comminism in. Indochine

en of the Comainisia in Indochina before and during
snined control of the iationalist movement is in-

BuUbhoDie,
pig ikea See

; = rece ree ess a oo PRES ae
at eal lavels iS Segre. norieo dst spuized anc active.

rane
oes BEL EAY
