Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

recovery from the damage sustained to date; (b) an
increase in movement capability; (c) a reduced require-
ment for total supplies in the pipeline; (a) a concen-
tration of air defenses into the Panhandle; and (e) a
release of personnel and equipment for increased efforts
in infiltration of South Vietnam. Also, it would relieve
the Hanoi leadership from experiencing at first hand the
pressures of recent air operations which foreign observers
have reported. Any possible political advantages gained
by confining our interdiction campaign to the Panhandle
would be offset decisively by allowing North Vietnam to
continue an unobstructed importation of war materiel.
Further, it is believed that such a drastic reduction in
the scale of air operations against North Vietnam could
only result in the strengthening of the enemy's resolve
to continue the war. We doubt the reduction in scope of
air operations would also be considered by many as a
weakening of US determination and a North Vietnamese
victory in the air war over northern North Vietnam. The
combination of reduced military pressures against North
Vietnam with stringent limitations of our operations in
South Vietnam, as suggested in Course B, appears even more
questionable conceptually. It would most likely strengthen
the enemy's ultimate hope of victory and lead to a re-
doubling of-his efforts. (See Part III, Appendix A, for
additional comments.)

Domestic Attitude and Predicted Reactions. The
DPM presents an assessment of US public attitude and
assumed reactions to several occurrences. [ts orienta-
tion is toward the risks involved in Course A. The
difficulty of making accurate judgments in the area of
public response is acknowledged, and the Joint Chiefs of
Staff concede that their appraisal is subject to the same
degree of uncertainty that is inherent in the DPM. Never-
theless, they are unable to find due cause for the degree
of pessimism expressed in the DPM. The Joint Chiefs of
Staff firmly believe that the American people, when well
informed about the issues at stake, expect their Govern-
ment to wphold its commitments. History illustrates that
they will, in turn, support their Government in its
necessary actions. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that
there is no significant sentiment for peace at any price.
They believe also that despite some predictable debate a
Reserve callup would be willingly accepted, and there would

176 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
