Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘a
i TOP SECRET - Sensitive

were similar, but there were important differences. They are set
forward here with deletions from the 7 December version in brackets,
and additions in the 24 January version underlined:

[Deployments of the kind we have recommended will
not guarantee success./ Our intelligence estimate is
that the present Communist policy is to continue to
prosecute the war vigorously in the South. They continue
to believe that the war will be a long one, that time is
their ally, and that their own staying power is superior
to ours. They recognize that the US reinforcements of 1965
signify a determination to avoid defeat, and that more US
troops can be expected. Even though the Communists will
continue to suffer heavily from GVN and US ground and air
action, we expect them, upon learning of any US intentions
to augment its forces, to boost their own commitment and
to test US capabilities and will to persevere at a higher
level of conflict and casualties (US killed-in-action with
the recommended deployments can be expected to reach 1000
a month).

If the US were willing to commit enough forces --
perhaps 600,000 men or more -- we could probably ultimately
prevent. the DRV/Vc from sustaining the conflict at a
significant level. When this point was reached, however,
the question of Chinese intervention would become critical.
(We are generally agreed that the Chinese Communists will
intervene with combat forces to prevent destruction of the
Communist regime in North Vietnam; it is less clear that they
would intervene to prevent a DRV/VC defeat in the South.) 56/
The intelligence estimate is that the chances are a little
better than even that, at this stage, Hanoi and Peiping
would choose to reduce their effort in the South and try to
salvage their resources for another day. fs but there is an
almost equal chance that they would enlarge the war and bring
in large numbers of Chinese forces (they have made certain
preparations which could point in this direction) ./

It follows, therefore, that the odds are about even
that, even with the recommended deployments, we will be
faced in early 1967 with a military stand-off at a much
higher level, with pacification fstill stalled, and with
' any prospect of military success marred by the chances of
an active Chinese intervention/ hardly underway and with
the reauirement for the deployment of still more US forces. 57/

é TOP SECRET - Sensitive
