Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Tt is true that we also believe that every small state has a
right to be unmolested by its neighbors even though it is within
reach of a great power. It is true that we are committed to general
principles of law and procedure which reject the idea that men and
arms can be sent freely across frontiers to absorb a neighbor. But
underlying the general principles is the harsh reality that our own
security is threatened by those who would embark upon a course of
aggression whose announced ultimate purpose is our own destruction. .

"Once again we hear expressed the views which cost the men of
my generation a terrible price in World War II. We are told that
Southeast Asia is far away--but so were Manchuria and Ethiopia. We
are told that, if we insist that someone stop shooting, that is asking
them for unconditional surrender. We are told that perhaps the aggressor
. will be content with just one more bite. We are told that, if we prove
faithless on one commitment, perhaps others would believe us about
other commitments in other places. We are told that, if we stop resist-
ing, perhaps the other side will have a change of heart. We are asked
to stop hitting bridges and radar sites and ammunition depots without
requiring that the other sidé stop its slaughter of thousands of ciy-
ilians and its bombings of schools and hotels and hospitals and railways
and buses.

"Surely we have learned over the past three decades that the
acceptance of aggression leads only to a sure catastrophe. Surely
we have learned that the aggressor must face the consequences of his
action and be saved from the frightful miscalculation that brings all
to ruin. It is the purpose of law to guide men away from such events,
to establish rules of conduct which are deeply rooted in the reality
of experience."

27. Statement by President Johnson at a News Conference at the White
House on April 27, 1965 and Transcript of Secreta of Defense
Robert S. McNamara's New Conference of April 26, 1965 on the

Situation in Viet-Nam, Department of State Bulletin, May 17, 1965,
Ds 7 *. -

"Statement by President Johnson .
* oe

"Tndependent South Viet-lNam has been attacked by North Viet-Nem.
The object of that attack is conquest.

"Defeat in South Viet-Nam would be to deliver a friendly nation to
terror and repression. It would encourage and spur on those who seek

D-39
