Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Police states, efficiently organized and operated, have
historically demonstrated much greater ability at countering insurgency
than other sorts of governments. South Vietnam in fact succeeded in
1955 and 1956 in quelling rural dissidence through a comprehensive polit-
ical and military assault on sect forces and other anti-government armed
bands using its army, the civic action cadre, the Communist Denunciation
campaign, and a broad range of promised reforms. Moreover, at its worst,
the Government of South Vietnam compared favorably with other Asian regimes
with respect to its degree of repressiveness. Nor did it face endemic
violence markedly different from that then prevalent in Burma, Indonesia,
South Korea. And its early "counterinsurgency" operations were as sophis-
ticated as any being attempted elsewhere in Asia. In 1957, the Government
of Viet Nam claimed that its pacification programs had succeeded:

"We believe that with clear, even elementary ideas based
upon facts...we can imbue...first the youth and ultimately
the entire population with the spirit and essential objectives
of...civic humanism. We believe that this above all is the most
effective antidote to Communism (which is but an accident of
history)....

",..We can see that the Viet-Minh authorities have dis-
integrated and been rendered powerless." 113/

P. J. Honey, the British expert on Vietnam, agreed; his evaluation as of
early 1958 was as follows:

",..The country has enjoyed three years of relative peace
and calm in which it has been able to carry on the very necessary
work of national reconstruction. The most destructive feature
in the national life of Vietnam throughout recent years has been
the lack of security in the countryside, which obliged farmers
and peasants to abandon the ricefields and to flee to the large
cities for safety. Today it is possible to travel all over South
Vietnam without any risk. The army and security forces have
mopped up most of the armed bands of political opponents of the
Government, of Communists and of common bandits. One still hears
of an isolated raid, but the old insecurity is fast vanishing...." 114/

After a 1959 trip, however, Honey detected dangerous unease in the
countryside:

"For the overwhelming majority of the Vietnamese, heirs to
experience of a century of French colonial rule, the Government
is a remote body which passes laws, collects taxes, demands
labour corvées, takes away able-bodied men for military service,
and generally enriches itself at the expense of the poor peasant.
‘Government’ is associated in the minds of the villagers with
exactions, punishments, unpaid labour, and other unpleasant matters.
These people are members of families-and members of villages, and
their loyalties to both are strong. But these loyalties do not
extend beyond the village, nor has any past experience taught the

46 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
