Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

i

LOP SECRET - SENSITI

(a) “Provide expedited training and equipping of the civil
guard and the self-defense corps with the objective or relieving
the regular Army of static missions and freeing it for mobile
offensive operations.

(e) Provide such personnel and equipment as may be neces-
sary to improve the military—political intelligence system be-
ginning at the provincial level and extending upward through:
the Government and the armed forces to the Central Intelligence
Organization.

(f) Provide such new terms of reference, reorganization
and additional personnel for United States military forces as
are required for increased United States participation in the
direction and control of GVN military operations and to carry
out the other increased responsibilities which accrue to MAAG
under these recommendations.

(g) Provide such increased economic aid as may be required
to permit the GVN to pursue a vigorous flood relief and rehabili-
tation program, to Supply material in support of the security
effort, and to give priority to projects in support of this ex-
panded counter~insurgency program. (This could include increases
in military pay, a full supply of a wide renge of materials such
as food, medical Supplies, transportation equipment, communica-
tions equipment, and any other items where material help could
assist the GVN in Winning the war against the Viet Cong.)

(h) Encourage and support (including financial support) a
Fequest by the GVN to the FAO or any other appropriate inter-
national organization for multilateral assistance in the relief
and rehabilitation of the flood area.

(i) Provide individual administrators and advisers for
insertion into the Governmental machinery of South Viet-Nan
in types and numbers to be agreed upon by the two Governments.

(3) Provide Personnel for a joint survey with the GVN of
conditions in each of the provinces to assess the social,
political, intelligence: ana mijitasy fachore bearing on the
Prosecution of the counter-insurgency program in order to reach
& Common estimate of these factors and a common determination
of how to deal with them.

130
! ‘TOP SECRET = Sensitive
