Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Vietnamese...However, numerous Vietnamese have
expressed the opinion to members of my staff that
it was a pity that General Minh was removed because
he is a "good man.”

)- The real question is, therefore: Is Khanh
able? Will he really supply some drive in connection
with the effort against the Viet Cong? ‘The evidence
to date is that he is able, that he has a lot of
drive, and that he is not tolerating any delay...

6. If Khanh is able, his advent to power
may give this country one-man command in place of
a junta. This may be good. We have everything
we need in Viet Nam. The U.S. has provided
military advice, training, equipment; economic
and social help; and political advice. The Govern-
ment of Viet Nam has put relatively large number
of good men into important positions and has evolved
civil and military procedures which appear to be
workable, Therefore, our side knows how to do it;
we have the means with which to do it; we simply
need to do it. This requires a tough and ruthless
commander, Perhaps Khanh is it. 41/

Privately we continued, however, to be deeply chagrined and even
shaken that we had not seen the coup coming. We recognized it was a
severe blow to the stability of government that we had believed was so
necessary for South Vietnam, and we doubted the charges that Khanh used
as a justification for his actions. But we accepted his explanations,
promised to support him, and hoped for the best. About all we could do
was threaten to withhold aid and that was ineffective because it was
increasingly apparent that we were as committed to the struggle as our
clients were -~-possibly even more committed. Whatever the real
possibilities of influence may have been, we accepted as inescapable the
fact that there was nothing we could do but go along with it. The
President of the United States quickly offered his public expression of
recognition and strong support. And one of our strongest resolves was to
see what we might hit upon es a means to assure that we would not be
taken again by a similar surprise.

6. Deepening Gloom in February

fmong the flood of SitReps that came in soon after the coup was
"Commander's Personal Military Assessment of the Fourth Quarter, CY-63." he/ .
This was a report that MACV had been directed to establish at the end
of the September 1963 visit of the Secretary and the CJCS in order to
establish checkpoints by which to measure progress toward achievement
of the goals agreed upon at that time. It is not essential here to
review all of MACV's report but there are interesting details that are

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
