Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

American Consulate General,
Saigon, Indochina, February 12, 1949.
MEMORANDUM ON INDOCHINA FOR NEW DELHI FOREIGN SERVICE CONFERENCE
SECTION II. UNITED STATES INFORMATION SERVICE

A. Weed for USIS in Indochina

No American news service reaches Indochina. UP service to Indo-
china ceased in December 1948 because it could not meet expenses. AP
is negotiating with the Bureau of Press and Information of the French
High Commissariat for Indochina, but even if AP succeeds in selling
its service to the Bureau, that organization will translate, select
and edit whatever AP material it sees fit to pass on to the public
through press and radio,

Agence France Presse service is distributed in Indochina under
the Bureau's supervision. The Bureau naturally concentrates on pre-
senting the French point of view and on excluding all news which
might disturb the population or be inimical to French policy. News
of the United States and of the United Nations reaches the public
here badly truncated or not at all.

Against this background, USIS Saigon should be disseminating the
full facts on United States policy. Here is an illustration of this
mission. The French in Indochina have admired the Dutch "police
action" of last December in Indonesia. The Indochinese press, lacking
adequate news sources, at first misinterpreted beyond recognition the
United States’ attitude toward that action. If the Department's wire-
less bulletin were being received here, it would have been possible
to provide the papers and Radio Saigon promptly with the full texts
of the Department's January releases on Indonesia and of Mr. JESSUP's
statements of United States policy. Though delayed, this material
@id reach here by pouch from Bangkok and has been brought to the
attention of friendly journalists. As will be explained below, ef-
forts are being made to begin copying the wireless bulletin in Saigon,
The British Consulate General distributes a small daily wireless
bulletin mimeographed in English on both sides of a single legal size

sheet.

American and other English language books are not on sale in Indo-
china. There has been very little English taught here. Nevertheless,
the public, whether Vietnamese, French, or Chinese, is acquiring some
English and is eager to learn about the United States and its culture
and achievements. The large, steady attendance at the Reading Room is
evidence that USIS' stock of bocks and publications fills a need and
at the same time contributes to American prestige

B. Current Activities

Since USIS Saigon first opened a temporary Reading Room on
August 26, 1946, there have been periods of inactivity imposed by
problems of space and personnel. The present Reading Room opened its
doors on August 13, 1947. It has a popular corner location on the

main

174
