Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

we achieve a victory that has meaning beyond the grim choice of
pulverization of American occupation into the indefinite future
.. This is the reason teams of American specialists in agri-
culture, heelth, and education are going to Vietnam..."

EDITORIAL: The New York Herald Tribune, February 9:

“Perhaps the most constructive part of the Honolulu
conference was the emphasis it placed on this hitherto
badly neglected espect of the Viet Nem war /Pacification/.
It is unfortunate that Chief of State Thieu diverted attention
from it by heaping more fuel on the controversy over whether
the Viet Cong should or should not sit at a peace conference
table...

EDITORIAL: ‘The New York Times, February 9 and 13:

"The Honolulu conference has followed the classic pattern
of Summit meetings that are hastily called without thorough
preparation in advance; it has left confusion in its wake,
with more questions raised than answered...The one important
area of agreement at Honolulu, apart from continuation of
the military efforts, was on an expanded program of ‘rural
construction.’ The prospective doubling of American economic
aid, however, will be futile unless it is accompanied by a
veritable social revolution, including vigorous land reform.
Premier Ky cast some doubt in his emphasis on moving slowly.
His Minister of Rural Pacification envisages action in only
1,900 of South Vietnam's 15,000 hamlets this year.

"Vice President Humphrey evidently has his work cut out
for him in his follow-up visit to Saigon. Unless some way
can be found to give more momentum to this effort, the new
economic aid program may go down the same drain as all previous
programs of this kind.

"Tt would be a cruel deception for Americans to get the
idea that social reforms carried out by the Ky government
with American money are going to make any perceptible difference
in the near future to the Vietnamese people or to the course
of the war."

COLUMNIST: ‘Ted Lewis, New York Daily News, February 10 (from
Washington):

“Why, all of a sudden, has President Johnson begun to
come to grips with the ‘other war’ in South Vietnam?...
Johnson, with his typical oratorical flourishes, has given
the impression that he launched something totally new at

47 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
