Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

important speeches of his life. His first words struck the theme of what
was to come:

Good Evening, my fellow Americans.

Tonight I want to speak to you of peace in Vietnam
and Southeast Asia. 67/

Underscoring the peaceful motivations of past and present U.S. policy
in the area, he reviewed the recent history of U.S. attempts to bring
peace to Vietnam:

For years, representatives of our government and others
have travelled the world -- seeking to find a basis for
peace talks.

Since last September, they have carried the offer that
I made public at San Antonio.

That offer was this:

That the United States would stop its bombardment of
North Vietnem when that would lead promptly to productive
discussions -- and that we would assume that North Vietnam
would not take military advantage of our restraint.

Hanoi denounced this offer, both privately and pub-
licly. Even while the search for peace was going on,
North Vietnam rushed their preparations for a savage
assault on the people, the government, and the allies of
South Vietnam.

The President noted that the Viet Cong had apparently
decided to make 1968 the year of decision in Vietnam and their Tet offensive
had been the unsuccessful attempt to win a breakthrough victory. Although
they had failed, the President acknowledged their capability to renew the
attacks if they wished. He forcefully asserted, however, that the allies
would again have the power to repel their assault if they did decide to
attack. Continuing, he led up to his announcement of the bombing halt in

this way:

If they do mount another round of heavy attacks, they
will not succeed in destroying the fighting power of South
Vietnam and its allies.

But tragically, this is also clear: many men’-~- on
poth sides of the struggle -- will be lost. A nation that
has already suffered 20. years of warfare will suffer once
again. Armies on both sides will take new casualties. And

the war will go on.

197 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
