Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

[ 38 i

"The other great Communist power, Red China, is now in the
early stages of its social and economic revolution. Its leaders are
showing the same ruthless drive for power and to this end are striving
for ever increasing economic output. They seem not to care that the
results--which thus far heve been considerable in materialistic terms--
are built upon the crushed spirits end the broken bodies of their
people. :

“The fact that the Soviet Union has just come through a great
revolutionary process to a position of enormous power and that the
world's most populous nation, China, is in the course of tremendous
change at the very time when so large e part of the free world is in
the flux of revolutionary movements, provides Communism with what it
sees as its golden opportunity. By the same token freedom is faced
with difficulties of unprecedented scope and severity--and opportunity
as well. ‘

"Communism exploits the opportunity to intensify world unrest
by every possible means. At the same time Communism mesquerades as
the pattern of progress, as the path to economic equality, as the
way to freedom from what it calls ‘Western imperialism’, as the wave
of the future.

“For the free world there is the challenge to convince a billion
cj people in the less developed areas that there is a way of life by
which they can have bread and the ballot, a better livelihood end the
right to choose the means of their livelihood, social change and
social justice--in short, progress and liberty. The dignity of man
is at stake.

“Communism is determined to win this contest-~freedom must be
just as dedicated or the struggle could finally go against us. Though
no shot would have been fired, freedom and democracy would have lost.

"This battle is now joined. The next decade will forecast its
outcome. »

“The fourth reality is that the military position and economic
prosperity of the United States are interdependent with those of the
rest of the free world.

"As I shall outline: more fully below, our military strategy is
part of a common defense effort involving many nations. The defense
of the free world is strengthened and progress toward a more stable
peace is advanced by the fact that powerful free world forces are
esteblished on territory adjoining the areas of Communist power. The
deterrent power of our eir and naval forces and our intermediate range
missile is materially increased by the evailability of bases in friendly
countries abroad.

. . B-45
