Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Option B -- The DRV manipulated the entire war. This is the
official U.S. position, and can be supported. Nonetheless, the case
is not wholly compelling, especially for the years 1955-1959.

Option C -- The DRV seized an opportunity to enter an ongoing
internal war in 1959 prior to, and independent of, U.S. escalation.
This interpretation is more tenable than the previous; still, much of
the evidence is circumstantial.

The judgment offered here is that the truth lies somewhere between
Option B and C. That is, there was some form of DRV apparatus functioning
in the South throughout the years, but it can only be inferred that this
apparatus originated and controlled the insurgency which by 1959 posed
a serious challenge to the Diem government. Moreover, up until 1958,
neither the DRV domestic situation nor its international support was
conducive to foreign adventure; by 1959, its prospects were bright in
both respects, and it is possible to demonstrate its moving force-
fully abroad thereafter. Given the paucity of evidence now, well after
the events, U.S. intelligence served policy makers of the day surprisingly
well in warning of the developments described below:

Failure of the Geneva Settlement (Tab 1

The Geneva Settlement of 195)} was inherently flawed as a durable
peace for Indochina, since it depended upon France, and since both
the U.S. and the Republic of South Vietnam excepted themselves. The
common ground from which the nations negotiated at the Geneva Conference
was a mutual desire to halt the hostilities between France and the Viet
Minh, and to prevent any widening of the war. To achieve eoncord, they
had to override objections of the Saigon government, countenance the
disassociation of the U.S. from the Settlement, and accept France as
one executor. Even so, Geneva might have wrought an enduring peace for
Vietnam if France had remained as a major power in Indochina, if Ngo
Dinh Diem had cooperated with the terms of the Settlement, if the crs
had abstained from further influencing the outcome. No one of these
conditions was likely, given France's travail in Algeria, Diem's
implacable anti-communism, and the U.S.' determination to block further
expansion of the DRV in Southeast Asia.

Therefore, the tragedy staged: partition of Vietnam, the sole
negotiable basis found at Geneva for military disengagement, became the
prime casus belli. To assuage those parties to Geneva who were reluctant
to condone the handing over of territory and people to a communist govern-
ment, and to reassure the Viet Minh that their southern followers could
be preserved en bloc, the Accords provided for regrouping forces to
North and South Vietnam and for Vietnamese freely electing residence in
either the North or the South; the transmigrations severely disrupted
the polity of Vietnam, heated the controversy over reunification, and
made it possible for North Vietnam to contemplate subversive aggression.
The arms control provisions of the Settlement of 1954 mollified parties

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
