Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FG
77 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On 25 January 1966, before the bombing had yet been
resumed, George Ball sent to the President a long memorandum on the
matter. Its first page warned:

I recognize the difficulty and complexity of the

problem and I do not wish to add to your burdens. But

before a final decision is made on this critical issue,

TI feel an obligation to amplify and document my strong

conviction: that sustained bombing of North Viet-Nam

will more than likely lead us into war with Red China --

probably in six to nine months. And it may well involve

at least a limited war with the Soviet Union. 58/
There were, Ball said, "forces at work on both sides of the conflict that
will operate in combination to bring about this result.

The Under-Secretary dealt with the U.S. side of the conflict
first. The bombing, he wrote, would inevitably escalate; the passage of
time, he contended, had demonstrated "that a sustained bombing program
acquires a life and dynamism of its own." For this there were several

Sa ee : :
yeasons. First was that the U.S. "philosophy of bombing requires gradual
escalation.” Ball explained:

Admittedly, we have never had a generally agreed
rationale for bombing North Viet-Nam. But the inarticulate
major premise has always been that bombing will somehow,
some day, and in some manner, create pressure on Hanoi to
stop the war. This is accepted as an article of faith, not
only by the military who have planning and operational
responsibilities but by most civilian advocates of bombing
in the Administration.

Yet it is also widely accepted that for bombing to
have this desired political effect, we must gradually
extend our attack to increasingly vital targets. In this
way -- it is contended -- we will constantly threaten
Hanoi that if it continues its aggression it will face
mounting costs -- with the destruction of its economic life
at the end of the road. 56

On an attached chart, Ball demonstrated that in the eleven months of
bombing target selection had gradually spread northward to a point where
jt was nearing the Chinese border and closing in on the Hanoi-Haiphong
area, "steadily constricting the geographical scope of immunity."

47 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
