(ts:

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. "Supplemental Note 2" to the paper, issued the day of the NSC
meeting, contained, among other comments, a JCS estimate of the size of the
American force needed "to clean up the Viet Cong threat." It reads:

Wider Military Implications. As the basic paper indicates,
the likelihood of massive DRV and Chicom intervention cainot be
estimated with precision. The SNIE covers only the initial phase
when action might be limited to 20-25,000 men. At later stages,
when the JCS estimate that 40,000 US forces will be needed to
clean up the Viet Cong threat, the chances of such massive inter-
vention might well become substantial, with the Soviets finding
it a good opportunity to tie down major US forces in a long ac-
tion, perhaps as part of a multi-prong action involving Berlin
and such additional areas as Korea and Iran.

Because of this possibility of major Bloc intervention, the
maximum possible force neeis must be frankly faced. Assuming
present estimates of about 40,000 US forces for the stated mili-
tary objective in South Vietnam, plus 128,000 US forces for
meeting North Vietnam and Chicom intervention, the drain on US-~
based reserve forces could be on the order of 3 or divisions
and other forces as well. The impact on naval capabilities for
blockade plans (to meet Berlin) would also be major. In light
of present Berlin contingency plans, and combat attrition, in-
cluding scarce items of equipment, the initiation of the Viet-
nam action in itself should dictate a step up in the present
mobilization, possibly of major proportions. uae

3 Finally, there is the following memo from William Bundy
(then acting Assistant Secretary of Defense, ISA) to McNamara. it is of
interest because it is the only piece of paper available for this period
that gives anyone's candid recommendations to his boss, as opposed to the
more formal staff papers:

Even if the decision at tomorrow's meeting is only pre-
liminary -- to explore with Diem and the British, Australians,
and New Zealanders would be my guess -- it is clearly of the
freatest possible importance. Above all, action must proceed
fast.

For what one man's feel is worth, mine -- based on very dose
touch with Indochina in the 1954 war and civil war afterwards till
Diem took hold -- is that it is really now or never if we are to
arrest the gains being made py the Viet Cong. Walt Rostow made
the point yesterday that the Viet Cong are about to move, by every
indication, from the small unit basis to a moderate battalion-
size basis. Intelligence also suggests that they may try to set

83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
