Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

L)

‘Secretary Rusk:

eo

"But I think that the end of the aggression in Viet-Nam would put
us a very long step forward toward this organization of a durable peace.
I think there is a general recognition in the world that a nuclear
exchange does not make sense, that sending massed divisions across
national frontiers is pretty reckless today. If we get this problem of
these 'wars of national liberation’ under reasonable control, then maybe
we can look forward to a period of relative peace, although there will
continue to be quarrels and neighborhood crspuves and plenty of business
for the Security Council of the United Nations.”

| ae 9

72. Address by Secretary Rusk before the National Conference of the
U.S. Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service at

Washington, D.C., May 18, 1967; “Our Foreign Policy Commitments
To Assure a Peaceful Future, Department of State Bulletin, June 12

1967, p- 874.

eS 0

"Secondly, I hear it said that Viet-Nam is just a civil war, there-
fore we should forget about it, that it is only a family affair among
Vietnamese. Well, it's quite true that among the Viet Cong and the
National Liberation Front there is a large component of authentic
Southerners who are in rebellion against the several authorities who
have been organized in Saigon.

"But those are not the people who explain the presence of American
combat forces in South Viet-Nam. Because beginning in 1960 the author-
ities in the North activated the Communist cadres which had been left
behind at the time of the division of the country. Then from 1960 onward
they sent in substantial numbers of Southerners who had gone North, were
trained in the North, and were sent back as cadres and armed elements to
join in seizing the country. And by 1964 they had run out of authentic
Southerners and were sending Northerners in increasing numbers, and late
that year they began to send regular units of the North Vietnamese
Regular Army. Today there are more than 20 regimentS of the North Viet-
namese Regular Forces in South Viet-Nam and substantial forces in and
just north of the demilitarized zone in direct contact with our Marines.

"Tt was what the North is doing to the South that caused us to send
combat forces there, because we felt we had an obligation to do so under
the SEATO treaty, a treaty which calls upon us to take steps to meet the
common danger. And if the North would decide to hold its hand and not
persist in its effort to seize South Viet-Nam by force, this situation
could be resolved peacefully, literally in a matter of hours."

D-111
