Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Tt is clear, therefore, that a Communist success in South Viet-Nam -
would be taken as positive proof that the Chinese Communists’ position
is correct and they will have made a giant step forward in their efforts
to seize control of the world Communist movement. Furthermore, such a_
success would greatly increase the prestige of Communist China among the
nonalined nations and strengthen the position of their followers every-
where. In that event,we would then have to be prepared to cope with the
same kind of aggression in other parts of the world wherever the existing
governments are weak and the social structures fragmented. If Communist
armed aggression is not stopped in Viet-Nam as it was in Korea, the con-
fidence of small nations in America's pledge of support will be weakened,
and many Of them, in widely separated areas of the world, will feel unsafe.

"Thus the stakes in South Viet-Nam are far greater than the loss of
one small country to communism. Its loss would be a most serious setback
to the cause of freedom and would greatly complicate the task of preventing
the further spread of militant Asian communism. And, if that spread is
not halted, our strategic position in the world will be weakened and our
national security directly endangered.

"Tt was in recognition of this fundamental issue that the United
States, under three Presidents, firmly committed itself to help the
people of South Viet-Nam defend their freedom. That is why President
Eisenhower warned at the time of the Geneva conference in July 1954
that ‘any renewal of Communist aggression would be viewed by us as a
matter of grave concern.' That is why President Johnson in his statement
last Wednesday made it clear to all the world that we are determined to
stand by our commitment and provide whatever help is required to fulfill
+,"

x * *

",...We have also identified at least three battalions of the regu-
lar North Vietnamese army, and there are probably considerably more. At
the same time the Government of South Viet-Nam has found it increasingly
difficult to make a commensurate increase in the size of its own forces,
which now stand at about 545,000 men, including the regional and local
defense forces but excluding the national police."

x ot

37. Interview with Secretary Rusk and Secretary MeNeamara on a Columbia
Broadcasting System television program by Peter Kalischer, Alexander

Kendrick, and Harry Reasoner, on August 9, 1965, "Political and
Military Aspects of U.S. Policy in Viet-Nam, Department of State
Bulletin, August 30, 1965, Dp. aS.

"Mr. Reasoner:

D-53
