Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Secretary McNamara played en important role in disposing of still
another issue in dispute -- that of where to begin. In mid-December 1961,
after President Kennedy had decided to adoptessentially all of General
Taylor's November recommendations except the introduction of major U.S.
forces into Vietnam, Secretary McNamara met in Honolulu with the U.5.
principals in Vietnam to discuss future plans. A central question was that
of what could be done in the short term future. The Secretary of Defense
made it clear that RVN had "number one priority." 52 McNamara. urged
concentration on one province: "I'll guarantee it /the money and equipment/
provided you have a plan based on one province. Take one place, sweep a6
and hold it in a plan." 53/ Or, put another way, let us demonstrate that
in some place, in some way, we can achieve demonstrable gains.

General McGarr, immediately upon his return to Saigon, wrote to
Secretary Thuan and passed on this proposal:

I would like to suggest that you may wish to set aside
one specific area, say a province, and use it as a "test
area," in establishing this type "pacification infrastruc-
ture." My thinking is that all the various elements of this
anti-VC groundwork be designated immediately by your govern-
ment and trained as a team or teams for the actual reoccupa-
tion and holding of the designated communist infiltrated
area when it has been cleared by RVNAF military action. 54

1

Such teams would embrace, McGarr suggested, police, intelligence, financial,
psychological, agricultural, medical, civic action, and civil political
functions. 55/

IV. THE ADVISORS "SELL" DIEM (OR VICE-VERSA)

A. Where to Begin?

GVN did indeed have a province in mind. It was not a Delta province,
however. Nor was it a province relatively secure from VC infiltration.
Quite to the contrary, Binh Duong Province, extending north and northwest
of Saigon, had been heavily infiltrated. Its main communications axis
(National Highway 13, extending northward from Saigon into Cambodia) sliced
directly between War Zone D and War Zone C. The province was crossed
by important routes of communications, liaison, and supply between two
insurgen redoubts. Hardly the logical place to begin, one might say,
- put "logic" was being driven by events and desires more than by abstract
reasoning.

One desire was the widely held wish to do something concrete
and productive as a symbol of U.S. determination and GVN vitality. Another
desire was GVN's wish to commit the Americans to support of Diem's govern-
ment on terms which would be in fact acceptable to that government and
would -- equally important -- appear to be U.S. support for GVN-initiated
actions. If one were Vietnamese one might reason that Binh Duong was an

LS TOP SECRET - Sensitive
