Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date; 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-"a. to ensure, with due respect for the culture of
the peoples concerned, their political, economic, social,
and educational advancement, their just treatment, and
their protection against abuses;

"b. to develop self-government, to take due account
of the political aspirations of the peoples, and to assist
them in the progressive development of their free political
institutions, according to the particular circumstances
of each territory and its peoples and their varying stages
of advancement;..." 22/

Again, however, military considerations governed U.S. policy in
Indochina. President Truman replied to General de Gaulle's repeated
offers for aid in Indochina with statements to the effect that it was
his policy to leave such matters to his military commanders. At the
Potsdam Conference (July, 1945), the Combined Chiefs of Staff decided
that Indochina south of latitude 16° North was to be included in the
Southeast Asia Command under Admiral Mountbatten. 23/ Based on this
decision, instructions were issued that Japanese forces located north
of that line would surrender to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, and
those to the south to Admiral Lord Mountbatten; pursuant to these
instructions, Chinese forces entered Tonkin in September, 1945, while
a small British task force landed at Saigon. Political difficulties
materialized almost immediately, for while the Chinese were prepared to
accept the Vietnamese government they found in power in Hanoi, the
British refused to do likewise in Saigon, and deferred to the French
there from the outset.

There is no evidence that serious concern deyeloped in Washington
at the swiftly unfolding events in Indochina. In mid-August, Vietnamese
resistance forces of the Viet Minh, under Ho Chi Minh, had seized power
in Hanoi and shortly thereafter demanded and received the abdication of
the Japanese puppet, Bnperor Bao Dai. On V-J Day, September end, Ho Chi
Minh, had proclaimed in Hanoi the establishment of the Democratic Repub-
lic of Vietnam (DRV). The DRV ruled as the only civil govermment in
all of Vietnam for a period of about 20 days. On 23 September 1945,
with the knowledge of the British Commander in Saigon, French forces
overthrew the local DRV government, and declared French authority re-
stored in Cochinchina. Guerrilla war began around Saigon. Although
American OSS representatives were present in both Hanoi and Saigon and
ostensibly supported the Viet Minh, the United States took no official
position regarding either the DRV, or the French and British actions in
South Vietnam. 2h In October, 1945, the United States stated its
policy in the following terms:

"US has no thought of opposing the reestablishment of

French control in Indochina and no official statement by US
GOVT has questioned even by implication French sovereignty

A-22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
