Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

production by civilians in occupied countries of food supplies
and yew materials of the character required by Japan. Had Japan
undertaken to obtain the supplies she required from Indochina

in a peaceful way, she not only would have obtained larger quanti-
ties of such supplies, but would have obtained them with complete
security and without the draining expense of a military occupa-
tion. Furthermore, from the military standpoint, the President
said, surely the Japanese Government could not have in reality
the slightest belief that China, Great Britain, the Netherlands
or the United States had any territorial designs on Indochina
nor were in the slightest degree providing any real threats of
aggression against Japan. This Government, consequently, could
only assume that the occupation of Indochina was being undertaken
by Japan for the purpose of further offense and this created a
situation which necessarily must give the United States the most

serious disquiet...

"...The President stated that if the Japanese Government
would refrain from occupying Indochina with its military and naval
forces, or, had such steps actually been commenced, if the Japanese
Government would withdraw such forces, the President could assure
the Japanese Government that he would do everything within his
power to obtain from the Governments of China, Great Britain,
the Netherlands, and of course the United States itself a bind-
ing and solemn declaration, provided Japan would undertake the
same commitment, to regard Indochina as a neutralized country
in the same way in which Switzerland had up to now been regarded
by the powers as a neutralized country. He stated that this
would imply that none of the powers concerned would undertake
any military act of aggression against Indochina and would re-
main in control of the territory and would not be confronted with
attempts to dislodge them on the part of de Gaullist or Free
French agents or forces." *

The same date, Secretary of State Cordell Hull instructed Sumner Welles
to see the Japanese Ambassador, and

"Make clear the fact that the occupation of Indochina by
Japan possibly means one further important step to seizing con-
trol of the South Sea area, including trade routes of supreme
importance to the United States controlling such products as
rubber, tin and other commodities. This was of vital concern
to the United States. The Secretary said that if we did not
bring out this point our people will not understand the signi-
ficance of this movement into Indochina. The Secretary mentioned
another point to be stressed: there is no theory on which Indo-
china could be flooded with armed forces, aircraft, et cetera,

|
* Memorandum of Conversation by Sumner Welles, Acting Secretary of States

24 July, 1941; the President's proposal for neutralization was submitted
to Japan in a note of 8 August, 1941.

A-11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
