Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Bien Hoas"” cannot be prevented; the new government will
probably be unstable and ineffectual, and the VC will probably
continue to extend their hold over the population and territory.
It can be expected that soon (6 months? two years?) (a) govern-
ment officiels at all levels will adjust their behavior to an
eventual VC take-over, (b) defections of significant military
forces will take place, (c) whole integrated regions of the
country will be totally denied to the GV, (d) neutral and/or
left-wing elements will enter the govermment, (e) a popular-
front regime will emerge which will invite the US out, and
(f) fundamental concessions to the VC and accommodations to
the DRV will put South Vietnam behind the Curtain.

These views were fully consistent with USIB-approved national intel-
ligence estimates which, as early as October 1964, predicted:

-..& further decay of GVN will and effectiveness. The
likely pattern of this decay will be increasing defeatism,
paralysis of leadership, friction with Americans, exploration
of possible lines of political accommodation with the other
side, and a general petering out of the war effort.... 13/

By February 1965, the intelligence community saw "the present polit-
ical arrangements in Saigon /as/ avowedly temporary" and detected no more
than "as faint chance that the scenario announced for the ensuing weeks
fwoula/ hold promise for improved political stability in SVN." It judged
the odds as "considerably less than even... /that/ the spring and summer
might see the evolution of a stronger base for prosecuting the counter-
insurgency effort than has heretofore existed.” 14

These views were most authoritatively endorsed by the President's
highest national security staff advisor, McGeorge Bundy, who undertook
an urgent fact-finding trip to South Vietnam at the beginning of February.
In a pivotal memorandum to the President 15/ (which will be referred to 4
in greater detail subsequently) he characterized the general situation as
follows:

For the last year--and perhaps for longer--the overall
situation in Vietnam has been deteriorating. The Communists
have been gaining and the anti-Communist forces have been losing.
As a result there is now great uncertainty among Vietnamese as
well as Americans as to whether Communist victory can be prevented.
There is nervousness about the determination of the U.S. Govern-
ment. There is recrimination and fear among Vietnamese political
leaders. There is an appearance of weariness among some military
leaders. There is 2 worrisome lassitude among the Vietnamese
generally. There is a distressing absence of positive commit-
ment to any serious social or political purpose. Outside
observers are ready to write the patient off. All of this tends
to bring latent anti-Americanism dangerously near to the surface.

10 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
