Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

KENNEDY ADMINTSTRATION
- SUMMARY

The Administration of President Kennedy justified the growing
U.S. involvement in Vietnam utilizing much the same rationale that
had been employed by the Administrations of President Truman and
President Eisenhower. Initially, the situation in Vietnam received
less emphasis than the crisis in Laos, although the principles cited
for U.S. concern for Laos -- the identification of U.S. interests with
its independence; SEATO obligations -- were couched in terms of col-
lective security for Southeast Asia. Thereafter, as insurgency in
Vietnam itself came to the fore, the Administration's public statements
stressed the following:

a. The struggle against the worldwide communist offensive
hed to confront the danger that through "subversion, infiltration,
and a host of other tactics...aqur security may be lost piece by piece,
country by country, without the firing of a single missile or the
erossing of a single border."

b. The "domino principle": the countries of Southeast Asia
are interdependent for security, and the independence of each is impor-
tant to the United States.

e. ICC reports, as well as U.S. and South Vietnamese intel-
ligence, demonstrate that Comminist North Vietnam hes provided illegally,
armed and unarmed personnel, arms, munitions, and other supplies from
North Vietnam to insurgents in South Vietnam for the purpose of supporting
an organized attempt to overthrow the government there.

d. "Now our great responsibility is to be the chief defender
of freedom, in this time of maximum danger. Only the U.S. has the
power and the resources and the determination.”

e, The United States, although not a party to the Geneva
Accords, declared at Geneva in 1954 that it would "view any renewal of
the aggression in violation of the asreements with grave concern and
as seriously threatening international peace and security." President
Kennedy assured President Diem that "in accordance with that declaration,
and in response to your request, we are prepared to help the Republic of
Vietnam to protect its people and to preserve its independence."

. £. The SEATO Pact, by a protocol, extended the protection of
the treaty to Vietnam; hence the treaty, in President Kennedy's words,
"stated that the United Stetes recognized that aggression by means of
armed attack against Vietnam would threaten our own peace and security...
the attack on the government by the communist forces, with assistance
from the north, beceme of greater and greater concern to the Government
of Vietnam and the Government of the United States.”
