Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As the Soviets entered the Geneva Conference, then, it
seems that one of their primary aims was to diminish the possibility of
U.S. intervention, either in the guise of a united action or unilaterally,
in Indochina. While this outlook did not prevent the Soviets from seek-
ing to capitalize on the change in administration in Paris from Laniel
to Mendes-France, it did work in the general direction of a reasonable
settlement that would be honorable for the French and generally accepta-
ble to the Viet Minh. The Russians evidently believed, however, that
so long as the French (and the British) were agreeable to a settlement,
the Americans would be hard-pressed to disregard their allies and inter-
vene.

(2) USSR Wishes to Prevent French Support of EDC

EDC was also almost certainly on Molotoy's mind during
the negotiations. There is no evidence to support the contention of some
writers that Molotov explicitly baited Mendes-France with a lenient Indo-
china settlement in return for Assembly rejection of EDC, but Molotov
need not have been that explicit. Throughout 1953 and into 1954, Soviet
propaganda was dominated by comments on EDC and the danger of a rearmed
Germany. It was certainly in Soviet interest to pressure the DRV for
concessions to the French, since removal of the French command from Indo-
china would restore French force levels on the Continent and thereby some-
what offset the need for an EDC. Soviet interests, in short, probably
dictated the sacrifice of Viet Minh goals if necessary to prevent German
re-militarization.

(3) USSR Seizes the Opportunity to Create a New Communist

Soviet efforts to gain control of Iran, Manchuria, Greece
and Korea indicate a possible third objective of their diplomacy at Geneva.
In these instances, the Soviet Union attempted to gain control of the tar-
get state by establishing a communist enclave in the target state itself.
This enclave would become, then, "a first stage in the ultimate absorption
of the whole state by the communist bloc.” It may have been that, in

the Soviet view, the timing for such a move in Vietnam was correct and

that control of Vietnam would come without the necessity for military
conquest. 1

ce. Chinese Objectives: The Need for Border Security

In contrast to the Soviet position, the Chinese made their
goals at Geneva quite clear: (1) emphasizing the commitment to assist
"wars of national liberation"; (2) guarding against the possibility of
U.S. military intervention; (3) preventing the Indochinese states from
becoming U.S. bases or joining the American alliance system; and (4) pro-
moting the "five principles of peaceful coexistence” as part of China's
effort to extend its influence across Asia. Central to each of these
objectives was the need to create a zone of security that encompassed
Laos, Cambodia, and the northern half of Vietnam, to insure China's south-
western flank against intrusion by the U.S. or any other large foreign
power.

State

c-19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
