Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

departure of Minh and Tho, In the "overall evaluation", there was the
following key paragraph:

January witnessed distinct, if limited, pro-
gress in GVN's organization and action, both on
political front in Saigon and on counter-insurgency
front in countryside. Nevertheless, by January 30,
when General Khanh moved swiftly and bloodlessly
to take over reins of government, GVN had still

not achieved sufficient momentum either to stem
growing tide of popular criticism against it or
to register meaningful gains against VC. In
retrospect, greatest single positive achievement
during three months of post-Diem regime was
measurable success of General Minh in establishing
himself as popular national leader. Measure of
his success reflected in General Khanh's obvious
effort to keep Minh on his side and exploit Minh's
growing popularity for benefit of second post-Diem
regime. 46

On the same day that the Mission Report was dispatched, CIA
addressed to the Secretary of Defense a special report which had just
been received by the Director of CIA by Mr. Peer de Silva (CAS station
chief in Saigon) and Mr. Lyman D. Kirkpatrick, concerning the situation
in Vietnam with particular respect to the conduct of the war and the
prognosis of the stability of the Khanh regime. The de Silva judgement
was that

The situation at this moment must be characterized

&s one in which the population at large appears
apathetic, without enthusiasm either for the GVN

or the VC sides but responsive to the latter

because it fears the VC. The most important

single factor appears to be whether or not the

rural population will be willing to defend itself
against the VC and to support GVN actions against

the VC. In this sector there now seems to be less
conviction and resolution, and a more widespread
inclination to avoid the problems of obposing the

VC, and to play both sides in hopes of somehow
getting on peacefully and without personal commit- .
ment. . .

---What is needed in this regard and very soon
are a series of GVN successes in the military sphere
which would go toward implanting and nourishing a
popular attitude that the GVN has the means of
bringing security and a sense of ease to the rural
population and is clearly determihed to do so on an
ever broadening front throughout the countryside.

Only within some such atmosphere of hopefulness can

33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
