Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

He saw quite clearly the imponderables which made any prognosis a
hazardous undertaking:

"A. Will Hanoi materially increase its infiltration
rate? I gather this is feasible (though will the barrier

make a major difference? ).

"B. Will the enemy escalate? Aside from increasing

infiltration, I see little more Hanoi itself could do. Or
Moscow. Peking could intervene in Vietnam or widen the
area of hostilities in SBA, but this seems quite unlikely.

"CG. Will the enemy revert to a guerrilla strategy?
This could be a serious complication before we get a major
pacification effort underway. But the evidence suggests
that the VC are still attempting to organize regiments and
divisions. I'd also agree with Doug Pike's conclusion in
his new book, 'Viet Cong' that such de-escalation would
shatter VC morale.

"D. Will Hanoi play the negotiating card, and how?
If I'm right about the trend line, Hanoi would find it

Wiser to negotiate. The only other options are escala-
tion, growing attrition, or fading away. If Hanoi decides
to talk sometime in 1967, a whole new calculus intervenes,
involving questions of cease-fire, standstill, bombing
pauses, etc. In this case we'll have to do a new prognosis.

"Eg, Will the GVN fall apart politically? While it

was @ risk worth taking, we've opened Pandora's box by
promoting a political evolution to representative govern-
ment. A series of coups or political crises in Cochin
China or Annam could so undermine GVIV cohesiveness as to
cause a tajor setback of popular revulsion in the U.S.

I expect plenty of political trouble, but would hazard
that a crisis of such magnitude can be avoided in 1967 if
we work hard at it.

"F. Will our new pacification program work? This too

is a major imponderable. But we've nowhere to go but up.
We're at long last planning a major new resource input plus
the necessary focus on improving US management and redirecting
ARVN assets. So to me the chief variable is how much progress
we can make how soon. Will it be enough to make a signifi-
eant difference in 1967 or even 1968?

"G. Last but not least, will the US appear to settle
down for a long pull if necessary? This is hardest to pre-

dict, yet crucial from the standpoint of SVN and NVN reactions.” 17/

5 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
