Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Whether or not the incidents plotted by Fall constituted a strategy as
he thought, they were patently more coherent. A U.S. intelligence
assessment submitted 7 March 1960 described VC plans, confirmed from

a variety of U.S. and GVN sources, to launch large scale guerrilla
warfare that year "under the flag of the People's Liberation Movement,"
which was identified as "red, with a blue star." 161/ The VC were
reportedly moving into position to exercise one or more of three strat-
egic options by the end of 1960: (1) incite an ARVN revolt; (2) set

up &@ popular front government in the lower Delta; (3) foree the GVN
into such repressive countermeasures that popular uprisings will follow.

162/

An ARVN coup d'etat did ensue, although it was neither
ve incited nor successful; nor was there any general revolt in the
ranks. No popular front government was set up. But the GVN was prompted
to a succession of repressive countermeasures which may have aided the
Viet Cong much as they had expected. Prodded by the rural violence,
Diem began his “counterinsurgency" in early 1959 with the reintensifica-~
tion of population classification and relocation programs. On 6 May 1959,
the GVN promulgated Law 10/59, which set up three military tribunals
which could, without appeal, adjudge death for crimes under Ordinance 47
of 1956 -~ the anti-comunist law. In actuality, these tribunals were
used sparingly, usually for show-case trials of terrorists. 163/ But
the existence of Law 10/59 furnished grist for. VC propaganda mills for
years.

On 7 July, 1959, the GVN launched its "prosperity and
density centers" -- the "agroville" program and Ngo Dinh Nhu and his
wife plunged into organizing rural youth, women, and farmers’ organiza-
tions. However, just as the VC Tet offensive of 1968 attenuated
"Revolutionary Development," the VC upsurge of late 1959 and early 1960
disrupted the new GVN organizational efforts, and reinforced Diem's
conviction that security was the paramount consideration. The U.S.
assessment of March 1960 cited widespread abuse of police powers by
local officials for extortion and vendetta, and pointed out that arbi-
trary and corrupt local officials compromised GVN efforts to root out
the VC "undercover cadres." Moreover:

",.++While the GVN has made an effort to meet the
economic and social needs of the rural populations through
community development, the construction of schools, hospi-
tals, roads, etc., these projects appear to have enjoyed
only @ measure of success in creating support for the
government and, in fact, in many instances have resulted in
resentment. Basically, the problem appears to be that such

62 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
