ats.

je

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

THE COUNTERINSURGENCY PLAN

IvV.5, CHAPTER II

I. WINTER, 1961

The Vietnam Counter-Insurgency Plan which was being worked on
through most of 1960 finally reached the White House in late January,
apparently just after Kennedy took office. We do not have a document show-
ing the exact date, but we know that Kennedy approved the main provisions of
the Plan after a meeting on January 28th, and negotiations with Diem began ©
February 13. 1/

The provisions of the CIP tell a good deal about how the Viet Cong
threat looked to American and Vietnamese officials at the beginning of 1961,
for there is nothing in the record to suggest that anyone -- either in
Saigon or Washington, Vietnamese or American -- judged the CIP to be an in-
adequate response to the VC threat.

The U.S. offered Diem equipment and supplies to outfit a 20,000 man
increase in his army. The cost was estimated at $28.4 million. The U.S.
also offered to train, outfit and supply 32,000 men of the Civil Guard (a
counterguerrilla auxilliary) at a cost of $12.7 million. These two moves
would help Diem expand the RVNAF to a total of 170,000 men, and expand the
Civil Guard to a total of 68,000 men. ‘There were some further odds and ends
totalling less than another million. The full package added up to less than
$2 million, which was a substantial but not enormous increment to on-going
U.S. aid to Vietnam of about $220 million a year. (Since most of these
costs were for initial outfitting of new forces, the package was mainly a
one-time shot in the arm.) 2/

For their part, the Vietnamese were supposed to pay the local cur-
rency costs of the new forces, and carry out a number of military and civil
reforms.

The key military reforms were to straighten out the chain of command,
and to develop an agreed overall plan of operations.

[The chain of command problem was that control of the counter-
insurgency effort in the provinces was divided between the local
military commander and the Province Chief, a personal appointee
of Diem, and reporting directly to Diem. Even at a higher level,
3 regional field commands reported directly to Diem, by-passing
the Chief of Staff. So a total of 42 officials with some sub-
stantial (and overlapping) control of the war effort reported
directly to Diem: 38 Province Chiefs, 3 regional commanders, and
the Chief of Steff. The "reform" eventually gotten from Diem put

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
