Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

were less the product of Wheeler, as the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs,
than of the corporate body itself. As Chairman's Memoranda indicate,
Wheeler had a much "softer" line on the military effectiveness of the
bombing.) The CIA and Vance were seen as at odds because the CIA believed
that the Chinese might not intervene if an invasion of North Vietnam

did not seem to threaten Hanoi, while Vance stated that an invasion (of
any kind) would cause Chinese intervention. Vance believed that the
Chinese would decide to intervene if the ports were mined. CIA reports
at the time did not mention this possibility. There was basic disagree-
ment, as to whether or not we had achieved the "cross-over point" and
more broadly how well the "big war" was going. One optimistic CIA
analysis which Bundy quoted contradicted a later CIA statement expressing
the view that the enemy's strategic position had improved over the past
year. State's INR also disagreed with CIA on Hanoi's basic objectives,
with CIA arguing that Hanoi was determined to wear us down or in the
vernacular of the time "wait us out,” while INR felt that Hanoi was
really determined to seek more positive victoriesin the South. The INR
also believed that the bombing was having a greater effect than did the
CIA. CIA and Vance, of course, had been saying for some time that all of
the worthwhile targets in North Vietnam except the ports had been struck,
while as we have seen, the JCS disagreed with this assessment. There
was some allusion to the dispute over whether or not inflationary pres-
sures would be aggravated by the increase in U.S. forces under Course A.
DOD said that these pressures were under control and could be handled if
Course A were adopted, while the CIA felt otherwise. (Comment: This
leads to the suspicion that the piaster limitation might not have been
as critical as was originally believed and possibly was just an instru-
ment of a sophisticated rationalization for limiting force increases in
the earlier programs.) Katzenbach also cited a basic disagreement about
just what message an increase of U.S. forces or a massive call-up of
Reserves would communicate to Hanoi.

The general goals which the Undersecretary predicated in Vietnam
and upon which he based the analysis which followed were: first, to
withdraw U.S, forces from Vietnam; we would only do so with the high
degree of confidence that three things were accomplished -- (1) that
we would be behind a stable democratic government (democratic by Asian
standards); (2) that we would confront the prospect of a reasonably stable
peace in Southeast Asia for several years; and (3) that we will have
demonstrated that we met our commitments to the government of Vietnam.
To do these, we had to persuade the North Vietnamese to give up their
aggression and we had to neutralize the internal Viet Cong threat while
in the process being careful not to create an American satellite nor to
generate widespread anti-American sentiment nor destroy the social
fabric of South Vietnam, nor incur disproportionate losses in our rela-
tions with other countries or bring in so called "enemy" countries.

18h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
