Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(2) Widen the War.

Adoption of this alternative would require more forces
than are now being considered and it runs further risks of
involving China and the USSR. The course of events already
set in motion could lead to adoption of this alternative;
increasing US forces in SVN would undoubtedly increase ‘the
possibilities of it. And the option is open fcr North
Korea. or other aggressive countries to test our will else-
where. .

(3) Opt Out of the War.

The price of quitting now would include the under-
mining of our other commitments world-wide, bitter dissension
at home, and a probable resurgence of active Chinese-USSR
territorial aggrandizements.

Before TET we could have done this with less risk than
now. * is

(4) Resuscitate GVN and RVNAF.
This option is to return to the concept of a GVN
war with US assistance instead of the present situation of
a US war with dubious GVN assistance. j

Adoption of this alternative requires:

(a) A solid commitment to a US force ceiling.
This commitment must be communicated to the highest levels

of GVN/RVNAF and our own military leaders.

(ob) A skillful conditioning of US and world
opinion to the limited US commitment to the South Vietnamese
war and to our right of withdrawal if GVN/RVNAF determina-
tion or performance wavers. :

(c) A statement that the US objective in SVN is
to develop the GVN capability to defeat the VC and NVA
forces in SVN and force their withdrawal. ho/_

The remaining Systems Analysis paper cited statistics to show that,
in the past, the North Vietnamese had been able to match the U.S. buildup
in SVN with their own buildup. Also statistics were used to project the
cost to the U.S. in casualties resulting from various deployment options
and-various strategies on the ground. These projections showed that a
shift to a population control strategy which was unchallenged by the enemy
would stabilize casualty rates, as some units would be underemployed. 41

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
