rs

fe i 4

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

We shall need forces to support a cowmter-guerrilla war
in Vietnam:

aircraft
helicopters
communications men
special forces
militia teachers
etc.

wir 13/

Two things ere striking about this note: first, it is a quite exact
description of the sort of military assistence Kennedy finally dispatched
to Vietnam (i.e., combat support and advisors but not American units
capable of independent combat against the guerrillas). Second, it cer-
tainly suggests that despite what Lansdale, McGarr, and others were doing,
those close to the President were not at this time thinking about sending
American combat units to Vietnam (or any American forces, for even the
units Rostow lists are for "later" in contrast to "Thailand now"), Never-
theless on July 20, McGarr again raised the question of combat units for
training with Diem, and reported again that he did not want them.

In general, we seem to be seeing here a pattern that first began to
emerge in the handling of the Task Force Report and which will be even
more strikingly evident in the President's handling of the Taylor Report.

Someone or other is frequently promoting the idea of sending U.S.
combat units. Kennedy never makes a clear-cut decision but some way or
other action is always deferred on any move that would probably lead to
engegements on the ground between American units and the Viet Cong.

We have no unambiguous basis for judging just what had really hap-
pened in each case. But we do see a similar pattern et least twice and
possibly three different times: in May, perhaps again in June (depending
on details of Thuan's talks in Washington not available to this study),
and as we will report shortly, again in November. In each case, the
record seems to be moving toward a decision to send troops, or at least
to a Presidential decision that, in principal, troops should be sent if
Diem can be persuaded to accept them. But no such decision is ever
reached. The record never shows the President himself as the controlling
figure. In June, there does not seem to be any record of what happened,
at least in the files evailable to this study. In May and, as we Will
see, in November, the President conveniently receives a revised draft of
the recommendations which no longer requires him to commit himself.

No reliable inference can be drawn from this about how Kennedy would
have behaved in 1965 and beyond had he lived. (One of those who had
advised retaining freedom of action on the issue of sending U.S. combat

68°
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
