Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that the U.S. could have insisted that Paris buy Ho and provide
Indochinese independence without endangering the more basic relation-
ship between the U.S. and France in Europe. Just as the U.S. came to
recognize the prime importance of Europe over any policy it pursued
elsewhere, so the French government would have soon realized (if it

had not already done so) that nothing should be done to impair seriously
U.S. acceptance of common interests in European recovery and collective
security. Moreover, it was not as if there were not sizeable segments
of the French community which would not have supported graceful U.S.
attempts to extricate France from Indochina. It may well be, however,
that the "Tito hypothesis" assumes a compliance from France of which
France was demonstrably incapable. No French government is likely to
have survived a genuinely liberal policy toward Ho in 1945 or 196;
even French communists then favored redemption of control in Indochina.
From '46 on, however, bloodshed hardened policy in France. As before,
the Ho alternative was never seriously contemplated.

French representations to the contrary notwithstanding, Ho Chi
Minh possessed real political strength among the people of Vietnam.
While calling Ho another George Washington may be stretching the point,
there is no doubt about his being the only popularly~recognized war-
time leader of the Vietnamese resistance, and the head of the strongest
and only Vietnam-wide political movement. There can be no doubt either
that in a test by ballot only Ho's Viet Minh could have delivered votes
at the hamlet level. Washington and Paris, however, did not focus on
the fact of Ho's strength, only on the consequences of his rule. Paris
viewed Ho as a threat to its regaining French economic, cultural and
political prerogatives in Indochina. The U.5S., wary of Ho's known
communist background, was apprehensive that Ho would lead Vietnam into
the Soviet, and later Chinese, orbit. President Eisenhower's later
remark about Ho's winning a free election in Vietnam with an 80% vote
shone through the darkness of our vision about Vietnam; but U.S. policy
remained unillumined.

In the last speculation, U.S. support for Ho Chi Minh would have
involved perspicacity and risk. As clear as national or independent
or neutral communism may seem today, it was a blurred vision in 1945-
1948. Even with the benefit of seeing Tito successfully assert his
independence, it would have been hard for Washington to make the leap
from there to an analogy in Asia. Recourse to "national communism" in
Vietnam as an eventual bulwark against China, indeed, would have called
for a perspicacity unique in U.S. history. The risk was there, too.
The reality of Ho's strength in Vietnam could have worked seriously
against U.S. interests as well as against Chinese Communist interests.
Ho's well-known leadership and drive, the iron discipline and effective-
ness of the Viet Minh, the demonstrated fighting capability of his
armies, a dynamic Vietnamese people under Ho's control, could have pro-
duced a dangerous period of Vietnamese expansionism. Laos and Cambodia
would have been easy pickings for such a Vietnam. Ho, in fact, always

C-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
