87.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV.B. FROM MAY TO SEPTEMBER

CHAPTER IV

At the end of September, Admiral Harry Felt, Commander-in-Chief of
U.S. forces in the Pacific, stopped off in Saigon on his way to a SBATO
meeting in Bangkok. Felt, Ambassador Nolting, and several of their
senior aides met with Diem at Independence Palace, on the evening of
the 29th. According to Nolting's cable the following day:

In course of long discussion...Diem pointed the question.
He asked for a bilateral defense treaty with the U.S. This
rather large and unexpected request seemed to have been
dragged in by the heels at the end of a fer~ranging discussion,
put we discovered upon questioning that it was seriously in-
tended... 1/

Although the availeble record does not explicitly say so, this re-
quest presumably triggered the intensive attention to Vietnam planning
that began early in October (Nolting's cable arrived October 1) end led
to the decision on the llth to send the Taylor Mission.

The balance of this chapter reviews the major developments between
the Presidential decisions on the Tesk Force Report (May 11) and the
arrival of Nolting's cable on the treaty request (October 1).

I, THe JOHNSON MTSSTON

The availeble record tells us almost nothing about the Vice
President's visit to Saigon beyond what is described in the public
memoirs. We know from Nolting's cables that Johnson brought up the
possibility of U.S. troops in Vietnam and of a bileteral treaty after
Diem (in an after-dinner conversation) began to talk about the problems
that communist gains in Laos would create for him. We know that Diem
replied that he wanted U.S. combat troops only in the event of open
invasion and that he also did not show interest in a treaty. 2/

But we do not know what, if anything, Johnson was authorized to say
if Diem hed reacted affirmatively. And this could have ranged anywhere
from attempting to discourege Diem if he did show interest, to offering
some specific proposal and timetable. No strong inference can be drawn
from the fact thet Johnson, rather then Diem, raised the issue. Even if
the President had decided against making troop commitments to Vietnam
at that time, there would have been nothing outrageous about instructing
Johnson to refer to such a possibility once Diem began to talk about
his concerns due to Laos. After all, the whole point of the Johnson

52
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
