Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

“wringing out of the VC from the land like you wring water out of a
sponge," is slow and methodical, requires vast numbers of troops,

runs the risk of turning into an occupation even while being called
"nacification/civie action," and involves Americans deeply in the
politics and traditions of rural Vietnam. The strategy can succeed,
perhaps, but if it is to succeed, it must be undertaken with full
awareness by the highest levels of the USG of its potential costs in
manpower and time, and the exacting nature of the work. Instead, the
documents suggest that the Marines determined their strategy basically
on their own, deriving part of it from their own traditions in the
"Banana Republics" and China (where Generals Walt, Krulek, Nickerson,
and others had served in the 1930's), and partly from an attempt to
solve problems of an unprecedented nature which were cropping up
inside their TAORs, even on the edge of the great air base at Da Nang,

As it was, the Marine strategy was judged successful, at least
by the Merines, long before it had even had a real test. It was
applauded by many observers before the VC had begun to react to it,
and as such, encouraged imitators while it was still unproven.

The Marine dilemma was how to support the pacification effort
without taking it over. They thought they had succeeded in doing
this by "self-effacing support for Vietnamese rural construction"
after August of 1965, but there is much contradictory evidence on
this point. The Marines themselves, according to the classified
historical study they recently produced, understood that their pacifica-
tion work had “to function through local Vietnamese officials. ‘The
tendency to produce Marine Corps programs or to work 'democratically'
through individuals had to be strictly controlled. Only Vietnamese
programs could be tolerated and support of these programs had to take
place through Vietnamese governing officials..." 32/

But despite their good intentions to work through the existing
GVN structure, the Marines found in many cases that the existing
structure barely existed, except on paper, and in other cases that
the existing structure was too slow and too corrupt for their require-
ments. And gradually the Marines got more deeply into the politics
of rural Vietnam than they had intended, or presumably desired,

Their difficulties were greatest in the area of highest priority,
the National. Priority Area (as it was to be designated in October 1965)
south of Da Nang. In a nine-village complex just south of the air base,
the Marines urged upon the GVN successful completion of a special
pacification program which had been designed by them in close conjunc-
tion with the Quang Nem Deputy Province Chief. The nine villages were
divided into two groups, and the first phase, scheduled for completion
first in December of 1965, included only five of the villages, with
only 23,000 people living in them. By February, 1966, the plan had
slipped considerably, and the projected completion.date for the first

1B ath TOP SECRET - Sensitive
