Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

JOHNSON ADMINISTRATION - 1966
SUMMARY

The Johnson Administration continued to employ the rationale of
previous administrations throughout 1966 in justifying U.S. involvement
in Vietnam. The Administration attempted continually to explain why
the U.S. was involved. Significantly, the U.S. also sought to publicize
the legal basis for the commitment as well as establishing firmly that
the commitment under SEATO would be fulfilled. The themes initially
stressed reassurance of the U.S. intent to remain in the struggle, later
building on the legality of commitment, and finally, stressing American ‘
aims and objectives in Vietnam. Points emphasized were:

a. The U.S. pledged to stay in Vietnam until aggression had
stopped and to honor commitments. "Our stand must be as firm as ever."

b. The question -- why are we in Vietnam? -- was repeatedly
answered: to help promote Vietnamese freedom and world security, to
fulfill the SEATO obligation, to stop aggression and wars of liberation,
to make Communist expansion unprofitable, and to prove that guerrilla
wars cannot succeed.

ec. Legally, the U.S. involvement was traced from the Geneva
Accords end the Eisenhower commitnent in 1954 ("to assist the Government
of Vietnam in developing and maintain a strong, viable state, capable of
resisting attempted subversion or aggression through military means."),
through SEATO ("collective self-defense against armed attack") to the
Kennedy commitments of 1961.

d. Asian communism was recognized repeatedly as a clear and
present. danger -- "aggression feeds on aggression" -- as well as the
fact that the security of Southeast Asia was extremely important to
the security interests of the U.S.

e. The fulfillment of the U.S. commitment had necessarily
changed with the nature of the aggression requiring combat troops only
pecause of the “escalation of aggression by the other side."

f. The U.S. aims in Vietnam were limited to the desire for a

political solution, to assure self-determination for the people of South
Vietnam, and reunification of Vietnam decided by free choice.

D-60
