Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

strengthened and I know that you will want to do the same at
your end. I was impressed with Ambassador Porter and it seems
to me that he probably has the necessary qualifications to
give you the support you will need in this field. While I
know that he is already doing so, I suggest that your desig-
nation of him as being in total charge, under your supervision,
of all aspects of the rural construction program would consti-
tute a clear and visible sign to the Vietnamese and to our own
people that the Honolulu Conference really marks a new departure
in this vital field of ow effort there. We will of course be
glad to give prompt support with whatever additional personnel
or administrative rearrangement this might require within the
Mission or Embassy. Please let me know your own thoughts on
this.

"I hope that in June we can have a full report showing real
progress in our war On social misery in Viet Nam. In the mean-
while, I know that you will not hesitate to let me know how we
can be of help. UNQUOTE

"The President has instructed that a copy of this message
be given to McGeorge Bundy." 2/

Mhe President also sent General Westmoreland a personal telegram that day,
which did not mention the matter of civilian organization. To Westmore-
land he wrote:

"QUOTE. I want you to know that I greatly enjoyed the oppor-
tunity of talking directly with you at Honolulu and I hope you
share my own satisfaction on the outcome of that conference.

I was much encouraged by your presentation of the military
situation and now have even more pride and confidence in what
you and your men are doing. I feel that we are on the right
track and you can be sure of my continued support.

"I know that you share my own views on the equal importance of
the war on social misery, and hope that what we did at Honolulu
will help assure that we and the Vietnemese move forward with
equal vigor and determination on that front. As I have told
Ambassador Lodge and am telling Thieu and Ky, I hope thst in
June I can have a report of real progress in that field. With
continued progress in the military field, we should by that
time be able to see ahead more clearly the road to victory over
poth aggression and misery.

"You have my complete confidence and genuine admiration and

absolute support. I never forget that I have a lot riding on
you. UNQUOTE." 3/ j

ANSI an” TOP SECRET - Sensitive
