Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a U.S. guarantee of the Accords, could not prevent the U.S. from subsequently
bringing Cambodia and Laos within the security perimeter of SEATO through

the Protocol, a device broached by Under Secretary Smith at Geneva.

later, the U.S. spread this umbrella over SVN as well.

3. The DRV Views Its Gains and Losses

a. Advantages are Gained, but at a Price

In terms of advantages, the military accords signed 21 July
by Ta Quang Buu, Vice-Minister of National Defense of the DRV, and Brigadier
General Delteil, Commander of French Union Forces in Indochina, ceded the
DRV full control of all Vietnamese territory north of the line set roughly
at the 17th parallel. French attempts to acquire enclaves in the area of
the bishoprics and around Haiphong had been rejected, and all French forces
were to be withdrawn from Haiphong within 300 days. Moreover, the Final
Declaration of the Conference specified that the demarcation line was pro-
visional and, under Article 7, would be expunged by elections to be held
in July, 1956. The DRV, therefore, could look forward to a possible legal
victory at the ballot boxes within two years.

But, the disappointments to the Viet Minh must have weighed
heavily also. National unity was specifically compromised by the creation
of two zones divided by a demilitarized area at the 17th, rather than the
13th or lth, parallel. A fast political solution in six months had to be
bargained away as well; elections would not be held for two years, and
even then under international, not strictly Vietnamese, supervision.
Finally, the Viet Minh had been forced to yield completely on their claims
advanced in support of the Pathet Lao and Free Khmer forces. In Laos and
Cambodia, as in Vietnam, international rather than indigenous inspection
teams were to be admitted. The so-called resistance forces would either
have to be withdrawn (in Laos, following temporary regroupment) or demobilized
(in Cambodia) on the spot. The Viet Minh could only salvage promises from
the governments of Laos and, Cambodia -- contained in their separate delcara-
tions of 21 July -- that "citizens" of the two countries would be able to
participate as candidates or electors in elections to be held during 1955.
The Viet Minh accepted these results even though they went well beyond
compromise positions which they advanced through the talks.

b. The DRV is Insured of Territorial Consolidation

The Viet Minh had no desire to surrender their de facto control
over considerable areas of Vietnam outside the Tonkin Delta. During June
and July, according to CIA maps, Viet Minh forces held down the larger
portion of Annam (excepting the major port cities) and significant pockets
in the Cochin-China delta. Their consequent claim to all the territory
north of a line running northwest from the 13th to the 14th parallel (from
Tuy Hoa on the coast through Pleiku to the Cambodian border) 8/ was far
more in keeping with the actual military situation than the French demand

D-8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
