—

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

MR. SPIVAK. Have we stopped the bombing there?

SECRETARY RUSK. No, we have not had a pause in
the traditionally accepted sense but we have limited
the bombing at certain points in order to make it some-
what easier to carry forward these explorations so that
particularly difficult incidents would not interrupt
them. We have not gone into a pause as that word is
generally understood.

But they've also known that the Tet cease-fire was
coming up. And they've known from earlier years that
we've been interested in converting something like a Tet
cease-fire into a more productive dialogue, into some
opportunity to move toward peace.

Now in the face of all these elements they partici-
pated in laying on this major offensive. Now I think it
would be foolish not to draw a political conclusion from
this that they are not seriously interested at the present
time in. talking about peaceful settlement. Or in explor-
ing the problems connected with the San Antonio formula.

I remind those who don't recall that formula that it was
that we would stop the bombing when it would lead promptly
to productive discussions. And we assumed that they

would not take advantage of this cessation of bombing
while such discussions were going on.

Now it's hard to imagine a more reasonable proposal
by any nation involved in an armed conflict than that. And
T think we have to assume that these recent offensives in
the south are an answer, are an answer, in addition to
their public denunciation of the San Antonio formula.

MR. ABEL. Are you saying, Mr. Secretary, that we
interpret this offensive as their rejection of the diplomatic
overtures that have been made?

SECRETARY RUSK, Well, they have rejected the San
Antonio formula publicly, simply on the political level.
And I think it would be foolish for us not to take into
account what they're doing on the ground when we try to
analyze what their political position is. You remember
the old saying that what you do speaks so loud I can't
hear what you say. Now we can't be indifferent to these
actions on the ground and think that these have no con-
sequences from 4 political point of view. So they know
where we live. Everything that we've said, our 14 points,
28 proposals to which we've said yes and to which they've

1h7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
