Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

{17

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

as other targets in those areas.

Moreover, even if the impact of POL strikes would be
within NVN itself -- because NVN supplied no POL at all to NVA/VC forces
in the South and used next to none in transporting other goods there --
POL was at least relevant as an interdiction target. It did power trucks
and boats which were involved in carrying men and supplies South. If
any truck in the NVN fleet was an acceptable interdiction target, wherever
it was and whatever its cargo, why not any POL?

4. McNamara Endorses POL, The President Defers It

Resumption of ROLLING THUNDER, as initiation of the pause,
did not, of course, constitute a final decision on escalation. The views
of CINCPAC and the JCS remained unaltered, and Secretary McNamara stood
committed, unless he reversed himself, to enlarging the area and intensity
of interdiction bombing and to destroying North Vietnamese POL. Neither
in OSD nor the White House had anyone opposed these measures on other than
prudential grounds -- the risk of alienating allies or provoking Chinese
or Russian intervention or uncertainty that results would justify either
the risks or the costs. Everyone seemed agreed that, were it not for these
factors, intensified bombing of the North would help to accomplish American
objectives. Nevertheless, the position of the decision-makers can best be
characterized as hesitant.

The services naturally undertook to tip the balance toward
the rapid and extensive escalation they had all along advocated. To
MeNamara's memorandum to the President, the JCS had attached a dissent.
They felt that the Secretary underrated the "cumulative effect of our
air campaign against the DRV on morale and DRV capabilities" and over-
estimated the "constancy of will of the Hanoi leaders to continue 4
struggle which they realize they cannot win in the face of progressively
greater destruction of their country." 63/

When McNamara reported to the Chairman the President's ruling

on ROLLING THUNDER, he apparently spoke of the difficulty of making out a
convincing case that air operations against North Vietnam could seriously
affect PAVN/VC’ operations in the South. In any event, following a conver-
sation with the Secretary, General Wheeler ordered formation of a special
study group to devise a bombing effort "redirected for optimum military
effect." He explained, "the primary objective should be to reduce to the
maximum extent the support in men and materiel being provided by North
Viet-Nam to the Viet Cong and PAVN forces in South Viet-Nam." 64/ Headed

by a Brigadier General from SAC, composed of five Air Force, three Navy,
two Army, and one Marine Corps officers, and making extensive use of
GINCPAC assistance, this study group went to work in early February, with
‘an assignment to produce at least an interim report by 1 March and a final
report no later than 1 August. 65/

8h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
