Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

Sip

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Something of the mood of the time can be sensed in these quotes, one
from a March 28 NIE on Southeast Asia, another from Lansdale's notes, and
finally a significant question from a Kennedy press conference;

From the NIE:

There is a deep awareness among the countries of Southeast Asia
that developments in the Laotian crisis, and its outcome, have a
profound impact on their future. The governments of the area
tend to regard the Laotian crisis as a symbolic test of strengths
between the major powers of the West and the Communist bloc. 3/

From Lansdale's notes (about April 21):

1. Psychological -- VN believed always they main target. Now
it comes -- ‘when our turn comes, will we be treated the same
as Laos?' Main task GVN confidence in US. L/

And suggesting the more general tone of the time (even a week before
the Bay of Pigs, prompted by the Soviet orbiting of a man in space) this
question at Kennedy's April 12 news conference:

Mr. President, this question might better be asked at a history
class than at a news conference, but here it is anyway. The
Communists seem to be putting us on the defensive on a number of
fronts -- now, again, in space. Wars aside, do you think there
is a danger that their system is going to prove more durable than

ours. 5/

The President answered with cautious reassurance. Eight days later,
after the Bay of Pigs, and the day he ordered the Task Force to go ahead,
he told the Association of Newspaper Editors:

seooit 18 clearer than ever that we face a relentless struggle
in every corner of the globe that goes far beyond the clash of
armies, or even nuclear armaments. The armies are there. But
they serve primarily as the shield behind which subversion,
infiltration, and a host of other tactics steadily advance,
picking off vulnerable areas one by one in situations that do
not permit our own armed intervention.... We dare not fail to
see the insidious nature of this new and deeper struggle. We
dare not fail to grasp the new concepts, the new tools, the

new sense of urgency we will need to combat it -- whether in
Cuba or South Vietnam. 6/ (Notice Kennedy's explicit assump-
tion about US armed intervention as a means of dealing with
insurgencies. Wot too much can be read into his remark, for it
probably was inspired primarily by criticism of his refusal to
try to save the Bay of Pigs contingent. But the balance of the
record adds significance to the comment. )

ee. TOP SECREP - Sensitive
