a

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

#

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

improved upon, the main thrust of his talk with Khanh was to hint that the
USG would in the immediate future be preparing U.S. public opinion for ac-
tions against North Vietnam. Khanh was reported to be eager to learn more
about the details. 82/

On June 13, Saigon replied to the State request for specific pro-
posals. A MACV study had been completed on point 1 and the RVNAF would
be approached. On point 2, it was noted that RF and PI were already under
the province chiefs; ARVN would be approached on province command of regu-
lars. A wordy description of “concept” spoke to the remainder of State's
ten points. 83/ It provoked a Jong series of specific questions from
Washington about the 8 provinces, asking in short, “How soon can action
be initiated?” 84/

On June 25, COMUSMACV sent his request to JCS for an increase of
4,200 U.S. personnel to implement this expanded advisory effort. He viewed
these as efforts to "influence the successful planning and execution of
the National Pacification Plan." Subsector advisors were to be "a general
reinforcement of the pacification effort at district level." 85/ Conse-
quently, the MACV terms ef reference for subsector advisors were developed
to provide that teams would extend the capabilities of USOM and USIS.
Guidance was intentionally not specific.

The same day General Westmoreland reported that, with the Ambassa-
dor's concurrence, he had called on General Khanh to discuss three military
matters: (1) Augmentation of advisors at battalion level and extension
of larger advisory teams to most districts; (2) The urgent need to coordi-+
nate pacification efforts in the provinces surrounding Saigon; and (3) ‘The
necessity of moving o regiment to Long An (the pacification show-case) as
soon as possible. General Khanh's reply was very receptive and agreeable
on all matters. 86/

On June 26, Lodge sent his last message as Ambassador reporting

-that he and General Westmoreland had that day met with General Khanh end had

reached "general egreement" on the concept, scope, and organization set

‘forth in the Saigon reply of June 13 (referred to above). 8

Meanwhile the proposal for a province advisors’ fund reappeared
in a new form, and won quick approval. USOM agreed that ATD should spend
$200,000 from its contingency funds for direct purchase of piasters, to
allocate to sector advisors for small expenditures (usvally less than $25
at a time). The funds were to buy local materials and services for projects
using AID commodities; end their use was to be coordinated with the Viet-
namese Province Chief, 88/ By subsequent us/GVN agreement, all uses of A
these funds and commodities, and requisitions of the commodities from Saigon
warehouses, required unanimous approval of a three-man ("troika") Provin-
ciel Coordinating Committee consisting of the Province Chief, the U.S. AID
Provincial Representative and the MACV Sector Advisor. The troika sign-
off had already applied te the commodities, as the means to the U.S. veto
on their use mentioned above in Section 1. Except for a high-level agree-
ment each year on the size and overall allocation of these resources,

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
