Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

If we followed RSM approach, ruin our image (pushing for
deal) and cause demoralization. Tri Quang may even say we
selling out.

We ch*lled bids earlier.
Could there be an independent Delta? Already accommodation.

As McNaughton's notes reveal, the group that met at the
White House on April 9 was preoccupied with the immediate political
crisis in South Vietnam. Early that morning, Walt Rostow had addressed
a memo to Secretaries Rusk and McNamara suggesting a course of action
for "breaking Tri Quang's momentum." gt/ His proposal -- which was the
form the subsequent solution took -- called for giving substantial
tactical concessions to the Buddhists on the issue of the Constituent
Assembly in order to bring the regime-threatening deomonstrations to an
end. At the White House meeting later that day several participants
were called on to prepare papers on the crisis.

Leonard Unger of the State Department drafted a paper out-
lining five possible outcomes of the crisis, the last two of which were
a secession of neutralist northern provinces and/or a complete collapse of
Saigon political machinery with the VC moving into the vacuum. 98/ His
paper was probally considered at a meeting on Monday, April 12, as sug-
gested by McNaughton's handwritten notes. 99/ At the same meeting,
a long memorandum prepared by George Carver of CIA in response to a request
at the Friday meeting,and entitled "Consequences of Buddhist Political
Victory in South Vietnam," was also considered. 100/ Carver argued that
while a Buddhist government would have been difficult for us to deal with
it would not have been impossible and, given the evident political strength
of the Buddhists, might even work to our long range advantage. The three
American options in such a contingency were: (1) trying to throw out the
new government; (2) attempting to work with it; or (3) withdrawing from
South Vietnam. Clearly, he argued, the second was the best in view of
our commitments..

That same day, Maxwell Taylor sent the President a detailed
memo with recommendations for dealing with the Buddhist uprising. In
essence he recommended that the U.S. take a tough line in support of Ky
and against the Buddhists. In his words,

ewe must prevent Tri Quang from overthrowing the
Directorate (with or without Ky who personally is expendable)
and support a conservative, feasible schedule for a transi-
tion to constitutional government. In execution of such a
program, the GVN (Ky, for the present) should be encouraged
to use the necessary force to restore and maintain order, short
of attempting to reimpose government rule by bayonets on

99 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
