ory

i»

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

G. Did U.S. assistance through 1960 result in creation of a South

Vietnamese Army in the image of the U.S. Army?

While it would probably be incorrect to assert that the U.S. created
a complete "mirror image" of its own forces in the Vietnamese defense estab-
lishment, consideration of the mission, strategy, tactics, organizations,
manpower policy, equipment, and training of that establishment indicates thet
conscious and unconscious U.S. efforts did result in emphasis on conventional
forces (at the expense of paramilitary forces) "governed by the concept of a
war front enabling use of the superior weaponry and technology of the West
against a guerrilla force that was potentially the spearhead of a more mas-
sive thrust out of North Vietnam." 1214/

1. Evolution of the mission of the VNA has been described. The
fact is that assignment of a dual mission to VNA led rapidly to formation of
a regular military establishment designed primarily to counter the threat of
overt invasion from the North. Countering the internal threat--as is so
often the case--was downgraded to the status of a “lesser-included capa-
bility in the regular forces." 125/

2. The Strategy of the regular establishment was described as
Cap SE eerreer

early as 1956 as

defensive in nature and involves the conduct of a delaying action
against external aggression of sufficient duration and effec-
tiveness to hold as much ground as possible, and retain the key
Strategic entity, the Saigon Complex, in order to permit the

' arrival of the foreign military assistance which will be neces-
Sary to preserve her territorial integrity and national sovereignty
ees This defensive strategy must not only include consideration
of the enemy threat in the form of overt military aggression from
outside her borders bus also from separate or concurrent extensive
guerrilla and clandestine activities conducted by indigenous dis-
Sident groups or foreign military and political cadres already
present or infiltrated into the country. 116/

The latter threat was countered by the territorial regiments in 1956; these

regiments were abolished in 1959, with the advent of the 7 standard division

force. Thus on the strategic level the regular forces came to reflect the
strategy evolved by the U.S. in Korea and elsewhere.

3. On the tactical level the Vietnamese forces also came to re-
flect standard U.S. doctrine--with one possible exception, that of “paci-
fication,"

Thus the tactical doctrine which will probably emerge from the
present /1956/ reorganization and training period will most likely

TOP-SECRET - Sensitive
2h
