Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

law, have deliberately and repeatedly attacked United States naval vessels
lawfully present in international waters, and have thereby created a serious
threat to international peace; and

"Whereas these attacks are part of a deliberate and systematic campaign
of aggression that the communist regime in North Vietnam has been waging
ageinst its neighbors and the nations joined with them in the collective
defense of their freedom; and

"Whereas the United States is assisting the peoples of Southeast Asia '
to protect their freedom and has no territorial, military or political am-
bitions in that area, but desires only that these peoples should be left
in peace to work out their own destinies in their own way: Now, therefore,
be it

"Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled, That the Congress approves and i ax
supports the determination of the President, as Commander in Chief, to
take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces

of the United States and to prevent further aggression.

"Sec. 2. The United States regards as vital to its national interest
and to world peace the maintenance of international peace and security in
Southeast Asia. Consonant with the Constitution of the United States and
the Charter of the United Nations and in accordance with its obligations
under the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, the United States is,
therefore, prepared, as the President determines, to take all necessary
steps, including the use of armed force, to assist any member or protocol
state of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance
in defense of its freedom.

"Sec. 3. This resolution shall expire when the President shall deter-
mine that the peace and security of the area is reasonably assured by inter-
national conditions created by action of the United Nations or otherwise,
except that it may be terminated earlier by concurrent resolution of the
Congress."

13. "Freedom in the Postwar World,” by Secretary Rusk before American
Veterans of WWiland Korea, Se ts August 1964, Department

of State Bulletin, 14 September 1 p-. 365:

% *& *

"In Southeast Asia the free world suffered a setback in 1954 when, after
the defeat at Dien Bien Phu, Vietnam was divided and a communist regime was
consolidated in Hanoi. We helped South Vietnam to get on its feet and to
build its military defenses. It made remarkable progress for a few years --
which is perhaps why Communist North Vietnam, with the backing of Communist
China, renewed its aggression against South Vietnam in 1959. In 1961
President Kennedy reviewed the situation, concluded that the assault from

D-17
