Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On the other hand, if Course A was pursued:

e. The greatly intensified pressures against NVN
that could be applied by conducting the air and naval
operations described in Annex D are not dependent on

‘Course A or Course B force levels. These military actions
can be initiated at any time with existing forces. By
increasing pressure on the enemy's warmaking capability,
the cumulative effect would complement the effects of
added deployments in the south. On the other hand, con-
tinued restraint, further restrictions or cessation of
the air campaign would provide the enemy with an incentive
and allow him the means to sustain and increase his sup-
port of aggression in SVN relatively unmolested. 17/

On the bombing, the high military chiefs persisted in their recom-
mendations contained in JCSM 218-67 asking for a more effective air/
naval campaign against North Vietnam, to include striking (closing)
principal North Vietnamese ports. The complete recommendations of
the study included:

It is concluded that:

a. The force levels of Course A for FY 68 should
be deployed as recommended in JCSM-218-67. They are
required in FY 68 to meet the threat posed in I CTZ, to
continue the pressures on the ve/NVA in SVN, and .to sus-
tain the progress of RD. Course B force levels would not
fulfill this requirement.

b. Course A force levels would provide the capability
to deploy additional forces in FY 69 should such action be
indicated.

e. Course A provides more flexibility in providing
the forces in the stipulated time frame for the immediate
need, @ greater capability to accomplish the mission, and
@ better posture for possible contingencies than does
Course B.

d. As recommended in JCSM-218-67, a more effective
air/navel campaign against NVN to include the principal
NVN ports should be undertaken now with existing forces.

e. Further restrictions or cessation of air action

against NVN would tend to prolong the war and could be
costly to friendly forces.

170 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
