Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The initial steps in ground build-up appear to have been grudgingly
taken, indicating that the President of the United States and his ad-
visers recognized the tremendous inertial implications of ground troop
deployments. Halting ground involvement was seen to be a manifestly
greater problem than halting air or naval activity. In addition, the
early build-up may have been permitted some leisure because of the lack
of ‘immediate urgency in the situation in Vietnam and the necessity to
improve on an inadequate logistical base there.

III. Strategies for Ground Force Employment

A. Strategy of Security

The strategy of security arose with the beginning of the bomb-
ing programs and was designed simply to increase security of U.S. bases
and installations supporting those programs. It was conceived at a
time when enthusiasm for the bombing programs was high and its proponents
were at pains to insure that U.S. troops did not get involved in the
ground war. All 9 of the U.S. battalions deployed to Vietnam by June
1965 had base security as their primary mission, and 21 of the 44 U.S.
and Third Country battalions deployed by the end of 1965 were so oriented.
In part, however, most of those units were deployed for far more ambitious
reasons. At a maximum, four Marine and possibly two Army battalions
were recommended for deployment solely under the provisions of the
security strategy, and the strategy was a dead letter by the time most
of those deployments had been approved. |

The strategy of security expired along with the early hopes
that Rolling Thunder could succeed by itself. The non-involvement of
the "security troops" in the ground war was designed to keep U.S.
casualties to a minimum and to facilitate withdrawal. By deploying its
own troops to secure bases, the U.S. showed lack of confidence in the
RVNAF, but by keeping U.S. troops out of the fighting it demonstrated
at the same time belief that the RVNAF would be able to hold on wntil
the other side decided it had had enough. Because of the well-known
shibboleth about U.S. involvement in an Asian ground war and because
of the ponderous nature of ground force deployments, it was inevitable
that some observers would see in the strategy of security the crossing
of a threshold. -

B. Enclave Strategy

The President decided during NSC meetings on 1 and 2 April 1965
to. get U.S. ground combat units involved in the war against the insurgents.

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
