Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

require US force levels substantially above those recom-
mended. They note especially that the equation and factors
used to price out piaster costs permit only rough approxi-
mations and have not been tested over a length of time.

They also note that the three force-level packages do not
cost out precisely at 42.0, 44.0, and 46.0 billion piasters,
respectively, since the operational requirement for balanced
forces prevented that degree of precision...." 69/

6. Decision on Program #4

With the Chiefs' views in hand the Secretary of Defense met
with the President on 4 November, and again at the ranch on Saturday,
the 5th. By late Saturday morning, the basic ground force deployment
decision had been made. Mr. McNamara, announced in an open-air press
conference that increases in Vietnam would be forthcoming "but at a
substantially lower rate and that draft calls for the next four months
fwould/ be significantly smaller." 70/ He also quoted a "new study"
based upon interrogations of NVA/VC captives and defectors which showed
that extensive allied air-ground operations impaired morale, exposed the
sanctuaries, reduced food supplies and brought the enemy death figure
to over 1,000 per week. He did not comment on how he thought the war
effort was going or what meaning he saw in the new report.

The elections were held on Tuesday, 8 November, with mixed results
for the Administration. It was difficult to tie specific results, or
even the general trend to the war issue. Even when there was some rela-
tionship, "basic dissatisfaction" was usually the explanation, a neutral
reply which failed to explain whether the respondents wanted to hasten
the end by escalation of our military efforts, by withdrawal, or what.
The fact that off-year elections are traditionally demaging to the party
in power further blurred the issue. In the end, lL? House seats and
8 Governorships had been gained by the Republicans and, in light of even
those "minor" gains, the 1968 Presidential race, potentially one debating
our war policies, promised to be a more interesting and heated campaign
than anyone had anticipated two years before.

E. Anti-Climaxes
1. Program Four is Announced
McNamara and General Wheeler returned to the ranch on Friday,
the 10th, to participate in a joint news conference. In the meantime,

Dr. Enthoven had given the following memorandum to the Secretary of
Defense;

101 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
