Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

my mouth the concept of ‘the yellow peril," which was a racial concept
of 60 or 70 years ago fostered by extreme journalism of those days.
This is not in my mind.

"I pointed cut that other Asian nations, ranging from Korea and
Japan on the one side around to the subcontinent of India on the other,
are concerned about their own safety over against the things which are
being said and done in Peking and by Peking. These free nations of
Asia also are of Asian races. So that to me, this has nothing whatever to
do with the sense of ‘yellow peril’ that was built upon a racial fear and
hostility 60 or 70 years ago in which the hordes of Asia were going to
overrun the white race as a racial matter.

"Now, as far as the difference in emphasis is concerned, one of our
problems is that people tend to listen to what we say on only one point
at a time. We have spoken about our treaty commitments to Viet-Nam.
We've talked about our interest in organizing a peace in the Pacific,
because of our other alliances in the Pacific as with Korea, Japan, the
Republic of China, the Philippines, the SEATO Treaty, and our ANZUS
Treaty with Australia and New Zealand.

"So we have a great stake in the integrity of the alliances which
we have in the Pacific Ocean area.

"Now, we have also talked about our own national interest, our own
security interests in Southeast Asia, and in these alliances. Now, we
haven't shifted from one to the other; we speak about all of these things
and have for 6 or 7 years. At times people seem to think we emphasize
one, some the other. I think this is more based upon the way people listen,
rather than the way in which we state these underlying elements in our
policy."

* * *

"Mr, De Segonzac; But by injecting the Chinese question in the whole
affair of Viet-Nam as you have in your last press conference, aren't you
making it more difficult to come to some form of solution, because you're
giving the impression now that the whole question of Viet-Nam is not so
much to help a small power, as was explained previously, to come to its
_ self-decisions, but now you ‘re putting it as a ee of China and the

dangers of China in the Far East?

"Secretary Rusk: Well, this is not something that is an opinion
solely of my own. There are many countries in Asia who are concerned about
Peking and their attitude. JI have no doubt that if Peking were strongly
+o support the reconvening of a Geneva conference that there might well be
a Geneva conference, for example. At the present time, they bitterly oppose
such a conference.

"This is a question that affects many countries. There are more than

D-127_
