ps toate cement ope paceman mmm me eam Fanta te apes oy

oh ane A ne ae ae eles ee

etcetera Se,

abe

a eT]

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

eoPry _TOP SEORET

ENCLOSURE "a"
STATE DEPT MSG
FROM: US MINISTER SAIGON VIETNAM SGD HEATH
TO: SECRETARY OF STATE .

- NR: 763 TOMAP 4 November 1950

6607182

Sent Dept 763 rptd info Paris 267; Dept pass CofSA for action,
From Chief MAAG singned Brink,

Reference unn Deptel 28, Oct 1950.

French are gradually withdrawing from northern frontier and
plan to hold general line Moncay-Laokay in Tonkin; in order protect
Hanol-Haiphong area and coal mining area north of Haiphong. Per-
imeter of these areas is to be organized as main line of resistance.
Pacification measures throughout pest of Indochina will continue
in.effect, Northern portion of new defensive area is mountainous
with corridors running generally, but not invarlebly so, toward
the Haiphong~Hanol Delta area, No natural barriers lie between
the new line and the Delta area. Haiphong and Hanoi are both
surrounded by open Delta paddy country with numerous winding tri-
butearies of the Red River. Railroads lead from Hanoi to Langson
and Haiphong. The latter, along with the highway, are the main
supply routes to the operational area, The presence of Viet Minh
troops prevents land communications between Saigon and Hanol re-
quiring movements by water and air only. Average time for move-
ments of troops and materiel from Saigon to Haiphong or Hanoi by
water and rail varies from 3 to 4 weeks. Airlift between the same
places is 36 hours.

Weather during November, December and January in Tonkin area
generally excellent with intermittent thunderstorms; in central
coastal area poor with average of 20 days per month heavy rain and
low ceilings. In southern area generally excellent with intermit-
tent thunderstorms. In the Tonkin Delta area Februery weather is
extremely poor with heavy fog and mist. In central coastal area
February weather conditions remain unchanged until June. Weather,
therefore, favors general offensive operations in next 3 months bz
the Viet Minh which has not yet materlalized.

Army: The Army combat strength equals the combat strength of
the Viet Minh. Army superiority in artillery, engineer services,

Cay
a
on

TOP SECRET
