Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

if new and sophisticated Soviet equipment were being
supplied. If the invasion became a general assault on
the DRV, an overt DRV call for volunteers might ensue
and be acted on. At this point of course the Chinese
would enter into the picture too and we are in a complex
new contingency. In general, it is hard to visualize
large numbers of Chinese and Soviet forces (transported
through China) fighting side by side against us in Viet-
nam and I would assume that what we would have would be
largely a US landwar against the DRV-China.

6. Matters would become even stickier if the US
offensive led to repeated damage to Soviet. ships in DRV
ports. (There are roughly eleven Soviet ships in these
ports on any one day). ‘The Soviets might arm their
vessels and authorize them to fire at US planes. Once
again, when this point has been reached we are in a
new contingency, although the basic fact holds that
the Soviets are not well situated, geographically
and logistically, for effective military counter-action
in the DRV itself. 27/

China's expected reactions to these three possible courses
of action were quite different in view of the lower level of its economic
and military support, the existence of ample land LOCs to China, etc.
Here is how Bundy foresaw Chinese responses:

3. Mining and/or Blockading of Haiphong

China would probably not regard the loss of Haiphong
port facilities as critically dangerous to the war effort
since it could continue to supply North Vietnam: by rail
and. road and by small ships and lighters. In addition,
Peking might seek to replace Haiphong as a deep sea
port, by expanding operations (Chanchiang, Ft. Bayard),
which is already serving as an unloading point for
goods destined for shipment by rail to North Vietnan.
China would be all means make sure that the flow of
both Soviet and Chinese material for North Vietnam--

“py land and by sea--continued uninterrupted and might
welcome the additional influence it wou'd gain as the
remaining main link in North Vietnam's life line. It
also would probably put at North Vietnam's disposal as
many shallow draft vessels as it could possibly spare,
and assist Hanoi in developing alternate maritime off-
loading facilities and inland waterway routes. At the
same time, the Chinese would probably be ready to
assist in improving North Vietnamese coasta] defenses,
and might provide additional patrol boats, possibly
including guided missile vessels.

158 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
