Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"The Communists are fond of saying that whether the Viet Cong
are born in the North or South, they are still Vietnamese and there-
fore an indigenous revolt must be taking place. Certainly, they are
Vietnamese, and the North Koreans who swept across their boundary in
1950 to attack South Korea were also Koreans. However, this did not
make the Korean war an indigenous revolt from the point of view of
either world security .or in terms of acceptable standards of conduct.

"By the same token, if West Germany were to take similar action
ageinst East Germany, it is doubtful that the East Germans, the Soviet
Union, and the rest of the Communist bloc would stand aside on the
grounds that it was nothing more than an indigenous affair.

"The simple issue is that military personnel and arms have been
sent across an international demarcation line (just as valid a border
as Korea or Germany) contrary to international agreements end law to
destroy the freedom of a neighboring people.”

* * * *

"..eeIt is for that reason, and because Hanoi has stepped up its
ageression, that the Government of South Viet-Nam and the United States
have been forced to increase our response and strike through the air
at the true source of the aggression--North Viet-Nam. This does not
represent a change of purpose on our part but a change in the means we
believe are necessary to stem aggression.

"And there can be no doubt that our actions are fully justified as
an exercise of the right of individual end collective self-defense
recognized by article 51 of the United Nations Charter and under the
accepted standards of international law."

* xX *

26. Address by Secretary Rusk, Made Before the American Society of
International Law on April 23, 1965, "The Control of Force in
International Relations, Department of State Bulletin, May 10, 1965
Dp. re

« *%
“That Is a 'War of National Liberation'?

“What is a ‘war of national liberation’? It is, in essence, any war
which furthers the Communist world revolution--what, in broader terms, the
Communists have long referred to as e ‘just’ war. The term ‘war of national
liberation' is used not only to denote armed insurrection by people still
under colonial rule--there are not many of those left outside the Communist
world. It is used to denote any effort led by Communists to overthrow by °
force any non-Communist government.

D-35
