Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

determination to continue the struggle. In a March ist letter to

Senator Jackson (who had publicly called for more bombing on February 27)
he pointed to the DRV's violation of the two Geneva Agreements of 1954
and 1962 as the reason for the bombing, its specific purposes being:

...first...to back our fighting men and our fighting
allies by demonstrating that the aggressor could not illegally
bring hostile arms and men to bear against them from the
security of a sanctuary.

Second...to impose on North Viet-Nam a cost for violating
its international agreements.

Third...to limit or raise the cost of bringing men and
supplies to bear against the South. 46/

The formulation of objectives for the bombing was almost identical two
weeks later when he spoke to-the Tennessee State Legislature:

--To back our fighting men by denying the enemy a
sanctuary 3

--To exact a penalty against North Vietnam for her
flagrant violations of the Geneva Accords of 1954
and 1962; .

--To limit the flow, or to substantially increase the
eost of infiltration of men and materiel from North
Vietnam. 47/

In both instances the President put the psychological role of the bombing
ahead of its interdiction functions. There was little evidence to sug-
gest, however, that Hanoi was feeling these pressures in the way in which
Mr. Johnson intended them.

3. The Guam Conference and More Salami Slices

Sometime early in March the President decided to arrange
a high level conference to introduce his new team for Vietnam (Ambassadors
Bunker and Komer, General Abrams, et al.) to the men they were to replace
and to provide them comprehensive briefings on the problems they would
face. later it was decided to invite Thieu and Ky to the conference as
well. The conference was scheduled for March 20-21 on Guam and the
President led a large high-level delegation from Washington. Two importan’
events occurred just before the group gathered and in large degree pro-
vided the packdrop if not the entire subject matter of their deliberations.
First, the South Vietnamese Constituent Assembly completed its work on
a draft constitution on March 18 and Thieu and Ky proudly brought the
document with them to present to the President for his endorsement. 48/
“Not surprisingly the great portion of the conference was given cover to
discussions about the forthcoming electoral process envisaged in the new

constitution through which legitimate government would once again be

AS TOP SECRET - Sensitive
