Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the so-called "Cross-over point" --- that is, when

we put out of action more enemy per month than we
estimate he brought into country and recruited for

that month. This is a nebulous figure, composed as you
have seen of several tenuous variables. We may have
reached the “cross-over point" in March and May of

this year, but we will not know for some months; 61/

and that the enemy could be expected to:

(1) present a constant threat in widely separated
areas, (2) attrite US, FW and ARVN forces, and (3) gain
military victories for propaganda purposes.

If our analysis is correct, his Main Forces have
failed to carry out their part of the enemy's campaign
plan. He has maintained his Main Force units as a
threat-in-being, largely at the sacrifice of the other
MF tasks. His immediate problem then, mist be to improve
his MF capabilities and operations.

From this analysis, what can we expect of the enemy
in the future? First, we believe that direct partici-
pation and control of the war in the South by NVA will
increase. The Northern Front, the DMZ Front, and B-3
Front have emerged as major NVA Control Headquarters.

North Vietnamese leadership in III CTZ is increasing with
the introduction of NVA units and political cadre. Senior
Generals in COSVN are North Vietnamese. The B-3 Front and
MR 5 are commanded by NVA generals. We have seen an
increase in the number of personnel taken from MRIII in
NVN whereas most of his personnel previously came from

MR IV. ‘This indicates an enemy willingness to draw down on
his strategic reserves in the North to restore the situ-
ation in the South. Another indication of growing NVA
control is the increased professionalism of his operations.
His equipment is better, he uses heavier and more modern
weapons, and his techniques (infantry - artillery coordina-
tion) more polished. It is obvious that the NVA effort

has increased and will continue to increase as the VC
effort falters.

Second, since we foresee increased NVA participation,
we believe that the enemy is now, or will shortly, bring in
significant numbers of NVA infiltrees or units. He must
attempt to reinforce the units in the coastal areas. He
must attempt to regain the initiative around the periphery
of SVN. He must attempt to attrite us. To do this he will
need more strength than we now sée at hand.

202 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
