Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

any duties other than the awesome duties of this office --
the Presidency of your country.

Accordingly, I shall not seek, and I will not accept,
the nomination of my Party for another term as your President.

But let men everywhere know, however, that a strong,
a confident, and a vigilant America stands ready tonight to
seek an honorable peace -- and stand ready tonight to defend
an honored cause -- whatever the price, whatever the burden,
whatever the sacrifices that duty may require.

Thank you for listening.
Good night and God bless all of you.

The speech had an electric effect on the U.S. and the whole
world. It completely upset the American political situation, spurred
world-wide hopes that peace might be imminent and roused fear and concern
in South Vietnam about the depth and reliability of the American commitment.
As already noted, no one in the Administration had seriously expected a
positive reaction from Hanoi, and when the North Vietnamese indicated three
days later that they would open direct contacts with the U.S, looking toward
discussions and eventual negotiation of a peaceful settlement of the conflict,
the whole complexion and context of the war was changed. To be sure, there
was the unfortunate and embarrassing wrangle about exactly where the northern
limit of the U.S. bombing would be fixed, with CINCPAC having sent extremely
heavy sorties to the very limits of the 20th parallel on the day after the
announcement only to be subsequently ordered to restrict his attacks below
19° on April 3. And there was the exasperatingly long public struggle
between the U.S. and the DRV about where their representatives would meet
and what title the contacts would be given, not finally resolved until May.
But it was unmistakably clear throughout all this time that a major corner
in the war and in American policy had been turned and that there was no
going back. The President's decision was enormously well received at home
and greeted with enthusiasm abroad where it appeared at long last there was
a possibility of removing this annoyingly persistent little war in Asia as
a roadblock to progress on other matters of world-wide importance involving
East and West. ' .

The President's speech at the end of March was, of course,
not the end of the bombing much less the war, and a further history cf the
role of the limited air strikes could and should be undertaken. But the
decision to cut back the bombing, the decision that turned American policy
toward & peaceful settlement of the war, is a logical and fitting place to
terminate this particular inquiry into the policy process that surrounded the
air war. Henceforth, the decisions about the bombing would be made primarily
in the Pacific by the field commanders since no vitally sensitive targets

203 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
