Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In these discussions the United States sought generally to stiffen
the will of the free nations in the Indochina crisis. It emphasized
poth the avowed intention of France to grant real independence to the
Associated States, and the condition accepted by the French at Berlin
for the United States' agreeing to discuss Indochina at Geneva. That
condition was that France would not agree to any arrangement which would
directly or indirectly result in the turnover of Indochina to the Com-
munists. The United States sought solid support for this position,
especially from the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand. Although
the possibility was held out of future involvement of the United Nations
in the Indochina problem, there was no thought of immediate UN action.14/

b. Initial Allied Reaction to “United Action"

Thailand and the Philippines gave a favorable response to
the call for united action. The British response was one of caution and
hesitancy. Churchill accepted Eisenhower's suggestion that Secretary
Dulles go to London for further talks, but the British saw dangers in
pressing for a defensive coalition before the Geneva conference. Eden
was determined not to be "hustled into injudicious military decisions."
As Eden later wrote:

"TI welcomed the American proposal for the organizetion
of collective defence in South-East Asia, since this would
contribute to the security of Malaya and Hong Kong and would
remove the anomaly of our exclusion from the A.N.%.U.S. Pact,
to which the United States, Australia and New Zealand were
party. But I felt that to form and proclaim a defensive
coalition, before we went to the conference table, would be
unlikely to help us militarily and would harm us politically,
by frightening off important potential allies. By the
beginning of May, the rains would be starting in Indo-China
and extensive campaigning by either side would be impossible
for several months. Since the complete collapse of the French
military effort before then was improbable, I did not think
that concern for the immediate military situation should be
the guiding factor in our policy.” 15/

c. French Call for U.S. Intervention at Dien Bien Phu (April 4-5)

The French response to the proposal for united action was
overtaken by military events at Dien Bien Phu. Foreign Minister Bidavlt
contended on April 5 that the time for a coalition approach had passed
and that the fate of Dien Bien Phu would be decided in the next ten
days. 16/ The previous day Ambassador Douglas Dillon was called to an
emergency Sunday cabinet meeting and was informed by Bidault, in the com-
pany of Laniel, that "immediate armed intervention of U.S. carrier aircreft
at Dien Bien Phu is now necessary to save the situation." Bidault, report-
ing Navarre's desperate state in the field and the extent of Chinese

B-22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

