Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
Washington, D. C.
26 January 1950

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE:
Subject: Military Objectives in Military Aid Programs

The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the current mutual
Defense Assistance Program and have considered the military implica-
tions of future programs of this nature. From their study, they
evolved the following objectives as the BASE basis for future mili-
tary assistance progrems,

The long-range overall military objective of United States
military defense assistance programs should be the development of con-
ditions which will improve to the maximum extent possible, within
economic realities both current and foreseen, the ability of the United
States in event of war to implement in conjunction with its allies a
long-range strategic concept. Briefly, that concept is that the United
States, in collaboration with its allies, will seek to impose the
allied war objectives upon the USSR by conducting a strategic offensive
in western Eurasia and a strategic defensive in the Far East.

Specific long-range objectives in furtherance of the overall
military objective for future military defense Be saeuraie programs
should be:

a. Development of sufficient military power in Western
Europe to - prevent loss or destruction of the industrial complexes
in that region and to control those areas from which future
operations can best be projected;

b. The security and the use of Greenland, Iceland, the
Azores, the United Kingdom, and French Northwest Africa;

ec. Denial to our enemy of naval and air bases in Norway,
Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, and France;

d. Development of the Italian armed forces authorized
by the peace treaty to their maximum s%rength and combat effec-
tiveness. If peace treaty limitations are lifted, development

' of sufficient military power in Italy to delay materially and
possibly to check Soviet invasion, to prevent loss of Sicily to
an enemy, and to defend successfully those sea and air approaches
within and adjacent to Italy which will be necessary for offen-
Sive operations;
