Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Although not much more than a footnote now, the reorganization
schemes that were presented at Warrenton deserve brief mention. At
Warrenton, the participants were still fishing for ways and means,
and their proposals reveal to a limited extent the intent of each
agency when faced, three months later, with a new structure in both
Saigon and Washington -- with Porter in charge in Saigon and Komer
in business in the White House (discussed in TII, 1 & 2).

--Chester Cooper, working for McGeorge Bundy in the White
House, proposed a second Deputy Ambassador for Pacifica-
tion, with control over CIA, USAID, JUSPAO, and partial
control (not clarified) over MACV's Rural Construction
advisors. Cooper also wanted a "Washington representative"
in Saigon to expedite resource allocation. He was ambiguous
about Lansdale's role. Cooper advocated a unified field
chain of command. .

--Poats and Mann submitted a joint Washington-Saigon proposal
on behalf of ATD (another clear indication of the fact that
the real chains of command ran through agency channels,
rather than through the Ambassador to Washington). They
advocated a complicated arrangement in which a Chief of
Staff for Pacification would head up special task forces
"drawn from operating agencies but staying in their opera-
tional job in their agencies," ATD in effect wanted no
major change in the Mission, and particularly opposed any
change in the multiplicity of chains of command in the
provinces. They also advocated a Theater CINC, a resources
allocation committee chaired by the ATD Mission Director,
and a MACV advisory structure that is partially under the
Ambassador and partially separate (not clarified).

Zorthian suggested that the Deputy Ambassador coordinate all
pacification activities but made it clear that he would make
no change in the chains of command. Indeed, he emphasized
the direct access of each Mission Council member to the
Ambassador, the separateness of each agency's field program.

SACSA proposed a division of MACV into a tactical unit com-
mand and a Pacification command. All civilian elements
supporting pacification would be under the Deputy for

- Pacification, who in turn would report to the Ambassador
and Deputy Ambassador. The advisory structure would have
been split down the middle between tactical unit advisors
and province/district advisors.

General Collins suggested no major change in the structure

of the Mission, but advocated the formation of "Task Groups
to deal with specific problems organized on en ad hoc

c 26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
