Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On 5 March his party was briefed by the Ambassador. Taylor saw the basic
unresolved problem as the provision of adequate security for the population,
Without it, other programs were either impossible or of marginal effec-
tiveness at best. Given security and reasonable time, however, these other
programs would fall into place, The three primary causes of insecurity were
(1) lack of satisfactory progress in destroying the W, (2) the continuing
capability of the VC to replace losses and increase their strength, and

(3) our inability to establish and maintain an effective government.

Inability to suppress the insurgency was considered largely the conse-
quence of insufficient trained paramilitary and police manpower, A numer-
ical superiority in excess of five to one over the VC had never been
obtained; historical example suggested a 10-to-1 or 20-to-l ratio was pre-
requisite to effective operations against guerrilla forces. It was there-
fore essential to raise new forces and improve those already in being,

Why was the pacification program of such limited effectiveness? In
many provinces the reason was poor -- or non-existent -~ civil action after
military clearing operations. The Ministries of Interior, Health, Agri-
culture, Public Works and Rural Affairs were responsible for civilian
"follow-up" but these departments had been impotent throughout 1964, largely
because of general government instability. Programs lacked continuity;
personnel were constantly rotating, Occasional military successes achieved
in clearing operations too frequently went unexploited. Areas were cleared
but not held, Other areas were cleared and held -- but were not developed;
the VC infra-structure remained in place, ready to emerge when the troops
moved on.

Counterinsurgency was plagued by popular apathy and dwindling morale,
some the consequences of a long and seemingly endless war. There was no
sense of dedication to the GVN comparable to that instilled in the VC.

Secondly, South Vietnam's open frontiers could not be sealed against
infiltration, Continued DRV support to the VC, the heart of the infil-
tration problem, could not be eliminated by closing the frontiers from
inside South Vietnam so the only way to stop infiltration was to make Hanoi
order it stopped, Such was the fundamental justification for BARREL ROLL
and ROLLING THUNDER operations, These, plus 34A, constituted the principal
hope for ending infiltration,

It was conceded that even without its support from the North the VC
could continue to recruit in the South, especially in areas lacking security
and commitment to Saigon. However, it was hoped that pressure on Hanoi :
would help to-change many conditions unfavorable to the GVN. For example,
offensive action against NVN would raise national morale in South Vietnam
and might provide at least a partial antidote against the willingness of
country boys to join the VC,

- 105 A TOP SECRET - Sensitive
