Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of both the JCS and Rostow papers. 59 A Special National Intelligence
Estimate weighed in with a hard lecz et this rash of proposals. 60/

The President's reaction, on 11 October, was to decide to send General.
Taylor on a mission to South Vietnen to examine several alternative
courses of action:

(2) The plan for military intervention discussed at this
morning's meeting on the basis of the Vietnam task force paper
entitled "Concept for Intervention in Vietnam";

(b) An alternative plan for stationing in Vietnam fewer
U.S. combat forces than those called for under the plan referred
to in (a) above and with @ mers limited objective then dealing
with the Viet Cong; in other words, such a small force would
probable go in at Tourane [be Nang/ and possibly another southern
port principally for the purpose of establishing a U.S. "presence"
in Vietnam;

(ec) Other alternatives in lieu of putting any U.S. combat
forces in Vietnam, i.e. stepping up U.S, assistance and training
of Vietnam units, furnishing of more U.S. equipment, particularly
helicopters and other light aircraft, trucks and other ground
transport, etc. 61/

THE TAYLOR MISSION TO SATGON

This range of alternatives susgesis, even without "20/20 hindsight,"
that if something was going to be done, and if the President were to decide
not to send U.S. combat units to Vietnem, there would be an advisory build-
up of some kind almost by default. This is close enough to what happened
to warrant the risk of oversimplification. It does not do justice to the
Taylor Report, of course, but Taylor's mission and his reports have been
covered fully in another study in the present series.* For their impact
on the advisory effort, and to plece this in perspective, it is sufficient
to describe only a few salient features. First, the Viet Cong were pur-
suing, in Taylor's appraisal, « political-military strategy aimed at
overthrowing Diem and opening the way to unification of Vietnam on Hanoi's
terms. Military action by the insurgents was aimed at this objective
rather than at a complete military victory:

The military strategy being pursued is, evidently, to
pin down the ARVN on defensive missions; to create a pervasive
sense of insecurity and frustration by hit-and-run raids on
self-defense corps and militis [cc] units...and to dramatize
the inability of the GVN to govern or to build....

Despite the considerable suerrilla capabilities of the
Viet-Cong, Communist strategy now appears, on balance, to

* Volume IV.B., Evolution of the Wer: Kennedy Program and Commitments,
1961 (TS). ne It ethe” alee es le

By. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
