Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This view was certainly held by some State Department experts, par-
ticularly in the Office of Asian Communist Affairs (ACA) and in the
Office of Intelligence and Research (INR). In an interesting memorandum
of February 5, 1965 to William Bundy, Lindsay Grant of ACA saw the impli-
cations for American policy of the Kosygin visit to Hanoi as “enormous.”

It is possible to hypothesize that the Soviet initiative
may be intended to present the United States with an acceptable,
albeit difficult, choice. They may presume that the situation
in the South would deteriorate to the point where we could
foresee ourselves confronted with the possibility of:

1) @ series of defeats on the ground and/or total collapse
of authority in Saigon, or

2) a rapid movement in the direction of neutralism, lead-
ing to our being invited out, or

. 3) some kind of negotiated settlement which would permit
us to reduce our commitment to the bare bones, and thereby at
least minimize a generally distasteful loss. The last prospect,
which would represent the best of a bad choice, could possibly
result from an increased Soviet presence in North Viet-Nam.

Thus, the Soviets might find it in their own interest to
propose to Hanoi a solution of the war in Viet-Nam along the
following lines:

1) North Viet-Nam would remain untouched, with the Soviet
Union guaranteeing to provide major economic and other help;

2) South Viet-Nem would be neutralized, with some sort of
paper guarantee offered by outside powers, including the Soviet
Union;

3) The National Front for the Liberation of South Viet-Nem
would participate in a neutralist coalition government.

(The Soviet Union would, presumably, give North Viet-Nam
private assurances. that it would not stand in the way of furthér
Front and Viet Cong efforts to gain a complete political victory
in the South.) i

The author of the memorandum, of course, recognized that it would be
only under the prospect of a collapse of the GVN or of being requested to
leave that the U.S. would be willing to accede to the solutions suggested.
But he stressed, as the major benefit of this course, that:

«the Soviet presence would represent a major deflection

of the rising Chinese Communist tide in Southeast Asia in par-
ticular, and in its world-wide efforts et subversion in general.

el TOP SECRET - Sensitive
