Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

THE ACTUALITY: 1962 - 1963

What happened during 1962 - 1963 is that only the second of these
developments actually occurred to any significant degree. The U.S,
provided helicopter companies for rapid tactical transport, small arms
and automatic weapons for increased firepower, and tactical eir and
artillery support to assure ARVN firepower superiority over the insurgents.
There were complaints -- as there have been ever since -- that individual
weapons were too heavy for the Vietnamese, that one helicopter company
for each Corps area was too little, and that supporting air and artillery
were an inducement to rely om indiscriminate firepower as a substitute
for aggressiveness, But the basic tools were provided.

The other developments did not take place. Training of the CG and SDC
was speeded up at Secretary McNamara's insistence in order to get a more
effective protective force quickly in being. Even by cutting the course
of instruction in half it required the remainder of CY 1962 to give a
basic familiarization course to even the bulk of the CG and SDC. GVN was
not eager to put weapons into SDC hands, fearing that the weapons might
wind up in the possession of the VC. 83/ In the event, both forces emerged
as something much less effective than had been expected. The strategic
hamlets which they were to protect proliferated in quantity in an uncontrolled
manner and varied widely in quality. It never really became possible for
ARVN to free itself from static defensive duties.

Even if it had become possible for ARVN to be cut loose from static
duties it is questionable that it could have risen to U.S, expectations.
The period in question is one in which the igo family felt itself con-
strained constantly to play off the military against the provincial officials
(who controlled the CG and SDC) in order to forestall attempts at a coup
d'etat. Military leaders seemed inclined to rely increasingly on firepower
as a substitute for aggressive maneuver. Rosy reports from the provinces
made it unappealing to sustain casualties engaging an enemy who was said
to have already been driven from the area. 84/ The all-too-common result
was that ARVN did not improve as the U.S. had expected it would. U.S.
advisors became frustrated end embittered. Even rare opportunities for
decisive engagement on the ground were allowed to pass or were mishandled.
The debacle at Ap Bac, in , 1962, stands as a landmark of this
continued impotence. mena re am

The failure of ARVN to develop as expected was, however, not officially
recognized until much later. Even then the reasons for this failure were
variously interpreted. In mid-1962, after the initial advisory build-up
had been completed, the commander of the recently established U.S, Military
Assistance Command, Vietnam (MACV), General Paul D. Harkins, estimated
that the U.S. task was simply one of training ARVN leaders on a one-time
basis and that the VC could be eliminated as a disturbing force within
@ year after this had been accomplished. (This was @ clear instance of

3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
