Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

ry
TOP SECRET - Sensitive Lette” per

IV. The Decision Process

A. Proposals for Actions Before the National Security Council
Working Group, Late 196k

Events in the late 1964-early 1965 period moved at such a rapid
pace as almost to defy isolated analysis. On 3 November 1964, just
two days after the Viet Cong successfully attacked the U.S. air base
and billetting at Bien Hoa, Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy
convened the newly established NSC Working Group on SVN/SEA. Member-
ship in the group included the State Department, OSD/ISA, the JCS,
and CIA. 3h/ Debate within the group centered around three proposed
courses of action, none of which contained a major U.S. ground troop
commitment to SVN. 35/ Ground troop commitment was addressed in draft
papers circulated within the group by the principals, but it does not
appear that anyone was thinking in terms of a major U.S. effort on the
ground in counterinsurgency operations. William Bundy's own papers
mentioned CINCPAC OPLAN 32-64 and CINCPAC OPLAN 39-65, both of which
contingency plans provided for the input of US ground combat forces
into SEA in response to Chicom or DRV aggression or a combination of
the two. 36/ In a draft dated 13 November 1964, Bundy discussed ground
troop commitment and said in part that he did "not envisage the intro-
duction of substantial ground forces into South Vietnam or Thailand in
conjunction with these initial actions." 37/ The initial actions to
which he referred were the three basic options under consideration at
the time by the Working Group. Bundy went on in the same draft memo-
randum to state that the question of ground troop involvement needed
further consideration, including the possibility of the introduction
of a multilateral force into the northern provinces of South Vietnan.
In discussing the pros and cons of ground troops, Bundy did not mention
the security of bases but he did suggest that the presence of troops
in South Vietnam might invite Viet Cong activity against them,

Other drafts circulated in the NSC Working Group dealt with ground
forces. In a memorandum to the Working Group dated 30 November 1964,
and entitled "Alternative to Air Attacks on North Vietnam: Proposals
for the Use of U.S. Ground Forces in Support of Diplomacy in Vietnam,”
Messrs. Johnson and Kattenburg of the State Department proposed the
introduction of a token ground force to provide proof of our resolve
as a prelude to a major diplomatic offensive. 38/ The Joint Chiefs
of Staff also made a proposal for the introduction of ground troops in
their 23 November 196) memo to the Secretary of Defense. 39/ In that
JCSM, which was principally concerned with analysis of various courses
of action to increase pressure on the DRV, the JCS recommended the
collateral deployment of Marine units to Da Nang and other units from
Okinawa to Ton Son Nhut Air Base for purposes of security and deterrence
in accordance with CINCPAC OPLANS. There is no documentary evidence,
however, that these drafts were in any way included in the memo sent to
the President. i

On 1 December 1964, the President approved the recommendations of
3

Ambassador Tsylor and the NSC Principals to proceed with the implementa-
tion of the Working Group's Course of Action A and, after 30 days or

Wh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
