Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

settlement. We appreciate fact that Vietnam started present
fighting in Indochina on December 19 and that this action has
made it more difficult for French to adopt a position of
generosity and conciliation. Nevertheless we hope that French
will find it possible to be more than generous in trying to
find a solution." 62/

Thus, the U.S. chose to remain outside the conflict; the announced
Wipes position WAS, in the words of Secretary of State George C. Marshall,
to hope that "a pacific basis of adjustment of the difficulties could be
found.” 63/ Events conspired against this hope, however, and as the
fighting continued, the prospect of a Moscow-controlled state in Vietnan
continued to draw the U.S. nearer to involvement. On 13 May 1947, the
Department of State furnished the following guidance to U.S. diplomats
in Paris, Saigon, and Hanoi:

"Key our position is our awareness that in respect develop-
ments affecting position Western democratic powers in southern
Asia, we essentially in same boat as French, also as British
and Dutch. We cannot conceive setbacks to long-range interests
France which would not also be setbacks our own. Conversely we
should regard close association France and members French Union as
not only to advantage peoples concerned, but indirectly our own.

"In our view, southern Asia in critical phase its history
with seven new nations in process achieving or struggling inde-
pendence or autonomy. These nations include quarter inhabitants
world and their future course, owing sheer weight populations,
resources they command, and strategic location, will be momentous
factor world stability. Following relaxation European controls,
internal racial, religious, and national differences could plunge
new nations into violent discord, or already apparent anti-Western
Pan-Asiatic tendencies could become dominant political force, or
Communists could capture control. We consider as best safeguard
against these eventualities a continued close association between
newly-autonomous peoples and powers which have long been respon-
sible their welfare. In particular we recognize Vietnamese will
for indefinite period require French material and technical
assistance and enlightened political guidance which can be provided
only by nation steeped like France in democratic tradition and
confirmed in respect human liberties and worth individual.

"We equally convinced, however, such association must be
voluntary to be lasting and achieve results, and that protraction
present situation Indochina can only destroy basic voluntary
cooperation, leave legacy permanent bitterness, and irrevocably
alienate Vietnamese from France and those values represented by
France and other Western democracies.

A-hi6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
