Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

" . . . if the Communists decide to exercise their
capability for armed intimidation and terror they could quickly
reassert political control or influence, at least in some rural
areas where GVN authority is tenuous.

"During the past year the Communists in South Vietnam
have remained generally quiescent. They have passed by a number
of opportunities to embarrass the Diem regime. Although some
cadres and supplies are being infiltrated across the 17th
parallel, the DRV probably has not sent any large scale reinforce-
ment or supply to the south. Communist activity in the south
appears to concentrate on protecting vital bases and supply
caches, developing clandestine paramilitary organizations, and
implementing a broad program of infiltration and subversion.
While seeking to maintain intact as much of their armed strength
as possible, their main activity seems to be an effort to
weaken the Diem government by subversive and political tactics.
Communist directives indicate that penetration and subversion
of the GVN military and security forces is a major ob jective.
erie! Sic tah ayers enw

But the communists' choices were narrowing all the time:

"The DRV probably estimates that its chances for securing
control of South Vietnam by means short of open attack or
large scale guerrilla action supported from the north will
gradually diminish with the passage of time... - The DRV
probably also believes that its covert assets in South
Vietnam will gradually decline if the Diem government is
permitted to concentrate on internal security and economic
problems free of external harassment." (Ibid., pp. 12-13)

Thus,

"The only remaining course of action holding out some
promise for the early achievement of Communist control in
South Vietnam appears to be the development of large scale
guerrilla warfare in the south. In recent weeks a number of
reports from sources of untested reliability have indicated
that the Communists may have started preparations in both
South Vietnam and in the north to begin guerrilla action.
DRV allegations of Vietnamese violations of the demilitarized
zone along the 17th parallel and Communist claims of US-Diem
plans to violate the Armistice could be propaganda cover for
the initiation of guerrilla action against the south."
(Ibid., p. 13)

12 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
