Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

124

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(2) Presence of strong U.S. combat forces will influence
greatly South Vietnamese will to eliminate the Viet Cong.

(3) If we use U.S. engineers with U.S. military protec-
tion to finish Dakto-Ban Net-Attapeu Road in order to enable US to
operate near plateau border area, a military corridor of sorts will
cut an important part of VC pipeline from north.

(4) U.S. forces will make available larger number ARVN
forces for employment against VC. RVNAF tasks accomplished by U.S.
forces will decrease proportionately certain RVNAF deficiencies,
particularly in logistics, communications, and air support.

(5) U.S. forces in SVN would tend to strengthen Diem's
government against pro-Red coup, but would not necessarily pre-
elude non-Communist coup attempts.

(6) Dividends would accrue from fact our troops could
provide variety training for ARVN forces, broadening base now pro-
vided by MAAG.

Bs Con:

(1) Would stir up big fuss throughout Asia about reintro-
duction of forces of white colonialism into SE Asia. Little ques-
tion that a propaganda issue will be made of this in all world
forums including UN.

(2) Action coula trigger intensification of Commie aggres-
Sion against SE Asia. This may not be all-out overt aggression, but
could consist, for example, of the DRV moving full blown combat
units through the mountain passes into southern Laos under excuse
that we initiated invasion of SE Asia and they are protecting the
flank of North Vietnam.

(3) Politically, presence of U.S. forces could hasten
Commies to establish so called "representative government" in
South Vietnam.

(4) Aside from offering Viet Cong a political target,
US troops would constitute provocative military one, inducing VC
to attack/harass it in manner/degree where issue might ultimately
force American units active military campaign, or suffer defen-
Sive alternative of being pot-shot at to point of embarrassment.

(5) Presence of US troops could induce Commies to resort
to related actions such as introduction of Red Air Force elements

89 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
