Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of supervising policy than the Eisenhower Administration's elaborate
National Security structure. The effort in Vietnam obviously required
some coordination of separate efforts by at least State, Defense, CIA,
and ICA (a predecessor of AID). Further, once a coordinated program was
worked out, the idea appears to have been to focus responsibility for
seeing to it that the program was carried out on some clearly identified
individual, This search for a better way to organize policy seems to
have been the principal motive behind the initial Gilpatric effort, al-
though it became inconsequential after the original submission.

3. The Apparent Futility and Divisiveness of the Durbrow (Pressure)
Tactics for Dealing With Diem

late April was a peculiarly appropriate time to undertake the
sort of sharpening up of policy and its organization just described. It
was probably clear by then that Durbrow's pressure tactics were not really
accomplishing much with Diem. Besides, Durbrow had been in Vietnam for
four years by April, and a new Ambassador would normally have been sent in
any event. Fritz Nolting had been chosen by early April, and he was
scheduled to take over in early May. Further, Diem had just been reelected,
an essentially meaningless formality to be sure, but still one more thing
that helped make late April a logical time for taking a fresh look at US
relations with Diem. And even to people who believed that a continuation
of Durbrow's pressure tactics might be the best approach to Diem, events
elsewhere and especially in Laos must have raised questions about whether
it was a politic time to be threatening to withhold aid.

Firm Policy in Vietnam

Tae situation in the world that April seemed to create an
urgent requirement for the US to do something to demonstrate firmess,
and especially so in Southeast Asia. The Task Force was set up the day
after the Bay of Pigs invasion force surrendered, and at a time when the
Laos crisis was obviously coming to head. There had been implicit agree-
ment in principle between the US and the Soviets to seek a cease fire in
laos and to organize a neutral coalition government. But it was not clear
at all that the cease-fire would come while there was anything left worth
arguing about in the hands of the pro-Western faction. Gilpatric's
initial Task Force report reached the President the day of a crisis meeting
on laos, and the more important second phase of the effort began then, in
an atmosphere wholly dominated by Laos.

But even before the Laos crisis reached its peak, there was a sense in
Washington and generally in the world that put strong pressures on the
Administration to look for ways to take a firm stand somewhere; and if it
was not to be in Laos, then Vietnam was next under the gun.

el
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
