Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

authority stems from the constitutional powers of the President as
Commander in Chief and Chief Executive, with responsibilities as well
for the conduct of foreign relations. However, it is not necessary

to rely upon the Constitution alone as the source of the President's
authority. The SEATO treaty, which forms part of the law of the land,
sets forth a United States commitment to defend South Viet-Nam against
armed attack, and the Congress, in a joint resolution of August 1964
and in authorization and appropriation acts in support of the military
effort in Viet-Nam, has given its approval and support to the Presi-
dent's action.

"the Constitution does not require a declaration of war for U.S.
actions in Viet-Nam taken by the President and approved by the Congress.
A long line of precedents, beginning with the undeclared war with France
in 1798-1800 and including actions in Korea and Lebanon, supports the use
of U.S. armed forces abroad in the absence of a congressional declaration
of war."

HK XR

52. Address by Secretary Rusk Before the Council on Foreign Relations

at New York, New York on May 24, 1966, “Organizing the Peace for

Man's Survival”; Department of State Bulletin, June 13, 1966, p. 926.

* * * |

"And significant changes have occurred within the Communist world.
It has ceased to be monolithic, and evolutionary influences are visible
in most of the Communist states. But the leaders of both the principal
Communist nations are committed to the promotion of the Communist world
revolution, even while they disagree--perhaps bitterly--on questions
of tactics.

"Tp mankind is to achieve a peaceful world order safe for free
institutions, it is of course essential that aggression be eliminated--
if possible by deterring it or, if it occurs, by repelling it. ‘The
clearest lesson of the 1930's and --40's is that aggression feeds on
aggression. I'm aware that Mao and Ho Chi Minh are not Hitler and
Mussolini, but we should not forget what we have learned about the ana-
tomy and physiology of aggression. We ought to know better than to
ignore the aggressor's openly proclaimed intentions or to fall victim
to the notion that he will stop if you let him have just one more bite
or speak to him a little more gently."

cS

",..-But What the Communists, in their familiar upside down language,
call ‘wars of liberation' are advocated and supported by Moscow as well
as by Peiping. And the assault on the Republic of Viet-Nam is a critical
test of that technique of aggression.

D-81
