Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Other evaluations, though more conservative, still tended to corr-
oborate this optimism. NIE 53-63, issued 17 April 1963, found no particular
deterioration or serious problems in the military situation in South Viet-
nam; on the contrary, it saw some noticeable improvements and gentral
progress over the past year. The worst that it could say was that the
situation "remains fragile." 17/

SECRETARY OF DEFENSE HONOLULU DECISIONS OF MAY 1963.

At the 6 May Honolulu Conference, briefing reports again confirmed
gratifying progress in the military situation. Addressing the CPSVN,
Mr. McNamara questioned the need for more Vietnamese forces in Fy © (22h. 4
thousand) than the present level of 215 thousand. His reasoning was that
a poor nation of 12 million like Vietnam could not support that many men
under arms. Qualitatively, furthermore, the plenned evolution of VNAF
seemed overambitious in terms of sophisticated weaponry such as fighter
aircraft. In sum, the Secretary felt the CPSYN assumed an unrealistically
high force level for the SVN military establishment and assigned it equip-
ment that was both unduly complicated to operate and expensive to procure
and maintain.

Based on these considerations, the Secretary of Defense concluded that,
if the insurgency came under control in FY 65 as anticipated, the U.S. MAP
investment in SVN thereafter should not be more than at the rate of about
$50 million per year. In his view, thus, the $573 million MAP proposed in
the CPSVN for the pericd FY 65 through FY 68 was at least $270 million higher
than an acceptable program.

With regard to phasing out U.S. forces, the Secretary of Defense stated
that the pace contemplated in the CPSVN was too slow. He wanted it revised
to accomplish a more rapid withdrawal by accelerating training programs in
order to speed up replacement of U.S. units by GVN units as fast as possible.
While recognizing that the build-up of RVNAF was inherently a slow process,
he stressed that in the instance of some U.S. units which had been in SVN
since 1961, it would be possible more rapidly to transfer functions to Viet-
namese. Specifically toward this end, he decided that 1,000 U.S. military
personnel should be withdrawn from South Vietnam by the end of CY 63 and
directed that concrete plans be so drawn up. 18/

On returning to Washington the Secretary of Defense instructed the
ASD(ISA) on 8 May to develop, in coordination with the Joint Staff, a plan
for replacing U.S. forces currently deployed in Vietnam with indigenous SVN
forces as rapidly as possible, and particularly, to prepare a plan for with-
drawing 1,000 U.S. troops before the end of 1965. In another memorandun
the same day to the ASD(ISA) regarding the MAP, he noted that "the plan
needs to be completely reworked." He therefore instructed ISA also to
develop a new, lower MAP for Vietnam for the period FY 65 through 69,
requesting that the ISA recommendations be submitted by the first of
September. 19/

12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
