Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

. a ee

policy has been limited in its effect as we have allowed the free export of arms
to France, such-exports thereby being available for re-shipment to Indochina or
for releasing stocks from reserves to be forwarded to Indochina,

|

2. Economic

Indochina’s trade with the United States before the war was relatively small
as the greater part of its commerce was carried on with France and the French
“ Empire duty free. Indochina now enjoys a limited customs autonomy, and the
US should be able to compete more successfully with France.

American investment in Indochina has also been of minor importance in
part at least because there has been no treaty basis for the protection of Ameri-
can interests there as activities in certain business lines are prohibited or can
be conducted only with the consent of the French authorities.

Should a political solution satisfactory to the French and the Vietnamese
be reached leading to the establishment of peaceful conditions within the area,
the US should endeavor to have the General Agreement on Tarifis and Trade
made effective In Indochina and to make an arrangement which would afford
protection for American enterprise there. The increased trade and investment
in Indochina which might result from these measures would tend to raise the
level of economic activity and standard of living.

We do not wish to press for these matters, nor to develop a long-term finan-
cial or econornic policy in the area, until such time as a political solution, such
as may terminate in large measure the present hostilities, has been achieved.

With respect to the important question of whether ECA assistance
should be extended to the area, we have informed the J'rench that because re-
construction and development of Indochina is impossible under the present con-
ditions of warfare which pertain there,, no direct HCA financing for Indochina
will be forthcoming,at present although French requirements will be readjusted
accordingly. We have indicated informally our willingness to reconsider the
question should conditions change.

As regards French claims for Japanese reparations on behalf of Indochina,
we have taken the position in the Far Eastern Commission (FEC) that France
should receive two percent of the total amount of reparations which may be
determined to be available. While most FEC countries feel that the proposed
share is too large, in view of the French wartime performance in Indochina,
we have indicated a willingness to allow the French an additional one half of
one percent. France presumably would also be eligible for a.prorata share
(or a portion to be determined by negotiation) of the 18 of our 28 percent of total
reparations which we have proposed to make available to such FEC countries
as accept our schedule for reparations distribution. This question remains
unsettled. We have not allowed the French @ portion of the advance transfers
within the interim reparations program.

We have under goa e a French claim to gold valued at 37.5 million
dollars earmarked for Japan in Indochina, The gold represents the settlement
of certain trade balances between Indochina and Japan and of Japanese local

146
