Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

851.00 28-8402 Teleeran

The Ambussador in France (Caffery) fo the Secreftury of Shuttle

SECRET Pants, Febrnary 6, 1946—9 p.m.
; [Received February T—12:45 a, m.]

595. Dept's 564, February 4. While T have not as vet detailed in-
formation on the differences of op*ntons between D'Argentien and
Leclere on Freneh policy toward Indo-China all indications in Paris
point to the fact that the French Govt at this time favors a concili-
atory and moderate policy. The Foreign Office has been stressing
to the Govt the fact that in the lieht of the evolution of events in the
Far Past anid Southenst Asia. French interests can best be saferuarded
by a liberal and progressive colonial policy in Indo-China. The So-
cialist Party. which at present ts in a position to exereise much in-
fluence on French gwovernmental pelicy, is also in favor of such a
policy as is the present Socialist Minister of Colonies. Marius Moutet.
This does not mean. however. that they are thinking in terms of in-
dependence for Indo-China for no Frenchmen appear to be thinking
in such terms. :

While it is, of course, impossible at this time fo saze too far into
the future. present evidence weuld seem to indicate that fhe present
Govi will try to fellow a conciliatery and moderate policy in Tndo-
China and will be more progressive in its outloo!: than the de Gaulle
Gort. As the Dept is aware, in the latter Govt the influence of

2 Ambassodor Caers reported in telerrgin S49. Tehyrnary 21, 1946: 3 1, m..

that the French Govermmnent Wad decided te give Admival d'Areceutien, then on
a visit fo Paris. “feneral antherity fo endearar te reach a seltitan with the
native elements, meeting them nmch more than lalf way’. (S516,00-2146)

certain old-lne military leaders sometimes lind an unfortunate in-
fluence on French colonial policy.
Carrery

8516.00 72-1846: Telecram
The Assistunt Chie] of the Division of Southeast Asian Affuses (Lan-
don) to the Secretary of Stute

.

SECRET Hanon. February 16, 1946.
PRIORITY [Received February 20—10: 34 a, m.]

9, From Landon for Moffat and Culbertson: 1 Chinese informally

FPanl T. Culbertson, Chief. Division of Western Enropean Afiiirs.

state that French are negotiating two instrument[s] at Clhungking:
j. An asreement in regard to Chinese troops in Tudochina.
> Atreatwof commerce: That the aereement touches on:

a. The amount to he paid the Chinese by the French to cover troop
expenses in Indochina.

6. Help to be given French troops by Chinese to reestablish them-
selves in Tonkin.

e. Time and method of withdrawal of Chinese traops. Tt is be-
lieved that Frenely want Chinese to withdimw 7n fafa at once and to
coordinate their withdrawal with Frenel) entry white Chinese want
to withdraw piecemenl over an extended neriod. Tn this eannection
93rd Army heean withdrasvine on 13 Febrery when 18th Division
started marching toward Nankine: that ahout every 10 days another
division will begin march wnfil all of rd Army exits. To Chi Minh

CONFIDENTIAL

Ss Se
