Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

From analysis of the cable traffic of early April, it appears
that Taylor was the only major figure opposed to further expansion of
the U.S. combat role beyond what was agreed at the NSC meetings in
Washington. His defense was tenacious, but as proposals from Washington
got progressively more radical, his patience began to wear thin. Then
Taylor communicated his ire to McGeorge Bundy in a message quoted in
full in Section I of this paper and in which he maintained that Quat's
government had quite enough to do without the addition of more U.S. ©
' programs or more U.S. forces. 78/ The chorus of suggestions and programs
from Washington reached a crescendo with the joint State/Defense message
of 18 April which, with the blessing of "highest authority" in Washington,
| proposed the following measures be considered to add "something new” to
the equation: 79/

(1) Experimental encadrement of U.S. troops into RVNAF -
either through the assignment of 50 U.S. soldiers to each of 10 ARVN
battalions or through the "brigading" of ARVN and US battalions for
operations;

(2) The introduction of a brigade force into Bien Hoa /
Vung Tau for security of installations and later expansion into counter-
insurgency operations under conditions to be spelled out by General
Westmoreland; :

(3) The introduction of several battalions into coastal
enclaves such as Qui Nhon in accordance with proposals to be submitted
by the Ambassador and COMUSMACV. ‘The purpose was "to further experi-
ment with US forces in the counterinsurgency role"; (Sic! The phrase
"to further experiment" is misleading since up to the date of this
cable, there had been no U.S. counterinsurgency operations worthy of
the name.) am:

(4) Expansion of Vietnamese recruiting, using proven U.S.
techniques;

(5) Expansion of the MEDCAP program using mobile dispen-
saries under guidelines to be worked out between COMUSMACYV and the
Surgeon General, U.S. Army; :

(6) Experimentation in two or three provinces with a team
of U.S. civil affairs personnel introduced into provincial government
structure under conditions to be worked out between MG Peers and General
Westmoreland;

(7) The supplement of low RVNAF pay through a program to

provide some of the troops with a food ration. General Timmes would be
seeing COMUSMACV to work out the details.

; 70 i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
