Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Geyelin gives the President very high marks for his performance:

..ehis handling of Vietnam in the early months of 1965 was
more than just skillful, it was a triumph of international and
domestic politics. For if one accepts the need to right the
Tequilibrium,' then it cannot be denied that Lyndon Johnson
moved to do so with a bare minimum of dissent at home and less
foreign opposition than might have been expected. And he did
it, at least for a good many months, without giving the Commu-
nist Chinese or the Russians provocation in such intolerable
degree that they felt obliged to move in any drastic way to the
defense of Hanoi. 45/

E. Reactions at Home and Abroad

Official and public reactions to the retaliatory strikes were
fairly predictable. In the U.S., as Newsweek put it, the decision
"touched off .a wave of national concern and international jitters
unequalled since the US-Soviet confrontation over the Cuban missile
build-up." 46/ Much of the US press expressed serious doubts about
where the US was heading in Vietnam. A great majority of the nation's
newspapers regarded the strikes as necessary and justified and the ~
notion that Pleiku was a deliberate VC provocation was widely accepted.
But many admitted to confusion as to just what U.5. policy in Vietnam
was; (e.g., Kansas City Star: "Do we have a specific, unwavering policy
or are we improvising from crisis to crisis?" St. Louis Post-Dispatch:
"a strike for strike strategy...without any ultimate objective except to
hang on in Vietnam, is not much of a policy." New York Times (James
Reston): "We do not know what the President has in mind...For the moment
we seem to be standing mute in Washington, paralyzed before a great
ot merely digging our thought deeper into the accustomed military
rut.

In Western Europe reactions were less uniform. To the dismay
of leftist members of his own Labor Party, the U.K.'s Harold Wilson
phoned a message of solid support to President Johnson. Moreover, the
London Economist saw the bombing as part of a drama acted out for the
benefit of Mr. Kosygin as a warning to all communist countries "that
there are limits beyond which the Viet Cong cannot push things in the
South without bringing down American reprisals onthe North. There is
no call to specify exactly what these limits are; but to make it clear
that they exist, the shot across Mr. Kosygin's bow was essential." 47
By contrast, de Gaulle issued a cool statement that the Southeast Asia
erisis "cannot be settled by force of arms" and called again for a new
Geneva conference to end the war -- a recommendation that was echoed by
India's Prime Minister Shastri and U.N. Secretary General U Thant.

The pro-Western nations in Southeast Asia that live in the
shadow of Communist China -- Thailand, Malaysia, Taiwan, Australia --

"29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
