Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in January, and everything thereafter that was, or could be interpreted
to be a weak U.S. response, only strengthened the pressure to hold on in
Vietnam. 10/

A further element of the Soviet problem impinged directly on
Vietnam. The new Administration, even before taking office, was inclined
to believe that unconventional warfare was likely to be terrifically
important in the 1960s. In January 1961, Krushchev seconded that view
with his speech pledging Soviet support to “wars of national liberation."
Vietnam was where such a war was actually going on. Indeed, since the war
in Laos had moved far beyond the insurgency stage, Vietnam was the only
place in the world where the Administration faced a well-developed Com-
munist effort to topple a pro-Western government with an externally-aided
pro-communist insurgency. It was a challenge that could hardly be ignored.

4, The Situation in Laos

Meanwhile, within Southeast Asia itself there was the peculiar
problem of Laos, where the Western position was in the process of falling
apart as Kennedy took office. The Eisenhower Administration had been giving
strong support to a pro-American faction in Laos. As a consequence, the
neutralist faction had joined in an alliance with the pro-communist faction.
The Soviets were sending aid to the neutralist/communist alliance, which
they recognized as the legitimate government in Laos; the U.S, recognized
and aided the pro-western faction. Unfortunately, it turned out that the
neuvtralist/communist forces were far more effective than those favored by
the U.5., and so it became clear that only by putting an American army
into Laos could the pro-Western faction be kept in power. Indeed, it was
doubtful that even a coalition government headed by the neutralists (the
choice the U.S. adopted) could be salvaged. The coalition government solu-
tion would raise problems for other countries in Southeast Asia: there
would be doubts about U.S. commitments in that part of the world, and
(since it was obvious that the communist forces would be left with de facto
control of eastern Laos), the settlement would create direct security
threats for Thailand and Vietnam. These problems would accompany a "good"
outcome in Laos (the coalition government); if the Pathet Lao chose to
simply overrun the country outright (es, short of direct American inter-
vention, they had the power to do), the problem elsewhere in Southeast
Asia would be so much the worse. Consequently, throughout 1961, we find
the effects of the Laos situation spilling over onto Vietnam.

5. The Special American Commitment to Vietnam
Finally, in this review of factors that would affect policy-making

on Vietnam, we must note that South Vietnam, (unlike any of the other coun-
tries in Southeast Asia) was essentially the creation of the United States.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
