Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

victory. I am concerned that he Government of Vietnam has

already moved some distance down the wrong road in dealing

with its Amred Forces. I do not know whether the Armed ,
Forces will collapse or whether, finding the present course
intolerable, they will make a desperate move to regain power:
Neither course of action is compatible with the objective

we seek." 31/

In Washington, Taylor, Rusk, McNamara and Wheeler reached a consen-
sus‘that (1) Khanh and GVN were too exhausted to be thinking about moves
against the North, (2) GVN needs reassurance, and (3) Khanh is likely to
stay in control, but not to get much done on the pacification program. 32/
There followed NSAM 314, whose main point was that "first order of business
at present is to take actions which will help strengthen the fabric of
the GVN." 33/

5. The HNC Goes to Work Amid Further Turbulence

Helping strengthen the fabric of GVN proved to be easier said than
done.

Another coup attempt on September 13 failed when Ky and Thi, along
with other young officers, supported the existing government. The USG
opposed the coup, and also opposed overt violence to suppress it; in particu-
jar, USG opposed VNAF bombing of Saigon, which was threatened at one point
when the coup generals gained control of much of the city. 3h/ When Khanh
and Ky asked for U.S. Marines, the USG refused; State authorized a strong
line in favor of the Triumvirate, and against internecine war:

"(A) It is imperative that there not be internecine war
within VN Armed orces.

(B) The picture of petty bickering among VN leaders has
created an appalling impression abroad.

(C) The U.S. has not provided massive assistance to SVN,
in military equipment, economic resources and personnel,
in order to subsidize continuing quarrels among SVN
leaders...

(G) Emphasize that VN leaders must not take the U.S. for
granted.

"2. In line with above you should make it emphatically clear
whenever useful, that we do not believe a Phat/Duc government
can effectively govern the country or command the necessary
popular support to carry forward the effort against the VC.
U.S. support for the GVN is based on the triumvirate and its
efforts to bring about # broadly based and effective govern-
ment setisfactorily reflecting the interests and concerns
of 411 groups." 35/

hs TOP SECRET - Sensitive
