Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

governments will proceed in their development toward stable
governments representing the true nationalist sentiments of
more than 20 million peoples of Indochina.

"French action in transferring sovereignty to Vietnam, Laos
and Cambodia has been in process for some time. Following French
ratification, which is expected within a few days, the way will
be open for recognition of these legal governments by the countries
of the world whose policies support the development of genuine
national independence in former colonial areas. Ambassador Jessup
has already expressed to Emperor Bao Dai our best wishes for
prosperity and stability in Vietnam, and the hope that closer
relationship will be established between Vietnam and the United
States." 83/

Formal French ratification of Vietnamese independence was announced
on 2 February 1950. President Truman approved U.S. recognition for
Bao Dai the same date, and on 4 February, the American Consul General
in Saigon was instructed to deliver the following message to Bao Dai:

"Your Imperial Majesty:

"I have Your Majesty's letter in which I am informed of
the signing of the agreements of March a 1949 between Your
Majesty, on behalf of Vietnam, and the President of the French
Republic, on behalf of France. My Government has also been
informed of the ratification on February 2, 1950 by the French
Government of the agreements of March 8, 1949.

"Since these acts establish the Republic of Vietnam as
an independent State within the French Union, I take this
opportunity to congratulate Your Majesty and the people of
Vietnam on this happy occasion.

"The Government of the United States of America is pleased
to welcome the Republic of Vietnam into the community of peace-
loving nations of the world and to extend diplomatic recognition
to the Government of the Republic of Vietnam. I look forward to
an early exchange of diplomatic representatives between our two
countries...." 64

Recognition of Bao Dai was followed swiftly by French requests for
U.S. aid. On May 8, 1950, Secretary of State Acheson released the fol-
lowing statement in Paris:

"The /French/ Foreign Minister and I have just had an ex-
change of views on the situation in Indochina and are in general
agreement both as to the urgency of the situation in that area
and as to the necessity for remedial action. We have noted the

A-60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
