Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

146 ne
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ce Cessation of further infiltration of men and
supplies from North Viet-Nam to South Viet-Nam.

d. Withdrawal of infiltrated North Vietnamese Army
units and cadres.

e. Dissolution or repatriation of Viet Cong. 139/

Continuing his argument, Taylor outlined his views about which "blue
chips" we should trade in negotiations for concessions from the DRV.

If these are the chips, how should we play ours to
get theirs at minimum cost? Our big chips are a and d,
the cessation of bombing and the withdrawal of U.S. forces;
their big ones are c and e, the stopping of infiltration
and dissolution of The Viet Cong. We might consider trading
even, our a and d for their c and e except for the fact that
all will require a certain amount of verification and inspec-
tion except our bombing which is an overt, visible fact.
Even if Hanoi would accept inspection, infiltration is so
elusive that I would doubt the feasibility of an effective
detection system. Troop withdrawals, on the other hand,
are comparatively easy to check. Hence, I would be inclined
to accept as an absolute minimum a cessation of Viet Cong
incidents and military operations (Hanoi a and b) which are
readily verifiable in exchange for the stopping of our
bombing and of offensive military operations against Viet
Cong units (our & and b). If Viet Cong performance under
the agreement were less than perfect, we can resume our
activities on a scale related to the volume of enemy action.
This is not a particularly good deal since we give up one of
our big chips, bombing, and get neither of Hanoi's two big ones.
However, it would achieve a cease-fire under conditions which
are subject to verification and, on the whole, acceptable.
We would not have surrendered the right to use our weapons
in protection of the civil population outside of Viet Cong-
controlled territory. 140

’ Summing up, Taylor argued against an unconditional bombing halt in these
words:

Such'a tabulation of negotiating blue chips and their
purchasing power emphasized the folly of giving up any one
in advance as a precondition for negotiations. Thus, if
we gave up bombing in order to start discussions, we would
not have the coins necessary to pay for all the concessions
reguired for a satisfactory terminal settlement. My estimate
of assets and values may be challenged, but I feel that it is
important for us to go through some such exercise and make up
our eoilective minds as to the value of our holdings and how

113 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
