Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(2).
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

with the major flood disaster in the southwestern provinces have com-
bined to create a deep and pervasive crisis of confidence and a serious
loss in national morale.

B. In the field, the military operations against the VC are
ineffective because of the absence of reliable intelligence on the
enemy, an unclear and unresponsive channel of command responsibility in
the Armed Forces, and the tactical immobility of the VN ground forces.
This immobility leads to a system of passive, fragmented defense con-
ceding the initiative to the enemy and leaving him free to pick the
targets of attack. The harassed population exposed to these attacks
turn to the government for better protection and the latter responds by
assigning more static missions to the Army units, thus adding to their
immobility. In the end, the Army is allowed neither to train nor to
fight but awaits enemy attacks in relative inaction.

C. The situation in the Saigon is volatile but, while morale
is down and complaints against the government are rife, there is not hard
evidence of a likely coup against Diem. He still has no visible rival
or replacement.

2. To cope with the foregoing situation, we are considering
recommending a number of possible forms of GVN-US cooperation to reverse
the present downward trend, stimulate an offensive spirit and buildup
morale. In company with Ambassador Nolting, Dr. Rostow and Mr. Menden-
hall, I discussed some of these Oct 24 with Diem and Thuan, advancing
them as personal ideas to which I was seeking their informal reaction.
The following outline, distributed in French translation at the start
of the interview, indicates the scope of the discussion.

A. Improvement of intelligence on V.C.: the available in-
telligence on V.C. insurgency is inadequate both for tactical require-
ments and for basis of judgment of situation at governmental levels.
A joint GVN-US effort should be able to improve organization, tech-
niques and end product to mutual advantage both parties.

B. Joint survey of security situation at provincial level:
The current situation can best be appraised at provincial Jevel where
the basic intelligence is found, the incidents occur, and the defenses
are tested. The problems vary from province to province and hence
require local analysis on the spot. Such a survey should result in
better understanding of such important matters as quality of basic
intelligence on V.C., needs of civil guard and self defense corps,
command relationships between provincial and Army officials and condi-
tions under which assumption of offensive might be possible.

: C. Improvement of Army mobility: it appears that size of
ARVN can not be much increased before end 19623; to make it more

92
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
