Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Iv. A. 5.

Tab 2.
REBELLION AGAINST MY-DIEM

A. Diem's Political legacy: Violence and Anti-Colonialism

World War II and the First Indochina War left the society of
South Vietnam severely torn. The Japanese, during the years of their
presence from 1940-1945, had encouraged armed factionalism to weaken
the French administration and strengthen their own position. af The
war between the Viet Minh and the French -- which began in South Vietnam
in September, 1945 -- wrought further disunity.. Paradoxically, the
South suffered political damage compared to the North from having been
the secondary theater of both wars. The Japanese had sought during
World War II to control it without sizable occupation forces. Similarly,
in the First Indochina War, the French had practiced economy of force
in the South so that they could concentrate in Tonkin. For conventional
forces, both the Japanese and the Frenth substituted irregular warfare
and a system of bribes, subversion, arms, military advice, and officially
condoned concessions in corruption. From 1945-1954, the fighting in
South Vietnam was more sporadic and diffuse than in the North, but in
a societal sense, ultimately more destructive. While in Tonkin the
Viet Minh flowed in through and behind the French and continued to build
a nation and unify the people with surprising efficiency, in the South
they were unable to do so. Not only were the Viet Minh centers of power
in the North and the China base area too remote to support effectively
the southern insurgency, but also the French had imitated the Japanese
in arming and supplying certain South Vietnamese factions, fomenting
civil war against the southern arm of the Viet Minh. The results
approached anarchy: a virtual breakdown in public administration by
Franco-Vietnamese central governments and deep cleavages within the Viet-
namese body politic. By the summer of 1954, conspiracy had become the
primary form of political communication in South Vietnam, and violence
the primary mode of political change.

Politically, as well as geographically, South Vietnam consisted
of three distinctive regions: the narrow, coastal plan of Annam, thickly
settled by Vietnamese, where was located Hue, the ancient Viet capital
and cultural center; the Highlands, sparsely populated by Montagnard
tribesmen, in which was situated the summer capital of Dalat; and Cochin-
china, the fertile, densely peopled river-delta area in which Saigon
stood (see maps, ff.). Cochinchina had experienced a political develop-
ment markedly different from that of Annam. The last area of modern

a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
