id

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

autonomy to non-Communist Vietnamese. But the Viet Minh, reforms in Japan
and on Taiwan, was pressed forward -- 123,000 heads of families became
smell lendowners. A comprehensive system of agricultural credit was set -
up. Thousands of Vietnamese were moved into the highlands to raise indus-
trial crops. Rubber production rose, and new plantings of better varieties
promised still higher production for the future. Sugar production doubled
in 1958. South Viet-Nam was soon producing enough rice to resume exports
on a rising scale. Various small industries were established. Textile
production rose from near zero to near self-sufficiency. Electric power
nearly doubled. Per capita national income rose by 20 percent. ie

"Thousands of new schools were built. Between 1956 and 1960, enroll-
ment in the elementary schools rose from 400,000 to 1,500,000. The
expansion of health facilities included new hospitals and 3,500 villege
health stations. Rail transportation was restored. Roads were repaired
and improved, and three new major highways were built.

"The Communists were not completely eliminated -- especially along the
land and sea frontiers, where they could be supplied -- but most of South
Viet-Nam beceme, for a period, safe for travel.

"Although North Viet-Nem inherited most of the industry of Viet-Nan,
and although its population is larger, it fell rapidly behind South Viet-
Nam in food production, the number of children in school, and in standards
of living. While per capita food production rose 20 percent in the South,
it fell 10 percent in the North.

"This was competition which the Communists apparently could not endure.
Very likely it was one of the reasons why they decided in 1959 to renew
their assault on South Viet-Nem. And in 1960 the Lao Dong Party -- that is,
the Communist Party -- ordered the ‘liberation’ of South Viet-Nan.

"According to Communist propaganda, the war in South Viet-Nem is a
civil war, a local uprising. The truth is thet it is an aggression
organized, directed, and partly supplied from North Viet-Nam. It is con-
ducted by hardened Communist political organizers and guerrilla leaders
trained in North Viet-Nem, who, upon their arrival in the South, recruit
local assistance. This has been done in a variety of ways, including
terror and assassination. Schoolteachers, health workers, malaria eradi-
cetion teams, local officials loyal to the Republic -- these were the
first targets of the assassins. But many ordinary villagers who refused
to cooperate with the Communist guerrillas likewise have been ruthlessly
killed. z

"Strategic Importance of South Viet-Nam

"This assault on South Viet-Nem was a major Communist enterprise, care-
fully and elaborately prepared, heavily staffed, and relentlessly pursued.

. Tt mede headway. In 1961 President Diem appealed for further assistance

and President Kennedy responded promptly and affirmatively.

C-32
