Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

17

ahead, and pass down the starboard side. Their written statement as-

serts their belief that this was one or more small boats at high speed.
These were Matthew B. Allasre, SGT, USMC, and David A. Prouty,
/CPL, USMC.)

INTELLIGENCE REPORTS

In addition to the above, intelligence reports received from a highly

classified and unimpeachable source reported that North Vietnam was
making preparations to attack our destroyers with two Swatow boats’
and with one PT boat if the PT could-be made read y in time. The same
Source reported, while the engagement was in progress on August 4,
that the attack was underway. Immediately after the attack ended, the
Source reported that the North Vietnamese lost two ships in the
engagement.
. No one within the Department of Defense has reviewed all of this
information without arriving at the unqualified conelusion that a deter-
mined attack was made on the Maddow and Turner Joy in the Tonkin
Gulf on the night of August 4, 1964. Vice Adm. Roy L. Johnson,
USN, commander of the U.S. 7th Fleet at the time, stated in his
review of the combined chronology and track charts submitted by the
task group commander: a

Commander, Seventh Flect, is convinced beyond any doubt that Maddox and
Turner Joy were subjected to an wuprovoked surface torpedo attack on the night
of 4 August 1964.

Adin. T. H. Moorer, then commander in chief, Pacific Fleet, con-
eurred in that appraisal. ;

In Washington, the Director of the Joint Staff, Lt. Gen. David A.
Burehinal, USAF, analyzed the incoming information from message
traflic, with the assistance of the Joint Staff. He then gave his evalua-
tion to the Seeretary of Defense: “The actuality of the attack is
confirmed.”

In the face of this evidence, I can only conclude that many of
the persistent questions as to whether or not an attack took pie must
have arisen from confusion between the August 4 attack and an-
other incident which occurred on the 18th of September 1964; that is,
about 45 days later. At that time, the U.S. destroyers J/orton and
Ldwards were patrolling, at night, in the Gulf of Tonkin, and initially
eporcd themselves under attack. While the ensuing situation reports
indicated the probability of hostile craft in the area of the patrol,
it was decided at both the Washington and field command levels
that no credible evidence of an attack existed. It should be noted that
the intelligence source that confirmed the attacks of August 2 and 4
provided no evidence of any enemy action on September 1S. In view
of our unresolyed doubts, no retaliatory action was taken. M any
individuals who were not aware of all of the facts about all three
incidents, that is, August 2 and 4, and September 18, have made the
mistaken assumption that descriptions of the September 18 incident
were referring to the second Tonkin Gulf incident. Aware of the
negative findings on September 18, they have mistakenly assumed that
there is serious doubt as to whether the “second” Tonkin Gulf attack
in fact took place. :

nee Deeiaite teeny ee eo ¥
