Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-- Expect general elections, but in prudence, anticipate their
not being held, and prepare to take the South by force if
necessary.

~~ Move north the bulk of the Viet Minh forces in the South,
and upgrade as a reserve.

-- Foster strong ties among the regroupees with families in the
South.

-- Establish an effective political infrastructure in the South,
and work to weaken the government as well as the position of
foreign powers there.

In 1955, Ngo Dinh Diem, with patent U.S. backing, refused
to open consultations with the DRV preliminary to the expected plebescite.
There followed in rapid succession Diem's own plebescite, the casting off
of Bao Dai, and the withdrawal of the French. When July, 1956, passed,
hope that the Geneva Settlement might lead toward reunification waned in
the North. It was thereafter increasingly clear that peaceable reunifica-
tion was not in prospect for the foreseeable future. Ho Chi Minh, ina
1956 letter to the 90,000 to 130,000 regroupees who had gone North in the
expectation of returning that year, explained the seeming inaction of the
DRV on their behalf as follows:

"Our policy is: to consolidate the North and to keep in
mind the South.

"To build a good house, we must build a strong foundation.
To have a vigorous plant with green leaves, beautiful flowers,
and good fruit, we must take care of it and feed the root.

"The North is the foundation, the root of the struggle for
complete national liberation and the reunification of the country.
That is why everything we are doing in the North is aimed at
strengthening both the North and the South. Therefore, to work
here is the same as struggling in the South: it is to struggle
for the South and for the whole of Viet-Nam.

"Struggle is always accompanied by difficulties. But your
difficulties are our common difficulties. After fifteen years
of devastating war, the newly liberated North is suffering
many privations....

",..our political struggle will...be a long and hard strug-
gle, then the tendency to become impatient, pessimistic, and
to succumb to other cares will disappear.

"The poietoet struggle will certainly be victorious,
national reunification will certainly be achieved." 69/

2h, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
