Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

"Te Minister of Defense of Communist China, Marshal Lin Piao, in
a. long statement of policy in September 1965, deseribed in detail how
Mao Tse-tung expects to utilize the ‘war of liberation’ to expand com-
munism in Latin America, Africa, and Asia.

"These testimonials show that, apart from the goal of imposing
comunism on 15 million South Vietnamese, the success of the ‘war of
liberation’ is in itself an important objective of the Communist leader-
ship. On our side, we can understand the grave consequences of such a
success for us. President Eisenhower in 1959 stressed the military
importance of defending Southeast Asia in the following terms. He said:

"Strategically, South Viet-Nem's capture by the Communists
would bring their power several hundred miles into a hitherto free
region. The remaining countries of Southeast Asia would be menaced by.
a great flanking movement....The loss of South Viet-Nam would set in
motion a crumbling process that coalits as it progressed, have grave con-
sequences for us and for freedom.

"This view has often been referred to as the ‘domino theory.' I
personally do not believe in such a theory if it means belief in a law ”
of nature which requires the collapse of each neighboring state in an
inevitable sequence, following a Communist victory in South Viet-Nam.
However, I am deeply impressed with the probable effects worldwide, not
necesserily in ereas contiguous to South Viet-Nam, if the 'war of libera-
tion’ scores a significant victory there. President Kennedy commented
on this danger with moving eloquence: ‘The great battleground for the
defense and expansion of freedom today is the southern half of the globe--
Asia, Iatin America, Africa, and the Middle East--the lands of the people
who harbor the greatest hopes. The enemies of freedom think they can
destroy the hopes of the newer nations and they aim to do it before the
end of this decade. This is a struggle of will and determination as
much as one of force and violence. It is a battle for the conquest of
the minds and souls as much as for the conquest of lives and territory.
In such a struggle, we cannot fail to take sides.'

"Gentlemen, I think a simple answer to the question, what are we
doing in South Viet-Nam, is to say that for more than a decade we have
been taking sides in a cause in which we have a vital stake."

x * *
43. Address by President Johnson at a Freedom House Dinner at New York,

February 23, 1966, “Viet-Nam: The Struggle to Be Free,” Department

of State Briletin, March ik, 1966, p- 390.

re cap Bess

"Our purpose in Viet-Nam is to prevent the success of aggression.
It is not conquest; it is not empire; it is not foreign bases; it is
not domination. It is, simply put, just to prevent the forceful conquest

D-69
