Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

2
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
s
—

These problems were aggravated by the clear and growing lack of
legitimacy of GVN. The generals led by Minh, who overthrew Diem, gained
an aura of respectability by this act because Diem had so completely
alienated the people. Whatever their "respectability" may have been
worth went down the drain, however, when Khanh seized power and then
lJater maneuvered Minh out of the country. Khanh's position as a brash
usurper geve him little room for maneuver among Saigon's complex political
currents, although for a time the U.S. counted on his "raw power." With
subsequent shifts in the form and composition of government, the expedi-
ency and lack of legitimacy of GVN grew more conspicuous and more debilitating.

Leverage

U.S. attempts to strengthen the GVN's will to govern and to pacify
the countryside failed. Moreover, the attempts, conceived in haste, often
backfired. In contrast to the steady discussion of alternatives among
Washington agencies, the Embassy, and MACV on the subject of pressures on
the North, the idea of pressures on GVN seldom surfaced. When it did sur-
face, it was either brushed aside or rushed into. Leverage planning failed
to receive even that quality and quantity of attention that pressures against
North Vietnam planning did.

As a general rule, Washington was more interested in putting pressure
on GVN than was the Embassy, with the notable exception of Taylor's initi-
() a@tives in December, and MACV was the least interested of all. But these
differences were less notable than was the almost universal consensus (most
of the time) that the Vietnamese were too sensitive for such pressures to
work, and that we had to accept the GVN's non-performance as the best avail-
able.

Starting with Rusk'’s conversation with Khanh at the end of May, 1961),
and ending with Taylor's initiative in early December, the U.S, tried to
use the prospect of U.S, force commitment as an inducement to the Vietnamese
to do better. However, Taylor said that if this inducement were to fail,
the U.S. should go ahead with its pressures against the North anyway. Taking
this position meant that the attempted inducement was bluff. There is every
sign, both in their non-performance and in their December-January defiance,
that the GVN sized it up that way and called the bluff.

Our attempted leverage included both inducements and threats at one
time and another; and neither worked out well. Rusk's May, 1964, conversa-
tion with Khanh, the intensification of pressures planning following the
Honolulu Conference in June, and the shift of the Chairman, JCS to the
post of Ambassador to SVN, all. showed U.S. commitment. We hoped these
measures and talks would directly contribute to GVN morale and effectiveness.
However, they were followed by the July press leaks and by direct pressure
to bomb North immediately. The July public endorsement of Khanh was intended
to reassure al] concerned of our support, and so to strengthen GVN. ‘Then,

dil TOP SECRET - Sensitive
