Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

did not wish France to be reduced to "its own small metropolitan terri-
tory," but warned that such would be the consequence if the colonial
peoples turned against France:

"Are we, after having lost Syria and Lebanon yesterday,
to lose Indochina tomorrow, North Africa the day after?" 41/

In the National Assembly in September, 1946, a Communist deputy had
declared that:

"The Communists are as much as the next person for the
greatness of the country. But...they have never ceased to
affirm that the French Union...can only be founded on the
confident, fraternal, and above all, democratic collaboration
of all the peoples and races who compose it...." ho/

However, Ho Chi Minh was unable to capitalize upon his connection with
the French Left (Ho had been one of the founding members of the French
Communist Party in the early 1920's) to turn the expressed convictions
of either the Socialists or the Communists to the advantage of the DRY.
The Communists were not prepared to press the case for the Vietnamese
at the cost of votes in France. The Socialists in power paid only lip
service to conciliation, and allowed the more militant colonialists,
especially those in Vietnam, to set France's policy in Indochina; thus,
Admiral d'Argenlieu, not General Leclerc, spoke for the French Govern-
ment.

In mid-December, 1946, as soon as Blum took office, Ho sent hin
a telegram with proposals for easing tension in Vietnam, but the message
did not reach Paris until December 26. 43/ By that time the flash-
point had been passed. In Hanoi, on 19 December 19/16, Vietnamese troops,
after several days of mounting animosity punctuated with violence, cut
off the city's water and electricity, and attacked French posts using
small arms, mortar and artillery. The issue of who was the aggressor
has never been resolved. The fighting flared across North Vietnam, and
two days later, the guerrilla war in South Vietnam quickened pace. The
French responded to the initial attacks with an occasional savagery which
rendered increasingly remote restoration of status quo ante.

On 23 December 1946, Premier Leon Blum addressed the National Assem-
bly on the Indochina crisis. His-speech was characteristically principled
and characteristically ambiguous: he talked peace, but endorsed mili-
tant French officials in Vietnam. Although he declared that, "The old
colonial system founded on conquest and maintained by constraint, which
tended toward exploitation of conquered lands and peoples is finished
today," he ‘also stated that:

Nye have been obliged to deal with violence. TI declare
that the men who are fighting out there, the French of Indochina,

2

A-32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
