Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"and if anyone has the illusion that my Government will abandon the
people of Vietnam -- or that we shall weary of the burden of support that
we are rendering these people -- it can only be due to ignorance of the
strength and the conviction of the American people.

x

5. "The Defense of the Free World," Robert S. McNamara, Secretary of Defense,
before the National Ind Conf Bd, 2] May 1964, Department of State Bulle-
tin, 8 June 1964, pv. 895: )

% * *

"me 'Forward Defense' Nations:

"Our military assistance program today is oriented mainly toward those
countries on the periphery of the major communist nations where the threats
are greatest and in which the indigenous resources are least. In the fiscal
year 1965 program now before the Congress, about two-thirds of the total
amount is scheduled to go to the 11 nations on the southern and eastern =
perimeters of the Soviet and Red Chinese blocs. These sentinels of the
free world, in a sense, are in double jeopardy from potential military
aggression from without and from attempted subversion from within. These
countries are under the Red shadow. They face the major threat, and they
are the ones most affected by the modernization of communist forces. For
this group we requested $745 million in military assistance. They best
illustrate the points I want to make.

"Imagine a globe, if you will, and on that globe the Sino-Soviet bloc.
‘The bloc is contained at the north by the Arctic. To the west are the re-
vitalized nations of Western Europe. But across the south and to the east
you find the 11 ‘forward defense’ nations -~ Greece, Turkey, Iran, Pakistan,
India, Laos, Thailand, South Vietnam, the Philippines, and the Republics
of China and Korea. These nations, together-with stretches of the Pacific
Ocean bearing the U.S. Fleet, describe an are along which the free world
draws its frontlines of defense.

"The frontlines are there in the interests of those 11 nations; the lines
are there also in the interests of the United States and the rest of the
free world. The areaswhich this ll-nation arc protects are of obvious stra-
tegic importance to the United States. More significant, however, is the
importance of the arc to the principle that nations have a right to be inde-
pendent -- a right to develop in peace, in freedom, and according to the
principle of seli-determination. United States support of these rights
eat the frontiers thickens the blood of the free-world family; it strengthens
our security at home.

"We must recognize, however, that the United States does not have the
resources to maintain a credible force by itself along all of this great
arc of forward positions. Such a strategy would be unbearably costly to
us in both money and human resources. The United States maintains major

D-10
