Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

16. A Conversation with Dean Rusk, NBC News Program on January 3,
1965, Department of State Bulletin, January 18, 1965, Dp. 6h. -
* + *

"Secretary Rusk: ....Now, when North Viet-Nam was organized as a
Communist country, almost immediately its neighbor, Iaos, and its neigh-
bor, South Viet-Nam, came under direct pressure from North Viet-Nem.
Now, this is the mature of the appetite proclaimed from Peiping. One
doesn't require a ‘domino’ theory to get at this. Peiping has announced
the doctrine. It is there in the primitive notion of a militant world
revolution which has been promoted by these veterans of the long march
who now control mainland China. So we believe that you simply postpone
temporarily an even greater crisis if you allow an announced course of
aggression to succeed a step at a time on the road to a major catas-
trophe.

+ +

"Now, there are some in other countries, for example, who seem to
be relatively indifferent to problems of this sort in Southeast Asia,
and yet they are the first ones to say that if we were to abandon South-
east Asia, this would cause them to wonder what our commitments under
such arrangements as NATO would mean. Do you see?

"In other words, the issue here is the capability of halting a
course of aggression at the beginning, rather than waiting for it to
produce a great conflagration."

x % *

17- The State of the Union Address of the President to the Congress,
January 4, 1965, Public Papers of the Presidents, Johnson, 1965,
D- Sie

& ke *

"We are there, first, because a friendly nation has asked us for
help against the Communist aggression. Ten years ago our President
pledged our help. Three Presidents have supported that pledge. We
will not break it now.

"Second, our own security is tied to the peace of Asia. Twice in
One generation we have had to fight against aggression in the Far East.
To ignore aggression now would only increase the danger of a much larger
war.

"Our goal is peace in Southeast Asia. That will come only when
aggressors leave their neighbors in peace."

D-25
