Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Drvet ens ae
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Assembly and the abolition of the Diem-Nhu government based on the .con-
stitution of 1956, and proclaiming the support of the committee for such
democratic principles as free elections, unhampered political opposition,
freedom of press, freedom of religion, and an end to discrimination. 26/
They were at pains to explain that the purpose of the coup was to bolster
the fight against the Communists which they pledge themselves to pursue
with renewed vigor and determination.

On the afternoon of November 3, the second day after the coup,
Generals Don end Kim called on Lodge at the Umbassy, explaining that
General Minh was tied up in conversetions with Vice President Tho on the
new government. 27/ The conversation was long and touched on many topics.
It began with mutual expressions of satisfaction at the success of the
coup, and continued with Lodge's assurance of forthcoming U.S. recognition
for their new government. ‘The generals explained thet they had decided
on a two-tiered government structure with a military committee presided
over by Generel Minh overseeing a regular cabinet that would be mostly
civilian with Tho as prime minister. Lodge promised to see to the im-
mediate restoration of certain of the aid programs and the speedy resvmp-
tion of the others when the government was in place. They then dealt
with a host of immediate problems including the return of the Whu chil-
dren to their mother and the disposition of the rest of the Ngo family,
press censorship, the release of Tri Quang from the Embassy, curfew,
reprisals against former ministers > ete. The generals confirmed the
psychological importance of the commodity import suspension to the suc-
cess of their plans. lodge was elated, both at the efficiency and
success Of the coup, and the seriousness and determination of the generals
to deal with the pressing problems and get on with the war.

The following day, on instructions fron Washington, Lodge, in company
with It Colonel Conein, met with Generals Minh and Don. 28/ Washington
had been anxious for Lodge to urgently convey to the generals the need
to make a clarifying statement about the deaths of the brothers and to
take steps to insure humane treatment of other members of the family.

The generals were responsive to Lodge's urgings and promised to see that
action was taken on the U.S. requests. Minh said that the composition of
the new government would be announced shortly. In describing the meeting
later, Lodge offered a prophetic description of Minh: "Minh seemed tired
and somewhat frazzled; obviously a good, well-intentioned man. Will he
be strong enough to get on top of things?” 29/ Lodge closed the cable
by taking exception to State's excessive pre-occupation with the negative
public relations problems of the coup and decrying its failure to note
the brilliance with which the coup was planned and executed.

The promised announcement of the new government came on the morning
of November 5. It was very much as General Kim had described it to Lodge
on November 3. Minh was named President and Chief of the Militery
Committee; Tho was listed as Premier, Minister of Economy, and Minister

61 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

=
