\3l.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

not soon achieved, The following recommendations are designed to
achieve that favorable turn, to avoid a further deterioration in the
situation in South Vietnam, and eventually to contain and eliminate
the threat to its independence.

Be It is recommended:
General

a. That upon request from the Government of Vietnam (GVN) to
come to its aid in resisting the increasing aggressions of the Viet-
Cong and in repairing the ravages of the Delta flood which, in combin-
ation, threaten the lives of its citizens and the security of the
country, the U.S. Government offer to join the GVN in a massive joint
effort as a part of a total mobilization of GVN resources to cope
with both the Viet-Cong (VC) and the ravages of the flood. The U.S.
representatives will participate actively in this effort, particularly
in the fields of government administration, military plans and opera-
tions, intelligence, and flood relief, going beyond the advisory role
which they have observed in the past.

Specific

b. That in support of the foregoing broad commitment to a joint
effort with Diem, the following specific measures be undertaken:

(1) The U.S. Government will be prepared to provide indivi-
dual administrators for insertion into the governmental machinery
of South Vietnam in types and numbers to be worked out with President
Diem.

(2) A joint effort will be made to improve the military-
political intelligence system beginning at the provincial level and
extending upward through the government and armed forces to the
Central Intelligence Organization.

(3) The U.S. Government will engage in a joint survey of
the conditions in the provinces to assess the social, political,
intelligence, and military factors bearing on the prosecution of the
counter-insurgency in order to reach a common estimate of these
factors and a common determination of how to deal with them. As
this survey will consume time, it should not hold back the immedi-
ate actions which are clearly needed regardless of its outcome.

(4) <A joint effort will be made to free the Amy for
mobile, offensive operations. This effort will be based upon im-
proving the training and equipping of the Civil Guard and the

6
9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
