Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for the U.S. to "support a program of national mobilization (including
a national service law) to put South Vietnam on a war footing."

A second measure under this heading was to strengthen the armed
forces, both regular and paramilitary by at least 50,000 men. Of
these, about 15,000 would be required to fill the regular armed forces
(ARVN) to their current authorized strength, 5,000 would be needed to
fill the existing paramilitary forces to their authorized strengths, and
the remaining 30,000 would be to increase the strength of the paramili-
tary forces. To this end it was specifically recommended that the U. S<
"assist the Vietnamese to increase the armed forces (regular plus para-
military) by at least 50,000 men."

The third measure of mobilization was to assist in an increase of
the civil administrative corps of Vietnam by an additional 7,500 in
1964, with the ultimate target of at least 40,000 men for service in
8,000 hamlets and 2,500 villages, and in 3 provincial centers. It was
specified that in accomplishing this the United States should work with
the GVN te devise necessary recruiting plans, training facilities,
financing methods and organizational arrangements, and should furnish
training personnel at once under the auspices of the AID mission. The
specific recommendation was "to assist the Vietnamese to create a greatly
enlarged civil administrative corps for work at province, district and
hamlet levels."

The improvement of SVN military forces was to be accomplished not
only by the increase in numbers specifiied above, but also by internal
reforms and organizational improvements. What remained of the current
hamlet militia and related forces of part-time nature for hamlet defense
should be consolidated with the self-defense corps into a single force
which would be compensated by the national government. The pay and
collateral benefits of the paramilitary groups should be substantially
improved. Strength of the forces should be maintained and expanded by
effectively enforced conscription measures and by more centrally
directed recruitment policies. It was recommended that U.S. personnel
should be assigned to the training of the paramilitary forces. The
National Police required further special consideration. An offensive
_ guerrilla force should be created to operate along the border and in
areas where VC control was dominant. These measures were included in
specific recommendations to "assist the Vietnamese to improve and re-
organize the paramilitary forces and to increase their compensation"
and "to assist the Vietnamese to create an offensive guerrilla force."

Under the last two headings there were recommendations to provide
the Vietnamese Air Force with 25 A-1H aircraft in exchange for their T-28s
and to provide the Vietnamese Army additional M-113 APCs (withdrawing
the M-ll4s there) and also to provide additional river boats and approxi-
mately 5 to 10 million dollars worth of related additional materiel. A

: 5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
