Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The immediate Johnson stamp on the Kennedy policy came on 26 November.
At a NSC meeting convened to consider the results of the 20 November
Honolulu Conference, the President "reaffirmed that U.S. objectives with
respect to withdrawal of U.S. military personnel remain as stated in the
White House statement of October 2, 1963." 48/ ‘The only hint that some-
thing might be different from on-going plans came in a Secretary of Defense
memo for the President three days prior to this NSC meeting. In that memo,
Mr. McNamara said that the new South Vietnamese government was confronted
by serious financial problems, and that the U.S. must be prepared to
raise planned MAP levels. 49/

In early December, the President began to have, if not second thoughts,
at least a sense of uneasiness about Vietnam. In discussions with his
advisors, he set in motion what he hoped would be a major policy review,
fully staffed jn depth, by Administration principals. ‘The President wanted
"a fresh new look taken" at the whole problem. In preparation for such a
basic reappraisal, an interdepartmental meeting of second-echelon principals
accordingly convened on 3 December and laid out a broad outline of basic
topics to be addressed and staff papers to be developed by various depart-
ments and agencies. 50/ This attempt at a systematic and comprehensive
reexamination, however, did not culminate in a fundamental national reassess-
ment.

ACCELERATED MODEL PLAN OF THE CPSVN

With no indication of policy change in the offing, U.S. military plan-
ning thus went forward with hardly a break in stride. On 5 December
CINCPAC submitted the Accelerated Model Plan to the JCS. It was the
revision to the Model M Plan version of the CPSVN that the Secretary of
Defense had ordered during his early October visit to Vietnam. The
Accelerated Plan provided for more rapid phase-out of the bulk of U.S.
military personnel and units and a decrease in the residual strength
remaining thereafter (see Figure Sy It also provided for building up
GVN forces at a faster pace but on a more reduced scale, then cutting
back from the peak sooner and leveling out somewhat lower (see Figure }).
MAP costs for the FY 1965-69 period would be a little higher than the
$392.2 million under the Model M Plan, coming to $399 4 million in the
Accelerated Plan (see Figure 5). 51/

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
