Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

CONPIDENTIAL

The Assistunt Chief of the Division af Southeast lst Ajfeuirs
(Landon) to the Secretary of State

SECRET : Tawxor, undated.
; [Received February 27—1L:45 a. m.]

From Landon for Moffat and Culbertson.

1. Sainteny stated that im conversation with Tlo Chi Minh he of-
fered Annamese complete independence within French community:
That this meant that Annamese would have benent of French advisers
In every Cepartment of Government: That for instance Annamese
Foreign Office would express its policies through French channels:
That Annamese Army and War Ministry would be caordiuated with
French Army and War Ministry: And that Annamese if [777] Finance
and Commerce Ministries world heed French advisers as Annamese
were inexpert in these matters and might jeopardize [anparent garble]
French inveshnent. Sainteny said that Annamese in Cochin China
would prebably prefer to remain French Colony rather come mder
northern \nnamese Government. In this connection Tlo Chi Minh
said that French officials had conferred with him but that they were
vague in their comments and had avoided the real issues of Aunamese
independence so that he had asked them to get specific terms from
Paris which would make clear whether the French really offered
Annamese independence or were merely using new language fo de-
seribe usual French control \anamese affairs.

2, Ho Chi Minh handed me two letters addressed to President of
USA, China, Russia, and Britain. identical copies of which were
stated to have heen forwarded to other governments named. Tn two
letters Tlo Clit Minh reqnests USA as one of Mnited Nations to sunport
idea of Annamese independence according to Philippines example, to
examine the case of the \nnamese. and to take steps necessary fo main-
tenance of world peace which is beg endangered by French efforts
to reconqver Indochina. Fe asserts that \nnamese will fieht until
United Nations interfere in support of Aimamese independence, The
petition addressed to major United Nations contains:

a, Review of French relations with Japanese where French Tndo-
china allewedly aided Jans:

b, Statement of establishment on 2 Sentember 1945 of [Provisional
Government of ?] Demoeratic Renublic of Viet Minh:

e. Summary of French conquest of Cochin China begun 23 Sept
1945 and still incomplete:

d. Outline of acconinlishments of Annamese Government in Tonkin
including populer elections, abolition of undesirable taxes, expansion
of education and resumption as far as possible of normal economic
activities: :

e. Request to four powers: (1) To intervene and stop the war in
Tndochina in order fo mediate Tair settlement and (2) to brine the
Tndechinese issue before the Vnited Nations Organization. The pe-
tition ends with statement that Annatmese ask for foll independence in
fact and that in interim while awnitine UNO decision the Aanuamese
will continue to ficht the reestablishment of French imperialisn.
Letters and petition will be transmitted to Department soonest.

[Lanxpex 1

64
