*

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

oR

correct although signs of tension develop from time to time. The Chinese have
pressed the French to indemnify Chinese who have suffered property loss in
Indochina’s fighting. The Kuomintang has striven to maintain a tight control
over the Chinese community through consular representation, while the French
have endeavored to reestablish the situation of pre-war years wherein the French
authorities successfully maintained a degree of control over Chinese within
Indochina.

The Chinese, however, have also tried to protect the several hundred thous-
ands of their fellowmen who live in territory not under French control. There
have been contacts between Ho’s agents and Chinese government officials which
apparently resulted in Chinese tolerance of a munitions traffic from China to
the benefit of the Ho government, French efforts to enlist Chinese support in
Kwangsi and Kwangtung to suppress Chinese bandit and Communist bands
which cross the Indochinese border have not been successful despite an agree-
ment in principle.

An increasing Soviet interest in Indochina, as demonstrated by a step-up
in radio broadcasts, was evidenced in the first half of 1948. The line taken by
these br oadcasts has been constantly to discredit the United States by attempt-
ing to identity it with “imperialistic France.” There continues to be no known
communication between the USSR and Vietnam, although evidence is accumu-
lating that a radio liaison may have been established through the Tass agency
in Shanghai.

D. POLICY EVALUATION

The objectives of US policy towards Indochina have not been realized.
Three years after the termination of war a friendly ally, France, is fighting
a desperate and apparently losing struggle in Indochina. The economic drain
of this warfare on French recovery, while dificult to estimate, is unquestionably
large. The Communist control in the nationalist movement has been increased
during this period. US influence in Indochina and Southeast’ Asia has suffered
asa result. =|

The objectives of US policy can only be attained by such French action as
Will satisfy the nationalist aspirations of the peoples of Indochina. We have
repeatedly pointed out to the French the desirability of their giving such satis-
faction and thus terminating the present open conflict. Our greatest difficulty
in talking with the French and in stressing what should and what should not
be done has been our inability to suggest any practicable solution of the Indo-
china problem, as we are all too well aware of the unpleasant fact that Com-
munist Ho Chi Minh is the strongest and perhaps the ablest figure in Indochina
and that any suggested solution which excludes him is an expedient of un-
certain outcome. We are naturally hesitant to press the French too strongly
or to become deeply involved so long as we are not in a position to suggest a
solution or until we are prtpared to accept the onus of intervention. The
above considerations are further complicated by the fact that we have an im-

148
