Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

According to the JCS, the destruction of the Haiphong
target "would drastically reduce the capabi-ity to receive and dis-
tribute the major portions of DRV bulk POL imports." Destruction of
the others would "force reliance upon dispersed POL storages and
improvised distribution methods." Recovery would be difficult and
time-consuming. As stated in an annex to the JCSM:

Recuperability of the DRV POL system from the
effects of an attack is very poor. Loss of the receiving and
and distribution point at Haiphong would present many
problems. It would probably require several months for
the DRV, with foreign assistance, to establish an alternate
method for importing bulk POL, in the quantities required.
An alternative to bulk importation would be the packaging
of POL at some point for shipment into NVN and subsequent
handling and distribution by cumbersome and costly methods
over interdicted LOCs. Loss of bulk storage facilities
would necessitate the use of small drums and dispersed
storage areas and further compound the POL distribution ~
problem. 10/

Any further delay in carrying out the strikes, on the
other hand, "will permit further strengthening of DRV active defenses
of the FOL, as well as the improvement of countermeasures, such as dis-
persed and underground storages." On the latter point, the appendix
to the JCSM added detailed intelligence information that boded ill for
any procrastination:

Current evidence shows that the DRV has in progress
an extensive program of installing groups of small POL
tanks in somewhat isolated locations and throughout the
Hanoi.area. Photographs reveal groups of tanks ranging
in number of 16 to 120 tanks per group. The facilities are
generally set into shallow excavations and are then earth-
covered leaving only the vents and filling apparatus exposed.
This construction was observed at several places in the Hanoi
area in August and appeared to be an around-the-clock activity....
In addition, considerable drum storage has been identified. 11/

Tt appeared that NVN had already begun a crash program to drastically
reduce the vuinerability of its POL storage and handling system. As
jn other instances, NVN expected further escalation of the bombing,

and was preparing for it.

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
