Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On that same day, 18 March, Mr. Johnson answered these critics, as
he charged in a speech before the National Farmers’ Union Convention in
Minneapolis, that Hanoi is seeking "to win in Washington what it cannot
win in Hue or Khe Sanh. Your President welcomes suggestions from com-
missions, from congressmen, from private individuals or groups," he
continued, “or anyone who has a plan or program which can stand inspection
and open a hope of reaching our goal of peace in the world." 91/

At this time, the President sought the advice of a group of his friends
and confidants outside of government. These men came to Washington on
18 March at the request of the President to receive briefings on the latest
developments in the war and to advise the President on the hard decision
he faced. Present were: former Undersecretary of State George Ball;
Arthur Dean, a Republican New York lawyer who was a Korean War negotiator
during the Eisenhower Administration; Dean Acheson, former President
Truman's Secretary of State: Gen. Matthew B. Ridgeway, the retired com-
mander of United Nations troops in Korea; Gen. Maxwell Taylor, former
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Cyrus Vance, former Deputy Defense
Secretary and a key troubleshooter for the Johnson Administration; McGeorge
Bundy, Ford Foundation President who had been special assistant for National
Security Affairs to Mr. Johnson and former President Kennedy; former Treasury
Secretary C. Douglas Dillon and Gen. Omar Bradley.

The only published account of this consultation, which is considered
reliable, was written by Stuart H. Loory and appeared in the Los Angeles
Times late in May. According to this report, the group met over dinner
with Secretary of State Dean Rusk; Defense Secretary Clark M. Clifford;
Ambassador W. Averell Harriman; Walt W. Rostow, the President's special
assistant for National security affairs; General Earle G. Wheeler, Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Richard Helms, Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency; Paul Nitze, Deputy Defense Secretary; Nicholas
Katzenbach, Under Secretary of State; and William P. Bundy, Assistant
Secretary of State for Hast Asian and Pacific Affairs.

The outsiders questioned the government officials carefully
on the war, the pacification program and the condition of the
South Vietnamese government after the Tet offensive. They in-
cluded in their deliberations the effect of the war on the
United States.

After dinner the government officials left and the group
received three briefings.

Philip C. Habib, a deputy to William Bundy and now a member
of the American negotiating team in Paris, delivered an unusuelly
; frank briefing on the conditions in Vietnam after the Tet offensive.
He covered such matters. as corruption in South Vietnam and the

growing refugee problem.

74 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
