Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

7. The program presents substantial risks. Under it,
the French build-up in Europe would be slowed down in some
degree, both by the limited troop diversion and the cut in
the French military budget. Moreover, in the best of
circumbances, the Indo-Chinese war cannot be successfully
closed out before the 1954-55 fighting season. Consequently,
in addition to any supplemental aid furnished now, we would
have to contemplate a comparable further contribution a year
from now to assure a satisfactory conclusion, Furthnerinore, ~
there is the risk that the French Union forces in Indo-China
mignt suffer reverses before the projected additional effort
can be brought to bear, :

8. Despite these risks and uncertainties it is believed
that the U. S. should agree, in its own security interests,
to furnish the additional $400 million of aid to France .
‘erious factors lead to this conclusion:

a. The Laniel government is almost certainly the
last French government which would undertake to continue the
war in Indo-China. If it fails, it will almost certainly
be succeeded by a government committed to seek a settlement
on terns dangerous to the security of the U. S,. anc the Free
World. The negotiation of a truce in Korea, added to tne _
frustrations and weariness of the seven years! war, has
markedly increased the sentiment in France for some kind of
negotiated peace in Indo-China, In the recent protracted
French governmental crisis, every leading candidate bid for
popular support with some kind of promise to reduce the
Indo-China commitment in some way, For the first time in
seven years, latent defeatist impulses emerged into real
‘efforts by political and parliamentary leaders to "pull out",

b. Under present conditions any negotiated settle-
nent would mean the eventual loss to Communism not only of
Indo-China but of the whole of Southeast Asia,

Gc. The loss of Indo-China would be critical to the
security of the U. S. Communist control of Indo-China would
endanger vital raw material.sources; it would weaken the
confidence of other Southeast Asian states in Western leader-
ship; it would make more difficult and more expensive the
defense of Japan, Formosa and the Philippines; and complicate
the creation of viable Japanese economy. If the French .
actually decided to withdraw, the U. S. would have to consider
most seriously whether to take over in this area,

dad. On the other hand,if the proposed program does
succeed, and the French are able to achieve victory in Indo-

128 ae TOP SECRET
