Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECREE - Sensitive

1. Reference is made to the memorandum by
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, dated 22 January 196}...
it sets forth a number of actions which the United
States should be prepared to take in order to ensure
victory...the Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed
the situation in South Vietnam with the view of de-
termining additional actions which can be recommended
for implementation immediately.

2. The Government of Vietnam has developed,
with the close collaboration of the U.S. Military
Assistance Command, a new National Pacification Plan
which provides for the orderly pacification of the
insurgency in accordance with a realistic phasing
schedule...and it provides for consolidation of
Secure areas and expansion of them (the 'spreading
oil drop'). U.S. military assets in Vietnam will
fully support this plan. What is now required is
implementation of additional actions which will
insure an integrated political, socio-economic, and
psychological offensive to support more fully the
military effort. Accordingly, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff recommend that the Country Team be directed to
implement the following actions at the earliest prac-
ticable time:

a. Induce the GVN (General Khanh) military to
accept U.S. advisors at all levels considered
necessary by COMUSMACV. (This is particularly ap-
plicable in the critical provinces)...

be Intensity the use of herbicides for crop
destruction against identified Viet Cong areas as
recommended by the GVIN.

ec. Improve border control measures...

d. Direct the U.S. civilian agencies involved
in Vietnam to assist the GVN in producing a civilian
counterpart package plan to the GVN National Pacifi-
cation Plan...

e. Provide U.S. civilian advisors to all
necessary echelons and GVN agencies...

f. Encourage early and effective action to
implement a realistic land reform program.

g- Support the GVN in a policy of tax for-
giveness for low income population in areas

38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
