Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

"ASTAN COMMUNISM, A CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER

"At the beginning today, I said the conflict in Viet-Nam was the
focus of a wider struggle taking place in Asia.

"During my recent mission I was struck by the depth of feeling, .
among almost all Asian: leaders, that Asian communism had direct design
on their national integrity and independence. ‘Almost all cited examples
of subversion and in many cases direct military involvement by Communist
troops within their countries. And none--without any exception--ques-
tioned our involvement in Viet-Nam. There were questions about aspects
of our policy there but none concerning the fact of our presence there
and our resistance to aggression.

"Among the leaders with whom I spoke, there was repeatedly expressed
a deep concern as to whether our American purpose, tenacity, and will
were strong enough to persevere in Southeast Asia. Public debate in
America was sometimes interpreted as a weakening of purpose. I empha-
sized not only the firmness of our resolve but also our dedication to
the rights of free discussion and dissent. ‘

"For we know that John Stuart Mill's advice remains valid: ‘We can
never be sure that the opinion we are endeavoring to stifle is a false
opinion; and if we were sure, stifling it would be an evil still.'

"Asian communism may be a’ subject for discussion here. In Asia, it
is a clear and present danger. Wo single, independent nation in Asia has
the strength to stand alone egainst that danger.

"T believe that the time may come when Asian communism may lose its
fervor, when it may lose some of its neuroses, when it may realize that
its objectives cannot be gained by aggression. But until that time I
believe we have no choice but to help the nations of Southeast Asia
strengthen themselves for the long road ahead.

"I also said, at the beginning today, that some very basic principles
of international conduct were under test in Viet-Nam. Some people think
not.

"Of them, I ask this: Were we to withdraw from Viet-Nam under any
conditions short of peace, security, and the right of self-determination
for the South Vietnamese people, what conclusions would be drawn in the
independent nations of Asia? In Western Europe? In the young, struggling
countries of Africa? In the nations of Latin America beset by subversion
and unrest? What conclusions would be drawn in Hanoi and Peking?”

ee

D-74 |
