Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

probably strengthen Viet Minh controls at the
village level and thus facilitate the collection

of rice.

32. Militarily, the Viet Minh are unlikely to
expand greatly their armed forces because
they are already experiencing manpower diffi-
culties. Their combat efficiency probably will
increase, however, as the result of a modest
augmentation of their unit firepower and a
steady improvement in staff planning and co-
ordination of forces. The Viet Minh probably
~ will continue to receive a steady flow of mate-

rial assistance from the Chinese Communists,

a and the amount may increase at any time.

-The Viet Minh do not have, and probably can-
- not develop within the period of this estimate,
: the capability to make such effective use of
heavy equipment — artillery, armor, and air-
,eraft—from the Chinese Communists as to
' permit successful attacks against strong con-
centrations of regular French forces. Over a
longer period, however, a great increase in

Viet Minh capabilities, including the develop-’

ment of an air force, is possible.

. 33. We believe that during the period of this
estimate the Communists in Indochina will
probably attempt to avoid combat except
where they can achieve surprise or great supe-
riority innumbers. They will attempt to con-
solidate Communist controls in ‘Free Laos”
and will build up supplies in northern Laos to
support further penetrations and consolida-
tion in that country. If they reach the Thai
border, they probably will attempt to organize
guerrilla forces among the Vietnamese in
northeastern Thailand, but we do not believe
they will have the capability to provide much
material assistance te such forces through
mid-1954. The Viet Minh forces in Laos may
hope to receive assistance from the Viet-
namese population in Thailand. The Viet
Minh will almost certainly intensify political
warfare, including guerrilla activities in
Cambodia.

34. We believe that neither the French Union
‘nor the Viet Minh will be able to win a final
military decision in Indochina through mid-
1954. The Viet Minh, with their principal
striking forees operating from the Tonkin
base area, will probably retain the initiative

during the period of this estimate by main-
taining attacks against lightly defended
French Union territory. The French Union

can hold key positions in Laos and may at-

tempt by attacks against Viet Minh lines of
communization, to prevent the Viet Minh
from moving southward in force towards
southern Laos and Cambodia. We believe,
however, that Viet Minh guerrillas in south-
ern Laos will develop sufficient strength to
control.much of the countryside and that
guerrilla activities in Cambodia will be inten-
Sified. The French Union probably will re-
duce, but not eliminate, Viet Minh strength in
south Vietnam. Viet Minh infiltration of the
Tonkin delta will probably be maintained at a
high level and the Viet Minh may undertake
major attacks against the delta if they can
weaken French defenses by drawing French

. Strength elsewhere.

35. Unless there is a marked improvement in
the French Union military position in Indo-
china, political stability in the Associated
States and popular support of the French
Union effort against the Viet Minh will de-
cline. We believe that such marked improve-
ment in the military situation is not likely,
though a moderate improvement is possible.
The over-all French Union position in Indo-
china therefore will probably deteriorate dur-
ing the period of this estimate.

36. Chinese Communist Capabilities and Prob-
able Courses of Action. The Chinese Com-
munists will have the capability during the
period of this estimate to improve airfields in
south China, to train Viet Minh pilots, to con-
tinue improvement of transportation facilities,
and to increase their present level of logistic
support for the Viet Minh. The Chinese Com-
munists will probably retain their present
capability to commit and support logistically
150,000 Chinese Communist troops for an in-
vasion of Indochina. The combat, efficiency
of this potential invasion force could probably
be increased considerably by the use of com-
bat-seasoned troops who have been rotated
from Korea in the past year. The ability of
Chinese Communist forces to sustain offensive
operations in Indochina would probably be in-
creased should logistic requirements in Korea
remain at low levels for a prolonged period.

| SECRET

ie 2
