Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that it was part of a concerted strategy of guerrilla base development -
in accordance with sound Mao-Giap doctrine, the GVN did not construe

it as a campaign, considering the disorders too diffuse to warrant
committing major GVN resources. In early 1959, however, Diem perceived
that he was under serious attack and reacted strongly. Population
relocation was revivified. The Army of Vietnam was committed against
the dissidents, and the Communist Denunciation Campaign was reinvigorated.
By autumn 1959, however, the VC were in a position to field units of
battalion size against regular army formations. By 1960, VC could
operate in sufficient strength to seize provincial capitals for periods
ranging up to 2 hours, overrun ARVN posts, and cut off entire districts
from communication with the GVN-controlled towns. Diem's counter-
measures increasingly met with peasant obstructionism and outright
hostility. A U.S. Embassy estimate of the situation in January 1960
noted that:

"While the GVN has made an effort to meet the economic
and social needs of the rural populations . . . these projects
appear to have enjoyed only a measure of success in creating
support for the government and, in fact, in many instances
have resulted in resentment . . . the situation may be summed up
in the fact that the government has tended to treat the population
with suspicion or to coerce it and has been rewarded with an
attitude of apathy or resentment."

In December 1960, the National Liberation Front of SVN (NLF) was
formally organized. From its inception it was designed to encompass
all anti-GVN activists, including communists, and it formulated and
articulated objectives for all those opposed to "My-Diem." The NLF
placed heavy emphasis on the withdrawal of American advisors and influence,
on land reform and liberalization of the GVN, on coalition government
and the neutralization of Vietnam; but through 1963, the NLP soft-
pedalled references to reunification of Vietnam. The NLF leadership
was a shadowy crew of relatively obscure South Vietnamese. Despite
their apparent lack of experience and competence, however, the NLP
rapidly took on organizational reality from its central committee,
down through a web of subordinate and associated groups, to villages
all over South Vietnam. Within a few months of its founding, its
membership doubled, doubled again by fall 1961, and then redoubled by
early 1962. At that time an estimated 300,000 were on its rolls.
Numerous administrative and functional "liberation associations"
sprang into being, and each member of the NLF normally belong simul-
taneously to several such organizations.

The key operational components of the NLF were, however, the
Liberation Army and the People's Revolutionary Party. The former had
a lien on the services of every NLF member, man, woman, or child,
although functionally its missions were usually carried out by formally
organized military units. The People's Revolutionary Party was

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
