™)

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

matericl in quantity through that area. The requirement to carry this
threat is evident. If allowed to go unchecked, it will permit enemy to
engage our flank in Quang Tri Province from the west and will permit
large-scale diversionary attacks further south. The seriousness of

this thrust led us to development of a new concept to block, deny, spoil
and disrupt the infiltration of enemy personnel and supplies through

laos during the forthcoming dry season." The concept hinged upon two
basic principles. "First, we will intensify around-the-clock surveillance
and interdiction of known infiltration routes. This process will stress
attack of selected interdiction points as well as strikes against targets
of opportunity. Second, we will concentrate our resources on successive
key target areas to be known as "slams.'" Once an area was designated as
a slam it would be hit with B-52 and Tactical Air Strikes to neutralize

it. This action would be followed by visual and photo air reconnaissance
and/or ground reconnaissance patrols and, if appropriate, exploitation
forces. Upon their withdrawal they would leave mines and booby traps,

and the Air Force would follow with air delivered land mines. In special
instances, General Westmoreland planned to leave stay-behind reconnaissance
parties. The term 'slem' itself came from "seek, locate, annihilate, and
monitor."

On 20 September 1966, General Westmoreland followed this up with
yet another message to Admiral Sharp. 37/

Subject: Containment of Enemy Forces in Sanctuaries

1. The threat to South Vietnam of large enemy forces in
the sanctuaries of Laos, Cambodia and North Vietnam has now
clearly emerged and is of increasing concern to me. Particu-
larly vulnerable to enemy attacks from these sanctuaries are
the Special Forces Camps of Khe Sanh, Duc Co, Du Dop, Loe Ninh
and Song Be. We are therefore compelled to seek ways of con-
taining the enemy forces in their sanctuaries and preventing
@ major ingress of these forces in South Vietnam.

2. The problem is now under active study by my staff.
Redeployment of available forces to counter this threat may
be necessary and could seriously jeopardize other important
undertakings. Moreover, additional forces already requested
may not be sufficient to contain the enemy forces in their
Sanctueries and still accomplish other essential tasks.
Studies are now underway to determine what additional forces
will be required.

3. The above is submitted for your information in connec-
tion with the force requirements and capabilities actions now
in progress. You will be advised of the results of our current
studies.

68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
