Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

paternal leadership. In general, they advocated reform of the relation-
ship between France and Vietnam to establish an independent and united
nation, but would neither sever beneficial bonds with the metropole, nor
alter drastically the Vietnamese social structure. Members included
many men of impeccable repute and undoubted nationalist convictions--
among them Ngo Dinh Diem--but also a number of known opportunist and
corrupt Vietnamese. The reformist parties were further discredited by
collaboration with the Japanese during World War II. These parties
formed the basis for the "Bao Dai solution" to which France and the

U.S. gravitated in the late 1940's.

Theocratic parties. In Cochinchina--and almost exclusively
there--during the 1930's there emerged religious sects commanding firm
loyalties of hundreds of thousands of peasants. Two of these--the Cao
Dai and the Hoa Hao~-aspired to temporal as well as spiritual power,
fielded armed forces, and formed local governments. They opposed both
French political and cultural hegemony, and domination by other Vietnamese
parties. Some elements collaborated openly with the Japanese during
1940-1945. Because these parties were of local and religious character,
any parallel with other Viet political organizations would be inexact.
These movements account in large measure for the distinctive character
of South Vietnamese nationalism as compared with that of Annam or Tonkin.

Revolutionary parties. The numerous remaining Vietnamese polit-
ical parties fall into the revolutionary category: they advocated Viet-
nam's independence from France and some degree of radical reorganization
of the Viet polity. Their political coloration ranged from the deep
red of the Saigon-centered Trotskyites (who advocated anti-imperialist
revolution throughout the world, and within Vietnam, expropriation for
the workers and peasants) through the less violent hues of communism
and Kuomintang~styled nationalism, to the indistinct, eclectic nationalism
of the Binh Xuyen criminal fraternity (another Saigon phenomenon) . Only
two of these movements developed a Vietnam-wide influence: the Indochinese
Communist Party (IcP), and the Vietnam Nationalist Party (VNQDD). Both
these parties were troubled throughout their history by factionalism, and
by repeated (French police) purges. Both aspired to politicizing the
peasants; neither wholly succeeded. Of the two, the ICP consistently
demonstrated the greater resiliency and popularity, attributable to
superior conspiratorial doctrine and technique, and to more coherent
and astute leadership. Both the ICP and the VIQDD figured in peasant
uprisings in 1930-1931, and 1940-1941. ach played a role in the Viet-
namese resistance against the Vichy French and the Japanese during World
War II: the ICP as the nucleus of the Viet Minh, and the VNQDD as the
principal component of the Chinese Nationalist-sponsored Dong Minh Hoi.

The Viet Minh--Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi, League for the Inde-
pendence of Vietnam--came into being in May, 1941, at the 8th Plemm
of the Indochinese Communist Party, held in South China. It was formed
as a “united front" organization with Ho Chi Minh at its head, and was

B-2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
