Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

D. RESISTANCS TO THE GROUND FORCE INCREASES CRYSTALLIZES

1. Systems Analysis -- Vanguard of the Reaction

The search for alternatives to the major force increases proposed
by the JCS was, as we have observed, intensive and widespread but the
most cogent critique of MACV's strategy developed in the Systems Analysis
Office headed by Assistant Secretary of Defense Alain Enthoven. Here a
concentrated attack was launched on the two most vulnerable aspects of
COMUSMACV's operations: the feasibility of the "war of attrition"
strategy pursued in the face of the uncertainty about NVN infiltration,
and "search and destroy tactics to support it." The reaction in Systems
Analysis to the 18 March troop request submitted by COMUSMACV was one
of surprise and incredulity. Everyone who had worked in the problem
area of ground force deployments believed that COMUSMACV had received
the message during the Program 4 discussions, that any troops were going
to be difficult to come by and those that were forthcoming had to be
completely and convincingly justified. af

a

Immediately upon receipt of the MACV requirements request Alain
Enthoven ordered that a detailed analysis of the request be made. ‘The
initial cuts at the request made by his staff were simply in the form
of tables comparing the approved Program #4 and the new force levels
required. 2/ These were completed and to the Secretary of Defense
within a week after the initial MACV request reached the Pentagon.

The more detailed follow-up analysis prepared in Systems Analysis
initially concentrated upon the "unfortunate lack of analysis” in the
MACV/JCS request, one which failed to explain how the extra forces were
needed to avoid defeat. 3/ Despite this orientation toward the analytic
lacunae the germ of the basic, vital critique which was to emerge was
there. The preface of the draft lamented the lack of analysis and
evidence, seemingly proof in itself that the request should be denied,
but more fundamentally it continued:

Despite considerable progress in the Vietnam conflict
during the past year, an end to the conflict is not in
sight and major unresolved problems remain. North Vietnam
still believes it can win in the long run, in the name of
nationalism if not ecomminism. It has been fighting for
over 25 years against the Japanese, French, and Americans
and appears prepared to fight indefinitely. The reaction
of COMUSMACV to this unsatisfactory situation is to request
more U.S, forces, rather than to improve the effectiveness
of the RVNAF, and U.S. and other Free World forces.

105 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
