Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. Revamp and put new steam behind a coordinated
US/GVN intelligence collation and action effort targeted
on the VC infrastructure at the critical provincial, district,
and village levels. We are just not getting enough payoff
yet from the massive intelligence we are increasingly collect-
ing. Police/military coordination is sadly lacking both in
collection and in swift reaction.

h, Press much harder on radical land reform initiatives
designed to consolidate rural support behind the GVN.

5. Step up refugee programs deliberately aimed at

depriving the VC of a recruiting base.” 50/

His argument and one which he was about to have the opportunity to
prove in Vietnam was simply that such a package of measures might offer
just as much prospect of accelerating the favorable trends in SVN over
the next 12-18 months as new U.S, military commitments. He closed by
pointing out that the "Komer package" could be combined with other U.S.
unilateral measures such as a minor force increase to the 500,000 level,
accelerated emphasis on the barrier, and some increased bombing, but he
cautioned that all of this was vitally dependent wpon his underlying
premise that we were already doing well enough in SVN "to see light at
the end of the tunnel." But, despite his optimistic assumptions he
believed that his package at least offered sufficient promise to deserve
urgent review by the President. 51/

On 25 April, General Westmoreland returned to the U.S, ostensibly
to address the Associated Press Annual Convention in New York, but actu-
ally to both undertake an intensive review of his strategy and force
requirements for Vietnam in 1967 and to marshall public support for the
war effort. John McNaughton, then ASD(ISA) reported portions of the con-
versation which occurred between the President, General Westmoreland, and
General Wheeler on 27 April 1967. Westmoreland was quoted as saying that
without the 2-1/3 additional divisions which he had requested "we will
not be in danger of being defeated but it will be nip and tuck to oppose
the reinforcements the enemy is capable of providing. In the final anal-
ysis we are fighting a war of attrition in Southeast Asia." 52/

Westmoreland predicted that the next step if we were to pursue our
present strategy to fruition would probably be the second addition of
2-1/3 divisions or approximately another 100,000 men. Throughout the
conversations he repeated his assessment that the war would not be lost
but that progress would certainly be slowed down. To him this was "not
an encouraging outlook but a realistic one." When asked about the influ-
ence of increased infiltration upon his operations the general replied
that as he saw it "this war is action and counteraction. Anytime we take
an action we expect a reaction." The President replied: “When we add
divisions can't the enemy add divisions? If so, where does it all end?"

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
2 Dept aa amare aeeTin” cep simp
