Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

pacification has been negligible. Many factors have contri-
buted, but one major reason for this lack of progress had
been the existence of split responsibility for pacifica-
tion on the U.S. side. For the sake of efficiency -- in
clarifying our concept, focusing our energies, and increas-
ing the output we can generate on the part of the Viet-
namese.-- this split responsibility on the U.S. side must
be eliminated.

"We have considered various alternative methods of
consolidating the U.S. pacification effort. The best
solution is to place those activities which are primarily
part of the pacification program, and all persons engaged
in such activities, under COMUSMACV...In essence, the re-
organization would result in the establishment of a Deputy
COMUSMACV for Pacification who would be in command of all
pacification staffs in Saigon and of all pacification
activities in the field.

"It is recognized that there are many important aspects
of the pacification problem which sre not covered in this
recommendation, which should be reviewed subsequent to the
appointment of the Deputy COMUSMACV for Pacification to
determine whether they should be part of his task -- for
exemple, the psychological warfare campaign, and the Chieu
Hoi and. refugee programs.. Equally important, is the ques-
tion of how to encourage a similar management realignment
of the South Vietnamese side, since pacification is re-
garded as primarily a Vietnamese task. Also not covered
by this recommendation are important related national pro-
grems...Finally, there is the question of whether any
organizational modification in Washington is required by
the recommended change in Vietnam.

"T recommend that you approve the reorganization de-
scribed in this memorandum as a first essential step toward
giving a new thrust to pacification. Under Secretary Ball,
Administrator Gaud, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Director
Helms, Director Marks, and Mr. Komer concur in this recom-
mendation." 38/

This memorandum was apparently never sent to the President, but it
was distributed, with a request for comments and concurrence, to Ball
(Rusk being out of the country), Gaud, the JCS, Helms, Marks, and Komer.
Only Komer and the JCS concurred, with the others producing alternate
suggestions. The entire question was handled as an "EYES ONLY" matter.

The positions that were taken were:
State opposed the recommendation. In informal discussions with Komer,

Alexis Johnson cited the failure of Hop Tac (which seems irrelevant), the

92 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
