Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201!

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the period of the RVNAF buildup and to weight the force ratios
in that important area. We assumed at that time that the ARVN
battalions would be brought to full strength by now and that
the force buildup would proceed on schedule. Neither of these
assumptions has materialized.

"The problem of low battlefield strength in ARVN has forced
us to plan the use of personnel now training in 11 new battalions
as fillers for old battalions. In effect, these 11 battalions
will be deferred and during the period from mid-July to early
November no new ARVN battalions will become available. Thus the'
gap to be filled is both deeper and wider.

"In summary, the force ratios continue to change in favor of
the VC. I believe that the DRV will commit whatever forces it
deems necessary to tip the balance and that the GVN cannot stand
up successfully to this kind of pressure without reinforcement.
Even if DRV VC intentions are debatable, their capabilities must
be acknowledged and faced. Additionally, it is prudent to con-
sider possible enemy air action, leading to significant escala-
tion and a broadening of the arena of conflict. We must be
prepared to face such a contingency.

"In order to cope with the situation outlined above, I see
no course of action open to us except to reinforce our efforts
in SVN with additional U.S. or Third Country forces as rapidly
as is practical during the critical weeks ahead. Additionally,
studies must continue and plans developed to deploy even greater
forces, if and when required, to attain our objectives or counter
enemy initiatives. Ground forces deployed to selected areas .
along the coast and inland will be used both offensively and de-
fensively. U.S. ground troops are gaining experience and thus
far have performed well. Although they have not yet engaged the
enemy in strength, I am convinced that U.S. troops with their
energy, mobility, and firepower can successfully take the fight
to the VC. The basic purpose of the additional deployments
recommended below is to give us a substantial and hard hitting
[cffen/sive capability on the ground to convince the VC that
they cannot win...."

There were some who thought COMUSMACV's assessment of the situation
was a bit precipitous, 16/ but the dissenters were effectively silenced
the following weék as the Viet Cong attacked the aforementioned Special
Forces camp and the adjoining district headquarters at Dong Xoai. ARVN
reinforcements were committed piecemeal to the fray and were devoured by
the enemy, who was on the scene with better-than two regiments of troops.
The battle, which lasted for five days and nearly saw the commitment of
the U.S. 173rd Airborne Brigade to bail the ARVN out, marked the bitterest
fighting of the war to date. ;
