Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

pegging the strikes primarily to that boat incident, and by directing the
strikes in part against a DRV naval base, the risk of an adverse Soviet
reaction would be minimized.

During the next several days, Washington was in almost continuous
communication (1) with Taylor in Saigon -- to ascertain whether the
political situation had stabilized sufficiently to permit rescheduling
the postponed air strikes; (2) with Kohler in Moscow -- to feel the pulse.
of the Soviet government and its likely reaction to the upcoming air
operation; and (3) with Ambassador Bruce in London -- to monitor the
progress of the Trevelyan approach to the Soviet Foreign Office concern-
ing the Co-Chairman process. Throughout this time, Secretary Rusk was
visibly torn on the question of whether or not to proceed with the air
strikes. He wanted very much to push ahead immediately, in order to
exploit promptly the DRV arms ship incident which seemed to beg for some
response. But he hesitated to launch a strike on behalf of and in con-
cert with a government that was teetering and whose Commander-in-Chief
was in the process of being deposed; he also wished to avoid angering the
Soviets, thus possibly sabotaging their Co-Chairmen effort. On the other
hand, he wanted to make it clear that the U.S. would not indefinitely
accept a “unilateral ceasefire” while the Co-Chairman effort dragged on.

It is important to note that the Co-Chairmen gambit was not viewed
by anyone involved on the US side as a negotiating initiative. On the
contrary, every effort was made to avoid giving such an impression.
Instead, the gambit was intended to provide a vehicle for the public ex-
pression of a tough U.S. position. This was clearly implied in Washing-
ton messages to Saigon and London on this issue, as, for example, in 4
cable from Unger to Taylor: 72/

You should not reveal possibility this UK/USSR gambit to

GVN for time being. We naturally wish have it appear entirely

as their initiative, so that our reply would not be any kind

of initiative on our part and would, in its content, make

clear how stiff our views are. ;

Finally, by February 24th, sirice no reply had as yet been received
from Moscow end the situation in Saigon had begun to settle down, Secre-
tary Rusk felt he could hold off no eOHger In a message to Bruce in
London, he wrote: :

We have-decided that we must go ahead with next operation
Feb. 26 unless there should be further political difficulties
in Saigon. Taylor will be seeking political clearance after-
noon Feb. 25 Saigon time once Khanh is off the scene.

We told Harlech this decision today stating that while we

recognized British concern and possibility some Soviet reaction
we cannot even by implication get into position of withholding

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
