Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

restrict the use of Laotian territory for infiltration into South Vietnam.
The U.S, would also favor intensification of MAROPS (covert activities
against the DRV). In the meantime, GVN and U.S. armed forces should be
ready to execute prompt reprisals for any unusual hostile action. When
these conditions were met (and after the GVN had demonstrated its firm
control) the U.S. would be prepared to consider a program of direct mili-
tary pressure on the DRV, These second phase operations would consist of
a series of air attacks on the DRV progressively mounting in scope and
intensity for the purpose of convincing DRV leaders that it was in their
interest to cease aid to the VG to respect the independence and security
of the South, The prospective participants in such attacks were the Air
Forces of the U.S., South Vietnam and Laos. The U.S. Mission was to be
authorized to initiate planning with the GVN for such operations immedi-
ately, with the understanding that the U.S. had not committed itself to
them, 135/ .

Immediately after the Ambassador's return to Saigon the U.S. began
to increase its covert operations against infiltration from the North, On
14 December U.S. aircraft began Operation BARREL ROLL (armed reconnaissance
against infiltration routes in Laos). This and other signs of increased
American commitment against North Vietnam's involvement in the South showed
no results in terms of increasing GVN stability. Jockeying among generals
behind the scenes continued. The younger generals who had saved Khanh in
the 13 September coup demanded the High National Council fire nine generals
and 30 other officers, notably Generals Minh, Don, Xuan and Kim, who had
been in the original post-Diem junta, The Council refused and the young
generals began a life and death struggle against the Huong regime, On
20 December Generals Thi and Ky led their group in a purge -- or virtual
coup -- of the Council. This was followed immediately by formation of an
Armed Forces Council (AFC). Nominally headed by Khanh, the young generals
aimed to curb his powers through the new council. AFC offered to mediate
conflicts between Buddhist dissidents and the Huong government, These
actions exacerbated already unhappy relations between Khanh and politically-
motivated young generals and the American Ambassador who was striving to
foster a representative civilian government and discourage coups by small-
time military dictators, The struggle (described in detail in other papers)
was intensified at this time and continued for several weeks, 136/

Throughout January and February 1965 the weekly Vietnam Sitreps pub-
lished by the Intelligence and Reporting Subcommittee of the Inter-
agency Vietnam Coordinating Committee warned generally and repeatedly
that progress concerning pacification was "slow" or that there was a
“slow down" or said there was "little progress to report." The Vietnamese
commander of the HOP TAC area generally continued to report “a favorable
situation" -- but this was accompanied frequently by a statement of in-
creased Viet Cong activity in these favorable areas,

102
TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
