Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

alliances organized and conducted in complete harmony with the U.N.
Charter, which expressly recognizes the right of individual and collec-
tive self-defense and also provides for regional organizations or
agencies to maintain international peace and security.

"Under those alliances, the United States is specifically pledged
to assist in the defense of more than 40 nations. Those commitments,
and:the power that lies behind them, are the backbone of world peace.

" ,..But the principal Communist states remain publicly committed
to what they call ‘wars of liberation'--the infiltration of arms and
trained men. That is the type of aggression by which Communist North
Viet-Nam set out to conquer South Viet-Nam. It is an aggression which
has become less and less indirect since the closing months of 1964, when
North Viet-Nam began to move an entire division of its regular army into
South Viet-Nam.

"Four successive Presidents of the United States, after extended
study in consultation with their chief advisers on defense and foreign
policy, have concluded that the security of Southeast Asia, and of South
Viet-Nam in particular, is very important to the security of the United
States. Those who take a different view are at odds with the men who
have borne the highest responsibility for the defense of the United States
and the free world since the Second World Wer.

"U.S. COMMITMENTS IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

"In accordance with our national interest in the security of South
Viet-Nam, the Government of the United States made commitments, of which
the most solemn was the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty. That
. treaty was approved by the United States Senate in 1955 with only one
dissenting vote. It bound us to take action in the event of an armed
attack on South Viet-Nam, among other nations. And Secretary of State
Dulles told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that that commitment
included the case of an attack by 'the regime of Ho Chi Minh in North
Viet-Nam.'

"The United States cannot run away from its commitments. If either
our adversaries or our friends should begin to doubt that the United
States will honor its alliances, the result could be catastrophe.

"We are fighting in Viet-Nam because also we have not forgotten the
lesson of the tragic 1930's, the lesson that was foremost in the minds
of the authors of the U.N. Charter: the lesscn that one aggression leads
to another...."

D-103.
