Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET = Sensitive

necessary tasks, more air should be brougot in. Secretary
Meilamera directed thet this policy be implemented at once.

From this evidence, it seems apparent that Honolulu marked the
relative downgrading of pressures against the North, in favor or more
intensive activity in the South. The key to success, it was now felt,
was not to destroy or-defeat the enemy, but to frustrate him -- "to
break the will of the DRV/VC by denying them victory" and, above all,
to avoid, for our pert, a dramatic defeat. Thus the decision at this
point was to "plateau" the eir strikes more or less at the vrevailing
level, relying on "repetition and continuation" to provide increasing
pressure, rather than to pursue the relentless dynamic course that had
been so ardently advocated by Ambassador Taylor and Admirel Sharp in
February and Merch, or the massive destruction of the North Vietnamese
target complex so consistently advocated by the Joint Chiefs. If
Honolulu represented more than a “shotgun wedding,” if it reflected in
fact a relatively wncoerced expression of views, the leading U.S. actors
in the Vietnem drama must heve undergone, in the intervening weeks, 4
reordering of expectations with respect to the results that pombing
might achieve. Their views at- this point, in any event, were strikingly
more restrained on the bombing issue than they had been previously.

An alternative -- and less charitable -- explanation might be that,
in the meantime, attention hed shifted from the air war to the subject
of U.S. combat force deployments, and had thus generated a need to con-
eentrate on issues, arguments and rationalizations that would serve to
promote and justify these new actions. Preoccupation with pressures
against the North had long been viewed as something of a competitor,
something of a distraction, by many advocates of a more forceful U.S.
role in the South. Thus it seems logical that, with the -decision to
begin a major U.S. ground force commitment, the air campaign should have
been reduced in rank to second billing. ,

B. Interdiction is Surfaced

Along with the levelling-off of the air strikes and a reordering
of exvectations as to their likely effectiveness came the decision to
publicize the fact that “interdiction” was now a major objective of the
strikes. It will be recalled that LOC interdiction had become a key
element in the U.S. target rationale beginning with ROLLING THUNDER IX
(week of April 2). After Honolulu, with the prospective deepening of
the U.S. involvement on the ground and the need to justify that involve-
ment in terms of "resisting NVN aggression," it seemed desirable to stress
that aspect of U.S. action more explicitly in public. Whereas previously
there had been only passing reference to the fact that U.S. air attacks on
North Vietnam had been aimed at targets "associated with infiltration," it
was now decided to feature interdiction as the objective of U.S. bombing.

Secretary Rusk made first public mention of this new rationale on
April 23, 115/ when he stated:

LOL TOP SECRET - Sensitive
