Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Chairman Ho at the head." 145/ An NVA naval officer captured in 1966,

a second generation Party member, asserted that: "Once South Vietnam

has been liberated, the NLF will suffer the same fate as the Viet Minh
did in North Vietnam after independence was gained from the French.

The Front will atrophy and quickly disappear . . ." This officer was
emphatic that: "The Lao Dong and the PRP are one and the same organism

- - + the PRP and the Lao Dong will emerge into the open (after reunifica-

tion) as one party . . . under Ho's authority." 146/

In March, 1962, the Central Office of South Vietnam (COSvN)
was reactivated, built around the Nambo Inter-Zone Committee, and given
purview over Cochinchina and Annam. The 1962 reorganization is believed
to have been intended to improve the coordination of insurgent activity
and to lend substance to the newly created PRP.

Available evidence indicates that the PRP is the southern
element of the DRV Lao Dong Party. But whether the PRP is a subsidiary
of the Iao Dong Party or merely a territorial department of the Party
is unclear. Pointing to a parent-subsidiary relationship are the facts
that membership requirements in the PRP are considerably less stringent
than in the Lao Dong Party, that the PRP regulations are designed for
an independent entity, and that the SVN military party system is sub-
ordinate to COSVN, whereas the DRV military party system is not sub-
ordinate to analogous party committees. But Vietnamese Communists
assert that there is only one Vietnamese Communist Party because Vietnam
is one country; the Lao Dong Party appears to count PRP members in its
official membership figures; and- infiltrating lao Dong Party members
are automatically accorded PRP membership. The fact that some members
of the Lao Dong Central Committee are officials of COSVN could be con-
sistent with either relationship; whatever the exact relationship,
COSVN is the extension of the Iao Dong. COSVN's immediate superior
in the Lao Dong Party hierarchy seems to be the Party's Reunification
Department, which is believed to have issued specific orders to COSVN
based upon the directives of the Iao Dong Central Committee. The
principal function of the Reunification Department seems to be to act
as the COSVN liaison office in DRV, where it forwards eorrespondence
and recruits and trains political cadre before infiltration south.
COSVN leadership of the military party system in SVN appears to have
been subject to the technical supervision of the Lao Dong Central
Military Committee. 117/

George Carver has summarized well presently available
information concerning command linkage between Hanoi and the South:

"As the organizational structure of the Viet Cong move-
ment has expanded over the past four years, its general outlines
have become fairly well known. In the insurgency's initial
phase (1954-1959), the Communists retained the Viet Minh's
division of what is now South Viet Nam into ‘Interzone V'

43 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
