Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Nonetheless, I cannot leave out the wider inter-
national fractors, and particularly the British and
Japanese as bellwethers. Both the latter have accepted
our recent bombings with much less outcry than I,
frankly, would have anticipated. But if we keep it
up at this pace, or step up the pace, I doubt if the
British front will hold. Certainly we will be in a very
bad Donnybrook next fall in the UN.

Whatever the wider implications of negative reactions
on @ major scale, the main point is that they would
undoubtedly stiffen Hanoi, and this is always the gut
question. 72/

With respect to negotiations, Bundy was guarded. He did
not expect any serious moves by the other side until after the elections
in South Vietnam in September. Thus, he argued against any new U.S.
initiatives and in favor of conveying an. impression of “steady firm-
ness" on our part. It was precisely this impression that had been
lacking from our behavior since the previous winter and that we should
now seek to restore. This was the main point of his overall assessment .
of the situation, as the following summary paragraph demonstrates:

A Steady, Firm Course. Since roughly the first of
December, I think we have given a very jerky and impatient
impression to Hanoi. This is related more to the timing
and suddenness of our bombing and negotiating actions than
+o the substance of what we have done. I think that Hanoi
in any event believes that the 1968 elections could cause
us to change our position or even lose heart completely.
Our actions since early December may well have encouraged and
greatly strengthened this belief that we wish to get the
war over by 1968 at all costs. Our major thrust must be
now to persuade them that we are prepared to stick it if
necessary. This means a steady and considered program of
action for the. next nine months. 73/

An SNIE a few days later confirmed Bundy's views about
the unlikelihood of positive Soviet efforts to bring the conflict to
the negotiating.table. It also affirmed that the Soviets would no doubt
continue and increase their assistance to North Vietnam and that the
Chinese would probably not impede the flow of materiel across its

territory. 74

Powerful and unexpected support for William Bundy's general
viewpoint came at about this time from his brother, the former Presi-
dential adviser to Kennedy and Johnson, McGeorge Bundy. In an unsolicited lette:

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
