Deelassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

complimentary about the paper, no machinery was set up in Ambassador
Porter's office to oversee the implementation of the recommendations.

While the agencies said that they agreed with most of the recommendations,

. the all-important decisions as to how fast and how hard to push forward with
each recommendation was left to whichever agency "had the action" on it.
This in effect left some crucial decisions -- the variables in our effort --
outside the Deputy Ambassador's hands. He had no machinery for checking to
see what the agencies were doing to carry out the suggestions they said they
agreed with. He had virtually no staff to observe how the agencies were
actually handling each problem, although it was obvious that success or
failure on each item lay to a large extent in the method it was handled.
Indeed, Porter had no good way to even find out whether the agencies really
did accept the recommendations. He was reliant on a knowledgeable but small
staff which could only meddle in the internal matters of other agencies

to a limited degree.

It was these shortcomings in the new mandate to Porter that were be-
coming evident in the late summer of 1966, and pressure began to build
in Washington for another reorganization.

The pressure and emphasis on pacification was also producing visible
results in MACV. On August 8, 1966, the J-3 of MACV, Major General Tillson,
briefed the Mission Council on how MACV intended to "give maximum support
+o RD.” ‘The briefing was general, simplistic, and shallow, but it was a
clear indication that General Westmoreland and MACV were beginning to re-
spond to the pressure from outside their command that they should give
RD more support. As such, it marked a mejor step for MACV. Tillson said
that "military operations must be used to assure the security necessary
for RD to begin. All military operations are designed towards this goal..."

He then went on to trace the degree to which criticism of ARVN was justi-
fied, and examine the suggestion that ARVN be re-oriented to support RD --
something which was to become part of the Manila communique only two months
dater:

"The ARVN has been at war continuously for a period of
over ten years...The fact that ARVN today even exists as an
organized fighting force is a tribute to its stamina and
morale.

"Since its inception, ARVN has been oriented, trained,
and led. towards the task of offensive operations...It is diffi-
cult, in a short period of time, to redirect the motivation
and training of years, and to offset the lone indoctrination

that offensive action against the VC is the reason for the

, existence of the Army...

"In the 1967 campaign plan, we propose to assign ARVN
the primary mission of providing direct support,to RD and
us/FW Forces the primary mission of destroying ve/NvA main
forces and base areas. Agreement has been reached between

88 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
