Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

make it an excellent base for further Communist aggression against the

rest of free Asia." In a September 9, 1963 interview, the President stated:
"I pelieve /"the domino theory'/. I think thet the struggle is close
enough. China is so large, looms up high just beyond the frontiers, that
if South Vietnam went, it would not only give them an improved geographic
position for a guerrilla assault on Malaya, but would also give the im-
pression that the wave of the future in Southeast Asia was China and the
Communists." One could argue that such an unequivocally strong statement
of strategic importance would not be consistent with any sort of phase-

out proposal short of s clear-cut victory over the communists. Despite

the caveats about it being essentially a South Vietnamese struggle, President
Kennedy's statements were very strong. And, insofar as the U.S. was inter-
ested in greater leverage on the GVN, these statements tended to reduce

U.S. bargaining power because of the explicit and vital nature of the
commitment.

The rationales behind the phased withdrawal policy were incorporated
into a formal programming and planning process that began in July 1962
and ended on 27 March 1964. It was at the Honolulu Conference on 23 July
1962, the same day that the ll-nation neutralization declaration on Laos
was formally signed, that the Secretary of Defense on guidance from the
President put the planning machine in motion. Noting that "tremendous
progress" had been made in South Vietnam and that it might be difficult
to retain public support for U.S. operations in Vietnam indefinitely,
Mr. McNamara directed that a comprehensive long range program be developed
for building up SVN military capability and for phasing-out the U.S. role.
He asked that the planners assume that it would require approximately three
years, that is, the end of 1965, for the RVNAF to be trained to the point
that it could cope with the VC. On 26 July, the JCS formally directed
CINCPAC to develop a Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam (CPSVN) in accor-
dance with the Secretary's directives. Thus began an intricate, involved
and sometimes arbitrary bargaining process, involving mainly MACV, the
Joint Staff, and ISA. There were two main pegs that persisted throughout
this process: MAP planning for the support and build-up of RVNAI, and
draw-downs on U.S. advisory and training personnel.

The first COMUSMACV CPSVN was floated on 19 January 1963. It envisioned
MAP for FY 1963-196) at a total of $05 million. The total for FY 1965-
1968 was $673 million. The RVNAF force level was to peak in FY 64 at
458,000 men. U.S. personnel in SVN were to drop from a high of 1le.@ thou-
sand in FY 65 to 5.9 thousand in FY 66, bottoming out in FY 68 at 1.5
thousand (Hq MAAG). No sooner was this first CPSVN cranked into the policy
machinery than it conflicted with similar osp/TSA planning. This conflict
between TSA /OSD guidance and COMUSMACV/Joint Staff planning was to be
continued throughout the life of the CPSVN.

‘ Secretary McNamare opposed General Harkins version of the plan for
a variety of reasons: (1) it programmed too many RVNAF than were train-
able and supportable; (2) it involved weaponry that was too sophisticated;
(3) it did not fully take account of the fact that if the insurgency came
into control in FY 65 as anticipated, the U.S. MAP investment thereafter

_

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
