Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Second, we want to reinforce the spiritual cohesion of
the Vietnamese people, cohesion which accounts for capacity to
enjoy a largely decentralized system without falling into anarchy.
Yet this cohesion has been largely shaken by the impact of the
west. j

"Yet man does not live only by the idea of liberty. He
must be given a minimum of material support which will guarantee
that liberty..."

A GVN approved biography of Diem explained that he recognized in communism
the antithesis of true freedom, precisely because communism denied the
existence of God and the immortality of the soul. Personalism was the
answer therefore to communism, since: 39/

“Personalism is a system based on the divine, therefore
spiritual law, which...extols man's transcendent value...
The practice of Personalism is symbolic of good citizenship
with a highly developed civic spirit..."

Late in Diem's reign, when his combat with the communists had been fully
joined, these vague precepts were elaborated by his brother, Nhu, but hardly
clarified: 4o/ .

"The personalist conception holds that freedom in an under-
developed society is not something that is simply given or
bestowed. It can only be achieved through militancy and vigi-
lance, by doing away with all pretensions and pretexts for not
realistically applying ourselves to our goals. Ina situation
of underdevelopment, and during a bleeding war of internal
division, it may be argued that there is reason enough not to
seek to develop democracy, but our personalist approach is pre-
cisely militant in denying this. Human rights and human dignity
are not static phenomenons. They are only possibilities which
men must actively seek and deserve, not just beg for. In this
sense, of believing in the process of constantly perfecting of
oneself in moral as well as practical ways our personalist
approach is similar to Confucianism. Personalism stresses hard
work, and it is the working class, the peasants, who are better
able to understand the concept than the intellectuals. We must
use Personalist methods to realize democracy at the level where
people are fighting and working, and in our new scale of values
it is those who participate physically and selflessly in the fight
against communism who are most privileged, then those who cour-
ageously serve the villages without profit, and finally those
who engage diligently in productive labor for their own as well
as for their villages' benefit..."

Some American observers found these ideas with their emphasis on "de-
mocracy" reassuring. Others, including General Edward Iansdale, urged
on Diem a broader ideological stratagem of forming a "front" embracing
the concepts of the more traditional Viet nationalist parties. ya/ But

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
