Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Without going into detail on the debate and decision on Program 5, from
the advisory standpoint the important development was COMUSMACV's view
of RVNAF. Im March, RVNAF had been regarded almost as & residual, but
by September, when the ambitious U.S. force proposals had been rejected
in favor of only a modest increase of about 45,000 COMUSMACV reasserted
the importance of RVNAF and asked for a major increase in its authorized
strength. Slowly, then, the realization that there was a ceiling on the
number of U.S. forces which could be deployed without calling up reserves
turned everyone's attention once again to RVNAF.

The one significant increase proposed in the MACV message cited
above was the increase of 50,000 in RF/PF. This was not to be immedi-
ately forthcoming. In May 1967, Secretary McNamara imposed a temporary
ceiling on RVNAT at the level authorized for end FY 66 to prevent further
inflation in South Vietnam and to arrest some of the balance of payments
imbalance stemming from U.S. Vietnam spending. 209/ Subsequently,
CINCPAC was authorized to make adjustments among the various components
within that limit, thereby permitting augnentation of REP/PF at the expense
of ARVN.

The question of additional U.S. troops had refined itself considerably
by the time the Secretary went to Saigon in July. Of the two force increase
proposals presented by MACV at that time, the first was merely a restate-
ment of the old "minimum essential force" which would have brought total
U.S. troops to 571,071 (2-1/3 division force equivalents); the second pro-
posal was a much smaller request for an authorized strength of 535,390
(1-1/3 division force equivalents). 210/ Both of these proposals con-
tained a request for 2,577 additional advisors -~ primarily to support the
anticipated expansion of RF/PF and to flesh out the sector and sub-sector
advisory teams supporting the pacification effort. The following table
shows the breakdown of the 1967 advisory increases, ineluding the request
presented to McNamara in July and subsequently approved,

109 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
