Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Expressions of cautious optimism, and of conviction that radical changes
to U.S. strategy were unwarranted -- Ambassador Taylor's notable among
them -- continued to reach Washington from Saigon through April and May.
Among the less sanguine, even General Westmoreland expressed hope that
perhaps, with the aid of increased U.S. air activity and signs of greater
RVNAF resolve, a corner had indeed been turned. In the absence of dra-
matic action in Vietnam, most observers were prepared to wait and see
what was to transpire when the military hiatus ended.

The drop in activity during the spring of 1965 was not unprece-
dented. The Viet Cong had traditionally yielded the initiative to the
more highly mobile RVNAF during the dry season, and they were expected
to reappear with the advent of the summer season, or rainy season, in
May and Jume. The official estimates of the Viet Cong Order of Battle,
including in April confirmed presence in the South of at least one
battalion of the North Vietnamese Army, provided little cause for com-
fort. Coupled with reports that the Viet Cong were concentrating their
forces in a few critical areas, the estimates of enemy capability were
a sure: indication that the coming summer monsoon in 1965 would provide
a sore test of the RVNAF's ability.

The test began in earnest in May as the Viet Cong mounted a
regiment-sized attack on the capital of Phuoc Long Province. The
enemy scored again with the successful ambush of an ARVN infantry
battalion and its rescue force near Quang Ngai in I Corps later that
month. The Quang Ngai action left two ARVN battalions decimated, and
American officers who had witnessed the battle went away with the dis-
tinct impression that the RVNAF were close to collapse. The impression
was confirmed during the battle of Dong Xoai in mid-June. In a textbook
display of tactical ineptitude, battalions of ARVN's finest reserves
were frittered away piecemeal during the fighting. The violence of the
action at Dong Xoai and the level of RVNAF casualties during the second
week of June 1965 were both unprecedented.

As the summer wore on, the focus of the enemy campaign shifted to
the highlands of the II Corps. By early July, Viet Cong successes in
taking remote District Headquarters heralded the expected loss of the
entire highlands area and the possible establishment there of a National
Liberation Front government.

General Westmoreland responded immediately to the marked upsurge
in Viet Cong activity by requesting in June U.S. and Third Country °
reinforcements to spell the RVNAF during their time of trial and to
blunt the Viet Cong offensive by conducting operations throughout the
country against them. The collapse of the Quat government in mid-June
and its succession by an untested military regime further increased
the urgency associated with Westmoreland's request. The debate in U.S.
official circles over the extent of American involvement in the war --
a debate which had followed a devious course all through the spring of
1965 -~ moved onto a higher plane at this juncture.

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
