Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I believe we must assist free peoples to work out their
own destinies in their own way...." 72/

The President went on to underscore the U.S. determination to commit
its resources to contain communism. While he clearly subordinated
military aid to economic and political means, he did assert the U.S.
intent to assist in maintaining security:

"To insure the peaceful development of nations, free
from coercion, the United States has taken a leading
part in establishing the United Nations. The United
Nations is designed to make possible freedom and inde-
pendence for. all its members. We shall not realize our
objectives, however, unless we are willing to help free
peoples to maintain their free institutions and their
national integrity against aggressive movements that seek
to impose upon them totalitarian regimes." 73/

In the year 1947, while U.S. military assistance began to flow
into Greece to ward off subversive aggression, the U.S. inaugurated
the European Recovery Plan (ERP). ERP was aimed at economic recovery
in Western Europe, especially in countries such as France and Italy
where post~war depression was fostering marked leftward political
trends. In one of the high level appraisals of the situation that
the U.S. had to counter in 1947, the Harriman Committee on Foreign
Aid has coneluded that:

"The interest of the United States in Europe...cannot
be measured simply in economic terms. It is also strategic
and political. We all know that we are faced in the world
today with two conflicting ideologies....Our position in
the world has been based for at least a century on the
existence in Europe of a number of strong states committed
by tradition and inclination to the democratic concept...." 7h/ ¥

The fall of the Czechoslovakian Government in February 198 brought
about the Brussels Pact, a Western European collective defense and
economic collaboration arrangement. The blockade of Berlin, which
began on 1 April 1948, accelerated U.S. movement toward membership
in the alliance. On June 11, 1948 the U.S. Senate adopted a resolu-
tion advising the Executive to undertake the:

"...Progressive development of regional and other
collective arrangements for individual and collective
self-defense in accordance with the purposes, principles,
and provisions of the Charter /of the UN/, association of

A-52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
