Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Diem's recent successes as indicating redeeming qualities. But,

Dulles pointed out "Vietnam is not worth a quarrel with France," and
offered U.S. withdrawal in preference to allied disunity. No decision
was taken immediately, and during a recess Secretary Dulles received
advice from the JCS that Diem seemed the most promising avenue to
achievement of U.S. objectives, and that while withdrawal of the

French Expeditionary Corps is "ultimately to be desired," a precipitate
withdrawal was to be prevented since it would "result in an increasingly
unstable and precarious situation" and the eventual loss of South Vietnam
to communism. Secretary Dulles then proposed to the French that they
‘continue to support Diem until a national assembly were elected.

British support for Diem seems to have swayed Faure, and he accepted
Dulles’ proposal. The tri-partite meeting ended on a note of harmony,
but the undertones were distinct: the days of joint U.S.-French policy
were over; thereafter, the U.S. would act independently of France in
Vietnam.

Backed by the United States, Diem refused to open consultation .
with the North Vietnamese concerning general elections when the date
for these fell due in July 1955. Pressing his military advantage
against the sects, he moved to consolidate his position politically
within South Vietnam. In October, he won a resounding victory in a
popular referendum in which voters were given a choice between Diem and
Bao Dai. As Diem's political strength grew, his relations with Paris
deteriorated. In December 1955, Diem suddenly terminated the existing
economic and financial agreements with France, and called upon France
to denounce the Geneva agreements and break relations with Hanoi. Soon
thereafter, he withdrew South Vietnamese representatives from the French
Union Assembly.

On January 2, 1956, general elections in France produced a govern-
ment under Socialist Guy Mollet, a third of the members of which were
communists or avowed neutralists. In early March, Mollet's Foreign
Minister, Pineau, declared in a speech to the Anglo-American Press
Association in Paris that France would actively seek policy position
bridging East and West, and that there was no unanimity of policy among
the U.S., UK, and France. He cited UK Middle East policy and U.S. sup-
port for Diem as contrary to French interests, and condemned both powers
for stirring up the Moslem world to France's distinct disadvantage in
North Africa. A few days later, at a SEATO Council meeting in Karachi,
Pineau proclaimed the end of the "era of aggression," and called for a
"policy of coexistence."

Action followed Pineau's line. On March 22, 1956, France agreed
with Diem to withdraw the FEC altogether. On April 26, 1956, the
French High Command in Saigon was disestablished. On the due date for
the general elections agreed to at Geneva, France possessed no military
forces in Vietnam. And the date for the fulfillment of the political
portions of the Settlement, July 1956, coincided with the inception of
the Suez crisis.

Vv . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
