Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

more and more troops for a war the U.S. "cannot win." In the same memo-
randum, McCone argued that a marked increased in the tempo of air opera-
tions against NVN was an indispensable concomitant of a change in ground
strategy. 175/ The NSAM which sanctioned the change of ground strategy

called for no more than "slowly ascending tempo" for Rolling Thunder
operations. 176/

MeCone circulated another memorandum on the day after the
Honolulu Conference in which he estimated probable enemy reactions to
greater U.S. involvement in the war. The enemy, McCone said, still saw
things essentially going his way. An increased U.S. involvement on the
ground would be seen by the enemy as an acceptance by the U.S. of a
greater commitment, but he would also infer from the cautious enclave
approach that the U.S. was quite reluctant to widen the war. It was
probable that the VC would be reinforced with men and equipment, but
direct intervention by the DRV or the Chinese Communists was unlikely. 177/

On the 28th of April, a SNIE entitled “Communist Reactions to
Certain U.S. Actions" described what could be expected of the enemy:

"The policies and tactics of the Communist powers engaged
by the Vietnamese crisis have settled into a fairly definitive
pattern. It appears that the DRV, with strong Chinese encourage-
ment, is determined for the present to ride out the U.S. bombard-
ment. Both the DRV and Communist China have hardened their
attitude toward negotiations, without categorically excluding
the possibility under all conditions. They apparently calculate
that the DRV can afford further punishment and that, in the
meantime, U.S, determination to persist will weaken because of
increasing DRV air defense capability, the threat of broader
conflict, and the pressure of international and U.S. domestic
opinion. Moreover, they consider that the tide is running in
their favor in the South..."

If the enemy's attitudes were as hard as described above, then a great
deal of patience was going to be required of those who expected the
Honolulu strategy to come to fruition.

C., The Search and Destroy Strategy
There are many aspects of the enclave strategy which were galling
to professional military men. Many of those were brought out by the military
men themselves i1 documents quoted in this paper. Probably the single most
disturbing factor in the enclave approach was the implicit failure to try and
seize the initiative from the enemy. Instead, it was proposed that the U.S.
and the GVN try and ride out the war by denying the enemy a victory. The

Ie; = TOP SECRET - Sensitive
