Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

year. Even if it were more serious, he went on, massive input of U.S.
troops was unlikely to make much difference. The best they could do
would be to hold a few enclaves. Johnson pointed out that the
Vietnamese were ¢fraid they would lose authority if more U.S. troops
were brought in. He advised that the U.S. allow the forces already
in the country to settle. After some experimentation with them, the
way would be much clearer. Once in, troops could not, without diffi-
culty, be-taken out again. 137/

The views expressed by Johnson to McNaughton parallel those of.
Ambassador Taylor throughout the build-up debate. Both men were very
much concerned with the effect of the proposed build-up on the Viet-
namese. They were not directly opposed to the use of U.S. forces to
help the GVN; they merely wanted to go very slowly to insure against
loss of control.

At the opposite end of the spectrum from General Westmoreland
was Under Secretary of State George Ball. Convinced that the U.S. was
pouring its resources down the drain in the wrong place, Ball placed
himself in direct opposition to the build-up. In a draft memorandum
he circulated on the 28th of Jume, Ball stated that Westmoreland's
intention was to go to Phase III combat (Phase III of the 8 May Concept
of Operations which called for US/Allied forays inland to secure bases
and areas for further operations). In Ball's view there was absolutely
no assurance that the U.S. could with the provision of more ground forces
achieve its political objectives in Vietnam. Instead, the U.S. risked
involving itself in a costly and indeterminate struggle. To further
complicate matters,-it would be equally impossible to achieve political
objectives by expanding the bombing of the North -- the risks of involv-
ing the USSR and the CPR were too great, besides which such action would
alienate friends. No combination of the two actions offered any better
prospect for success. Since the costs to achieve its objectives if the
U.S. embarked on an expanding program were indeterminate, the U.S.
should, in Ball's view, not elect to follow such a course of action.

It should instead "cut its losses” by restricting itself to the pro-
gremmed 15 battalions and 72,000 men made public at a press conference
in mid-June by the Secretary of Defense. 138/ By holding those forces
to a very conservative Phase II strategy of base defense and reserve in
support.of RVNAF, U.S. combat losses could be held to a minimum while
the stage was being set for withdrawal. 139/

Ball was cold-bleoded in his analysis. He recognized that the
U.S. would not be able to avoid losing face before its Asian allies if
it staged some form of conference leading to withdrawal of U.S, forces.
The loss would only be of short term duration, however, and the U.S. could
emerge from this period of travail as a "wiser and more mature nation."
On 1 July, Ball sent to the President a memorandum entitled "A Compromise
Solution for South Vietnam." In that memorandum, Ball presented his case
for cutting losses essentially as it is described above. 1h0/

“105 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
