Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

reforms other than changing the exchange rate, and proposed to force the
GVN to maximize its legal. revenues from CIP by threatening to curtail the
progrem. Without reform of the licensing, high market prices for CIP
commodities yielded extortionate profits to those merchants who could get
licenses, with a presumption of kickbacks to the licensing agencies. The
proposed reform was to auction the licenses in the presence of US obser-
vers. He also proposed direct US purchases of piasters, in a "grey"
market. 52/

Upon settling the devalustion package, the Embassy immediately
pressed for drastic changes in Saigon port management; the pile-up of
civilien cargoes had grown so much as to add to the already serious con-
gestion. Lodge proposed a complete MACV takeover of the port and ware-
houses with a Vietnamese general to be appointed as figurehead port
director. 53/ However, the Mission backed away from the idea of complete
takeover for the time being, and settled for MACV handling of AID direct
assistance commodities, not including CIP. 54/

The agreement reached with GVN at the end of June said:

‘The United States Military Agency appointed by COMUSMACV
»«-Shall forthwith assume responsibility and all necessary
authority for...

A. The receipt and discharge of all AID-financed commodi-
_ ties consigned to CPA.

B. The obteining of customs clearances and all other clear-
ances...for such commodities.

C. The storage and warehousing of such conmodities intransit
as necessary.

D. The transport of such commodities to such first destina-
tions, including GVN holding areas and/or CPA/ministerial
depots as may be designated by USATD/CPA. 55/

9. Political Affairs in the Third Quarter, 1966

This period was comparatively quiet, and transactions between the two
governments were routine. Late in June, Ky had brought up with Lodge the
idea of a cabinet reshuffle, and Lodge had advised him to go slow. In
July, Ky agreed to put it off. In August Ky volunteered to do something
ebout the most corrupt generals in the Directorate, especially Co and
Quang. Again, Lodge, who head frankly given uo on corruption in the
highest places, cautioned him to go slow, and Ky decided to put off any
action until after the September elections. Lodge's advice, with Stete
coneurrence, concentrated on making sure Ky had definitive evidence of the
alleged corruntion; Lodge was sure that following this advice would delay
things sufficiently. 56/ Late in August, Ky received an invitation to

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
