Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

You could not .go from the airfield to Mytho
without an armed guard in full.daylight, or...
transport anything for fear of ambush by ground,
although the Vietnamese themselves could move
the freight by some kind of pay-off to the Viet
Cong.

In response to this the Secretary said that we were in a very different
position than the French had been and that in this sort of war improve-
ment was bound to be slow--a matter of years. But this did not mean

we should retain all of our existing personnel in South Vietnam. It
would be a waste to do so, and by “keeping the crutch there too long
we would weaken the Vietnamese rather than strengthen them."

Within a day or two after this testimony was given there came the
Khanh coup, which constituted not only another hard blow to our efforts
in Vietnam but also to our confidence that we knew what was going on
there. The Khanh coup of 30 January 196: came as an almost complete
surprise to the mission and to Washington. What may be considered in
retrospect, but only in retrospect, as the first very general danger
signal came in the form of a conversation between the US/DOM in Saigon
and Italian Ambassador D'Orlandi, on 20 January, and reported that same
evening to Washington. In discussing the current French initiative in
Asia (recognition of Communist China and advocacy of neutralization of
SEA), the Italian Ambassador had said that the greatest danger to the
U.S. position in Southeast Asia lay in the effect it might have upon
certain pro-French and potentially neutralist mambers of the MRC.

When asked to clarify, D'Orlandi named Generals Tran Van Don and Ton
Thap Dinh as potential leaders of a group that might accept a French
neutralization formula, expecially if the U.S. position on that issue
were not clarified immediately. In reporting the incident the Bnbassy
commented it had no hard evidence of either of these two flirting with
neutralization, although because of French training they were frequently
cited as pro-French. 36

A few days later Ambassador Lodge issued a public statement which
acknowledged existence of neutralization rumors and proceeded to affirm
that U.S. policy remained unchanged and that the U.S., "In solidarity
with the Government of the Republic of Vietnam, firmly rejects the
spurious idea of 'neutralizing' South Vietnam since 'neutralization'
would simply be another means of Communist take-over." 37

The first warning of the coup that may be considered specific and
definite, however, did not come until 28 January, when General Khanh
told Colonel Jasper Wilson, U.S. Senior MAAG advisor for I Corps, that
pro-French, pro-neutralist members of the MRC --Generals Xuan, Don, and
Kim -- were planning a palace coup that would take place as early as 31
danuary. 38/ Once the coup was effected, they would call for neutralization
of South Vietnam. It was not reported that in the conversation with
Wilson, Khanh had expressly suggested that he might try a counter coup
action. He did say, however, that he planned to go to Saigon that day
or on the morrow. In reporting this conversation to Lodge and Harkins
in Saigon and to CIA/Washington, CAS cited four other recent intelligence

oT TOP SECRET - Sensitive
