Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

put firm:

We ave prepared to talk at any timo and place, in
any forum, and with the object of bringing peace to
Vietnam; however, I know you would not expect us to
reduce military action unless the other side is willing
to do likewise. 27/

Meanwhile the possibility that a definitive suspension of
the bombing might produce negotiations became increasingly likely.
Premier Kosygin had arrived in London to confer with Prime Minister
Wilson on February 6, two days before the truce started. They immedi-
ately began a frantic weeklong effort to bring the two sides together.
Multiple interpretations of position were passed through the inter-
mediaries in London, but in the end, the massive DRV resupply effort
forced the U.S. to resume the bombing without having received a final
indication from the DRV as to their willingness to show restraint. But
this was not before the bombing halt had been extended from 4 to 6 days,
and not before the Soviets had informed the DRV of the deadline for an
answer.

The factor which took on such importance and eventually
forced the President's hand was the unprecedented North Vietnamese
resupply activity during the bombing suspension. As already noted, the
military had opposed the halt for just this reason and the Christmas
and New Year's halts had given warning of what might be expected. By
the time the truce had been in effect 24 hours, continuing surveillance had
already revealed the massive North Vietnamese effort to move supplies into
its southern panhandle. Washington sounded the alarm. On February 9
Rusk held a press conference and warned about the high rate of supply
activity. The same day Bundy called Saigon and London with details of
the rate of logistical movement and with instructions for dealing with
the press. To London he stated:

Ambassador Bruce...should bring this story to the
attention of highest British levels urgently, pointing out
its relevance both to the problems we face in continuing
the Tet bombing suspension and to the wider problem involved
in any proposal that we cease bombing in exchange for mere
talks. In so doing, you should not repeat not suggest that
we are not still wide open to the idea of continuing the
Tet bonbiag suspension through the 7-day period or at least
until Kosygin departs London. You should emphasize, how-
ever, that we are seriously concerned about these develop-
ments and that final decision on such additional two- or
three-day suspension does involve serious factors in light
of this information. 28/

f¢ TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘
