Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Fa

The first day of the Secretary's stay in Saigon was spent in briefings,
and not all of what he heard was encouraging. There was first a briefing
from the Ambassador, who said the administrative mechanism of the central GVN
was not functioning smoothly, that Khanh overcentralized authority, and that
although the situation might work out the prospects were not good. One bit
of encouragement was that Khanh was requesting more U.S. advisors -- this was
taken as a token of good intentions and of willingness to cooperate with the
U.S. The provincial government would continue to be weak, and the corps
commanders’ authority handicapped the provinces. Khanh's 23 new province
chiefs and 80 new district chiefs had improved the quality of leadership, he
thought. But the Buddhists, although fragmented, remained politically active
and Thich Tri Quang was agitating strongly against Khanh. The Catholics were
about to withdraw their chaplains from the Army. The students supported
Khanh but the intellectuals did not. Lodge thought that the current U.S.
program was of about the right size but that better leadership was needed.

He would like U.S. civilian advisors in each corps area. When USOM Director
Brent gave his briefing he made the point that USOM was 25 percent short of
authorized personnel strength. This led the Secretary to ask about the use
of U.S. military personnel, FSOs, or Peace Corps personnel to fill the 7
shortage. Forrestal was asked to look into the problem and report. The NIA
was short of faculty because seven instructors had been assigned elsewhere
and there was, moreover, an inadequate budget. 83/

In the afternoon briefing, Gmeral Harkins said he was guardedly opti-
mistic in spite of the fact that 23 province chiefs, 135 district chiefs,
and practically all senior military commanders had been replaced since the
last coup. In discussing "Population Control” (pacification), it was de-
cided to use 1 April 1964 as a base for statistical measurements of pacifica-
tion progress. When he came to the subject of the planned augmentation of
ARVN and the paramilitary forces, the figures presented by General Harkins
showed that achievement lagged behind the agreed goals. Although the agreed
MAP program called for 229,000 RVNAF personnel at that time and 238,000 for
the end of calendar year 1964, there were actually only 207,000 currently
in RVNAF. (This showed no improvement over March). The strength of RVNAF
had in fact been decreasing consistently from a high of 218, 000 in July 1963
because of increased activity (hence losses through camumities), Gober sene:
budget problems and miscellaneous lesser causes. 89

Among the topics receiving considerable attention during the meeting
on the morning of the 13th of May was that of VNAF pilot training program.
This subject assumed special importance for three reasons. First, the
March program of providing helicopters to the Vietnamese Air Force called
also for the provision of pilots to fly them. Second, there had just
previously been some embarrassing publicity concerning the participation
of USAF pilots in covert combat roles, an activity that had not been
publicly acknowledged. Third, the meeting with the President on 6 May
had led to the instructions to the Secretary, already noted, to discourage
Khanh's hopes of involving the United States in his March to the North.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

12
