Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201!

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

which could be furnished to bolster the French Union forces,
would be dependent upon certain factors which cannot now be
predicted with accuracy. These include the extent of progress
in U.S. rearmament, whether or not hostilities in Korea were
continuing, and strategic developments in other parts of the
world. [Jt would be desirable to _avoid.the use.of major U.S.
ground forces in Indochina, Other effective means of oppos=-
ing the aggression would include naval, air and logistical
support of the French Union forces, naval blockade of Com-
munist China, and attacks by land and carrier-based aircraft
on military targets in Communist China. The latter could be
effective against the long, tenuous, and vulnerable supply
lines by which Chinese operations in Indochina would have to
be supported. In the event of a forced evacuation, U.S.
forces might provide cover and assistance. United Kingdom
participation in these measures might well result in the
seizure of Hong Kong by the Chinese Communists. \

ee

29. It is recognized that the commitment of U.S. military
forces against Communist China would: (a) increase the risk
of general hostilities in the Far East, including Soviet par-
ticipation under cover of the existing Sino-Soviet agreements}
(b) involve U.S. military forces in another Asiatic peripheral
action, thus detracting from U.S. capabilities to conduct a
global war in the near future; (c) arouse public opposition
to "another Korea"; and (d) imply willingness to use U.S. mili-
tary forces in other critical areas subject to communist ag-
gression. Nevertheless, by failing to take action, the United
States would permit the communists to obtain, at little or no
cost, a victory of major world consequence.

30. Informed public opinion might support use of U.S.
forces in Indochina regardless of sentiment against "another
Korea" on the basis that: (a) Indochina is of far greater
strategic importance than Korea; (b) the confirmation of UN
willingness to oppose aggression with force, demonstrated at
such a high cost in Korea, might be nullified by the failure
to commit UN forces in Indochina; and (c) a second instance of
ageression by the Chinese Communists would justify measures
not subject to the limitations imposed upon the UN action in
Korea, ;

31. The military action contemplated herein would con-
be limited only as to its objectives, but would not be subject
to any geographic limitations. Employment of U.S. forces in
a de facto war without a formal declaration would raise ques-
tions which would make it desirable to consult with key members
of both parties in Congress in order to obtain their prior con-
currence in the courses of action contemplated.

ANNES TO NSC 124 L76 TOP SECRET
;

/
