Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

were already assigned to NATO on that station. The 60,000 figure
which we just mentioned was to reappear later, much later in fact,

when Secretary McNamara travelled to Saigon in late July to "negotiate"
the new force levels for Program 5.

h, Bombing in the North: Its Contribution to the Ground War

In early May attention also focused on how the bombing campaign
in the North could better contribute to successful military outcomes in
the South. Three important memos appeared during the first week in May,
all devoted to this problem. On 5 May, in a draft memorandum for the
President, John McNaughton proposed that all of the sorties allocated
to the ROLLING THUNDER program be concentrated on the lines of communica-
tion, or what he called the "funnel" through which men and supplies to
the south must flow between 17-209, while reserving the options and the
intention to strike in the area north of this (or in the 20-23° area. ) as
necessary to keep the enemy's investment in defense and in repair crews
high throughout the country. In arguing for this course of action, he
noted that General Wheeler, when General Westmoreland was in Washington
in April, had said that the bombing campaign was reaching the point
where all of the worthwhile fixed targets, except the ports had been
struck. McNaughton did not believe that the ports should be struck nor
closed by mining, primarily because of the confrontation which he saw
this might cause with the Soviet Union. Examining the bombing alter-
natives, he observed that we could continue to conduct attacks north
of the 20° parallel, that is continue striking minor fixed targets while
conducting armed reconnaissance against movement on roads, railroads
and waterways. This course, though, was costly in American lives and
in his estimation involved serious dangers of escalation, either with
the Chinese or the Russians. The loss rate in Hanoi /Haiphong Route
Package 6 for example was more than six times the loss rate in the
southernmost route packages 1 and 2, and actions in the Hanoi /Haiphong
area, involved serious risks of generating confrontations with the Soviet
Union and China, both because they involved destruction of MIGs on the
ground and counters with MiGs in the air and because they might be
construed as U.S. intention to crush the Hanoi regime. The military
gain of the expanded bombing appeared to be slight; in fact, McNaughton
could locate no evidence at the time to establish some convincing con-
nection between operations in the north against targets north of the
20° parallel and enemy actions in the South. Furthermore, if the United
States believed that air attacks in the aree. would change Hanoi's will,
they might have been worthwhile, he added, and consequently reduce the
loss. of American life in the south and the risk of the expansion of the
war in the North. However, McNaughton noted there was no evidence that
this would be the case, for there was considerable evidence that such

137 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
