Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnam and the US of violations. It is seeking to enhance
its international prestige and position, and to secure

the broadest possible support for the political settlement
envisaged at the Geneva Conference which it still insists
must eventually be implemented."

"The DRV will probably continue for the next year or two
to restrict its campaign for reunification to ‘peaceful’ means.
However, the DRV will continue its efforts to infiltrate and
to subvert official and nonofficial organizations and to exploit
dissident and dissatisfied groups in South Vietnam. It would
probably not use its paramilitary forces in South Vietnam to
initiate widespread guerrilla activity unless it estimated that
the situation in South Vietnam had so deteriorated that such
action could overthrow the government. The DRV will continue
to have the capability to overrun South Vietnam in a relatively
short time if opposed only by South Vietnamese forces, but it
would only launch such an attack if the DRV together with Moscow
and Peiping were to estimate that such action carried little
risk of military intervention by the US."

By mid-1957, the security outlook in South Vietnam, according
to MAAG's intelligence, was rosy indeed; the only dark clouds hovered
over the Viet Cong (MAAG, "Country Statement..., 15 July 1957):

"In the past six months Dissident Sect strengths have
fallen off. Numerically the Hoa Hao Sect has remained about
the same (estimated at 850-950 armed men) but its power has
been greatly diminished due to continuous government military
operations, the improvement of the Civil Guard and Self-Defense
Corps, the capture of bases and equipment by government forces,
and the resulting loss in morale. Cao Dai and Binh Xuyen mili-
tary forces are negligible....

"The Viet Cong guerrillas and propagandists, however, are
still waging a grim battle for survival. In addition to an
accelerated propaganda campaign, the Communists have been forming
'front' organizations to influence at least portions of all anti-
government minorities. Some of these organizations are militant,
some political. An example of the former is the "Vietnamese
Peoples' Liberation Movement Forces,’ a military unit composed
of ex-Cao Dai, ex-Hoa Hao, ex-Binh Xuyen, escaped political
prisoners, and Viet Cong cadres. An example of the latter is
the 'Vietnam-Cambodian Buddhist Association’, one of several
organizations seeking to spread the theory of 'Peace and Co-
existence.’ The armed strength of Viet Cong-controlled units
in Free Vietnam is now estimated at approximately 1,500."

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
