Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By; NWD Date: 2011

in 1947 and in Korea in 1950. The Indochinese Communist Party, the perent
of the present Communist Party in North Vietnam, made it abundantly clear
as early as 1951 that the aim of the Vietnamese Communist leadership is

to take control of all of Indochina. This goal has not changed -- it is
still clearly the objective of the Vietnamese Communist leadership in Hanoi.

"Hanoi seeks to accomplish this purpose in South Vietnam through sub-
versive guerrilla warfare directed, controlled, and supplied by North Viet-
nam.’ The communist leadership in Hanoi has sought to pretend that the
insurgency in South Vietnam is a civil war, but Hanoi's hand shows very |
clearly. Public statements by the Communist Party in North Vietnam and &
its leaders have repeatedly demonstrated Hanoi's direction of the struggle
in South Vietnam. For example, Le Duan, First Secretary of the Party, stated
on September 5, 1960, 'At present our Party is facing /a/ momentous task:...
to strive to complete...revolution throughout the country...' He also said
this: ‘The North is the common revolutionary base of the whole country.'
Three months after the Communist Party Congress in Hanoi in September 1960,
the so-called ‘National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam' was set
up pursuant to plans outlined publicly at that Congress.

"The International Control Commission in Vietnam, established by the
Geneva accords of 1954, stated in a special report which it issued in June
1962 that there is sufficient evidence to show that North Vietnam has violated
various articles of the Geneva accords by its introduction of armed personnel,
arms, munitions, and other supplies from North Vietnam into South Vietnam
with the object of supporting, organizing, and carrying out hostile activi-
ties against the Government and armed forces of South Vietnam.

"Infiltration of military personnel and supplies from North Vietnam
to South Vietnam has been carried out steadily over the past several years.
The total number of military cadres sent into South Vietnam via infiltra-
tion routes runs into the thousands. Such infiltration is well documented
on the basis of numerous defectors and prisoners taken by the armed forces
of South Vietnam.

"Introduction of communist weapons into South Vietnam has also grown
steadily. An increasing amount of weapons and ammunition captured from the
Viet Cong has been proven to be of Chinese Communist manufacture or origin.
For example, in December 1963 a large cache of Viet Cong equipment captured
in one of the Mekong Delta provinces in South Vietnam included recoilless
rifles, rocket launchers, carbines, and ammunition of, Chinese Communist
manufacture.

"The United States cannot stand by while Southeast Asia is overrun by
armed aggressors. As long as the peoples of that area are determined to
preserve their own independence and ask for our help in preserving it,
we will extend it. This, of course, is the meaning of President Johnson's
request a few days ago for additional funds for more economic as well as
military assistance for Vietnam.
