Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

The report made no attempt to predict how the DRV might answer the “basic
question" given alternative assessments of the variables in the quoted
paragraph. However, it did offer the caveat that “comprehension of the

. Other's intentions would almost certainly be difficult on both sides,

end especially so as the scale of hostilities mounted." 38/

In assessing Hanoi's ability and willingness to sustein US.
attacks in order to pursue its goals, the report continued its balanced

but slightly pessimistic approach:

"We have many indications that the Hanoi leadership is
acutely and nervously eware of the extent to which North
Vietnam's transportation system and industrial plan is vul-
nereble to attack. On the other hend, North Vietnam's
economy is overwhelmingly agriculture and, to a large extent,
decentralized... .Interdiction of imports and extensive de-
struction of transportation facilities and industriel plants
would cripple DRV industry. These actions would also seriously
restrict DRV military capabilities, and would degrade, though
to a lesser extent, Hanoi's capabilities to support guerrilla
werfare in South Vietnam and Laos..-.We do not believe that
attacks on industrial targets would so greatly exacerbate
current economic difficulties as to creat unmanageable control
problems....DRV leaders...would probably be willing to suffer
Some damage to the country in the course of a test of Wilts
with the U.S. over the course of events in South Vietnam. 39/

The assessment concluded with estimates of likely Chinese Con-
munist end Soviet efforts to offset pressures directed toward North '
Vietnam. The Working Group recorded its belief "that close cooperation
exists between Hanoi and Peiping and that Hanoi consults Peiping on
major decisions regarding South Vietnam." Because the Mea eaE COLOR
Served "Peiping's interests in undermining the U.S. position in Asia
and because of the Sino-Soviet dispute, the group thought it likely that
the Chinese would "feel compelled to demonstrate their readiness to
support" Hanoi in maintaining pressure on South Vietnam. However, it
was noted that "Chinese Commmist capabilities to augment DRV offensive
and defensive capabilities ara slight," being limited largely to modest
quantities of air defense equinment, additional jet fighters and navel
patrol craft. On the other hand, the group believed “Moscow's role in
Vietnam is likely to remain a relatively minor one." Khrushchev's .
euccessors were believed unwilling to rm substential risks to undermine
the GVN. Citing Hanoi's desire for continuing Soviet military and
economic aid, the report stated an ironic judgment concerning the less-

=

militant of the large Communist powers:
"Moscow's ability to influence decisions in Hanoi tends
consequently to be proportional to the North Vietnamese
regime's fears of American action against it, rising in

aL TOP SECRET - Sensitive
