Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

hO. The State of the Union Address of President Johnson to the Congress
(Excerpts), January 12, 1966; Department of State Bulletin, January 31

ne 09; Dp. i553
xy & =

"And we will stay until aggression has stopped.

"We will stay because a just nation cannot leave to the cruelties
of its enemies a people who have staked their lives and independence on
America's solemn pledge--a pledge which has grown through the commit-
ments of three American Presidents.

"We will stay because in Asia--and around the world--are countries
whose independence rests, in large measure, on confidence in America's ~
word and in America's protection. To yield to force in Viet-Nam would
weaken that confidence, would undermine the independence of many lands,
and would whet the appetite of aggression. We would have to fight in
one land, and then we would have to fight in another--or abandon much
of Asia to the domination of Communists."

% &

ki. Statement by President Johnson, U.S. and South Vietnamese Leaders
Meet at Honolulu, February 6, 196060; Department of State Bulletin,
February 28, 1966, p. 303.

Se oa: oe

",.eeWe cannot accept their logic that tyranny 10,000 miles away
is not tyranny to concern us, or that subjugation by an armed minority
in Asia is different from subjugation by an armed minority in Europe.
Were we to follow their course, how many nations might fall before the
aggressor? Where would our treaties be respected, our word honored,
and our commitment believed?

"In the forties and fifties we took our stand in Europe to protect
the freedom of those threatened by aggression. If we had not then
acted, what kind of Europe might there be today? Now the center of
attention has shifted to another part of the world where aggression is
on the march and enslavement of free men is its goal.

"Our stand must be as firm as ever. If we allow the Communists to
win in Viet-Nam, it will become easier and more appetizing for them to
take over other countries in other parts of the world. We will have to
fight again someplace else--at what cost no one knows. That is why it
is vitally. important to every American that we stop the Communists in
South Viet-Nem." A
