Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"In view of foregoing considerations, I conclude that
only mission worth considering now for additional Marines
in Da Nang area is to contribute to defense of base against
mortar fire and ground attack. However, to defend against °
fire would require at least full brigade and I do not be-
lieve threat and possible consequences of mortar attack are
so great as to warrant pinning down so valuable force in
static defensive mission. However, in view of General
Westmoreland's understandable concern for safety of this
important base, I would be willing to recommend placing in
Da Nang Marine battalion landing team. Such force would
strengthen defense of base and, at same time, would be
manageable force from point of view of accommodating it on
base and absorbing it into Da Nang community. Such force
with those Marines already present should remove any sub-
stantial danger of VC ground attack and in conjunction
with available ARVN forces provide an acceptable level of
security against attack by fire.

"If Washington decision is to introduce additional
Marines into /Vietnam, it should/, of course, be made con-
tingent upon getting concurrence of GVN. It would be
useful and, I believe, not difficult to get GVN to initiate
request for additional forces to which USG could then
accede. Taylor.” 6/

C. CINCPAC's Support

CINCPAC cabled the JCS on 24 February and recommended immediate
deployment of two Marine BLT's, one over the beach and one by air and
surface. He advised, in addition, that a squadron of Marine F's be
deployed to Da Nang simultaneously. Those aircraft would be for close
air support of the defenders and could be used "for other missions
along with primary mission. . .. All CINCPAC contingency plans for
SEA provide for employment of Marine aircraft from Da Nang." The tone
of CINCPAC's cable was urgent. He encouraged deployment now "before
the tragedy," and he added that were the base to be attacked before
the BLT's were put ashore, the landing force afloat would be unable,
because of the time required to get forces to the scene, to influence
the outcome. One of the references cited in this lengthy CINCPAC cable
was the Ambassador's message of 22 February. In addressing that
reference, CINCPAC disagreed openly with Ambassador Taylor and cited
the Marine's "distinguished record," saying:

"In ref F the Ambassador discusses the pros and cons
of deploying the MEB to Da Nang. The Ambassador comments
on the difficulty of providing complete assurance of
security from surprise mortar fire even with the whole of
MEB. This is true and consequently, what we are obliged to -
do here is to reduce within the limits of our capability
the hazards to our people. I believe that the vulnerability

h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
