Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

- TOP SECRET - Sensitive

supported by military strength. For the foreseeable
future, therefore, our immediate objective must be

to contain and where feasible to reduce the power and
influence of the USSR in Asia to such a degree that
the Soviet Union is not capable of threatening the
security of the United States from that area and that
the Soviet Union would encounter serious obstacles
should it attempt to threaten the peace, national
independence or stability of the Asiatic nations."

NSC 48/1 also recognized that "the colonial-nationalist conflict provides
a. fertile field for subversive communist movements, and it is now clear
that Southeast Asia is the target for a coordinated offensive directed by
the Kremlin."

At this time, the NSC believed that the United States, as a
Western power in any area where the bulk of the population had long been
suspicious of Western influence, should insofar as possible refrain from
taking any lead in Southeast Asia. The United States should instead
"encourage the peoples of India, Pakistan, the Philippines and other Asian
states to take the leadership in meeting the common problems of the area,”
recognizing "that the non-communist governments of South Asia already
constitute a bulwark against communist expansion in Asia.” NSC 48/2 pointed
out that particular attention should be given to the problem of Indochina
where "action should be taken to bring home to the French the urgency of
removing the barriers to the obtaining by Bao Dai or other non-communist
nationalist leaders of the support of a substantial proportion of the
Vietnamese."

2. Importance of Indochina

Indochina was of special importance because it was the only area
adjacent to China which contained a large European army which was in armed
conflict with "communist" forces. The Chinese Communists were believed to
be furnishing the Viet Minh with substantial material assistance. Official
French sources reported that there were some Chinese troops in Tonkin, as
well as large numbers ready for action against the French on the Chinese
side of the border. The first NSC memorandum dealing solely with Indochina
(NSC 64) was adopted as policy on March 27, 1950. This paper took note of
Chinese assistance to the Viet Minh and estimated that it was doubtful that
the French Expeditionary forces, combined with Indochinese troops, could
successfully contain Ho Chi Minh's forces should they be strengthened by
either Chinese troops crossing the border, or by communist-supplied arms
and material in quantity.

_ NSC 64 -- written, it should be noted, by the Truman Administra-~
tion and before the outbreak of the Korean War -- observed that "the threat
of Communist aggression against Indochina is only one phase of anticipated
communist plans to seize all of Southeast Asia." It concluded with a
statement of what came to be known as the "domino principle”:

A-L6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
