Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ground troops on the stage in early April. Westmoreland had recommended
in March that a separate Army Brigade (possibly the 173rd) be deployed to
the Bien Hoa/Vung Tau areas "in order to secure vital U.S. installations."
. That recommendation accompanied Westmoreland's request for up to two
divisions of forces and was contained in his "Commander's Estimate of the
Situation," which will be considered later in some detail. 5k/ On the
lith of April, Westmoreland cabled CINCPAC that he understood from news
of the Taylor meetings in Washington that the requested divisions of
forces were not immediately in the offing. Nevertheless, Westmoreland
wanted a brigade in the Bien Hoa-Vung Tau area because "it was as neces-
sary from a purely military standpoint as the deployments in the Da Nang-
Phu Bai area which have already won acceptance.” (Security of Bien Hoa/
Vung Tau was not all COMUSMACV had in mind, however, for the same message
mentioned the need to offset a Viet Cong threat embodied in two regiments
and two separate battalions perched on the eastern flank of III Corps.

He also wanted a light reserve force which could be airlifted to the
Central Highlands in case of emergency.) 55/

The 173rd, a two-battalion airborne brigade, was then located
in Okinawa. It constituted CINCPAC's airmobile reserve. When an
earlier attempt had been made to deploy the 173rd to Da Nang in place of
the Marines, CINCPAC had stringently opposed the removal of his only
quick-reaction force. 56/

What followed General Westmoreland's request of 11 April, a re-
quest that Ambassador Taylor "hed noted," was a rapid-fire series of
cables, proposals, and false starts which, if nothing else, indicated
that Washington was well ahead of Saigon in its planning and in its
anxiety. The first event in the chain was a planning conference held
in Honolulu 8-10 April and attended by representatives of PACOM and the
Joint Staff. The conferees recommended the deployment of the 173rd and,
in deference to CINCPAC's concern for his airmobile reserve, they also
recommended that the 173rd be replaced by another brigade from CONUS as
soon as practicable. 57/ The JCS ordered on 14 April that the 173rd be
deployed temporarily to Bien Hoa/Vung Tau for security of air operations
and logistical bases and at the same time tasked CINCSTRIKE to provide a
brigade to replace the 173rd. 58/

The decision to deploy the 173rd apparently caught the Ambassador
flatfooted, for he had quite obviously not been privy to it. He cabled
the State Department on the lth and said: 59/

"I have just learned by the reference JCS message to CINCPAC
that the immediate deployment of the 173rd Airborne Brigade to
Bien Hoa-Vung Tau has apparently been approved. This comes as a
complete surprise in view of the understanding reached in Wash-
ington that we would experiment with the Marines in a counterin-
surgency role before bringing in other U.S. contingents........-

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
