Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

which it did -- that if U.S. assistance was not forthcoming, it would
simply withdraw from Indochina, leaving to the United States alone the
task of the containment of communism in Southeast Asia. When the Laniel
Government requested in the fall of 1953 a massive increase in American
assistance, the State Department representative at an NSC meeting asserted
that "if this French Government, which proposes reinforcing Indochina
with our aid, is not supported by us at this time, it may be the last
such government prepared to make a real effort to win in Indochina.” 9

In effect, then, because of the overriding importance given by Washington
to holding the communist line in Indochina, the French in being able to
threaten to withdraw possessed an important instrument of blackmail.

The upshot of this was that U.S. leverage was quite minimal.
Since the French were, in a way, fighting a U.S. battle as well as their
own to prevent communist control of Indochina, any ham-fisted U.S. pressure
was bound to weaken the French resolve and capability. Consequently, the
leverage which the U.S. attained through its aid could be used for little
more than to urge greater efficiency and determination on France. In
other words, Washington could move Paris to formulate a Navarre type plan,
but could not influence the way France conducted the war, nor could it
move France on political issues in dispute.

b.° Expectation of French Success

The temptation to "go along" with the French until the Viet
Minh was defeated was all the more attractive because of the expectation
of victory which pervaded official Washington. Before Dien Bien Phu,
General O'Daniel consistently reported that victory was within reach if
the United States continued its support. In November, 1953 General O'Daniel
submitted a progress report on the Navarre Plan which summarized what the
French had been doing and what remained to be accomplished. The report
said that French Union forces held the initiative and would begin offen-
sives in mid-January, 1954 in the Mekong Delta and in the region between
Cape Varella and Da Nang. Meanwhile, a relatively small force would
attempt to keep the Viet Minh off balance in the Tonkin Delta until
October, 1964, when the French would begin a major offensive North of
the 19th parallel. The report concluded by assessing that the Navarre
Plan was basically sound and should be supported since it would bring a
decisive victory. 10/

O'Daniel's optimism was not duplicated by other observers.
CINCPAC, for one, considered the report over-optimistic, stating that
political and psychological factors were of such crucial importance that
no victory would be possible until the Vietnamese were able to capture
villages and until psychological warfare operations could be undertaken
to win over the people. 11/ The Army attache in Saigon was even less
sanguine. He flatly stated that the French, after six months of the
Navarre Plan, were still on the defensive and showed no sign of being
able to win the war in the future. The attaché's views were, moreover,

A-39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
