Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It

AMBASSADOR TAYLOR'S FIRST SEVEN MONTHS:
Planning for "Bomb North" Amid Turbulence in the South

1. Ambassador Taylor's Initiation, July, 1964

Anbassedor Taylor arrived in Saigon amid the start of planning
to extend the war outside the borders of South Vietnam. Rusk had dis-
cussed the options with Khanh on June 1, and the participants of the
Honolulu Conference had mulled them over further. Although there was
no formal decision to recommend new operations in Laos or North Vietnam,
there was an atmosphere of expectation. A joint State-Defense message
on June 27 authorized joint planning with the Vietnamese Joint General
Staff for cross berder operations in Taos; on June 30, Westmoreland dis-
cussed it with General Khiem, who agreed to initiate joint planning. 1

Taylor came with a letter of support from the President that
cleared up any previous doubt about the Ambassador's control over MACV:

"I want you to have this formal expression not
only of my confidence but of my desire that you have
and exercise full responsibility for the effort of
the United States in South Vietnam...I wish it clearly
understood that this overall responsibility includes
the whole military effort in South Vietnam and author-
izes the degree of command and control that you consider
appropriate." 2/

Rither the letter was intended to prevent confusion of authority such as

_existed among Lodge, Felt, and Harkins, or the expectation of greater

militarization of the war made it appropriate to appoint Taylor Ambassador
and to give him unchallenged authority.

Taylor met Khanh and presented his eredentials on July 8. Khanh
promised him “the frank cooperation of a soldier." He said the U.S. should
not merely advise, but should participate in making and implementing
plans; in this he still held the view he had expressed to Taylor when he,
Khanh, was still @ Corps Commander. (By referring to Zorthian"s contacts
with the Minister of Information, Khanh made it clear he had the brain
trust idea in mind.) However, he noted that this degree of involvement
should be kept secret, because of the criticism it would attract if known.
They discussed Minh's trips around the country, and agreed these were use-
ful and constructive. Finally, Taylor stressed the importance of Vietnamese
unity and resolve. 3/

The next day Taylor called on the three Vice Premiers, Hoan,
Do Man, and Oanh, and received the civilian point of view. Hoan did most

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
