Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

division) require about 4 tons of supplies daily for the ‘current’
level of combat but would require 67 tons of supplies daily for
"light? combat. ('Current' levels are operations conducted largely
in small wits; 'light' combat would involve larger elements in action
on the average of every third day, with expenditures of one-third of
each unit's basic load of ammmition on each action.) It is believed
that regular North Vietnamese units and Pathet Lao forces in the Laos
Fanhandle require about 21 and 51 tons daily respectiveiy for the two
levels of combat. Viet Cong arms, ammunition and other supply require-
ments are estimated at 8 tons daily for ‘current’ combat and 115 tons
for *light' combat. The effect of the interdiction program on the
movement of supplies is summarized below:

The 440-ton per day rail traffic from Hanoi south to Vinh has been
cut off at Ninh Binh (40 miles south of Hanoi). Supplies still move
by sea and over the parallel highway system. The latter has been badly
damaged and is subject to armed reconnaissance; sea traffic into SVN
is under surveillance. At a minimum, supply is slower and less regular
and delivered at increased cost in resources and energy expended.

Roads into Laos have been subjected to similar interdiction and armed
recce. Only limited interdiction has been imposed on the key rail and
road net northwest of Hanoi, and none on the railway net northeast of
Hanoi; and port destruction has been minimal. Thus, substantially
uninterrupted supply continues from China by rail into Hanoi and by

sea into Haiphong to meet major North Vietnamese military, industrial
and civilian needs.

The effect of the bombing on military operations is estimated to
have been as follows:

(1) For regular North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces.
The interdiction program has caused North Vietnam increasing diffi-
culty in supplying their units in Laos and South Vietnam. How severe
this difficulty is or how stretched North Vietnam's supply eapabili-
ties are cannot be estimated precisely. Our interdiction efforts may
have either prevented or deterred the North from sending more troops
- than they already have. The interdiction programs in North Vietnam
and Laos also may have influenced a Commumist decision to forego 4
1965 offensive in Laos.

(2) For Viet Cong forces, Because the VC require signifi-
eantly less infiltrated arms and ammunition and other supplies than
do the North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces, the interdiction program
probably has had less of an adverse effect on their operations. By
raising VC fears concerning adequacy of supplies, however, the program
may have caused the VC summer offensive to be less intense, aggressive
and unrelenting than it would otherwise have been.

5 137 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
