Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

core if Cram:
Zee ee NSC 161 Meeting
September 9, 1953

ITEM 2
(For Consideration)

FURTHER U.S. SUPPORT FOR OPERATIONS IN INDOCHINA

SUMMARY AND COMMENTS

Le This very important and complex matter is being rushed to such
an extent that there remain a number of questions which are not completely
answered at this time, However, a successful termination to the Indochina
problem is so desirable with respect to all our Far Eastern policies, and
the pressure of time so great due to the approaching end of the rainy
season there (about October 1 -- after which major operations by the Viet
Minh may recommence), that action in principle if felt to be essential by
the Secretary of State is warranted at this time. The State Department
asserts that if this French government which proposes reinforcing Indo-
china with our aid, is not supported by us at this time, it may be the last
such government prepared to make a real effort to win in Indochina. (This
May be somewhat over-pessimistic.)

2. This brief is written without having available the finel papers
upon which the NSC will be asked to act. These are still (7 September) in
process of being drafted by the State Department. However, we are aware
generally of their probable content.

3. As you remember, General Bedell Smith presented to the NSC on
6 August the proposals of the Daniel government to finish up the Indochina
situation. This involved a request for ebout $400 million additional U.S.
aid (now $385 million), and Daniel's statement that his program for Indo-
china would have to be paralleled by a program to balance the French budget
or it would not be politically acceptable to the French Assembly. The NSC
(see Teb "A", Action No. 874) agreed at this time that State, FCA and the
JCS should proceed promptly with further exploration with the French and
that if these agencies felt the French program held promise of success,
they shculd submit detailed recommendations to the NSC. This has now been
done and the recommendations will be considered at Wednesday's meeting.

h, At the 6 August NSC meeting, the President commented on the
Daniel proposals, saying he thought we should support the French proposals
only under the following conditions (see Tab "BR", Brief of NSC Meeting,

6 August.):

a. We must get the French to commit themselves publicly
to a program which will insure the support and cooperation
or the native Indochinese. The later increments of our

THY) CRATES
fA Se pee ft

Tih
