Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

ideals of communist domination for all of Vietnam, would
peacefully contribute to shaping the destiny of SVN in con-
formity with democratic principles and without any foreign
interference. To encourage contact with the VC would consti-
tute a major shift in US policy in Southeast Asia which
would certainly appear to the communists as a sign of weak-
ness and lack of firmmess of purpose and undermine the
resolve of the GVN." 29/

Furthermore, the JCS detected an unacceptable fraternization with the
negotiating option which in their eyes might be justified by future
attainment of some degree of representative government and political
development. They stressed the "military role" in the GVN in both nation-
building and national security, arguing that regardless of the eventual
political outcomes and the success or failure of representative govern-
ment, the extent of the present U.S, commitment had eliminated the option
of “abandoning” the country on the grounds that "the government is not
established by constitutional or legal processes and might be changed by
illegal methods." 30/

The crucial difference, however, arose over what the national objec-
tives in South Vietnam should really be. In contrast to McNaughton's
view, the Chiefs believed that the

",. national objective of the United States in South
Vietnam (SVN) is an independent nation free of communist
subversion and able to determine its own government and
national aspirations." 31/

and that to achieve this required three interdependent undertakings:

"a. In the North - Take the war to the enemy by unremit-
ting and selective application of US military power.

"b. In the South - Seek out and destroy communist forces
and infrastructure in concert with the GVN/FWMAF.

"e. Nation Building - Extend the secure areas of South
Vietnam by coordinated civil/military operations and assist
the GVN in building an independent, viable, noncommunist
society." 32/

The JCS vere actually insisting upon the achievement of a non-
communist South Vietnam and their military aims accorded with that
‘view. They were holding to the basic strategic concept written in
JCSM 702-66, a month earlier, one which had elicited so little reaction
from either McNamara or his staff. 33/ No doubt the resistance of
the JCS was heavily influenced by the COMUSMACV-CINCPAC reaction to the

pial TOP SECRET - Sensitive
