Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the above program does not provide adequate security for
the Associated States against external aggression after
the withdrawal of the French forces. With the Viet Minh
increasing the size and effectiveness of their forces and
with no forces in being committed to mutual defense under
the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, the above
long-range program would be insufficient to provide more
than limited initial resistance to an organized military
assault by the Viet Minh. 31/

f. Collins Agrees with the NSC

Another memorandum of November 17 indicated how quickly
the United States had moved to inaugurate the crash program approved at
the October 22 NSC meeting. Secretary Dulles outlined for President
Eisenhower the recommendations of General J. Lawton Collins, special
envoy sent to Vietnam to over-see all U.S. operations, coordinate them
with French programs and get things moving. Collins recommended the
the "Vietnamese National Army...be reduced by July 1955 to 77,000. It
should be placed under Vietnamese command and control by that date....
The cost to the U.S. would be two hundred million dollars annually....
The United States should assume training responsibility...by January 1,
1955, with French cooperation and utilizing French trainers."

Collins insisted that French forces be retained in
Vietnam:

It would be disastrous if the French Expeditionary
Corps were withdrawn prematurely since otherwise Vietnam
would be overrun by an enemy attack before the Manila
Pact Powers could act.
To "encourage the French to retain sufficient forces," Collins urged
U.S. financial support of at least $100 million through December 1955.
General Ely concurred. 35/

2. Conditions in Vietnam Invite Firmer Action

The situation in Vietnam during the autumn of 1954 invited
an action program of some kind -- any kind. Premier Diem barely
controlled Saigon; he was opposed by his army's chief of staff, by power-
ful sect politicians guarding significant special interests with powerful
sect armies; he was at least tacitly opposed by many French in Vietnan.
The countryside had been devastated by the war; communications, adminis-
tration and financial operations were stalled; an already prostrate
economy was threatened by the deluge of some 860,000 refugees from the
north. Over all hung "an atmosphere of frustration and disillusionment"
created by the Geneva Accords and imposed partition, "compounded by
widespread uncertainty as to French and US intentions." 36/ U.S. policy
in August set out to correct the uncertainty: Diem was to be supported
by both America and France. But U.S. policy could not eliminate Diem's
opposition.

12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
