Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The above is what Ky said and it stood up to questioning.
It sounds too good to be true, and we will await next

steps. 27/

The next day, June 1, a mob of students burned the consulate and
consular residence in Hue. When GVii forces prepared to move on Hue, the
Struggle Movement filled the streets with Buddhist altars, serving as
roadblocks the GYi) forces hesitated to disturb, while dissident ARVN
units deployed in the city. 28/

*

The Directorate's April 14 promise of elections of a Constituent
Assembly on August 15 had led to the creation of an Electoral Law Com-
mission, which the Buddhists boycotted as a result of the subsequent
disagreements. The Commission presented its proposals en June 5, and
they included several features unacceptable to the Directorate, especi-
ally those related to the powers and tenure of the Assembly. Ky reacted
publicly on June 7, saying thet if military-civil unity proceeded
smoothly enough over the next few months it would be possible to post-
pone elections. Demonstrations continued in Saigon, while a combination
of negotiations and force gradually brought Hue under GVN control. 29/

On June 15, Ky made it clear that the Assembly would not be permitted
to continue and to legislate after drafting a constitution, and that the
Militery Directorate would continue in power until promulgation of the
new constitution and the seating of a subsequently elected Assembly in
1967. (Hote that Lodge backed this attitude.) The Buddhist Institute
called a general strike in response to the GV decleration that June 18,
the anniversary of the Thieu-Ky government, would be a national holiday.
On June 19, the Directorate scheduled the elections for the Constituent
Assembly for September 11, 1966. The announcement had a calming effect,
and the disorders came under control within a few days. The approved
electoral law gave the Directorate ample scope to exclude unwanted candi-
dates, and prevented the Buddhists from putting their symbol, the red
lotus, on the ballot. 30/ (Again, note Lodge's concurrence.)

On July 31, Thi went into exile. 31/

5. Revolutionary Development, March - June, 1966

To help implement the increased emphasis given pacification at
Honolulu. President Johnson in late March appointed Robert Komer as his
gpecial Assistant for "peaceful reconstruction." The creation of a high
level focal point for pacificetion planning and coordinating hed the
effect of supplanting the interagency Vietnem Coordinating Committee
(created in 1964 and originally headed by William Sullivan.) Though
Komer's charter was more limited than thet of the VNCC, his direct access
to the President conferred particuler importance to this position. To
his desk came the MACY and Mission reports on the progress of pacification
thet struck the seme gloomy note month efter month. 32/ The Status Report

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
