Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date; 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"J have taken position that this proposal and certain
counter proposals put forward by civilian agencies here
require careful field study. In its existing form, as
I understand it, it does not take into account the fact
that militarization of our approach to this important
civilian program runs counter to our aim of de-militarizing
GVN through constitutional electoral process...

"I have been stressing here that our military are al-
ready heavily loaded with responsibility for achieving
military measures required to further civilian RD programs,
such as eyoking adequate cooperation from RVN...1I have
emphasized need for MACV to grapple with problem of VC
guerrilla activity during night, as distinct from main
force activity during daytime which we now know can be
dealt with. These areas would appear to offer great possi-
bilities for application of military talent and I repeat
that in my view question of burdening MACY further with
complex programs (cadre, police, ete.) requires careful
field study which I would have done promptly, if you agree,
by group similar to that which carried out ‘Roles and Missions'
study." 4h/

This was the background as Secretary McNamara, Under Secretary Katzenbach,
General Wheeler, and Mr. Komer went to Saigon in October. The issue had
been deferred, and when the visitors returned, they would make recommenda-
tions to the President. Katzenbach, making his first trip as Under Secretary,
was requested to look at the problem with a new eye and no prior prejudices.

When they came back from Saigon, Katzenbach and McNamara both sent the
President an important memorandum. Katzenbach argued for a strengthening
of Ambassador Porter's role, and a deferral of the question of turning
the RD effort over to MACV, McNamara concurred, but with a different em-
phasis. The memorandums were dated October 14 and 15, 1966, less than two
weeks before the Manila conference, and the recommendations were accepted
by the President. Katzenbach’s memorandum was, for a first effort after
a, short VIP trip, an unusually interesting one. Excerpts:

"..1 believe decisive, effective RD depends on @ clear
and precise common understanding of the security as we all
recognize to be the foundation of success in the ‘other
war. '

"To illustrate the divergency of meanings, let me report
briefly on @ conversation I had with a small group of reporters
in Saigon. It quickly degenerated into a debate, not between
the reporters and me, but between Ward Just of the Washington
Post and Charles Mohr of the New York Times.

"Just argued heatedly that RD could not begin to be effec-
tive unless security were first guaranteed both to the peasants

.

94 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
