Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The paper prepared by the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public
Affairs) was entitled "Possible Public Reaction to Various Alternatives."
Five alternative options were examined:

1. Increased mobilization and deployment. This includes
sending General Westmoreland 50,000 to 200,000 more troops
and the additional moves this would require at home -- calling
reserves, extending enlistments, extra expenditures, bigger
tax bill, etc.

2. Increased mobilization/deployment plus expanded bombing
of North Vietnam.

3. Increased mobili zation/deployment plus a bombing pause.

h, Denial of the Westmoreland requests and continuation of
the war "as is" -- as it was being fought prior to the Tet
offensive and Khe Sanh.

5. Denial of the Westmoreland requests and a change in
war-fighting policy with greater concentration on defending
populated areas and less on search-and-destroy in unpopulated
areas. This would include an announced program to begin
troop withdrawal at a fixed date. he/

The Assistant Secretary, Mr. Goulding, emphasized that all options
were being examined from a public reaction standpoint only. He also
emphasized that no action would unite the country. The question to be
attacked was which option will most coalesce supporters and most isolate
the opposition.

In analyzing the various options ebove, Mr. Goulding divided the
public into hawks, doves, and middle~of-the-roaders. Under Option 1,
he argued, increased mobilization and deployment moves, without other
new actions:

.. Will make the doves unhappy because we become more
and more enmeshed in the war. They will make the hawks
unhappy because we still will be withholding our militery
strength, particularly in the North. And the middle-of-
the-roaders who basically support the President out of
conviction ‘or patriotism will be unhappy because they will
see the ante going up in so many ways and still will not
be given a victory date, a progress report they can believe
or an argument they can accept that all of this is in the
national interest. (Further, they will read in the dissent
columns and editorials that 18 months from now, when the
North Vietnamese have added 30,000 more troops, we will be
right back where we started.)

*

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
