Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that U.S. civilian support of RD has been unsatisfactory -- on
the contrary I am pleased with progress to date -- but because

I think it is essential to bring the U.S. military more fully
into the RD advisory effort and to pool our civil/military ~
resources to get optimum results: (b) indeed I regard all
official Americans in Vietnam as part of one team, not as

part of competing civilian and military establishments; (c)

as senior U.S. official in Vietnam, I intend to keep a4 close

eye on all U.S. activities, including pacification -- I am

not abdicating any of my responsibilities but rather am having
the entire U.S, pacification advisory effort report to me
through General Westmoreland rather than through two channels

as in the past: (d) during 34 years in the business world I have
learned that unified management with clear lines of authority is
the way to get the most out of large scale and highly diversified
programs: (e) since continuous local security, which RVNAF must
primarily provide, is the indispensable first stage of the paci-
fication process, the MACV chain of command can obviously be
helpful to the RVNAF: and (f) I intend to see that the civilian
element of the U.S. effort is not buried under the military --
jin many instances soldiers will end up working for civilians as
well as the reverse -~ in fact Ambassador Komer will be General
Westmoreland's principal assistant for this funetion while
General Knowlton will be deputy to Mr. Lathram of OCO. I intend
to keep fully informed personally about all developments in this
field and to hold frequent meetings with General Westmoreland
and Ambassador Komer for the purpose of formulating policy." 5/

The reaction of the civilians in Vietnam to the announcement of
Ambassador Bunker was one of dismay. In the first confused days, before
details of the reorganization could be worked out and announced, the
press was able to write several articles which probably were accurate
reflections of the mood of most civilians:

"Civilian reactions today ranged from the bitter ('We
don't think they can do their own job -- how can they do ours?')
to the resigned ("I'll be a good soldier and go along') to the
very optimistic ('We've finally got a civilian in among the
generals'). Almost nowhere was there much enthusiasm for what
Bunker called 'a unique experiment in a unique situation.'

"Nor was there jubilation at the American military command.
Westmoreland, who wanted to take charge of the pacification pro-
gram two years ago, is now reported to be deeply skeptical of
the possibility of producing the kind of quick results the White
House apparently wants.

"ty did not volunteer for the job,' he is reported to have
said privately this morning, "but now that I've got it, I'll do
my best with it.’

130 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
