Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A. Move progressively from north to south with a continuing
series of hard hitting offensive campaigns to invade base Areas,
interdict and disrupt infiltration routes, and eliminate or
evict VC/NVA forces from SVN.

B. At the same time, the highly mobile exploitation force
(two divisions) would be available to counter enemy aggression
or to exploit opportunities for tactical success anywhere in
SVN without reducing the minimal essential force necessary to
guarantee maintenance of security in those areas where success-
ful military campaigns have already been waged.

C. Addition of the new division in III Corps during this
time frame would re-establish the capability for conducting
constant operations in and around war zones "C" and "D" and make
possible the constant use of a division size force in the
IV CTZ which capability was removed with transfer of the 10lst
Airborne Division (-) to I Corps. In addition, combat operations
conducted by this division would provide added security for
LOC and the vital seat of government and economic center of
Saigon.

D. With the total additive combat forces requested it will
be possible to deal with the invader from the north, and to face
with a greater degree of confidence the potential tank, rocket and
tactical air threat as well as the ever present possibility that
he may reinforce with additional elements of his home army. 60/

The second docwnent available to General Wheeler was an analysis of
the military implications in South Vietnam of the deployment of various
increments of U-S. forces. This analysis was done by the Short Range
Branch, Plans and Policy Directorate, Joint Staff. It was an informal
staff document which had not been addressed by the Joint Chiefs of
Starf or any of the military services separately. 61/ The five
options addressed were those indicated by the Secretary of Defense in
his meeting of 29 February (see pages 7-8). This paper documented the
large enemy buildup in South Vietnam:

1. The enemy, since November, has increased his forces
in South Viet Nam by at least 41 maneuver battalions, some armored
elements, a large number of rockets, and additional artillery.
There are indications he is preparing for the use of limited air
support, including logistical air drops and bombing missions.
The Joint Staff paper took exception to COMUSMACV's stated first
priority of insuring "the security of the GVN in Saigon and in the
provincial capitals."

46 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
