Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By; NWD Date: 2011

"In 1954 we made our position clear toward Vietnam.

"In July of that year we stated we would view any renewal of the
aggression in violation of the 1954 agreements ‘with grave concern and
as seriously threetening international peace and security.'

"In September of that year the United States signed the Manila Pact,
on which our participation in SEATO is based. That pact recognized that
ageression by means of armed attack on South Vietnam would endanger the
peace and the safety of the nations signing that solemn agreement.

"In 1962 we made our position clear toward Laos. We signed the Declara-
tion on the Neutrality of laos. That accord provided for the withdrawal
of all foreign forces and respect for the neutrality and independence of
that little country.

"The agreements of 1954 and 1962 were also signed by the government of
North Vietnam. :

"In 1954 that government pledged that it would respect the territory
under the military control of the other party and engage in no hostile act
against the other party.

"In 1962 that government pledged that it would ‘not introduce into the
Kingdom of Laos foreign troops or military personnel.'

"that government also pledged that it would 'not use the territory of
the pang aca of Iacs ee interference in the internal affairs of other coun-
tries.’

"That government of North Vietnam is now willfully and systematically
violating those agreements of both 1954 and 1962.

"To the south, it is engaged in aggression against the Republic of
Vietnan.

"To the west, it is engaged in aggression against the Kingdom of Laos.

"To the east, it has now struck out on the high seas in an act of
aggression against the United States of America. s

“There can be and there must be no doubt about the eases and no doubt
about the purpose.

"So there can be no doubt about the responsibilities of men and the
responsibilities of nations that are devoted to peace.

"Peace cannot be assured merely by assuring the safety of the United
States destroyer MADDOX or the safety of other vessels of other flags.

D-13

\
