Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Mase “SECRET

y can opposition party which would coalesce the majority of the opposition ¥
_ into one organization, of helping this new party adopt a platform which
! contains sound ideas for building national entities which the Vietnamese
_ people would find worth defending against the Communists, and of
. strongly influencing it to play the role of loyal opposition while President
. Diem is in power and the nation is in such great danger.

f This work with the opposition is a matter of grave urgency.

I Unless the energies of the malcontents, the frustrated, the patriots on
‘the outs are quickly channeled into constructive political works, they

_ are going to explode into destructive political work. This opposition

‘ situation in Saigon-Cholon is at the bursting point, and there is no
safety valve. When it next blows, and if Diem cannot cope with it,

the Siagon political scene has all the makings of turning into anarchy.
It can REED PHs and soon,

I saw a number of opposition people, officials of various parties,
members of the National Assembly, and disgruntled members of
President Diem's administration. They eagerly told me how they were
criticizing Diem!'s actions more and more openly. Iasked them what
their own program was, other than to seize power for themselves ox
to have me pat them on the head for being critics. Few of them had
any sensible ideas, J told them they'd better get busy scratching for
a better program themselves or else ] could only assume that they
were being disloyal or treasonous in a time of great national danger.

I trust that other Americans talking to these oppositionists will do the
Same or we will be inviting disaster by listening to this and keeping
mum when we should be working like beavers to turn it into construc-

tive channels,

-If we can get most of the oppositionists meeting with each other
to try to put together a platform they can all agree on, and can pro-
tect such work so that it can be done fajrly openly, we will have an
extremely useful political action in motion. It will absorb months
lof political energies which otherwise will go towards the solution of
jarmed overthrow. A major opposition party, once it starts becoming
ja reality, will tend to make the seyeral governmental groupings such
jas the Can Lao, MNR, and Nhu's labor organizations start coalescing
ie one stronger group. In this way, we can help promote a two-party

system which can afford to be surfaced, end much of the present
j Clandestine political structures, and give sound encouragement to

j the development of new political leade: rs. There are many fine younger

\natrints who need this sort of a healthy political atmosphe re to pad ay le
= ~5-tan if vis | ever expect t Vietnam to ha ve a eeer future. ;

bs

a

10 ms.
15

