Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

evidence of large scale, concerted guerrilla operations until after
"March 1945.

At the end of 19, the Viet Minh claimed a total membership of

_ 500,000, of which 200,000 were in Tonkin, 150,000 in Annam, and 150, 000
in Cochinchina. The Viet Minh political and military structure was
significantly further developed in North Vietnam. In May 1945, a Viet
Minh "liberated zone" was established near the Chinese border. As the
war drew to a close the Viet Minh determined to preempt allied oceupa-
tion, and to form a government prior to their arrival. The Viet Minh
ability to do so proved better in the north than in the south. In
August 1945, Ho Chi Minh's forces seized power from the Japanese and
Bao Dai in North Vietnam, forced the emperor to abdicate, and to cede
his powers to Ho's Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV). In Cochinchina,
however, the Viet Minh were able to gain only tenuous control of Saigon
and its environs. Nonetheless, when the allies arrived, the Viet Minh
were the de facto government in both North and South Vietnam: Ho Chi
Minh and his DRV in Hanoi, and an ICP-dominated "Committee of the South"
in Saigon.

On 12 September 1945, the British landed a Gurkha battalion and a
company of Free French soldiers in Saigon. The British commander regarded
the Vietnamese government with disdain because of its lack of authority
from the French and because of its inability to quell civil disorder in
South Vietnam. Saigon police clashed with Trotskyites, and in the rural
areas, fighting broke out between Viet Minh troops and those of Cao Dai
and Hoa Hao. Spreading violence rendered futile further attempts to
draw together the Vietnamese factions, and prompted the French to impor-
tune the British commander to permit them to step in to restore order.

On the morning of 23 September, French troops overthrew the Vietnamese
government after a tenure of only three weeks. The official British
account termed the French method of executing the coup d'etat "unfortunate"
in that they "absolutely ensured that countermeasures would be taken by
the /Vietnamese/...." Vietnamese retaliation was quick and violent:

over one hundred Westerners were slain in the first few days, and others
kidnapped; on 26 September, the U.S. commander of the 0.S.S, in Saigon

was killed. Thus, the first Indochina War began in Cochinchina in late
September, 1945, and American blood was shed in its opening hours.

At that juncture, the ICP in Cochinchina was in a particularly
vulnerable position. The ICP had permitted the Viet Minh to pose as an
arm of the Allies; and had supported cooperation with the British and
amnesty for the French. The Party had even undertaken, through the
Committee of the South, to repress the Trotskyites. But violence under-
mined its advocacy of political moderation, of maintaining public order,
.and of negotiations with the French. Further, the ICP in Saigon was
assured by French communists that they would receive no assistance from
Party brethren abroad. The French coup d'etat thrust conflict upon the
Vietnamese of Cochinchina.- The question before the communists was how
to respond; the ICP leadership determined that violence was the sole

B-) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
