Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

weakness of its built-in inflexibility and the longer reaction
time required for its conventional type action -- and yes,
even its conventional type thinking: Thinking which is too
often geared to highly sophisticated weapons systems, complex
logistics, stylized or rigid tactics, and vulnerable lines of
communications... . "

"Thus, from the purely military point of view, the solution
hinges on the capability of the armed forces to protect the
very lives of the people - to include government functionaries,
from mounting communist assassination and intimidation. In the
far-flung villages, especially those isolated from governmental
protective power in point of time, space and force, this is
most difficult. The guerrilla, because of mobility and a
battle-tested plan, together with the unique situation here,
has been able to seize the initiative by taking the military
offensive. This is because all of the elements of national
power have not been adequately coordinated in the past. The
government of the armed forces are literally blind due to a
lack of information on VC guerrilla actions and intentions. As
indicated previously, the military particularly must have adequate,
evaluated, collated military intelligence if it is to be able to
best apply its present force. To the military man - especially
the commander of a small military group defending his country
against the VC guerrillas in the swamps or jungles - timely,
accurate, evaluated intelligence - not false rumor - spells
the difference between success or defeat - life or death. With
both the present military and political situation a matter for
serious concern, it appears logical that the time has come when
the armed forces must have the necessary force to give the
population full and complete physical protection from the VC.
Because of various reasons - some within and some beyond the
immediate control of the Government of Vietnam - this cannot
be done to the required degree at present... .

"Now, let us examine the broad objective of the MAAG in
South Vietnam. As advisors, you must not only advise but follow
through! Therefore, you must clearly understand that proper
advising requires an instructor-pupil relationship with explana-
tion, illustration and close personal supervision. It is not
enough to tell your counterparts what to do and stop there.
Your government prohibits your accompanying troops on wartime
operations, but this does not lessen - only adds to - your
advisory mission. Also, it is most important you understand that
even as you cannot make a ‘template type solution' of conventional
concepts work on varied terrain, the same is true of solutions
based on unconventional concepts. ... Objective, creative-type

8h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
