Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Western powers. The GVN representatives continually referred to their
sense of responsibility to the Vietnamese people and to national aspira-
tions for unity and freedom. The obvious dependence of the GVN on the
military power of the West was not mirrored by an accompanying political
spirit of accommodation: the GVN attitude at Geneva must be characterized
as stubborn, unyielding, and idealistic. The GVN was the one nation at
Geneva that remained completely unmoved by the spirit of compromise.

b. GVN Consistentl oses Partition

The attitude of GVN toward the Geneva Settlement was the
product not only of its non-recognition of the DRV, but also of its hostility
to partition and its opposition to national elections held in a divided
country. Evidently quite independent of American instigation or pressure,
the Saigon government concluded well in advance of the Conference termina-
tion on 21 July that it could not accept what it regarded as a set of
agreements contracted in defiance of Vietnamese aspirations and without
GVN consent. Nguyen Quoc Dinh, speaking for the GVN in the third plenary
session (12 May) at Geneva, first read into the record in detail the new
treaty guaranteeing GVN independence, then laid down his country's unyield-
ing opposition to any agreement which would tend. to split the country either

geographically or politically. Any document tabled for consideration,
said Quoc Dinh, "Must not lead to partition, either direct or indirect,
final or provisional, de facto or de jure, of the national territory."
Free elections can be held, he asserted, "as soon as the [un/ Security
Council has decided. that the authority of the State has been established
in the whole of the territory, and that conditions of freedom have been
obtained." 18/ In the fifth restricted session, on 2h May, Quoc Dinh
again stressed the GVN's total independence from France:

"_,.the problem of the independence of Vietnam
dominates all events in Indochina whether considered
from the point of view_of_the independence which
the state of Vietnam /has/ secured as a result of
negotiations with France, or from that of the in-
dependence which Vietnam must defend from all
foreign invaders." 19/

On the following day, Quoc Dinh repeated, in the Sixth Restricted
Session, that the GVN "would not agree to any plan which would result in
the partition of Vietnam." Any partition, he said, would incur "the grave
danger one would gradually move down a path which would lead to what his
people feared most.” 20/ On the 27th of May, Quoc Dinh once again spoke
on partition. He reminded the other delegates that the GVN had finally
achieved independence, the first of its aspirations. The second aspira-
tion, also achieved, was territorial integrity. The GVN could not now
accept partition "without betraying its own people”:

"With reference to Vietnam, the Vietnam delegation

Wished to warn the conference against any measures tend-
ing to divide the national territory. If a division

B-10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
