Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date; 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive.

Vietnemese province chief's point of contact on all non-military
matters. All other civilians in the province would be under his
control.

"Alternative No. 3 -- Assign responsipility for pacification
civil and and military, to COMUSMACVY. This is not a new suggestion,

and has a lot to recommend it. In 1964, General Westmoreland pro-
posed that he be made "executive agent" for pacification. MACV

at that time had an even greater preponderence of field advisors
than it does today, and was devoting the bulk of its attention to
pacification. Since the military still has by far the greatest
capacity among U.S, agencies in Vietnam for management and the
military advisors outnumber civilians at least 8 to 1 in the field,
MACV could readily take on responsibility for all pacification
matters. :

"Turning over the entire pacification management task to
COMUSMACV would reguire him to reorganize his staff to handle
simultaneously the very large military operations business inyoly-
ing U.S., Free World and Vietnamese forces and the civil/military
aspects of pacification at the same time. The USAID, JUSPAO, and
CAS Covert Operations staffs would come under COMUSMACV's control
where they would be used as additional "component commands." In

this case, it might be desireable to have a civilian deputy to
COMUSMACV for pacification.

"Also appropriate under this concept would be a single U.S.
advisory team, under a team chief, at each subordinate echelon.
The result would be a single chain of command to the field and
coordinated civilian/military pacification planning and operations
on the U.S. side. The U.S. Mission would speak to Vietnamese
corps and division commanders, province chiefs and district chiefs
with a single voice." 16/

In the latter part of this lengthy memorandum, Komer clearly fore-
shadowed both the formation of OCO after the Manila conference -- his
Alternative No. 2 -~ and the merger of OCO and MACV into MACCORDS after
Guam -- his Alternative No. 3. But when he sent the paper to Saigon
with his deputy in mid-August, the reaction from Lodge, Porter, and
Westmoreland was uniformly negative: they asked him, in effect, to leave
them alone since they were satisfied with their present organization,

But Komer had also distributed his paver around Washington, and was
lobbying for another change in the structure of the Mission, although he
remained, in August, vague as to which of the three alternatives he put
forward he personally favored. When other senior officials of govern-
ment began to voice feelings that additional organizational changes were
necessary in the Mission in Saigon, the die was cast.

a : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
