Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Hanoi is willing to wait. We have hurt them some,
and we can even hurt them some more, but not so badly as
to destroy their society or their hope for regaining in
the future the material things they sacrifice today.
Their policy will be to wait until dissent in the US
(coupled with world opinion) forces us to retire. Our
only hope is to establish an equally strong and patient
nationalism in South Vietnam.

We, too, must be willing to wait. We cannot estab-
lish a strong Southern nationalism in a few months or a
year. If we leave before that is one /sic/, we will have lost,
regardless of the military havoc we have caused in SHA.

Additional forces, added burdens on the US economy,
and calling of the reserves will only serve to increase
DRV's belief that the US will not remain in SVN for the
long pull. Additional forces make it appear that we are
trying for the "quick kill." Hanoi knows that we cannot
achieve it and that the American public will be bitter and
divided unless we do. We should be looking for ways to
ease the burden for the years ahead, rather than making
the war more costly. }/

The diversion of resources from other national goals also had costs
which demanded accounting:

If we are to stay, we must have the backing of the
US electorate. As we divert resources from other
national goals, as US lives are lost, and as the elec-
torate sees nothing but endless escalation for the future,
an increasing fraction will become discouraged. If this
keeps on in the future as it has in the past, we will
have to leave SEA before stability is achieved, losing
all that we ave invested up to that point, and foregoing
the general stability of the world which was established
as a result of the Korean War. If we are not to lose every-
thing, the trends will have to be changed: the increase
in unfavorable public opinion will have to be slowed; the
development of SVN society will have to be speeded. Ly!

The memorandum recommended that only enough forces be provided to
meet minimum military goals:

Thus we must provide only enough US forces to meet
minimum military goals. These goals are: (1) to deter
a Chinese Communist invasion; (2) to prevent military
defeat in South Vietnam, and (3) to prevent excessive
terrorism. We have at least sufficient forces presently

106 | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
