Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

-TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The "Psychological Operations” proposed were mainly additions to pro-
posals already made in the USIS report of Mr. Rowan,

The specific measures under "GVN Personnel" (and its systems. of re-
eruiting and training officials for the rural program) were to urge the GVN
to establish rewards for outstanding performance, and give double or triple
pay to rural school teachers and officials.

There were two measures to aid "Refugees in Emergency Situations:" one
to provide additional U.S. support for the refugee program, and the other
to establish a joint U.S./GVN reaction team for quick survey and immediate
action in war disaster situations.

The last group of proposals was a revision of the old idea of encadre-
ment of U.S. officers at key spots within the GVN. The administrative
measures to increase U.S. effectiveness included such suggestions as allow-
ing U.S. officers to work directly with special interest groups including
Buddhists, Catholics, the sects, Montagnards, students, labor, etc.; and
assigning other U.S. officers to work directly within the GVN, including
the Prime Minister's office and key ministries. Another suggestion was
for the establishment of a U.S. inter-agency group on pacification to be
directed by a senior Mission officer reporting directly to the Ambassador.
(This suggestion was evidently directed at the same problem as the sugges-
tion for establishing all U.S. pacification effort under MACV that had
arisen during the visit of General Johnson.)

A feature of this proposed program that should be noted is that many
if not most of the suggestions began with such phrases as "urge the GVIN"
or "persuade the GVN." This was of course not the first time that our
assistance took this form. This had been going on for a long time, But
the difference between merely supplying aid and also trying to supply
initiative is significant. l2e/

In preparation for the importent 1 April meeting a White House paper
entitled "Key Elements For Discussion, Thursday, April 1, at 5:30 P.M."
was circulated to participants. In summarizing the situation the paper
said that morale had improved in South Vietnam and that, although the
government had not really settled dow, it seemed "hopeful both in its
capacity and its sense of political forces," The South Vietnamese armed
forces were in reasonably good shape although its top leadership was not
really effective and the ratio of ARVN to VC (whose members were increasing)
was not good enough, The situation in many parts of the countryside con-
tinued to go in favor of the VC although there was, at that writing, what
was believed to be a temporary lull. Turning to the matter of the bombing
this statement seid that:

' Hanoi has shown no signs of give, and Peiping has stiffened
its position within the -last week. We still believe that

ll. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
