Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(14) The Provincial Committee "signoff" provision should be
reinstated for the Revolutionary Development budget.

On September 7 COMUSMACY made the following comments eee toeeere to
the Roles and Missions Study:

(1) Action had been taken to increase ARVN participation in
RD, but removal of Division from the chain of command in
RD activities appeared illogical. If ARVN combat battalions
were dispersed to all 43 provinces, the Corps span of
control would be ineffective and this arrangement would risk
having these units defeated in detail. The proposed place-
ment of battalions under sector commanders was feasible only
in some areas -- to be considered on an individual basis.
The 1967 Combined Campaign Plan would clarify the functions
of ARVN. Other things such as the buddy system with US units
were the realistic ways of accomplishing the goal.

(2) The recommended disbandment of Ranger Battalions would
seriously reduce ARVN combat strength. They should be
retained and reorganized under new commanders.

(3) Recruitment of PF personnel for RD would weaken hamlet
security.

(4) Although the study recommended giving primary responsikility
for intelligence to the National Police, the nature of the
problem dictated that all US and GVN military and quasi-
military elements contribute to this important goal.

(5) The idea of a single intelligence director seems sound
theoretically, but it is not realistic when DIA and CIA
are not amalgamated in Washington.

(6) RD requires both military and civil participation. Con-
tinued emphasis on military participation would be given
but the major change in the MACV organization suggested
by the study did not seem necessary.

One of the year's changes that could have led to implementation of a
major recommendation of the Roles and Missions Study, but didn't, was the
March decision in Washington to transfer the support of FWMAF and RVNAF
from MAP funding to service funding. Studies were made by MACV on how
best to implement this change, which became effective in September. It
was decided that only the logistic advisory function would be transferred
to USARV. Programming budgeting and executing programs remained under
MACV. 60/ Most important, MAP goods were still put into RVNAF logistic
channels, although under the new funding they could have been held in US
channels down to the receiving unit.

32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
