Sas

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

war they are ill-equipped to fight in a non-cooperative
if not downright hostile countryside.

Once we suffer large casualties we will have started
a well-nigh irreversible process. Our involvement will be
so great that we cannot -- without national humiliation --
stop short of achieving our complete objectives. Of the
two possibilities I think humiliation would be more likely
than the achievement of our objectives -- even after we

have paid terrible costs. 3

"Humiliation" was much on the minds of those involved in
the making of American policy for Vietnam during the spring and sum-
mer of 1965. The word, or phrases meaning the same thing, appears
in countless memoranda. No one put it as starkly as Assistant Secre-
tary of Defense John McNaughton, who in late March assigned relative
weights to various American objectives in Vietnam. In McNaughton's
view the principal U.S. aim was "to avoid a humiliating US defeat (to
our reputation as a guarantor)." To this he assigned the weight of
70%. Second, but far less important at only 20% was "to keep SVN
(and then adjacent) territory from Chinese hands." And a minor third,
at but 10%, was "to permit the people of SVN to enjoy a better, freer
way of life." 4/

Where Ball differed from all the others was in his willing-
ness to incur "humiliation" that was certain -- but also limited and
short-term -- by withdrawing American forces in order to avoid the
uncertain but not unlikely prospect of a military defeat at a higher
level of involvement. Thus he entitled his memorandum "Cutting Our
Losses in South Viet-Nam." In it and in his companion memorandum to
the President ("A Compromise Solution for South Viet-Nam") he went on
to outline a program, first, of placing a ceiling on U.S. deployments
at present authorized levels (72,000 men) and sharply restricting their
combat roles, and, second, of beginning negotiations with Hanoi for a
cessation of hostilities and the formation in Saigon of a "government
of National Union” that would include representatives of the National
liberation Front. Ball's argument was based upon his sense of relative
priorities. As he told his colleagues:

The position taken in this memorandum does not
suggest that the United States should abdicate leader-
ship in the eold war. But any prudent military com-
mander carefully selects the terrain on which to stand
and fight, and no great captain has ever been blamed for
a successful tactical withdrawal. .

From our point of view, the terrain in South Viet-
Nam could not be worse. Jungles and rice paddies are

not designed for modern arms and, from a military point

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
