Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ACTIONS. AUTHORTTIES/POLTCY CHANGES

= bn - = = aS oy ar ae TiS. cT AST =e, vod :
TOP SECRET - Sens itive MILITARY ACTION PROGRAMS FOR SOUTHEAST ASIA MARY odes nace
PROGRAM
: es ee we onsistent with norte] ROLLING
a Saree - Electric Power System, Thai Nguyen Se No change in operation authorities except deletion of 10 KM radius mes operations in the heavily defended eh ek
Btee B = » Haiphong ie ah 3 All Unoceupied Air- = around Hanoi where ordnance delivery is prohibited. This area then ~ = ast area. Loss rates should not exceed acceptable
elds; eliminate 10 NM Hano chibited Ares. becomes part of 30 NM Restricted Aree. No policy changes. Limits commensurate with results to be achieved.

. Political risks ere negligible.

2. NAVAL SURFACE OPERATIONS - Expand offensive operations ‘ ee eae J No military risk beyond normal conbat. Political
to Incinde Walid mitbady (eee anhona noute oF "ape N. Forces now engaged in an an eperetions. require sihortsatdon risk is low since US ships now fire against shore

: 5 thea laweape er Se : targets in self defense and against waterborne
logistic craft beached and in rivers.

3. SHINING BRASS - Within current operational limits dele- : ities to CIN 5 4 Wo increase in military or political risk over that
gete authorities now held et DOD/STATE level to CINCPAC Menge seseni aS oe aie eae a a ccna ala ware associated with current operations.
in coordination with Embassy Vientiane. Bae ee ts . é

5 - = milite ational risks. Risk of com-
4. LAOS OPERATIONS Continue es at eee plus Operation Authorization required to implement operational phase of weather modifi- see a5 SEEM =.

POP EYE to reduce trafficability along infiltration routes cation process previously successfully tested and evaluated in same area. ey ,

No significant military risk. Political risk
negligible; however, criticism is to be expected.

5. B-52s - Base part of operations at U-Tapao. Requires country clearance for aircraft and personnel to enter Thailand.
6. LAND ARTILLERY - Fire from positions in SVN ageinst es: requ: : : No significant military risk. Negligible polit-
n chang res approvel of t ts only. r
yalid military targets in and immediately north of Diz. . No significant policy aS ze sie he. ical risk.
Reduction of CONUS strategic reserve. : i

7. DEPLOYMENTS - Accelerate Program #4 Deployments isi 1 a
: 2 Requires by 1 March 1967 decision to accelerate eployments.
(including 3 Army Maneuver Battalions). Requires aeeceepsndiae end strength authorization. :
8. ROLLING THUNDER - Elements of 3 ports, MIG airfields c e to attack Militery risks are consistent with operations in
i poli rang MIG airfields.
less those from which international civil transport Requires significant ee ie heavily defended NE area. Loss rates acceptable
operate, selected rail facilities, ammo dump, rachine/ in terms of expected results. Moderate political
tool plant, 7 locks; reduce Haiphong Restricted Area to risk due to possibility endangering foreign ships,
NM. : and increased civilian casualties.

Se eS eS mig Operations can be authorized and conducted within framework of eS military risk. Insignificant POLL e=

: ROLLING THUNDER.
Military risk/losses commenstirate with ROLLING

10. NAVAL SURFACE OPERATIONS ~ Extend to 20° N. 3 i i
Requires authorization for offensive action ageinst shore targets. THUNDER ations in NVN. Political risk is
acceptable.

11. SHINING BRASS - Expand operational limits to 20 Ku it + Senbi Will increase to minor degree risk of exposure of
: : Requires delegation of authority to CINCPAC/Embassy Vientiane. Vitecnk vieke in dandy slightl
into laos, increase helo operations, author rE - f = activity. Political risks creased © ghtly

4 p P orize lerger Policy change required to extend operational limits. . present levels.

forces, increase frequency of operations, decentralize r
‘

control to CINCPAC in coordination with Embassy Vientiane. yg 4 \
12, LAND ARTILLERY - Fire from positions in SVN against Negligible militery risk. Political risk less
valid military targets in Laos. = g Minor policy change required: E than that associated with current eir strikes
wo and SHINING BRASS in Laos.
pe 13. DEPLOYMENTS - Deploy the 9th MAB (3 BLT, 2 TFS, 2 HMM) Requires by 1 March 1967 decision to accelerate deploy- . oie Moderate military risk associated with loss of
from Okinawa/Japan to the I CTZ in March 1967. ments. Requires corresponding end strength authorization. t : PACOM amphibious reserve. Political risk less
: than moderate.
14. ROLLING THUNDER - 4 ports, remaining MIG airfields, Requires significant policy change, although operations - Military risk commensurate with objectives to be
AD HQ, Ministry Defense HQ, dikes; eliminate pro- . can be conducted within framework ef current ROMLING achieved. Higher losses initially, but lower there-
hibited/restricted areas. THUNDER program. after as air defenses degraded. Political risk
: : moderate or higher. Usual propaganda reaction
expected on basis of “escalation.”
15. MINE MAJOR PORTS AND APPROACHES, Mine INIAND WATER- Major policy change required. Military risk no greater than associated ROLLING
WAYS and estuaries north of 20° n. THUNDER programs in port area. Political risk
; is acceptable - no direct military confrontation
| ] i iikely; no realignment of power blocs. Propaganda
: = cutery severe. Possible increase in USSR/Chins
S eceporation to NVN.
16. NAVAL SURFACE OPERATIONS - Expand north of 20° N. Moderate policy change required. reas military risk. Less than moderate
political risk. :

Moderate military risk associated with increased
size/duration of operations. Political risk
moderate, but acceptable. Deniability is lessened,
but operations defensible on basis enemy conduct.

17. SHINING BRASS - Battalion size exploitation forces - Significant policy change required. |

start guerrilla warfare.

o Wvuooud

Ld -
18. DEPLOYMENTS - Deploy up to 4 US Divisions (3 Arzy, Requires decision by 1 March 1967 to call up reserves, : Military risk significant in that strategic reserves
1 USMC); and up to 9 TFS (5 AF, 4 USMC). extend tours and terms of service, repetitive tours, degreded until end CY 67. Political/domestic risk
ae { : increase service strengths, 6nd partial industrial in terms of increased draft, call up of reserves.
! "JOP SECRET - Sensitive ods te es 0ae :
SS ee . - ;

BALI{SUBS = 139939S dol

He
y

