Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The JCS also recommended that the Secretary of Defense
initiate the action to obtain such U.S. Government support of
counter-insurgency operations in Laos and Vietnam." (CINCPAC
study and JCS memorandum 232-60, June 6, 1960, enclosed in letter,
Rear Admiral E. J. O'Donnell, USN (Director, Far East Region,

ISA, Office of Assistant Secretary of Defense), to J. Graham
Parsons (Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs),
September 16, 1960, secret (file 611.51K); cited in Department
of State, Division of Historical Policy Research, Research

Project No. 630, January 1965, Recent American Policy and
Diplomacy Concerning Vietnam, 1960-1963, pp. 10-11)
In a subsequent memo for the Secretary of Defense ( JCSM-
382-60, dated August 30, 1960) the JCS asserted that
"tencouraging the Government of South Vietnam to adopt a
national course of action designed to reduce the growing threat
of Communist insurgent actions' was vital to the continued
freedom of that country and an important action ‘to preclude
the necessity for implementing U.S. or SEATO war plans.'"

(Cited in Department of State Research Project No. 630, January
1965, "Recent American Policy . . .," op. cit.)

The draft plan forwarded to MAAG stressed organizational
matters, including the formation of a National Emergency Council and a
Director of Operations to integrate civil and military efforts and
formulate the Vietnamese National Counter-Insurgency Plan, with sub-
councils at regional, provincial and village levels, but concluded
with a concept of operations:

"(1) Politico/Military Operations. In order to provide

protection which the people require, it is necessary to exercise
more than an ordinary degree of control over the population.
Among the more important operations required are those for
exercising control in such manner as to isolate insurgents and
sympathizers from the support of the populace. Such techniques
as registration and identification, food control, and control

of movement, should be implemented as offering the best prospects
for success. Control measures instituted should require support
by psychological warfare and information programs to gain and
maintain popular confidence and support.

"(2) Military Operations. An effective continuing defensive
system should remain in place, with a capability for reinforcing
the permanent local security establishment since it is not
sufficient temporarily to defeat or suppress insurgents or to
establish control in one area and then move the counter-
insurgency forces to a new area thus allowing insurgents to

61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
