Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

action and, in pursuance of the United Nations principle, has entered
into regional security agreements with other nations. Examples are the
Inter-American Agreement, the NATO Agreement, and numerous pacts in the
Pacific. These arrangements are invariably to assure the peaceful
security of the contracting nations and to prevent likelihood of attack;
they are not arrangements designed primarily for waging war.

"The Geneva conference, now 9 days old, has produced no surprises.
The expressed fears of some have proved unfounded.

"Tt has not been a 'Five-Power' conference as the Soviet Union
tried to make it.

"It has not involved establishing express or implied diplomatic
recognition by the United States of the Chinese Communist aggressors.

"The Korean phase of the conference has been organized. Here the
Communists came up with a scheme for Korean unification which was a
Chinese copy of the Soviet scheme for the unification of Germany. Under
their proposal no election measures could be taken without Communist
consent, and there could be no impartial supervision of the election
conditions or of the voting.

"This scheme was rejected for Germany. Secretary Dulles tells me
that is equally unacceptable to the Republic of Korea and to the
United Nations members which took part in the Korean war under the
United Nations Command now represented at Geneva.

"The Indochina phase of the conference is in process of being
organized and the issues have not yet been clarified. In this matter
a large measure of initiative rests with the governments of France,
Viet-Nam, Laos, and Cambodia, which are the countries most directly
concerned.

"Meanwhile, plans are proceeding for the realization of a Southeast
Asia security arrangement. This was publicly suggested by Secretary
Dulles in his address of March 29. Of course, our principal allies
were advised in advance. This proposal of the Secretary of State was
not a new one; it was merely reaffirmation of the principles that have
consistently guided our post-war foreign policy and a reminder to
interested Asian friends that the United States was prepared to join
with others in the application of these principles to the threatened
area. Most of the free nations of the area and others directly con-
cerned have shown affirmative interest, and the conversations are

actively proceeding.

"Opviously, it was never expected that this collective security
arrangement would spring into existence overnight. There are too many
important problems to be resolved. But there is a general sense of
urgency. The fact that such an organization is in the process of forma-
tion could have en important bearing upon what happens at Geneva during
the Indochina phase of the conference.

B-17
