Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

Likely Communist Reactions

At the present time, no actions -- except air strikes.and
artillery fire necessary to quiet hostile batteries across
the border -- are allowed against Cambocian territory. In
Laos, we average 5000 attack sorties a month against the infil-
tration routes and base areas, we fire artillery from South
Vietnam against targets in Laos, and we will be providing
3-man leadership for each. of 20 12-man US-Vietnamese Special
Forces teams that operate to a depth of 20 kilometers into
Laos. Against North Vietnam, we average 8,000 or more attack
sorties a month against all worthwhile fixed and LOC targets;
we use artillery against ground targets across the DMZ; we
fire from naval vessels at targets ashore and afloat up
to 19°; and we mine their inland waterways, estuaries...up
+o 20°,

Intensified air attacks against the same types of targets,

we would anticipate, would lead to no great change in the
policies and reactions of the Communist powers beyond the
furnishing of some new equipment and manpower.” China, for
example, has not reacted to our striking MIG fields in North
Vietnam, and we do not expect them to, although there are some
signs of greater Chinese participation in North Vietnamese

air defense.

Mining the harbors would be much more serious. It would
place Moscow in @ particularly galling dilemma as to how to
preserve the Soviet position and prestige in such a disad-
vantageous place. The Soviets might, but probably would not,
force a confrontation in Southeast Asia -- where even with
minesweepers they would be at as great a military disadvantage
as we were when they blocked the corridor to Berlin in 1961,
put where their vital interest, unlike ours in Berlin (and in
Cuba), is not so clearly at stake. Moscow in this case should
be expected to send volunteers, including pilots, to North
Vietnam; to provide some new and better weapons and equipment;

* The U.S. Intelligence Board on May 5 said that Hanoi may

press Moscow for additional equipment and that there is a
"good chance that under pressure the Soviets would provide
such weapons as cruise missiles and tactical rockets" in
addition to a limited number of voluntesrs or crews for air-
craft or sophisticated equipment. Moscow, with respect to
equipment, might provide better surface-to-air missiles,
better anti-aircraft guns, the YAK-28 aircraft, anti-tank
missiles and artillery, heavier artillery and mortars,
coastal defense missiles with 25-50 mile ranges and 2200-
pound warheads, KOMAR guided-missile coastal patrol boats
with 20-mile surface-to-surface missiles, and some chemical
munitions. She might consider sehding medium jet bombers
and fighter bombers to pose a threat to all of South Vietnam.

Tg TOP SECRET - Sensitive
