Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and economic assistance for the prosecution of the Indochinese war. The

French forwarded their request efter deciding "to set forth to the United
States Government fully and frankly the extreme gravity of the situation

in Indochina..."

"... the truth of the matter was that the effort in Indo-
china was such of a drain on France that a long-term program
of assistance was necessary and it was only from the United
States that it could come. Otherwise ... it was very likely
that France might be forced to reconsider her entire policy
with the possible view to cutting her losses and withdrawing
from Indochina ... looking into the future it was obvious ...
that France could not’ continue indefinitely to bear this bur-
den alone if the expected developments in regard to increased
assistance to Ho Chi Minh came about... In any event the French
Government was confronted with necessity of reducing the present
French forces in Indochina by at least 25,000 not only for
budgetary reasons, but because additional men were urgently
needed in connection with French national military program." BT

Yet this appeal for aid, its thinly-veiled reinforcing arguments referring
to withdrawal and the defense of Europe (on the day following the severing
of U.S.-Bulgarian relations), was unaccompanied by a willingness to satisfy
a U.S. request for France to announce the "evolutionary nature" of the
governments of the Associated States, or to clarify otherwise the French
intentions toward Indochina.

On February 27, a Department of State report on the position
of the United States with respect to Indochina was submitted for the NSC's
consideration. Issued on February 27 as NSC 64, the report concluded
that: :

"10. It is important to United States security interests
that all practicable measures be taken to prevent further
Communist expansion in Southeast Asia. Indochina is a key
area of Southeast Asia and is under immediate threat.

"ll. The neighboring countries of Thailand and Burma
could be expected to fall under Communist domination if Indo-
china were controlled by a Communist-dominated government.
The balance of Southeast Asia would then be in grave hazard.

"12. Accordingly, the Departments of State and Defense
should prepare as a matter of priority a program of all prac-
ticable measures designed to protect Unitel States security
interests in Indochina." 28/

To "facilitate" Department of Defense consideration of NSC 64, then Deputy
Under Secretary of State Dean Rusk provided Major General. James H. Burns
of OSD a brief statement of Department of State policy in Indochina and
Southeast Asia:

Silo. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
