Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

they appointed a new civilian govermment, with Suu still President and
with Quat as Prime Minister. In dune, Ky took over. Besides all this,
coup groups seized Saigon twice before being faced down each time.

During the first few months of this period the U.S, abandoned the
plan for the phased withdrawal of most of our military assistance personnel,
and stopped believing that the main-force war would come to a successful
end by the close of 1965. With the start of planning pressures against
the North, the U.S. first hoped that repeated preliminary signals to Hanoi
would bring a response before bombing began; and we hoped that the promise
of U.S, force commitments would strengthen Vietnamese unity and resolve.
Both hopes proved vain, and we started bombing North Vietnam systematically
without getting anything from either Hanoi or GVN. Then the bombing itself
failed to stop Hanoi's intervention, Seeing no other choice, the U.S,
poured troops into the country.

Throughout 1964, the U.S. pursued the objective of e strong, effective
GVN like the Holy Grail. Increasingly, we felt we had to reassure our
Saigon ally about the U.S. resolve, and hoped that a firm U.S. commitment
through extending advisors and: through bonbing would improve GVN performance.
Recurrently, we looked to the military as the one coherent, anti-communist
force in the country. We leaned on them and on their strong-man, who for
most of the period was Khanh, at first hoping that he cor Minh would play the
role that Magsaysay did in the Philippines. We were interested in legiti-
macy and democratic forms only as a long-run deferreble proposition; although
— more and more we recognized the need for broad political support -- especially

after the Buddhist crisis in August, 196), had proved its importance.

As early as the Honolulu Conference in June, 1964, we worried about the
possible emergence of a hostile government or anarchy; and the South Viet-
namese played effectively on our fears. We lectured them repeatedly on
the importance of national unity, both in periods of political calm and in
crises. When the mobs in the streets faced down the generals, we then clung ,
to the position that no one should rock the boat.

Yet, well beyond ovr control, General Khanh was a central figure in
most of these changes. He took over in a coup in Jenuary, 1964, and played
one role after another, for over twelve turbulent months. Then when a coup
attempt failed against a newly installed government in February, 1965, the
generals turned on Khanh and exiled him. Only the final coup, in which Ky
teok over, saw Khanh absent from the scene.

Withall, the military improved their hold on GVN machinery. The high
turnover of district and province officials arcund the time of the Khanh
coup put ARVN officers everywhere; and the corps commanders gradually con-
sdlidated their power throughout 1964. This tendency reached a climax
and received a temporary setback in the rebellion that followed the August
constitution. As a result of the successful Buddhist opposition, cabinet
changes and the charter of the government in Saigon required Buddhist

s acquiescence.

sb TOP SECRET - Sensitive.
