Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Diem coup, a special meeting on Vietnam ‘was held at CINCPAC
headquarters on 20 November. Although this Honolulu meeting was
marked by seme concern over the administrative dislocation that had
resulted from the coup of three weeks before, the tone remained one
of optimism along the lines of the October 2 report to the President.
Ambassador Lodge took note of what he called the “political fragility"
of the new regime, but he was on the whole optimistic, and even
mentioned that the statement on U.S, military withdrawal was having
a continued "tonic" effect on the Republic of Vietnam (RVN). General
Harkins in his report mentioned a sharp increase in Viet Cong (vc)
incidents right after the coup, but added that these had dropped

to normal within a week, and that there had, moreover, been compensa-
ting events such as additional Montagnards coming out of the hills

to get government protection. All in all there was some uneasiness,
perhaps, about unknown effects of the coup, but nothing was said

to suggest that any serious departure was contemplated from the
generally optimistic official outlook of late September and early
October. And so, with reference to the statements of October 2,

NSAM 273 repeated:

The objectives of the United States with respect
to the withdrawal of U.S, military personnel
remain as stated in the White House statement of
October 2, 1963. 2/

Before examining further the background of NSAM 273 -- especially
the appraisals of the Vietnam situation that it reflected -- it is
well to review some of the main provisions of that policy statement
of 26 November 1963.

NASM 273 was not comprehensive, as the McNemara-Taylor report
of 2 October (discussed below) had been, nor as NSAM 288 was later
to be. Mainly it served to indicate continuance by the new President
of policies already agreed upon, and to demonstrate full support by
the United States of the new government of Vietnam (GVN). Both
military and economic programs, it was emphasized, should be main-
tained at levels as high as those in the time of the Diem regime,
In addition, there was an unusual Presidential exhortation -- reflect-
ing the internal U.S. dispute over policy concerning Diem and Nhu
that had made embarrassing headlines in October -- that:

The President expects that all senior officers
of the government will move energetically to
insure the full unity of support for established
U.S. policy in South Vietnem. Both in Washington
and in the field, it is essential that the govern-
i ment be unified, It is of particular importance
that express or implied criticism of officers of
other branches be assiduously avoided in all
contacts with the Vietnamese government and with
the press. 3/

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
