Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

wy *
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

12. To prepare immediately to be in a position on 72 hours’
notice to initiate the full range of Laotian and Cambodian
"Border Control" actions (beyond those authorized in paragraph
11 above) and the "Retaliatory Actions" against North Vietnam,
and to be in a position on 30 days' notice to initiate the j
program of "Graduated Overt Military Pressure" against North
Vietnam.

As for the future of the phased-withdrawal plans, the Secretary of
Defense's report contained the following:

"The U.S. policy of reducing existing personnel where South
Vietnamese are in a position to assume the functions is still sound.
its application will not lead to any major reductions in the near
future, but adherence to this policy as such has a sound effect in
portraying to the U.S. and the world that we continue to regard
the war as a conflict the South Vietnamese must win and take ultimate
responsibility for. Substantial reductions in the numbers of U.S.
military training personnel should be possible before the end of
1965. However, the U.S. should continue to reiterate that it will
provide all the assistance and advice required to do the job regard-
less of how long it takes." 61/

By formal decision at the NSC session of 17 March, the President
approved the Secretary of Defense report of 16 March 1964 and directed all
agencies to carry out the 12 recommendations contained therein. 62/ A
White House statement, reproduced below, was issued the same day.

IMMEDIATE RELEASE March 17, 1964
Office of the White House Press Secretary
THE WHITE HOUSE

Secretary McNemara and General Taylor, following their
initial oral report of Friday, today reported fully to President
Johnson and the members of the National Security Council. The
report coyered the situation in South Vietnam, the measures being
taken by General Khanh and his government, and the need for United
States assistance to supplement and support these measures. There
was also discussion of the continuing support and direction of the
Viet Cong insurgency from North Vietnam.

At the close of the meeting the President accepted the report
and its principal recommendations, which had the support of the
National Security Council and Ambassador Lodge.

Comparing the situation to last October, when Secretary McNamara
and General Taylor last reported fully on it, there have unques-~
tionably been setbacks. The Viet Cong have taken maximum advantage
of two changes of government, and of more long-standing difficulties,

35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
