Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -° Sensitive

e. Again, the NSC Backs Dulles, Recommends a U.S.
Military Program in South Vietnam

Political considerations were overriding. The JCS
concession to consider training the Vietnamese for internal security
alone coincided with deliberations in the Operations Coordinating Board
over possible ways in which to strengthen the Diem regime. A crash
program had been outlined by State, part of which was a limited interim
training program recommended by the OCB. Admiral Radford, Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, believed this would set in motion the long-
range training program proposed by General O'Daniel in June; he still
believed that program should not be adopted. But before the JCS could
consider or suggest revisions to the OCB proposal, the National Security
Council met on October 22 and approved a joint State-Defense message to
Saigon authorizing Ambassador Donald Heath and O'Daniel to "collaborate
in setting in motion a crash program designed to bring about an improve-
ment in the loyalty and effectiveness of the Free Vietnamese Forces." 32/
The JCS were directed to recommend force levels necessary to “accomplish
the military objective merely of the maintenance of internal security." 33/

Responding on November 17, the JCS proposed a force of
89,085 at an estimated cost of $193.1 million for Fiscal Year 1956 and
approximately $100 million for the remainder of FY 1955. To provide
internal security and "in an attempt to stabilize the Diem government" the
JCS suggested prompt reduction in force and prompt reassignment of selected
personnel and units to maintain "the security of the legal government in
Saigon and other major population centers," execute "regional security
operations in each province" and perform "territorial pacification missions."
Later, military centers would be established for reorganization and training
of the military.

The Chiefs expressed serious reservations about the
probability of Vietnamese -- and American -- success. First,

the chaotic internal political situation within Vietnam

is such that there is no assurance that the security forces
visualized herein can be developed into loyal and effective
support for the Diem Government, or, if developed, that
these forces will result in political and military stability
within South Vietnam. Unless the Vietnamese themselves show
an inclination to make individual and collective sacrifices
required to resist communism, which they have not done to
date, no amount of external pressure and assistance can long
delay complete Communist victory in South Vietnam.

: Secondly, "the cooperation and collaboration of the
French MAAG" is vital to effective execution of the program -- and the
JCS doubted that support would be readily offered. Finally, the Chiefs
cautioned,

“ith TOP SECRET - Sensitive
