Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

country, where there should be no place for clannishness and
factions -- the spirit of the "national revolutionary move-
ment" or of the "personalist body" divides the men of one and
the same unit, sows distrust between friends of the same rank,
and uses as a criterion for promotion fidelity toward the
party in blind submission to its leaders. This creates ex~
tremely dangerous situations, such as the recent incident of
Tay-Ninh.*

The purpose of the army, pillar of the defense of the
country, is to stop foreign invasions and to eliminate rebel
movements, It is at the service of the country only and
should not lend itself to the exploitation of any faction or
party. Its total reorganization is necessary. Clannishness
and party obedience should be eliminated; its moral base
strengthened; a noble tradition of national pride created;
and fighting spirit, professional conscience, and bravery
should become criteria for promotion, The troops should be
encouraged to respect their officers, and the officers should
be encouraged to love their men. Distrust, jealousy, rancor
among colleagues of the same rank should be eliminated.

Then in case of danger, the nation will have at its dis-
posal a valiant army animated by a single spirit and a single
aspiration: to defend the most precious possession ~~ our
country, Viet Nam.

Economic and Social Affairs

A rich and fertile country enjoying food surpluses; a
budget which does not have to face military expenditures,
important war reparations; substantial profits from Treasury
bonds; a colossal foreign-aid program; a developing market
capable of receiving foreign capital investments -~ those
are the many favorable conditions which could make Viet Nam
a productive and prosperous nation, However, at the present
time many people are out of work, have no roof over their
heads, and no money. Rice is abundant but does not sell;
shop windows are well-stocked but the goods do not move,
Sources of revenue are in the hands of speculators -~ who
use the [government/ party and group to mask monopolies

alate
rari

This refers to the penetration of the compound of the 32d ARVN Reginent
in Januery, 1960, when communist forces killed 23 soldiers and captured
hundreds of weapons.

The military expenditures of the Vietnamese budget are paid out of
U.S. economic and military aid,

38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

