Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

* tls
Korea." Thus, for South Vietnam to come under Communist control, “in
any form," was seen as

"a major blow to our basic policies. U.S. prestige is
heavily committed to the maintenance of a non-Comnunist
South Viet-Nam, and only less heavily so to a neutra-
lized Laos," he/

: Unlike the current Objectives, those comprising a fall-back
position dealt Only with South Vietnam. Moreover, they were modified
during the course of the Working Group's efforts. The modifications
occurred in the way the objectives were presented -- in the context of
the presentation -- rather than in their specific phrasing. The words
remained the same throughout:

"1. To hold the situation together as long as possible
so that we heve time to strengthen other areas of Asia.

"2. To take forceful enough measures in the situation
so that we emerge from it, even in the worst case, with our
standing es the principal helver ageinst Communist expan-
sion as little impaired as possible.

"3. To make clear...to nations in Asia particularly,
that failure in South Viet-Nem, if it comes, was due to
special locel factors that do not apply to other nations
We are conmitted to defend -- thet, in short, our will and.
ability to help those nations defend themselves is not im-
paired.” 13/

At first, these fall-back objectives for South Vietnem were pre-
sented as possible alternatives -- to be considered in conjunction with
& reassessment of the costs and risks associated with currently ac-
knowledged objectives, Following its recognition of the extent to which
U.S. prestige had been committed, even the second draft (8 November)
stated:

"Yet...we cennot guarantee to maintain a non-Commmist
South Viet-lam short of committing ourselves to whatever
degree of military action would be required to defeat North
Viet-Nam and probably Communist China militarily. Such a
commitment would involve high risks of a major conflict in
Asia, which could not be confined to air and naval action
but would almost inevitably involve a Korean-scale ground
action and possibly even the use of nuclear weapons at some
point."

Despite all this, it was acknowledged, South Vietnam "might still come

apart," leaving the United States deeply committed but with much of its
initial justification disintegrated. "Hence," the evaluation continued,

AB TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
