Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

9. The Decision is Announced

On Sunday, 31 March, it was announced that the President would
address the nation that evening concerning the war in Vietnam. The
night before, Saturday, 30 March, a cable was dispatched to the U.S.
Ambassadors in Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, Laos, the Philippines,
and South Korea. This cable, slugged "Literally Eyes Only for
Ambassador or Charge", instructed the addressees to see their
respective heads of government and inform them of the following major
elements of the President's planned policy announcement on Sunday
night: 98/ }

a. Major stress on importance of GVN and ARVN increased
effectiveness, with our equipment and other.support as first
priority in our own actions.

b. 13,500 support forces to be called up at once in order
to round out the 10,500 combat units sent in February.

ce. Replenishment of strategic reserve by calling up
48,500 additional reserves, stating that these would be
designed to strategic reserve.

d. Related tax increases and budget cuts already largely
needed for non-Vietnam reasons.

3. In addition, after similar consultation and concurrence,
President proposes to announce that bombing will be
restricted to targets most directly engaged in the battle-
field area and that this meant that there would be no
pombing north of 20th parallel. Announcement would leave
open how Hanoi might respond, and would be open-ended as to
time. However, it would indicate that Hanoi's response
could be helpful in determining whether we were justified in
assumption that Hanoi would not take advantage if we
stopping (sic) bombing altogether. Thus, it would to
this extent foreshadow possibility of full bombing stoppage
at a later point.

This cable offered the Ambassadors some additional rationale for this
new policy for their discretionary use in conversations with their
respective heads of government. This rationale represents the only
available statement by the Administration of some of its underlying
reasons and purposes for and expectations from this policy decision.

a. You should call attention to force increases that would

be announced at the same time and would make clear our continued
resolye. Also our top priority to re-equipping ARVN forces.

7c TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
