Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

pressure would develop against deliberate U.S. expansion of the war.
Further, that given present trends in South Vietnam, both Hanoi and
Peking had good reason to expect success without having to initiate
actions carrying the risk of the kind of war which would expose them

to "the great weight of superior U.S. weaponry." The panel also viewed
Henoi as estimating that the U.S. will to maintain resistance in South-
east Asia could in time be eroded -- that the recent U.S. election would
provide the Johnson Administration with "greater policy flexibility”
than it previously felt it had. 34/

This view was challenged by the Working Group's JCS member as
being too "negative." Interpreting the panel's non-specific reference
to "policy flexibility" in an extreme sense, he wrote:

"If this means that Hanoi thinks we are now in position
to accept world-wide humiliation with respect to our formerly
stated objectives in Vietnem, this is another reason why it
is desirable that we take early measures to disabuse their
thinking.”

Moreover, he indicated the JCS view that the slightly improved hopes for
government stability (acknowledged by the panel) were good reason why
Nearly and positive actions" should be taken. This point was reinforced
by his judgment that (in contrest with its impact on esprit and political
effectiveness) the GVN's "principal task is to efford the platform upon

~

which the RVN armed forces, with U.S. assistance, prosecute the war." 35

In criticism of the intelligence panel's emphasis on the need
to influence DRV will, Admiral Mustin indicated that enemy capabilities
represented a more appropriate target. He stated the JCS assessment
thst:

"a. The actual U.S. requirement with respect to the DRV
is reduction of the rate of delivery of support to the vc,
to levels below their minimum necessary sustaining level...

"b. In the present unstable situation something far less
than total destruction may be all that is required to accan-
plish the above. A very modest change in the government's
[GvN/ favor. ...may be enough to turn the tide and lead to a
successful solution. Of course it is not possible to predict
in advance...the precise level of measures which will be
required to achieve the above. This is the reason for de-
signing a program of progressively increasing squeeze."

One of the factors encouraging JCS optimism, he pointed out, was the .
assessment accepted by the panel that both Hanoi and Peking wanted to
avoid direct conflict with the United States. This would act as a de-
terrent to Communist persistence, particularly if by a program of

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
