Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

regarding coordinated action regardless of the outcome of the conference.
The position paper declared America's intention "to seek, with other
interested nations, a collective defense association designed to pre-
serve, against firmect and indirect aggression, the integrity of the non-
communist areas of Southeast Asia following any settlement." 23/

e. France Continues Insistence on High-Level U.S. Representation

On all but one matter, the U.S. and France were now in
complete accord on a negotiating strategy. That strategy, if adhered
to, would not only prevent a sell-out to the communists, but also
provide the framework for further allied discussions whether or not a
settlement were concluded. The point of difference was Mendés-France's
continued insistence that his delegation be supported by the presence
of Dulles himself. Writing to Dulles of his understanding of the seven-
point position paper just signed, the French Premier added:

", . . In effect, I have every reason to think that your
absence would be precisely interpreted as demonstrating, before
the fact, that you disapproved of the-conference and of every-
thing which might be accomplished. Not only would those who
are against us find therein the confirmation of the ill will
which they attribute to your government concerning the re-
establishment of peace in Indochina; but many others would read
in it a sure sign of a division of the western powers," 2/

f. The U.S. Reconsiders French Request

For reasons not entirely clear, Mendés-France's appeal for
high- -level U.S. representation at Geneva was now favorably received in
Washington. Dulles was able to inform Mendés-France on 1). July:

"In the light of what you say and after consultation with
President Eisenhower, I am glad to be able to inform you that
the President and I are asking the Undersecretary of State,
General Walter Bedell Smith, to prepare to return at his
earliest convenience to Geneva to share in the work of the
conference on the basis of the understanding which we have
arrived at." 25/

For the first time since mid-1953, the U.S. and France were solidly
joined in a common front on Indochina,

g. Bedell Smith Instructed Not to Commit the U.S.

On 16 July Smith received a new set of instructions based
upon the U.S.-France seven-point agreement, After reiterating the

A-h1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
