Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~ TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The prospective early arrival of the 101st Airborne DENISE OR, General
Westmoreland indicated,

-»-Will now allow for initiation of planned operations in
III CTZ while diverting the lst Cav Div to I CTZ as required
by the intensified enemy situation there. To insure ade-
quate combat ready forces for III CTZ operations, I now
plan to delay the movement of additional 9th Div elements

to the delta; however, a Vietnamese Marine battalion will
deploy to IV CTZ to reinforce our mobile Riverine operations
planned for that area.

3. (TS) These moves are carefully planned to preclude any
regression in the vital coastal areas of II CTZ; to insure
that the ultimate posture of forces required to meet ob-
jectives for next year is not changed significantly; to do
that is necessary to relieve and reverse the situation near
the DMZ; and to conduct large scale operations in selected
areas when weather is favorable. By this reoriented effort
I desire to preempt the enemy strategy of attempting to tie
down forces and denude the pacification shield. 83/

General Westmoreland indicated that higher authority could provide
him the following additional assistance to help accomplish his strategy:

A. Accelerate the deployment of the 1Olst Div to close all
major elements of the Div prior to 20 December 1967. This
will facilitate early combat readiness of this force and
allow its employment in late January...

B. Continue the retention of the elements of 9th MAB now
in-country. My evaluation now of the situation in I CTZ
indicates a continuing requirement for this force through
the spring of 1968.

C. Accelerate deployment of llth Separate Infantry BDE to
arrive in-country during December 1967. Early arrival would
permit early release of the 173d ABN Bd which would be
employed in II CTZ. A consideration in all accelerated
deployments is the possibility of an extended holiday
moritorium resulting in an agreement of status quo on force
deployments. 8h

In a memorandum for the President on 4 October 1967, the Secretary

‘of Defense indicated the actions taken to date on COMUSMACV's recom-
mendations, to include:

220 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
