Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A quite different approach to a settlement was proposed in a rather
puzzling informal contact between Pierre Salinger and two somewhat
shadowy Soviet officials in Moscow. On the evening of May 11 (i.e., one
full day prior to the inauguration of the bombing pause) Salinger, who
was in Moscow at the time on private movie preduction business, was in-
vited to dinner by Mikhail Sagatelyan, whom Salinger had known in Wash-
ington during the Kennedy years as the TASS Bureau Chief, and who was
at this time assigned to TASS headquarters in Moscow. Salinger reported
his conversation to Ambassador Kohler who related it to Secretary Rusk
in a cable 139/ as follows:

Sagatelyan probed Salinger hard as to whether he was on
some kind of covert mission and seemed unconvinced despite
latter's reiterated denials. In any case, Sagetelyan, pro-
testing he was speaking personally, talked at length about
Viet-Nam. He wanted Salinger's opinion on hypothetical form-
ula for solution approximately on following lines:

1. US would announce publicly temporary suspension of
bombing DRV;

2. DRV or USSR or both would make statement hailing
suspension as step toward reasonable solution;

3. Soviet Union would intercede with Viet Cong to curtail
military activities;

4. De facto cease fire would thus be accomplished.

5. Conference would be called on related subject (not
specifically Viet-Nam). Viet Cong would not be participant
but have some kind of observer or corridor status (this
followed Salinger's expression of opinion US Government
ee never accept Viet Cong as participant in any confer-
ence).

6. New agreement would be worked out on Viet-Nam pro-
viding for broader-based SVN Government not including direct
Viet Cong participation but including elements friendly to
Viet Cong.

In a follow-up dinner conversation between Salinger and Sagatelyan
two nights later, in which a Foreign Office representative, identified
only as "Vassily Sergeyevich" also participated, the Soviet interlocutors
generally confirmed the proposal quoted above, modifying points three
and four by suggesting tht en actual cease fire could take place only
after initiation of negotiations and that a cease fire would in fact be
the first item on the agenda of any negotiations. LHS Additional items
of interest were reoorted by Kohler as follows:

123 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
