Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B. Impact on Public in US, on US Mission in Vietnam, and on Vietnamese

"This week the word 'pacification' was on everyone's lips ati the
Honolulu conference on Vietnam," wrote Charles Mohr in the New York
Times, February 13, 1966, "end many important members of the Johnson
Administration embreced the idea with all the enthusiasm of a horse
player with a new betting system. The main purpose of the Honolulu
conference was to dramatize this American enthusiasm for the 1966
rural pacification -- sometimes called ‘rural construction' -- program
of the Government of South Vietnam and to pledge more American
assistance for the program."

Mohr's article may have been slightly exaggerated, but there can
be little doubt that the President's pledge on behalf of the U.S.
Government to the pacification effort began a new period for the U.S.
Government in Vietnem. From Honolulu on it was open and unmistakable
U.S. policy to support pacification and the "other war," and those who
sav these activities as unimportant or secondary had to submerge their
sentiments under a cloud of rhetoric. Despite this fact, of course,
many heated discussions still lay ahead of the Mission on program
after program, and many major battles remained to be fought. Porter
and Komer would fight them, as will be shown later.

This was the great impact of Honolulu -- on pacification. But
there were other ramifications of the Honolulu conference which over-
shadowed the emphasis on non-military activities in the months that
followed. Because of these events -- particularly the political up-
heavals that rocked Vietnam from March until June -- the follow-up
conference tentatively planned for June did not take place, and the
growth in pacification's importance was probably set back about six
months. While this study does not try to cover the concurrent events
of the period, it should be emphasized that the most important parts
of the Honolulu Declaration were not those dealing with pacification at
all, but rather the sections which committed the GVN to "formulate a
democratic constitution to the people for discussion and modification;
to seek its ratification by secret ballot; to create, on the basis of
elections rooted in that constitution, an elected government..." 11/
With these words, the GVN was openly committed, under U.S. pressure, to
a process which they probably did not desire or appreciate. In the
months that followed, the words of the Honolulu Declaration were used
against General Ky by his Buddhist Struggle Movement opponents, to
hoist him on his Honolulu petard; but then, in a remarkable about-
face, Ky simulteneously cracked down on the Buddhists and held success-
ful elections for a Constitutional Assembly (September 11, 1966).

The following collection of newspaper items is selected to show
that there were differing opinions within the U.S. Mission and among
Vietnamese, but that in general the message from Honolulu did get
through to the Mission. Since almost every reporter in Saigon had
sources Within some element of the Mission who were telling him their

ls TOP SECRET - Sensitive
