Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

vi]
we TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In essence, what Ambassador Lodge seemed to be looking for was a
solution which would balance the conflicting inexorables, especially
those of battle and inflation. He ended up by straddling the fence.

He stated that he believed that we should “bring as massive an American
military force to bear in Vietnam that we can and that we should do so
&s quickly as we can." But he hedged by adding "so long as this can be
done without a wildcat inflation and other lethal political effects."
He seemed to think he had found a solution in Westmoreland's new fasci-
nation with the sanctuaries across the borders of South Vietnam. He
hoped that with large numbers of troops employed in the less populated
areas, it might be possible to have both the massive force quickly
employed and a relatively small inflationary effect. However, he seems
to have been misjudging what Westmoreland had in mind.

Nevertheless, his 42 billion piaster limit on U.S. military expen-
ditures was to become one of the controlling factors in the decision on
Program #4 strengths.

2. Westmoreland's Reclama

On 5 October, COMUSMACV sent a message to Washington to set
forth his reclama to the Ambassador's proposed piaster expenditure limit. dy]

1. ....While MACV does not coneur in the Ambassador's
message, we are fully committed to maintaining restrictions
On US spending in Vietnam. COMJSMACV's position concerning
the military and economic situation in SVN is as follows:

A. The primary mission of US forces in RVN is to
defeat the VC/NVA forces in SVN, and to assist GVN in
extending governmental control throughout the land. if
MACV must operate within a piaster ceiling of 42 billion
for CY 67 and if our actual deployments approach the
approved deployment level as identified in OSD's South-
east Asia Deployment Program No. 3 dated 1 Aug 66, it
would mean that US troop deployments to RVN would have
to stop about mid-December 1966. Such action would
deprive us of at least one division and the required
combat support and combat service support necessary to
balance our forces as identified and approved in the
CY 66 force requirements. A US military piaster expen-
diture ceiling of 47.4 billion is the minimum requirement
needed by MACV in order to conduct sustained operations
of the OSD FY 66 approved force level of 415,000, an
average of 40,000 during CY 67.

B. While it is recognized that inflation is a
serious problem, a reduction of US military piaster
spending with a corresponding reduction of US forces
or military efforts could seriously jeopardize our
military progress. .

6. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
