Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

of South Viet-Nem by North Viet-Nem."

ee SE

. "The contest in Viet-Nam is confused and hard, and many of its
forms are new. Yet our American purpose and policy are unchanged. Our
men in Viet-Nam are there. They are there, as Secretary Dillon [former
Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon/ told you, to keep a promise that
was made 12 years ago. The Southeast Asia Treaty promised, as Secretary
John Foster Dulles said for the United States, that ‘an attack upon the
treaty area would occasion a reaction so united, so strong, and so well
placed that the aggressor would lose more than it could hope to gain. '

"...But we keep more than a specific treaty promise in Viet-Nam
tonight. We keep the faith for freedom.

"Four Presidents have pledged to keep that faith."

ce

4h, Legal Memorandum Prepared by Leonard C. Meeker, State Department

Legal Adviser, for Submission to the Senate Committee on Foreign

Relations, March ra 1966, "The legality of United States Partici-
ation in the Defense of Viet-Nam"; Department of State Bulletin
March 28, 1966, pp. 15-106.

23m ae 46
"Vy. CONCLUSION

"South Viet-Nam is being subjected to armed attack by Communist
North Viet-Nam, through the infiltration of armed personnel, military
equipment, and regular combat units. International law recognizes the
right of individual and collective self-defense against armed attack.
South Viet-Nam, and the United States upon the request of South Viet-Nam,
are engaged in such collective defense of the South. Their actions are
in conformity with international law and with the Charter of the United
“ Nations. The fact that South Viet-Nam has been precluded by Soviet veto
from becoming a member of the United Nations and the fact that South
Viet-Nam is a zone of a temporarily divided state in no way diminish the
right of collective defense of South Viet-Nam.

"The United States has commitments to assist South Viet-Nam in
defending itself against Communist aggression from the North. The United
States gave undertakings to this effect at the conclusion of the Geneva
conference in 1954. Later that year the United States undertook an inter-
national obligation in the SEATO treaty to defend South Viet-Nam against
Communist armed aggression. And during the past decade the United States
has given additignal assurances to the South Vietnamese Government.

"he Geneva accords of 1954 provided for a cease-fire and regroup-
ment of contending forces, a division of Viet-lNam into two zones, and

D-70
