Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

2hi. General Collins submits a seven step recommendation which
centers on getting rid of Diem and reorganizing the govern-
ment structure. Collins 4448 to Dulles, 9 April 1955.......- 894

242. Diem exists by reason of U.S. support despite French reluc-
tance. If the French view prevails, "removal of Diem...
may well be interpreted in Vietnam and Asia as an example
of U.S. paying lip service to nationalist cause, and then
forsaking a true nationalist leader when "colonial interests'
put enough pressure on us." Dulles 4438 to Saigon, 9 Apr 55.. 907

243. Bao Dai recommends that the U.S. agree with the French to
create a "Supreme Council" or "Council of Elders" to govern
in place of Diem. The Binh Xuyen could have been used in
the common effort if. "Diem had not bungled matters." Bao
Dai cannot rule for Diem by decree and considers Diem's
strength as a "mockery." Paris 4396 to Dulles, 9 Apr 55..... 910

2k. Ely disagrees with the U.S. on maintaining Diem in office.
The worsening situation is attributed to Diem by the
French and “only by surgery, that is renoval of Dien,
cen the country be saved." Ely feels that if Diem is
retained, he could not be the responsible French repre-
sentative or remain in Saigon. Saigon 4661 to Dulles
(Excerpbe)) 2) Apr G50. a) carersmitielenics ecvrs teininieg-ctealsieniaa mpiésee ockes

2h5. Diem is seen as a barrier to forming an interim govern-
ment and the gap between him and other elements in the
society is becoming wider. The U.S., however, warns
Vietnamese leaders that if Diem is removed as a "sect
victory" it would be "difficult to obtain popular support
in the U.S. for continuation of U.S. aid." Saigon 4662
t6 Diilies., PO Aur 55.sc.css. escacmes Batecaaty ate ota winiae/aletem grates gies SO

26. Diem announces to the U.S. his willingness to accept a
coalition in the government but on his terms. This
uncompromising attitude leads Collins to remerk: "I see
no alternative to the early replacement of Diem." Saigon
N6G8. to Deites) CO cpr Shp. vcessnsracnosaveces aversusecsecss 2D

ei7. Conclusions and recommendations are offered as a basis
for future Department of Defense positions on the sub-
ject of South Vietnem. Key recommendations made are:
to determine U.S, military action within the scope of
SEACDT to prevent the loss of Southeast Asia as a
result of the loss of South Vietnam, and to postpone
indefinitely the elections proposed by Geneva Accords
for Vietnam. ISA Letter to State Department, 22 Apr 55...... 963

ALI TOP SECRET - Sensitive
