Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

will be held on this subject between the competent repre-
sentative authorities of the two zones from 20 July 1955
onwards...."

The DRV approved the Final Declaration, and, having failed
in its attempts to bring about immediate elections on unification, no
doubt did so reluctantly. T/ There has been some authoritative specu-
lation that the Viet Minh accepted this aspect of the Settlement with
deep cynicism; Pham Van Dong, the DRV delegate at Geneva is supposed to
have expressed conviction that the elections would never be held. 8/
But it seems more likely that the communist powers fully expected the
nascent GVN, already badly shaken from internal stresses, to collapse,
and unification to follow with elections or not. In any event, the
public stance of the DRV stressed their expectations that the election
would be held. Ho Chi Minh stated unequivocally on 22 July 1954 that:
"North, Central and South Vietnam are territories of ours. Our country
will surely be unified, our entire people will surely be liberated." 9/

The Saigon Government was no less assertive in calling
for unification of Vietnam. In a note to the French of 17 July 195),
the GVN delegate at Geneva protested having been left until then "in
complete ignorance" of French intentions regarding the division of the
country, which he felt failed to “take any account of the unanimous will
for national unity of the Vietnamese people"; he proposed, futilely,
United Nations trusteeship of all Vietnam in preference to a nation
“dismembered and condemned to slavery." 10/ At the final session of
the Conference, when called upon to join in the Final Declaration, the
GVN delegate announced that his government "reserves its full freedom
of action in order to safeguard the sacred right of the Vietnamese people
to its territorial unity, national independence and freedom." u/ Thus
the Geneva truce confronted from the outset the anomaly of two sovereign
Vietnamese states, each calling for unification, but only one, the DRV,
committed to achieving it via the terms of the Settlement.

2. France Withdraws, 1954-1956

France, as the third party in Vietnam, then became pivotal
to any political settlement, its executor for the West. But France had
agreed to full independence for the GVN on June 4, 1954, nearly six
weeks before the end of the Geneva Conference. 12/ By the terms of
that June agreement, the GVN asswned responsibility for international
contracts previously made on its behalf by France; but, there having
been no reference to subsequent contracts, it was technically free of
the Geneva Agreements. It has been argued to the contrary that the GVN
was bound by Geneva because it possessed at the time few of the attri-
butes of full sovereignty, and especially because it was dependent on
France for defense. 13/ But such debates turn on tenuous points of
international law regarding the prerogatives of newly independent or
partitioned states. a4/ Tt is fact that in the years 1954 to 1956,
first the Communist Chinese and then the Soviets acknowledged the sepa~-
rate and sovereign identity of the GVN, and that the United States and

3 TOP SECRET - SENSIPIVE
