Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Accordingly, we will establish contact with the repre-
sentatives of North Vietnam. Consultations with the
Government of South Vietnam and our other allies are now
taking place. 101/

The first step on what would undoubtedly be a long and tortuous road
to peace apparently had been taken. In one dramatic action, President
Johnson had for a time removed the issue of Vietnam from domestic political
contention. In an unexpectedly prompt and responsive reply to his initi-
ative, Hanoi had moved the struggle for South Vietnam into a new path.

As has been indicated, little had been expected to result from the
partial bombing halt and the limitation upon U.S, troop commitments to
South Vietnam. Why, then, were these steps taken?

In March of 1968, the President and his principal advisers were again
confronted with a dilemma which they had faced before, but which they had
postponed resolving. Although seldom specifically stated, the choice had
always been either to increase U.S, forces in South Vietnam as necessary
to achieve military victory or to limit the U.S. commitment in order to
prevent the defeat of our South Vietnamese allies while they put their
political-military house in order. In the past, the choice had not been
so clear-cut. Progress toward military victory had been promised with
small. increases in force levels which did not require large reserve call-
ups or economic dislocations. Military victory would then assure a viable
South Vietnamese political body capable of protecting and gaining the
support of its people.

In March of 1968, the choice had become clear-cut. ‘The price for
military victory had increased vastly, and there was no assurance that
it would not grow again in the future. There were also strong indica-
tions that large and growing elements of the American public had begun
to believe the cost had already reached unacceptable levels and would
strongly protest a large increase in that cost.

The political reality which faced President Johnson was that "more
of the same" in South Vietnam, with an increased commitment of American
lives and money and its consequent impact on the country, accompanied by
no guarantee of military victory in the near future, had become unaccept-
able to these elements of the American public. The optimistic military
reports of progress in the war no longer rang true after the shock of
the TET offensive.

Thus, the President's decision to seek a new strategy and a new road
to peace was based upon two major considerations:

(1) ‘The convictions of his principal civilian advisers, particularly

Secretary of Defense Clifford, that the troops requested by General
Westmoreland would not make a military victory any more likely; and

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
