Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fase ares: TOP SECRET
etre pony : ’ SECURITY INFORMATION

f£. -The’ implications end the political effects of a
nrobeble re fusal by the United States to provide ground
forces for collective United Nations action or for com-
bined military operations in support of France end the
| United Kingcon in Southeast Asia.

5. The BETO decision, in light of the factors set forth
ih paragraph 3 above, those developed in NSC 124, end the
‘militery considerations set forth herein, is essentially poli-
tical in nature. Its resolution will have direct bearing upon
future United States global stratezy. Accordingly, the Joint
Chiefs of Staff believe that consideration by the members of
the National Security Council itself cf these factors and
military considerations is necessary prior to any final deci-
sion regarding the policy statement in NSC 124,

6. The Joint Chiefs of Staff wish to report that, during
the course of their preliminary discussions with representa -
tives of the Chiefs of Steffs of the United Kingdom and France
on the matter of possible courses of action to meet Chinese
Communist agsression against Southeast Asia, the British and
Frenen military position opeosed even the concept of action
against Communist Chine other than that limited to the area of,
or approaches to, the land battle in opposition to the ag-
gressor forces. The Joint Chiefs of Steff believe that the .
British and French would, at least initially, oppose taking
militery action against Communist China as a nation, even in
the face of aggression.

{- The British end French appear to think almost ex-
clusively in terms of defense, at least as far as Europe and
Soutneast Asia are concerned. Their unwillingness to take
even tnose measures for the defense of Southeast Asie which
are within their capability, indicates thet they may not
‘recognize the ectual long-term danger to themselves involved
in the nossibdle loss of Southeast Asia.

&. Piecemeal actions by Soviet satellites, such as the
overrunning of Southeast Asia, can eventually lead to attain-
ment by the USSR of its objective, among others, of dominating
the continent of Asia end possibly the continent of Europe.

It is emphasized that each Communist gain directly eee a
loss to the Western World.

9. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that there would
be grave danger to United States security interests if Southn-
eest Asia should pass into the Communist orbit.

10. The militery problems which would erise as:a result

TOP SECRET

Les
