“

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

of the United States. I think four such realities stend out.

"First, the United States end the entire free world are con-
fronted by the militery might of the Soviet Union, Communist China,
and their satellites. These nations of the Communist Bloc now main-
tain well-equipped standing armies totaling more than 6,500,000 men
formed in some 400 divisions. They are deployed along the borders of
our allies end friends from the northern shores of Europe to the
Mediterranean Sea, around through the Middle East and Far Bast to
Korea. These forces are backed by an air fleet of 25,000 planes in
operational units, and many more not in such units. They, in turn,
are supported by nuclear weapons and missiles. On the seas around
this land mass is a large navy with several hundred submarines.

"Second, the world is in a great epoch of seething change.
Within little more than a decade a world-wide political revolution
has swept whole nstions--21 of them--with three-quarters of e billion
people, a fourth of the world's population, from colonial status to
independence--and others are pressing just behind. The industrial
revolution, with its sharp rise in living stendards, was accompanied
by much turmoil in the Western world. A similer moyement is now
beginning to sweep Africa, Asia, and South America. A newer end
even more striking revolution in medicine, nutrition, and sanitation
is increasing the energies and lengthening the lives of people in the
most remote areas. As a result of lowered infant mortality, longer
lives, and the accelerating conquest of femine, there is underway a
population explosion so incredibly great that in little more then
another generetion the population of the world is expected to double.
Asia alone is expected to have one billion more people than the entire
world has today. Throughout vast areas there is 6 surging social up-
heaval in which, overnight, the responsibilities of self-government
are being undertaken by hundreds of millions, women ere assuming new
places in public life, old family patterns are being destroyed end
new cnes uneasily established. In the early years of independence,
the people of the new netions ere fired with a zealous nationalism
which, unless channelled toward productive purposes, could lead to
harmful developments. Transcending all this there is the accompanying
universal determination to achieve a better life.

"Third, there is loose in the world a fanatic conspiracy, Inter-
national Communism, whose leaders have in two score years seized
control of all or parts of 17 countries, with nearly one billion
people, over @ third of the total population of the earth. The center
‘of this conspiracy, Soviet Russia, has by the grinmest determination
and harshest of means raised itself to be the second military and
economic power in the world today. Its leaders never lose the oppor-
tunity to declare their determination to become the first with all
possible speed. ;

Bh)
