I?

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

MACY Dir 10-19
28 way 1967

(0) The new prGvs intial tear will continue to carry out

, all functions currently performed ai srovince. However, the province rep-

reseniai uve may o2 rganize, with the apsroval of the Deputy for Revolutionary
Deveioomeni

upport at region/CTZ, his nersonnel and functions as he sees
fs =

fs

“hatte

Pawson (c) A single team eo cesignated the Senior Provincial
-dvisor, will be assicned to each province, The senior provincial advisor
will be chosen by ie Deputy for CORRS and the force commander/senior
advisor ? with the concurrence of the De puty CORDS to CCOMUSMACYV, on the
basis of security in the province, Ciyil-military balance in the RD effort : ard
oualifications and experience of fie current OCO senior provincial advisor
and MACV Sector advisor. The individual not selecied will serve as the
other's deputy as well as being his prin ipal advisor for civil operations or

military support as the case may be

ior advisor will receive operational
sputy for CORDS to the force com-

ley ment of the provincial team will
sport from the division advisor y

(d) The province se:
direction from and report th: “ough the De
mancer/senior advisor. The miliiar oe e
receive logistical and administrative
team,

are attached to the province
1e5e units will come under the.
eon. : :

(e) Where RVNAF uniis
chief for direct support of RD, advisers to t
operational control of the senior province ad

() The senior province advisor will serve as the Viet- ©
namese province chief's principal advisor. However, technical advice,
military or civil, should continue to be siven io the province chief or his
representative by the most qualified member of the provincial team. In all
cases, the senior province advisor must be aware of the advice given and
will set the policies to which advice will conform.

(3) District,
(a) At district : an integrated Cistrict advisory team
composed of the current MAGV sub-sector tear and OCO district repre~
seniative will bert organized, ; 4

(b) ‘The new district team will be responsible for civil/

military advice to the GVN district organization and for the implemeniation
of all US civil and military support prozrams at district.

19
