Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"But they changed their policies very markedly. They were depend-
ing on force and the threat of force only. And suddenly they have gone
into an entirely different attitude. They are going into the economic
and political ‘fields and are really wearing smiles around the world

instead of some of the bitter-faces to which we have' become accustomed.

"Now any time a policy is winning and the people are completely
satisfied with it, you don't change. You change policies that markedly,
you destroy old idols as they have been busy doing, only when you think
a great change is necessary. So I think we can take some comfort; at
least we can give careful consideration to the very fact they had to
chenge their policies.

"And I think the whole free world is trying to test and determine
the sincerity of that plan, in order that the free nations themselves,
in pursuing their own policies, will make certain that they are not
-surprised in eny place.

"We look at some of the advances we think they have made, but let
us remember: they did not conquer Korea, which they announced they were
going to do. They were stopped finally in the northern part of Vietnam;
and Diem, the leader of the Southern Vietnamese, is doing splendidly
and a much better figure in that field than anyone even dared to hope.

"The Iranian situation which only a few short years ago looked
so desperate that each morning we thought we would wake up and read in
our newspapers that Mossadegh had let them under the Iron Curtain, has
not become satisfactory, but that crisis has passed and it is much
better."

* oe

19. United States Policy with Respect to Viet-Nam: Address by the
Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (this address
by Assistant Secretary of State Robertson restated American policy
and was delivered at a time of relative stability in South Viet-Nam),

Washington, June l, 1956, Department of State Bulletin, June ll,
1956, pp. 972-974:

"This past March, I had the pleasure of accompanying the Secretary
of State on his visit to Saigon where we conversed with President Diem
on the present and future problems of Viet-Nam. I was struck, as so many
other recent observers have been, at the progress Free Viet-Nam has made
in a few short months toward stability, security, and strength. President
Diem seemed to reflect this progress in his own person. On the occasion
of our earlier visit some 15 months ago, he seemed tense and gravely con-
cerned about the problems facing Viet-Nam. This time he was reposed,
poised, and appeared confident of the future of his country.

“Among the factors that explain the remarkable rise of Free Viet-
Nem from the shambles created by 8 years of murderous civil and inter-
national war, the division of the country at Geneva and the continuing

B-28
