Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

wounding his pride and alienating him from the regime. Diem reacted

as expected, and ordered Dinh to take a "vacation" in Dalat for a while.
Don at this point began his long effort to woo Dinh to the plotters

side against Diem. Dinh, however, lacked self-confidence and vacillated,
although he does not appear to have played a double role by revealing
the existence of the plot to the palace. While the elaborate stratagems
for seducing Dinh were taking place, the plotters had carefully sur~
rounded him with supporters of ‘the coup, including his deputy, Colonel Co,
whom they felt they could rely on to neutralize him if he showed signs
of rallying to the family once the balloon was up. By the end of the
third week in October, the plotters felt reasonably confident that the
problem of Dinh had been resolved: he would, as an opportunist, rally

to the coup if he felt it was going to succeed; if he did not, he would
be eliminated.

At the same time, plans had been under way to neutralize General Cao,
the IV Corps commander, since he would certainly betray the plotters to
the palace if he got word of the plans, or bring his troops to Diem's
aid if the coup started while he was still in control of them. ‘lo do .
this, Colonel Co, Dinh's deputy, was sent to the Delta to win the support
of the subordinate commanders in IV Corps. In the ultimate plan, Co
would be sent with JGS orders te take command of the 7th Division in
My Tho on the day before the coup began; he would order all boats to the
Saigon side of the Mekong River; and, thus, act as a blocking force to
General Cao who, stranded in Can Tho on the far side of the Mekong,
would then be arrested by dissident officers in his cwn command. Co
apparently was successful in getting the support of the great majority
of the subordinate officers, but one loyal officer heard of the plans
and immediately tipped off Nhu.

Diem and Nhu called in Dinh and revealed what they had learned,
attempting to force his hand. Dinh reacted with feigned shock and
suggested that Co be executed immediately. This convinced Nhu that
Dinh was not involved. They preferred to keep Co alive to get more
information from him. Nhu then revealed his own elaborate scheme for
a pseudo-coup that would pre-empt the plotters and squelch their plans.
His two-part plan was to start with the transfer of Colonel Tung's
special forces out of Saigon on maneuvers. The phony coup would then
take place with Diem and Nhu escaping to their hideaway at Cap St Jacques.
After several days of hooliganism including the murder of several promi-
nent Vietnamese and some Americans, the loyal 5th Division under Dinh
and the 7th under Cao would counterattack the city and Diem and Nhu would
return as triumphant heroes, more secure than ever. Dinh was the key
to Iihu's plan.

Dinh's role becomes confused at this point. He apparently was
uncertain about the relative balance of forces and decided to cooperate
with both sides until he could decide which he felt was going to gain
the upper hand, although he was probably still leaning toward the palace.

5h TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
