Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and programs, all of which turned out to be pretty general and fuzzy,
comprised a less important part of the report than the discussion of
Vietnamese military requirements. Here the study group reflected the
instructions of the two governments. On the basis of the Staley Report,
the U.S. agreed to support a further increase of 30,000 in the RVNAF, but
deferred a decision on the balance of the South Vietnamese. request on the
grounds that the question might not have to be faced since by the time

the RVNAF reached 200,000 men, sometime late in 1962, the Viet Cong might
already be on the run. The Staley Report also contained what by now had
already become the usual sorts of nice words about the importance of social,
political, and administrative reforms, which turned out to have the usual
relevance to reality. The U.S. was still sticking to the May formula of
trying to coax Diem to reform, instead of the equally unsuccessful January
formula of trying to pressure him to reform.

The other issue -- the request for "elements of the American Armed
Forces" -- was left completely obscure. From the record available, we
are not sure that Diem really wanted the troops then, or whether Kennedy
really was willing to send them if they were wanted. All we know is that
Diem included some language in his letter that made the request a little
ambiguous, and that Washington -- either on the basis of clarification
from Diem's aide who delivered the letter, or on its own initiative, or
some combination of both -- interpreted the letter as not asking for troops,
and nothing came of the apparent request.

A new, and much more serious sense of crisis developed in September.
This time the problem was not directly Laos, but strong indications of
moderate deterioration of Diem's military position and very substantial
deterioration of morale in Saigon. There was a sharp upswing in Viet Cong
attacks in September, including a spectacular raid on a province capital
55 miles from Saigon during which the province chief was publicly beheaded
by the insurgents. At the end of September, Diem surprised Nolting by
asking the U.S. for a U.S.-GVN defense treaty. By Diem's account the loss
of morale in Saigon was due to worries about U.S. policy growing out of the
Laos situation. Both U.S. officials in Washington and South Vietnamese
other than those closest to Diem, though, put most of the blame on deteri-
oration within South Vietnam, although the demoralizing effect of Viet Cong
successes was unquestionably magnified by uncertainties about the U.S.
commitment to Vietnam. In response, President Kennedy sent General Taylor
and Walt Rostow, then both on the White House staff, to Vietnam, accompanied
by some less prominent officials from State and Defense.

What Taylor and Rostow reported was that Saigon faced a dual crisis of
confidence, compounded out doubts arising from Laos that the U.S. would
stick by South Vietnam, and doubts arising from the Viet Cong successes
that Diem's unpopular and inefficient regime could beat the Viet Cong anyway.
The report said that a U.S. military commitment in Vietnam was needed to
meet the first difficulty; and that the second could best be met by supplying
a generous infusion of American personnel to all levels of the Vietnamese
government and army, who could, it was hoped, instill the Vietnamese with
the right kind of winning spirit, and reform the regime "from the bottom up"

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
