Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Parenthetically, even this equivocal judgment was reversed in
effect, though not explicitly, in a June, 1965 estimate, this time with
USAF ACS/I dissenting:

Our present estimate is that the odds are against the
postulated US attacks leading the DRV to make conciliatory
gestures to secure a respite from the bombing; rather, we
believe that the DRV would persevere in supporting the insur-
gency in the South. 18/

On top of these by no means reassuring estimates, Ambassador Taylor's
hopes for a more stable GVN had been badly shaken by his abrasive experi-
ences with General Khanh during the late-December episode. The Ambassador-
Premier relationship was now ruptured beyond repair, and highest-level
contacts between the USG and the GVN had to be carried on through Deputy
Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson. For the first time Maxwell Taylor talked
seriously of possible U.S. disengagement, and even suggested a new role
for air attacks on the North in such a context.

In @ year-end joint Taylor-Johnson cable to the Secretary of
State, 19/ the Mission leadership actually suggested, as one possible
alternative, "disengaging from the present intimacy of relationship with
the GVN, withdrawing the bulk of our advisers...while continuing sufficient
economic and MAP aid to keep the GVN going." In such a situation, they
would shrink MACV to the status of a MAAG and USOM to that of an economic-
budgetary advisory group, but continue to accept responsibility for air
and maritime defense of South Vietnam against the DRV. The danger in such
@ course, however, would be that "panicked by what would be interpreted as
abandonment, the /GVIN/ leaders here would rush to compete with each other
in making deals with the NLF." Taylor and Johnson, however, believed that
this danger could be offset by an energetic U.S. program of reprisal attacks
and Phase II operations against the DRV.

Thus, in the Taylor/Johnson view, there were now three conditions
in which reprisal attacks and Phase II operations might be conducted:

(i) In association with the GVN after the latter had proven
a reasonably stable government “able to control its armed forces" -- the
condition originally laid down in the President's 1 December decision,
but which now appeared unlikely to be attained.

(ii) Under the prevailing acutely unstable conditions "as an
emergency stimulant hopefully to create unity at home and restore failing
morale."

(iii) As a unilateral U.S. action "to compensate for reduced
in-country U.S. presence," if such reduction were to be undertaken.

A similarly unprepossessing view of "stronger action" alternatives
was probably presented to the President by Rusk. The files contain no

12. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
