Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"2, It should have a single American "negative," anti-VC
channel -- that is a single commander for all action against
communist guerrilla forces. This commander would calibrate and
choose among the various force alternatives -- depending on
whether he believed the need to be military, para-military, or
police.

"This command would include complete responsibility for
’ g11 anti-VC intelligence -- that is, concerning all VC suspects
either in the infrastructure or in guerrilla units.

"3. It should have a single, unified channel for all 'posi-
tive' pro-people aspects of RD, irrespective of the present
lines of command within civilian agencies, allowing a single
commander to calibrate and assign priorities to relevant posi-
tive programs on behalf of the peasantry.

"This, too, would include the immediate expansion of and
control over all 'pro-people’ intelligence -- that is, detailed
district-by-district and provyince-by-proyince reporting on the
particular gains most wanted by the populace (land reform, for
example, in one province; or schools in another; or agricultural
assistance in another).

"h, Sensitivity to political inputs and wise political
guidance of the whole process are needed to ensure that mili-
tary programs support rather than negate efforts to win public
support and participation. Failure to assure this -- which
characterized French efforts in Indochina and Algeria, in con-
trast to civil-led, successful, British efforts in Maleya and
the Filipino campaign against the Huks -- means that the very
process of gaining security would be weakened and prolonged,
at increased cost in Vietnamese and American lives.

"Thus, overall civilian command of the RD program is needed
for fundamental practical reasons, by no means for considera-
tions of international image alone (though on the latter point,
it must be observed that as soon as we put ‘the other war' under-
obvious military control, it stops being the other war). In
particular, it is important not to block or reverse -- by the
way we organize our efforts -- the current genuinely hopeful
Vietnamese trend toward increased civilian influence and parti-
cipation in government.

"In short, it is not the precise form of organization or the
precise chaice of flow chart that is important. What is impor-
tant is:

"1, An immediate and effective military screen for RD
efforts; and

06; 47 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
