Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

carry through the tasks of the national and democratic revolution
against all schemes of reaction to hinder progress of society....”

"The Declaration of the Conference of Representatives of Com-
munists and Workers' Parties in Moscow in 1957, and the new statement
are a profound summary of the experiences of revolutionary struggle
and of building a new life of our time. They represent a development
of Marxism-Leninsim for the new conditions of history.” 207/

But none of the communist statements--neither the Moscow
Declaration of 1957, nor that of 1960; neither the Lao Dong Resolution of
September, 1960, nor that of January, 1961--attracted much attention in the
West. Neither did the Manifesto of the National Liberation Front of South
Vietnam, proclaimed,in December, 1960, seemingly in response to the Lao
Dong Third Congress Resolution. But N. S. Khruschev made news with his
6 January 1961 “wars of national liberation" speech. Khruschev's remarks
were actually little more than a precis of the Moscow Declarations of 1957
and 1960; nonetheless, they shocked the President of the United States,
John F. Kennedy. Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., in his "\ Thousand Days,"
declared that Khruschev's "elaborate speech...made a conspicuous impression
on the new President, who took it as an authoritative exposition of Soviet
intentions, discussed it with his staff, and read excerpts from it aloud
to the National Security Council....Underneath the canonical beat of language,
the oration sounding a brutal joy over a world where democracy was everywhere
on the retreat and communism everywhere on the march." 208/ The President
and his principal cabinet officers returned to this speech again and again
in their explanations of Administration policy. 209/ \

Khruschev offered an analysis of the world situation as
it appeared at the beginning of the 1960's and declared that, as of that
moment, "the prevention of a new war is the question of all questions." He
described three categories of wars: "world wars, local wars, and liberation
wars or popular uprisings.” World wars, he declared, were unlikely. Local
wars were also improbable. But, he said, "liberation wars and popular up-
risings will continue to exist as long as imperialism exists...such wars are
not only admissible but inevitable...an example...is the armed struggle of
the Vietnamese people...." He asserted unequivocally that "the communists
support just wars of this kind whole-heartedly and without reservation and
they march in the van of the peoples fighting for repression." But Khruschev's
speech notwithstanding, by 1961 the strategic course of the DRV was well set,
and the new President was already at war in South Vietnam with the DRV.

71 TOP SECRET .- Sensitive
