Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Geneva despite France's unstable domestic politics and its poor military
posture in Indochina. The settlements at Geneva were respectable enough
for the French Government to stay in power. If anything, the results of
Geneva provided a greater measure of internal political cohesion than
France had enjoyed in a number of years. It would have been very diffi-
cult for any French Government to continue the actual fighting in Indo-
china -- especially when it appeared to many that France was losing.

be. France Retains a Significant Foothold in Indochina

The results at Geneva also allowed France to hold on to some-
thing very tangible -- most of Indochina itself. The Viet Minh forces
and auxiliaries in Cambodia and Laos were shunted aside, preserving
paramount French influence in Vientiane and Phnom Penh. Moreover, in
South Vietnam the French maintained clear title to their military,
cultural, and economic interests; in North Vietnam, they had some pros-
pect of salvaging their investments.

As early as 26 June, France made it privately clear that its
intention was to maintain a viable Vietnamese state in the south. Thus,
when in late June the Franco-Viet Minh "underground" talks were elevated
to direct discussions between Jean Chauvel and Pham Van Dong, the French
gave as one of their objectives the hope of arriving at an equitable
territorial settlement "which will assure the State of Vietnam a territory
as solid as possible..." Although aware of possible violent GVN reaction
against partition, the French considered that arrangement best for the
GVN inasmuch as it would enable the country "to consolidate herself in
such a fashion as to create in the face of the Viet Minh an authentically
national and independent force." 2/ In agreeing to partition, the French
Government, like Washington, was motivated in part by a desire to assure
the State of Vietnam a defensible territory within which the Saigon
regime could attempt to construct a stable authority competitive with
the DRV.

3. GVN Achieves More Than Its Situation Warrants

Considering the fact that the newly independent State of Vietnam
was still little more than a figurehead for French authority, that the
French by far were carrying the burden of the fighting against the Viet
Minh, and that the French and Vietnamese together were not doing well
against the Viet Minh, the GVN received much more than they could have
realistically expected from the Geneva Conference. Indeed, Geneva
opened new opportunity to the GVN. Though territory had been lost, a
way was gained for the establishment of governmental’ authority in the
south. Only through consolidation of territory and regroupment of
population could Bao Dai have hopes of being able to meet the challenges
-~- whether at the polls or militarily -- that the Viet Minh were sure to
provide in the future. The GVN delegation at Geneva nonetheless took the
view that the Accords were a sell-out to the Communists. While the Saigon
Regime did not directly disavow these agreements in the sense that they

D-13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
