Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"They have hampered the prospering of our national bourgeoisie;
they have mercilessly exploited our workers.

"In the autumn of 1940, when the Japanese fascists violated
Indochina's territory to establish new bases in their fight against
the Allies, the French imperialists went down on their bended
knees and handed over our country to them.

"Thus, from that date, our people were subjected to the
double yoke of the French and the Japanese. Their sufferings
and miseries increased. The result was that, from the end of
last year to the beginning of this year, from Quang Tri Province
to the North of Viet-Nam, more than two million of our fellow
citizens died from starvation. On March 9 fous, the French
troops were disarmed by the Japanese. The French colonialists
either fled or surrendered, showing that not only were they in-
capable of "protecting" us, but that, in the span of five years,
they had twice sold our country to the Japanese.

"On several occasions before March 9, the Viet Minh League
urged the French to ally themselves with it against the Japanese.
Instead of agreeing to this proposal, the French colonialists
so intensified their terrorist activities against the Viet Minh
members that before fleeing they massacred @ great number of
our political prisoners detained at Yen Bay and Cao Bang.

"Notwithstanding 211 this, our fellow citizens have always
manifested toward the French a tolerant and humane attitude.
Even after the Japanese Putsch of March, 19115, the Viet Minh
League helped many Frenchmen to cross the frontier, rescued
some of them from Japanese jails, and protected French lives
and property.

"From the autumn of 1940, our country had in fact ceased
to be a French colony and had become a Japanese possession. +

"After the Japanese had surrendered to the Allies, our whole
people rose to regain our national sovereignty and to found the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.

"The truth is that we have wrested our independence from
the Japanese and not from the French.

"The French have fled, the Japanese have capitulated,
Emperor Bao Dai has abdicated. Our people have broken the chains
which for nearly a century have fettered them and have won inde-
pendence for the Fatherland. Our people at the same time have
overthrown the monarchic regime that has reigned supreme for
dozens of centuries. In its place has been established the
present Democratic Republic.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-35
