Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

12. He thanked me more effusively and warmly than he has
ever done before and said he was so grateful for my interest
in his welfare, physical and political.

13. The situation is not yet out of hand. Ky has had
offers from Catholics and Southerners for them to enter the
fray on his side and start throwing their weight around, which
he so far has been able to prevent them from doing. This is
one of the things which I have been fearing. I talked in this
vein with the Papal delegate and the Archbishop of Saigon
yesterday, and they agreed completely. The leadership of the
Southerners is not, I fear, as responsible. 7/

On March 25, Ky followed Lodge's advice more or less closely, and
announced the Constitutional Preparatory Commission and said it would
finish its work within two months; elections might follow by the end of
1966. However, he insisted that GVN would exclude "Vietcong or corrupt
elements" from the elected assembly. ‘The move feiled to restore order. —
On March 26, demonstrators in Hue broke out anti-American banners
written in English, and an ugly incident followed in which a Marine
tore one down. (After detailed negotiations, an apology was given and
accepted.) The radio stations at Da Nang and Hue fell under control of
dissident elements. —

On March 29, Ky told Lodge that he and the generals wanted to move
on Hue and Da Nang with military forces, and said that he could show
that an unpublicized Buddhist split had caused the uprising. lodge
concurred in Ky's plan to use forces, but urged him not to try to create
an open breach among the Buddhists. 8/

Although Lodge had no objection to using force against the Buddhist
movement, both he and Rusk felt that U.S. men and equipment should stay
out of it, to avoid heightening anti-American feelings. Rusk told Lodge
of his deep concern about Vietnamese internal bickering at a crucial
time; he was particularly disturbed by the anti-American propaganda com-
ing from the Hue radio, which was physically defended by the U.S. Marines
in that general area. He went on to say,

We face the fact that we ourselves cannot succeed except
in support of the South Vietnamese. Unless they are able to
mobilize reasonable solidarity, prospects are grim. I appre-
ciate your frank and realistic reporting and am relying
heavily upqn your good judgment to exert every effort to get
us over the present malaise. 9/

Iodge replied that his influence with the Catholics had kept them

out of it, but that his talks with Tri Quang had been unproductive.
He estimated that Tri Quang had used the anti-American theme to put

14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
