Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"The failure of free men in the 1930's was not of the sword but |
of the soul. And there just must be no such failure in the 1960's."

HE.

34. Secretary Rusk's Interview re Vietnam on "Issues and Answers,"

American Broadcasting Company Radio and Television on July ll, 1965,
With ABC Correspondents William H. Lawrence and John Scali, Depart- ,
of State Bulletin, August @, 1965, Dp. 138.

Fe ad

"U.S. Obligation to Allies

"Mr. Scali: Mr. Secretary, you have mentioned repeatedly, in
explaining why we sre fighting, that the credibility of American pledges
is at stake here and that if the Communists succeed in overrunning South ,
Viet-Nam we will have trouble elsewhere in the world. What, specifically,
could you foresee in the unlikely event we did lose this?

"Secretary Rusk: Well, suppose that our 41 other allies--or 42
allies--should find themselves questioning the validity of the assurance
of the United States with respect to their security? What would be the
effect of that? If our commitment to South Viet-Nam did not mean any-
thing, what would you think if you were a Thai and considered what our
commitments meant to Thailand? What would you think if you were West
Berliners and you found that our assurance on these matters did not
amount to very much?

"Now, this is utterly fundamental in maintaining the peace of the
world, utterly fundamental. South Viet-Nam is important in itself, but
Hanoi moved tens of thousands of people in there in the face of an Amer-
ican commitment of 10 years’ standing. Now, this is something that we
cannot ignore because this begins-to roll things up all over the world
if we are not careful here.

"Mr. Scali: Is the converse not also true--if we stop the Communists
in South Viet-Nam that it will make it considerably easier to achieve an
enduring peace elsewhere? —

"Secretary Rusk: Well, I think that one can say with reasonable
confidence that both sides recognize that a nuclear exchange is not a
rational instrument of policy and that mass divisions moving across
national frontiers is far too dangerous to use as an easy instrument of
policy, but now we have this problem of ‘wars of liberation’ and we must
find a complete answer to thst, and the other side must tealize that the
use of militancy, of men and arms across frontiers in pursuit of what
they call 'wars of liberation,’ also is too dangerous.

"Now, there has been a big argument between Moscow and Peiping on

p-k9
