Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

as resulting from this action. The next DE SOTO Patrol did not oceur until
31 July, on which the U.S.S. Maddox was restricted to a track not closer
than 8 n.m. off the North Vietnamese mainland. 12/ Its primary mission,
assigned on 17 July, was "to determine DRV coastal activity along the

full extent of the patrol track." Other specific intelligence require-
ments were assigned as follows:

"(a) location and identification of all radar transmitters,
and estimate of range capabilities; (b) navigational and hydro
information along the routes traversed and particular naviga-
tional lights characteristics, landmarks, buoys, currents and
tidal information, river mouths and channel accessibility, (c)
monitoring a junk force with density of surface traffic pattern,
(a) sampling electronic environment radars and navigation aids,
(e) photography of opportunities in support of above...."

Separate coastal patrol operations were being conducted by South
Vietnamese naval forces. These were designed to uncover and interdict
efforts to smuggle personnel and supplies into the South in support of
the VC insurgency. This operation had first been organized with U.S.
assistance in December 1961; to support it a fleet of motorized junks
was built, partially financed with U.S. military assistance funds.
During 1964 these vessels operated almost continually in attempts to
intercept communist seaborne logistical operations. As Secretary
McNamara told Senate committees:

"In the first seven months of this year [19647, they
have searched 149,000 junks, some 570,000 people. This is
a tremendous operation endeavoring to close the seacoasts
of over 900 miles. In the process of that action, as the
Junk patrol has increased in strength they [sic/ have moved
farther and farther north endeavoring to find the source of
the infiltration." 1)/

in addition to these acknowledged activities, the GVN was also
conducting a number of operations against North Vietnam to which it
did not publicly admit. Covert operations were carried out by South
Vietnamese or hired personnel and supported by U.S. training and logis-
tical efforts. Outlined within OPLAN 34A, these operations had been
underway theoretically since February but had experienced what the JCS
called a "slow beginning." Despite an ultimate objective of helping
convince the North Vietnamese leadership that it is in its own self-
interest to desist from its aggressive policies," few operations designed
to harass the enemy were carried out successfully during the February-May
period. Nevertheless, citing DRV reactions tending "to substantiate the
premise thet Hanoi is expending substantial resources in defensive measures, "
the JCS coneluded that the potential of the OPLAN 34A program remained
high and urged its continuation through Phase II (June-September). 15/
Operations including air-infiltration of sabotage teams, underwater demo-
lition, and seizures of communist junks were approved for the period, and
a few were carried by specially trained GVN forces during June and July. 16/

eo TOP SECRET - Sensitive
