Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On June 17, Ambassador Bunker added his voice to the
chorus already doubting the effectiveness of the bombing in interdicting
the flow of North Vietnamese support for the war. In his first major
pronouncement on the subject he told Rusk in an "eyes only" cable:

Aerial bombardment has been helpful in greatly increas-
ing the difficulties of infiltration by the NVN forces and
in keeping them supplied. It has also destroyed or damaged
a large amount of the NVN infrastructure. Aerial bombard-
ment, however, though extremely important, has neither
interdicted infiltration nor broken the will of the NVN and
it is doubtful that it can accomplish either. 168/

Continuing his analysis, he stated:

It seems apparent therefore that the crux of the
military problem is to choke off NVN infiltration.

* * * * *

When the infiltration is choked off, it should be
possible to suspend bombings at least for a period and
thereby determine whether there is substance to the
statement in many quarters that Hanoi would then come
to negotiations. If the bombings were stopped it would
at least call their bluff. 169/

In the remainder of this cable he advanced the arguments for an anti-
infiltration barrier even in view of the political problems it would
ereate. Disillusioned, like so many others, with the bombing, he pinned
his hopes on this untried military alternative to "choke off the infil-
tration."

A few days later, CINCPAC, undoubtedly aware of the air
war debate in Washington and the direction in which it was tending, sent
a long cable to the Chiefs evaluating the results of recent months in
‘the ROLLING THUNDER program, results which argued for intensification of
the bombing he felt. Reviewing the history of the bombing since Febru-
ary, he noted the curtailment of sorties during the early spring because
of bad weather but stated that, “Starting in late April and over a period
of five weeks, the air campaign in the NE quadrant increased the level of
damage in that area and the consequent stress on the Hanoi government
more than during the entire previous ROLLING THUNDER program.’ 170/ In
an apparent attempt +o head off the arguments for limiting the bombing to
below the 20th parallel, Admiral Sharp pointed out that the significant
achievements in the NE quadrant in the previous two months had not been
at the expense of sorties in the panhandle and, perhaps more importantly,

74. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
