Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of the MRC. General Khiem states that General Minh
has been informed of his move and agrees. ‘The only
definite statement we have as yet is that Premier
Tho must go. 40/

Over the nex! two or three days Ambassador Lodge altered consider-
ably his first opinions about the justification for the coup. The U.S,
chose to view the act as merely a change of personnel within the same
MRC format; and the Ambassador's first attempt to explain the affair
revealed his hope that an effort to put a good face on it might not be
amiss, (There was little else he could do).

Herewith my preliminary assessment of the new
Government in Viet Nam. It is very much subject to
change as we move along.

1. General Khenh's coup was obviously extremely
disconcerting at first blush. We felt we were begin-
ning to make real progress here with the Minh Govern-
ment--in the conduct of the effort against the Viet
Cong; and in making General Minh into a popular
figure. To overthrow a Government which was pro-
gressing fairly Satisfactorily seemed like a2 violent
and disorderly procedure...

2. On second thought, however, one realized
the Generals Don and Kim had never at any time fore-
sworn the possibility of a neutral solution at which
might seem to them to be the proper time. They had
clearly been working, and working effectively, to
strengthen the effort against the Viet Cong. But
none of us had ever discussed whet the next step would
be after the Government of Viet Nam had reached a
position of strength, Perhaps they did favor the
French neutrality solution at that time. We had all
concentrated exclusively on winning...Finally,
Ambassador D!Orlandi of Italy, who is one of the
shrewdest men here, has thought ever since
November that the Minh Government was actively in
Support of General De Gaulle's ideas and would turn
overtly neutralist at the proper time. He had said
this to me several times and had made much of the
fact that both Don and Kim were still French citizens,
had been aides to Marshal de Lattre when he was here,
and had actively worked in the French Secret Service
in the past. Therefore, opinion of the French in-
tentions for neutralization coup might be correct...

L, Finally, in this country it rarely occurs
to anyone that an election is an efficient or
appropriate way to get anything important accomplished.
The traditional way of doing important things here is
by well planned, well thought out use of force. ‘ What
General Khanh has done does not appear to have shocked

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
