Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

There was Stalin's thrust of 1946-51, in association with Mao, from
1949; Khrushchev's of 1958-62; finally, the offensive conducted over
the past four years by Mao and those who accepted his activist doctrines
and policies with respect to so-called ‘wars of national liberation.'

* %X* %*

"At one point after another this Chinese Communist offensive in
the developing world fell apart, leaving the war in Viet Nam perhaps
the last major stand of Mao's doctrine of guerrilla warfare.

"Mere is a certain historical legitimacy in this outcome.

"For the better part of a decade, an important aspect of the strug-
gle within the Communist movement between the Soviet Union and Communist
China had focused on the appropriate method for Communist parties to
seize power. The Soviet Union had argued that the transit of frontiers
with arms and men should be kept to a minimum and the effort to seize
power should be primarily internal. They argued that it was the essence
of ‘wars of national liberation' to expand Communist power without
eausing major confrontation with the United States and other major powers.
The Chinese Communists defended a higher risk policy; but they were mili-
tarily cautious themselves. Nevertheless, they urged others to accept the
risks of confrontation with United States and Western strength against
which the Soviet Union warned.

"Although Hanoi's effort to take over Laos and South Viet Nam pro-
ceeded from impulses which were substantially independent of Communist
China, its technique constituted an important test of whether Mao's
method would work even under the optimum circumstances provided by the
history of the area. As General Giap has made clear, Hanoi is conscious
of this link: ‘South Viet Nam is the model of the national liberation
movement in our time...if the specjal warfare that the United States
imperialists are testing in South Viet Nam is overcome, this means that
it can be defeated everywhere in the world.'"

x * *
"Similarly, a failure of the Vietnamese and their allies to see
through the engagement to an honorable peace could destroy the emerging

foundation for confidence and regional cooperation in Asia, with further
adverse consequences on every continent.”

_% *
"On the other hand, we are confident that what we are seeking to

accomplish in Viet Nam is right end essential if we are to move success-
fully through the great transition.

° D-105
