Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive —

the war with countermeasures against North Vietnam, such as guerrilla
raids, air attacks, naval blockade, or even land invasion, if the aggres-
sion persisted; and a number of overt military actions of a precautionary
nature, intended more to demonstrate U.S. resolve than to affect the mili-
tary situation. Taken together, however, the signals were somewhat
ambiguous.
Among the more important military-political actions, carried out
with considerable publicity, were the accelerated military construction
effort in Thailand and South Vietnam, the prepositioning of contingency
stockpiles in Thailand and the Philippines, the forward deployment of a
carrier task force and land-based tactical aircraft within close striking
distance of relevant enemy targets, and the assignment of an unprecedentedly
high-level "first team" to man the U.S. Diplomatic Mission in Saigon. These
Measures were intended both to convince Hanoi and to reassure the GVN of
the seriousness and durability of the U.S. commitment.

In addition, the U.S. undertook a number of unpublicized and more
provocative actions, primarily as low-key indications to the enemy of the
U.S. willingness and capability to employ increased force if necessary.
Chief among these were the occasional DE SOTO Patrols (U.S, destroyer patrols
conducted deep into the Gulf of Tonkin along the coast of North Vietnam),
poth as a "show of strength" and as an intelligence gathering device;
Iaotian air strikes and limited GVN cross-border operations against VC
infiltration routes in Laos; GVN maritime raids and other harassing actions
against North Vietnam; YANKEE TEAM, low-level photo reconnaissance missions
over Laos, conducted by U.S. jet aircraft with fighter escorts for suppres-
sive or retaliatory action against enemy ground fire; and finally, the
initiation at the very end of 1964 of BARREL ROLL, armed reconnaissance
missions by U.S. jet fighters against VC infiltration routes and facilities
in Laos.

The fact that these actions were not publicized--although most of
them eventually became public knowledge--stemmed in part from 4 desire to
communicate an implicit threat of "more to come" for Hanoi's benefit, with-
out arousing undue anxieties domestically in the United States in a Presi-
dential election year in which escalation of the war became a significant
campaign issue. 7/

Within this general pattern of subtle and not-so-subtle warning

- signals, the U.S. reprisal strike, following the controversial Gulf of
Tonkin incident of 4-5 August, stands out as a single forceful U.S. reaction,
the portent of which could hardly have escaped Hanoi. Its effect, however,
may have been gradually diluted, first by the care that was taken to allay
public fears that it represented anything more than an isolated event, and
subsequently by the failure of the U.S. to react to the November 1 attack

at Bien Hoa or to the Christmas Eve bombing of the Brink BOQ. 8/ Even

this signal, therefore, may not have been, in Hanoi's reading, entirely
unambiguous. fe

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
