Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

reason for such an initiative); and (3) the declining loss rates of
aireraft and pilots in Route Packages 4-6. ‘The appeal of Brown's
analysis, however, for McNamara must have clearly been its reliance on
statistical data -- hard facts.. This is now Brown argued that ending
the northern sorties would reduce interdiction effectiveness:

.»ethe inerease in weight of effort south of 20° from
transferring 1500 sorties out of the area north of 20° is
only about 21% (or about 13% increase of the total effort
south of 20° and in laos). Even if there is no law of
diminishing returns south of 20°, for that overall increase
to compensate the decrease in effect north of 20° would
require that the former be presently five times as effective
as the latter. I believe there would be diminishing returns
south of 20°, because there are no targets south of 20°
which are now not struck for lack of availability of sorties.
North of 20° the question is a different one. The damage
to LOCs can be increased by increasing the weight of effort
(and this has been done in the past few months). What we
have not been able to measure well is the incremental effort
this forces on the North Vietnamese, or the extent to which
they could and would use it to increase infiltration if
they did not have to expend it on keeping supplies flowing
to the 20° line.

It can be argued that because the flow into SVN is a
larger fraction of what passes through Route Packages I-III
than it is of what passes through Route Packages IV-VI, an
amount of materiel destroyed in the former area has more
effect than the same amount destroyed in the latter. This
is true, but to argue that sorties in the northern region
are therefore less important overlooks the fact that this
very gradient is established largely by the attrition
throughout the LOC. In analogous transport or diffusion
problems of this sort in the physical world (e.g., the
diffusion of heat) it is demonstrable that interferences
close to the source have a greater effect, not a lesser
effect, than the same interferences close to the output.
If the attacks on the LOCs north of 20° stopped, the flow
of goods past 20° could easily be raised by far more than
20% and the 20% increase of attack south of 20° would
nowhere near compensate for this.

One interesting observation about the NE LOC is that
the enemy has expended a significant percentage of his
total. imports in executing military defensive operations
for the NVN heartland. From 1 January 1967 through 19 June
1967, he has launched 1062 SAM missiles in Route Package VI.
A record totel of 556 surface-to-air missiles were fired at

76 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
