Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_TOP SECRET - Sensitive

increased his NVA battalions by about 25. The bulk of :
these and the bulk of the uncommitted NVA forces are in the

I Corps area.

"Hh, It is not clear whether the enemy will be able to
recyele his attacks in a second phase. He has indicated his
intention to do so during the period from 10 to 15 February.

"3. South Vietnamese forces have suffered nearly two
thousend killed, over seven thousand wounded, and an unknown
number of absences. MACV suspects the desertion rate may be
high. The average present for duty strength of RVN infantry
battalions is 50 percent and Ranger Battalions, 43 percent.
Five of nine airborne battalions are judged by MACV to be
combat ineffective at this time.”

Based on this assessment, COMUSMACV voiced to the Joint Chiefs three
major concerns: : ;
"a. The ability of the weakened RVNAF to cope with additional
sustained enemy offensive operations.

"b. Logistic support north of Danang, because of weather
and sea conditions in the Northern I Corps area, enemy inter-
diction of Route 1, and the probability of intensified combat
in that area.

"co. The forces available to him are not adequate at the
moment to permit him to pursue his own campaign plans and to
resume offensive operations against a weakened enemy, consider-
ing the competing requirements of reacting to enemy initiatives,
assisting in defending Government centers, and reinforcing weakened
RVNAF units when necessary."

The three plans for.emergency reinforcement examined by the Joint
Chiefs of Staff were:

"a, .Plan One, which is based upon prompt deployment of the
82nd Airborne Division and 6/9 Marine division/wing team, callup
of some 120,000 Army and Marine Corps Reserves, and appropriate
legislative action to permit extension of terms of service of
active duty personnel and the recall of individual Reservists.

'%. Plan Two, which would deploy as many Marine Corps
battalions as are now available in CONUS, less one battalion
in the Caribbean, the battalion in the Mediterranean, and the
Guantanamo Defense Force. This plan would not be based upon
a callup of Reservists or legislative action.

3 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive

