Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Japan, Taiwan, the Republic of
Korea, and the Republic of the Philippines with respect to
U.S. durability, resolution, and trustworthiness. Finally,
this being the first real test of our determination to de-
feat the Communist wars of national liberation formula, it
is not unreasonable to conclude that there would be a
corresponding unfavorable effect upon our image in Africa
and in Latin America." 20/

Similarly, in Secretary Rusk's perception.

"We mast demonstrate to both the Communist and the non-
Communist worlds that the wars of national liberation
formula now being pushed so actively by the Communists will
not succeed.” 21/

B. Interagency Study, February-March 1964

The immediate effect of the heightened interest in causing Hanoi
to alter its policies by exerting greater punitive pressures was to stimua-
late a variety of planning activities within the national security estab-
lishment. For example, on 20 February, at a meeting with the Secretaries
of State and Defense, CIA Director McCone, CJCS Taylor and members of the
Vietnam Committee, the President directed:

"Contingency planning for pressures against North
Vietnam should be speeded up. Particular attention should
be given to shaping such pressures so as to produce the
maximum credible deterrent effect on Hanoi." 22/

Underway at the time was a detailed interagency study intended to
determine ways of bringing measured pressures to bear against the DRV.
Directed by Robert Johnson, of the Department of State Policy Planning
Council, the study group was assembled under the auspices of State's
Vietnam Committee. Its products were funneled through William Sullivan,
head of the committee, to its menibers and thence to the principal offi-
cials of the agencies represented. However, the papers produced by the
study group did not necessarily represent coordinated interdepartmental
views. 2

The study examined three alternative approaches to subjecting
North Vietnam to coercive pressures: (1) non-attributable pressures
(similar to the advanced stages of the covert actions program); (2) overt
U.S. deployments and operations not directed toward DRV territory; and
(3) overt U.S. actions against North Vietnam, including amphibious, naval
and air attacks. In addition, it encompassed a number of “supporting
studies" on such subjects as U.S. objectives, problems of timing, upper
limits of U.S. action, congressional action, control arrangements, in-
formation policy, negotiating problems, and specific country problems.
By addressing such a range of subjects, participants in the study came to
grips with a number of broader issues valuable for later policy delibera-
tions (e.g., costs and risks to the U.S. of contemplated actions; impact
of the Sino-Soviet split; possible face-saving retreats). 2au/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
