Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

armed and trained many Annamese. A Japanese general claimed

they had taken over on March 9 simply because the French could

no longer control the Annamese, but this statement General
Gallagher characterized as a lie. He had heard that under the
pretext of arming Annamese gendarmes for police duty in Hanoi,

the Japanese had actually armed three distinct contingents, dis-
missing each group when armed and bringing in a new one to be

armed and trained. Furthermore, the Annamese had acquired Japanese
arms from arsenals which had been opened. General Gallagher did not
know whether or not Tai Li (Deputy Director, Bureau of Investigation
and Statistics, Chinese National Commission of Military Affairs) was
sending arms to the Viet Minh.

"General Gallagher was asked whether the presence of French
hostages in the north would restrain French forces when they enter
the region. He pointed out that only a few French civilians had
been removed by air. All the rest, besides some five thousand
disarmed French troops, were still to be removed. The Chinese can-
not take them out nor would Iu Han even permit their evacuation to
the Do Son Peninsula. Their presence had been a constant restraining
influence on Sainteny. Asked whether the Annamese would let these
French be evacuated, General Gallagher replied that they would have
to if the Chinese were still there, but that these French nationals
would be a real problem if the Chinese were moved out. ‘The American
Army group had to exert considerable pressure on the Chinese to get
them to give any freedom at all to French civilians in Haiphong,

Hué and other centers besides Hanoi. However, the Chinese and French
alone had arranged for shipments of food from the south. The Ameri-
can group, incidentally, had to intervene to prevent the monopoly

by the French of such food or of food distributed by the U.S. Amy.
The French nationals could be evacuated from Hongai and Tourane by
the United States when the Japanese were removed if the Chinese

would concentrate them at those ports. However, General Gallagher
noted, that would place us in 4a position of working against the
Annamese «

"Originally, General Gallagher explained, the French expected
the United States to play the same role in the north that the British
were playing in the south. When they found us neutral they became
more and more antagonistic and did everything possible to persuade
United States personnel to favor the French position. They had no
appreciation of the actual help which the American group gave to
the prisoners. of war and some of the civilian French in the form of
food, medical aid, and so on. The Annamese, too, expected American
help originally, having been thoroughly indoctrinated with the
Atlantic Charter and other ideological pronouncements. In our neutral
role we were thus a disappointment to both sides....

"At the present time the Hanoi radio is controlled by the Chinese
so that there is communication between Hanoi and Saigon. A British

B-45- TOP SECRET - Sensitive
