Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The Diem Government's resistance to communist demands
for all-Vietnam elections, under the Geneva Accords, and its
success in achieving internal security increase the likelihood
of enlarged communist subversive efforts. This underlines
the necessity of assisting the Diem Government to develop
further counter-measures with considerable emphasis on police
and para-military forces and civic action....The Vietnamese
are increasingly critical of the general orientation and specific
procedures of our aid program. Their request for an increased
emphasis on capital development with consequent dimunition of the

flow of consumer goods entering the country will require careful review....

a. NSC 5612/1

During the summer of 1956 the NSC Planning Board conducted a review of
U.S. policy in Southeast Asia, and on September 5, 1956, the NSC adopted
anew "Statement of Policy" (NSC 5612/1) which after stipulating that
"the loss to Communist control of any single free country would encourage
tendencies toward accommodation by the rest...", noted that:

"Although Communist policy now emphasizes non-military
methods, the danger of overt aggression will remain inherent
so long as Communist China and North Viet Nam continue 4
basically hostile policy supported by substantial military
forces. There is only a cease-fire in Viet Nem and sporadic
hostilities continue in Laos....At present overt aggression
and, except in the cases of Viet Nam and Laos, militant sub-
version are less likely than an intensified campaign of
Communist political, economic and cultural penetration in the
area.

NSC 5612/1 laid out the following objectives for Vietnam:

"Assist Free Vietnam to develop a strong, stable and
constitutional government to enable Free Viet Nam to assert
an increasingly attractive contrast to conditions in the
present Communist zone."

"Work toward the weakening of the Communists in North
and South Viet Nam in order to bring about the eventual peace-
ful reunification of a free and independent Viet Nam under
anti-Communist leadership."

"Support the position of the Government of Free Viet Nem
that all-Viet Nam elections may take place only after it is
satisfied that genuinely free elections can be held throughout
both zones of Viet Nam." :

"Assist Free Viet Nam to build up indigenous armed forces,
including independent logistical and administrative services,
which will be capable of assuring internal security and of
providing limited initial resistance to attack by the Viet Minh."

aye TOP SECRET - Sensitive
