Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The agroville program was eventually superseded by the GVN
strategic hamlet program, formally launched by President Diem in February,
1962, which avoided the mistake of trying to erect whole new communities
from the ground up. 87/ Rather, the plan aimed at fortifying existing
villages, but did include provisions for destroying indefensible hamlets,
and relocation of the inhabitants into more secure communities. The
strategic hamlet, ap chien luoc, also eschewed elaborate social or economic
development schemes, concentrating on civil defense through crude fortifi-
cations and organizing the populace to improve its military capability and
political cohesiveness. In some exposed sites, "combat hamlets" were
established, with a wholly militarized population. High goals were estab-
lished, the GVN announcing that by 1963 some 11,000 of the country's 16,000-
17,000 hamlets would be fortified. In this instance, as before, the GVN
encountered opposition from the peasants, and as before, the insurgents
attacked it vigorously. Despite its relative sophistication, the strategic
hamlet program, like its predecessors, drove a wedge not between the insurgents
and the farmers but between the farmers and the GVN, and eventuated in less
rather than more security in the countryside.

8. Rural Security Forces

Security was the foremost consideration of the GVN's rural
programs, and American aid was lavished on the GVN security apparatus
in general. It is surprising, therefore, that the GVN tolerated so ineffec-
tive a security apparatus at the village level. The Self-Defense Corps
(SDC) and the Civil Guard (CG), charged with rural security, were poorly
trained and equipped, miserably led, and incapable of coping with insurgents;
they could scarcely defend themselves, much less the peasantry. Indeed,
they proved to be an asset to insurgents in two respects: they served as
a source of weapons; and their brutality, petty thievery, and disorderliness
induced innumerable villagers to join in open revolt against the GVN. 88/
Nor was the ARVN much better, although its conduct improved over the years;
in any event, the ARVN seldom was afield, and its interaction with the rural
populace through 1959 was relatively slight. It should be noted that the
SDC and the CG, the security forces at the disposal of the provincial admin-
istration, were often no more venal nor offensive to the peasants than the
local officials themselves. Corrupt, arrogant, and overbearing, the men
the people knew as the GVN were among the greatest disadvantages of the GVN
in its rural efforts.

E. Urban Political Alienation.

The rigidity of GVN rural political policy was mirrored in the
cities: the regime became preoccupied with security to the exclusion of
other concerns, with the result that step by step it narrowed its active
or potential supporters, aroused increasing fears among its critics, and
drove them toward extremism. In a step similar to that he took on village
council elections, Diem abolished elections for municipal councils in 1956. 89/
The Anti-Communist Denunciation Campaign had its urban counterpart, but com-
munist strength in the French-occupied cities had been less than in the
countryside, and threats or imagined challenges to Diem's government were
seen as coming from other elements as well. The cities, of course, had

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
