Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

XI. HONOLULU, APRIL 20 ~- IN) SEARCH OF CONSENSUS

A. Background and Conclusions of Conference

By the middle of April, communications between Washington and

Saigon were becoming increasingly strained, as it began to dawn upon
Ambassador Taylor that Washington was determined, with the President's
sanction, to go far beyond the agreements to which Taylor had been a
party at the beginning of April and that had been formalized in NSAM 328.
From Avril 8 onward, Taylor head been bombarded with messages and instruc-
tions from Washington testifying to an eagerness to speed up the intro-
duction to Vietnam of U.S. and Third County ground forces and to employ
them in a combat role, all far beyond anything that had been authorized
in the April 2 NSC decisions. Ambassador Taylor's jll-concealed annoy-
ance at these mounting pressures and progressively more radical proposals
changed to outright anger and open protest when, on April 18, he received
another instruction, 114/ allegedly with the sanction of "highest
authority," proposing seven additional complicated measures having to do
with combat force deployment and employment, on the justification that

something new must be added in the South to achieve victory." Taylor's
exasperated response to McGeorge Bundy the same day made it clear that
meaningful communication, between Washington and Saigon had all but broken
down and that something needed to be done quickly to restore some sense
of common purpose and to provide Taylor with a revised set of instructions.

It was with this background that Secretary McNamara convened a
conference in Honolulu on very short notice, bringing together most of
the key personalities involved in Vietnam policy-making: Chairman Wheeler
of the JCS, General Westmoreland, COMUSMACV, Admiral Sharp, CINCPAC,
Ambassador Taylor from Saigon, William Bundy of State, and John McNaughton
of Defense. .

Precisely what transpired during the one-day meeting in Honolulu
on April 20th is not known to this writer. But clearly the meeting was
called for the explicit purpose of ironing out differences and smoothing
ruffled feathers. The immediate concern was to reach specific agreement
on troop deployments; but an underlying objective was to restore a sem-
plance of consensus about assessments and priorities.

: The record contains two documents that report on the results of
the meeting. (1) The minutes of the meeting prepared by John McNaughton,
and (2) a Memorandum for the President prepared by the Secretary of
Defense on April 21 which is almost, but not quite, identical with
McNaughton's minutes. The differences are significant in that they
suggest an effort on McNiemara's part to stress even more than did
MeNaughton the unanimity of view thet was achieved at Honolulu.

Sections of the two documents relevant to the air war are quoted
below. Where the two texts differ, both versions are shown -- McNamara's
in brackets / /, McNaughton's in parentheses ( ):

99 ' TOP SECRET - Sensitive
