Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Peking and Moscow, the DRV was forced to give in on this point. Molotov,
on 17 May, opened the door by agreeing that military solutions should
precede political solutions, and Eden, on 25 May, moved to include on the
agenda the question of “regrouping areas for Vietnam." Pham Van Dong, in
reply, accepted this concept of including a demarcation line and made the
following points:

1. There should be a recognition of the principles of
readjusting the areas under control of each state;

2. Readjustment would mean an exchange of territory taking
into account actual areas controlled including population and
strategic interests;

3. Each side would get territory in one piece to include
complete control of the area both economic and administrative;

4, A line of demarcation should be established following
the topographical line of territory so that it is easy to follow
and would make transportation and communications possible within
each state. 15/

The subsequent discussions of a cease-fire and partition were stymied
initially by the DRV demand for a demarcation line at the 13th parallel.
After two weeks, by 16 June, the DRV reduced this demand to "all of
Tonkin and the entire delta area." The French, "without agreeing," said
if such an arrangement were made, they "would demand a free hand in the
South, indicating area south of the line starting approximately 18th
parallel..." 16/ Discussions continued through the rest of June. The
French Ambassador, Bonnet, commented on 28 June that the Viet Minh dis-
position to negotiate arose, in the French opinion, from a fear that the
conflict might expand to include the U.S.; 17/ in other words, the DRV
had come around to the view of China and the USSR. From this time on,
the French increasingly threatened the DRV with the possibility of U.S.
intervention, even though, ironically enough, the U.S. was moving further
away from such a position:

"Chauvel reports that he spoke most firmly to Dong regarding
military discussions. He said French have accepted Viet Minh
proposal that Viet Minh receive Tonkin area, including Capitol,
but that further Viet Minh proposal for demarcation line is un-
acceptable. Chauvel reiterated in strongest terms fact that
French proposal for demarcation line just north of Dong Hoi would
be acceptable to conference and would thus eliminate danger of
extension of war.” 18/

By 6 July, Pham Van Dong was almost willing to accept the
17th parallel. His attitude indicated that he, personally, was ready
to compromise and that he felt his government was coming around:

"Chauvel had seen Dong this morning. On question of

demarcation lines, Dong again referred to status of popu-

CHL = TOP SECRET - Sensitive
