~~
/

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

rather be listed as ‘assistants’ to the Vietnamese principals
at the various levels of government...

"Americans should be integrated to all levels of the
Vietnamese Government...Americans would be integrated into
the Central Government to insure that decisions are taken,
orders are issued and funds, supplies and personnel are made
available for their implementation, and execution actually
takes place. At the regional level Americans, both military
and civilian, would also be introduced...Americans would
likewise be brought into the government machinery at province
and district level to insure that the counterinsurgency pro-
grams are actually executed at the level at which the aa
live.

"Aside from the command aspect which Americans would assume,
the principal other new element in this concept would be the
introduction of American civilians at the district level.

Their purpose would be to insure that programs are put into
effect at the nate and hamlet level. to gain the support
of the people..

"Personnel at the district level would confront a maximum
risk and casualties are virtually certain. Since the U.S,
should take any feasible measure to assure their security,
it is important that Vietnamese units of the Civil Guard
and Self-Defense Corps, which operate at this level, be en-
eadred with an adequate number of American military personnel
to insure that they will operate effectively."

This DPM also proposed extensive reshuffling of the lines of authority in

the GVW itself, including the elimination of divisions from the Vietnamese
military structure and placing all authority for pacification, military —

and civilian, in the hands of the province chiefs under the corps comman-

ders. 73/

The Vietnam Committee watered down this proposal immediately, how-
ever. On May 27, ib went to four high-level addressees as a talking peper
with the second sentence of the above recommendation altered to say, "They
should become more than advisors , but should not become an integral part
of the chain of command." (Emphasis added.) Recognizing Vietnamese
sensitivities and the GVN's political vulnerability, the revised paper
recommended a gradual, phased approach. But even the watered-down version
was termed “radical” in the cable putting it on the agenda for the upcoming |
Honolulu Conference. 7/

In the new advisory program already underway, MACV reported a
big improvement by late May in the experimental districts with U.S. advisors.
People rather than messages moved back and forth. Economic and social bonds
were reported improved. Further extension of advisors to districts was put

21° TOP SECRET - Sensitive |
