Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

government of Ngo Dinh Diem; and (2) that only after it became clear,
in late 1960, that the U.S. would commit massive resources to succor
Diem in his internal war, was the DRV impelled to unleash the South
Vietnamese Viet Minh veterans evacuated to North Vietnam after Geneva.
French analysts have long been advancing such interpretations;
American protagonists for them often quote, for example, Philippe
Devillers, who wrote in 1962 that:

" . . . In 1959, responsible elements of the Communist
Resistance in Indo-China came to the conclusion that they
had to act, whether Hanoi wanted them to or no. They could no
longer continue to stand by while their supporters were
arrested, thrown into prison and tortured, without attempting
to do anything about it as an organization, without giving
some lead to the people in the struggle in which it was to be
involved. Hanoi preferred diplomatic notes, but it was to
find that its hand had been forced." *

Devillers related how in March 1960 the "Nambo Veterans of the
Resistance Association" issued a declaration appealing for "struggle"
to "liberate themselves from submission to America, eliminate all
U.S. bases in South Vietnam, expel American military advisors... .
and to end "the colonial regime and the fascist dictatorship of the
Ngo family." ** Shortly thereafter, according to Devillers, a
People's Liberation Army appeared in Cochinchina and:

"From this time forward it carried on incessant guerrilla
operations against Diem's forces.

"It was thus by its home policy that the government of
the South finally destroyed the confidence of the population,
which it had won during the early years, and practically drove them
into revolt and desperation. The non-Communist (and even the
anti-Communist) opposition had long been aware of the turn events
were taking. But at the beginning of 1960 very many elements,
both civilian and military, in the Nationalist camp came to a
clear realization that things were moving from bad to worse,
and that if nothing were done to put an end to the absolute
power of Diem, then Communism would end up by gaining power
with the aid, or at least with the consent, of the population.
If they did not want to allow the Communists to make capital
out of the revolt, then they would have to oppose Diem
actively. . . ." #**

Based on a similar analysis, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., held that:

* Philippe Devillers, "The Struggle for the Unification of Vietnam,"
China Quarterly, No. 9, January-March 1962, 15-16.

x* “Declaration of Former Resistance Fighters," excerpts in Kahin and
Lewis, op. cit., Appendix 5, 384-387.

*** Devillers, loc. cit.

13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
