Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRUT — Sensitive

"GENERAL THIEU: We will still have a press conference
this afternoon but only to say why we acted as we did.

"AMBASSADOR TAYLOR: I have real troubles on the US
Side. I don't know whether we will continue to support you :
after this. Why don't you tell your friends before you act?
I regret the need for my blunt talk today but we have lots
at stake...

"AMBASSADOR TAYLOR: And was it really all that necessary
to carry out the arrests that very might? Couldn't this have
been put off a day or two?...

"In taking a friendly leave, Ambassador Taylor said:
You people have broken a lot of dishes and now we have to
see how we can straighten out this mess." 59/

Amid the hustle and bustle of meetings between MACV officers, Embassy offi-
cials, and their Vietnamese counterparts, Khanh and the Young Turks, stood
fast. 60/

On the next day, December 21, Taylor suggested to Khanh that he
resign and leave the country. This meeting brought to a head the Khanh-
Taylor personal feud which then became public and continued for the balance
of Khanh's tenure. Taylor's report of the meeting said his suggestion that
Khanh leave the country came in response to Khanh's asking whether .
he should leave. But Khanh told a different story to the AIC, who were
still smarting from the sharp interchange that Ky, Thiev, Thi and Cang
had had with Taylor. Immediately they accused Taylor of interfering in
GVN affairs. Commenting afterward, he said:

"If the militery get away with this irresponsible inter-
vention in government and with flaunting proclaimed U.S.
policy, there will be no living with them in the future.”

State supported Taylor in taking a strong line to bring the situation
under control. It approved a Westmoreland proposal, sent by military
channels to State, that Huong get the credit for dismissing Khanh and that
MACV should bargein with the Armed Forces Council to offer a quid pro quo
for reinstating the HNC. State spelled out the guid pro quo in detail:

"In support of your efforts persuade military to at
least partially undo damage [Sunday's actions, we have also
been considering possible leverage we might apply in event
you conclude it was necessary.

"If dispute continues unresolved, most obvious action
might be withholding approval any pending U.S. assistance

actions and letting this become known. You are in best posi-
tion to evaluate whether these would impress generals or

S 58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

4
