Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

CINCPAC forwarded General Westmoreland's Phu Bai proposal to the JCS on
19 March and further recommended that the remainder of the 9th MEB, one
BLT plus headquarters elements, be landed at Da Nang within a month in
order to consolidate command and control and build up the defensé of
that base. ho/ The JCS recommended both measures to the Secretary of
Defense on 25 March, 4a/ and they were discussed by the National
Security Council and Ambassador Taylor during the latter's visit to

the United States in late March-early April 1965. The President him-
self, in National Security Action Memorandum 328, approved the deploy-
ment of those two BLT's and at the same time, by changing the Marines'
mission to include offensive operations, he ended the strategy of
security. h2/ (For full text of NSAM 328, see page 12.)

NSAM 328 is a pivotal document. It marks the acceptance by
the President of the United States of the concept that U.S. troops
would engage in offensive ground operations against Asian insurgents.
It indicates as well the anxiety of the President -- his decision to
proceed very slowly and carefully so that U.S. policy should appear to
be wholly consistent. Thus the President only approved the deployment
of two Marine BLT's, although he was doubtless aware of a JCS proposal
favored by the Secretary of Defense and forwarded by the Chiefs on
20 March, which called for the deployment of a three division force,
two U.S. and one Korean. 43/ At the President's request, all NSC
members were admonished in NSAM 328 not to allow the release of any
premature publicity for the actions dealing with the Marines and their
mission. As a result, the change of mission was not publicized until
it crept out almost by accident in a State Department release on

8 June. hh/

Nor was the change of mission clearly defined in NSAM 328.
The Marine BLT's were to be permitted more active use "under conditions
to be established and approved by the Secretary of Defense in consulta-
tion with the Secretary of State” 45/ and, of course, their new mission
was subject to the approval of the GVN. During his return trip to
Saigon, Ambassador Taylor sent the following cable to the State Depart-
ment:

"In Washington discussions of new Marine mission in Da Nang-
Phu Bai area, it was my understanding that SecDef would provide
text of revised mission. If no guidance beyond language of
reftel [eptel 2184 containing the summarized guidance/ is to
be provided by Washington, I propose to describe the new mis-
sion to Quat as the use of Marines in a mobile counterinsurgency
role in the vicinity of Da Nang for the improved protection of
that base and also in a strike role as 8 reserve in support of
ARVN operations anywhere within fifty miles of the base. This
latter employment would follow acquisition of experience on
local counterinsurgency missions.”

ao TOP SECRET - Sensitive
