139.
140.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Ibid., 9-10.

Zasloff, RM 4703-ISA/ARPA, 25-37. <A senior captain in the Viet
Cong intelligence service wrote a record of his experiences in

a document entitled Regroupment Diary: according to this document,
his political officer lectured the unit as follows: a

"(1) Have confidence in the leadership of the General
[Centrai?/ Committee. In two years, the country will
be re-unified, because that was the decision of an
international body, which gives us reason to trust it.
This does not mean that we should be too trustful,
but we must continue to struggle.

"(2) The Party will never abandon the people of the South
who will stay to fight; when the time comes, they will

be led.

"(3) Those who go north should feel happy in their duties.

; Those who remain behind should carry out the glorious
missions entrusted to them by the Party, standing side
by side with the people in every situation of struggle."

The political officers also stressed the dangers to which the stay-
behinds would be subjected. A cadre whose party history extended
back to 1930 stated that: b/

"Those who did regroup did it voluntarily, after realizing

that it was the thing to do. They did it to protect then-

selves from being arrested by the authorities in the South. ff
They were afraid of being charged with having participated

in the Resistance before. All cadres were afraid of future
persecution by the South Vietnamese authorities; they all

wanted to regroup . . . They were afraid . Fi

Still, the Regroupment Diary records that one cadre bet his comrades
"three to ten, the country won't be reunified in two years," and
that many cadres were worried about leaving family and friends
behind. e/ In the RAND Study, the regroupees were asked, "Were

you a volunteer for regroupment?" The following responses were

typical: a/

(A Defector) At the time it was said that we were volunteers.
In reality, they took measures to make sure that everyone
jeft. At the time of regroupment, we had to go. If I had
remained, I would have been arrested. I believed that I
would remain in the North two years.

83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
