Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Taiwan, carried out by free Chinese, stands in stark contrast to the
failures of the mainland Communist government. Also the existence on
Taiwan of a well-trained and -equipped force of 600,000 men, dedicated
to the Pight against communism, must have a restraining effect on any
expansionist ambitions of the Communist Chinese. Furthermore the
spirit of the people of the Republic of China, and of their leader,
President Chiang Kai-shek, who have conducted a 40-year struggle against
Commmist imperialism, is an inspiration to free peoples everywhere. :
"We stand ready to help peoples who want to help themselves to i
maintain their independence. Sometimes this involves outright alliance,
as with the Republic of Chine, Japan, South Korea, and, through the
Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, with the Philippines, Thailand, and
Pakistan. If any of these nations is attacked the United States is com-
mitted to help defend it. Our contribution to security in the Far East
also takes other forms, forms designed to meet threats of varying nature.

"These threats are never simple ones; some sre extremely subtle and
sophisticated. If we are to meet these threats successfully, certain
qualities of mind must be stressed and certain dangers avoided. Governor
Bryant, in a recent address, referred to the danger that the 'timid
American' poses for our democracy. I think he is quite right. I have
often had a similer thought, which I would like to emphasize in what I
have to say today.

"What has often occurred to’me is that, if the United States is not
only going to meet the Commmist threat but carry off the difficult task
of helping to create a new and stable world in the process, then Americans
are going to need very steady nerves.

"By this phrase ‘steady nerves,’ I mean not only not being timid but _
two additional qualities: first, the capacity for cold, deliberate analysis
in order to know when to act and when to bide one's time; second, the un-
emotional self-discipline and self-control that enables one to act effect-
ively as a result of that analysis. JI mean the kind of self-control that
enabled President’ Kennedy to use United States power with such coolness
and skill as he did during the Cuban crisis. In negotiations, also,
extraordinary qualities of mind and will are demanded, among which the
element of cold calm in dealing with complex situations is increasingly
important. President Kennedy was speaking of this in his inaugural
address when he said: "Let us never negotiate out of fear. But let us
never fear to negotiate.'

"The quality of 'steady nerves’ is needed in both of the fundamental
tasks before us. For there are two separate tasks.

"One is the meeting of crises; the other is the slower, but more
positive, task of nation building, of helping to build a system of stable,
strong, and independent states which have solved the problem of both
political and economic development."

ey RUA Hae

C-35
