Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"co, Plan Three, which would deploy the 82nd Airborne
Division but would leave Marine Corps battalions in CONUS.
This plan would likewise envisage no Reserve callup and no
legislative action.”

Under Plan One, elements of one brigade of the 82nd Airborne
Division could commence movement within 2h hours and the division itself
36-48 hours later. 6/9ths of a Marine Corps Division/wing team could be
ready for deployment to Vietnam in one week without utilizing Vietnem
replacement drafts. Dependent upon the availability of aircraft and
the degree of drawdown on the current level of Southeast Asia airlift
support, the deployment could be completed within three to four weeks.

Under Plan Two, elements of two CONUS Marine Divisions, consisting
of 12 battalions could be air transported to Vietnam, although two weeks
preparation would be required. This deployment, however, would deplete
Marine Corps assets except for three battalions -- one afloat in the
Mediterranean, one afloat in the Caribbean, and one ashore at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba.

Under Plan Three, as under Plan One, elements of one brigade of the
82nd Airborne Division could commence movement in 24 hours, the division
itself 36-48 hours later.

All of these plans, however, would require drawdowns on previously
protected CONUS stocks during procurement lead-time for new production
and would further aggravate the shortage of long procurement lead time
items currently short, such as helicopters, tracked combat vehicles,
and ammunition.

An examination was also made of the feasibility of an increased
acceleration in the deployment of the four infantry battalions scheduled
to deploy in March-April under Program 5. It was concluded that these
units could not be deployed earlier "except under the most critical
circumstances.”

In examining the capacity to meet the possibility of widespread
civil disorder in the United States, the Joint Chiefs of Staff concluded
‘that, whether or not deployments under any of the plans were directed,
it appeared that sufficient forces would still be available for civil

disorder control.

However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff cautioned that the residual CONUS-
based active combat-ready ground forces that would result from the exten-
sion of each of the plans examined would be:

a. Pian One - 6/9 Marine Division/Wing Team.

>. Plan Two - One Airborne Division.

.

hy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
