Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that the Administration now felt that Premier Huong's cabinet might
require broader representation. Finally, on the 9th, the generals

pledged to return to terms agreed to during the previous August whereby
matters of state would be left in the hands of a civilian government.

The joint communique issued by Huong and Khanh also promised to speedily
convene a representative constituent assembly to replace the High National
Council. 209/

The generals' reassessments were no doubt helped by a strong
U.S. public statement, directed toward the South Vietnamese press, ex-
pleining the U.S. policy position toward that country's political situ-
ation. In language strikingly similar to the President's draft instruc-
tions to Taylor, it included the following:

"The primary concern of the United States Government and
its representatives is that there be in Saigon a steble
government in place, able’to speak for all its components,
to carry out plans and to execute decisions. Without such
a government, United States cooperation with and assistance
to South Vietnam cannot be effective.

"...The sole object of United States activities has been
and continues to be the reestablishment as quickly as possible
of conditions favorable to the more effective prosecution of
the war against the Vietcong." 210/

Consistent with the expressed U.S. policy position, discussions between
U.S. and GV officials concerning expanded assistance to the South
Vietnamese war effort were resumed on 11 January. 211/

However, the apparent reconciliation of South Vietnam's military
and civilian leadership was short-lived. Close on the heels of an
announced GVN decision (17 January) to increase its military draft calls
-- long advocated by the U.S. Mission -- student and Buddhist riots
swept through Hue and Dalat. On the 20th, as arrangements were completed
to appoint four leading generals to Premier Huong"s cabinet, a leading
Buddhist official issued a proclamation accusing the Huong Goverrment of
attemoting to split the Buddhist movement. On the 21st, Tri Quang issued
a statement charging that the Huong Government could not exist without
U.S. support, a charge that. gained in intensity in the days to follow.

On the 23rd, Buddhist leaders ordered a military struggle against the
United States. Denouncing Premier Huong as 2 lackey of the U.S, Ambassa-
dor, they accused Taylor of seeking to wipe out Buddhism in Vietnam. In
Hue, student-led demonstrators sacked the USIA library and destroyed an
estimated 6,000 books. ‘Two days later, riots and strikes were in progress
in Hue, Saigon and Da Nang, and Hue was placed under martial law. Mean-
while, military leaders were attempting to convince Buddhist spokesmen

to call off their demonstrations against the CVN and the United States.
Finally, on the 27th, the generals withdrew their suvport from the Huong

“fd TOP SECRET - Sensitive
