ee es, eee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SONTERENCS BOCUMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY PAPIRS

9. Pressing requirements for operations in the Paci&e during: the
comin ng months make certain thes i will not be possible to move this
corps from France for at less: severe] months after the dates you
Sugeest, o2d it appesrs unlikely that this corps will be committed to
operations prior to the spring of 1946.

3, The United States Chiefs of Stefi will advise you further im this
matter subsequent to the conclusion of a governmental c- -sement,

No. 1289
3. G. 6. Files
Méemoranduin by the United Sicies Chiefs of Stag *

=ZOP GHCBUT [(Basenseenc,] 18 July 1045
CG. ©. 8.8422

Wrenca axp Durer Participation ux tan Wan Acainsr JAPAN

The United States Chicks of Sta? recommend that the Combined
Chiefs of Stat Fee ward the enclosed memorandum to the Hronon and
Notherioncs Ke eprese nistives to tha Combined Chisis of Steff in lieu
of She memerandum in the Hnelesure to CO. C. 8. & 20/32

[Enelosirs]

oP SUCHET. ,
DRAFT =

Muxoraxpum To THY TRENCH AND NETEERLANDS RMPRUSUNTATIVES
go THE Combined Criurs or Starz® e

o Combined Chiefs of Stafi have given consideration to tha
quest jon of Pranch/Netherlends participation mi the! ‘war against

Japon end wish to inform you of their views which ore as iollows:—

sen!

a. Wouile it is ab present lnprscticabic due chiefly to logist
resus ieulti tas Tor French or Netherlands armed forces to tole & mrjor
part in the immedinte operations in the Far Mast, the provision.of
suc assistance which may be synchronized rats operations will be
takers into ae: gunt by the Oombin | Chiefs of Stall. The use of such
forces will depend solely on Sry: consicerations. Trench. ‘or
Nethewlands forces so secopted must operate under the complete
consol of ths Comme: ard ‘oy in e

sf

ial 1 Conpearn

Aretha)

é. BE. the Combined St taf
wncdertese uJ Nethorlanris renzese ental ves timely

n (TRI AT & C2 .fy + Te O33 ir, rs aise TR?
mod Chisie-of Stal at their 105th Mestis, July 28,

36

