Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

"So we do not have a worldwide commitment as the gendarme of the
universe, but we do have 42 allies, and South Viet-Nem is a protocol ©
state of the Southeast Asia Treaty and it does have a commitment fram
us. Therefore, the nature of that conmitment is fundamental here if
we are to maintain peace in the years ahead.

"Mr. Reasoner: Are we overconmitted from your standpoint, Mr.
Secretary? Can you handle everything you foresee?

"Secretary McNamara: I believe so. The military forces of this
country have been built up in strength, as you know. We do have 45 per-
cent more combat-ready divisions today than we did 3 or 4 years ago. We
do have nearly 50 percent more tactical fighter squadrons today than we
did then. We have been building up our inventories in men and equipment.

"I think the question is really more fundamental than are we over-
committed. The question is, what kind of a world would we and our
children live in if we failed to carry out the commitments we have or
sought to reduce them?”

38. Address by William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern
Affairs, Before the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, on
November 5, 1965, "A Perspective on U.S. Policy in Viet-Nam, "
Department or State Bulletin, December 6, 1965, p. 890.

"Our own objectives in relation to the Far East are simple. There,
as throughout the world, we wish to see independent nations developing as
they see fit and in accordance with their own traditions. We may hope
that the development will be in the direction of governments based on
consensus and increasingly on democratic processes, with economic sys=
tems that enlist the initiatives of the individual. But we have long
since outgrown any notion that we have a blueprint for government and
economic organization that can be applied in any pat sense to other
nations, particularly in the less developed state.

. "Moreover, our national interest is no longer guided in the Far Eest
by particular economic or military concern with individual areas, as was
to a considerable extent the case before the war. We have a deep concern
for expanded trade and cultural ties--which alone can in the end bind the
world together~-and we have military base rights and needs related to our
role in assisting in the security of the area. But neither of these is
an end in itself: The first will, we believe, flourish if the nations
of the area are able to develop in freedom; the second must now be main-
tained but will over time, we hope, become susceptible of reduction and
indeed, wherever possible, of elimination.

D-58
