Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

seemed on the verge of overthrowing Diem. Diem ordered Hinh out of the
country; Hinh defied him. An apparent coup d'etat in late October was
blocked by adroit maneuvering by Colonel Lansdale, and by assurance
from General Collins to Hinh that American support would be promptly
withdrayn from Vietnam were his plot to succeed. As Hinh recalled it:

"T had only to lift my telephone and the coup d'etat would
have been over....Nothing could have opposed the army. But the
Americans let me know that if that happened, dollar help would
be cut off. That would not matter to the military. If necessary,
we soldiers could go barefoot and eat rice but the country cannot
survive without American help." 100/

Diem removed Hinh on 29 November 1954. The Acting Chief of Starf, General
Nguyen Van Vy, Diem found "insufficiently submissive," and replaced him on
12 Decenber 1954 with General Le Van Ty, kicking Vy upstairs to be Inspector

General. 101/ In April 1955, during the turmoil of the sect rebellion,

Bao Dai attempted to appoint Vy as Chief of Staff with full military powers,
and to recall Diem to France. .As Diem committed his army to battle with
the sects, Vy announced that, in the name of Bao Dai, and with the backing
of all but ten percent of the Army, he had assumed control of the govern-
ment. However, General Ty, Diem's Chief of Staff, remained loyal, rallied
key local comsanders around Diem, and Vy fled. Within weeks both Generals
Hinh end Vy were afield against Diem in the Mekong Delta, maneuvering a
disparate army of Hoa Hao, French "deserters," and others -- Diem's forces
again beat them, and both then went into exile. 102

2. Militarizing Public Administration

What Diem remembered from these experiences was thet personal
loyalty was the prime requisite for high command. As a result, he took
an intense and direct interest in the appointments of military officers,
and -- as in other endeavors -- found it easier to place his trust in
Northerners and Catholics. Before long, the upper echelons of the officer
corps were preponderantly from these groups, and closely netted to the
Diew family web of preferment. As GVN demands for loyal civil servants
willing to forego the advantages of Saigon multiplied, Diem was impelled
to shift trusted military officers into his civil administration. The
head of the General Directorate of Police and Security was a military
officer from 1956 forward: his subordinates in the police apparatus included
a growing nutber of military officers--for Seema, all the Saigon district
police chiefs appointed in the year 1960 were soldiers. 103/ The govern-
ment in the provinces reflected similar moves toward militarization: 1oh/

43 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
