Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

consultations were held frequently, but were attended by relatively
low-ranking U.S. officers, carefully instructed on limits of their
planning flexibility. At the SEATO conference in Bangkok in February
1955, the U.S. position on military arrangements under the pact was

to avoid discussion of permanent formal organization. A Defense Depart-
ment memorandum on the U.S. stance again recommended that the ANZUS
pact be used as a model:

"The U.S. desires to make no commitments of U.S. forces
for use under the Manila pact. (This view has not been con-
veyed to the other powers.)

"With regard to military machinery for the coordination
of measures to combat overt aggression, the U.S. is opposed
to the establishment of formal military machinery or of a
permanent SHATO staff. Instead, the U.S. supports the estab-
lishment of military advisors, who would meet periodically,
formulate their own rules of procedure and any necessary
organizational arrangements, designate planning assistants to
work on specified projects, and insure that military planning
activities are coordinated with those designed to counter sub-
versive activities.

"While not explicitly so stated, the U.S. position is one
of confining its activities and commitments to the scope of
those made under the ANZUS Pact. Such apparent concessions
to the other powers as have been made in the Working Group
papers do not alter the fact that the U.S. is unwilling to
commit any forces to the defense of Southeast Asia, opposes
any military organizational arrangement which would require
the integration of U.S. and allied war plans, and prefers to
deal with its allies bilaterally rather than multilaterally."
4e/ /®mphasis added/

The U.S., although it refused to become deeply committed
in advance to a military organization styled along NATO lines, was
well aware of the necessity to be prepared to fight in the SHATO area.
U.S. unilateral plans and preparations had been set in motion when, in
January, 1955, the Secretary of Defense requested the JCS to provide
"a concept of the possible application of U.S. military power in the
implementation of Article IV of the Manila Pact" under two different
assumptions: (1) prohibition of nuclear weapons; (2) permission to
employ nuclear weapons. Requirements were established for:

"1. Broad outline plans for U.S. action...to deter
or counter overt aggression by Communist China or, where
applicable, by Viet Minh, against each of the Southeast
Asian nations which are parties to the Manila Pact or
against the free areas of Indochina which might be covered

by the Pact. /fmphasis added/

A-2h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
