Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ts Cs 3. HO CHI MINH'S COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE U.S.
1945-19

Li
Resume

Ho's earliest representations to the United States were via the
0.S8.S. teams assigned to work with the Viet Minh. ‘The Americans
found Ho genial, and cooperative. One American officer subsequently
reported his experiences with Ho to Robert Shaplen:

"There are many facets to the story of Ho's relations
with the West during and after the Second World War. Let us
start with the somewhat naive but at the same time revealing
account of a former young lieutenant in the United States
Army--I shall haye to refer to him only as John--who in May,
1945, parachuted into Ho's jungle headquarters near the vil-
lage of Kim Lung in northern Tonkin on a mission to establish
an underground that would help Allied personnel escape to
freedom. Kim Lung lies on the edge of a heavy rain forest,
thickly underlaid by brush. Amid sugar-loaf formations of
mountains lie tiny valleys, and it was in one of these, near
a small stream half-way up a tall hill, that Ho Chi Minh's
camp, consisting of four huts, lay sequestered. Each of the
huts was twelve feet square, set four feet off the ground on
bamboo stakes, and Ho's was as bare as the others.

"In this crude revolutionary cradle, deep in Japanese
territory, John had the unique experience of living and
working with Ho for several months. He found Ho completely
co-operative in lending the support of his guerrillas for
scouting and raiding parties, including one to rescue some
French internees near the China border. John used his portable
radio to put Ho in preliminary touch with French negotiators
who were in Kunming, China, and who would soon be debating
Indochina's postwar future with Ho in Hanoi, but John himself
played a more immediate role in Vietnamese affairs by inforn-
ally helping Ho frame a Declaration of Independence.

"'He kept asking me if I could remember the language of
our Declaration,’ John says. ‘I was a normal American, I
couldn't. I could have wired up to Kunming and had a copy
dropped to me, of course, but all he really wanted was the
flavor of the thing. The more we discussed it, the more he
actually seemed to know about it than I did. As a matter of
fact, he knew more about almost everything than I did, but
when I thought his demands were too stiff, I told him anyway.
Strange thing was he listened. He was an awfully sweet guy.

c-58
TOP SECRET -- Sensitive
