Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV

THE COUP MATURES ~ OCTOBER 2-NOVEMBER 1

1. The South Vietnamese Situetion in October

Through the month of September the GVli resorted to police state tactics
ever more frequently. The regime, now more than ever under Nhu's dominance,
lifted martial law September 16, but repressions against the Buddhist
clergy continued unabated. Students, down to the grade school level, were
arrested and detained for the most minor of protests. Civil servants came
under pressure to avoid contact with Americans, end to demonstrate their
loyalty to the ruling family. Regime-inspired rumors of impending mob
attacks on U.S, facilities, and assassination lists of prominent Americans
eirculated regularly. af Then, on October 5, at noon in the central mar-
ket place, another Buddhist monk burned himself to death, the first self-
immolation since the pagoda raids. 2]

In this tense atmosphere, elections for the National Assembly were
held on September 27 after a pro forma one-week campaign. Predictably,
GVN candidates won overwhelming victories. The new assembly convened on
October 7 to hear President Diem's state of the union message. Diem spoke
mainly of South Vietnam's past and present progress, playing down the
internal political crisis, and made only scant reference to U.S, assist-
ance, 3/ As might have been expected, he threw the blame for the buddhist
erisis on the Communists, foreign adventurers, and the Western press.

On the same day, Mme. Nhu arrived in the U.S. after a month in Europe
to begin a three-week speaking tour. She immediately launched into shrill
denunciations of the Buddhists and of U.S. policy that progressively
alienated U.S. public opinion. She was followed around the country by her
father, the former Ambassador to the United States, however, who acted as
a one-man truth squad revealing the inaccuracies and distortions of her
statements. The Administration's dignified and temperate reaction further
discredited her attacks. On October 8, the UN General Assembly voted to
send a fact-finding team to South Vietnam to investigate the charges of
repressions against Buddhists.

2. The New American Policy

Lodge's immediate reaction to the new policy approach was enthusias-
tic, "an excellent instruction outlining a course of action which should
yield constructive results." 4/ With the exception of the aid suspen-
sion, his views, in essence, had prevailed with both Mciiamara and the
President, the standard public kudos to military progress notwithstand~
ing. His plan was to allow the suspension of the commodity import pro-
gram, the largest and most important of the economic sanctions, to become

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
