Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

than by armed attack or is affected or threatened by any fact or

situation which might endanger the peace of the area, the Parties
shall consult immediately in order to agree on the measures which
should be taken for the common defense.)

The May 1 draft also cleared up, or papered over, part of the con-
fusion described earlier regarding the rationale for the military measures
recommended in the Laos annex: the increased RVNAF force levels were
attributed now both to concern over increased infiltration and to concern
over overt invasion. But the US troop commitments are still described
solely as for training, with no mention of the original political rationale.

VII. SLATE'S REDRAFT

lansdale circulated the May 1 draft among the Task Force, with a note
that comments should be in May 2, with a final Task Force review scheduled
the morning of May 3, all in anticipation of an NSC meeting on the paper
May 4.

George Ball, then Deputy Under Secretary of State, asked to post-
pone the meeting for a day. Lansdale sent Gilpatric a memorandum opposing
the postponement. "It seems to me that George Ball could appoint someone
to represent him at the meeting, and if he has personal or further comments
they could come to us later in the day at his convenience." But Gilpatric
delayed the meeting a day, and State produced a drastic revision of the

paper. AS)

On the organizational issues, the State draft was brutally clearcut.
It proposed a new version of the Gilpatric memorandum transmitting the
Report, in which:

1. The paragraph (quoted earlier) describing Lansdale's special
role is deleted.

2. A new paragraph is added to the end of the memorandum, in
which Gilpatric is made to say: "Having completed its assign-
ment...2 recommend that the present Task Force be now dis-
solved."

later sections of the paper were revised accordingly, giving respon-
sibility for coordinating Vietnam policy to a new Task Force with George
Ball as chairman. (In the final version, the Task Force has a State
Department director, but no longer included Presidential appointees repre-
senting their departments. The whole Task Force idea had been downgraded
to a conventional interagency working group. Although it continued to
function for several years, there will be little occasion to mention it
again in this paper.) 16/

State's proposal on organization prevailed. From the record avail-
able, the only thing that can be said definitely is that State objected,

35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
