Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

HH TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Also in February, Secretary McNamara asked the JCS to
develop an optimum air interdiction program "to reduce to the maxi-
mum extent the support in men and materiel being provided by North
Vietnam to the Viet Cong and PAVN forces in South Vietnam." 47/ The
study, forwarded to the Secretary on 14 April, managed to frame an
interdiction program which embraced virtually everything the JCS had
been recommending. It pointed out that less than half of the JCS
targets, "the most critical to North Vietnam's support of the insurgency,
military capabilities, and industrial output," had been hit, "due to
self-imposed restraints”:

These restraints have caused a piecemealing of air
operations which has allowed the enemy a latitude of freedom
to select and use methods that significantly increase his
combat effectiveness. It has permitted him to receive war
supporting materiel from external sources through routes of
ingress which for the most part have been immune from attack
and then to disperse and store this materiel in politically
assured sanctuaries. From these sanctuaries the enemy then
infiltrates this materiel to SVN/Laos....Throughout the
entire movement, maximum use is made of villages and towns
as sanctuaries. These and the Hanoi, Haiphong, and China
porder buffer areas cloak and protect his forces and mater-
iel, provide him a military training and staging area free
from attack, and permit him to mass his air defense weapons.

----The less than optimum air campaign, and the rela-
tively unmolested receipt of supplies from Russia, China,
satellite countries, and certain elements of the Free World
have undoubtedly contributed to Hanoi's belief in ultimate
victory. Therefore, it is essential that an intensified air
campaign be promptly initiated against specific target sys-
tems critical to North Vietnam's capability for continued
aggression and support of insurgency. 48/

The study went on to outline an intensified bombing
campaign to cause NVN to stop supporting the insurgency in the South

by making it difficult and costly for North Vietnam to

continue effective support of the NvN/VC forces in South
Vietnem and to impose progressively increasing penalties
on NVN for continuing to support insurgency in Southeast

Asia. 4g/

Its language left no doubt that while the strikes were intended "to
restrict NVN capability to support and conduct armed aggression in

78 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
