Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Now Southeast Asia is an important part of the world.
It is the so-called ‘rice bowl' ... It is an area that is
rich in many raw materials ... :

"And in addition to these tremendous economic values,
the area has great strategic value ... Communist control
of Southeast Asia would carry a grave threat to the
Philippines, Australia and New Zealand ... The entire western
Pacific area, including the so-called ‘offshore island chain,'
would be strategically endangered."

He then went on call for “united action," and after noting Chinese
assistance to the Viet Minh, prophesied that aggression would “lead to
action in places by means of the free world's choosing, so that the
aggression would surely cost more than it would gain.” 12/ :

In the following weeks the aim of U.S. diplomacy was to secure allied
agreement to a collective defense pact consisting of ten nations: the
U.S., France, Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Philippines, Thailand, and
the three Associated States. Secretary Dulles presented his proposal in
discussions with British Ambassador Sir Roger Makins and French Ambassa-
dor Henri Bonnet. President Eisenhower addressed a personal message to
Prime Minister Churchill explaining the proposed coalition. The President
noted that:

"Geneva is less than four weeks away. There the possi-
bility of the Communists driving a wedge between us will,
given the state of mind in France, be infinitely greater than
at Berlin. I can understand the very natural desire of the
French to seek an end to this war which has been bleeding
them for eight years. But our painstaking search for a way
out of the impasse has reluctantly forced us to the conclusion
that there is no negotiated solution of the Indochina problem
which in its essence would not be either a face-saving device
to cover a French surrender or a face-saving device to cover
a Communist retirement. The first alternative is too serious
in its broad strategic implications for us and for you to be
acceptable....

"Somehow we must contrive to bring about the second al-
‘ ternative."

President Eisenhower went on to outline the need for a coalition willing
to fight the Communists, if this proved necessary. He concluded with a
historical question certain to appeal to Churchill:

"If I may refer again to history; we failed to halt
Hirohito, Mussolini and Hitler by not acting in unit and
in time. That marked the beginning of many years of stark
tragedy and desperate peril. May it not be that our nations
have learned something from that lesson?..." 13/

B-2el TOP SECRET - Sensitive

4
