Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Force in China were loaded with relief supplies for the
undergrounders but could not start without authority from
Washington. I immediately contacted General Handy and told

him of the President's agreement that American aid to the
Indo-China resistance groups might be given provided it

involved no interference with our operations against Japan." 15/

allure © e Trusteeship Proposa
(2) Fail f the Trusteeship posal

In the meantime, the President's concept of postwar
trusteeship status for dependent territories as an intermediate step
toward autonomy had undergone study by several interdepartmental and
international groups, but had fared poorly. In deference to British
sensibilities, the United States had originally sought only a declara-
tion from the colonial powers setting forth their intention to liberate
their dependencies and to provide tutelage in self-government for sub-
ject peoples. Such a declaration would have been consistent with the
Atlantic Charter of 1941 in which the U.S. and the U.K. jointly agreed
that, among the "common principles...on which they base their hopes
for a better future for the world,” it was their policy that:

"...they respect the right of all peoples to choose the
form of government under which they will live; and they
wish to see sovereign rights and self-government restored to
those who have been forcibly deprived of them...." 16/

In November, 1942, Secretary Hull submitted to the President a proposed
draft US-UK declaration entitled "The Atlantic Charter and National
Independence," which the President approved. Before this draft could
be broached to the British, however, they submitted a counter~proposal,
a statement emphasizing the responsbility of "parent" powers for
developing native self-government, and avoiding endorsement of trustee-
ships. Subsequent Anglo-American discussions in March 1943 addressed
both drafts, but foundered on Foreign Secretary Eden's opposition.
Secretary Hull reported in his memoirs that Eden could not believe that
the word "independence" would be interpreted to the satisfaction of all
governments: |

",,.the Foreign Secretary said that, to be perfectly frank,
he had to say that he did not like our draft very much. He
said it was the word ‘independence’ that troubled him, he had
to think of the British Empire system, which was built on the
basis of Dominion and colonial status.

"He pointed out that under the British Empire system there
were varying degrees of self-government, running from the
Dominions through the colonial establishments which had in
some cases, like Malta, completely self-government, to backward
areas that were never likely to have their own government. He

A-19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
