Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. If we must resume RT, have veasens justifications’
and start in Route packages 1 & 2, working werk North as

* =a |
excuses appear (and excuses will appear).

6. if talks start and DRV &-they demands ceasefire in
South or cessation of US troop additions, consider exact deal
then. >

7. Accelerate readiness of Project 728. /anti-infiltration
parrier/

8. Avoid allowing our terms to harden just because things
appear to be going better. :

(Vance: How handle case if resupply keeps up during Pause?) 2h/

In @ puzzling marginel note, McNaughton recorded McNamara's reaction to
the scenario: "SecDef (2/3/67: ‘Agreed we will do this if answer

to note is unproductive' (2). Something like this even if productive.
gm." 25/ It is not clear what the Secretary may have had in mind in
his reference to a “note.” The U.S, had exchanged notes with the DRV
through the respective embassies in Moscow in late January and he may
have meant this contact. Another possibility is that he was thinking of
the letter from the President to Ho that must have been in draft at that
time (it was to have been delivered in Moscow on February 7 but actual
delivery was not until the 8th). In either case, McNamara must have
foreseen this scenario for unilateral extension of the pause based on
DRV actions on the ground as an alternative if they formally rejected
our demands for reciprocity.

Whatever the explanation, the President's letter to Ho
reiterated the demand for reciprocity:

I am prepared to order a cessation of bombing against
your country and the stopping of further augmentation of
U.S. forces in South Vietnam as soon as I am assured that
infiltration into South Vietnam by land and by sea has stopped. 26/

The President did, however, tie his proposal to the Tet pause and voiced
the hope that an answer would be received before the end of Tet that would
permit the suspension to continue and peace talks to begin.

Pressures on the President to continue the pause also came
‘from his domestic critics and from the international community. On the
very day the pause began, the Pope sent a message to both sides in the
conflict expressing his hope that the suspension of hostilities could be
extended.and open the way to peace. The President's reply was courteous

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
