Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

were continued, and French strength and military resources were not
substantially increased above those then programmed, "the Viet Minh
probably can drive the French out of North Vietnam (Tonkin) within
6 to 9 months."

But half a year later, an NIE of 7 August 1951 (NIE-35,
pp- 1-2), reported, "The present military situation in Indochina is
one of stalemate." General de Lattre de Tassigny had repulsed
the Viet Minh regime's drive to conquer Tonkin, this "success
resulting from a number of factors including French reinforcements,
Viet Minh mistakes in their initial foray into large-scale conventional
warfare, and "the timely arrival of U.S. military aid, including air-
craft, napalm bombs, patrol and landing craft, and ground combat
materiel," which had helped de Iattre "to inflict heavy losses on
the Viet Minh..." But, the Estimate noted, "Political developments
- « « have been less favorable ... "

In other words, the French and Bao Dai showed no inten-
tion of using the time thus purchased by averting military defeat to
bring about political progress: *

" . . . Despite the gradual French transfer of certain
responsibilities, the Vietnamese government has been slow
to develop and has continued to suffer from a lack of strong
leadership. It has had to contend with: (a) French reluctance
to relinquish ultimate control of political and economic
affairs; (b) lingering Vietnamese suspicion of any French-
supported regime, combined with the apathetic and 'fence-
sitting’ attitude of the bulk of the people, which has deprived
the government of broad-based popular support; \(c the difficulty
common to all new and inexperienced governments, of training the
necessary personnel and building an efficient administration;
and (d) the failure of factional and sectional groups to unite
in a concerted national effort.

"In January 1951 the opportunity arose of forming a broad-
based cabinet representing most non-Communist group in
Vietnam; instead Premier Huu formed a cabinet composed pri-
marily of members of his own pro-French faction. Although
Huu has displayed some administrative skill and his government
has gained slowly in effectiveness, the weakness of the Huu
cabinet and its alleged ‘French puppet’ status have limited its
appeal to Vietnamese nationalism and have alienated strong
nationalist groups, including the powerful Dai Viet group in
Tonkin. Communist control of much of the country and Viet Minh
infiltration of large areas under nominal French control have
also discouraged many people from openly allying themselves
with the government."

* In this and all following citations, italics are added, unless
otherwise noted.

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
