Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201!

(48.
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On the question of better performance by Diem's regime, we have
this exchange, which does not seem likely to have prepared Diem for the
fairly substantial guid pro guo which turned out to be part of the pack-
age proposed by Washington:

e.s3. Taylor told Diem it would be useful if he and I could
develop specifics with respect to political-psychological point
in paper which Taylor presented to Diem October 24. * Taylor
pointed out this would be very useful to him in Washington be-
cause he will be faced with question that, if program he proposes
is adopted, what will be chances of early success. In response
Thuan's question asking for exact meaning of this point in
Taylor's paper, latter said there has been loss of confidence
among both Vietnamese and American people about situation in Viet-
nam and we need to determine together what measures can be taken
to restore confidence. Rostow commented that secret of turning
point is offensive action. Diem stated complete psychological
mobilization required so that everything can be done to raise
potential GVN forces and damage enemy's potential. He referred
to GVN efforts in past to colleborate more closely with US in
military planning and said these efforts had run up against wall
of secrecy surrounding US and SEATO military plans... 45/

Finally, there was this exchange, which does not appear to provide
much support for the high hopes expressed in the Taylor Report that Diem
was anxious for U.S. guidance and "in principle” ready to grant a role for
Americans in his administration and army.

-.-4. Taylor referred to Diem's comments in earlier talk
about shortage of capable personnel and suggested US might
assist by lending personnel. Diem replied that US could help
in this respect in training field. Thuan then brought up
dilenma facing GVN re instructors at Thui Duc Reserve Officers'
School... 46

* Paragraph 12 of Taylor's cable reporting the meeting. Quoted in
Section IV, above.

"Actions to emphasize national emergency and beginning of a new phase
in the war; we should consider jointly all possible measures to em~
phasize turning point has been reached in dealing with communist
aggression. Possible actions might include appeal to United Nations,
an announcement by GVN of governmental changes to cope with crisis and
exchange of letters between the two heads of State expressing their
partnership in a common cause..." 47/

113 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
