Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"In South Viet-Nam both defense and development--the war against
the aggressor and the war against despair--are fused as never before.
Viet-Nam challenges our courage, our ingenuity, and our ability to
persevere. If we can succeed there--if we can help sustain an inde-
pendent South Viet-Nam, free to determine its own future--then our
prospects, and the prospects for free men throughout Asia, will be
bright indeed. s

"We know this. Our friends and allies know it. And our adver-
saries know it. That is why one small country looms so large today on
everyone's map of Asia."

x %

"War is always cruel. But the war in Viet-Nam should not obscure
for us the fact that behind the smoke and uproar is the testing of an
issue vital to all of Asia and indeed the world. Can independent, non-
Communist states not only survive but grow and flourish in face of
Communist pressure?"

ck

54, Address by President Johnson at Omaha Municipal Dock on June 30,
1966, "Two Threats to Peace: Hunger and Aggression"; Department
of State Bulletin, July 25, 1966, p. 115.

+

"Now I want to point out to you that the conflict there is impor-
tant for many reasons, but I have time to mention only a few. I am
going to mention three specifically.

"The first reason: We believe that the rights of other people are
just as important as our own. We believe that we are obligated to help
those whose rights are being threatened by brute force."

cat ue Re

"The North Vietnamese at this hour are trying to deny the people

’ of South Viet-Neam the right to build their own nation, the right to
choose their own system of government, the right to go and vote in a free
election and select their own people, the right to live and work in peace.

"South Viet-Nam has asked us for help. Only if we abandon our
respect for the rights of other people could we turn down their plea.

“VIET-NAM AND THE SECURITY OF ASIA

"Second, South Viet-Nam is important to the security of the rest of
all of Asia. ;

D-85.
