Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a. General McGarr Replaces General Williams

A study prepared at the U.S. Army Command and
General Staff College, * dated 10 June 1960, noted that:

"Prom a loose conglomeration of combat battalions and
various supporting units under French command in 1954, and
under the aegis of, and with the impetus furnished by the U.S.
MAAG, the Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces have evolved into a
balanced defense force. This force consists of 3 Spaehe with
7 infantry divisions (tailored to meet the existing situation
in Vietnam, rather than mirroring’ U.S. or other divisions)
and supporting arms and services, together with small but
appropriate naval and air forces + + + These potas Torces
have the mission of (1) maintaining internal security 3
(eventually to become the primary mission of the civil ase
and other civil security forces when these organizations
reach a satisfactory state of organization, traininé ae
equipment, at which time the armed forces will become the
"hack-up' force), and (2) providing limited initial resistance
to attack from Communist North Vietnam + + ° the ie cons Ae
[Dieu] continues to organize military units outside the aegis,
and contrary to the advice, of the U-5- MAAG. These non-U.S.=
supported units are of questionable value and tend to drain the
best people away from U.S.-supported units. Also, they may
result in a requirement for U.S. support, not previously
programmed."

The same study noted as a major deficiency the unwieldy high command
of the RYNAF;

"An example of complicated and duplicating channels of
command is where a division commander receives orders from
both the corps commander (who should be his undisputed boss)
and the region commander in whose region his division is
stationed. Another example is where the President, by means of
his SCR-399 Radio Net (NCS in a radio van in the garden of the
presidential office) sends operational orders to a regiment
direct, bypassing the Department of National Defense, the
General Staff, the field commander, the corps, and the
division. Still another example is where & chief of an arm
gives orders to a unit of that arm, the unit being at the time
assigned to a corps.”

The study quoted above was produced at the behest of Major General
Lionel C. McGarr, who was at the time the Commandant at Leavenworth,

——————— ee s
* "Study on Army Aspects of the Military Assistance Program in
Vietnam (U)," 10 June 1960.

82 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
