Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

II. A. 2. LUBVERAGE: FRANCE HAD MORE THAN THE UNITED STATES

It is sometimes asserted that France could not have continued
the war in Indochina without American aid, but that the United States
failed to use its considerable leverage on the French to force them to
take more positive steps towards granting complete independence to the
Associated States. An examination of Franco-American relations between
1950-1954 suggests, however, that American leverage was severely limited
and that, given the primacy accorded in U.S. policy to the containment
of communism in Southeast Asia, French leverage on the United States was
the stronger of the two.

1. American Leverage on France
a. NATO and Marshall Plan

In the first postwar decade, France was relatively weak and
depended upon the United States through NATO and the Marshall Plan for its
military security and economic revival. But neither NATO nor the Marshall
Plan offered usable fulcrums for influencing French policy on Indochina.
Both were judged by the U.S. Government and public to be strongly in the
American national interest at a time when the Soviet threat to Western
Europe, either through overt aggression or internal subversion, was clearly
recognizable. A communist take-over in France was a real possibility.
(The French Communist Party was the largest political party in the nation,
and, at the time, quite militant in character.) Thus, an American threat
to withdraw military and economic support to metropolitan France if it did
not alter its policies in Indochina was not plausible. To threaten France
with sanctions in NATO or through the Marshall Plan would have jeopardized
a U.S. interest in Europe more important than any in Indochina.

b. Military Assistance Program

The chief remaining source of influence was the military
assistance program to the French in Indochina. Announced by President
Truman on May 8, 1950, in response to an urgent French request of Febru~
ary 16, 1950, for military and economic assistance, the purpose of the aid
was to help the French in the prosecution of the war against the Viet
Minh. The American Ambassador in Paris was called to the Quay d'Orsay,
following a determination by the French Government that "it should set
forth to the United States Government fully and frankly the extreme gravity
of the situation in Indochina from French point of view as a result of
recent developments and the expectation that at least increased military
aid will be furnished to Ho Chi Minh from Communist China." He was told:

"...that the effort in Indochina was such a drain on
France that a long-term program of assistance was necessary
and it was only from the United States that it could come.
Otherwise.,.it was very likely that France might be forced

A-35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
