Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

/8/ 3 ge:
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

either the capacity or the will for the DRV to support the

vc. The DRV knows that we cannot force them to stop by bombing
and that we cannot, without an unacceptable risk of a major war
with China or Russia or both, force them to stop by conquering
them or "blotting them out." Knowing that if they are not
influenced we cannot stop them, the DRV will remain difficult
to influence. With continuing DRV support, victory in the
South may remain forever beyond our reach.

Having made the case against the bombing, the memo then spelled out the
case for an anti-infiltration barrier:

II. SUBSTANCE OF THE BARRTER PROPOSAL

A. That the US and GVN adopt the concept of physically
cutting off DRV support to the VC by an on-the-ground barrier
across the Ho Chi Minh Trail in the general vicinity of the 17th
Parallel and Route 9. To the extent necessary the barrier would
run from the sea across Vietnam and Laos to the Mekong, a straight-
line distance of about 160 miles.

B. That in Laos an “interdiction and verification zone,"
perhaps 10 miles wide, be established and legitimated by such
measures as leasing, international approval, compensation, etc.

C. That a major military and engineering effort be
directed toward constructing a physical barrier of minefields,
barbed wire, walls, ditches and military strong points flanked
by a defoliated strip on each side.

D. That such bombing in Laos and North Vietnam as
takes place be narrowly identified with interdiction and with
the construction of the barrier by

1. Being within the 10-mile-wide interdiction
zone in Laos, or

2. Being in support of the construction of the
barrier, or

3. Being interdiction bombing pending the completion
of the barrier.

E. That, of course, intensive interdiction continues at
sea and from Cambodia.

(It might be stated that all bombings of North Vietnam will stop
as soon as there is no infiltration and no opposition to the con-
struction of the verification barrier.) 32/

147 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
