Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

ARVN 25th Division, the Combined Lighting Concept. It brought together
in one outpost a US squad, an ARVN squad, and a PF squad.

In response to Washington inquiries, General Westmoreland reported
by message in Mey, 1967, "A command project was initiated on January 26,
1967, to review the performance of RVNAF units and to identify those
considered ineffective and non-productive. Units so identified are being
evaluated with a view to withdrawal or reduction of military assistance
support unless improvement in these mits is possible. The evaluation
will be conducted every six months resulting in a final determination each
June and December...

The methodology for evaluation includes;
(1) Identification of units judged ineffective or nonproductive.

(2) Evaluation of credibility or feasibility of present plens
to guarantee increased effectiveness.

(3) Study of unit performance trends during the past six months.
(4) Determination of the availability of plans to train personnel.
(5) Evaluation of command interest at all levels for improvement.

Units will be classified as Improvement Probable, Improvement
Doubtful, and Improvement Unlikely. Those in the latter two
groups must justify continued military assistance or action
will be initiated to reduce FY 68 support.

Current Status: All VNAF and VIMC units are effective and pro-
ductive. Support to VN reduced by $7800 which reflects dis-
continuance of support for two fishing boats which are not con-
figured to support any role assigned to VNN. The evaluation of
ARVN is only partially completed." 88/

In July, the MACV staff briefed Secretary McNamara in Saigon and
touched again on the subject of encadrement. One concept considered was
VATUSA (Vietnamese Augmentation to US Army) whereby two or three Viet-
namese would be assigned to each squad in US combat battalions. While
this scheme offered the advantages of improving ARVN skills and of utiliz-
ing additional RVN troops without further strains on already limited ARVN
leadership, the only real gain for the US was viewed to be a possible
reduction in US strength. The disadvantages pointed out were the political
climate, the language berrier, the danger to US unit security, the adminis-
tretive and disciplinary difficulties and the probable irritation between
VATUSA and regular ARVN unit soldiers. These, it was judged, dictated
against its adoption.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
