Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The net effect of the swift U.S. reprisals and the Congressional
Resolution was to dramatically demonstrate, publicly state and formally
record the commitments to South Vietnam and within Southeast Asia that had
been made internal U.S. policy by NSAM 288 in March 1964. They were also
conceived and intended as a clear communication to Hanoi of what it could
expect if it continued to pursue its current course ef action. They were
portents of the future designed to demonstrate the firmness of U.S. resolve
and the direction its policy was tending. The psychological impact of the
raids on the Administration and the American public is also significant.

They marked the crossing of an important threshold in the war, and it was
accomplished with virtually no domestic criticism, indeed, with an evident
increase in public support for the Administration. The precedent for strikes
against the North was thus established and at very little apparent cost.

There was @ real cost, however. The number of unused measures short of direct
military action against the North had been depleted. Greater visible commit-
ment was purchased at the price of reduced flexibility.

But, a worried Administration went to some lengths to insure that the
strikes did not bind or commit it to any future policies or actions and to
have it understood that the strikes had been pure and simple reprisals of
the one of a kind variety. Yet, for all these reasons, when @ decision to
strike the North was faced again, it was much easier to take.

The Tonkin reprisals were widely regarded within the Administration as
an effective, although limited demonstration of the firmness of American
resolve. However, they also served to stiffen that resolye and to deepen
the commitment. Several officials within the Administration, including
Ambassador Taylor, felt that to have any lasting impact this demonstration
of resolve would have to be followed up by other continuing actions, in an
increasing tempo. The positive short-term effect of the reprisals in raising
South Vietnamese morale was noted as an important by-product of the strikes
and offered as one justification for continuing pressures against the North.
Also figuring importantly in calculations of resolve and intent was the
appreciable improvement in our position in Laos 45 & result of the vigorous
spring offensive by Laotian Government forces. This improvement had led us
to oppose a l-nation conference on Laos for fear of placing the new gains
in jeopardy, and convinced many that only military measures were unambiguously
understood by Hanoi's communist rulers. This, however, was tempered by 4
countervailing concern not to provoke by U.S. action any communist military
escalation in Laos.

Quite another set of arguments for strikes against the North were
advanced by Walt Rostow, then Counselor of the State Department, in a paper
that circulated videly through the Administrat*on in August 1964. The
"Rostow Thesis" argued that externally supported insurgencies could only
be successfully dealt with by striking at their sources of support and
neutralizing them. The objective of such attacks would be psychological
rather than purely military. They would be designed to alter the aggressor's

calculation of interests in supporting the insurgency through the fear of

Ea Seri = oy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
