Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Nothing in the U.N. Charter purports to restrict the exercise of
the right of collective self-defense to regional organizations such as
the OAS [Organization of American States/

"As required by the U.N. Charter, the United States has reported
to the Security Council the actions it-has taken in exercising the
right of collective self-defense in Viet-Nem. It has indeed requested
the Council to seek a peaceful settlement on the basis of the Geneva
accords, but the Council has not been able to act.

"There is no requirement in international law for a declaration of war
before the right of individual or collective self-defense can be exercised.

"South Viet-Nam did not violate the Geneva accords of 1954 by refus-
ing to engage in consultations with the North Vietnamese in 1955 with a
view to holding general elections in 1956, as provided for in those accords.
Even assuming that the election provisions were binding on South Viet-Nam,
which did not agree to them, conditions in the North clearly made impossi-
ble the free expression of the national will contemplated by the accords.
In these circumstances, at least, South Viet-Nam was justified in declining
to participate in planning for a nationwide election. ;

"The introduction of U.S. military personnel and equipment in South
Viet-Nam is not a violation of the accords. Until late 1961 U.S. mili-
tary personnel and equipment in South Viet-lNem were restricted to replace-
ments for French military personnel and equipment in 1954. Such replace-
ment was expressly permitted by the accords.

"North Viet-Nam, however, had from the beginning violated the accords
by leaving forces and supplies in the South and using its zone for aggres-
sion against the South. In response to mounting armed infiltration from
the North, the United States, beginning in late 1961, substantially
increased its contribution to the South's defense. This was fully justi-
fied by the established principle of international law that a material
breach of an agreement by one party entitles another party at least to
withhold compliance with a related provision.

"The United States has commitments to assist South Viet-Nam in
defending itself against Communist aggression: In the SEATO treaty--
which I have already mentioned and which is similar in form to our
defense commitments to South Korea, Japan, the Philippines, Australia,
New Zealand, and the Republic of China--and even earlier in the Geneva
conference we had declared that we would regard a renewal of Communist
aggression in Viét-Nem with ‘grave concern.'

"Since 1954 three Presidents have reaffirmed our commitments to
the defense of South Viet-lan.

"Finally, the President of the United States has full authority to
commit U.S. forces in the collective defense of South Viet-Nam. This

D-80
