Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

OP SECRET - Scenibive

&. An early occasion for reprisal action against the DRV.

‘b. Possibly beginning low-level reconnaissance of the DRV
at once.

Cc. Concurrently ane @ orb, an early orderly withdrawal of
our dependents. We all think this would be a grave mistake in the
absence of stronger action, and if taken in isolation would tre-
mendously increase the pace of deterioration in Saigon. If we are
to clear our decks in this way--and we are more and more inclined
to think we should--it simply must be, for this reason alone, in
the context of some stronger action.

d. Intensified air operations in Laos may have some use, but
they will not meet the problem of Saigon morale and, if continued
at a high level, may raise significant possibilities of Communist
intervention on a substantial scale in Laos with some plausible
justification. We have gone about as far as we can go in Laos by the
existing limiting actions, and, apart from cutting Route 7, we would
not be accomplishing much militarily by intensifying US air actions
there. This form of action thus has little further to gain in the
Laos context, and has no real bearing at this point on the South
Vietnamese context.

‘e. Introduction of limited US ground forces into the northern
area of South Vietnam still has great appeal to many of us, con-
currently with the first air attacks into the DRV. It would have
a real stiffening effect in Saigon, and a strong signal effect to
Hanoi. On the disadvantage side, such forces would be possible
attrition targets for the Viet Cong. For your information, the
Australians have clearly indicated (most recently yesterday) that
they might be disposed to participate in such an operation. The
New Zealanders are more negative and a proposal for Philippine
participation would be an interesting test."

Whether and how these alternatives were posed for the President is
not recorded, but at least two of the actions--getting the U.S. dependents
out of Vietnam and reacting promptly and firmly to the next reprisal oppor-
tunity--were also recommended to another top presidential advisor, namely
to Secretary McNamara, by Assistant Secretary John McNaughton, in a
McNaughton memorandum 21/ that he discussed with McNamara on January 27.
The memorandum contains McNaughton"s pencil notations of McNamara's com-
ments on various points, which suggest that the Secretary of Defense was
dissatisfied with the way U.S. Vietnam policy was "drifting" and seemed
a good deal less dubious than was McNaughton about the potential benefits
to be derived from initiating air strikes against the DRV.

ik TOP SECRET - Sensitive
