Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(4) Conduct random and frequent weather reconnaissance,
and medium and low-level photo reconnaissance, over prospec~
tive strike areas of North Vietnam to reduce the likelihood
of signaling our intentions.

(5) Improve security and cover and deception measures
at US/VNAF air bases.”

These and other measures were explored in greater depth in a USAF
Study Teem effort launched on March 15 and reported on in late May. 86/
Many of the recommendations to lift restrictions and improve air strike
technology were being acted upon during this period and in subsequent
days and weeks. For example, the restrictions on the use of FARMGATE
and PACOM aircraft were lifted, permitting their use in combat opera-
tions in South Vietnam with USAF markings and without VNAF personnel
aboard, effective 9 March; 87/ and use of napalm against North Viet-
namese targets was approved by the President on the same date. 88/

B. Teylor's Concern Over Feeble, Irresolute Action

Sharp annoyance over what seemed to him an unnecessarily timid
and ambivalent US stance on air strikes was expressed by Ambassador
Taylor. The long delays between strikes, the marginal weight of the
attacks, and the great ado about behind-the-scenes diplomatic feelers,
led Taylor to complain: j

I am concerned from standpoint our overall posture
vis-a-vis Hanoi and communist bloc that current feverish
diplomatic activity particularly by French and British
tends to undercut our ability to convey a meaningful signal
to Hanoi of USG determination to stick it out here and pro-
gressively turn the screws on DRV. Seaborn's estimate of
mood of confidence characterizing DRV leadership despite our
joint air strikes to date almost identical our estimate...It
appears to me evident that to date DRV leaders believe air
strikes at present levels on their territory are meaningless
and that we are more susceptible to international pressure
for negotiations than are they. Their estimate may be based
in part on activities of "our friends" to which we seem to
be active party. a “ae

In my view current developments strongly suggest that we
follow simultaneously two courses of action: (1) attempt to
apply brekes to British and others in their headlong dash to
conference table and leave no doubt in their minds that we
do not intend to go to conference table until there is clear
evidence Hanoi (and Peking) prepared to leave neighbors alone;
and (2) step up temoo and intensity of our air strikes in
southern part of DRV in order convince Hanoi authorities they

66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
