Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Vietnamese coastal targets -=- this time the Rhon River estuary and

the Vinh Sonh radar installation, which were bombarded on the night

of 3 August. The more controversial of the two, this incident occurred
under cover of darkness and seems to have been both triggered and des-
cribed largely by radar and sonar images. After the action had been
joined, however, both visual sightings and intercepted North Vietnamese
communications confirmed that an attack by hostile patrol craft was in
progress. 2h/

At 1940 hours, 4 August 1964 (Tonkin Gulf time), while "proceeding
S.E. at best speed," Task Group 72.1 (Maddox and Turner Joy) radioed
"RCVD INFO indicating attack by PGM P-} imminent." Evidently this was
based on an intercepted communication, later identified as "an intelli-
gence source," indicating that "North Vietnamese naval forces had been
ordered to attack the patrol." At the time, radar contacts evaluated
as "probable torpedo boats" were observed about 36 miles to the northeast.
Accordingly, the Task Group Commander altered course’ and increased speed
to avoid what he evaluated as a trap. At approximately 2035 hours, while
west of Hainan Island, the destroyers reported radar sightings of three
unidentified aircraft and two unidentified vessels in the patrol area.
On receiving the report, Ticonderoga immediately launched F-8s and A-4Ds
to provide a combat air patrol over the destroyers. Within minutes, the
unidentified aircraft disappeared from the radar screen, while the vessels
maintained a distance of about 27 miles. Actually, surface contacts on
a parallel course had been shadowing the destroyers with radar for more
than three hours. ECM contacts maintained by the C. Turner Joy indicated
that the radar was that carried aboard DRV patrol boats. 25/

New unidentified surface contacts 13 miles distant were reported
at 2134 hours. These vessels were closing at approximately 30 knots on
the beam and were evaluated as "hostile". Six minutes later (2140)
Maddox opened fire, and at 1ehe, by which time two of the new contacts
had closed to a distance of 11 miles, aircraft from Ticonderoga's CAP
began their attacks. Just before this, one of the PI boats launched
a torpedo, which was later reported as seen passing about 300 feet off
the port beam, from aft to forward, of the C. Turner Joy. A searchlight
beam was observed to swing in an are toward the C. Turner Joy by all of
the destroyer's signal bridge personnel. It was extinguished before it
illuminated the ship, presumably upon detection of the approaching air-
eraft. Aboard the Maddox, Marine gunners saw what were believed to be
cockpit lights of one or more small boats pass up the port side of the
ship and down the other. After approximately an hour’s action, the
destroyers reported two enemy boats sunk and no damage or casualties
suffered. 26/

In the meantime, two patrol craft from the initial surface contact
had closed to join the action, and the engagement was described for higher
headquarters -- largely on the basis of the destroyers’ radar and sonar
indications and on radio intercept information. In successive messages to
CINCPACFLT, beginning about 2150 hours, the Commander of Task Group 72.1
radioed that he was "under continuous torpedo attack" -- that at least
six and later ten torpedoes had been successfully evaded. Eventually,

ff : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
