Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"But Porter sees even this rate as insufficient to keep
up with ‘the growing military capability to sweep the VC out
of key areas.’ He urges rapid expansion via building another
training center (which he'd like to get Seabees to build).

The aim is roughly to double cadre output from 19,000 to
39,000 trained personnel per year. He thinks this rate could
be reached by end CY 1966. I agree with Porter and will press
this concept at the Washington end." 10/

Plans were approved, and construction began on the second training
center. But by the end of 1966 it was recognized that the attempt to
double cadre training would only weaken their quality, which was shaky
to begin with. The construction of the second center was abruptly halted.
Komer and Porter had miscalculated badly.

Komer also sought to influence the military in both Saigon and
Washington to give more attention to the pacification effort.

In cables to Saigon -- most of them slugged with his name, and thus
known as "Komergrams" -- Komer sought to prod the Mission forward on a
wide variety of programs. One of his most recurring themes was the Chieu
Hoi program * and in time his urgings did contribute to a more successful
program, with a high-ranking American official in Ambassador Porter's
office working on nothing else, in place of the previous ad hoe arrange-
ment between JUSAPO and USAID. Pao

Another recurring theme was refugees, but here he was less success-
ful, particularly since the U.S. Mission was never able to determine
whether or not it desired to stimulate more refugees as means of denying
the VC manpower. His cables on this complex issue were characterized by
an absence of objective, but at least he was addressing frontally ques-
tions few other people would raise at all:

"For Porter from Komer: We here deeply concerned by grow-
ing number of refugees. Latest reports indicate that as of
31 August, a total of 1,361,288 had been processed...Of course,
in some ways, increased flow of refugees is a plus. It helps

* For example: "Porter from Komer: Highest authorities interested in
stepping up defection programs. While recognizing limitations Chieu
Hoi program and inadequacies GVN administration, program has achieved
impressive results end shown high return in terms modest U.S. support
costs. Greatly concerned by two recent administrative decisions taken
by GVN..." 11/ Or: "Yo Porter from Komer: USIA eager help maximize
suecess both Chieu Hoi and RD programs, in which highest authorities
vitally interested..." 12/ Or: "For Mann and Casler from Komer:
Would appreciate your following through on coordinated set of action
proposals to energize lagging Chieu Hoi program...We are concerned
about drop-off in returnees since April...Bell and Marks concur." 13/

64, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
