135

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

tion B: To continue roughly along present lines, but
40 move more actively to stimulate a negotiated solution, ~
specifically through contact between the Saigon government
and elements in the Viet Cong and Liberation Front. This
epsten /lined out in MeNaughton/ could be approached on an
"optimistic" [Gnderlined in MeNaughton/ or "Lesser visk"
/lined out in McNaughton with "harder" penciled in above and
question marks in the margin/ basis, or ona "pessimistic"
/Mctaughton underline/ or "greater-visk" /lined out in
McNaughton with "softer" pencilled in/ basis. The opening
moves might be the same in both options, but more drastic
indications of the U.S, position would /"be involved" penned
in by MclNaughton/ in the "pessimistic" approach /, which
shades into option C below.” penned by McNaughton/.

Option C: To decide now that the chances of bringing about an
independent (and non-Communist) [parenthesis added by McNaughton/
South Viet-Nam have shrunk to the point where, on an over-all ~
basis, the US effort is no longer warranted [linea out by
MeNeughton and replaced in pencil with "should be directed at a
minimum-cost disengagement.” Stet pencilled in the margin. /

This would mean setting the stage rapidly /circled by MclNaughton/
for US disengagement and withdrawal irrespective of whether any
kind of negotiation would work or not." Jencetion marks in the

margin./ 111

Bundy did not identify in the paper his preferred option.
The tone of his paper, however, suggested a worried preference for "A".
In a concluding section he listed a number of "broader factors" which
“out, as they always have, in deeply contradictory directions." 112/ The
first was the level of support for the Vietnam policy within the U.S.
While it was adequate for the moment, continued GVN weakness and political
unrest could seriously undermine it. With an eye on the 1968 Presidential
elections, Bundy prophetically summed up the problem:

As we look a year or two ahead, with a military program
that would require major further budget costs--with all their
implications for taxes and domestic programs--and with steady
or probably rising casualties, the war could well become an
albatross around the Administration's neck, at least equal to
what Korea was for President Truman in 1952. 113/

Moreover, if the prevailing malaise about the war among our non-SEATO
allies degenerated into open criticism, a far wider range of world issues
‘on which their cooperation was required might be seriously affected. With
respect to the Soviet Union, no movement on disarmament or other matters

of detente could be expected while the war continued. But since no

102 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
