Ce

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

MILITARY PRESSURES AGAINST NVN: JULY - OCTOBER, 1964

SUMMARY and ANALYSIS

During the spring and summer of 1964, there was disquiet about
the situation in South Vietnam and disillusion with on-going U.S. actions
to right that situation. During the third quarter of 1964, @ consensus
developed within the Johnson Administration that some form of continual
overt pressures mounting in severity against North Vietnam soon would be
required. The purpose of these pressures was twofold: (1) to effect DRV
will and capabilities in order to persuade and force the leadership in
Hanoi to halt their support and direction of the war in the South; and
(2) to induce negotiations at some future point in +ime on our terms after
North Vietnam had been hurt and convinced of our resolve. This consensus
was in an early formative stage -- it had become an idea, not a program
for action; it was a belief, not as yet fully staffed and considered.
Because of this and because of important tactical considerations (the
impending U.S. elections, the instability of the GVN, and the need to
produce further evidence of VC infiltration into the South) implementation
of such a policy was deferred. Nevertheless, the groundwork was being
laid. The Tonkin Gulf reprisal constituted an important firebreak, and.
the Tonkin Gulf Resolution set U.S. public support for virtually any action.

Since the fall of Diem in November 1963, the political situation in
South Vietnam had been deteriorating. The Khanh Government had succeeded
Minh in January 1964, but had demonstrated only greater capacity for surviv-
ability, not more capacity for reversing the trend toward collapse. In
the wake of the Tonkin Gulf reprisals, when South Vietnamese morale was
still temporarily inflated, Khanh made a bold bid to consolidate his personal
power and impose semi-dictatorial rule. He was brought to heel, however, in
less than a month by the military junta which continued to operate behind
the scenes. By September, the most salient aspect of the confused political
situation in South Vietnam was the likelihood that it would continue its
downward slide into the foreseeable future.

In this setting, a program of covert military pressures against North
Vietnam already had been set in process. These were basically of three
kinds: (1) low level reece with armed escort over Laos; (2) De Soto patrols
within 4 n.m. of the NVN coast to acquire visual, electronic, and photo-
graphic intelligence; and (3) Oplan 34-A which included a variety of anti-
infiltration, sabotage, and psywar measures. The portent of these actions
was being conveyed to the North Vietnamese through private and public
channels. A Canadian, Blair Seaborn, was sent to Hanoi to state that U.S.
objectives were limited but that our commitment was deep, and that "in the
event of escalation the greatest devastation would of course result for the
DRVN itself."

TOP SECRET - Sensitive |
