Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Ae)

"Those fighting under the banner of Ho Chi Minh have largely
been trained and equipped in Communist China. They are supplied with
artillery and ammunition through the Soviet-Chinese Communist bloc.
Captured materiel shows that much of it was fabricated by the Skoda
Munition Works in Czechoslovakia and transported across Russia and
Siberia and then sent through China into Viet-Nam. Military supplies
for the Communist armies have been pouring into Viet-Nam at a steadily
increasing rate. ‘

’ "Military and technical guidance is supplied by an estimated
2,000 Communist Chinese. They function with the forces of Ho Chi Minh
in key positions -- in staff sections of the High Command, at the
division level, and in specialized units such as signal, engineer,
artillery, and transportation.

"In the present stage, the Commnists in Indochina use national-
istic anti-French slogans to win local support. But if they achieved
military or political success, it is certain that they would subject
the people to a cruel Communist dictatorship taking its orders from
Peiping and Moscow.

"The tragedy would not stop there. If the Communist forces won
uncontested control over Indochina or any substantial part thereof,
they would surely resume the same pattern of aggression against other
free peoples in the area.

"The propagandists of Red China and Russia make it apparent that
the purpose is to dominate all of Southeast Asia.

"Southeast Asia is the so-called 'rice bowl' which helps to feed
the densely populated region that extends from India to Japan. It is
rich in many raw materials, such as tin, oil, rubber, and iron ore.

It offers industrial Japan potentially important markets and sources of
raw materials.

"The area has great strategic value. Southeast Asia is astride
the most direct and best-developed sea and air routes between the Pacific
and South Asia. It has major naval and air bases. Commmist control of
Southeast Asia would carry a grave threat to the Philippines, Australia,
and New Zealand, with whom we have treaties of mitual assistance. The
entire Western Pacific area, including the so-called ‘offshore island
chain,' would be strategically endangered. ‘

"President Eisenhower appraised the situation last Wednesday
(Merch 24) when he said that the area is of ‘transcendent importance.'

"The United States has shown in many ways its sympathy for the
gallent struggle being waged in Indochina by French forces and those of
the Associated States. Congress has enabled us to provide material aid
to the established governments and their peoples. Also, our diplomacy
has sought to deter Commnist Chine from open aggression in that area.

B-7
