Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION -

less desirable peripheral bases, Soviet exploitation of the

naval and air bases in mainland Southeast Asia probably would

_ be limited by the difficulties of logistic support but would,
nevertheless, increase the threat to existing lines of com- °

munication. :

II. REGIONAL STRATEGY

8. The continued integrity of the individual countries
of Southeast Asia is to a large extent dependent upon a
“successful coordination of political and military measures
for the entire erea. The development of practical measures
aimed at preventing the absorption of these countries into
the Soviet orbit must therefore recognize this interdependence
and must, in general, seek courses of action for the area as
a whole.

9. However, it must be recognized that the governments
and peoples of Southeast Asia have little in common other than
their geographic proximity and their newly awakened nationalism
and anti-colonialism. For the most part, their economies are
competitive rather than complementary. The countries are
divided internally and from eech other by languege and ethnic
differences. The several nationalities and tribal groups are
the heirs of centuries of warfare, jealousy, and mutual dis-
trust. In addition, their present governments ere sharply
divided in their attitudes towerd the current Hast-West
struggle. Tne governments of the three Associated States of
Indochins are not recognized by any other Asian states except
Nationelist China and Thailand. ;

10. In the strategic sense, the defense of Tonkin is
important to the defense of mainland Southeast Asie. If
Communist forces should succeed in driving the French Union
forces from Tonkin, militery action in the remainder of
Indochine might have to be limited to delaying action and
the perimeter defense of certain coastal areas pending rein-
forcement or evacuation. With the appeerance of communist
success, native support would probably swing increasingly to
the Viet Minh.

ll. Thailand has no common border with China and no
strong internal communist element. It adjoins ereas of Indo-
china now controlled by the Viet Minh, but the border areas
@re remote and difficult. Hence, communist seizure of
Thailand is improbable except as a result of. the prior loss
of either Burma or Indochina.

12, Communist control of either Indochina or Burma would
expose Theilend to infiltration end severe political pressures,

ANNEX TO NSC 124 , TOP SECRET

. 470

