Pee | eee |

pea |

eer. ee See

eee

ee |

Pod

od

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

2h. ° Utilization of Korean uititeny Training Lessons in Indochina;

Korean military training methods can be employed advantageously in the

raining of the Armies of the Associated States, Although the French,
naturally proud of their own military heritage and partially justified
in their claims that the war in Indochina is different from that in
Korea, have verbally minimized the benefits which may eaetas to the

Armies of the Associated States from training lessons. learned in Korea,

* the: Associated | States Have ailready. benefited from Korean Pras ninee This

‘was. particularly evident at the Officers’ Bendidate School in Dalat.

; “Here HeAG officers ‘emphasized the considerable improvement, not only in

training potas but also in utilization of plant capacity, since the

visit to hones by members of the Dalat staff. Shortly before our

departure we noted increased interest on the part of senior French

' commanders in making visits to training centers in Korea. More visits

to KAVAG training centers in Korea are planned. These visits should

include visits by officers of the Hanoi Tactical School (which trains

battalion and regimental commanders and staff officers) and the new

"National War College", when established, to similar training centers

in Korea. This is one of the most desirable means by which Korean

milit ary training meth od s INMay be applied to the training of the Armies
of the Associated States.

25. Development of Aesociated States Military Forces: With respect
to numbers, the indigenous forces of the Associated States are developing
according to plan (see Annex "J"). Monsieur Quat, Vietnamese Minister
of Defense, informed me that 31 of tne 54 Vietnamese commando battalions
pehoanied for organization this year will be operational by 1 Cctober
1953. My observations at training camps confirmed Monsieur Quat's

remark 2
are 4 TA el fie

= |
fs ‘
ree whieh

Bi
