Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FW 795.00/8-753

examination of the general problem of Communist aggres-
sion elsewhere than in Korea, (c) or might be included
in a general discussion of Far Eastern questions.

In any case, it B essential that the inter-
dependence of the different theaters where Communist
aggression is taking place not be lost sight of by
the Allied negotiators and be clearly affirmed.

4, On the assumption that it proves impossible
for any of the three formulas, indicated above, to be
carried out, the matter could be taken up on the fringes
of the Political Conference. It could, in effect, be
studied, after the appropriate contacts--official and
restricted--had been established with the Chinese repre-
sentatives, in a parallel conference which might be
held at the same time, but which need not be of the
same nature or the same composition,

This parallel conference could be limited to
the question of Indochina alone, or deal equally with
other Far Eastern problemsather than Korea. It would
have the advantage of not having any tie, legally or
otherwise, with the United Nations since the latter
would have no part in the establishment or in the
program of its work. It would allow for more flexibil-
ity and for more possibilities in the conversations.
The parties could, in this parallel conference consider
themselves uninhibited by any previous positions
taken at the time of the working out of the articles
of the armistice regarding the calling of the Political
Conference.

5. In any event, the French Government considers
it important that the following consideration guide
the conduct of the Allies: that no non-Korean problems
of interest particularly to China--viz., admission of
its representative to the United Nations, raising the
embargo, and the question of Formosa--will be the
object of discussions or of more or less long-range
promises until the Indochina problem has been discussed.
The French Government could not agree that the Political
Conference take up the non-Korean questions if among
them is not included--in fact as a pricrity item--the
question of Indochina.

6. The objective we would wish to attain, ,when
this question in one way or another is seriously discussed,

110
