7#

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ean be remedied only by a strong and successful India, a strong and success-
ful Japan, and some kind of regional group over Southeast Asia which gives
these smaller countries the feeling that, in spite of their distaste for a
military alliance, they will not be left to be picked off one by one at the
whim of the Peiping regime."

4. Senator John F. Kennedy Interview as Reported in The Washington Post,
October 22, 1900:
ee &

“Cronkite: '...What areas do you see where the United States might
take the offensive in a challenge to communism over the next 4 to 8 years?'

"Kennedy: '...the most vulnerable area, I have felt, has been eastern
Europe. I have been eritical of the Administration's failure to suggest
policies which would make it possible for us to establish, for example,
closer relations with Poland, particularly after the '55-'56 period and the
Hungarian revolution. We indicated at that time that we were not going to
intervene militarily. There was a period there when Poland demonstrated a
netional independence, and even the Polish Government moved some distance
away from the Soviet Union.

"Secondly, the relations between Russia and China. They are now
engaged in @ debate over whether war is the means of communizing the world, ~
or whether they should use subversion and infiltration, economic struggles
and all the rest. No one can say what that course of action will be, but
I think the next President of the United States should watch it carefully.
If those two years should split, it could have great effects throughout
the entire world. ‘

"Thirdly, I believe that India represents a great area for affirmative
action by the Free World. India started from about the same place that
China did. The Chinese Communists have been moving ahead the last 10 years.
India...has been making some progress, but if India does not succeed with

her 450 million people, if she can't make freedom work, then people around

the world are going to determine, particularly in the underdeveloped world,
that the only way they can develop their resources is through the Communist
system."

« - * .

Kennedy Presidential News Conference as Quoted in the New York Times,
1951. News Conference of March 23, 1961:

"My fellow Americans, Laos is far away from America, but the world is
small. Its 2,000,000 people live in a country three times the size of
Austria. The security of all Southeast Asia will be endengered if Laos
loses its neutral independence. Its own safety runs with the safety of
us all, in real neutrality observed by all. :

c-6
