Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

any military alliance and shall not be utilized for the resumption of
hostilities or in the service of an aggressive policy. The Conference
also tekes note of the declarations of the Governments of Cambodia and
Leos to the effect that they will not join in any agreement with other
States if this agreement includes the obligation to participate in a
military alliance not in conformity with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations or, in the case of Laos, with the principles of
the agreement on the cessation of hostilities in Laos or, so long as
their security is not threatened, the obligation to establish bases on
Cambodian or Laotian territory for the military forces of foreign
Powers.

"6. The Conference recognizes that the essential purpose of the
agreement relating to Viet-Nam is to settle military questions with a
view to ending hostilities and that the military demarcation line is
provisional and should not in any way be interpreted as constituting a
political or territorial boundary. The Conference expresses its con-
viction that the execution of the provisions set out in the present
declaration and in the agreement on the cessation of hostilities creates
the necessary basis for the achievement in the near future of a political
settlement in Viet-Nan.

"7, The Conference declares that, so far as Viet-Nam is concerned,
the settlement of political problems, effected on the basis of respect
for the principles of independence, unity and territorial integrity, shall
permit the Viet-Namese people to enjoy the fundamental freedoms, guar-
anteed by democratic institutions established as a result of free general
elections by secret ballot. In order to ensure that sufficient progress
in the restoration of peace has been made, and that all the necessary
conditions obtain for free expression of the national will, general
elections shall be held in July 1956, under the supervision of an inter-
national commission composed of representatives of the Member States of
the International Supervisory Commission, referred to in the agreement
on the cessation of hostilities. Consultations will be held on this
subject between the competent representative authorities of the two
zones from 20 July 1955 onwards.

"8, The provisions of the agreements on the cessation of hostilities
intended to ensure the protection of individuals and of property must be
most strictly applied and must, in particular, allow everyone in Viet-
Nam to decide freely in which zone he wishes to live.

"9, The competent representative authorities of the Northern and
Southern zones of Viet-Nam, as well as the authorities of Laos and
Cambodia, must not permit any individual or ccllective reprisals
ageinst persons who have collaborated in any way with one of the parties

during the war, or against members of such persons' families.

"10, The Conference takes note of the declaration of the Government
of the French Republic to the effect that it is ready to withdraw its
troops from the territory of Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nem, et the request

B-24
