—

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. Add this new and justified interpretation
of San Antonio so that: in fact we would not be put on
the spot ever the next 2-4 months.

c. Keep sufficient flexibility so that, if the
situation should improve, we could move during the summer
if we then judged it wise. 5h/

This position represented the widely held belief at the time that the
question of negotiations, in spite of continuing contacts through third
parties, was no less moribund than it had been at any time in the
previous year. The San Antonio formula was regarded as eminently
reasonable and DRV failure to respond to it was interpreted as evidence
of their general disinterest in negotiations at the time. In that
context, and in the wake of the ferocious attacks in South Vietnam, new
initiatives could only be construed by Hanoi as evidence of allied
weakness. Hence, no new offers were recommended.

As already noted, the Clifford Group was split on the
issue of bombing policy, therefore, two papers on the subject were
included. The first had been written by the Joint Staff and was sub-
mitted by General Wheeler. It advocated reduction of the Hanoi /Haiphong
perimeters, the extension of naval operations and authority to use
sea-based surface-to-air missiles against North Vietnamese MIGs. The
cover memo for this tab noted that: "In addition General Wheeler would
favor action to close the Port of Haiphong through mining or otherwise.
Since this matter has been repeatedly presented to the President,
General Wheeler has not added a specific paper on this. proposal." 35/
The General had apparently gotten the word that closing the ports just
wasn't an action the President was going to consider, even in this
"comprehensive" review. The JCS bombing paper began with a discussion
of the history of the air war and offered some explanations for its
seeming failure to date:

1. The air campaign against North Vietnam is now
entering the fourth year of operations. Only during the
latter part of the past favorable weather season of April
through October 1967, however, has a significant weight
of effort been applied against the major target systems.
During this period, even though hampered by continuous and
temporarily imposed constraints, the air campaign made a
marked imoact on the capability of North Vietnam to prose-
cute the war. Unfortunately, this impact was rapidly
overcome. The constraints on operations and the change
in the monsoon weather provided North Vietnam with numerous
opportunities to recuperate from the effects of the air
strikes. Facilities were rebuilt and reconstituted and
dispersal of the massive material aid from communist
countries continued.

aS TOP SECRET - Sensitive
