2h8.

2h9.

250.

251.

253.

25 De

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In a debriefing, General Collins is firmly convinced that
it will be to the detriment of U.S. interests to continue
to support Diem. ISA Memorandum, 25 April 1955.....soesessee F3T

The U.S. tentatively proposes to maintain full support to
Diem until an alternative supported by Bao Dai is developed. ;
Dulles 4757 to Saigon, 27 ADril 1955...ecccsccecceccceececces SHI

The State Department is being forced to take a strong stand
for Diem. Senator Mansfield is a strong backer of Diem

and if Diem is forced out,there will be "real difficulties
on the Hill.” K.T. Young Memorandum for Robertson, 30 April

RS Wale aa tle ais eee a scat od sce Sole min PVA ata 's ah re stele oe
Bao Dai registers strong complaints against U.S. support of

Diem, U.S. inaction which allowed the present civil strife,

end against U.S. failure to urge Diem to go to France.

Diem, in Bao Dai's opinion, is a "psychopath who wishes

to martyrize himself." Paris 4746 to Dulles, 30 April O48

Ao VERE Te ee Oe Oe

It is predicted that the success of Diem against the Binh

Auyen, Bao Dai, the French and General Vy has created a
potentially revolutionary situation in Vietnam and, given

U.S. support and French acquiescence, Diem is expected to
stabilize the situation in Saigon. SNIE 63.1-2/1-55, :

B Mag 16S a ce oniccies cease Rowen seitosee casa cou eccasemecnunoae, OR

Tripartite discussions again reveal basic disagreement.

The French conclude: "Diem is a bad choice...withowt him

some solution mizsht be possible but with him there is

none...Whet would you say if we /France/ were to retire

entirely from Indechina...” SECTO 8, 8 May U6S5acceccueeacue 722

. The French are increasingly bitter toward Diem and con-

vinced he must go. Steps are suggested to reconstitute

@ joint Franco-American approach to the situation.

Among these are steps to reduce the French garrison

in Saigon, replace Ely, and form a course of action

after the crisis is over which persuades Diem to reor-

ganize his government or else get rid of him. Saigon

O(a to Miles, UO May 19551 icc.mectaverdsaseessvevsweseccee Ot

The JCS reject both alternatives suggested by Dulles

as solutions to the Vietnam problem. The JCS recom-

mend that Dulles be advised that Diem shows the most

promise for achieving internal stability, that the ~

U.S, cannot guarantee security of French nationals,

and that U.S. actions under SEATO could possibly re-

place FEC presence. JCS Memorandum for Secretary of

DePvenseg Oi Mayy LOS Dc. wcie e's a/e'c tw areeew eee eee ig aie Sees atten mae? Ce

XLIT TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
