Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in intelligence collection and production, in planning, and in operational
execution in the countryside, where the battles were fought -- both the
"pattle for men's minds" and the more easily understood battles for con-
trol of the hamlets, villages, districts, and provinces.

The U.S. and GVN were agreed that in order to defeat the tieurcenes
it was necessary that the rural populace identify with at least the local
representatives of the central government. They were agreed, too, that
some measure of physical security must be provided the rural population
if this end were to be achieved. Both agreed that the GVN must be the
principal agent to carry out the actions which would bring the insurgency
to an end.

The high level U.S.-GVN discussions held during President Kennedy's
first year in office focused on what the U.S. could provide GVN to assist
the latter's counterinsurgency efforts and on what GVN should do organi-
zationally to make its efforts more effective. A subsidiary and related
discussion revolved around the U.S. advisory organization to parallel the
GVN reorganization. The problem of how additional resources in some im-
proved organizational framework were to be applied operationally was frag-
mented into many sub-issues ranging from securing the border to building
social infrastructure.

The story of the Strategic Hamlet Program, as it came to be called,
is one in which an operational concept specifying a sequence of concrete
steps was introduced by an articulate advocate, nominally accepted by all
of the principal actors, and advanced to a position of apparent centrality
in which it became the operational blueprint for ending the insurgency.

But it is also the story of an apparent consensus built on differing, some-
times competing, expectations and of an effort which was, in retrospect,
doomed by the failure to resolve in one context the problem it was designed
to alleviate in another -- the problem of GVN stability.

II. THE FORMULATION OF THE STRATEGIC HAMLET PROGRAM
A. U.S.-GVN Consultations

Beginning in May 1961, the U.S. and GVN conducted a series of high
level conferences to fashion responses to the insurgent challenge. The
first. of these was the visit to Saigon by the Vice President, Lyndon B.
Johnson. The Vice President's consultations were designed to reinforce
the U.S. commitment to RVN and to improve the image of President Diem's
government.

In @ communique issued jointly in Saigon, it was agreed that the
RVNAF was to be increased to 150,000 men, that the U.S. would support the
entire Civil Guard with military assistance funds, that Vietnamese and —
U.S. military specialists would be used to support village-level health
and public works activities, and that the two governments would "discuss

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
