Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

preparing for war; therefore, we should firmly hold aloft
the banner of peace and enhance our vigilance." 154/

The text of this statement reported by U.S. intelligence at the time,
however, had Ho coupling his statement that "the enemies of our people
still occupy one half of our national territory and are preparing for
war . . ." with the ominous assertion that the DRV must "be in a
position to change the form of the struggle - " Moreover, Truong
Chinh, the Party First Secretary, was reported to have addressed the
notion that "peaceful unification" of Vietnam might be “illusory and
reformist." 155/

In May the Soviet Co-chairman of the Geneva Conference
signed the letter calling upon the two Vietnams to observe the Accords,
but in effect committing the Geneva powers and ICC to status quo in
Vietnam. At this juncture, the DRV appeared resigned to partition for
the foreseeable future, as evidenced in the public letter of 19 June
1956 from Ho Chi Minh to the restive regroupees, in which he undertook
to explain and defend a "socialism in one country” strategy (see
supra, p. 24), but stressed that “the present political struggle is a
stage in our national democratic revolution . . . in the present
political struggle, as in the Revolution and the Resistance, our com-
patriots in the South are in the vanguard, closely united and struggling
heroically and perseveringly." 156/ As the deadlines for the Geneva
Elections (July, 1956) approached, NVA troops were drawn back from the
Demilitarized Zone in Vietnam to defensive positions; DRV diplomats
wooed the neutral nations in search of support, openly advocating
neutralization of Southeast Asia. Captured orders to Party cadre in
sees Vietnam stressed "an ideology of lying low for a long time... -
EDIe

"

The Geneva deadline passed uneventfully, the DRV by July
being well impressed with the futility of looking to the Conference for
aid. Ho's Pravda article of 2 August 1956 underscored the DRV's rejec-
tion of a go-it-alone strategy, and its continued fealty to the Bloc
led by the Soviets. 158/

2, Internal Dissent and Reassessment: Summer, 1956 -- Fall, 1957.
By mid-1956, the Lao Dong Party leaders faced at home

not only a crisis of confidence over their foreign policy failure, but
the serious threat to internal security arising from reaction to the
Land Reform Campaign. To stem deterioration of public morale, Ho
announced on 18 August 1956 the "successful completion" of Land Reform,
admitting to "errors" by the Party, and closing his statement with an
appeal for unity under the Fatherland Front:

uy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
