Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

uy Peta eee Se
Ui o3e933 by dia

"This peace depends upon you (the Vietnamese people) to ebtain it."
ANALYSIS
Individual States

The speech left the way open for unification of the three Kys which
the French feel as a foregone conclusion. The French cleverly do not
propose any solution but leave the burden of preparing a plan acceptable
to all Kys in the hands of the Vietnamese.

The status of the states, either unified or separate, is one of
"liberty and freedom" within the French Union. There is no recognition
of Vietnam as an "etat Libre”, such as was done in the March 6 agreement.
There is nowhere any mention of "independence" save in the statement by
M. Bollaert in Vietnamese: "BOC IAP TRONG KHOI LAEN HIRP THAT" (Indepen-
dence within the framework of the French Union.) Nor will France hand
over anything to the States which resembles "sovereignty". Rather she
will give only "public administration".

This omission is commented upon by the AI'P in a September 12 despatch
from Hanoi as follows:

"Qn the other hand, French circles expressed appreciation for the
liberalism of the French government, a liberalism which may reduce the
tension. It is only regretted that the word '‘independence', as being
capable of producing a (favorable) psyschological shock, was not pro-
nounced.”

Bach state or states will organize its representative institutions,
its justice, its fimances, its education, its social legislation and its
hospitals.

The exact judicial formula has not yet been settled, however.
Didier MACHEL, Political Counsellor to the High Commissioner, whom I
saw after the speech was delivered, pointed out it was uncertain whether
the courts of the states would have jurisdiction over French and for-
eigners within its territory. He did not specify whether Laotians end
Cambodians would be considered foreigners with a special status. He
suggested, as his Deen opinion, that perhaps there might be a solution
in the establishment of "mixed tribunals" or possibly mixed or wholly
French appelate courts over Vietnamese courts of first instance.

The state governments will have the help, if they so desire of "our
functionnaires and our technicians" » another retreat from the pre evious
position as only French "counsellors, technicians, and experts" were
mentioned in Article 4 of the Modus Vivendi of September 14. Finally,
France solemly renowmced all administration direct and indirect. Frence
solemmly renounced "direct" administration in the June 6, 1884 Treaty
which states in Article 7: The (French) residents (in Tonkin) will avoid
treating details of interior administration in the provinces.

eine Ato oa ratT ans
itliar fi iY

