Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(1) Measures that Diem had, in fact, requested,
and that required U.S. action, principally the proposed 20,000-man
increase in ARVIN. é

(2) Measures which the GVN currently had "under
study" or which would shortly be presented to the GVN, but on which
foot-dragging and some resistance could be expected; such as implementa-
tion of a firm military chain of command (in particular, willingness
by Diem to cease by-passing his military staff and commanders in dealing
with province chiefs and subordinate commanders); establishment of a
military operational command for counterinsurgency operations; and
development of a national plan for counterinsurgency.

(3) Recommendations "considered by the Country
Team to be indispensable and in the GVN's own best interests," but
which would "probably not be particularly palatable to the GVN";
this situation pertained particularly to certain political actions and
concepts of the military-civilian relationship. (For example,
strengthening the role of the National Assembly, and including respected
oppositionists in the Cabinet.)

The disagreement between the Ambassador and Chief, MAAG, evident in

the CIP, reflected the divergences that were to persist among U.S.
decision-makers through 1961. Durbrow's position, reflected in later,
Similar dispatches to the State Department, and to the President himself,
was that the unpalatable political measures aimed at "liberalizing"

the regime were essential to the achievement of U.S. (and GVN) goals in
Vietnam. Therefore, in the face of resistance to such measures by Diem’
it was necessary to assert some leverage to win his acceptance; and

the most expedient means of leverage would be to postpone or threaten
withholding of those measures of support that Diem actually wanted,
until Diem should have complied with our aims in the political area.

In the case of the program represented by the CIP, this could only

mean withholding approval of part or all of the funding for the 20,000
man force level increase that Diem (backed by MAAG) had requested.
Earlier, Durbrow may have turned to this tactic because of a suspicion
that the 20,000-man increase was not really essential. By January
1961, he was evidently prepared to agree on the need for additional
troops (referring to the increasing threat posed by the Soviet airlift
in Laos), but he still pointed to the tactical requirement that some-
how Diem had to be induced to take unpalatable political actions.

"These questions are an integral part of the overall plan and are
essential to its successful accomplishment. Consideration should,
therefore, be given to what actions we are prepared to take to encourage
or, ans necessary to force, acceptance of all essential elements of the
plan."

9h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
