Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

asserted that "the US may sharply reduce its aid to Vietnam unless
President Diem gets rid of secret police officials responsible for the
attacks," 28/ Lodge was understandably upset, and sent a testy cable
rhetorically inquiring whether he really was in charge of tactics as he
had been given to understand, 29/ Rusk sent a personal cable of apology
to Lodge, and VOA promptly broadcast a denial of U.S, intent to cut aid,
but the initial damage had been done.

The Vietnamese reaction to the attack on the pagodas during this
time had been dramatic, In the United States, Mme, Nhu's father and
mother, respectively the Vietnamese Ambassador to the U.S. and the
Vietnamese observer at the UN, had both resigned, making bitter public
statements denouncing the raids. In South Vietnam, the Foreign Minister,
Vo Van Mau, had resigned and shaved his head like a Buddhist monk in
protest. On August 23, students at the faculties of medicine and
pharmacy at the University of Saigon turned out to stage mass demonstra-
tions on behalf of the Buddhists. The GVN reacted in the only way it
seemed to know, with massive arrests. But the demonstrations continued,
and when the university was closed, the protest was taken up by high
school and junior high school students. These were dramatic evidences
indeed of the degree of disaffection with the regime, since most of these
students were from the middle class families that formed the bureaucracy
and the army leadership. Students in Vietnam had no substantial record
of political activism as was the case with their counterparts in other
parts of Asia, like Korea. Furthermore, some of the Buddhist leadership
had survived the raids and gone underground and were soon passing out
leaflets on the streets again. On the day of the raids, two monks had
taken refuge in the USOM building next door to Xa Loi pagoda, The
following day, three others, including the militant young leader Tich
Tri Quang, took refuge in the U.S. Embassy, where they were warmly
received by Lodge and remained until the successful November coup. 30/

vee Mis~Coup

Rumors of coup plotting had been a standard part of the Saigon scene
under Diem from the very beginning. And there had been several attempts.
In 1957, an assassin fired at Diem at an up-country fair. In November 1960,
he had narrowly escaped being overthrown by a military coup by negotiating
with the dissident officers until loyal reinforcements could be moved
into Saigon to restore his control. And in 1962, two disgruntled Air Force
pilots had unsuccessfully bombed and strafed the Gia Long Palace. So,
when rumors of coup plotting began to gain currency again in the spring
of 1963, they were monitored by the U.S. intelligence community, but not
given extraordinary prominence or credence. By mid-summer, however, with
the Buddhist crisis in full bloom, more serious consideration was given
to the growing number of reports identifying plotters and schemes. 31/

One plot, identified in late June, was led by Dr. Tran Kim Tuyen, Diem's
Director of Political and Social Studies (national intelligence). 32/
It involyed elements of the Civic Action Ministry, the Information
Ministry, the Secret Police and some junior army officers. A separate
plot involving other elements of the army was reported, and on July 8

avd TOP SECRET - Sensitive
