Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

WS

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a, “logistic funnel" through which supplies from the USSR and China
flowed. As such, it was a hard target, easy to maintain in operation
and quite large for the load. This was particularly the case in the
lower half of the "funnel", where the bombing had been concentrated:

-»-the rudimentary nature of the logistic targets
in the southern part of North Vietnam, the small volume
of traffic moving over them in relation to route capaci-
ties, the relative ease and speed with which they are
repaired, the extremely high frequency with which they
would have to be restruck -- once every three days --
all combine to make the logistic network in this region
a relatively unattractive target system, except as a
supplement to a larger program. A significant lesson from
the ROLLING THUNDER program to date is that the goals of
sustained interdictions of the rudimentary road and trail
networks in southern North Vietnam and Laos will be
extremely difficult and probably impossible to obtain in
1966, given the conventional ordnance and strike capabili-
ties likely to exist. 58/

The upper half of the "funnel" was a much more lucrative
target -- not, however, because attacking it would choke the volume
of supplies flowing into the South, but because it would inflict more
pain on the regime in the North.

The flow of military logistics supplies from the USSR
and China cannot be cut off, but the movement could be
made considerably more expensive and unreliable if authoriza-
tion is granted to attack intensively the rail connections to
Communist China and if the three major ports are effectively
mined. About 2/3 of North Vietnam's imports are carried by
sea transport and the remainder move principally over the
yail connections from Communist China. Mining the entrances
to the three major ports would effectively transfer all
imports to rail transport, including the flow of imports needed
to maintain economic activity. The rail connections to Com-
munist China would then become a more lucrative target and
the disruptive effect of interdiction would then be more
immediately felt. Sustained interdiction would then force
Hanoi to allocate considerable amounts of manpower and
materials to maintain the line. 59/

Bombing the supplies and supply facilities at the top of
the "funnel" was therefore a "preferred LOC target system." It was
not advanced as an interdiction measure, however, but as a means of
jnereasing the penalty to Hanoi (and its allies), in terms of economic,

82 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
