Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The barrier may not be fully effective at first, but
I believe that it can be made effective in time and that
even the threat of its becoming effective can substantially
change to our advantage the character of the war. It
would hinder enemy efforts, would permit more efficient use
of the limited number of friendly troops, and would be per-
suasive evidence both that our sole aim is to protect the
South from the North and that we intend to see the job
through. 58/

The purpose of these two actions would be to lay the
groundwork for a stronger U.S, effort to get negotiations started. With
the war seemingly stalemated, this appeared to be the only "out" to the
Secretary that offered some prospect of bringing the conflict to an end
in any near future. In analyzing North Vietnamese unwillingness to date
to respond to peace overtures, McNamara noted their acute sensitivity to
the air attacks on their homeland (recalling the arguments of the Jason
Summer Study) and the hostile suspicion of U.S. motives. To improve the
climate for talks, he argued, the U.S. should make some gesture to
indicate our good faith. Foremost of these was a cessation or a limita-
tion of the bombing.

As a way of projective /sic/ U.S. bona fides, I believe
that we should consider two possibilities with respect to
our bombing program against the North, to be undertaken, if
at all, at a time very carefully selected with a view to
maximizing the chances of influencing the enemy and world
opinion and to minimizing the chances that failure would
strengthen the hand of the "hawks" at home: First, without
fanfare, conditions, or avowal, whether the stand-down was
permanent or temporary, stop bombing all of North Vietnan.
It is generally thought that Hanoi will not agree to negoti-
ations until they can claim that the bombing has stopped
unconditionally. We should see what develops, retaining
freedom to resume the bombing if nothing useful was forth-

coming.

Alternatively, we could shift the weight-of-effort away
from "Zones 6A and 6B" -- zones including Hanoi and Haiphong
and areas north of those two cities to the Chinese border.
This alternative has some attraction ir that it provides
the North Vietnamese a "face saver" if only problems of
"race" are holding up Hanoi peace gestures; it would narrow
the bombing down directly to the objectionable infiltration
(supporting the logic of a stop-infiltration/full-pause
deal); and it would reduce the international heat on the
Us. Here, too, bombing of the Northeast could be resumed at
any time, or "spot" attacks could be made there from time
to time to keep North Vietnam off balance and to require

165 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
