Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

{37
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Once again, the domino theory, albeit in a refined
case by case presentation, was offered by this key member of the
Administration as a fundamental argument for the continuing U.S.
involvement in Vietnam. Bundy rejected even the subtle argument,
offered by some longtime Asian experts, that the uniqueness of the
Vietnamese case, particularly its extraordinary lack of political
structure, invalidated any generalization of our experience there to

- the rest of Asia. Thus, he argued the American commitment was both
open-ended and irreversible.

George Carver of CIA argued quite a different point
of view. His paper began, "The nature and basis of the U.S. commit-
ment in Vietnam is widely misunderstood within. the United States,
throughout the world, and in Vietnam itself." 115/ Placing himself
squarely in opposition to the kind of analysis presented by Bundy,
Carver argued that we had allowed control over our policy to slip from
our grasp into the "sometimes irresponsible and occasionally unidentifi-
able hands of South Vietnamese over whom we have no effective control.
This is an intolerable position for a great power. 116/ By inferring
that our commitment was irreversible and open-ended, Carver maintained
we permitted the Vietnamese to exercise leverage over us rather than
vice versa. To correct this mistaken view of our commitment and get
our own priorities straight, Carver proposed a reformulation of objec-
tives:

Whatever course of policy on Vietnam we eventually
decide to adopt, it is essential that we first clarify the
nature of our commitment in that country and present it in
a manner which gives us maximum leverage over our Vietnamese
allies and maximum freedom of unilateral action. What we
need to do, in effect, is return to the original 1954
Eisenhower position and make it abundantly clear that our
continued presence in Vietnam in support of the South Viet-
namese struggle against the aggressive incursions of their
northern compatriots is contingent on the fulfillment of
both of two necessary conditions:

(a) A continued desire by the South Vietnamese
for our assistance and physical presence.

(b) Some measure of responsible political
behavior on the part of the South Vietnamese themselves
including, but not limited to, their establishment of a
reasonably effective government with which we can work. 117/

Carver was careful to state, however, that two to three
months would be required to prepare the ground for this kind of clarifi-
cation so as not to have it appear we were reversing directions on Vietnam

104 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
