Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The military establishment was not eager, however, to undertake
this effort. The JCS feared that the advisory limit imposed by the
Geneva Accords (342 military persomel) was too restrictive to permit
a successful training program even if all administrative tasks were
performed by civilians and a11 military personnel freed for advisory
duties in training the army of the new netion. Even this would create
a situation, the JCS argued, in which the U.S. would have only very
limited influence, yet assume the responsibility for failure. 3 The
same resource allocations would bring a greater return, in the JC6 view,
if devoted to the support of military forces in other nations. Lf The
Joint Chiefs were agreed that the creation of a Vietnamese Army might not
even be adequate to the task of establishing a stable GVN, let alone to
protecting that nation from external aggression:

The Joint Chiefs of Staff further consider that the
chaotic internal political situation within Vietnam will
hamper the development of loyal and effective security
forces in the support of the Diem Government and that it is
probable that the development of such forces will not result
in political and military stability within South Vietnam.
Unless the Vietnamese themselves show an inclination to
make the individual and collective sacrifices required to
resist communism no amount of external pressure and assistence
can long delay a complete Commmnist victory in South Vietnam. 5/

Their conclusion, "from a military point of view," was that the risk was
not worth the gamble:

.../T/he Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the United States
should not participate in the training of Vietnamese forces in
Indochina. However, if it is considered that political con-
siderations are overriding, the Joint Chiefs of Steff would
agree to the assignment of a training mission to MAAG, Saigon,
with safeguards against French interference with the US
training effort. 6/

THE DECISION TO GAMBLE WITH LIMITED COMMITMENT

Political considerations were indeed overriding. Reasonable fears
of failure, claims about the inadequacy of resources, and caveats on the
necessity for Vietnamese initiatives are inherently inconclusive arguments
when one is speaking of a calculated gamble. Indeed, low value chips for
high stakes made the gamble all the more appealing. Secretary of State
Dulles’ position immediately prevailed: only relatively small military
forces were needed; their principal purpose should be to promote internal
stability rather than to guard against external aggression; nations
acting in concert (under the umbrella of U.S, nuclear superiority)

h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
