Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"But the point is this. The men who led the opposition to Diem
are not today in the Viet Cong. On the contrary, the present Prime
Minister, Dr. [Phan Huy/ Quat, and his group of so-called Caravellistes,
all of whom opposed Diem, are todey the leaders of the Government. ‘These
men, and their followers, are nationalists anc strongly anti-Communist;
not one of them, of any significance, went over to the Viet Cong.

"this brings me to the question of the so-called National Liberation
Front, which is the political facade, made in Hanoi, for the Viet Cong -.
movement. I doubt if any of you can name a single leader of the National
Liberation Front. But these are faceless men installed by Hanoi to give
the appearance of bourgeois and truly South Vietnamese support for the
operation.

"Lest you think I exaggerate, I refer you to the excellent recent
account by Georges Chaffard, a French correspondent for L'Express in
Paris, who recently visited the Viet Cong and interviewed some of its
. "leaders." Chaffard describes vividly what these men are, including
their strong desire to find a replacement for the obscure lawyer named
Tho who is the titular head of the front and who apparently is the only
figure Hanoi can find who was even in Saigon or perticipating in South
Vietnamese political life during the latter Diem period. Chaffard's
conclusion, which I quote, is that:

‘The Front for National Liberation structure is the classic
structure of a ‘National Front' before the taking over of power by the
Communists. '

"So there should be no doubt of the true nature of the Viet Cong
and its Liberation Front, or that they are a completely different move-
ment from the political opposition to Diem. As to the latter, and its
present emergence into a truly nationalistic amalgam of forces--regional,
religious, military, and civilien--I can perhaps best refer you to the
excellent lead article by Mr. George Carver, an American with long
experience in Saigon, in the April issue of Foreign Affairs. Mr. Carver
tells a fascinating story of the emergence of these new nationalistic
forces in South Viet-Nem, with all their difficulties and weaknesses,
but with the fundamental and overriding fact that they are the true new
voice of South Viet-Nam and that they have never had anything to do with
the Viet Cong."

or

"The Korear: War also had an important message for the Communists--
and as a result we mey have seen the last of the old classical war of
open invasions. Korea proved to the Communists that they had to find a
more effective strategy of conquest. They chose to refine a technique
that they had used on a primitive scale and to their ultimate defeat in
Greece, Malaya, and the Philippines. I am referring to the so-called
'twar of national liberation.' This is the label Khrushchev employed in

D-hy
