Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

important to U. S. security interests that U. S. erie and
economic assistance programs be developed in such a manner as
to maximize the availabilities of the material resources of
the Asian area to the United States and the free world.

ie, Contrel by an eneny of the Asiatic mainland would deny
to us the use of the most direct sea and air routes between
Australia and the Middle East and between the United States
and India. Such control would produce disastrous moral and
psychological effects in border areas such as the Manet East
and a critical effect in Western Europe.

6. The fact of Soviet power and communist aggression in Asia
establishes the context within which the policies of the United
States must operate.

a. The problem of China is the central problem which faces
the United States in Asia. A solution to this problem, through
a change in the regime in control of mainland China, would fa-
cilitate the achievement of United States objectives throughout
Asia. Therefore, United States policies and courses of action
in Asia snould be determined in the light of their effect upon
the solution of the central problem, that of China.

b. The communist attack in Korea has transformed the Far
East into a theater of combat. Whether the Kremlin or Peiping
intends that hostilities be extended into other areas of Asia
or aggression committed in another part of the world is as yet
unknown. The United States must expect either eventuality. In
any case, the United States should use the resources which can
be disposed, without unacceptably jeopardizing our objectives
elsewhere, to prevent the communists from achieving a victory
in Korea and to build resistance to communist encroachments in
Asia.

c. Our ability to achieve national objectives in Asia will
be conditioned by the capabilities and global commitments of
the United States and by the weight of the effort the enemy is
willing and able to make. Consequently, there is required a
constant and careful serutiny of policies and actions on the
basis of which decisions can be made which will advance us to-
ward our ultimate objectives without sacrificing immediate se-
eurity interests.

ve The guiding principle of U. S. foreign policy as it relates
to meeting the threat of Soviet aggression is the promotion of the
establishment of a system of collective security based on the prin-
Ciples of the UN Charter. The United States,is consequently forced
inevitably to weign elements of policy toward Asia against their ef-
fect upon the free world coalition, a coalition fundamental to our
world-wide struggle for security against Soviet aggression,
‘

Nsc 48/5 Lud TOP SECRET
