Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

further military and economic damage, the fear of involvement in a wider
conflict, the fear of internal political upheaval and the fear of greater
dependence on a major communist power. Any incidental improvement in morale
in the country troubled by insurgency or improvement in bargaining leverage
were to be regarled as bonuses. To achieve the desired effect, a care-
fully orchestrated series of escalating military measures, coupled with
simultaneous political, economic and psychological pressures was called for.
The "thesis" was articulated in general terms, but the immediate case in
everyone's mind was, of course, Southeast Asia.

A thorough critique of Rostow's paper was prepared in OsD/ISA with
inputs from State's Policy Planning Council. This analysis argued that
the validity of the "thesis" would depend on two variables: (1) the extent
of the commitment of the nation supporting the insurgency; and (2) the
degree to which vital U.S. interests were at stake in the conflict. The
latter question having been settled with respect to South Vietnam by
NSAM 288, the remaining problem was whether the kinds of actions Rostow
recommended could succeed given the level of determined commitment of the
North Vietnamese. For the Rostow approach to succeed, the DRV would have
to be persuaded that: (1) the U.S. was taking limited action to achieve
limited goals; (2) the U.S. commitment was total; and (3) the U.S. had estab-
lished a sufficient domestic consensus to see the policy through. If the
DRV was not so convinced, the approach would fail unless there were a major
U.S. military involvement in the war. The critique concluded that the
public opinion problems of such:an approach, both domestic and international,
would be very great, and that in view of the inherent problems of imple-
menting and managine such a discriminating policy, it had poor chances of
success. These reservations notwithstanding, the outlook embodied in the
"Rostow thesis" came to dominate a good deal of Administration thinking on
the question of pressures against the North in the months ahead.

All of the pressures~against-the-North thinking came to a head in
the strategy meeting of the principals on September 7th. It appears that
a rather narrow range of proposals was up for consideration. One program
proposal came from the JCS. It was a repeat of the 9i-target list program
which the JCS had recommended on August 26th. ‘The JCS called for deliberate
attempts to provoke the DRV into taking acts which could then be answered
by a systematic U.S. air campaign. The JCS argued that such actions were
now essential to preventing complete collapse of the U.S. position in the
RVN and SEA," because "continuation of present or foreseeable programs
limited to the RVN will not produce the desired result." ‘The Chiefs were
supported by ISA in their provocation approach. For ISA, ASD McNaughton
argued that our acts and the DRV response "should be likely to provide
good grounds fo» us to escalate if we wished." McNaughton's approach was
for a "gradual squeeze," not simply a tit-for-tat contingency and unlike
the quick, all-out proposals of the JCS.

The principal conferees at this September meeting did not believe that
deliberate acts of provocation should be undertaken "in the immediate future
while the GVN is still struggling to its feet." However, they apparently
reached 4 consensus that they might recommend such actions -- "depending on
GVN progress and communist reaction in the meantime" -- by early October.

iv i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
