Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"I. Mount a Major Information Campaign to inform both
the US electorate and world opinion of the realities in Viet-
nam, finding weys of credibly to measure progress." 24/

The first two (B. and C.) would require force increases of varying
magnitudes, dependent upon whose estimates of enemy capability and U.S.
relative effectiveness you accept -- JCS or DoD's or Komer's. Programs
B. and C. patently endorse the offensive nature of our operations, but
leave their extent or intensity undefined. Interpretation of the third
item (H.) rests heavily upon what assumptions were held about negotia-
tions; were they synonymous with military defeat and capitulation or
something less emotionally loaded, and less satisfying, like compromise.
Implicit in the last point (I.), concerning public information, is the
acceptance of a certain "reality" that we wanted to advertise, this
being also the mood that pervades the entire NSAM -- victory is near.

The principal interest in this paper, however, derives not from
disagreement as to technique and programs (nor even their basic config-
uration) but from the open discussion of basic objectives in South Vietnam
which it prompted. Formal Department of Defense comment on the draft
centered in two places: with McNaughton in ISA and in the JCS.

McNeughton's comments seem to reflect a growing concern with our
diminishing prospects of early success and a desire not to irreversibly
lock ourselves into either any fixed strategy or excessive ground commit-
ments. These views were apparently shared with the Secretary of Defense.
In his draft reply to Rostow (through Mcllemara) McNaughton essentially
"loads the dice” against significant alteration of the  REReee ese concept.
In the preamble paragraph he states that...

",..The national commitment of the United States in South
Vietnam (SVN), as stated in Manila, is that the South Viet-
namese people shall not be conquered by aggressive force and
shall enjoy the inherent right to choose their own way of life
and their own form of government. The United States is com-
mitted to continue our military and all other efforts, as firmly
and as long as may be necessary, in close consultation with
our allies until the aggression is ended." 25/

_ In the draft, the Assistant Secretary was painstakingly developing
alternatives to continued widespread U.S. military involvement over time.
His additions (or line-ins) placed emphasis upon participation by other
Asian nations, development of a "rapid and effective" R/D effort, and
continued...

".,.reorientation of the bulk of RVNAF toward and into a
steadily increasing role in R/D operations in coordination
with regional and local civil and military forces. The goal
is the establishment of security to permit PET OTA ESy
development to take place." 26/ —

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
