bea

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Bundy in fact suggested resuming at a lesser level, opening with strikes
below the 20th parallel, and only after a fev weeks again moving north-
ward. McNaughton wrote:

No consideration argues for a ‘noisy’ resumption....
The program at first should be at the level and against
the kinds of targets involved prior to the Pause (only
two weeks later should the program begin...to escalate ). 37/

He also suggested that criticism would be less if the first strikes were
clearly identified with the effort to stop the southward flow of men
and supplies, which had been greatly increased during the Pause.

The decisions went against ending the Pause with a bang.
When the bombing was resumed on 31 January (Saigon time) it was limited
"until further notice" to armed reconnaissance. No new major targets
were authorized. The former sanctuary restrictions and the sortie
ceilings were maintained. 38/

It was also decided to postpone any serious escalation for
the time being. Secretary McNamara informed the JCS that their proposals
for rapid escalation were being considered, and on 24 January he sent
the President a memorandum on the overall Vietnam program which side-
stepped the issue. For 1966, the memorandum said, the bombing program
against NVN should include 4000 attack sorties per month "at a minimum."
It should consist of day and night armed reconnaissance against rail and
road targets and POL storage sites. The present sanctuaries should be
preserved. There should be more intense bombing of targets in Laos,
along the Bassac and Mekong Rivers running into SVN from Cambodia, and
better surveillance of the sea approaches. 39/

The use of interdiction rather than pressure terms in the
Presidential memorandum, and the emphasis on bombing infiltration routes
into SVN, rather than the flow of supplies into or within NVN, indicates
that the Secretary was still interested in keeping the objectives of the
pombing limited and any escalation in check. The memorandum said that
the bombing had already achieved the objective of raising the cost of
infiltration, and was reducing the amount of enemy supplies reaching the
South. In NVN it had also diverted manpower to air defense and repair
work, interfered with mobility, and forced the decentralization of many
activities. I+ could further reduce the flow of supplies to NvA/VC forces
in the South, and limit their "Plexibility" to defend themselves adequately
or undertake frequent offensive action, but it was doubtful that even
heavier bombing would put a "tight ceiling" on the NVN effort in the

South. 40/

75 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
