ts}
id

—.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The first essential reform is in the attitude of GVN officials. They are
generally epathetic, and there is corruption high and low. Often appointments,
promotions, and draft deferments must be bought; and kickbacks on salaries are
common, Cadre at the bottom can be no better than the system above them.

The second needed reform is in the attitude and conduct of the ARVY. The
image of the government cannot improve unless and until the ARVN improves
markedly. They do not understand the importance (or respectability) of pacifi-
cation nor the importance to pacification of proper, disciplined conduct.
Promotions, assignments and awards are often not made on merit, but rather on
the basis of having a diploma, friends or relatives, or because of bribery.

The ARVN is weak in dedication, direction and discipline.

Not enough ARVN are devoted to area and population security, and when the
ARVN does attempt to support pacification, their actions do not last long enough;
their tactics are bad despite US prodding (no aggressive small-unit saturation
patrolling, hamlet searches, quick-reaction contact, or offensive night ambushes);
they do not make good use of intelligence; and their leadership and discipline
are bad.

Furthermore, it is my conviction that a part of the problem undoubtedly
lies in bad management on the American as well as the GYN side. Here split
responsibility -- or "no responsibility” -- has resulted in too little hard
pressure on the GV to do its job and no really solid or realistic pianning with
respect to the whole effort. We must deal with this management problem now and .
deal with it effectively. ;

One solution would be to consolidate all US activities which are primarily
part of the civilian pacification program and all persons engaged in such
activities, providing a clear assignment of responsibility and a unificd com-
mand under a civilian relieved of all other duties.,/ Under this approach,
there would be a carefully delineated division of résponsibility between the
civilian-in-charge and an element of COMUSMACV under a senior officer, who would
@ive the subject of planning for and providing hamlet security the highest pri-
ority in attention and resources. Success will depend on the men selected for
the jobs on both sides (they must be among the highest rank and most competent
administrators in the US Government) , on complete cooperation among the US
elements, and on the extent to which the South Vietnamese can be shocked cut
of their present pattern of behavior. The first work of this reorganized US
pacification organization should be to produce within 60 days 6 realistic and
détailed plan for the coming: year.

From the political and public-relations viewpoint, this solution is prefer-
able -- if it works. But we cannot tolerate continued failure. If it fails
after & fair trial, the only alternative in my view is to place the entire
pacification program -- civilian and military -- under Generel Westmoreland.
This alternative would result in the establishment of a Deputy COMUSMACV for
Pacification who would be in command of all pacification staffs in Saigon and
of all pacification staffs and activities in the field; one person in each
corps, province and district would be responsible for the US effort.

a,/ If this task is assigned to Ambassador Porter, another individual must be
~ sent immediately to Saigon to serve as Ambassador Lodge's deputy.

86 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
