Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

could in any way be considered typical, the fore-
cast would be pessimistic in nature and a complete
reappraisal of U.S. effort, approach, and even
policy would be indicated. However, viewed in

the light of January operational improvements,

the forecast remains one of potential long term
military progress. h/

. The improvements cited as grounds for not accepting the pessimis-
tic implications were a new military plan to support the pacification
program; adoption of U.S. advice concerning GVN management to cope _
with increasing VC threats, especially around Saigon; and some govern-
ment operations that seemed to demonstrate improved military leadership,
and what he called "victories" while admitting they were not decisive.
Tae difficulty here was that the judgment did not include consideration
that these happier signs had come under the regime which had just been
overturned by the Khanh coup a day or two before this report was dis-
patched, which coup, it was acknowledged, would have a disturbing
and disruptive effect upon GVN capabilities as they had existed before
the coup. Although it was still too soon to predict the full impact
of the coup, it seemed "likely -that at least part of the operational
momentum which was being slowly generated earlier this month will be
slowed for a time..."

In closing this assessment, MACV philosophized, in words with
which few would disagree, that experiences of the last quarter of
calendar year 1963 disclosed "the extent to which military opportunities
are devendent upon political and psychological policies and accomplish-
ments in a counter-insurgency environment." And he found the big
lesson -- "the broad implication" -- was, that

no amount of military effort or capability can
compensate for poor polities. Therefore, although
the prospects for an improved military posture

are good, the ultimate achievement of the estab-
lished military goal depends primarily upon the
quality of support achieved by the political
leadership of the government of Vietnam at all
levels. 45/

Here again was an explicit judgment that the sine qua non of an
effective counter-insurgency operation was a stable, broadly based,
popular and effective government. It was. acknowledged at this time,
as it had been acknowledged before concerning other govermments, that
a government of these qualities did not exist. But along with the
acknowledgment that what was described as the sine qua non did not
exist, there was apparently always the hope that fate would not close
in before something happened to change the situation.

The U.S. mission Monthly Status Report, dated 9 February 196),
agreed with MACV that it was too soon to judge the effects of the -
Khanh coup. The Mission Report, following a week after the personal
report of MACV, did not hesitate to express explicit regret over the

32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
