Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

enlarge government. It was agreed to give him until January at
which time, if he had failed, we would look into matter of alter-
nate discreetly. This was not done. Last March present govern-
ment broke into open conflict with sects. United Front of sects
was formed against Diem. Both December agreement and common

sense told us at that time that something (had) to be done to avoid
civil war....¥or this reason, joint Ely-Collins approach was tried.
It was hoped they would arrive at joint plan for solution.
Washington appeared first to welcome this concept then changed its
mind. Collins left Saigon when civil war was about to break out.
Untenable truces were declared. When they were about to expire
Bao Dai submitted his own plan...in order to try to reconcile US
and French failure to act. US failed to reply to Bao Dai. In
absence of Collins from Saigon, Bao Dai acted.

9

LaForest continued...that new RevOlutionary Committee appeared to
have control. Committee is strongly under Viet Minh influence...
There is violent campaign against French and French Expeditionary
Control. Viet Minh agents make good use of it and certain
Americans do not seem sufficiently aware of this. French Govern-
ment does not wish to have its army act as platform for Vietminh
propaganda. Army will not be maintained at any cost... 138/

e. Faure: We Will Withdraw to Save the US-France Alliance

Then M. Faure took the floor, stating France was not in
agreement with the United States and that it was time to speak frankly.
He said Diem is ' not conty incapable but mad," he took advantage of Collins'
absence to effect a "coup de force which won primary victory but which has
not contributed to any lasting solution"and "France can no longer take
risks with him.” Diem will bring on a Viet Minh victory, focus the hostility
of everyone on French and force a break between France and the US.

Faure concluded with this significant statement.

Diem is a bad choice, impossible solution, with no chance to
succeed and no chance to improve the situation. Without him some
solution might be possible, but with him there is none. However,
I cannot guarantee any other solution would work nor is it
possible to clarify the situation. There seems to be fundamental
disagreement between us. JI could have claimed that since French
position is predominant in Vietnam, you should accommodate your
views more to ours, but I have rejected this. What should be
done under the circumstances? What would you say if we were to
retire entirely from Indochina and cali back the FEC as soon as
possible. I fully realize this would be a grave solution, as it
would leave French civilians and French interests in a difficult

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
35
