Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

M2

our peace, because what happens in Europe or Latin America or Africa or
Asia directly affects the security of the people who live in this city,
and particularly those who are coming after.

"T make no apologies for the effort that we make to assist these
other countries to maintain their freedom, because I know full well that
every time a country, regardless of how far away it may be from our own
borders -- every time that country passes behind the Iron Curtain the
security of the United States is thereby endangered. So sll those who
suggest we withdraw, all those who suggest we should no longer ship our
surplus food abroad or assist other countries, I could not disagree with
them more. This country is stronger now than it has ever been. Our
chances for peace are stronger than they have been in years. The nuclear
test ban which was strongly led in the Senate of the United States by
Mike Mansfield and Lee Metcalf is, I believe, a step toward peace and a
step toward security, and gives us an additional chance that all of the
weapons of Montana will never be fired. That is the object of our policy.

"So we need your support. These are complicated problems which face
a citizenry. Most of us grew up in a relative period of isolation, and
neutrality, and unalignment which was our policy from the time of George
Washington to the Second World War, and suddenly, in an act almost un-
known in the history of the world, we were shoved onto the center of the
stage. We are the keystone in the arch of freedom. If the United States
were to falter, the whole world, in my opinion, would inevitably begin to
move toward the Communist bloc.

"It is the United States, this country, your country, which in 15

to 18 years has almost singlehandedly protected the freedom of dozens of
countries who, in turn, by being free, protect our freedom. So when you
ask why are we in Leos, or Viet-Nam, or the Congo, or why do we support
the Alliance for Progress in Latin America, we do so because we believe
that our freedom is tied up with theirs, and if we can develop a world
in which all the countries are free, then the threat to the security of
the United States is lessened. So we have to stay-at it. We must not be
fatigued."

ee Ae

ho, U.S. Policy on Viet-Nam: White House Statement, October
Department of State Bulletin, October 21, 1963, pv. :

"1. The security of South Viet-Nem is a major interest of the United
States as other free nations. We will adhere to our policy of working
with the people and Government of South Viet-Num to deny this country to
communism and to suppress the externally stimulated and supported insur-
gency of the Viet Cong as promptly as possible. Effective performance in
this undertaking is the central objective of our policy in South Viet-Nam.”
