Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Dien Bien Phu by aircraft of the U.S. Air Force and U.S. Navy. The plan,
named Operation Vulture, called for about sixty B-29's to take off from
Clark Field near Manila, under escort of 150 fighters of the U.S. Seventh
Fleet, to conduct a massive strike against VPA positions on the perimeter
of Dien Bien Phu. 10/

Operation Vulture, according to French sources, was con-
ceived by a joint American-French military staff in Saigon. It is
admitted to have been an informal proposal which had not as yet received
full U.S. Government backing es policy. No record of Operation Vulture
has been found in files examined. In an interview in 1965, Admiral
Radford stated that no plans for "Operation Vulture" existed, since
planning to aid Dien Bien Phu by an air strike never proceeded beyond the
conceptual stage. 11/ Nevertheless, such an operation probably was the
subject of informal discussions both in Vietnam, and between Radford
and Ely.

Lbs

3. United Action" as an Alternative to Either Negotiations or to
Unilateral U.S. Intervention

a. Formulation of U.S. Policy

By late March the internal debate within the Eisenhower
Administration had reached the point where it was recognized that:
(a) unilateral U.S. intervention in the Indochina War would not be
effective without ground forces; (b) the involvement of U.S. ground forces
was logistically and politically undesirable; (c) preferably, "free world"
intervention in Indochina to save the area from communism would take
the form of a collective operation by allied forces. This was the import -
of the NSC deliberations, the Ridgway Report, the Report of Under Secretary
of State W. Bedell Smith's Special Committee on the U.S. and Indochina,
and President Eisenhower's general train of thought (see Tab 1).

Accordingly, Secretary Dulles in his discussions with General
Ely went beyond the question of immediate assistance to the French garrison
at Dien Bien Phu and broached the possible establishment of a regional
defense arrangement for Southeast Asia.

This proposal was given public exposure in Secretary Dulles'
speech of March 29 before the Overseas Press Club. Dulles described the
importance of resisting communist aggression in Indochina in these words:

"If the Communist forces were to win uncontested control over
Indo-China or any substantial part thereof, they would surely
resume the same pattern of aggression against the other free
peoples in that area.

"The propagandists of Red China and of Soviet Russia

make it perfectly apparent that the purpose is to dominate
all of Southeast Asia.

B-20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
