Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

fact that the problem of meeting the threat to the security

of Viet Nam, Cambodia, and Laos which now enjoy independence
within the French Union is primarily the responsibility of
France and the Governments and peoples of Indochina. The
United States recognizes that the solution of the Indochina
problem depends both upon the restoration of security and upon
the development of genuine nationalism and that United States
assistance can and should contribute to these major objectives.

"The United States Government, convinced that neither
national independence nor democratic evolution exist in any
area dominated by Soviet imperialism, considers the situation
to be such as to warrant its according economic aid and mili-
tary equipment to the Associated States of Indochina and to
France in order to assist them in restoring stability and
permitting these states to pursue their peaceful and demo-
eratic development." 85/

On May 11, 1950, the Acting Secretary of State made the following
statement:

"A special survey mission, headed by R. Allen Griffin, has
just returned from Southeast Asia and reported on economic and
technical assistance needed in that area. Its over-all recom-
mendations for the area are modest and total in the neighborhood
of $60 million. The Department is working on plans to imple-
ment that program at once.

"Secretary Acheson on Monday in Paris cited the urgency of
the situation applying in the associates states of Viet-Nam,
Laos and Cambodia. The Department is working jointly with FCA
to impelment the economic and technical assistance recommenda-~
tions for Indochina as well as the other states of Southeast
Asia and anticipates that this program will get underway in the
immediate future.

"Military assistance for Southeast Asia is being worked out
by the Department of Defense in cooperation with the Depart-
ment of State, and the details will not be made public for
security reasons. :

"Military assistance needs will be met from the President's
emergency fund of $75 million provided under MDAP for the general
area of China.

"Keonomic assistance needs will be met from the ECA China
Aid funds, part of which both Houses of Congress have indicated
will be made available for the general area of China. Final

A-61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
