Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

emphasis on pacification as the public statements that came out of
Honolulu, particularly the Declaration itself. The discussions and
the Declaration are summerized, including the President's final re-
marks in plenary session. .

B. Public Impact...

The press reaction to the conference is summarized,

TII. Honolulu to Manila

A. Saigon: Porter in Charge

The first reorganization now took place, and Deputy Ambassador Porter
was put in direct charge of the civilian agencies. His responsibility and
his ability to carry out his responsibility were not equal from the outset,
and Porter saw his role in different terms than those in Washington who
had given him his difficult task. A major problem was the lack of full
support that Porter received from Ambassador Lodge, who had never been
fully in favor of the reorganization. Another problem was the lack of a
parallel structure in Washington, so that Porter found himself caught
between the Washington agencies and their representatives in Saigon, with
Komer (see below) as a frequent participant. Nonetheless, Porter accom-
plished a great deal in the months this arrangement lasted; it just wasn't
as much as Washington sought.

B. Washington: Komer As The Blowtorch

In Washington, the President selected a McGeorge Bundy deputy,
R. W. Komer, to be his Special Assistant on non-military activities in
Vietnam. Komer did not have the same kind of authority over the Washing-
ton agencies that Porter, in theory, had over the Saigon extensions.
Komer pushed pacification hard, and became the first senior official,
with apparently ready access to the President, who put forward the pro-
pacification position consistently in high level meetings. His mandate
was contained in a loosely worded NSAM, 343, dated March 28, 1966. During
the summer of 1966, Komer applied great pressure to both the Mission and
the Washington agencies (thus earning from Ambassador Lodge the nickname
of "Blowtorch"), with a series of cables and visits to Vietnam, often
using the President's name.

C. Study Groups and Strategists: Summer 1966

With Porter and Komer in their new roles, a series of Task Forces
and Study Groups began to produce papers that gave a better rationale
and strategy to pacification. These included the Army study called PROVN,
the Priorities Task Force in Saigon, and the Roles and Missions Study
Groups in Saigon. At the same time, Westmoreland, whose year end wrap-
up message on January 1, 1966, had not even mentioned pacification, sent

, v TOP SECRET - Sensitive
