Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ee Pressures to settle, More countries are now, as a con-
sequence of the bombing program, more interested in taking steps to
help bring the war to an end.

\ f. Impact on US-Soviet detente. The bombing program --
because it appears to reject the policy of ‘peaceful co-existence,'
because it involves an attack on a ‘fellow socialist country, '
because the Soviet people have vivid horrible memories of air bombing,
because it challenges the USSR as she competes with China for leader-
ship of the Communist world, and because US and Soviet arms are now
striking each other in North Vietnam -- has strained the US-Soviet
detente, making constructive arms-control and other cooperative
programs more difficult. How serious this effect will be and whether
the detente can be revived depend on how far we carry our military
“actions against the North and how long the campaign continues. At
the same time, the bombing program offers the Soviet Union an oppor-
tunity to play a role in bringing peace to Vietnam, by gaining credit
for persuading us to terminate the program. There is a chance that
the scenario could spin out this way; if so, the erfect of the entire -
experience on the US-Soviet detente could be 4 net plus.

Zo Risk of escalation. The bombing program --— especially as
strikes move toward Hanoi and toward China and as encounters with
Soviet/Chinese SAMs/MIGs occur-- may increase the risk of escalation
into a broader war.

h.° The future of the program. Even with hindsight, I believe the
decision to bomb the DRV was wise and I believe the program should be
continued. The future program should:

€@. Emphasize the threat. It should be structured to

capitalize on fear of future attacks. At any time, 'pressure’ on the
DRV depends not upon the current level of bombing but rather upon the
credible threat of future destruction which can be avoided by agreeing
to. negotiate or agreeing to some settlement in negotiations.

Bs Minimize the loss of DRV ‘face.’ The program should
be designed to make it politically easy for the DRV to enter negotia-
tions and to make concessions during negotiations. It may be politic-
ally easier for North Vietnam to accept negotiations and/or to make
concessions at a time when bombing of their territory is not currently
taking place.

ec. Optimize interdiction vs. political costs. Interdic-
tion should be carried out so as to maximize effectiveness and to
minimize the political repercussions from the methods used. Physical-
ly, it makes no difference whether a rifle is interdicted on its way

139 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
