Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

C-O-P-Y

In the economic field, the situation is bettering every day. All
the vexatory measures imposed by colonial planned economy have been
abrogated. Commerce, production, the transformation and consummation
of raw materials, once subjected to very strict regulations, are now
operated on an entirely free basis. The shortage of rice, though still
eritical, has been relieved by the intensive production of other food-
stuffs and the price of rice has been reduced some 40 % of its 1945 figures.
Cereals, matches, salt, tobacco, once monopolized by speculators, are now
offered on the normal markets at prices within reach of the common man.
All public services have resumed their prewar activities, and the Viet-
namese staff under their Vietnamese Directors, are working with industry
and efficacy. The communications have been reestablished, the dam system
not only mended but still fortified.

All this program was carried out while in the South, the French
aggression has intensified every day. The Vietnam people, despite the
difficulties of the present, and the heavy heritage of five years of
Nippo-French condominium, has shown the world what it is worth. Foreign
correspondents and members of the Allies Missions who have come to the
country can bear witness to the new life in regenerated Vietnam, to our
capacity to self-government, our desire to live free and independent, and
our faith in the ATLANTIC and SAN FRANCISCO Charters.

CONCLUSTON.-

For those reasons, we think it our duty to send this note to the Great
Powers -- which had led the anti-fascist crusade to final victory and
which had taken up the reconstruction of the world with a view to
definitely outlawing war, oppression and exploitation on the one hand,
misery, fear and injustice on the other. We request of these great
_powers:

a) To take all proper steps to stop by an urgent interference, the
bloodshed that is taking place in South Vietnam, and to arrive at an
urgent and fair settling of the Indochinese issue. We are confident in
their mediation that may be given to us in this Pacific World a status
worthy of a people that had fought and suffered for the democratic ideals.
So doing, they will give a solid foundation to peace and security in this
part of the world, and fulfill the hopes that the oppressed peoples had
placed in them. While waiting with confidence for a positive measure
from the Governments of WASHINGTON, MOSCOW, LONDON, and CHUNGKING, we
have determined to fight to our last drop of blood against the reestab-
lishment of French imperialism.

b) To bring the Indochinese issue before the United Nations' Organiza-
tion. We only ask full independence, independence that is so far a fact,
and that will enable us to cooperate with the other nations in the building-
up of a better world and lasting peace. Such aspirations are but legiti-.
mate and the cause of world peace must be defended.

Hanoi, February 18, 1946.
C-0-P-Y

C-100

