Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

had experienced a declining aircraft loss rate compared with the
previous year. The numbers of trucks, railroad cars, boats, etc.,
destroyed were offered as evidence of the effsctiveness of bombing

in interdicting the flow of supplies. No mention is made of the
undiminished rate of that flow. The mining of the rivers south of

209 is also judged a success, although no evidence is offered to sup-
port the statement. After fulminating about the reimposition of the
10-mile restriction around Hanoi, CINCPAC notes the significant
achievements of the last months -- al11 in terms of increased DRV defen-
sive activity (MIG, SAM, AAA, ete.). In a peroration worthy of Billy
Mitchell, CINCPAC summed up the achievements of the recent past and made
the case for intensification:

-..we believe that our targeting systems concept, our
stepped up combet air effort over the Northeast and the
continued high sortie rate applied against enemy infiltra-
tion is paying off. With the exception of RT 55 and RT 56,
air power for the first-time. began to realize the sort of
effectiveness of which it is capable. This effectiveness
can be maximized if we can be authorized to strike the many
important targets remaining.

We are at an important point in this conflict. We
have achieved a position, albeit late in the game, from
which a precisely executed and incisive air campaign
against all the target systems will aggregate significant
interrelated effects against the combined military, politi-
cal, economic, and psychological posture of North -Vietnam.
In our judgment the enemy is now hurting and the operations
to which we attribute this impact should be continued with
widest latitude in planning and execution in the months of
remaining good weather. 171/

CINCPAC's arguments, however, were largely falling on deaf
ears. The debate had resolved itself as between options B and C. On
July 3, the energetic Secretary of the Air Force, Harold Brown, sent
McNamara another long detailed memo supporting his preference for
alternative C. Convinced that the bombing did have some utility in
northern North Vietnam, Brown had sent supplementary memos to his 3 June
basic reply on 9 and 16 June. His July memo compared the objectives of
the two alternatives and noted that the only difference was that alter-
native C would somewhat impede the import of supplies into North Vietnam
and would allot 20% of the available sorties north of 20° compared with
‘34, under alternative B. 172 The principle arguments for maintaing the
northern attack were: (1) ‘the fact that a substantial erosion of inter-
diction effectiveness would occur if it was curtailed; (2) the political
irreversibility of de-escalation (and the current -lack of diplomatic

75 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
