Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

He did this in the sober awareness that Rolling Thunder was unlikely to
_ produce immediate results, but also with the caveat that U.S. troops
might not do too well in an Asian insurgency environment. The enclave
strategy, which had been presented by Ambassador Taylor as a way to get
U.S. troops engaged at relatively low risk, was implicitly endorsed by
the President. The strategy proposed that U.S. troops occupy coastal
enclaves, accept full responsibility for enclave security, and be pre-
pared to go to the rescue of the RVNAF as far as 50 miles outside the
enclave. Initially, the U.S. was to experiment with four Marine battal-
ions in two coastal enclaves to see if the concept and the rules for
operating with the RVNAF (which were to be worked out with the GVN) were
feasible.

Without the benefit of any experimentation the number of battalions
was increased at Honolulu in mid-April to 17 and the number of enclaves
to 5. The enclave strategy as formalized at Honolulu was designed to
frustrate the Viet Cong in the South while Rolling Thunder continued to
hammer the North. The intent was not to take the war to the enemy but
rather to deny to him certain critical areas while simultaneously pro-
viding ready assistance to the RVNAF if they should run into difficulty.
The RVNAF were expected to continue aggressively prosecuting the war
against the enemy's main forces, thereby bearing the brunt of the casual-
ties.

The enclave strategy was controversial and expectations for it ran
the gamut from extreme optimism to deep pessimism. The Ambassador
expected it to buy some time for the Vietnamese to eventually save
themselves. General Westmoreland and other military men expected it to
guarantee defeat for the U.S. and the RVNAF, who were already demonstrat-
ing that they were incapable of defeating the enemy.

A masterpiece of ambiguity, the enclave strategy implied a greater
commitment to the war on the part of the U.S., but simultaneously demon-
strated in the placing of the troops with their backs to the sea a
desire for rapid and early exit. While purporting to provide the basis
for experimentation with U.S. soldiers in an unfamiliar environment, it
mitigated against the success of the experiments by placing those troops
in close proximity to the Vietnamese people, where the greatest difficulty
would be encountered. In order to prove the viability of its reserve
reaction foundation, it required testing; but the rules for commitment +
were not worked out until the stratesy was already overtaken by events.

As a consequence of this delay, several opportunities were passed up

when the RVNAF really needed help and U.S. trcops were available. The
whole enclave concept implied that the RVNAF would ultimately prevail,

but in any case the Viet Cong could never win as long as certain areas

were denied to them. The enclave strategy tacitly yielded the initiative
to the enemy, but the initiative was not seen as the vital factor. The

key was to be able to outlast the enemy at lowest cost to the United States.

6 - ' TOP SECRET - Sensitive
