Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"While fully appreciating difficulties French position this
conflict, we feel there is danger in any arrangement which might
provide Vietnamese opportunity compare unfavorably their own
position and that of other peoples southern Asia who have made
tremendous strides toward autonomy since war.

"While we are still ready and willing do anything we can
which might be considered helpful, French will understand
we not attempting come forward with any solution our own or
intervene in situation. However, they will also understand
we inescapably concerned with situation Far East generally, upon
which developments Indochina likely have profound effect....

"For your INFO, evidence that French Communists are being
directed accelerate their agitation French colonies even extent
lose much popular support France (URTEL 1719 Apr 25) may be
indication Krenlin prepared sacrifice temporary gains with
4O million French to long range colonial strategy with 600 mil-
lion dependent people, which lends great urgency foregoing
views....DEPT much concerned lest French efforts find QUOTE
true representatives Vietnam UNQUOTE with whom negotiate result
creation impotent puppet GOVT! along lines Cochinchina regime,
or that restoration Baodai [sic/ may be attempted, implying
democracies reduced resort monarchy as weapon against Communism.
You may refer these ES ons views if nature your conversations
French appears warrant." 64/

The U.S. position may have influenced the French to revise the first

Ha Long Bay Agreement (December, 1947) and when the second agreement
was signed in June, 1948, the U.S. pranptly instructed the U.S.
Ambassador to "apply such persuasion and/or PreSaune as is best
calculated /to/ produce desired result" of France's "unequivocally

and promptly approving the principle of Viet independence." 65/ Again,
however, the Ambassador was instructed to avoid ostensible intervention
while making it clear that the U.S. foresaw France's losing Indochina
if it persisted to ignore American advice. These instructions were
repeated at the end of August, 1948, with the assertion that the Depaxt=
ment of State "believes nothing should be left undone which will
strengthen truly nationalist groups in Indochina and induce present
supporters of the Viet Minh to come to the side of that group." 66/

r

The first suggestions that the U.S. became tangibly involved in
Vietnam appear in a reported conversation of the U.S. Ambassador with
the French Foreign Office in September, 1948. The U.S. Ambassador
again urged on France legislation or other definite action to move
toward the unification of Vietnam, and the immediate negotiation of
concrete steps toward autonomy as envisaged by the Ha Long Bay Agreement.
He then told the French representative that:

A-h7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
