Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

held out the promise of ending the long war, put France in a position to
pressure the United States for more funds to underwrite the training
and equipping of nine additional French battalions and a number of new
Vietnamese units.

e. U.S. Supports Independence for Associated States

Throughout the period of assistance to the French military
effort, American policy makers kept in mind the necessity of encouraging
the French to grant the Associated States full independence and to take
practical measures in this direction, such as the training of Vietnamese
officers and civil servants. Such active persuasion was delicate and
difficult because of the high sensitivity of the French to any "inter-
ference" in their "internal" affairs.

A reading of the NSC memorandum and the France-American
diplomatic dialogue of the time indicates that Washington kept its eyes
on the ultimate goal of the de-colonialization of Indochina. Indeed, it
was uncomfortable in finding itself -- forced by the greater necessity
of resisting Viet Minh communism -- in the same bed as the French. Amer-
ican pressure may well have helped account for the public declaration of
Premier Joseph laniel of July 3, 1953, that the independence and sovereignty
of the Associated States would be "perfected" by transferring to them
various functions which had remained under French control, even though no
final date was set for complete independence. h/ At an NSC meeting on
August 6, 1953 President Hisenhower stated that assistance to the French
would be determined by three conditions:

(1) A public French commitment to "a program which will
insure the support and cooperation of the native Indochina";

(2) A French invitation for "close /U.S./ military advice";
(3) Renewed assurances on the EeStoe= of the EDC. BF

Consistent with these, Washington's decision of Septehes 9, 1953,to grant
$385 million towards implementation of the Navarre Plan was made dependent
upon a number of conditions. The American Ambassador was instructed to
inform Prime Minister Laniel and Foreign Minister Bidault that the United
States Government would expect France to:

",...continue pursue policy of perfecting independence of
Associated States in conformity with July 3 declaration;

"facilitate exchange information with American military
authorities and take into account their views in developing
and carrying out French military plans Indochina;

"assure that no basic or permanent alteration of plans and

programs for NATO forces will be made as result of additional
effort Indochina;...." 6/

A-37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
