Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-- What was the threat to South Vietnam?

~~ What was the Histon of the South Vietnamese army?
-- What-was the state of the South Vietnamese army?
~- How did the U.S. go about altering this condition?

-- Did U.S. assistance through 1960 result in creation of
South Vietnamese army in the image of the U.S. army?

The principal conclusion is that U.S. efforts in the period 195)-
1959 failed to produce an effective Vietnamese counterinsurgent force
due to contemporary perceptions of and reactions to the threat, to
exaggerated estimates of the value and relevance of American military
standards in responding to that threat, to lack of effective bargaining
techniques vis-a-vis the Government of Vietnam, and to fragmentation
and other inadequacies in the American system of determining and
administering the overall progtam of es to Vietnam.°

U.S. efforts: in the period 1954-1960 to aetna effective South
Vietnamese military establishment -- and particularly an effective
National Army ~- were critically affected by the following considerations;

-- The reasons the U.S. undertook the training of the

Vietnamese armed forces had their roots not only in the ~
‘ desire to contain communism and preserve the freedom of

South Vietnam, but also in U.S. discontent and frustration
with French military policy during the Indochina War.
A strong desire to correct French mistakes generated con-
siderable bureaucratic momentum; preoccupation with the
perceived inadequacies of French practices led to under-
estimation of the problems the French had to overcome -~
including that of internal division and governmental
reluctance -- in developing an effective Vietnamese army,
and to overcorrection of French mistakes by the creation of
a conventional military force. That Vietnamese army came
to be organized in divisions -- as the U.S. had so often
and so unsuccessfully urged the French to do -- that would
have the capability to perform well against the Viet Minh
divisions in the Red River Delta in 1954, or presumably
against their post-1954 equivalent, communist divisions
erossing the 17th parallel. But the French Indochina War
was over; circumstances had radically changed.

-- The decision to train the South Vietnamese military
was based on a ee Og aTS between the Deparcmetivs of State and
Defense in which "political considerations" which had nothing
to do with the military objections to an affirmative decision,

res TOP SECRET - Sensitive

