Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

not yet be visible. They were right, of course, but being right was not
good enough. They fought the time deadline with too great a vehemence
and did not do enough to "prove" OCO's worth. ‘The result was the decision
of March 1967 to put OCO under MACV.

The Mission thought that because they were "on the ground" they had
a unique understanding of the problems of Vietnam, and that because they
were on the ground they were the only accurate judges of the rate at
which events needed to move. This point of view did not take into account
domestic pressures in the United States; or, worse, it deliberately dis-
regarded them. Thus, the Mission in Vietnam has generally tended to
formulate strategy as though the United States will be fighting a slow war
in Indochina for decades, while the Washington policymakers and strategists
have tended to behave as though time runs out in November of 1968. (The
mood of the Mission towards Washington is seen more clearly in press leaks
than in cables. Thus, for example, the Evans and Novak column, from
Saigon, on November 30, 1966, as OCO was being formed and the trial period
beginning: "A note of quiet desperation is creeping into the top echelons
of the U.S. Mission charged with winning the war in Vietnam. It grows
partly out of frustration with what one top Embassy official describes as
‘the hot blow torch on our rear ends' that comes from Washington, and,
particularly, from the White House in search of ever-new victory pro-
posals...Much of this frustration and gloom would vanish if attention in
Washington were centered not on impossible trance tables for ending the
war next month or next year but on a realistic projection of the modest
gain now being made at great and painstaking effort." The difference in
mood is reinforced by the climate of Vietnam, which is sluggish and humid,
and by the influence of the Vietnamese, who after many years of war are
rarely ready to race out and seek instant immortality on the field of
pattle or in the Ministries.

The one exception to this dangerous generalization has often been
the individual American officer, usually military, serving in advisory
or combat positions. There, with a 12-month tour standard, the Americans
have pushed their Vietnamese counterparts hard, and often encountered
great resistance. Indeed, the Americans in Vietnam often think they are
already pushing the Vietnamese as hard as is desirable, and that
Washington is asking the impossible when they send out instructions to
get more out of the Vietnamese.

These were some of the backsround factors which were playing them-
gelves out in late 1966 and early 1967. While tension between Washington
and Saigon had existed before, and is inevitable between headquarters and
the field, the pressure had by now reached a level higher than ever
before. (It is ironic to note that the same vensions that exist between
Washington and Saigon tend to exist between the Americans in Saigon and
the Americans in the field. The phrase "Saigon commando” is used continu-
ally to castigate the uninformed officials in Saigon, . There are too few
people serving in Saigon with previous field experience, an unavoidable by-
product of the 12-month tour, and this increases the gap.)

ae TOP SECRET - Sensitive
