Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

essential to designate a specific focal point for the direction,
coordination and supervision in Washington of U.S. non-military
programs relating to Vietnam. I have accordingly designated
Mr. Robert W. Komer as Special Assistant to me for carrying cut
this responsibility.

"T have charged him and his deputy, Ambassador William
Leonhart, to assure that adequate plans are prepared and coordi-
nated covering all aspects of such programs, and that they are
promptly and effectively carried out. The responsibility will
include the mobilization of U.S. military resources in support
of such programs. He will also assure that the Rural Construc-
tion/Pacification program and the programs for combat force
employment and military operations are properly coordinated.

"His functions will be to ensure full and timely support
of the U.S. in Saigon on matters within his purview...

"In addition to working closely with the addressee Cabinet
officers he will have direct access to me at all times.

"Those CIA activities related solely to intelligence collec-
tion are not affected by this NSAM." 9/

Mr. Komer was in business, with a small staff and a mandate, as he
saw it, to prod people throughout the government, in both Washington and
Saigon. Combined with a personality that journalists called "abrasive,"
his mandate resulted in more pressure being put on the civilians associated
with Vietnam than ever before, and in some understandable frictions.

Komer's significance in the re-emphasis of pacification is important,
and must be dealt with briefly, although this section does not relate his
story in detail.

First, there was Komer's influence on AID. With little difficulty,
he established his ability to guide AID, and began to give them direct |
instructions on both economic and pacification matters. AID, previously
with limited influence in the Mission's pacification policy, found its
influence diminished still further.

Of more significance was Komer's emphasis on the RD Cadre program,
run by the CIA. Together with Porter, he recommended a premature expan-
sion of the program, in an effort to get the program moving faster. On
April 19, 1966, after his first trip to Vietnam, Komer told the President:

"Cadre Expansion. While the RD program has some question-
able aspects, it seems the most promising approach yet developed.
The RD ministry led by General Thang is better than most, and
the Vung Tau and Montagnard training centers are producing 5500
trained men for insertion in 59-man teams into 93 villages
every 15 weeks.

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
