Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

recognition of the Associated States by the other non-
Communist states of Southeast and South Asia.

Ne. In the event of overt attack by organized
Chinese Communist forces against Indochina, the United
States should not permit itself to become engaged in a
general war with Communist China but should, in concert
with the United Kingdom, support France and the Associated
States by all means short of the actual employment of
United States military forces. This support should
include appropriate expansion of the present military
assistance program and endeavors to induce States in
the neighborhood of Indochina to commit armed forces to
resist the aggression.

"f£. The United States should immediately
reconsider its policy toward Indochina whenever it
appears that the French Government may abandon its
military position in that country or plans to refer the
problem of Indochina to the United Nations. Unless the
situation throughout the world generally, and Indochina
specifically, changes materially, the United States
should seek to dissuade the French from referring the
Indochina, question to the United Nations.

"eg. Inasmuch as the United States-sponsored
resolution, ‘Uniting for Peace,' has been adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations, and should a
situation develop in Indochina in a manner similar to that in
Korea in which United Nations forces were required, the United
States would then probably be morally obligated to contribute
its armed forces designated for service on behalf of the
United Nations. It is, therefore, in the interests of the
United States to take such action in Indochina as would
forestall the need for the General Assembly to invoke the
provisions of the resolution, ‘Uniting for Peace." ..."

The JCS also proposed long-term objectives, urging the development of an
underground guerrilla warfare capability, a psychological warfare program
("to demonstrate the evils of Communism....and to warn...of renewed

Chinese imperialism"), and encouragement of an appropriate regional
security arrangement. These concepts formed the heart of an NSC Staff
Study af December 28. 44/ The initial decision to give assistance was con-
firmed after nearly one year's continual re-examination, and remained basic
to U.S. policy for the remainder of the war.

*.- MAP for Indochina
a. Magnitude

The U.S. military assistance program to the French and
Associated States was implemented rapidly, considering the major U.S.

14 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
