Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for Vietnam as publicly stated by US officials be reaf-
firmed.

ec. The military objective, concept, and strategy
for the conduct of the war in Vietnam as stated in
JCSM-218-67 be approved by the Secretary of Defense. 25/

4, The Last Interagency Round of Alternatives

Certainly the Joint Chiefs of Staff had been correct in detecting
the basic policy realignment and the crystallization of opposition to
expansive increases in the war in South Vietnam or in the air war over
North Vietnam. If they had misread or underestimated anything it was
in the magnitude and the strength of this opposition as it began to
erystallize throughout different agencies of the government. As the
replies to the 19 May DPM from other agencies began to filter in there
was little doubt remaining that, in fact, the validity of the assump-
tions in the DPM were not those being called into question, but the
ones of JCSM 218-67 were under attack.

Before the other agency views on the DPM were received, however,
the JCS reported in again with their discussion of air operations
against North Vietnam. This was in response to a SecDef memo of 20 May
1967 in which McNamara requested the JCS to examine two alternative
bombing campaigns -- one concentrating the bombing of North Vietnam on
the lines of communication in the Panhandle Area of Route Packages 1,

2 and 3, with the concomitant termination of bombing in the remainder
of North Vietnam; and the other, to terminate the bombing of fixed
targets not directly associated with LOC's in Route Sectors 6A and 6B
and simultaneously expand the armed reconnaissance operations in those
sectors by authorizing strikes on all LOC'’s. Furthermore, the second
program was to be examined under two alternative assumptions, one in
which strikes against ports and port facilities were precluded, and
the other, in which every effort was made to deny importation from the
sea. (This final option was essentially that recommended in JCSM 288-67
dated 20 May.) To all of this, the JCS concluded that their original
recommendation on 20 May represented the most effective way to success-
fully prosecute the air and naval campaign against North Vietnam. The
Joint Chiefs' position was vigorously stated in their conclusion:

The analysis provided in the Appendix supports the
conclusion that the recommendations submitted to you on
20 May 1967 represent the most effective way to prosecute
successfully the air and naval campaign against North Viet-
nam. Such a campaign would exert appropriate military
pressures on North Vietnamese internal resources while
substantially reducing the importation of the external
resources that support their war effort and could be
accomplished at risks and costs no greater than those

178 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
