Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Bill Bundy's experts read this into Ho Chi Minh's
release of the Johnson-Ho exchange of letters: (a) Ho
thereby “played the world harp," thereby "losing" in the
Anglo-Saxon world; (b) to Ho's Hanoi public, he "told off
the Americans," showing the hard line but simultaneously
reiterating the Burchette line (which China did not like);
(c) in the process of quoting the President's letter, Ho
leaked the fact of previous exchanges, thereby admitting
past contacts and preparing the public for future ones;
and (a) Ho ignored the NLF. 51/

The most immediate and obvious effect of the disclosure, however, was
to throw cold water on any hopes for an early break in the Washington-
Hanoi deadlock.

Shortly after the President's return from the Pacific he
received a memo from the Chairman of the JCS, General Wheeler, describing
the current status of targets authorized under ROLLING THUNDER 54. While
most of the targets authorized had been struck, including the Thai Neuyen
Iron and Steel plant and its associated thermal power facility, bad weather
was preventing the kind of sustained campaign against the approved industrial
targets that the JCS would have liked. 52/ The Thai Nguyen complex, for
instance, had been scheduled for attack 51 times by March 21, but only hk of
these could be carried out, the rest being cancelled because of adverse
weather. Piecemeal additions to the authorized target list continued
through the month .of April. On April 8, ROLLING THUNDER program 55 was
approved, adding the Kep airfield; the Hanoi power transformer near the
center of town; and the Haiphong cement plant, POL storage, and ammunition
dump to the target list along with more bridges, railroad yards and vehicle
parts elsewhere in the country. 53/ The restrictions on the Hanoi and
Haiphong perimeters were relaxed to permit the destruction of these new

targets.

In spite of the approval of these new "high-value" industrial
targets that the JCS and CINCPAC had lusted after for so long, the Chairman
in his monthly progress report to the President in April could report little
progress. Unusually bad weather conditions had forced the cancellation
of large numbers of sorties and most of the targets had been struck
insufficiently or not at all.

In addition to broadening the NVN target base, increased
pressure must be attained by achieving greater effectiveness
in destruction of targets, maintaining continuous harassment
during periods of darkness and marginal attack weather, and
generating surge strike capabilities during periods of visual
attack conditions. In view of the increased hostility of NVN
air environment, achievement of around-the-clock strike
capability is imperative to effect maximum possible degrada-
tion of the NVN air defense system which, in turn, will

mire TOP SECRET - Sensitive
