Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

on the 26th was a classic Leavenworth-style analysis, detailed and
thorough in its consideration of possible U.S. courses of action. 105/
Copies of the Estimate, which in bulk amounted to a full half inch of
foolscap paper, were delivered to Washington by Brigadier General De Puy,
Westmoreland's J-3, who was traveling with Ambassador Taylor to the NSC
meetings of 1-2 April. 106/ If the awesome bulk of the Estimate deterred
anyone from giving it the careful study it merited, that is most unfor-
tunate. As Westmoreland himself said:

"Recognizing recent marked changes in situation in SVN,
we considered it appropriate to undertake a classical Comman-
der’s Estimate of the Situation to think through in a logical
and precise manner strategy, objectives, enemy capabilities
and our own possible courses of action before making what may
prove to be in the light of history a momentous recommendation.
In addition, by reducing the Estimate to writing we expose our
thoughts to others, thus making possible careful review by
higher authority and perhaps introduction of new considerations
that were not apparent here." 107/

The Estimate is as good as the Commander's word. The basic con-
sideratiors to be analyzed are all laid out for the reader to see. First,
the Mission as General Westmoreland interpreted it:

"Forces of the Government of Vietnam supported and assisted
by forces of the U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, to-
' gether with additional supporting U.S. and Free World forces,
take as rapidly as possible those necessary actions to:

"A. Cause the DRV to-cease its political and military sup-
port. of the VC in SVN, and

"B. Enable an anti-communist GVN to survive so that ulti-
mately it may defeat the VC insurgency inside SVN.”

Secondly, the Basic U.S. Strategy:

"The analysis is predicated upon the assumption that basic
strategy of retaliatory and punitive air strikes against NVN
will, in time, bring about desired results, that is, supply
and support of the insurgency will be terminated by DRV and
hopefully DRV/VC High Command will direct the cessation of
offensive operations. In any event, without external support
the forces of RVNAF supported by U.S. would be able at first
to contain and then to defeat VC. Therefore, Estimate addres-
ses itself primarily to the interval in time between now and
time at which basic strategy takes effect. If any time VC

85 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
