Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Bao Dai attempted at first to maintain a central position
between the two protagonists, but was soon persuaded to decline the
Viet Minh overtures by non-Communist nationalists. A group of these,
including members of the Cao Dai, Hoa Hao, Dong Minh Hoi, Dai Vet, and
the VNQDD formed a National Union, and declared support for Bao Dai.
One authority termed the National Union "a fragile coalition of dis-
eredited collaborators, ambitious masters of intrigue, incompetent
sectarians, and a smattering of honest leaders without a following."
Among the latter were Ngo Dinh Diem, who "for the first and only time,
joined a party of which he was not the founder," and pledged to back the
Emperor so long as he pursued independence for Vietnam. 3 Now, having
eliminated the Viet Minh support option, Bao Dai became more compliant
in his discussions with the French, and the French became correspondingly
stiffer in their attitude toward the Viet Minh. Yet, little came of the
talks. On December 7, 1947, aboard a French warship in Ha Long Bay, Bao
Dai signed an accord with the French, committing the French to Vietnamese
political independence so minimally that it was promptly condemned not
only by Diem, but also by more opportunistic colleagues in the National
Union. Bao Dai, in what might have been a political withdrawal, removed
himself from the developing intrigue, and fled to European pleasure
centers for a four month jaunt which earned him the sobriquet "night club
emperor."

The French, despite lack of cooperation from their elusive
Vietnamese principal, sent diplomats to pursue Bao Dai and publicized
their resolve "to carry on, outside the Ho Chi Minh Government, all
activities and negotiations necessary for the restoration of peace and
freedom in the Vietnamese countries" -- in effect, committing themselves
to military victory and Bao Dai. u/ French persistence eventually per-
suaded Bao Dai to return to Hong Kong, to endorse the formation of a
Vietnamese national government prior to independence, and finally, to
return to Vietnam as the Head of State. French negotiating pressures
on him and the National Union included both spurious "leaks" of Franco-
Viet Minh settlement talks, and further assurances of intentions to
grant Vietnamese autonomy. On June 5, 1948, Bao Dai witnessed the
signing of another Bay of Ha Long Agreement. Thereby, France publicly
and "solemnly" recognized the independence of Vietnam -- but specifically
retained control over foreign relations and the Army, and deferred trans-
fer of other governmental functions to future negotiations; no authority
was in fact transferred to the Vietnamese. Again Bao Dai retired to
Europe, while in Hanoi the French assembled a transparently impotent
semblence of native government. A second summer of war passed in 1948
without dispelling the military miasma over Indochina, and without mak-~
ing the "Bao Dai solution” any less repugnant among Vietnamese patriots.
Opposition to it began to mount among French Leftists. This disenchant-
ment, combined with a spreading acceptance of the strategic view that the
Franco-Viet Minh war was a key anti-Communist struggle, influenced French
leaders to liberalize their approach to the "Bao Dai solution.”

A-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
