Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As to our conditions for stopping the bombing and
entering into talks, we continue to believe that the San
Antonio formula is "rock bottom." The South Vietnamese
are in fact talking about much stiffer conditions, such
as stopping the infiltration entirely. Any move by us to
modify the San Antonio formula downward would be extremely
disturbing in South Vietnam, and would have no significant
offsetting gains in US public opinion or in key third countries....

This being said, we believe that it would strengthen our
over-all posture, and involve no significant risks in Vietnam,
if we were to reiterate our basic position on our terms of
settlement in South Vietnam. A systematic restatement of our
position on the Geneva Accords and free choice in the South
could be a vital part of selling our whole course of action
to the public, to Congress, and the world. Although we have
stated all the elements at different times, we have not pulled
them together for a long time and we could get a considerable
impression of freshness, even novelty, and certainly reasonable-
ness by identifying more precisely the elements of the Geneva
Accords; our position on free choice, and perhaps adding
something on external guarantees, which have always been a
generalized part of our position and that of the South Viet-
namese. 7

Further diplomatic actions, the Appendix indicated, would be designed
to dramatize the Communist threats to Laos, Thailand, and Cambodia. Among
the actions suggested were the following:

First, that the restatement of our position on South Viet-
nam include substantial emphasis on restoration of the Laos
Accords of 1962 and on the preservation of the neutrality and
territorial integrity of Cambodia under the 1954 Accords.

Indeed, we could go still further and take the occasion
to talk in terms of an over-all settlement for Southeast Asia
that would specifically provide that each nation was free to
assume whatever neutral or other international posture it
wished to take. We could explicitly state that we were pre-
pared to accept a Southeast Asia that was "neutral" in the
sense of not adhering to any power bloc or forming a part
of any alliance directed at others.

We could say a favorable word about regional arrange-
ments in Southeast Asia consistent with the concept, and
could indicate our willingness to join with other outside
nations to consider what kind of general assurances of sup-
port could be given to such a Southeast Asia....

Second, there are strong diplomatic steps that could be

61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
