Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for infiltration into South Viet-Nam. Is it not logical
and reasonable, therefore, that South Vietnamese troops
should oppose and combat North Vietnamese offensive action
by whatever method can be devised in order to prevent the
invasion of their country? Guarantees, of course, would
have to be given to the Lao Government by the South Viet-
namese, and I believe should be underwritten by us, that
Vietnamese troops were on Lao territory for defensive
purposes only and would be withdrawn immediately when peace
is secured. The operation, especially in its preparatory
stages, should be carried out with as much security and
secrecy as possible. I have made some recommendations as
to methods we might use to achieve these objectives. This
is a matter which I believe we should pursue with the utmost
concentration. 57/

These views, of course, accorded with those which the military had
been pressing for some time. COMUSMACV was fortunate in having such a
staunch ally in his battle for expanded operations into the sanctuaries
as well as the moral support for a more intensive war effort. Bunker
concluded his short introduction by outlining his current assessment
and summarized by saying that Hanoi's stance was one of determined
inflexibility until the situation developed more clearly in favor of
either the United States or the North Vietnamese. Under these condi-
tions, he concluded that Hanoi might consider the next six-ten months
@ crucial time of testing of wills. The period coincided with the
monsoon season, most favorable to the VC militarily and this, combined
with electoral pressures in South Vietnam followed by the pre-electoral
period in the United States with its mounting pressures for resolution
of the Vietnam conflict, seemed to indicate to Hanoi that a crucial
period of developments was emerging. Bunker estimated that Ho Chi Minh
held to the expectation that the United States could not significantly
curb infiltration or destroy the VC's military and political capability
in the next six to twelve months, and that by their domestic and inter-

national political pressures would dominate the course of events demanding
some sort of resolution of the war unfavorable to United States interests.

COMUSMACV, who followed the briefing by Ambassador Bunker, inter-
preted United States overall strategy as one of applying such pressure
on the enemy as would destroy his will to continue the aggression. In
COMUSMACV's words,

, -e-we must convince the enemy that he cannot win,
that time is not on his side. I believe that this strategy
will succeed, provided we step up the pressure by rein-
foreing our mounted successes. The grueling success of
our air and sea offensive is being matched by the less
dramatic success of our ground campaign. Although our

200 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
