Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

impression on the new President, who took it as an authoritative
exposition of Soviet intentions, discussed it with his staff and read
excerpts from it aloud to the National Security Council." Thereafter,
Administration leaders, by their frequently identifying that Khrushchev
declamation as a milestone in the development of communist world
strategy, lent credence to the supposition that the Soviet Union had
approved aggression by its satellite in North Vietnam only in December
1960 -- the month the NLF was formed.

American Kremlinologists had been preoccupied, since Khrushchev's
"de-Stalinzation" speech at the 20th Congress of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union in February 1956, with the possibilities of a
genuine detente with the USSR. They were also bemused by the prospect
of a deep strategic division with the "Communist Bloc" between the
Soviets and the Chinese. Yet, despite evidences of disunity in the Bloc
-~- in Yugoslavia, Albania, Hungary, Poland, and East Germany -- virtually
all experts regarded North Vietnamese national strategy, to the extent
that they considered it at all, as a simple derivative of that of either
the USSR or the CPR. P. J. Honey, the British authority on North A
Vietnam, tends to the view that Hanoi remained subservient to the
dictates of Moscow from 1956 through 1961, albeit carefully paying lip
service to continue solidarity with Peking. More recently, a differing
interpretation has been offered, which holds that the Hanoi leaders were
in those years motivated primarily by their concern for internal develop-
ment, and that they, therefore, turned to the Soviet Union as the only
nation willing and able to furnish the wherewithal for rapid economic
advancement. Both interpretations assume that through 1960 the DRV
followed the Soviet line, accepted "peaceful coexistence," concentrated
on internal development, and took action in South Vietnam only after
Moscow gave the go-ahead in late 1960.

But it is also possible that the colloquy over strategy among the
communist nations in the late 1950's followed a pattern almost exactly
the reverse of that usually depicted: that North Vietnam persuaded the
Soviets and the Chinese to accept its strategic view, and to support
simultaneous drives for economic advancement and forceful reunification.
Ho Chi Minh was an old Stalinist, trained in Russia in the early 'e0's,
Comintern colleague of Borodin in Canton, and for three decades leading
exponent of the Marxist-Leninist canon on anti-colonial war. Presumably,
Ho spoke with authority within the upper echelons of the communist party
of the Soviet Union. What he said to them privately was, no doubt, quite
similar to what he proclaimed publicly from 1956 onward: the circum-
stances of North Vietnam were not comparable to those of the Soviet
Union, or even those of the CPR, and North Vietnem's policy had to reflect
the differences.

Khrushchev's de-Stalinization bombshell burst in February 1956 at a
dramatically bad time for the DRV. It overrode the Chinese call for
reconvening of the Geneva Conference on Vietnam, and it interfered with
the concerting of communist policy on what to do about Ngo Dinh Diem's
refusal to proceed toward the general elections scheduled for July 1956.

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
