Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

began to develop in late spring for an even more significant increase in
U.S. forces.

A special meeting on Southeast Asia was called at PACOM Headquarters
in Honolulu for 1-2 June because of the unsatisfactory progress in execu-
tion of the National Pacification Plan. There, COMUSMACV proposed extending
and intensifying the U.S. advisory effort in order to improve the operational
effectiveness of the VNAF performance generally. The idea was discussed
and supported in principle, and a staff working paper outlining the concept
was prepared by the conferees. Near the end of June, COMUSMACV submitted
to JCS (info CINCPAC, DOD, State, White House) his formal proposal recom-
mending enlargement of the advisory assistance program. He reiterated, and
offered further justification for, the need to augment the current advisory
detachments at the battalion level and to extend the advisory effort at both
the district and sector levels. His detailed breakout of primary personnel
requirements came to a total of 900 more advisors.as the net in-country
increase, but conceded that additional administrative and logistic support
requirements would be substantial and would be submitted separately. Also,
approximately 80 additional U.S. Navy advisors would be requested, in con-
nection with recommendations made earlier in the "Bucklew Report" for a
Junk Force and other measures to counter infiltration by sea. CINCPAC
indicated concurrence and recommended approval of the proposal on h July. 6h/

In the middle of July, the new U.S. Ambassador to Vietnam, General
Maxwell Taylor, sent an evaluation of the military situation to the Secre-
tary of State, Secretary of Defense, and JCS that lent strong support to
COMUSMACV's proposal. The Ambassador advised that formal estimates of
regular VC strength in South Vietnam had been revised and now were raised
to between 28,000 and 34,000. He explained that this did not reflect a
sudden dramatic increase, but had been suspected for the past two or three
years, though confirmatory evidence had become available only in the last
few months. There was thus no occasion for alarm, but the new estimate
emphasized the growing magnitude of the problem and the need to increase
the level of U.S. /GVN efforts. Therefore, additional requirements were
being formulated, including U.S. military personnel requirements, to support
U.S. plans during the ensuing months to cope with the new understanding of
the realities of the situation. He forecast an increase in U.S. military
strength to around 21,000 over the next six-month period to meet projected
needs. 65/

Immediately the size of the estimated force requirements connected
with the proposed expansion of the advisory effort began to climb. On
16 July COMUSMACV submitted the support requirements associated with the
program. For the next year he would need, over and above the original
900 additional advisors requested, more than 3200 other personnel, for a
total gross military strength increase of about 4200. 66/ The Ambassador
in Saigon concurred in COMUSMACV's proposed increase in U.S. military
strength by 4200 over the next nine months, bringing the total in-country
to nearly 22,000, and he urged prompt action. The Secretary of State also
recomnended approval, as did CINCPAC and JCS, and on 20 July, at the JCS-
SecDef meeting, overall support was given to the COMUSMACV requested

38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
