Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date; 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B. Washington: Komer as the Blowtorch

The Warrenton conference had discussed not only the reorganization
of the Mission in Saigon, but -- far more gingerly -- the need for a
more centralized management of the effort in Washington.

After the Honolulu conference the President decided to take action
to change the Washington structure on Vietnam, but not in quite the way
suggested at Warrenton. While many people at Warrenton, particularly the
State representative, had hoped that the President would designate one
man, with an interagency staff, as the overseer of an integrated political-
military-diplomatic-economic policy in Vietnam, the President decided to
reduce the scope of the job, and give one man responsibility for what was
coming to be called "The Other War." Thus, for the very first time, there
would be a high-ranking official -- a Special Assistant to the President
~- whose job would be to get the highest possible priority for non-military
activities. In effect, the President had assured a place at the decision
councils in Washington for someone with built-in pro-pacification, pro-
civil side bias. This was Robert W. Komer, whose strenuous efforts in the
next few months were to earn him the nickname of "The Blowtorch" (given
to him by Ambassador Lodge, according to Komer).

How much authority the President intended to give Komer is not clear.
It is quite likely that the issue was deliberately left vague, so as to
see what authority and what accomplishments Komer could carve out of an
ambiguous NSAM and his ready access to the President.

On March 23, 1966 -- six weeks after Manila -- Joseph Califano,
Special Assistant to the President, sent the Secretary of Defense an
EyES ONLY draft of the NSAM setting up Komer's authority. In the cover-
ing note, Califano said, "We would be particularly interested in whatever
suggestions you would have to strengthen Komer's authority." 8/ In response,
the Defense Department (the actual person making suggestion unidentified in
documents) suggested only one minor change, and approved the NSAM.

The other departments also suggested minor changes in other parts of
the NSAM, and on March 28, 1966, the President issued it as NSAM 343. It
said:

"In the Declaration of Honolulu I renewed our pledge of
common commitment with the Government of the Republic of Viet-
nam to defense against aggression, to the work of social
revolution, to the goal of free self-government, to the attack
on hunger, ignorance and disease, and to the unending quest for
peace. Before the Honolulu Conference and since, I have stressed
repeatedly that the war on human misery and want is as fundamen-
tal to the successful resolution of the Vietnam conflict, as our
military operations to ward off aggression... In my view, it is

62 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
