44.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

1. It is another reminder of the prevailing (although not
universal) over-optimism of U.S, appraisals of the Vietnam problem.

2. One of the follow-on actions to the report was supposed to
be a Vietnamese announcement of a program of social reform, Producing
this piece of paper (and in the end it was not much more than a piece
of paper) took months, It was experiences such as this that gave
questions about the viability of the Diem regime greater prominence in
the fall review than they had received during April and May.

3. The U.S. was still continuing to deal with Diem most gently.
Nothing more was asked of Diem as a quid pro quo than that he finally
work up a plan for the counterinsurgency. The President explicitly
accepted the assumptions of the Joint Plan worked out by the Staley
Mission and their Vietnamese counterparts.

This is from the formal record of decision:

Joint Program of Action
With the Government of
Vietnam (Staley Report)

August 4, 1961

The President agrees with the three basic tenets
on which the recommendations contained in the Joint Action
Program are based, namely:

a, Security requirements must, for the present, be given
first priority.

b. Military operations will not achieve lasting results
unless economic and social programs are continued and
accelerated,

ec. It is in our joint interest to accelerate measures to
achieve a self-sustaining economy and a free and
peaceful society in Viet-Nem. 1/

Similar language was used at the time of the May decisions. So it
is not new, It is only that, in the light of Diem's inactivity, the
phrases implying that non-military efforts are also important had come
to sound a little hollow,

IV. U.S. COMBAT TROOPS

From the time of the Laos Annex £5 ‘the original Gilpatric/Lansdale

draft of the Task Force Report (April 28), the record shows persistent

activity on some level or other on the issue of sending U. S. combat troops
to Vietnam,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
