Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

' TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Two days later on 18 April Khanh again brought the matter up, this
time with Secretary of State Rusk. Rusk replied that this was a big prob-
lem, that political preparation would be needed, and that while the U.S.
was prepared to take any action necessary to win the war, it had ‘to be very
clear that such action was indeed necessary before the U.S. would embark

on it. 80/

A fortnight before on 4 April 1964 W. P. Bundy had written a letter to
Ambassador Lodge with enclosures which concerned a possible political scen-
ario to support action against North Vietnam and for the earlier, so-called
"Blue Annex" (considerations of extended actions to the North) completed
during the McNemara-Taylor visit in March 1964. In Washington there was
considerable theorizing, in this period, about the best manner of persuading
North Vietnam to cease aid to the NLF-VC by forceful but restrained pres-
sures which would convey the threat of greater force if the North Vietnamese
did not end their support of the insurgency in South Vietnam. In certain
circles in Washington at least, there was what appears now to have been an
amazing level of confidence that we could induce the North Vietnamese to
abandon their support of the SVN insurgency if only we could convince them
that we meant business, and that we would indeed bomb them if they did not
stop their infiltration of men and supplies to the South.

This confidence, although ultimately accepted as the basis for decision,
was neither universal nor unqualified. This was evident, for instance in
the meeting of 19 April, when the subject was discussed in Saigon with Rusk,
‘lodge, Harkins, Nes, Manfull, DeSilva, Lt. Col. Dunn, General Wheeler,
W. P. Bundy, and Solbert of ISA. Much of the discussion on that occasion
centered on the political context, objectives, and risks, of increasing mili-
tary pressure on North Vietnam. It was understood that it would be first
exerted solely by the Government of Vietnam, and would be clandestine.
Gradually both wraps and restraints would be removed. A point on which there
was a good deal of discussion was what contact with the DRV would be best in
order to let Hanoi know the meaning of the pressures and of the threats of
greater pressures. Ambassador Lodge favored a Canadian ICC man who was about
to replace the incumbent. The new man he had known at the UN. While Lodge
was willing to participate in discussions of the mechanisms, he was explicitly
unsure of Hanoi's reaction to any level of pressure. Lodge was not always
fully consistent in his views on this subject, and it is not clear that his
reservations on this score led him to counsel against the move or to express
other cautions. However, he did say he doubted that we could meet massive
intervention by the DRV by purely conventional measures. Rusk hoped that the
threatened pressures against Hanoi would induce her to end her support for
the VC. Rusk emphasized the importance of obtaining the strongest possible’
evidence of DRV infiltration. It was during this discussion that the ques-
tion of the introduction of U.S. Naval forces -- and hints of Cam Ranh Bay --
arose aS a measure which it was hoped would induce increased caution in
Hanoi. The presence of military power there, it was hoped, might induce
Hanoi to be more restrained in its actions toward South Vietnam. There was

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
