Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

resumed, the bombing must be carefully controlled, Ball offered dis-
turbing analysis but little in the way of helpful practical advice.

The week including the Tet holidays (January 23-29)
saw some final debate at the White House on the question of whether
to resume at all in which Ball's memo surely figured. The outcome
was a Presidential decision that ROLLING THUNDER should recommence
on January 31. The President declined for the time being, however,
to approve any extension of air operations, despite the strong recom-
mendations of the military and the milder proposals of the Secretary
of Defense for such action.

E. Accomplishments by Year's-End

After 10 months, of ROLLING THUNDER, months longer than U.S. officials
had hoped it would require to bring NVN to terms, it was clear that NVN
had neither called off the insurgency in the South nor been obliged to
glow it down. Still, decision-makers did not consider bombing the North
a failure. While willing to entertain the idea of a temporary pause
to focus the spotlight on the diplomatic track they were pursuing, they
were far from ready to give up the bombing out of hand. Why not? What
did they think the bombing was accomplishing, and what did they think
these accomplishments were worth? What did they hope to achieve by
continuing it? .

As already noted, certain political gains from the bombing were
evident from the start. Morale in SVN was lifted, and a certain degree
of stability had emerged in the GVN. MNVN and other countries were shown
that the U.S. was willing to back up strong words with hard deeds. These
were transient gains, however. After the bombing of the North was begun,
other U.S. actions -- unleashing U.S. jet aircraft for air strikes in
the South, and sending U.S. ground troops into battle there -- had as
great or even greater claim as manifestations of U.S. will and determina-
tion. Similarly, breaking through the sanctuary barrier had been accom-
‘plished, and once the message was clear to all concerned it did not
require daily and hourly reinforcement. The acquisition of an important
bargaining chip was a gain of uncertain value as yet, since it might
have to be weighed against the role of the bombing as an obstacle to
getting negotiations underway in the first place. As one high-level
group stated in the fall of 1965:

eit would be difficult for any government, but
especially an oriental one, to agree to negotiate while
under sustained bombing attacks. 60/

*

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
a
