Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

Turnines cyer te Zao Doi of the No, 1
resicente in ealgon, now oscupled by
the Freneh Aith Vomaissaioner. This

de symbolic as voll as practicsl.

fhig is undoubtedly the renson why 2b -
is impossible for cao Dal to take
rasidence in the eonitel olty, where
his pretties Would te a siin of the
Feallty of his Governnent. ven Fisnon
dis opposed to this, on the rene that
4 would affect Pronth morale. Kever-
theless this vannot te overlooked.

Statezent of the French that taeir
purpose in training and prepering fox
fisld cnerations of 2 BAD Dai army is
part of thels pien tor ths tonplets
prot¢etion of the eountry by Viet
Fereus, whieh tisrestter would enabie
Shan to withdraw.

£3 thers AY many other nections, most OR
then miror in Bm ye are a we eben

eyea but ict aly: aiLenitica ta “Grienteld,
r~ $haté can be eeren co sat - the prestige
oo} : and position * Bao Eat. Soma of. thess

Propsssin. Gaye baen contained in
uuliionis eavles,

14 4, Suereh} Hllitary Probless.

A Fronch exsy of nixed but *regubler® troops of
anproniuately 200,000 2en Ls maintained in Indo-Taina,
GCaioriy in the Provinee of comin, 20 prevint the
overrunning of the Provines' and the Red River valley by
the kde sank ie $3 stand guard ssainst Gitnesa inragion

|

| The presences of thie amiy is indtapensable even though

1} Hany 220 Dai supporters would prafer to hava 1t ramoved

| -. ‘ferbhvith. These weoole believe thay esuld settle their
adifggsesnees vith Ho Uhi Mink by nerotiation if the French

. ‘wera withdrawn, The Latter sodnt of view 1s not realistio,

\"s and thera 2epood rennon toe believe that withdvews2 of

Proneh fosaue would duiekly lead to Communist takeover. '

s& Vlet troops ere effautive and loyal, .
in the Frengh army ave es14 to be the
ial teconus. The French are visorously

end shots embo di ise

eqved. of any eolo:

7 trelmin? apeyvoxinately 52,000 ¥iet trooss Tor the San Dat
arny, Such dite, once tricd and found catiagnatory,

25 fos

|
oa a i dan in

——
