Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive ~

Apart from the tactical countermeasures against the
barrier itself, one has to consider strategic alternatives
available to the North Vietnamese in case the barrier is
successful. Among these are: a move into the Mekong Plain;
infiltration from the sea either directly to SVN or through
Caribodia; and movement down the Mekong from Thakhek (held by
the Pathet Lao-North Vietnamese) into Cambodia.

Finally, it will be difficult for us to find out how
effective the barrier is in the absence of clearly visible
North Vietnamese responses, such as end runs through the
Mekong plain. Because of supplies already stored in the
pipeline, and because of the general shakiness of our quan-
titative estimates of either supply or troop infiltration,

; it is likely to be some time before the effect of even a
wholly successful barrier becomes noticeable. A greatly
stepped-up intelligence effort is called for, including
continued road-watch activity in the areas of the motorable
roads, and patrol and reconnaissance activity south of the
anti-personnel barrier. 46/

This, then,was the new option introduced into the Vietnam
discussions in Washington at the beginning of September.

Their work completed, the Jason Group met with McNamara
and McNaughton in Washington on August 30 and presented their conclusions
and recommendations. McNamara was apparently strongly and favorably
impressed with the work of the Summer Study because he and McNaughton
flew to Massachusetts on September 6 to meet with members of the Study
again for more detailed discussions. Even before going to Massachusetts,
however, McNamara had asked General Wheeler to bring the proposal up
with the Chiefs and to request field comment. 47/ After having asked
CINCPAC for an evaluation, Wheeler sent McNamara the preliminary reactions
of the Chiefs. 48/ They agreed with the Secretary's suggestion to estab-
lish a project manager (General Starbird) in DDR&E, but expressed concern
that, "the very substantial funds required for the barrier system would
be obtained from current Service resources thereby affecting adversely
important current programs."

CINCPAC's evaluation of the barrier proposal on September 13
was little more than a rehash of the overdrawn arguments against such a
system advanced in April. The sharpness of the language of his summary
arguments, however, is extreme even for Admiral Sharp. In no uncertain
terms he stated:

The combat forces required before, during and after con-
struction of the barrier; the initial and follow-on logistic
support; the engineer construction effort and time required;
and the existing logistic posture in Southeast Asia with
respect to ports and land LOCs make construction of such a
parrier impracticable. ~

160 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
