Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

"For South Viet-Nam is the outcome of a very particular slice of
recent Asian history. Only in Viet-Nem was a genuine nationalist move-
ment taken over by Communist leaders and transmuted into the Communist
state of North Viet-lNam. And so the French, instead of yielding gradu-
ally or with the fullest possible prepsration for self-government, as
the British wisely did in India, Pakistan, and Malaysia, were effectively
driven out in 1954 and Viet-Nam was divided."

are tan Mya

"By 1956, to paraphrase the same eminent scholer, Communist China
and North Viet-Nam, all propaganda to the contrary notwithstanding,
simply were not willing to risk the loss of South Viet-Nam in elections,
and, perhaps most crucial, the conditions for free elections did not
prevail in either North or South Viet-Nem. So the date passed, and the
dividing line between the two Viet-Nams became a political division as
in Germany and Korea, with reunification left to the future. And in
the course of time another 30-odd nations recognized South Viet-Nam,
and recognize it today.

"(By the way, the eminent scholar I have just been citing was
Professor Hans J. Morgenthau, writing in a pamphlet entitled ‘America's
Stake in Viet-Nam,' published in 1956. One of the other participants in
that conference was the then junior Senator from Massachusetts. He was
a bit more downright than the professor, saying thet ‘neither the United
States nor Free Viet-Nam is ever going to be a party to an election ob-
viously stacked and subverted in sdvance.')

"Since 1956 two different strands have dominated developments in
South Viet-Nam. One is a genuine nationalist internal political ferment,
in which the South Vietnamese themselves are seeking a lasting political
base for their country-~in the face of the same problems other new
nations have faced, but compounded by the colonial heritage of lack of
training and divide-and-rule tactics. That ferment should not surprise
us; almost every new nation has gdéne through it--for example, Korea and
Pakistan. Under Diem it drove many distinguished South Vietnamese to
exile or prison, from 1962 until early this year it seriously weakened
the defense of the nation, and it now has brought into power e regime led
by men who were the real opponents of Diem and are something close to
the true voice of South Vietnamese nationalism--men,* too, who ere already
widening the base of support and holding local elections.

ae NG 9 Se

"The other, ‘and entirely different, strand has been Hanoi's effort
to take over the South by subversive aggression. On this the facts are
plain and have been fully set out, though still in summary form, in the
white papers published in December of 1961 and February 1965. If these

D-“:7
