Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

In a similar fashion Bundy developed his arguments against a major
increase in U.S, troop strength in the South and urged the President
not to take any new diplomatic initiatives for the present. But the
appeal of Bundy'’s analysis for the President must surely have been its
finale in which Bundy, acutely aware of the Fresident's political
sensitivities, cast his arguments in the context of the forthcoming
1968 Presidential elections. Here is how he presented the case:

There is one further argument against major escalation
in 1967 and 1968 which is worth stating separately, because
on the surface it seems cynically political. It is that
Hanoi is going to do everything it possibly can to keep its
position intact until after our 1968 elections. Given their
history, they are bound to hold out for a possible U.S. shift
in 1969 -- that's what they did against the French, and they
got most of what they wanted when Mendes took power. Having
held on so long this time, and having nothing much left to
lose -- compared to the chance of victory -- they are bound to
keep on fighting. Since only atomic bombs could really knock
them out (an invasion of North Vietnam would not do it in
two years, and is of course ruled out on other grounds), they
have it in their power to "prove" that military escalation
does not bring peace -~ at least over the next two years.
They will surely do just that. However much they may be
hurting, they are not going to do us any favors before
November 1968. (And since this was drafted, they have been
publicly advised by Walter Lippmann to wait for the Republicans --
as if they needed the advice and as if it was his place to give
it!)

It follows that escalation will not bring visible victory
over Hanoi before the election. Therefore the election will
have to be fought by the Administration on other grounds.

I think those other grounds are clear and important, and that
they will be obscured if our policy is thought to be one of
increasing -- and ineffective -- military pressure.

If we assume that the war will still be going on in
November 1968, and that Hanoi will not give us the pleasure
of consenting to negotiations sometime before then what we
must plan to offer as a defense of Administration policy is
not victory over Hanoi, but growing success -- and self-
reliance -- in the South. This we can do, with luck, and on
this side of the parallel the Vietnamese authorities should be ©
prepared to help us out (though of course the VC will do their
damnedest against us.) Large parts of Westy's speech (if not
quite all of it) were wholly consistent with this line of argu-

ment. 77

28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
