Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

TII. B. 2. French and GVN Responsibilities After Geneva
1. French Presence Does Not Imply French Sovereignty

The fact that French Union forces were still in Vietnam at the
time the Geneva military agreements were signed, and that they remained
there during and after the Conference, need not be interpreted as evi-
dence of lack of Vietnamese sovereignty. French Union forces could
hardly have left the country immediately without surrendering all Vietnam
to the communists, and without inviting the slaughter of the Vietnamese
National Army. French officers and noncommissioned officers led the
latter troops. Clearly, only a gradual withdrawal of the French Expedi-
tionary Corps was reasonable in view of the prevailing military situation.
The GVN accepted. these realities and recognized the need for continued
French presence. The French government, in granting the GVN independence
had agreed that the Expeditionary Corps would be pulled out of Vietnam
at the request of the GVN -- although no doubt it hoped to delay that day.
In fact, the French moved swiftly after Geneva, under American urging,

_ to relinquish to the GVN the full trappings of the sovereignty granted

an June, 1954. By mid-September, the turning over of the civil service,
police, and other public administration in South Vietnam was formally com-
pleted. By February, 1955, the Vietnamese Army was placed under the com-
mand of Vietnamese leaders, and the French accepted American primacy in
advising, training, and equipping GVN armed. forces.

2. France Is The Executor Of The Geneva Agreements

a. GVN Does Not Inherit French Responsibilities

Article 27 of the Armistice agreements signed by France

-states in part: "The signatories of the present Agreement and their
successors in their functions shall be responsible for ensuring and _
observance and enforcement of the terms and provisions thereof..."

That clause seemed to obligate the State of Vietnam in the event France
abrogated its responsibilities -- but even if construed thusly, the obli-
gation extended only to "the present /military/ Agreement," and not to
the political provisions included in the unsigned Final Declaration. It
is also possible to construe the reference to "successors" as a binder
on the procession of French governments likely to follow Mendes-France.
In any event, the State of Vietnam explicitly denied responsibility for
all the agreements concluded by France at Geneva, although it pledged
not to interfere with the cease-fire. 1/ The declarations of Vietnamese
disavowal were early, repeated and specific. Moreover, these declarations
included warnings that the partition and elections provided for by the
Geneva Conference would lead to renewed violence. Examples of these
statements follow:

B-21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
