Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

eut our loss rate in pilots and planes, that we might somewhat improve
our harassment of infiltration into South Vietnam, and that we would
diminish the risk of counter-escalatory action by the Soviet Union and
Communist China, as compared with the first two courses he had listed.
He did not recommend that we pursue Course A since the returns "did not
on present evidence seem high enough to justify the risk of Soviet-
Chinese countermeasures and heightened world tensions." 36/ in this,
he felt that he was supported by the conclusions of the majority of the
intelligence community. With respect to the second option which he had
outlined, he felt:

«+eL believe we have achieved greater results in
increasing the pressure on Hanoi and raising the cost of
their continuing to conduct the aggression in the South
than some of my most respected colleagues would agree.

I do not believe we should lightly abandon whet we have
accomplished; and specifically, I believe we should mount
the most economical and careful attack on the Hanoi power
station our air tacticians can devise. Moreover, I
believe we should keep open the option of coming back

to the Hanoi-Haiphong area, depending upon what we learn
of their repair operations; and what Moscow's and Peiping's
reactions are; and especially when we understand better
what effects we have and have not achieved thus far.

I believe the Soviet Union may well have taken cer-
tain counter-steps addressed to the more effective pro-
tection of the Hanoi-Haiphong area and may have decided --
or could shortly decide -- to introduce into North Viet Nam
some surface-to-surface missiles. 37,

Rostow favored the third option ((c) - bombing below the 20°) because,
in his words, he felt that we were “wasting a good many pilots in the
Hanoi-Haiphong area without commensurate results and that the major objec-
tives of maintaining the B option, or the restrikes back into the Hanoi-
Haiphong could be achieved at a lower cost." 38/

He, too, addressed the problem of presenting this to the American
public, noting that "we shall have to devise a way of presenting our
total policy in Vietnam in a manner which is consistent with diminished
attacks in the Hanoi-Haiphong area; which is honest; and which is acceptable
to our own people. Surfacing the concept of the barrier may be critical to
that turnaround as will be other measures to righten infiltration and
improve RVNAF pacification and that provision of additional allied forces
to permit Westy to get on with our limited but real role in pacification,
notably with the defense of I Corps in the North and the hounding of
provincial main force units." 39/

140 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
