Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. The Combined Campaign Plan is Published

Ten days earlier, on the 7th, COMUSMACV, in a formal ceremony
had signed with General Vien, the Chairman of the RVNAF Joint General
Staff, the Combined Campaign Plan 1967, which committed RVNAF to sup-
port pacification with the majority of its forces, and identified as
priority for U.S, effort military operations in areas adjacent to the
populated regions of Vietnam -- the concept advocated by Lodge and
Komer throughout the summer. 15/

The concept for conducting operations was as follows:

a. Concept. The initiative achieved in the 1966 Cam-
paign will be retained through a strategic and tactical
offensive conducted in consonance with political, economic
and sociological programs of GVN and US/Fil agencies. RVNAF,
U.S, and FWMA forces will be employed to accomplish the
mission in accordance with the objectives established and
tasks assigned for this campaign. RVNAF will have the primary
mission of supporting Revolutionary Development activities,
with priority in and around the National Priority Areas and
other areas of critical significance, defending governmental]
centers, and protecting and controlling national resources,
particularly rice and salt. U.S. forces will reinforce RVNAF;
operate with other FWMAF; and as necessary, conduct unilateral
operations. The primary mission of U.S. and FWMAF will be to
destroy the ve/NVA main forces, base areas, and resources and/
or drive the enemy into the sparsely populated and food-scarce
areas; secure their base areas and clear in the vicinity of
these bases; and as directed assist in the protection and
control of national resources.

Throughout this campaign increased emphasis will
be given to identifying and eliminating the VC infrastructure
and to small unit operations designed specifically to destroy
the guerrilla force. These operations will be characterized
by saturation patrolling, ambushes, and an increase in night
operations by both ARVN and US/FWMAF.

River Assault Group forces will be used to the optimum
in ITI and IV cTz's in small unit operations against enemy
river crossing points and tax collection points; in armed
river patrol. operations in the major rivers of the Delta; and
iin any other operations where their special capabilities may
be profitably employed.

Surface LOC's will be used to the maximum, to include
optimum use of River Assault Groups where appropriate, in

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
120
