Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fs
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

social, and political consequences, of supporting the war in the South,
and thus presumably to reduce the desire to continue it. Other targets
which might be attacked in order to similarly influence the will of the
regime were: 26 military barracks and/or supply facilities on the JCS
list, the neutralization of which would "impede the flow of military
supplies and disrupt the military training programs of NVN"; 8 major POL
storage facilities, which had a "direct bearing" on the regime's ability
to support the war in the South, but which had to be hit almost simul-
taneously in order to reduce NVN to the critical point in meeting essential
requirements; the Haiphong cement plant, the loss of which would "create
a major impediment to reconstruction and repair programs" until cement
could be imported; 3 major and 11 minor industrial plants which, though
they made "no direct or significant contribution to the war effort" and
"only a limited contribution” to the economy, were "highly prized and
nominally lucrative" targets; or, as an alternative method of knocking
out industrial production, the main electric power facilities. 60/

As for other potential targets in NVN -- the command and
eontrol system, agriculture, and manpower --

Attacks on these targets are not recommended at this
time. In each case the effects are debatable and are
likely to provoke hostile reactions in world capitals. 61/

The March CIA report, with its obvious bid to turn ROLLING
THUNDER into a punitive bombing campaign and its nearly obvious promise
of real payoff, strengthened JCS proposals to intensify the bombing. In
particular, however, the report gave a substantial boost to the proposal
to hit the POL targets. The POL system appeared to be the one target system
in NVN to which, what the report called, “the principle of concentration"
might be applied; that is, in which enough of the system could be brought
under simultaneous attack to cut through any cushion of excess capacity,
and in which a concentrated attack might be able to overwhelm the other
side's ability to reconstruct, repair, or disperse its capacity. 62/

The POL targets had other qualities to commend them as the
next escalatory step in ROLLING THUNDER. They really were pressure tar-
gets, but they could be plausibly sold as interdiction targets. The
main ones were in the Hanoi/Haiphong sanctuaries, so that over and above
any economic or military impact, strikes against them would signal that
the last sanctuaries were going and the indvstrial and other targets there
were now at risk. They fit the image of "war-supporting"” facilities which
strategic bombing doctrine and ample military precedent had decreed to be
fair game in bringing a war machine to a standstill. They had, in fact,
been struck before in other parts of NVN without any unusual political
repercussions. They were situated in the arbitrerily-defined urban/
industrial centers, but somewhat set apart from the densest civilian
housing areas, and thus might not entail as many civilian casualties

83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
