Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

time to time...The rice procurement and distribution agency
which you have in mind is an important measure of...a program
which should also include the further development of port
capacities.

USOM also began talking about devaluing the piaster. 12/ These matters
were to come to a head a year later. At this time, however, the Embassy
treated these matters routinely and applied no pressure to GVii. GVN
officials opened the serious bidding in their meeting with Secretary
McNamara on July 16, saying thet their gold and foreign exchange reserves
had suffered the alarming drop from $175 million to $100 million since
January, 1964, and requested a big increase in AID. 13/ Ambassador
Taylor preferred to limit ovr counter-demands to get quick agreement;

he said,

We would avoid giving the impression of asking for new
agreements or imposing conditions for our increase AID...
We do not want to raise conditions in terms likely to be
rejected or to require prolonged debate. 14/

On July 28, the Embassy and GVN settled it. The agreement touched very
lightly on GVN obligations and on joint economic planning. It provided
for "joint discussions to precede policy decisions...for control of
inflation," etc. 15/

On July 8, MACV reviewed its relationships with the military leader-
ship. ‘There was no problem; they agreed that operations involving both
U.S. and ARVN troops would use the concepts of coordination and coopera~
tion. They did not discuss combined command. 16/ However, a flap
developed late in July. when General Thi was reported to be planning
operations in the DMZ. Both Taylor and Westmoreland took it up with
GV, who reassured them; Thi got back on his leash before it was too
late. Such operations coimenced more than a year later. 17/
A candid subsequent statement from Saigon shows the Vietnamese desired
to have the best of both worlds. Ambassador Lodge reported to Washington
the disparaging reactions of ARVN general officers on the JGS staff to
the U.S. Marine victory south of Chu Lai. "I flag this small straw in
the wind as pointing up the importance of portraying our operations here
as combined with the GVIi in nature." 18/

3. Quiet Sailing Through January, 1966

In August, Ky wanted to make a trip to Taiwan, being interested in
getting Nationelist Chinese troops into Vietnam. The U.S. Government
objected both to the trip and to its objective, but failed to persuade
him to give up the trip. later he brought in some Chinats on the sly.
An idea floated in Washington that he or Thieu should visit the United
states was dropped without having been brought up -with the GVN. 19/

h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
