Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
- SECURITY INFORMATION

- of any overt Chinese Communist aggression against Southeast
Asia are different in character and in scope from those of
-Korea’, The Joint Chiefs of Steff are of the opinion that any
restrictions which would limit the military action taken in
French Indochina, Thailand, and/or Burma to. the area of, or
the approaches to, the land battle in opposition to the ag-
gressor forces would result in such military action becoming
wholly defensive in character. Such action would, in their
opinion, at best be indecisive and would probably extend over
an indefinite period,

11. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that military
meesures taken to prevent the Chinese Communists from gaining
control of Southeast Asia by military aggression should, from
the outset, be planned so as to offer a reasonable chance of
ultimate success, After consideration of the military factors
involved, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that
,in order to offer such chance of success, military overations
| in defense against Chinese Communist invasion of French Indo-
china, Thailand, and/or Burma must be accompanied by military
action egainst the sources of that aggression, nemely, Com-
minist China itself. Accordingly, and in view of the fore-
going, the Joint Chiefs of Staff would recommend, SOLELY FROM
TH POINT OF VIEW OF MILITARY OPERATIONS, that a strong de-
fense be maintained egainst such Chinese Communist aggression
and that concurrent offensive operations be undertaken egainst
the nation of Communist China. They would point out, however,
that this course of action, while offering promise of ultimate
success, might result in a long war, and an expensive one at
least materiel-wise.

12. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, from the military point of
viev, must, in any event, oppose acceptance of all.of the mili-
tary commitments devolving from NSC 124 without e clear under-
standing that the United States must be accorded freedom of
action and, if possible, support in the undertaking of appro-
priete military action to include -action against Comnunist
China itself. Feiling such freedom of action, the United
States. should accept the possibility of loss of at least
Indochina, Thailand, and Burma. Such acceptance would call
for a United States policy which would limit United Stetes
military commitments in Southeast Asia to those necessary to
cover and essist possible forced evacuations of the French
and/or the British from their positions. The Joint Chiefs of
Staff reaffirm their position that United States ground forces
should not be committed in French Indochins, Thailand, or
Burme and for the defense of those countries. Further, they
strongly oppese the United States joining a combined military
command for the defense of those countries.

= TOP SECRET

489
