VBE

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for re-enforcements and to threaten Hanoi with bombing. Unless the SNIE
was wholly wrong, threats to bomb Henoi would not turn off the war, and
Hanoi would increase its infiltration in response to U.S. commitments of
troops. Even should Hanoi not react with counter-escalation, the Presi- .
dent knew that the Chiefs, at least, were already on record as desiring

a prompt build-up to 40,000 ground troops. In short, the President was
being told that the issue was not whether to send an 8,000-man task force,
but whether or not to embark on a course that, without some extraordinary
good luck,would lead to combat involvement in Southeast Asia on a very
substantial scale. On the other hand, he was being warned that anything
less than sending the task force was very likely to fail to prevent the
fall of Vietnam, since "the odds are against, probably sharply against,
preventing that fall by any means short of the introduction of U.S. forces
on geno scale" (of which the task force would be the first incre-
ment).

Although the Chief's position here is clear, because their views are
on record in other memoranda, McNemara's own position remains a little
ambiguous. For the paper does not flatly recommend going ahead; it only
states he and his colleagues are "inclined" to recommend going ahead.
Three days later McNamara joined Rusk in a quite different recommendation,
and one obviously more to the President's liking (and, in the nature of
such things, quite possibly drawn up to the President's specifications).

As with the May revision of the Gilpatric Report, this paper combines
an escalation of the rhetoric with a toning down of the actions the Presi-
dent is asked to take. Since the NSAM formalizing the President's decisions
was taken essentially verbatim from this paper, the complete text is re-
printed here. (The NSAM consisted of the Recommendations section of this
memorandum, except that Point 1 of the recommendations was deleted.)

Of perticular importance in this second memorandum to the President
was Section 4, with its explicit sorting of U.S. military aid into
Category A, support forces, which were to be sent promptly; and Category
B, "larger organized units with actual or potential direct military
missions" on which ho inmediate decision was recommended. There is no
explicit reference in the paver to the flood relief task force; it simply
does not appear in the list of recommended actions, presumably on the
grounds that it goes in Category B. Category B forces, the paper notes,
"involve a certain dilemma: if there is a strong South Vietnamese effort,
they may not be needed; if there is not such an effort, United States
forces could not accomplish their mission in the midst of an apathetic
or hostile population."

If McNemera's earlier memorandum is read carefully, the same sort
of warning is found, although it sounds much more perfunctory. But that
such warnings were included shows a striking contrast with the last
go-around in May. Then, the original Defense version of the Gilpatric

‘ 124
2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
