Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

November 17, 1963, did reassert the reunification objective:

"Concerning the reunification of Vietnam, as was expounded
many times by the South Vietnam National Liberation Front, the
Vietnam Fatherland Front and the DRV government, it will be
realized step by step on a voluntary basis, with consideration
given to the characteristics of each zone, with equality, and
without annexation of one zone by the other." 172)

Concerning coalition government there was less vacillation
in NLF emphasis, although there was some detectable variation in the wel-
come extended from time to time to anti-communist political movements.
Similarly, the objective of "neutralization" was constant. Cambodia was
held up as a model, and there was some implication in early NLF statements
that it would accept international supervision of "neutralization."
Beginning in 1963 NLF statements were couched to convey the notion that
"reunification" and "neutralization" were distinct one from the other,
apparently out of deference to DRV reaction against proposals to neutralize
North Vietnam. 173/

“pb. Leadershinv

The NLF founders were shadowy figures most of whom had
earned modest repute on the murky fringes of Vietnamese politics. They
seem to have been chosen with an eye to avoiding known Communists, and
to obtaining wide representation fran South Vietnam's complicated society.

' Although the NLF Central Comaittee reserved places for 52 members, only

31 names were publicized as founding members, indicating either a large
covert membership, or, more likely, simple inability to find eligible
persons to fill the posts. 174/ AU.S. study of 73 NLF leaders in 1965
indicated that almost all were born in South Vietnam, and almost all were
highly educated. 175/ Most had histories of anti-French political activity,
or identification with religious movements, and it appears that if many
were not themselves crypto-comnunists, they had known and worked with com-
munists for years. The prime example of the group is Nguyen Huu Tho,

who was the first formally elected chairman of the Presidium of the Central
Committee of the NLF. Tho was a Cochinchinese lawyer, once a socialist,
who spent some months with the Viet Minh in the Mekong Delta in 1947. He
thereafter led anti-French and anti-US demonstrations, defended a number

of Vietnamese before Saigon courts for crimes related to the "Resistance,"
and served some time in French jails. He also edited a clandestine Viet
Minh newspaper aimed at Saigon intellectuals. In August, 1954, he became
vice chairman of the leftist Saigon Peace Committee, or Movement for the
Defense of Peace (MDP). In November, 195, according to CIA information,
Tho and others in the MDP were arrested, and Tho spent the next seven years
in Diem's detention centers. Mysteriously released in December, 1961, the
CIA reported him elected to NLF office at the congress of March, 1962. 176/
Douglas Pike's information has Tho active in Saigon politics through 1958,
at which time he was jailed. His NLF biography states that “he was liber-
ated by a daring guerrilla raid on the jail in 1961," but Pike, unable to
find any record of such a raid, concludes that Tho was provisional chair-
man of the WLF, and was elected Central Committee Chairman at the organizing
meeting in December 1960. 177/

69 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
