Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

approved if they could be included in the 525,000 ceiling. (This
accounts for the original ARCOV total of 33 battalions dropping out

in the subsequent figures and planning for Program 5). The 525,000
also included five TFS, 3 Air Force and two Marine. Of these squadrons,
two Air Force would be scheduled to move. The other three would be
included in the plan but without a movement schedule, although as a
footnote, "their availability when needed" was recognized. Enthoven
proceeded by directing that Program 5 should be prepared for publica-
tion with a strength of 525,000 minus the strengths of the three air
squadrons now scheduled for deployment. 69/

Another subject which occupied much focus of attention in early
July when Program 5 approached final approval was how to go about
obtaining additional troops from our allies in South Vietnam.

A 13 July 1967 memorandum for Rusk, McNamara, Rostow and Katzen-
bach, Subject: Messages to Manila Nations and Possibilities for
Additional Troop Contributions, prepared by William P. Bundy following
a luncheon with the President indicates just how urgently everyone saw
the problem and how much they desired to obtain troops from these
sources. In accordance with the directives at the luncheon, Bundy had
put together a series of letters making the need for additional forces
more clear and blunt. Even-though the letters were all put in terms
of early indication of prospects or exchanges of views rather than a
blunt request for additional forces, the message was unmistakeable. 70/
Australia and New Zealand were seen as being prepared to come in with
"more" but it was expected that their contribution would be modest in
relation to the need, perhaps 2,000 or 3,000 from the Australians and
a few hundred from the New Zealanders. The Philippines were characterized
as a "doubtful starter," at least in the immediate future. Anything over
2,000 from the Philippines by whatever route seemed highly unlikely. In
Korea, Park himself seemed to be willing, but he had already fended off
the Vice President's general approach completely and it was clear that
he intended to get his political situation straightened out before he
moved with any additional forces for the United States. At best Korea
appeared to be a prospect for action in late fall and with perhaps an
additional division coming by the end of the year. Thailand was con-
sidered a possibility with the thought that it might come through with
an additional 3 - 5,000 over the next six months, but it would, in
Bundy's words, "take very careful handling." In fact, earlier on
3 July the President had had a conversation with the King of Thailand
on just this very subject. The President had posed the problem raised
for the United States by the need to respond to General Westmoreland's
request for an additional 200,000 troops. He said that it would be
impossible for him, President Johnson, to get support for such addi-
tional forces unless the troop-contributing allies also put in more

210 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
