Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

explosive debate about the bombing. Not only had he questioned the
"surgical" precision claimed for the bombing of military targets in
populated areas, but he questioned the basic purpose of the strategy
itself. In his view, civilian casualties were being inflicted delib-
erately to break the morale of the populace, a course both immoral and
doomed to failure. The counter-attack mounted by bombing advocates
(and apologists) combined with the predictable quick denunciations and
denials from official sources helped generate a significant public re-
action. ay

The Pentagon reaction to the Salisbury articles touched off a new
round of editorial comment about the credibility gap. Polls at the
start of the year reflected the public's growing cynicism about public
statements. One Harris poll indicated that the public of January 1967
was just as likely to blame the United States for truce violations (des-
pite public announcements to the contrery) as the enemy. Two years
earlier this had not been so. 8/ Salisbury happened to be in North
Vietnam when Hanoi was first bombed -- whether by accident or design is
uncertain. Consequently, his dispatches carried added sting -- he was
reporting on the less appealing aspects of a major escalation in the
bombing campaign which would have attracted headlines on its own merits.
His "in depth" of such an important benchmark added markedly to its public
impact. 9 So great was the ery that President Johnson felt impelled to
express "deep regret" over civilian casualties on both sides.

Actual war news seemed good. Draft calls were down with the policy
of "keeping [the] induction rate at a reduced level for 1967." (Mclamara
press conference). Allies like Thailand were helping to ease our manpower
and commitment problems, the Thais announced in January that they were dis-
patching 1,000 troops to South Vietnam. The U.S. 9th Infantry Division
had commenced landing at Vang Tau, highlighting the continuing infusion
of U.S. strength now reaching the 380,000-man mark. North Vietnam's MIG
force had come up to engage our bombers over Hanoi on 7 January. The
result was the foe's worst day of air war -- seven MIG's were downed.
The United States made its first direct troop commitment to the Delta
when Marines were landed at Thanh Phong Peninsula. ‘This event generated
a storm of criticism especially from Congressman Gerald Ford who attacked
the Administration for expanding operations into the Delta without advising
Congress. 10

There was little to be hopeful about in regard to North Vietnam's
resolution, it was not eroding. The Washington Star, in an exclusive,
quoted Premier Phan Van Dong of the DRV as being convinced that American
public opinion would eventually force the U.S. to leave South Vietnam.
,He confirmed the oft-expressed fears of U.S. officials who prophesied
great danger of a wider and bloodier war if North Vietnam mis-read the
peace marches and opposition to the war, interpreting it as lack of U.S.
determination. 11/ Harlier, Salisbury had quoted the Premier when he
discussed the bombing, saying "that once hostilities are brought to an
end it would be possible to speak of other things." 12/ The North Viet-
namese were evidently resigned to a long bitter war -- one they believed
they could wait out better than we.

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
