Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Government were mapped out and the Viet Nam people's Liberation
Committee, which became later the Provisional Government of the
Viet Nam Democratic Republic, was created.

"At this historical gathering, the Viet Minh Party laid
down a clear-cut program which bore on the following points:

a) to disarm the Japs before the entry of Allied forces into
Indochina;

b) to wrest the power from the hands of the eneny;

c) to be in a position of authority when receiving the Allied
Forces.

"In some areas, the order for the general revolution was not
received. Acting on their own initiative, members of the Viet
Minh Front ordered a general mobilization and led the population
into the fight for power. Thus, on August 11, our compatriots
of Ha Tinh took up arms against the Japanese fascists while
uprisings also took place at Quang Ngai.

"On August 14 and 15, ovr forces seized numerous enemy advanced
positions in the vicinity of the liberated zones.

"On August 16, with the news of the Japanese capitulation,
millions of people throughout the country rose up to the occasion
and a general attack on Japanese barracks and military establish-
ments begen.

"On August 17-18, huge demonstrations took place in the
capital city of Hanoi. The fight for power effectively started
here, on the 19, with the local militia forces going over to the
Revolutionists' side. Spearheaded by youth formations, the peo-
ple"’s army under the command of the Viet Minh forced their way
into the compounds of the Home Ministry Building. Governor Phan
ke Toai had already fled with his closest collaborators. The
Tran trong Kim puppet government promptly gave way while at the
former capital of Annam, Emperor Bao Dai signed his act of abdi-
cation in the presence of representatives of the Viet Minh Central
Headquarters.

"Thus, a new Power came into being, as the people's Revolu-
tionary Government was officially proclaimed and was given the
unqualified support of the entire population,

"A few days later, members of the National Liberation Con-
mittee met in session in Hanoi. In view of the changed situation,
the New Power was re-organized and a provisional Government which
included several non-party members was established with Ho Chi
Minh as its president." 29/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-28
