Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

peace and security in Southeast Asia.' This was not a new idea in 1964.
Tt was the basis for the SEATO Treaty a decade earlier. It is no less
valid in 1967. Our several alliances in the Pacific reflect our pro-
found interest in peace in the Pacific, and in Asia where two-thirds

of the world's people live, no less vital to us as a nation than is
peace in our own hemisphere or in the NATO area.

“"T have heard the word 'credibility' injected into our domestic
debate. Let me say, as solemnly as I can, that those who would place
in question the credibility of the pledged word of the United States
under our mutual security treaties would subject this nation to mortal
danger. If any who would be our adversary should suppose that our
treaties are 2 bluff, or will be abandoned if the going gets tough, the
result could be catastrophe for all mankind."

* +

" ...1 have never subscribed to the domino theory; it's much too
esoteric. There are North Vietnamese regiments today fighting in South
Viet-Nam. There are North Vietnamese armed forces in Laos being opposed
by Iaotian forces. There are North Vietnamese~trained guerrillas opera-
ting in Northeast Thailand. There are Communist dissident elements in
Burma who are being aided, encouraged, and helped from outside Burma
across the Chinese frontier.

"There was a major Communist effort in 1965 to pull off a coup
d'etat against Indonesia. You don't need the domino theory. Look at
their proclaimed doctrine and look at what they're doing about it."

* + *

"Q. Mr. Secretary, one of the questions -- basic questions -- that
seems to be emerging in this Senate debate is whether our national security
is really at stake in Viet-Nam, and whether Viet-Nam represents an integral
part of our defense perimeter in the Pacific.

"your earlier statement indicates that you think our security is at
stake in Viet-Nam. JI think it would help in this debate if you would
_ perhaps elaborate and explain why you think our security is at stake in
Vie G -jlam . . - -

"A, Within the next decade or two, there will be a billion Chinese
on the Mainland, armed with nuclear weapons, with no certainty about what
their attitude toward the rest of Asia.will be.

"Now the free nations of Asia will make up at least a billion people.
They don't want China to overrun them on the basis of a doctrine of the
world revolution. The militancy of China has isolated China, even within
the Communist World, but they have not drawn back from it. They have

p-12h
