Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

for the basic responsibility of the nations themselves for their own
defense, political stability, and economic progress. It was a commit-
ment to do what we could to help these nations attain and maintain the

' independence and security to which they were entitled--~both for their
own sake and because we recognized that, like South Korea, Southeast
Asia was a key area of the mainland of Asia. If it fell to Communist
control, this would efiormously add to the momentum and power of the
expansionist Communist regimes in Communist China and North Viet-Nam
and thus to the threat to the whole free-world position in the Pacific."

x * ‘

",...In simple terms, a victory for the Communists in South Viet-.
Nem would inevitably make the neighboring states more susceptible to
Communist pressure and more vulnerable to intensified subversion sup-
ported by military pressures. Aggression by ‘wars of national libera-
tion’ would gain enhanced prestige and power of intimidation throughout
the world, and many threatened nations might well become less hopeful,
less resilient, and their will to resist undermined. These are big
stakes indeed." :

x * *
19. William Bundy Discusses Vietnam See ote February T, 1965,
Department of State Bulletin, March 1965, p. 292.
* * *

"5...«Why are we there? What is our national interest? I think it
was pretty well stated by Congress last August when it passed a resolu-
tion, following the Gulf of Tonkin affair, in which it stated that the
United States ‘regards as vital to its national interest and world peace
the maintenance of international peace and security in southeast Asia.'
And that's the basic reason right there--peace in the area, letting the
nations of the area develop as they see fit and free from Communist exter-
nal infiltration, subversion, and control.

"Secondly, it's obvious on the map that if South Viet-Nam were to
fall under Communist control it would become very much more difficult--
I'm not using what's sometimes called ‘the domino theory,' that anything
happens ‘automatically or quickly--but it would become very much more
difficult to maintain the independence and freedom of Thailand, Cambodia,
of Malaysia, and so on. And the confidence of other nations in the whole
perimeter of Southeast Asia would necessarily be affected, and the Com-
munists would think they had a winning game going for them. So that's a
very important, strategic reason in addition to the fact that we're help-
ing a nation under aggression.
