1

u*

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

aia ~2 at
Ce sie pore] i
= RIMENT OF STATS

Memorandum of Cony ersation

DATE: OQctober 26, 1950

eee Desirability of French Government Bringing Indochina

Situation to the United Nations.

PARTICIPANTS: Mr. Pierre Millet ~ Counselor, French Embassy

Mr. lacy ~ PSA

COPIES TO: ¥s American Embassy Paris

EUR American Legation Saigon
UNA + Mr. Hickerson

QO ~ Mr. Matthews

S/A ~ Ambassador Jessup

a

Mr, Millet asked to see me during the afternoon of October
14. During the course of conversation on the nilitary situation
in Indochina (see Memorandum of Conversation entitled "Military
Stretton in ind dochina!, Se tote: 14) Mra Millet said that his

Coe views on the ativiude - the ae ent coward the
desirability of the French Government bringing the Indochina
Situation, in some vuspecified manner, to the United Nations,
He seemed to imply by several elliptical statements that either
General Mackrthur or the Department might consider that the
success of the United Nations operation in Korea argued for a

reproduction of the same operation in Indochine.

I replied that any ees I might express were entirely my
own and that, as he lnew, this subject could be more profitabiy
discussed with Mr; Hickerson. The rest of my remarks were
designed to convey to Mr. Millet the idea that; (1) the decision
as to whether to take the Indochina situation to the United Nations
jay with the French Governrient and not with the United States.
(2) I dia not.think that the Department had developed, during the
“last few weeks as Mr,. Milles implied, = sentiment in favor cf the
French submission of the Indochina situation to the United Nations;
that so far as I kmew the Department rine to adhere to the.
position’in respect of this problem agreed on between the United
States, French and British deleeations during the course of their
discussions prelininary to the Foreign Ministers Conferences in
New York, (3) United Nations activity in Indochina seened to re

hey
ot
a

at
i

3) : a erent aie om > macert 2 rien

2
aa pot fl tae fled

we Bec? Recane aie? OL % ) See i
