Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET + Sensitive

- The RVNAF held up against the initial assault with
gratifying, and in away, Surprising strength and fortitude.
However, ARVN is now in a defensive posture around towns
and cities and there is concern about how well they will
bear up under sustained pressure.

- The initial attack nearly succeeded in a dozen places,
and defeat in those places was only averted by the timely
reaction of US forces. In short, it was a very near thing.

- There is no doubt that the RD Program has suffered
a severe set back.

- RVNAF was not badly hurt physically -- they should
recover strength and equipment rather quickly (equipment
in 2 - 3 months -- strength in 3 - 6 months). Their prob-
lems are more psychological than physical.

- US forees have lost none of their pre-TET capability.

- MACV has three principal problems. First, logistic
support north of Danang is marginal owing to weather, enemy
interdiction and harassment and the massive deployment of
US forces into the DMZ/Hue area. Opening Route 1 will
alleviate this problem but takes a substantial troop com-
mitment. Second, the defensive posture of ARVN is permitting
the VG to make rapid inroads in the formerly pacified country-
side. ARVN, in its own words, is in a dilemma as it cannot
afford another enemy thrust into the cities and towns and yet
if it remains in a defensive posture against this eontingency,
the countryside goes by default. MACV is forced to devote
much of its-troop strength to this problem. Third, MACV
has been forced to deploy 50% of all US maneuver battalions
into I Corps, to meet the threat there, while enemy syn-
chronizes an attack against Khe Sanh/Hue-Quang Tri with an
offensive in the Highlands and around Saigon while keeping the
pressure on throughout the remainder of the country, MACV
will be hard pressed to meet adequately all threats. Under
these circumstances, we must be prepared to accept some
reverses. 12

As to the future, General Wheeler saw the enemy pursuing a strategy of
a reinforced offensive in order to enlarge his control throughout the
countryside and keep pressure on the government and the allies. The enemy
is likely, the Chairman indicated:

To maintain strong threats in the DMZ area, at Khe Sanh,
in the highlands, and at Saigon, and to attack in force when
conditions seem favorable. He is likely to try to gain

13 TOP SRCRET - Sensitive |
