Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ASF ai,
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

cabled his appreciation to the President for his courtesy, but expressed
his own feeling of obligation to urge the President not to make these
new raids. Thus, he stated:

I was most grateful to you for asking Bob McNamara to
arrange the very full briefing about the two oil targets near
Hanoi and Haiphong that Col. Rogers gave me yesterday....

I know you will not feel that I am either unsympathetic
or uncomprehending of the dilemma that this problem presents
for you. In particular, I wholly understand the deep concern
you must feel at the need to do anything possible to reduce
the losses of young Americans in and over Vietnam; and Col.
Rogers made it clear to us what care has been taken to plan
this operation so as to keep civilian casualties to the
minimum.

However,...I am bound to say that, as seen from here,
the possible military benefits that may result from this
bombing do not appear to outweigh the political disadvantages
that would seem the inevitable consequence. If you and the
South Vietnamese Government were conducting a declared war
on the conventional pattern...this operation would clearly
be necessary and right. But since you have made it abundantly
clear -- and you know how much we have welcomed and supported
this -- that your purpose is to achieve a negotiated settlement,
and that you are not striving for total military victory in
the field, I remain convinced that the bombing of these targets,
without producing decisive military advantage, may only increase
the difficulty of reaching an eventual settlement....

The last thing I wish is to add to your difficulties, but,
as I warned you in my previous message, if this action is taken
we shall have to dissociate ourselves from it, and in doing so
I should have to say that you had given me advance warning and
that I had made my position clear to you....

Nevertheless I want to repeat...that our reservations
about this operation will not affect our continuing support
for your policy over Vietnam, as you and your people have
made it clear from your [Sprit 1965/ Baltimore speech onwards.
But, while this will remain the Government's position, I know
that the effect on public opinion in this country -- and I

- believe throughout Western Europe -- is likely to be such as
to reinforce the existing disquiet and criticism that we have
to deal with. 162/ |

121 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
