Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

we attach to certain political and economic reforms
in Vietnam which are an essential element in frus-
trating Communist encroachments. Recognizing the
difficulties we have had in the past in persuading
Diem to take effective action on such reforms, as
specific an understanding as possible should be
solicited from Diem on this point.

It was this sort of guidance (plus, perhaps, a memo from Lansdale
describing President Diem in terms that bear comparison with those
Jack Valenti would later use in connection with another President) that
accounts for Johnson's famous reference to Diem as the Churchill of

‘Asia. 35/

In sum, what emerges from the final version of the report is a sense
that the U.S. had decided to take a crack at the Lansdale approach of
trying to win Diem over with a strong display of personal confidence in
him. What does not emerge is any strong sense that the Administration
believed this new approach really had much hope of working, but undoubt-
edly this pessimistic reading is influence by the hindsight now available.
The drafters of the paper very probably saw themselves as hedging against
the possible failure of the policy, rather than implying that it probably
would not work,

If we go beyond the paperwork, and ask what judgments might be meade
about the intent of the senior decision-makers, and particularly the
President, it seems that here, even more than in connection with the mili-
tary commitments discussed earlier, the Administration adopted a course
which, whether in hindsight the wisest available or not, probably seemed
to have no practical alternative.

Presumably the top level of the Administration believed there was at
least some chance that the new policy toward Diem might produce useful
results. :

But even to the extent this prospect seemed dim, there were political
advantages (or at least political risks avoided) in giving this plan a try,
and there must not have seemed (as even now there does not seem) to have
been much cost in doing so.

Finally, whatever the President thought of the prospects and political
advantages of this approach to Diem, it might have been hard at that time
to see any drastically different alternative anyway. After all, the heart
of the Laos embarrassment was that the U.S. was (with some face-saving
cover) dropping an anti-communist leader who had come into power with the
indispensable assistance of the U.S. This dropping of Phoumi in Laos in
favor of support for the neutralist government Phoumi had overthrown with
U.S. encouragement and assistance remained an essential part of whatever
outcome developed in Laos. In the wake of this embarrassment, the U.S. was

- 50 res
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
