Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The NSC study responding to the Secretary's request is remarkable
for the rarity of its specific references to Indochina. ‘The staff
study focused, rather, on generalities concerning the conflict between
the interests of European metropoles and the aspirations of subject
Asian peoples for independence. The following extract is from the
section of the study dealing with Southeast Asia:

"The current conflict between colonialism and native
independence is the most important political factor in south-
east Asia. This conflict results not only from the decay of
European imperial power in the area but also from a widening
political consciousness and the rise of militant nationalism
among the subject peoples. With the exception of Thailand and
the Philippines, the southeast Asia countries do not possess
leaders practiced in the exercise of responsible power. The
question of whether a colonial country is fit to govern itself,
however, is not always relevant in practical politics. The
real issue would seem to be whether the colonial country is
able and determined to make continued foreign rule an overall
losing proposition for the metropolitan power. If it is,
independence for the colonial country is the only practical
solution, eyen though misgovernment eventuates. A solution of
the consequent problem of instability, if it arises, must be
sought on a non-imperialist plane. Im any event, colonial-
nationalist conflict provides a fertile field for subversive
communist activities, and it is now clear that southeast Asia
is the target of a coordinated offensive directed by the Kremlin.
In seeking to gain control of southeast Asia, the Kremlin is
motivated in part by a desire to acquire southeast Asia's
resources and communication lines, and to deny them to us.

But the political gains which would accrue to the USSR from
communist capture of southeast Asia are equally significant.

The extension of communist authority in China represents a

grievous political defeat for us; if southeast Asia also is
swept by communism we shall have suffered a major political 3
rout the repercussions of which will be felt throughout the

rest of the world, especially in the Middle East and in a then
critically exposed Australia. The United States should con-

tinue to use its influence looking toward resolving the colonial
nationalist conflict in such a way as to satisfy the fundamental
demands of the nationalist-colonial conflict, lay the basis for
political stability and resistance to communism, and avoid

weakening the colonial powers who are our western allies. How-

ever, it must be remembered that the long colonial tradition

in Asia has left the peoples of that area suspicious of Western
influence. We must approach the problem from the Asiatic point

of view in so far as possible and should refrain from taking

the lead in movements which must of necessity be of Asian

origin. It will therefore be to our interest wherever possible

A=55 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
