Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"To meet the situation, General Khanh and his govermment
are acting vigorously and effectively. They have produced
@ sound central plan...To carry out this plan...General Khanh
has informed us that he proposes in the near future to put
into effect a National Mobilization Plan....

"ihe policy should continue of withdrawing United States
personnel where their roles can be assumed by South Vietnamese
and of sending additional men if they are needed. It will
remain the policy of the United States to furnish assistance
and support to South Vietnem for as long as it is required....

"Secretary McNemare, and Genera] Taylor reported their
overall conclusion that with continued vigorous Leadership
from General Khanh and his government, and the carrying out
of these steps, the situation can be significantly improved
in the coming months." 51/

In @ speech in Washington on March 26, Secretary McNamara more
explicitly supported the Khanh government, and gave the accepted priorities
of U.S. policy:

",,.In early 1963, President Kennedy was able to report
to the nation that ‘the spearpoint of aggression has been
biunted in South Vietnam.’ It was evident that the Govern-
ment had seized the initiative in most areas from the insur-
gents. But this progress was interrupted in 1963 by the
political crises arising from troubles between the Government
and the Buddhists, students, and other non-Commnist opposi-
tionists. President Diem lost the confidence and loyalty of
his people; there were accusations of maladministration and
injustice. There were two changes of government within three
months. The fabric of government was torn. The political
control structure extending from Saigon down into the hamléts
virtually disappeared. Of the 41 incumbent province chiefs
on November 1 of last year, 35 were replaced. Wine provinces
had three chiefs in three months; one province had four.
Scores of lesser officials were replaced. Almost all major
military commands changed hands twice. The confidence of the
peasants was inevitably shaken by the disruptions in leader-

. Ship and the loss of physical security...Much therefore depends
on the new government under General Khanh, for which we have
high hopes.

"Today the government of General Khanh is vigorously re-
building the machinery of administration and reshaping plans
to carry the war to the Viet Cong. He is an able and energetic
leader. He has demonstrated his grasp of the basic elements --
political, economic and psychological, as well as military --
required to defeat the Viet.Cong. He is planning a program
of economic and social advences for the welfare of his people.

-

15 TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive
