a
moth f

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But various individuals and groups would stress the importance of different
shortcomings and propose quite different methods of "persuading" GVN to
overcome them,

The prevalent military view, as already suggested in the summary
explanation of the CIP and the Geographically Phesed Plan, was that organ-
ivational reform and national planning were prerequisites to effective
action. If these could be achieved, the military foresaw 6 pacification
process which would proceed from the provision of physical security in the
rural areas through the establishment (or reestablishment) of civilian
political administration to a state of political stability. The first nut
to erack was that of military security. Political analysts, including those
of the Department of State, emphasized the need for the Diem government to
liberalize itself, to attract dissident groups at least into a, loyal active
opposition and away from indifference and disaffection. In this view the
heart of the matter was essentially political, rather then military.

In both views, it should be noted, advocates agreed that the GVN must
be persuaded to take certain necessary steps. Just how such ‘persuasion was
to be achieved was a prime subject for discussion. Who was to persuade whom
and in what organizational framework was another such subject. But although
these subjects were bound to be discussed, neither was the central issue <<
by late 1961 the question of whether or not to send U.S. combat forces to
South Vietnam had clearly earned that title.

The U.S. determination of what steps to take was driven as much by
events as by arguments. By-late 1961 the course of events dictated that
physical security would take primacy over governmental liberalization, not
because the argurients for security were inherently more persuasive but
because of the very real fear that there would be no GVN to save if the
U.S. did not do something very quickly. During the first half of 1961,
terrorists and guerrillas had assassinated over 500 local officials and
civiliens, kidnapped more than 1,000, and killed almost 1,500 RVNAY per-
sonnel. 31/ ‘The VC had gainea the upper hand in most of the countryside
and were drawing an increasingly tight cinch around Saigon. 32/ Viet
Cong regular forces were now estimated to number 25,000 and were being
organized into increasingly large regular formations. The terrorist-
guerrilla apparatus had grown to embrace an estimated 17,000. 33/ The
operative question was not whether the Diem government as it was then
moving could defeat the insurgents but whether it could save itself.

The deteriorating situation was one reason why the military security
argument quickly gained the ascendancy. Another reason was the military's
recognition that, while security was en important precondition, political,
economic, and social reforms were necessary to the realization of viability
within South Vietnam. Thus, security was recognized as a means to a polit-
ical end, The process outlined in MAAG's Geographically Phased Plan, des~
eribed earlier, gave recognition to this fact. This process would shortly
become known as the "pacification process," widely accepted throughout
important places in the U.8. Government (specifically to include what is
usually referred to euphemistically as "the highest level") and stil1
widely accepted at this writing (1968).

avn TOP SECRET - Sensitive
