Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the last half of 1966. There was increasing evidence that NVA was fur-
nishing large numbers of replacements for damaged VC units, even for
local forces and some units in the Delta. The great uncertainty, surely,
if you accepted the indicators and the analysis of what they meant, was
the infiltration rate and how successful we assumed we would be in con-
trolling it.

Just as crucial seemed to be the level of vc/NVA activity as the
year closed. Systems Analysis estimated that incidents were down 19%
("incidents" being attacks, terror, harassment and sabotage). Battalion-
sized and larger enemy attacks in late 1966 were down to less than half
those of the preceding six months, while small attacks nearly trebled.
The significance of some relationships holding here was lost on decision-
makers until much later in the new year when we began to seriously question
the search and destroy strategy in Vietnam. The assumption that major
enemy unit activity was a function of the total size of our forces, i.e.,
the more we have the more extensively active we can be in search, finding
and destroying large units, is just not a convincing one when you look
at enemy activity (large units) vs. our build-up. Also, leading from
this, no one had yet questioned another assumption implicit in the COMUS-
MACV attrition strategy; we needed to ask: Who initiates the battles
when they do occur?

Revolutionary development plans were moving ahead. By 9 January
1967, the provincial RD programs had been approved by General Thaing,
Commissioner General of RD; some 1,091 hamlets with a total population
of 1,272,950 people were to be the targets of extensive RD effort. How-
ever, inputs and plans do not constitute outputs or results and such
flimsy evidence as this offered as proof of "progress" was surely trans-
parent. Concurrently, however, the reaction of the enemy to pacification
seemed to be confirmation that the program was making headway. Looking
back to the 1964-1965 “pacification programs" the enemy hardly bothered
to react to what he considered a minimal threat, and an unwanted diversion
from his successful military campaign. Only in late 1966 did he begin to
exert significant effort and begin attacking RD cadre teams. Many dis-
agreed with this interpretation, but few could dispute the graphic evidence
of basic RD weakness (security) the VC/NVA operations had revealed. RD
cadre desertions increased markedly (33 to 84 per week from January to
March 1967) and the program was grossly unable to meet its recruitment
goals (approximately 10,000 short of the 41,000 CY 67 target). 5/

If military indicators were trending upward, the political indicators
at the new year, both at home and abroad, were mixed. The Levy case had
broken to the press and had become the temporary focus of anti-war group
propaganda at the close of the year. U Thant had advanced his proposals
for peace to the President who promised to give them "careful evaluation." 6/
Harrison Salisbury's dispatches from North Vietnam were. generating an

PB} TOP SECRET - Sensitive =
