Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Administration was the fact that MACV made the request despite explicit
comment that the concept was "an overly ambitious scheme." Ty Presum-
ably, he considered it likely to be ineffective militarily, but perhaps
important in stimulating more vigorous GVN efforts. Whatever his particu-
lar reasons at the time, MACV repeated the recommendations later in the
month as part of several measures to be taken inside and outside South
Vietnam. These were designed “to give the VC a bloody nose," to steady
the newly reformed South Vietnamese government, and to raise the morale
of the population. 78/ However, the earlier MACV cable had already =
acknowledged what must have been one of the Administration's key inhibitions
against undertaking cross-border actions: General Westmoreland stated,
"It should be Tecognized that once this operation is initiated by the GVN,
U.S. controls may be marginal."

The period of the "holding phase" was also a period of significant
developments within South Vietnam. Ambassador Taylor's initial report
(10 August) made clear that the political situdtion was already precarious,
giving Khanh Only a 50-50 chance of staying in power and characterizing
the GVN as ineffective and fraught with conflicting DOB GE In Taylor's
view, the leadership in Saigon showed symptoms of defeatism and a hesi-
tancy to prosecute the pacification campaign within South Vietnam. Mean-
while, however, its popular support in the countryside seemed to be directly
proportional to the degree of protection which the government provided. 79/
In view of this shaky political base, General Khanh seized upon the occasion
of post-Tonkin euphoria -- apparently with Ambassador Taylor's encouragement --
to acquire additional executive authority. On 7 August, announcing the
necessity for certain “emergency” powers to cope with any heightened vc
activity, he proclaimed himself President and promulgated the Vung Tau
Charter. This action, which gave him virtually dictatorial power over
several aspects of South Vietnamese life, met with hostile reactions. In
jate August, Khanh's authority was challenged in the streets of Saigon,
Hue and Da Nang, during several days of student protest demonstrations
and clashes between Buddhist and Catholic groups. In response to student
and Buddhist pressures primarily, he resigned his recently assumed post
as President and promised that a national assemblage would be called to
form a more popularly based government. On 3 September, Khanh returned
to assume the premiership, but clearly with weaker and more conditional
authority than before the government crisis.

Meanwhile, as the GVN's lack of cohesion and stability was being
demonstrated, the infiltration of communist forces into South Vietnam may
have been on the increase. At least, belief in an increase in the rate of
this infiltration apparently gained currency in various U.S. agencies at
this time. ‘The documents available to this writer from the period neither
refute nor substantiate the inerease, but several of them contained
references to this berception. For example, a State Department memo-
randum, dated 2h August, acknowledged a "rise and change in the nature
of infiltration in recent months." 80/ tater analyses confirmed that
increases had taken place, but the precise period when they began was
not identified. 81,/ Hence, unless there were other intelligence data ;
to confirm them, any implications regarding North Vietnamese policy deci-
Sions were largely speculative.

2a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
= Pe ~ wensitave
