Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Within South Vietnam, there are key variables that could
move the situation sharply, one way or the other, in the
coming months. Specifically:

a. The degree to which Hanoi and the VC are
able to keep pressing, and how effectively they are
countered in the military sphere.

b. The degree to which the VC are able to extend
their control in the countryside and recoup their losses --
or whether conversely the South Vietnamese can take the
initiative and either neutralize such recoupment cr set in
motion a new favorable trend.

ec. The degree to which the GVN improves its per-
formance and galvanizes potentially greater popular support
than it can now have.

Thus, there was created an urgent need, both practical and psycho-
logical, to send such forces as could be effective within the next four
or five months.

The following additional forces of about 22,000 men could
be deployed by June 15 in accordance with the schedule set
forth below:

Six Tactical Pighter Squadrons - 3,000 men
: 2 Squadrons by - 1 April
3 Squadrons by - 1 May
1 Squadron by - 1 June

lth Marine Expeditionary Force (minus) - 18,100 men
by - 15 June

aval Mobile Construction Battalion - 700 men
by - 1 May

In addition, it was reiterated that an urgent effort was required to
improve and modernize the equipment of the SVN Armed Forces.

Tab B elaborated on what should be done to increase the effectiveness
of Vietnamese efforts in conjunction with the U.S. troop increase. Two
possible GVN reactions were foreseen to the ceployment of additionel U.S.
forces. The reaffirmation of the U.S, commitment would be welcomed, would
add to the feeling of confidence, and might stiffen the GVN's will at a
time "when the tasks it faces are rather monumental.” On the other hand,
there was always the danger that the Vietnamese would be tempted to relax
behind the refuge of American power, and the sense of anxiety and urgency
which had resulted from the TET offensive could suffer. The memorandum
indicated, however, that the GVN had the capacity to take those civil and

military actions which would materially improve the political and security

5h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
