Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"And thirdly, this technique they're using--they call it ‘wars
of national liberation'--is a technique that will be used elsewhere
in the world if they get away with this one, and they'll be encouraged
to do that.

"So those are the three basic reasons why our national interest--
and basically our national interest in peace in this whole wide Pacific
area with which we have historically had great concern and for which we
fought in World War II and in Korea~--are deeply at stake in this conflict.

rei | kate Stak

20. Secretary Rusk's News Conference of February 25, 1965, Department
of State Bulletin, March 15, 1965, Dp. 307-
x & &

"Q. Mr. Secretary, what kind of legal basis did the United States
have to bomb the targets of North Viet~Nam?

"A, Self-defense of South Viet-Nam and the commitments of the
United States with respect to the security and the self-defense of South
Viet-Nam."

21. Statement Submitted By Adlai Stevenson to U.N. Summarizing a
Significant Report Entitled, Aggression From the North, the Record

of North Vietnam's Campaign to Conquer South Vietnam. Tt was
released as Department of State Publication 7039, February 27, 1965.

“EXCELLENCY: For the information of the Members of the Security
Council, I am transmitting a special report entitled Aggression From the
North, the Record of North Viet-Nem's Campaign To Conquer South Viet-Nam,
which my Government is making public today. It presents evidence from
which the following conclusions are inescapable:

"First, the subjugation by force of the Republic of Viet-Nem by the
regime in northern Viet-Nam is the formal, official policy of that regime;
this has been stated and confirmed publicly over the past five years.

"Second, the war in Viet-Nam is directed by the Central Committee
of the Iao Dong Party (Communist) which controls the government in
northern Viet-Nam.

"Third, the so-called People's Revolutionary Party in the Republic
of Viet-Nam is an integral part of the lao Dong Party in North Viet-Nen.

*

D-28
