Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Its introductory section was a rather gloomy assessment of the
situation. As such, it was at variance with the then current assessment
of the situation ~- but in retrospect, it is of far greater interest than
the recommendations themselves:

"After some 15 months of rapidly growing U.S. military
and political commitment to offset a major enemy military
effort, the RVN has been made secure against the danger of

’ military conquest, but at the same time it has been subjected
to a series of stresses which threaten to thwart U.S. policy
objectives...

"The enemy now has a broad span of capability for
interfering with progress toward achievement of U.S.
objectives. He can simultaneously operate offensively
through employment of guerrille and organized forces at
widely separated points throughout the country, thus tying
down friendly forces, while concentrating rehearsed sur-
prise attacks in multi-battalion or even multi-regimental
strength. ...The war will probebly increase in intensity
over the planning period (two years) though decisive mili-
tary victory for either side is not likely. Guerrilla
activity will make much of the countryside insecure. More
of the rural populetion will be directly affected, and. the
number of refugees and civilian casualties on both sides
seem bound to rise...

"Reasons for lack of success of the overall pacification
program -~ including all the stages from clear and secure
operations to sustaining local government -- were varied.
First, the primary hindrance to pacification was the low
level of area security given active Viet Cong opposition.
Second, political instability prevented continuing and
coherent GVN direction and support of any pacification
program. Third, pacification execution has been almost
wholly Vietnamese and can be supported only indirectly by
the U.S. This has made it less susceptible to American
influence and more subject to political pressures and the
wealmesses of Vietnamese administration and motivation.
Fourth, no pacification concept since the strategic hamlet
program has been sufficiently clear in definition to pro-
vide meaningful and consistent operational guidance to those
executing the program. Fifth, given the pressure for success
and the difficulty of measuring progress the execution of
pacification failed to emphasize the political, social and
psychological aspects of organizing the people and thus
eliciting their active cooperation, The material aspects,
being both visible and less difficult to implement, have
received too much attention. Sixth, there was an absence
of agreed, definitely stated pacification roles and missions
not only within the GVN and the U.S. Mission but also between

80 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
