Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Reprisal Planning. In spite of these rather hesitant judgments,
the graduated approach was adopted and a program of relatively mild
military actions aimed at North Vietnam was set in motion beginning
in December 1964. At the same time, detailed preparations were made
to carry out bombing strikes against targets in North Vietnam in
reprisal for any future attacks on U.S. forces. These preparations
were made chiefly in connection with the occasional DESOTO Patrols
that the US Navy conducted in the Gulf of Tonkin which had been
fired upon or menaced by North Vietnamese torpedo boats on several
previous occasions during 1964. In order to be prepared for an
attack on any future patrol, a pre-packaged set of reprisal targets
was worked up by CINCPAC on instructions from the JCS, and pre-
assigned forces were maintained in a high state of readiness to
strike these targets in accordance with a detailed strike plan that
provided a range of retaliatory options.

In late January, a DESOTO Patrol was authorized to begin on
Feb. 3 (later postponed to Feb. 7) and Operation Order FLAMING DART
was issued by CINCPAC, providing for a number of alternative US air
strike reprisal actions in the eventuality that the DESOTO Patrol
were to be attacked or that any other provocation were to occur,
such as a spectacular VC incident in South Vietnam. At the last
moment, however, the Patrol was called off in deference to Soviet
Premier Kosygin's imminent visit to Hanoi. U.S. officials hoped
that the USSR might find it in its interest to act as an agent of
moderation vis a vis Hanoi in the Vietnam conflict, and wished to
avoid any act that might be interpreted as deliberately provocative.
Nevertheless, it was precisely at the beginning of the Kosygin visit,
during the early morning hours of February 7, the the VC launched
their spectacular attack on US installetions at Pleiku, thus triggering
FLAMING DART I, the first of the new carefully programmed US/GVN
reprisal strikes.

; Imperceptible Transition. By contrast with the earlier Tonkin
strikes of August, 1961 which had been presented as @ one-time
demonstration that North Vietnam could not flagrantly attack US
forces with impunity, the February 1965 raids were explicitly
linked with the "larger pattern of aggression" by North Vietnam,
and were a reprisal against North Vietnam for an offense committed
by the VC in South Vietnam. When the VC staged another dramatic
attack on Qui Nhon on Feb. 10, the combined US/GVN response, named
FLAMING DART II, was not characterized as an event-associated
reprisal but as a generalized response to "continued acts of aggression."
The new terminology reflected a conscious U.S. decision to broaden
the reprisal concept as gradually and imperceptibly as possible to
accommodate a much wider policy of sustained, steadily intensifying
air attacks against North Vietnam, at a rate and on a scale to be
determined by the U.S. Although discussed publicly in very muted

: : icy ss TOP SECRET - Sensitive
