Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

despite Diem's weaknesses. The report recommended the dispatch of heli-
copter companies and other forms of combat support, but without great
emphasis on these units. Probably, although the record does not specifically
say so, there was a general understanding that such units would be sent

even before the report was submitted, and that is why there is relatively
little emphasis on the need for them. .

The crucial issue was what form the American military commitment
had to take to be effective. Taylor, in an eyes only cable to the
President, argued strongly for a task force in the delta, consisting
mainly of army engineers to work where there had been a major flood. The
delta was also where the VC were strongest, and Taylor warned the President
that the force would have to conduct some combat operations and expect to
take casualties. But Taylor argued that the balance of the program, less
this task force, would be insufficient, for we had to "convince Diem that
we are willing to join him in a showdown with the Viet Cong..."

We do not know what advice President Kennedy received from State:
Sorenson claims all the President's advisors on Vietnam favored sending
the ground force; but George Ball, at least, who may not have been part
of the formal decision group, is widely reported to have opposed such a
move; so did Galbraith, then Ambassador to India, who happened to be in
Washington; and perhaps some others. From Defense, the President received
a memo from McNamara for himself, Gilpatric, and the JCS, stating that they
were “inclined to recommend" the Taylor program, but only on the understanding
that it would be followed up with more troops as needed, and with a willing-
ness to attack North Vietnam. (The JCS estimated that 40,000 American
troops would be needed to "clean up" the Viet Cong.) The Taylor Mission
Report, and Taylor's own cables, had also stressed a probable need to attack,
or at least threaten to attack, North Vietnam.

The McNamara memo was sent November 8, But on November 11, Rusk and
McNamara signed a joint memo that reversed McNamara's earlier position:
it recommended deferring, at least for the time being, the dispatch of combat
units. This obviously suited Kennedy perfectly, and the NSAM embodying the
decisions was taken essentially verbatim from the recommendations of the
Rusk/McNamara paper, except that a recommendation that the U.S. was commiting
itself to prevent the loss of Vietnam was deleted.

But where the Taylor Report had implied a continuation of the May
policy of trying to coax Diem into cooperating with the U.S., the new
program was made contingent on Diem's acceptance of a list of reforms;
further Diem was to be informed that if he accepted the program the U.S.
would expect to "share in decision-making"...rather than "advise only".

Thus, the effect of the decision was to give Diem less than he was expecting
(no symbolic commitment of ground forces) but to accompany this limited

offer with demands for which Diem was obviously both unprepared and unwilling
‘to accede to. On top of this, there was the enormous (and not always recog-
nized) extent to which U.S. policy was driven by the unthinkability of

Vv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
