Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

even more, from the perspective in which it was viewed. And this per-
spective was comprised of the whole context of incompletely described,
not fully identified values, and imperfectly defined priorities, that
determined the weight and place given to that factual detail in the
mysterious caleulus of the decision-maker. If this were not the case,
any bright college boy given the seme set of "facts" would inevitably
derive from them the same judgments of what national policy should be, -
as the canniest, most generally knowledgable and experienced veteran.

ie The Unrealized January Upturn and the Khanh Coup

There was hope that as January 196): wore on the situation would
take a turn for the better. But, as the CAS reports cited in the fore-
going section suggest, things did not get:better. The hope was that
the Minh regime would find itself, but before it did the Khanh coup
of 30 January came as another blow to progress in the operating
program and as a disillusioning surprise to the hopes for the stable
political situation generally agreed to be the prerequisite to ultimate
success,

Despite the unfavorable news -- which was beginning to excite the
first serious proposals within the JCS for carrying the war to the
north by expanded clandestine operations and finally by overt bombing --
the Secretary managed to maintain the earlier philosophy that the U.S.
involvement would remein limited and that in fact the counterinsurgency
effort could not really attain its goals unless the U.S. role continued
to be limited and the South Vietnamese did the main job themselves.

dust before the Khanh coup, in testimony on 27 and 29 January
before the House Armed Services Committee, the Secretary encountered
some sharply probing questions on the continuing costs of the war.
The guestions centered on the inconclusiveness of the efforts to date
and upon the apparent discrepancies between autumnal optimism and
the winter discouragements, and between official optimism and the
pessimistic reports appearing in newspaper stories. Even Mr. Mendel
Rivers, evidently impatient that the VC had not already been subdued
‘and perhaps suspecting that this was due to lack of vigor in our
prosecution of thewar , asked during these hearings if we were planning
to "do anything to bring this war to the VC, any more than what we
have done already..." 35/ The Secretary tried to explain that ".,.It is
a Vietnamese war. They are going to have to assume the primary
responsibility for winning it. Our policy is to limit our support to
logistical and training support." To this, Mr. Rivers replied with
the following question: "There are no plens to change the modus
operandi of this war, so far as the pleeis8 of this country is con-
cerned?”

A little later, Representative Chamberlain asked the Secretary if
he continued to be as “optimistic” about the scheduled withdrawal of U.S.
personnel as he had been in October. The Secretary in reply reaffirmed
that he believed that:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
25
