Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive :

summary, they said that the political situation would continue to decay
with a gradual petering out of the war effort. Coup after coup, intrac-
table Buddhists, Montegnard revolt, and strikes were all evidence of
the lack of leadership, and no charismatic leader was in sight. The
Viet Cong were uilikely to make an overt bid to seize power as things
were going their way, and they were looking for a neutralist coalition
which they could easily dominate. The endurance of the people and the
ability of the administration to carry on routine duties without any
guidance from Saigon were cited as latent strengths as was the fact
that no identifiable power group had yet called for an end to the fight-
ing or had sought accommodation with the Viet Cong. 28/

The events of the next few months added no new ingredients to this
gloomy picture until the decision to initiate Rolling Thunder. In esti-
mating probable communist reactions to the latter, the National Intelli-
gence Board stated "we accordingly believe that the DRV/VC reaction to
a few more air attacks like those of early February would probably be
to continue their pressures in the South more or less on the scale of
recent weeks... It is possible that they would, for a week or two,
refrain from direct attacks on U.S. installations, but we cannot esti-
mate that such restraint is probable." 29/

MacGeorge Bundy in his Memorandum to the President dated 7 February
1965 estimated that without additional U.S. action, the GVN would collapse
within the next year. He saw latent anti-Americanism near the surface
in South Vietnam and detected- amongst the Vietnamese the attitude that
the U.S. was going to quit. Bundy recommended the initiation of a policy
of gradual and continuing reprisal, but he did not even mention the
question of U.S. installation security nor did he mention the possibility
of committing U.S. ground forces. 30/

D. Contemporary Accounts

Contemporary accounts of the situation in South Vietnam from the
non-official viewpoint are unanimous in their recognition of the continu-
ing decay in the political and’military capacity of the GVN to resist.

The prospect for success if the U.S. did not change its approach to the
war was nil. The Viet Cong were clearly winning. To writers like Halber-
stam and Mecklin, the choice for the U.S. boiled down to two alternatives;
either get out or commit land forces to stem the tide. 31/ Neither of
these writers was likely to view the arrival of the Marines as anything
else but indication of a decision to take the second course. Shaplen
treated the landing of the Marines as an isolated incident, but he did
not accept the rationale that they were in Vietnam for strictly defen-
sive reasons. In commenting on the subsequent arrival of more Marines
and the concomitant expansion of their mission to include offensive
patrol work, he says: ™"...and sooner or later, it was surmised, they
would tangle directly with the Viet Cong; in fact, it was obvious from
the outset that in an emergency they would be airlifted to other areas
away from their base." 32/

12 a bs TOP SECRET - Sensitive
