Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

=
ChABET 0 - | , |
eal ae ee | 3 o
SECUNETY Te SGMATION y

BA UARTERS S

LITARY ASSIST: ANCE ADVISORY GROUP, j =
INDO-CHINA al

SAIGON (Vietnen) pal

20 Deceniber 1952 ss
Dear General Collins: j
It became increasingly evident afver my arrival in Indo China and sesing
the. terrain, visiting, the troops, and knowing the type of pense, that the most
important aid inmediste need to the successful coriclusion of the war in Indo
China was more troops. During the pasv year, the Vietnamese Army has been
organized as scheduled. However, most of these units heave been activated >
merely transferring and reining units in the Vietnamese Army which were already
in being in the Prench Colonial Army. 1 am convinced that additional Vietnamese
battalions, over and above the units approved for support by the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, should be activated. cons
SN
In an informal conversation, the matter was discussed with General Salon S
who egreed to the need but felt that the cost of many additional] battalions and
the cadre requirements were aoe 1d the capacity of France to support, bub that VY

a realistic mumber should be set up to be supported and traired. In order to

have e clear pictures of the vegitveminta, a study was made on the basis of an -
additionel forty (40) battalions. oe
| In a short conference with General Alessandri, Military Advisor to His |
Majesty Bao Dai, he stated that he ei a oe the inmediate need for additional Sh
Vietnamese troops, and he explained to me his concespt for the organization of ‘an
additional battalions. These troops would be armed only with shoulder weapons, _
light machine guns, and 60-.M morters and would be trained in maneuvers over 5
mountainous verrein, cepavsle of finding arid destroying the enemy in his on ea
territory. Hach batbalion would be cadred with a minimum of seven (7) French <<
officers and thirty (30) French non-commissioned officers. French cadres would =e

be furnished as far as possible from the Vietnamese battalions already in being, ~N
put which are at orsésent being employed on 9 static guard=-duty basis. Military

schools would se expanded in order bo permit the battalions to be ready for « 4
combat assigtaent in Yesember 154. he
A
This is sn smbitious progrem, but one which (if implemented) will most Ci
surely bring this war te a Quicker end. There is no problem as to manpower ac
availability. The equipment required cen be tiet by subspitution of items al- aa
ready scheduled for programing in the FY 1954 MDA Progran; however, the big ™
problem is the money necessary “for the pay, rations, and individual equipment. *

al

The French state that this) is beyond the Tinancial capscity of the Vietnemese "
Government or Prunce. Their estimate for thease additional forty (40) batta- oS
lions is twelvs (12) billion franes fer equipment ond seventy (70) billion

frenes a year for inaintenance. This figure is high in coiparison with our

sstinate, becouse it includes the construction cost for schools and barrecks,

as well os pay, rations, ammmition, POL, ard clothing, The French staff is

now drewang up plans for this proposed expansion.

oars
cd 1 ve KY Lopes lg
x
