Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. Diem: France Will Leave South Vietnam

In this endeavor, Ely received qualified support from
French officials, "colons " and military officers in Vietnam. He
received sporalic support from Paris. He received almost no support
from the Vietnamese. France was not welcome in Vietnam for many
reasons, a major one being Premier Ngo Dinh Diem. A Francophobe
of the first order, Diem wanted full independence for South Vietnam
and wanted France out of the country as soon as possible. Many shared
Diem's sentiments. France had just lost a long, devastating and
demoralizing war against Vietnamese communists as well as Vietnamese
nationalists. French colonial rule had been tight, previous French
promises of independence had been broken. Why believe professions of
French good intentions in 1954 were any different from those of the
past? Added to this was the problematical relationship of France
vis-a-vis South Vietnam and the Democratic Republic of North Vietnam.
Some South Vietnamese expected France to actively work toward
accommodation with the Viet Minh and reunification of North and
South under Viet Minh direction. Many more felt the fact of continued
French presence alone compromised South Vietnamese independence.
"To convince the people of Vietnam that the administration was independent,
it became a political necessity to be anti-colonial and specifically anti-
French." 6a

3. The U.S. Will "Join" France in South Vietnam

Finally, France was not alone in Vietnam. More than
Diem, more than the psychological damage done by colonial years, the
United States made life in Vietnam difficult for France. The U.S.
was eager to strengthen Vietnam, needed and demanded French cooperation,
but offered little in return. U.S. policy insisted upon an immediate
and dramatic transformation of French policy. But the U.S. little
understood what this meant to France, what problems it created for
French domestic and foreign policy or what U.S.° concessions might
help effect the transformation.

Although remnants of the French Expeditionary Corps
remained until 1956, France was out of Vietnam to all intents and
purposes by May 1955, ten months after Geneva. These months are
characterized by professions of Franco-American cooperation but
demonstrations of Franco-American division, characterized by conflict
of word and action on several levels. Paris said one thing but did
another, Paris said one thing and French officials in Saigon did the
opposite; Washington activities were not always in line with Washington
pronouncements and the gulf between the thought and deed of Ngo Dinh
Diem only compounded an already sensitive situation. It is during
this period that Diem established his rule,against French advice and

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
