Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a balanced picture of what is going on in South Viet-Nam: the thousands
of local officials who have been kidnaped, the tens of thousands of
South Vietnamese civilians who have been killed or wounded by North
Vietnamese mortars and by the constant depredations of these acts of ~-
violence against the civilian population.

"No, there are costs involved in meeting your commitments of honor.
There always have been, there always will be. But I would suggest, if
we look at the history of the last 30 or 40 years, that the costs of
not meeting your obligations are far greater than those of meeting your
obligations.

"Political and Military Situation in Viet-Nem

"Mr. Reasoner: Gentlemen, having set the stage, more or less, with
your opening statements, I would like to start off first in the area of
what we hope to achieve there this year and how we are doing militarily
and politically. Peter?

"Mr. Kalischer: Well, I would like to bring up the subject of who
we are committed to. You mentioned the fact, Mr. Secretary, that we
have had a commitment to the Vietnamese Government. That government has
changed some seven or eight times in the last 18 to 20 months, and when
we say we have this commitment to this government, are we reasonably assured
that this government represents the people of South Viet-Nem or even 4
large number of the people in South Viet-Nem?

"Secretary Rusk: Well, we recognize, of course, that there are
difficulties in the top leadership in South Viet-Nam and have been over
the months, but that does not mean that our commitment to the nation
and to the people of South Viet-Nem is changed any more than the fact
that we have had three changes of government in our own Government during
the period of this commitment. : ‘

"Nr. Kalischer: In a slightly different form.

"Secretary Rusk: The impression we have is that among the 14 million
people in South Viet-Nam we do not find any significant group outside of
the Viet Cong itself, relatively limited in numbers, that seems to be
looking to Hanoi for the answer. The Buddhists are not, the Catholics ere
not, the other sects are not, the montagnards are not, the million Cam-
bodians living in South Viet-Nam are not. In other words, we, I think,
would know very quickly, because we have lots of Americans living through-
out the countryside--we would know very quickly if these people of South
Viet-Nam wanted the program of the Liberation Front or wanted Scere ce
from Hanoi. That we do not find."

"ir. Kendrick:
