Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

e. The French Reject Independence Options for Associated States

The American response to Laniel's requests set the stage
for an extended series of discussions over the ensuing five weeks.
In Paris, Dillon communicated the American conditions to Laniel, who
accepted the conditions, but with important reservations. First,
Ianiel indicated his dismay at the U.S. insistence on the right of the
Associated States to withdraw from the French Union. The Premier com-
mented, that the French public could never accept this condition inasmuch
as the Associated States had themselves never made it and since even the
Viet Minh envisioned joining the Union. Second, the obvious U.S. reluc-
tance to go beyond air and naval forces disturbed the Premier. He
requested that the U.S. provide, in addition, artillery forces and token
ground troops. Moreover, he indicated pleasure that UK participation
was no longer a prerequisite to American involvement.

f. Laniel Presents Two Additional Questions to U.S,

laniel's qualified approval of the preconditions was accom-
panied by a request for a U.S. response to two other questions: (1)
Could the U.S. in some way guarantee the borders and independence of
Laos and. Cambodia following a French withdrawal from those countries?
(2) Could the U.S. provide written assurance of prompt air intervention
to meet a Chinese Communist air attack on French forces in the delta? u/

g- The U.S, Replies

The American response to Laniel's demurrers and requests
was for the most part negative. On the French-Associated States
relationship, which Ambassador Dillon had commented was the chief
barrier to a French request for intervention, 5/ Dulles replied
(through Dillon) that the U.S, might have some flexibility on the matter,
but had to remain adamant on complete independence if we ever hoped. to
gain Thai and Filipino support. Next, on the question of the extent of
U.S. involvement, the U.S. was more amenable: we would not exclude anti-
aircraft “and limited U.S. ground forces for protection of bases which
might be used by U.S. naval and air forces." As for Ianiel's specific
requests, Washington answered that it saw no way, in view of the military
and legal impracticalities, to guarantee the security of Laos and Cambodia;
the alternative was that Laos and Cambodia join with Thailand in seeking
a UN Peace Observation Commission (POC) on their territories. On the
possibility of Chinese MIG intervention, considered extremely remote by
the Defense Department, the French were to be assured that a collective
defense arrangement would include protection against that contingency. 6/

h. Other Concerned Western Nations are Kept Informed

During the U.S.-French give-and-take, the British were
clearly being kept at arm's length, no longer considered essential to
the beginning of a united action. This irked London considerably,

A-18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
