Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"We are in Viet-Nam because an international agreement signed by
the United States, North Viet-Nam, and others in 1962 is being systema-
tically violated by the Communists. That violation threatens the inde-
pendence of all the small nations in Southeast Asia and threatens the
peace of the entire region and perhaps the word.

"We are there because the people of South Viet-Nam have as much
right to remain non-Communist--~if that is what they choose--as North
Viet-Nam has to remain Communist.

"We are there because the Congress has pledged by solemn vote to
take all necessary measures to prevent further aggression.

"No better words could describe our present course than those once
spoken by the great Thomas Jefferson: 'It is the melancholy law of
human societies to be compelled sometimes to choose a great evil in
order to ward off a greater.'

"We have chosen to fight a limited war in Viet-Nam in an attempt
to prevent a larger war--a war almost certain to follow, I believe, if
the Communists succeed in overrunning and taking over South Viet-Nam by
aggression and by force. I believe, and I am supported by some authority,
that if they are not checked now the world can expect to pay a greater
price to check them later."

=

64. Secretary Rusk Interview on ‘Today' Program, January 12, 1967,
With Hugh Downs from New York and Joseph C. Harsch in Washington;
Department of State Bulletin, January 30, 1967, p. 16. .
* *&

"AGGRESSION IN SOUTHEAST ASIA
"Mr, Harsch: ‘Thank you, Hugh. I'm glad I am here.

"Mr. Secretary, I'd like to start it out by going back to the news
conference that Secretary-General U Thant of the United Nations did 2 days
ago. In that there appeared to be considerable differences with American
policy. For example, he said, 'I do not subscribe to the generally held
view that if South Viet-Nem falls, then country X, then country Y, then
country Z will follow. Ido not agree with this so-called domino theory.'
Is this a matter of difference with our policy?

"Secretary Rusk: Well, I myself have never subscribed to something
called the domino theory, because that suggests that we're merely playing
games with little wooden blocks with dots on them. Actually, the prob-
lem is the old problem of the phenomenon of aggression.

D-99
