Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

plotters however, which many Vietnamese -- but not the U.S. Embassy --
advised. Instead, on 7 August, he announced a state of emergency, re-

imposed censorship and other prescriptions and restrictions on liber-~

ties and movements of the Vietnamese people. 116/

Apparently hoping to further exploit the opportunity, Khanh
hurriedly sought to draw up a new charter to centralize and increase
his powers. On 12 August he discussed this for the first time with
Ambassador Taylor, The Ambassador made two comments, one suggesting
catttion lest “renewed instability...result from these sweeping changes,"
the other urging a public explanation of the need for the changes be-
eause of a state of emergency. 117/

Two days later at a joint NSC planning session, Khanh showed
Ambassador Taylor a rough translation of the proposed draft of a new
charter, It was hastily drawm and included both dubious provisions
and gruff language. The Ambassador was immediately afraid this would
lead to criticism in the U.S. and the world press; he assigned Sullivan
and Manfull to work on a revision. But they had little time and were
unable to exert much influence, A day later, August 15, the Ambassador
reported the document still did not satisfy him but that the MRC fully
intended to impose it and he saw no alternative to trying to make the
best of it. Certain passages evidently had been toned down and some-
thing resembling a bill of rights inserted. Nevertheless the charter
gave virtually complete power to Khanh. A special session of the MRC
approved Khanh's new charter and elected him President. Minh was
expediently removed: the charter abolished his job as Chief of State.
Since his overthrow at the end of January Minh had been inactive and
sulky; but whatever his faults he had a considerable following within
South Vietnam, It had been American policy to convince Khanh to bring
Minh into his government thereby endowing the Khanh regime with some
of Minh's popularity. Khanh had acceded to U.S. wishes. But Minh's
presence had not yielded the hoped for unity. Ambassador Taylor,
Minh's friend for several years, had attempted to patch up the de-
teriorating relations between the two generals but these efforts only
incurred Khanh's suspicion of Taylor. 118/

In the period immediately following the Tonkin Gulf affair, Wash-
ington officials sought agreement on Southeast Asian policies. We
were entering a new era, On 14 August, State cabled a summary of a
_tentat'ive policy paper to Saigon, Vientiane and CINCPAC for comment.
The paper begen Ly stating that during the next fortnight no pre-
cipitate actions that might relieve the Communists of the onus of
further escalation should be taken, DESOTO patrols should be held
up; there should be no extra 34A operations, But low morale and
lost momentum in SVN had to be treated, The best means to improve
morale in South Vietnam and at the same time pressure North Vietnam
at the lowest level of risk had to be found, This was the guiding
philosophy, Basically required were military pressures plus other
actions to convince Hanoi and Peking to cease aggression, Negotia-
tion: without continued military pressure would not achieve these

gn . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
