Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

we must be tolerant of the shortcomings we may see in other societies.
While we are justifiably proud of our institutions and our freedoms and
stand as leaders in the democratic world, our prestige and influence in
the world suffer whenever we fall short of our own ideals."

* *
35. President Kennedy's News Conference, July 17, 1963, Public Pavers
‘ of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1963, D. 509: ~

“* * *

"Q; Mr. President, there has been a good deal of public concern
about the political situation in South Viet-Nam, and I would like to ask
you whether the difficulties between the Buddhist population there and
the South Vietnamese Government has been an impediment to the effective-
ness of American aid in the war against the Viet Cong?

"He PRESIDENT. Yes, I think it has. I think it is wnfortunate that
this dispute has arisen at the very time when the military struggle has
been going better than it has been going in many months. I would hope that

some solution could be reached for this dispute, which certainly began as
' a religious dispute, and because we have invested a tremendous amount of
effort and it is going quite well.

"I do realize of course, and we all have to realize, that Viet-Nam
has been in war for 20 years. The Japanese came in, the war with the
French, the civil war which has gone on for 10 years, and this is very
difficult for any society to stand. It is a country which has got a good
many problems and it is divided, and there is guerrilla activity and
murder and all of the rest. Compounding this, however, now is a religious
dispute. I would hope this would be settled, because we want to see a.
stable government there, carrying on a. struggle to maintain its national
independence. ;

"We believe strongly in that. We are not going to withdraw from that
effort. In my opinion, for us to withdraw from that effort would mean a
collapse not only of South Viet-Nem, but Southeast Asia. So we are going
to stay there. We hope with the great effort which is being carried by
the Vietnamese themselves, and they have been in this field a lot longer
than we have, and with a good deal more deaths and casualties, that
behind this military shield put up by the Vietnamese people they can reach
an agreement on the civil disturbances and also in respect for the rights
of others. That's our hope. That's our effort. That -- we're bringing
our influence to bear. And the decision is finally theirs, but I think
that before we render too harsh a judgment on the people, we should realize
that they are going through a harder time than we have had to go through."

HEA SE ine

C-37_
