Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the village near My Tho which he studied very intensively that around
mid-1958:

",..For the first time /the village/ experienced the
activities of a relatively new political movement--Mat Tran Dan
Toc Giai Phong Mien Nam Viet Nam (National Front for the Liberation
of Vietnam) referred to by the South Vietnamese government as the
Viet Cong or Vietnamese Communists...and invariably called the
Viet Minh by the villagers. In the vicinity of /the village/ the
initial efforts of the Viet Cong were largely confined to anti-
government propaganda.” 151/

One VC pamphlet of late 1958 from the Mekong Delta reads as follows:

"Support the just struggle of the people to overthrow
the government of the Americans and Diem /My-Dien/, to establish
a democratic regime in the South, and to work for general elec-
tions which will unify the country by peaceful means." 152/

But, if "struggle" sounds innocuous enough in English, the
word fails to carry the intensity of the Vietnamese equivalent, dau tranh.
A VC rallier put it this way:

"Dau tranh is all important to a revolutionist. It marks
his thinking, his attitudes, his behavior. His life, his revo-
lutionary work, his whole world is dau tranh. The essence of his
existence is dau tranh.” 153/ al

And, the term "just struggle of the people" sheathed the terror integral
to Viet Cong operations. In Pike's estimate:

"Insurgency efforts in the 1958-1960 period involved
violence such as assassinations but few actual armed attacks.
This was so partly because the cadres had little military
capability but chiefly because doctrine counseled against
violence....

"For the true believers operating throughout the South
this was a time of surreptitious meetings, cautious political
feelers, the tentative assembling of a leadership group, and
the sounding out of potential cadres whose names went into a
file for future reference. It meant working mainly with non-
Communists and, in many cases, keeping one's Communist identity
a secret...." 15h/

Diem's own party newspaper, the NRM's Cach Mang Quoc Gia, published an
article in February, 1959 which reported that "the situation in the
rural areas is rotten," and described communist cells established in
the villages collecting taxes and conducting “espionage," supporting
local guerrilla forces responsive to a hierarchy of provincial and
regional committees. 155/

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
