719+

80.

81.

82.

83.

Bh.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It is noted by the NSC Planning Board that France has had
the loan of U. S. carrier "Belleau Wood" for nearly a

year without use in the Indochina war. Further, the French’
“urgent reauests" for U. S. aircraft appear contradictory

in light of the sale of "Ouragon" jets to India and use of
the "Belleau Wood" as a "delivery wagon." General Bonesteel
Memorandum for Robert Cutler, Presidential Assistant,
TOWARE Es LOS ers. wscnveets ur bieiealaslsrereeceie'e fer eye et en oy ay Wren i A a

In view of the NSC actions on 6 April (192d Meeting) and
subsequent Presidential approval, the Secretary of Defense
directs the JCS to “promptly prepare the military plans"

for the contingency of intervention at Dien Bien Phu. He
also notes that the Presidential directed the State Depart-
ment to concentrate its. efforts prior to Geneva on organiz-
ing a regional grouping for the defense of Southeast Asia.
Secretary of Defense Memorandum to the Secretaries and JCS,
Lis ovak? ARES) a ee eee eee Mee OM AS oar I ra oe

The Department of Defense indicates concern over the lack

of U. S. policy and pressures the State Department to

come up with a U. S, position for the Indochina phase of

the Geneva Conference. The Defense version of a draft
position recommends a positive and definite stance that

U. & objectives in Southeast Asia not be compromised and
that if France does not accept this position the U, S.

should not participate at Geneva. Defense Foreign Mili-
tary Affairs Letter to U. Alexis Johnson, Coordinator of

U. S. Delegation to Geneva, 15 April 1954..........65. alee na

Hden informs Dulles that Britain is strongly opposed to
intervention at Dien Bien Phu and intends to lend only
diplomatic support to France at Geneva in search of a
eae DULTE 5 (Geneva) to Washington, 25 April

VOB cies miele’ 0's] alain e n's)<\ac¥ wise e-a)010 Saja aiereceyalere wrotnta/ siete te /aecaiaie elses tetsmcsrere

Dulles expresses "dismay that the British are apparently
encouraging the French in a direction of surrender which

is in conflict not only with ovr interest but what I
Dulles] conceive theirs to be." DULTE 9, 26 April 1954.....

The Joint Chiefs of Staff reject a French proposal for
additional aid because of the major military consequences

of involving U. &. plenes and crews in the Indochina

action as well as the little value of the project to

relief of Dien Bien Phu. JCS Memorandum for Secretary

Of Defense, Of April LOG. ct mene ee envawwietw ae aw eeaenpeenienne. we

Page ©

380

382

38h

388

390

392

Kiii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
