—

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS

The Diem coup was one of those critical events in the history of U.S.
policy that could have altered our commitment. The choices were there:
(1) continue to plod along in a limited fashion with Diem -- despite his
and Nhu's growing unpopularity; (2) encourage or tacitly support the over-
throw of Diem, taking the risk that the GVN might crumble and/or accommodate
to the VC; and (3) grasp the opportunity -- with the obvious risks -- of the
political instability in South Vietnam to disengage. The first option was
rejected because of the belief that we could not win with Diem-Nhu. The
third was nevery seriously considered a policy alternative because of the
assumption that an independent, non-communist SVN was too important a stra-
tegic interest to abandon -- and because the situation was not sufficiently
drastic to call into question so basic an assumption. The second course
was chosen mainly for the reasons the first was rejected -~Vietnem was
thought too important; we wanted to win; and the rebellious generals
seemed to offer that prospect.

In making the choice to do nothing to prevent the coup and to tacitly
support it, the U.S. inadvertently deepened its involvement. The inadvertence
is the key factor. It was a situation without good alternatives. While
Diem's government offered some semblance of stability and authority, its
repressive actions against the Buddhists had permanently alientated popular
support, with a high probability of victory for the Viet Cong. As efficient
as the military coup leaders appeared, they were without a manageable base
of political support. When they came to power and when the lid was taken
off the Diem-Nhu reporting system, the GVN position was revealed as weak
and deteriorating. And, by virtue of its interference in internal Vietnamese
affairs, the U.S. had assumed a significant responsibility for the new regime,
a responsibility which heightened our commitment and deepened our involvement.

The catalytic event that precipitated the protracted crisis which
ended in the downfall of the Diem regime was a badly handled Buddhist religious
protest in Hué on May 8, 1963. In and of itself the incident was hardly
something to shake the foundations of power of most modern rulers, but the
manner in which Diem responeded to it, and the subsequent protests which it
generated, was precisely the one most likely to aggravate not alleviate the
situation. At stake, of course, was far more than a religious issue. The
Buddhist protest had a profoundly political character from the beginning.
It sprang and fed upon the feelings of political frustration and repression
Diem's autocratic rule had engendered.

The beginning of the end for Diem can, then, be traced through events
to the regime's violent suppression of a Buddhist protest demonstration in

a TOP SECRET = Sensitive
