Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Tt constitutes a clear aggression by a Communist regime supported both
by China and the Soviet Union--attempting to take over another country
by force. Whatever view one takes of the origins of the war--whether

it is considered an insurrection against the authority of the South
Vietnamese state aided by North Viet-Nam or, ¢s we believe, an infil-
tration and invasion from North Viet-Nam--the issue in intemational

Jaw and politics is the same. In either view, North Viet-Nam is waging
war, against South Viet-Nam. And South Viet-Nam has the right to ask for
the help of the international community in resisting an attack mounted
from beyond its borders.

"Neither South Viet-Nam nor the United States wants to conquer
North Viet-Nam or to overturn its Communist regime. The central issue
of the war is whether North Viet-Nam will be allowed to conquer South

Viet-Nan.

. "What is America's national interest in South Viet-Nam? Why are
we there?

"There are several answers.

"We are in Viet-Nam because we are obliged to be there specifically
by the SEATO treaty and generally by the U.N. Charter itself.

"The obligations of the United Nations Charter are not suspended
when permanent members of the Security Council disagree or the Assembly
cannot act. The principles of the charter condemn the attack of North
Viet-Nam on South Viet-Nam and authorize the members of the organization
to offer South Viet-Nam assistance in its efforts of self-defense.

"Honoring these commitments is dictated by the most hardheaded
assessment of our national interest. Three Presidents have concluded
that the fate of Southeast Asia as a whole is directly related to the
preservation of South Viet-Nam's independence. And Congress has repeat-
edly affirmed their judgment. If South Viet-Nam were to be taken over,
the expansionist forces of Communist China and North Viet-Nam would be
encouraged, and resistance to them and to aggression generally throughout
the world would be seriously weakened.

"The United States is no less a Pacific than an Atlantic power. Our
security demands an equilibrium of power in the Far East as much as it
does in Europe and in the Middle East. That equilibrium depends on Viet-
Nem and the system of alliances it symbolizes.

"Responsible opinion throughout Southeast Asia believes that the
outcome in Viet-Nam will determine the future alinement of the whole
region. Present events in Iaos, Thailand, and Burma confirm this wide-
spread judgment.

D-131.
