Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

considerable stocks of munitions and supplies were seized. Since the
fem-Dinh ~ Phu Ly - fedong line is tir surrounds 16s Min)
n Phu Ly g line is entirely surreunded by Viet Minh
ia aren and Hrd te be see en by air or river-bout, French withdrew
ci «! 4
from the area when objectives had been reached, operation endings

21 Januarye

Central and South Annan

This relati vely tray guid sector erupted on 16 January 1949 with a
large scale Viet Minh attack on the Tourane = Hue railr ad resulting
in destruction of the train and capture of the manager of the railroad.
Previously only routine French clean-up eperations heave beon noted
during the post six months in the narrow, hundred-mile-long coastal
strip held by rrench forces in central Annam. As in South Annem, an
sea chain of srall forts and Slockhouses, manned by second-

ore >
is sudject to intermittent and admit

ps, Lbedly nerve-wracking
atticks. This SeerNe tens pius miserable ee: and sanitary conditions
as reduced morale and initiative in both Central snd South Annan sharpl
Cochinchins
Three fearly able generals, LE CLERC, NYO, and Boyer DE LA TOUR
DU MOULIN, have tried their*hanc at pacifying Cochinchina, but: in al-
most three years the situcticn has remained virtually unchanged. The
pes
wu

Prénsh hold all the large towns and a omat network of roads radiating
from Saigon to the north, west and northwest quite firmly, although
attacks evon within this limited framework are frequens and sometimes
severe. Beyond it, in spite of missive swoeps and encirclements, para-
troop and amphibious operations, the countryside eS in Viet Ninh
contrel. The "Plaine ees Jones" aren west anc

Zt 1 south of Saigon and the
whole rich, rice-groving Ca bau peninsula remain ene ularly strong
centers of Viet resistance. The latest reported French plan for the
Ca Mau peninsuln is to permit no rice to be exported from it, in spite

Led
s

of world rice Shores, so solidly is its economy controlled by the

Viet Minh.

+

Cambo2is and Lacs

nbited, deficit arcas use up large num-

These large, sparsely-inh
bers of French and Indochiness garrison troops to protect tovms and
communications from an insignificant Independence movement which draws
most of its strength from Siem and the Viet inh. ‘Anper tant operations
on. the part of either 1dversary are very rare, although large scale
fF

Free Laos operations are reported plenned for late eae ate

Current estimates give a tetal of 100,000 French troops for ali
of Indcchina. Of these, ainees 50% are believed to be Indochinese
natives, under French offic ms h -tro
sreludine esdres,; are not i
20,090. 12,000 Foreign Legion and a mixture of Sencgalese, Morrocan
fle sriaEs Tunisians, epeauier with & few Poncichery Indians, make up
ths: te ators i 1% of F 1 Marines also serve as infantry combat

trons with the Pron

iVe
