Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

our airfields in the Danang area.

IT do not believe that the continuation of attacks at
about the level we have been conducting them in the Hanoi-
Haiphong area will lead to pressure on Berlin or a general
war with the Soviet Union. In fact, carefully read, what
the Soviets have been trying to signal is: Keep away from
our ships; we may counter-escalate to some degree; but
we do not want a nuclear confrontation over Viet Nam.

C. Concentration in Route Packages 1 and 2

The advantages of concentrating virtually all our attacks
in this area are three:

--We would cut our loss rate in pilots and planes;

--We would somewhat improve our harassment of infil-
tration of South Viet Nam;

--We would diminish the risks of counter-escalatory
action by the Soviet Union and Communist China, as compared
with courses A and B.

With this analysis of the pros and cons of the various
options, Rostow turned to recommendations. He rejected course A as
ineurring too many risks with too little return. Picking up MciNaughton's
recommendation for concentrating the air war in the North Vietnamese
panhandle, Rostow urged that it be supplemented with an open option to
return to the northern "funnel" if developments warranted it. Here is
how he formulated his conclusions:

With respect to Course B I believe we have achieved
greater results in increasing the pressure on Hanoi and
raising the cost of their continuing to conduct the
aggression in the South than some of my most respected
colleagues would agree. I do not believe we should lightly
abandon what we have accomplished; and specifically, I
believe we should mount the most economical and careful
attack on the Hanoi power station our air tacticians can
devise. Moreover, I believe we should keep open the option
of coming back to the Hanoi-Haiphong area, dpending upon
what we learn of their repair operations; and what Moscow's
and Peiping's reactions are; especially when we understand
better wheat effects we have and haye not achieved thus far.

I believe the Soviet Union may well have taken certain
counter-steps addressed to the more effective protection of

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
