Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

were outsiders -~ northerners, Catholics, or other "dependable"

persons -- and their alien presence in the midst of the close-knit

rural comunities encouraged revival of the conspiratorial, underground
politics to which the villages had become accustomed during the resistance
against the French.

But conspiracy was almost a natural defense after Diem launched his
Denunciation of Communists Campaign, which included a scheme for classify-
ing the populace into lettered political groups according to their con-
nections with the Viet Minh. This campaign, which featured public con-
fessions reminiscent of the "people's courts” of China and North Vietnam,
invited neighbors to inform on each other, and raised further the premium
on clandestine political activity. In 1956, the GVN disclosed that some
15-20,000 communists had been detained in its "political reeducation
centers," while Devillers put the figure at 50,000. By GVN figures in
1960, nearly 50,000 had been detained. A British expert on Vietnam,

P. J. Honey, who was invited by Diem to investigate the reeducation
centers in 1959, concluded that, after interviewing a number of rural
Vietnamese, "the consensus of the opinion expressed by these peoples
is that . . . the majority of the detainees are neither communists nor
pro-~communists." Between 1956 and 1960, the GVN claimed that over
100,000 former communist cadres rallied to the GVN, and thousands of
other communist agents had surrendered or had been captured. The
campaign also allegedly netted over 100,000 weapons and 3,000 arms
caches. Whatever it contributed to GVN internal security, however, the
Communist Denunciation Campaign thoroughly terrified the Vietnamese
peasants, and detracted significantly from the regime's popularity.

Diem's nearly paranoid preoccupation with security influenced his
population relocation schemes. Even the refugee relief programs had been
executed with an eye to building a "living wall" between the lowland
centers of population and the jungle and mountain redoubts of dissidents.
Between April 1957 and late 1961, the GVN reported that over 200,000
persons -- refugees and landless families from coastal Annam -- were
resettled in 147 centers carved from 220,000 acres of wilderness. These
"strategic" settlements were expensive: although they affected only
2% of South Vietnam's people, they absorbed 50% of U.S. aid for agri-
culture. They also precipitated unexpected political reactions from
the Montagnard peoples of the Highlands. Im the long run, by introducing
ethnic Vietnamese into traditionally Montagnard areas, and then by
concentrating Montagnards into defensible communities, the GVN provided
the tribes with a cause and focused their discontent against Dien. The
GVN thus facilitated rather than hindered the subsequent subversion of
the tribes by the Viet Cong. But of all Diem's relocation experiments,
that which occasioned the most widespread and vehement anti-GVN sert iment
was the "agroville" program begun in mid-1959. At first, the GVN tried
to establish rural communities which segregated families with known Viet
Cong or Viet Minh connections from other citizens, but the public outcry
eaused this approach to be dropped. A few months later, the GVN announced

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
