Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

with him, (copy by pouch) I discussed growing criticism of his
brother and Madam Nhu, as well as Dr. Tuyen and suggested that
they should be assigned abroad. Diem did not interrupt me but
assumed somewhat grim, and I detected, slightly hurt manner.

His only comment was that these rumors about the Nhus were spread
by communists. I replied that I was sure that communists were
doing all they could to spread such rumors but I repeated that
the unfortunate part about it is that more and more people are
believing these reports - Vietnamese loyal to him, those who
might be considered in the opposition, foreign civilians and
foreign diplomats to say nothing of the press. I repeated, as

I had previously, these reports were seriously damaging prestige
of his regime.

"After discussing the Nhus, I again apologized, first of
all for bringing up this personal and sensitive subject, as well
as the other suggestions I had made. I again asked his indulgence
and forgiveness for speaking so frankly and added I hoped he
would understand that I was talking as a sincere friend."
(Saigon 802 to SecState, 15 October 1960, corrected copy)

The same day, September 16, 1960, as the Ambassador's
recommendations for a political demarche to Diem, the JCS informed
CINCPAC and the Chief of MAAG that they and the Deputy SecDef had
approved a CINCPAC draft plan for counterinsurgency operations by the
Government of South Vietnam. This had its origins in CINCPAC's staff
study of April 26, 1960, subsequently endorsed by the JCS on June 6,
1960, with the recommendations:

"a. That appropriate U.S. Government Departments and
agencies encourage the Vietnamese and Laotian Governments
to adopt a national emergency organization to integrate civil
and military resources under centralized direction for the
conduct of counter-insurgency operations. i

"b. That these U.S. departments and agencies encourage
the Vietnamese and Laotian Governments to develop coordinated
national plans for the progressive reduction of Communist
influence.

"e. That these U.S. Government departments and agencies
be authorized and directed to support the training for and
conduct of emergency operations .. ."

"e. That the U.S. Government provide sufficient materiel

and budgetary support to insure the successful accomplishment
of these emergency campaigns.

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
