Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

predominant. He noted in the concluding paragraph of his memo that he
"may be overly pessimistic, inasmuch as the ambassador, COMUSMACV, and
General Minh were not discouraged and look forward to significant improve-
ments in January."

By 6 March 1964 when another major Secretary of Defense Conference
convened at CINCPAC Headquarters, the consensus was the the military situa-
tion was definitely deteriorating. The issue was no longer whether there
was or was not satisfactory progress; the question was how much of a set-
back had there been and what was needed to make up for it. Mr. McNamara
observed that attention should now be focused on near term objectives
of providing for necessary greater U.S. support. It was finally agreed
that the insurgency could be expected to go beyond 1965.

The intelligence and reporting problem during this period cannot be
explained away. In behalf of the evaluators and assessors, it can be
argued that their reporting up until the Diem cowp had some basis in fact.
The situation may not have been too bad until December 1963. Honest and
trained men in Vietnam looking at the problems were reporting what they
believed reality to be. In retrospect, they were not only wrong, but more
importantly, they were influential. The Washington decision-makers could
not help but be guided by these continued reports of progress.

Phased withdrawal was a good policy that was being reasonably well
executed. In the way of our Vietnam involvement, it was overtaken by
events. Not borne of deep conviction in the necessity for a U.S. with-
drawal or in the necessity of forcing the GVN te truly carry the load,
it was bound to be submerged in the rush of events. A policy more deter-
mined might have used the pretext and the fact of the Diem coup and its
aftermath as reason to push for the continuation of withdrawal. Instead,
the instability and fear of collepse resulting from the Diem coup brought
the U.S. to a decision for greater commitment.

wii : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
