Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Why were the discussions so heated? Either with the Second,
Second-and-a-half, or Third International, the revolution could
be waged. What was the use of arguing then? As for the First
International, what had become of it?

"What I wanted most to know -- and this precisely was not
debated in the meetings -- was: Which International sides with
the peoples of colonial countries?

"I raised this question -- the most important in my opinion --
in a meeting. Some comrades answered: It is the Third, not the
Second, International. And a comrade gave me Lenin's 'Thesis
on the National and Colonial Questions,' published by 1'Humanite,
to read.

"There were political terms difficult to understand in this
thesis. But by dint of reading it again and again, finally I
could grasp the main part of it. What emotion, enthusiasm, clear-
Sightedness, and confidence it instilled into me! TI was over-
joyed to tears. Though sitting alone in my room, I shouted aloud
as if addressing large crowds: ‘Dear martyrs, compatriots! This
is what we need, this is the path to our liberation!'

"After then, I had entire confidence in Lenin, in the Third
International,

"Formerly, during the meetings of the Party branch, I only
listened to the discussion; I had a vague belief that 211 were
logical, and could not differentiate as to who were right and
who were wrong. But from then on, I also plunged into the debates
and discussed with fervor. Though I was still lacking French
words to express all my thoughts, I smashed the allegations attack-
ing Lenin and the Third International with no less vigor. My
only argument was; ‘If you do not condemn colonialism, if you
do not side with the colonial people, what kind of revolution
are. you waging?’

"Not only did I take part in the meetings of my own Party
branch, but I also went to other Party branches to lay down ‘my
position.* Now I must tell again that Comrades Marcel Cachin,
Vaillant Couturier, Monmousseau, and many others helped me to
broaden my knowledge. Finally, at the Tours Congress, I voted
with them for our joining the Third International.

"At first, patriotism, not yet Communism, led me to have
confidence in Lenin, in the Third International. Step by step,
along the struggle, by studying Marxism-Leninism parallel with
participation in practical activities, I gradually came upon
the fact that only Socialism and Communism can liberate the
oppressed nations and the working people throughout the world
from slavery.

C-3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
