Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

fight us if we invaded the northern part of North Viet Nam.

One can always take the view that, given the turmoil
inside Communist China, an irrational act by Peiping is
possible. And such irrationality cannot be ruled out.

I conclude that if we try to close the top of the
funnel, tension between ourselves and the Soviet Union
and Communist China would increase; if we were very deter-
mined, we could impose additional burdens on Hanoi and its
allies; we might cut capacity below requirements; and the
outcome is less likely to be & general war than more likely.

B. Attacking what is inside the funnel

This is what we have been doing in the Hanoi-Haiphong
area for some weeks. I.do not agree with the view that the
attacks on Hanoi-Haiphong have no bearing on the war in the
South. They divert massive amounts of resources, energies, and
attention to keeping the civil and military establishment
going. They impose general economic, political, and psycho-
logical difficulties on the North which have been complicated
this year by a bad harvest and food shortages. I do not
believe that they "harden the will of the North." In my
judgment, up to this point, our bombing of the North has been
a painful additional cost they have thus far been willing to
bear to pursue their efforts in the South. F

On the other hand:

--There is no direct, immediate connection between bombing
the Hanoi-Haiphong area and the battle in the South;

--If we complete the attack on electric power by taking
out the Hanoi station -- which constitutes about 80% of the
electric power supply of the country now operating -- we
will have hit most of the targets whose destruction imposes
serious military-civil costs on the North.

-- With respect to risk, it is unclear whether Soviet
warnings about our bombing Hanoi-Haiphorg represent decisions
already taken or decisions which might be taken if we persist
in banging away in that area.

It is my judgment that the Soviet reaction will continue
to be addressed to the problem imposed on Hanoi by us; that is,
they might introduce Soviet pilots as they did in the Korean
War; they might bring ground-to~ground missiles into North
Viet Nam with the object of attacking our vessels at sea and

35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
