Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I. C. 2. A POLITICAL BIOGRAPHY OF HO CHI MINH, 1890-1950

There have been two periods in the life of Ho Chi Minh, President
of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV), in which he ostensibly devoted
himself wholly to Vietnamese Nationalism. The first period was in the
early years before 1920 when Ho Chi Minh was an avid anti-colonialist,
but not yet caught up in the communist revolution. The second period of
seeming nationalist preoccupation was from 1945 to 1950, when Ho tried to
negotiate with the French, appealed to the U.S., UK and China for inter-
vention in Vietnam, denied being a communist, and avoided any ostensible
link between the DRV and the Kremlin. ‘The remainder of Ho Chi Minh's
political life has been that of a classic communist, anti-colonial,
nationalist revolutionary -- exile, Moscow schools, prison, covert opera-
tions, guerrilla warfare, party politics. A chronology of his career
through 1950 is attached, (pp. C-48 ff).

1. Forming the Political Man

Ho Chi Minh was born Nguyen Van Thanh, 19 May 1890, in Kim-Lien
in the northern Annam province of Nghe-An (in what is now North Vietnam).
Ho was exposed early in life to bitter resentment of the French presence
in Vietnam; his father was jailed at Poulo Condore for participation in
nationalist activities. Ho's secondary education took place in a hotbed of
nationalism, Hue's Lycee Quoc-Hoc. His schooling terminated around 1910
before he received 2 diploma, but still he acquired more education than
most of his compatriots. His decision to work as a mess boy on a French
liner in 1912 has been regarded by Bernard Fall as a key political deci-
sion -- that is, Fall held that Ho, unlike most conservative fellow
Nationalists, thereby opted for the West (republicanism, democracy, popu-
lar sovereignty, etc.), against the East (militarism, mandarinal society,
etc.). 1/ If the going to sea were a significant decision at all, it
probably showed only that Ho was not inclined to follow the normal path
of Vietnamese nationalism. This fact was borne out by Ho's break with
his father, Nguyen Tat Sac, who had given him a letter for Phan Chu Trinh,
a veteran Viet nationalist, in Paris. Sac had hoped Fhan would tutor
Ho in Vietnamese nationalis , but Ho could not accept Phan's "peaceful
cooperation with the French," and left Paris; thereafter he severed his
ties with his father. 2/

As a young Asian struggling to earn a living in pre-World War I
Europe and America, Ho had been exposed to the racial inequalities of the
Western civilization and perhaps sought security when he joined the Chinese-.
dominated Overseas Workers Association, a clandestine, anti-colonialist
organization concerned with improving the working conditions of foreign
laborers but increasingly a political force. Ho went to France from London
in 1917 with the war in the forefront, and the Russian Leninist revolution
in the background. Looking on himself as a political organizer and writer
of sorts, Ho signed his articles Nguyen Ai Quoc (which means "Nguyen-the-
Patriot") -- an alias by which all Vietnam came to know him until be became

ee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
