Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

1%
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

changes also included a closing sentence which read, "Requests for
changes in the Program may be submitted by the Service Secretaries

or JCS whenever these appear appropriate." 7/ This language clearly
reflected the following instruction that McNamara had received from
the President on June 28:

As you know, we have been moving our men to Viet Nam
on a schedule determined by General Westmoreland's require-
ments.

As I have stated orally several times this year, I should
like this schedule to be accelerated as much as possible so
that General Westmoreland can feel assured that he has all
the men he needs as soon as possible.

Would you meet with the Joint Chiefs and give me at
your early convenience an indication of what acceleration
is possible for the balance of this year. 8/

While the Chiefs were unable to promise any further speed-up in the
deployment schedule, the Secretary assured the President on July 15

that all possible steps were being taken, 9/ But as in the air war,

so also in the question of troop deployments a turning point was

being reached. By the fall of 1966 when Program #4 was under considera-
tion, the President would no longer be instructing McNamara to honor
all of General Westmoreland's troop requests as fully and rapidly as
possible.

2. ROLLING THUNDER 51

In the air campaign strikes continued on the other major
POL storage sites, and were soon accepted as a routine part of the
bombing program. On 8 July, at a Honolulu conference, Secretary McNamara
was given a complete briefing on the POL program. He informed CINCPAC
that the President wished that first priority in the air war be given to
the complete "strangulation" of NVN's POL system, and he must not feel
that there were sortie limitations for this purpose. (He also stressed
the need for increased interdiction of the railroad lines to China.) 10/
As a result, ROLLING THUNDER program No. 51, which went into effect the
next day, specified a "strangulation" program of armed reconnaissance
against the POL system, including dispersed sites. The ceiling for
attack sorties on NVN and Laos was raised from 8100 to 10,100 per month. 11/

; McNamara left CINCPAC with instructions to develop a com-
prehensive plan to accomplish the maximum feasible POL destruction while
maintaining a balanced effort against other priority targets. On July 2h,
CINCPAC forwarded his concept for the operation to Washington, 12/ In
addition to the fixed and dispersed sites already under attack, he recom-
mended strikes against the storage facilities at Phuc Yen and Kep airfields;

140 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
