Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

25. In view of the world-wide reaction to overt aggres-
sion in Korea, Communist China may prefer to repeat in Indo-
*china the method of "volunteer" intervention, Inasmuch as the
French do not control the border between China and Indochina
nor large areas north of Hanoi, it may be difficult to detect
the extent of preparation for such intervention. It is inm-
portant to U.S. security interests to maintain the closest
possible consultation with the Freneh Government on the
buildup of Chinese Communist intervention in Indochina. The
Government of France has agreed to consult with the United:
States before it requests UN or other international action to
oppose Chinese Communist aggression in Indochina in order that
the two countries may jointly evaluate the extent of Chinese
Communist intervention,

26. If it is thus determined that Chinese Communist
forces (including volunteers) have overtly intervened in the
conflict in Indochina, or are covertly participating to such
an extent as to jeopardize retention of the Tonkin Delta by
the French forces, the United States should support the French
to the greatest extent possible, preferably under the auspices
of the UN. It is by no means certain that an appropriate UN
resolution could be obtained. Favorable action in the UN
would depend upon a change -in the attitude of those governments
which view the present regime in Indochina as a continuation
of French colonialism, A new communist aggression might bring
about a reassessment of the situation on the part of these
governments and an increased recognition of the danger.
Accordingly, it is believed that a UN resolution to oppose
the aggression could be passed in the General Assembly by a
small margin. :

27. Even if it is not possible to obtain a UN resolution
in such a case, the United States should seek the maximum
possible international support for and participation in any
international collective action in support of France and the
Associated States. The United States should take appropriate
military action against Communist China as part of a UN col=
lective action or In conjunction with France and the United

Kingdom and_other friendly governments. However, in the |
absence of such support, it is highly unlikely.that the United
States would act unilaterally. It is probable however, that
the United States would find some support and token participa~
tion at least from the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth

countries, .
28, The U.S. forces which would be comMiitted, and the
manner of their employment, as well as the military equipment

ANNEX TO NSC 124 oe TOP SECRET

75
