Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

recommended to the President after the Honolulu Conference and in keep-
ing with the "Victory Strategy" as described above was considerably
less than three divisions as has been pointed out in earlier sections
of this paper. The JCS should have been addressing the "Victory
Strategy" in their 30 April memorandum, but preferred instead to con-
tinue the push for three divisions. 125/

COMUSMACV's request of 7 June altered drastically the role of
the JCS in the build-up debate. Up to that time the JCS had, if any-
thing, been ahead of General Westmoreland in advocating Allied forces
for Vietnam. The 27 battalions of their three-division plan were in
themselves more than Westmoreland ever requested until 7 June. After
that date, the big push came from Westmoreland in Saigon, and-the JCS
were caught in the middle between the latter andthe powerful and stri-
dent opposition his latest request for forces had surfaced in Washington.
The JCS memoranda of June and July 1965 were numerous and reflected,
apparently without guiding, the 4 Battalion debate's progress. They
showed the Airmobile Division in and out of Qui Nhon as the debate on
the strategy for its employment ebbed and flowed. The 173rd Airborne
Brigade and the brigade from the 10lst Airborne Division were first
counted and then dropped and then counted again as the total permanent
force to be deployed to Vietnam approached 44 maneuver battalions as a
limit. On the 9th of June, the JCS favored the deployment of the
Airmobile Division to the highlands. 126/ On the llth they favored its
going to Qui Nhon after discussing the matter with the Ambassador. 127/
On the lith, the total recommended force was 33 battalions, 23 U.S. with
the 173rd coming out, and 10 Third Country. 128/ 0n the 18th of June,
the total had dropped to 22 and 10 as the 173rd was scheduled to stay
but the brigade from the 10lst was to leave. 129/ Final sanction for
both airborne mits to remain in Vietnam was not secured until August.130/

D. Search and Destroy as a Strategy and 44 Battalions as a Force

It was not at all clear that with the advent of the 44 battalion
' debate the vestiges of the enclave strategy and the conservatism which
had characterized it had expired. On the contrary, enclave thinking was
still very much alive. On the lth of June, the JCS cabled CINCPAC and
informed him that somewhat less than Westmoreland's 19118 was very close
to being approved for deployment. The force described amounted to two
Marine BLT's and three Army brigades, two of which had already been
approved. The JCS wanted to know where Westmoreland intended to put
this force in Vietnam. 131/ The implicit intention to keep a string on
every unit going into Vietnam was obvious to General Westmoreland. In
reply to this query and in response to the rising volume of criticism
directed at his estimate of the seriousness of the situation and his
proposed utilization of combat forces, Westmoreland sent the following
cable to CINCPAC: 132/

9h. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
