Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(70 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was "very doubtful" that anything short of a prompt commitment of ground
troops would restore South Vietnamese morale. But such a commitment
would obviously be a costly stop. The President was thoroughly fore-
warned that such a move would lead both to continual pressure to send
more troops and to political difficulties at home that would inevi-
tably flow from the significant casualties that had to be expected to
accompany a ground troop commitment. The risk of delaying the ground
troop commitment might easily have been judged not worth the certain
costs that would accompany it. And of course, in hindsight, we know
that the limited program approved by the President was sufficient to

put off any imminent collapse of the Diem regime. Consequently, Kennedy's
decisions do not tell us just what his view was, and indeed he did not
need to have a firmly settled view to make the decision, which after all,
was only to put off, not to foreclose a decision to send ground troops.
He had only to decide that, on balance, the risks of deferring the troop
decision were no worse than the costs of making it, and he could have
reached that judgment by any number of routes. The reasons stated in
the various papers may or may not accurately reflect the President's
state of mind. The only thing we can be sure of is that they conveyed
his judgment of the tactically most suitable rationale to put in writing.
The most detailed record we have of this rationale and explanation of

is the following cable to Nolting:

«++-Review-of Taylor Report has resulted in following basic
decisions: ae zr

-l. Must essentially be a GVM task to contain and reduce the VC
threat at present level of capability. Means organizing to go on
offensive. We are prepared to contemplate further assistance after
Joint assessment establishes needs and possibilities of aid more
precisely. ‘

2. No amount of extra aid can be substitute for GVN taking
INeasures to permit them to assume offensive and strengthen the
administrative and political bases of government.

. °3. Do not propose to introduce into GVN the US combat troops
now, but propose a phase of intense public and diplomatic activity
to focus on infiltration fron North. Shall decide later on course
of action should infiltration not be radically reduced.

‘h. On flood, decide best course to treat’ as primarily civil
problem, and occasion should be used to draw in as many nationals
of other countries as can be used in GVN flood plan. Have been en-
couraged this course on advise of Desai of Indian Foreign Office who
Observed a good thing if some Indians and Burmese involved con-
structively in SVN and subject to VC attack. We prepared to put
maximum pressure on FAO. Do not exclude ad hoc US military aid in

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
135: a ee a
