Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

full measure in the anti-Chinese odium among the people of North Vietnam.
In South Vietnam, French intrigue, and Vietnamese disunity precluded the
emergence of a competitor to Ho. When France resorted to force to restore
its control over Vietnam, Ho again became the head of Viet resistance,

and the Viet Minh became the primary nationalist protagonists. Hence,

Ho Chi Minh,both on his own merits and out of lack of competition, became
the personification of Vietnamese nationalism.

Ho, nonetheless, found himself, his movement, and his government
under intense pressure. From within the nation, the Chinese-backed Viet
parties attacked communist domination of his government. For the sake
of national unity, Ho dissolved the Communist Party, avoided comunist
cant, announced general elections, and assured the contending factions
representation in the government well out of proportion to their popular
support. External pressures from France and from China proved more diffi-
cult. The French capitalized on the relative weakness of the Viet Minh
in South Vietnam, and the dissension among the Vietnamese there to over-
throw the DRV government in Saigon, and to force the Viet Minh to resort
to guerrilla warfare. In famine-wracked North Vietnam, Chinese hordes
under booty~minded warlords descended on the DRV, supplanting its local
governnent with committees of their own sponsoring and systematically
looting. Ho vainly sought aid abroad; not even the Soviet Union proved
helpful. Ho eventually (March, 1946) negotiated with the French, accepting
@ French military presence in North Vietnam for a period of five years in
return for vague French assurances to the DRV as a "Free State within the
French Union." When Ho was attacked for this by the pro-Chinese elements
within the DRV, he declared:

"You fools! Don't you realize what it means if the Chinese
stay? Don't you remember your history? The last time the
Chinese came, they stayed one thousand years!

"The French are foreigners. They are weak. Colonialism
is dying out. Nothing will be able to withstand world pressure
for independence. They may stay for a while, but they will
have to go because the white man is finished in Asia. But if
the Chinese stay now, they will never leave.

"As for me, I prefer to smell French shit for five years,
rather than Chinese shit for the rest of my life."

The unresolved historic problem, of course, is to what extent Ho's
nationalist goals over-rode his communist convictions in these maneuvers.
Ho seemed to place the former above the latter not solely as a matter of
dissemblance, as he might have done in the dissolution of the Party and
the simultaneous formation of a "Marxist Association," but possibly as
a result of doubts about communism as a political form suitable for
Vietnam. Bao Dai is reputed to have said that: "I saw Ho Chi Minh
suffer. He was fighting a battle within himself. Ho had his own strug-
gle. He realized communism was not best for his country, but it was

C-3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
