Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Most of the physically fit Southerners had been placed in
the North Vietnam Army (NVA) where they acquired military training and
discipline, and political indoctrination--the 305th, 32hth, 325th, 330th,
and 338th NVA Divisions were filled with Southerners, and remsined so
until 1959, when infiltration started on a large scale. 107/ Those
Southerners with non-military professional skills were placed in DRV
civilian society where they could be useful. But all, no matter where
placed, were apparently watched to assess their reliability, and eventu-
ally selected for return to the South by DRV authorities. Civilians were
urged to "volunteer" to return, soldiers were ordered to do so. Almost
all were pleased to comply, not only because it meant a return to family
and land of birth, but because few liked North Vietnam, and because they
had heard of the sufferings inflicted upon their people by the GVN, and
wanted to "liberate" them from Diem and the Americans. The chosen were
then sent to special training centers -- the most important of which for
the interviewed regroupees was at Xuan Mai -- where they attended courses
of several weeks to several months, depending on their background. The
emphasis -- about two-thirds of instructional time -- was on political
indoctrination. Themes included an impending victory in the South, to
be followed by "peace, neutrality, and reunification." They were taught
that after infiltration, they were to approach uncommitted Southerners,
by stressing the land reform policy of the Viet Cong, by urging families
to call back sons serving in ARVN, and by castigating the agroville-
strategic hamlet program of the GVN. One propaganda specialist related
that he was instructed to press three programs: political struggle,
armed struggle, and "military proselyting" (vinh van) -- the latter again
aimed at sapping the will of ARVN to fight, and causing desertions.

Following training, the regroupees were formed into units
of 40 to 400 for the trip south. A few were infiltrated by sea, but the
majority were taken by truck through North Vietnam to Laos, and thence
walked south on foot. The journey took at least two and one-half months;
most reported the trails were well organized, with camps built at intervals,
and guides available at each camp to conduct arrivals on the next leg of
their trip. Strict camouflage discipline was observed, and conversations
with camp attendants or guide personnel was forbidden. On arrival at their
destinations in South Vietnam, they were smoothly integrated into local
Viet Cong organizations. (Little subsequent friction was reported by the
regroupees between themselves and the Viet Cong, but some southern VC
recruited in the late Fifties or early Sixties, the "winter cadres," have
tay animosity toward the "autumn cadres," as the regroupees were
called.

The interviews with the regroupees suggest that:

-- The DRV quite deliberately organized, and trained an
infiltration force of Southerners.

-- The infrastructure for doing so -- the training centers
and the infiltration routes south -- indicate extensive
preparations for the process before it was started in
earnest in 1960.

33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
