Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

position here can be argued plausibly with both logic and wisdom,
but by sheer weight of what one official called the juggernaut...

"Westmoreland says do this, do that, and something happens,'
one informed observer said. ‘When Lodge says do this, do that,
sometimes something happens, and sometimes it doesn't happen.'

"The men here who wanted to see one ideology beaten by a
better one, to see the Vietnamese character (not to mention the
countryside) preserved and not submerged by the war, who viewed
the struggle as an exercise in counterinsurgency, have now cer-
tainly lost...

"Tt remains to be seen whether the problems of Vietnam lend
themselves to military solutions and whether changing conditions
in this war are better handled by colonels than diplomats." 51,/

dust's article was wrong, of course, since the decision to give MACV
responsibility for pacification had not been made. Indeed, within a few
days this fact had also leaked to the press, and stories in the New York
Times, datelined Saigon, spoke of the “abortive effort" by MACV to take
over the effort. But the importance of the stories was not in their
accuracy or inaccuracy, but in the fact that they indicated the emotions
that had been raised by the subject during and after the McNamara-
Katzenbach-Komer visit. In truth, no one in Saigon, not even Lodge and
Westmoreland, knew at this tine what the final decision was to be. But
the subject was up for discussion, and the pressure from Washington had
been measurably increased.

With the McNemara and Katzenbach memoranda in hand, the President
apparently indicated tentative agreements to give the civilians a short
trial period to get pacification moving. Then he left for his Asian tour,
which was to climax with the Seven-Nation Conference at Manila. He left
behind him instructions to prepare a message to Lodge and Porter and
Westmoreland, instructing them in his decision. Since the message was
drafted and sent on to the President in Wellington on October 18, before
Manila, but not sent on to Lodge and Porter in Saigon until November 4,
after Manila, there apparently remained some uncertainty as to his decision,
which was not clarified until most of the principals were united briefly
in Manila. But this is of marginal importance, The fact was that the
President had approved the idea of giving the civilians a final chance.

The Cable Exchange: November, 1966

“By October 18, McNamara, Katzenbach, and Komer had an agreed-upon
telegram for the President to send lodge. It was forwarded to Wellington,
where the President had begun his Asian tour:

"State/Defense and Komer recommend your concurrence in
the general plan recommended by both Secretary McNamara and

106 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
