Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Not only does that release U.S. forces for use elsewhere
in the world or for stationing in the United States, but also
it is probably the most effective way to combat the Communist
subversion and covert aggression. To introduce white forces --
U.S. forces -- in large numbers there today, while it might
‘have an initial favorable military impact would almost certainly
lead to adverse political and in the long run adverse military
operations. And therefore, we think the program we are carrying
out is the most effective one and certainly it is directed toward
termination of operations as rapidly as possible."

In late spring of 1962, the military situation in South Vietnam showed
hopeful signs of at last having turned a corner. The various programs
under way, initiated the previous fall as a result of decisions in NSAM
No. lll,appeared to be bearing out the basic soundness of the new approach,
Assessments and evaluations being reported from the field indicated a
pattern of progress on a broad front, and their consistency through time
reinforced the impression. By mid-year the prospects looked bright.
Continuing favorable developments now held forth the promise of eventual
success, and to many the end of the insurgency seemed in sight. This
optimism was not without the recognition that there were unsolved politi-
eal problems and serious soft spots in certain areas of the military
effort. But U.S. leadership, both on the scene in Vietnam as well as in
Washington, was confident and cautiously optimistic. In some quarters,
even & measure of euphoria obtained.

At the same time, events outside Vietnam, some of them ostensibly
unrelated, were asserting a direct and immediate relevance for U.S. policy
and strategy in Vietnam. As competing priorities, they far overshadowed
Vietnam. In the larger scheme of things, an indefinite military commit-
ment in Southeast Asia was being relegated perforce to a parenthetical
diversion the nation could then ill afford. More central issues in Berlin,
Cuba, and in Laos were at stake, perhaps even to the extent of survival.

Looming foremost was the Berlin problem. Fraught with grave over-
tones of potential nuclear confrontation with the USSR, it reached crisis
proportions in the spring of 1962 over the air corridor issue, and after
a temporary lull, flared anew in early summer. By the first of July it
was again as tense as ever. U.S. reserves had been recalled to active
duty, additional forces were deployed to Europe, and domestic Civil Defense
activities, including shelter construction programs, were accelerated.

The burgeoning Cuba problem too was taking on a pressing urgency by
virtue of both its proximity and growing magnitude. The Castro aspects
alone were becoming more than a vexing localized embarrassment. Given
the volatile Caribbean political climate, Cuban inspired mischief could
raise tensions to the flash point momentarily. Moreover, by early swnmer
of 1962 increasing evidence of Soviet machinations to exploit Cuba mili-
tarily was rapidly adding an alarming strategic dimension. Though the

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
