Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"ce, Navy. Support of the newly authorized deployments will
require the callup of two Navy mobile construction battalions
(NMCB) totalling 1,700 personnel and 600 individual medical/
dental /chaplain Reservists. These callups will provide for
bringing recalled Marine units up to strength, sustaining the
Navy personnel organic to the deployed RLT, and adding medical
staffing -required by the increased level of activity in South-
east Asia to forward hospital facilities including Guam.

"a. Air Force. The Air Force plans to support this approved
deployment operation without recall of individuals or units.
Reserve airlift augmentation needed to supplement the deployment
airlift can be accomplished by Reservists on a voluntary basis.”

In addition, the Joint Chiefs indicated that it would be both prudent
and advisable to reach a readiness level that could be responsive to
further COMUSMACV force requirements, if the remainder of the 82nd Airborne
Division and one more RLT were required. COMUSMACV had already indicated
the potential need for these units at an early date. To reach such a
readiness level, the Joint Chiefs indicated that the following Reserve
forces would have to be activated:

"a, Army. Should the additional deployments be made, it would
be necessary for the Army to recall (in addition to the two brigade
forces previously discussed) one infantry division force and one
infantry brigade force of the Army Reserve components, totalling
58,000 men. These forces will be needed to reconstitute the
strategic reserve and to broaden the source of critical ranks
and skills to be applied against the increased rotation base
requirements. The Reserve units should be recalled at this time
to bring them closer to a combat-ready status prior to the probable
deployment of the balance of the 82nd Airborne Division. The
Reserve division force should attain a combat-capable status in
15 weeks after recall and the brigade force should require 12 weeks.

"bd, Marine Corps.

(1) The most desirable Reserve callup consists of the
entire th Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF), plus other units
and selected individual Reserves. This totals about 51,000.
Mobilization and subsequent deployment of the Reserve forces
should be accomplished incrementally. This callup permits the
early and orderly replacement of the 5th Marine Division (-)
in South Vietnam and the subsequent redeployment of the 5th
Marine Division (-) to CONUS, or, alternatively, the 4th Division/
Wing Team can meet the additional requirements....

"eo, Navy. Support of these additional deployments. would
require the callup of an additional three NMCB (total of five)
totalling 4,150 personnel and an additional LOO (for a total
of 1,000) medical /dental/chaplain Reservists. These callups

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
