Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

206 TOP SECRET = Sensitive

principle but indicated that 3 TFS and the carrier would not be available.
They supplemented CINCPAC's rationale with a statement of their own on
the matter in appendix A. The two objectives of the air war were to

"make it as difficult and costly as possible™ for NVN to support the war
in the South and to motivate the DRV to “cease controlling and directing
the insurgency in South Vietnam." 78/ Their evaluation of the effective-
ness of the bombing in achieving these objectives was that:

Air operations in NVN have disrupted enemy efforts to
support his forces and have assisted in preventing the success-
ful mounting of any major offensives. The NVN air campaign
takes the war home to NVN by complicating the daily life,
causing multiple and increasing management and logistic problems,
and preventing the enemy from conducting an aggression from
the comfort of a sanctuary. 79/

Failures to date were attributed to the constraints imposed on the
bombing by the political authorities, and the Chiefs again urged that
these be lifted and the target base be widened to apply increasing pres-
sure to the DRV.

These were the standard old arguments. But on October 6,
the Secretary had addressed them a memo with an attached set of 28
"issue papers" drafted in Systems Analysis. One of these took sharp
issue with any increase in the air war on purely force effectiveness
grounds. The Chiefs attempted to rebut all 28 issue papers in one of the
attachments to the November 4 memo. The original Systems Analysis "issue
paper" on air war effectiveness had argued that additional deployments of
air squadrons should not be made because: (1) the bulk of the proposed
new sorties for North Vietnam were in Route Package I (see Map) and could
be attacked much more economically by naval gunfire; (2) although inter-
diction had forced the enemy to make greater repair efforts and thereby
had diverted some resources, had forced more reliance on night operations,
and had inflicted substantial casualties to vehicular traffic, none of
these had created or were likely to create insuperable problems for the
DRV; and (3) CINCPAC's increased sortie requirements would generate 230
aircraft losses in CY 1967 and cost $1.1 billion while only doing negligible
damage to the DRV. 80/ The similarity of much of this analysis to the
conclusions of the Jason Summer Study is striking.

The Chiefs rejected all three of the Systems Analysis argu-
ments. Naval gunfire, in their view, shoule be regarded as a necessary
supplement for the bombing, not as a substitute since it lacked flexibility

‘and responsiveness. As to the question of comparative costs in the air
war, the Chiefs reasoned as follows:

172 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
