Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

requirement submitted in the 28 March message. In effect, the require-
ment for a division in Quang Ngai Province which was identified in the

late March cable was being filled by Task Force ORHGON. 34/ ‘The provis-
ional division was composed of the 3rd Brigade of the 25th Infantry
Division, 196th Light Infantry Brigade and the lst Brigade of the 10l1st
Airborne Division. Permanent assignment of the airborne brigade to the
north had an especially adverse impact because it was the sole reserve

of the First Field Force. This shifting of forces created an undesirable
situation in that MACV would possibly be forced to assign a mechanized
battalion as the Field Force reserve. Accordingly, COMUSMACV cancelled
his urgent request foracavalry unit in the north and asked to delay
further discussions on this subject until during his visit to Washington
in the next two weeks. 35/ Concurrent with the movement of Task Force
OREGON to the north COMUSMACV submitted via CINCPAC to the JCS a request to
deploy the 9th Marine Amphibious Brigade from Okinawa to South Vietnam.
JCSM 208-67, prepared by the Chiefs on the subject, proposed that two
special landing forces from the brigade be stationed off the Vietnamese
coast to be committed when required by COMUSMACV and the remainder of the
MAB placed on 15-day call in Okinawa. The proviso that unless these forces
were employed on a contingency basis they would revert to their normal
schedules by 1 September was inserted in the recommendation at CINCPAC's
request. He disagreed with the dismemberment of the PACOM strategic
reserve. This proposal was approved by the Secretary of Defense on 14 April
and the brigade removed to Vietnamese waters shortly thereafter. 36/

On 20 April, the JCS, in JCSM-218-67, formally reported to the
Secretary of Defense that MACV required additional forces to achieve
the objectives they considered the U.S. was pursuing in Vietnam. The
JCS announcement came as little surprise to the Secretary of Defense
since as early as 23 March he had seen the original message in which
COMUSMACV had outlined the minimum essential and optimum force require-
ments. 37/

JCSM-128-67 reaffirmed the basic objectives and strategic concepts.
contained in JCSM 702-66 dated 4 November 1966. Briefly, these entailed
@ national objective of attaining a stable and independent non-communist
government in South Vietnam and a four-fold military contribution toward
achieving the objectives of:

“(a) Making it as difficult end costly as possible for
the NVA to continue effective support of the VC and to cause

North Vietnam to cease direction of the VC insurgency.

"(b) To defeat the VC/NVA and force the withdrawal
of NVA forces. :

"(c) Extend government dominion, direction and control.

73 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
