Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

134 ie ere
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

estimated that the POL strike would involve only 13 civilian casualties,
and the mining would cause none. 107/ While there is no specific record
of the Secretary's reaction to this full-blown presentation of the argu-
ments for expanded bombing, he had sent a curt memo to the Chiefs the
previous day in reply to their JCSM 189-66 of March 26, in which they had
again urged attacking the POL. Tersely reflecting the President's failure
to adopt their (and his) recommendation, he stated, "I have received
JCSM-189-66. Your recommendations were considered in connection with

the decision on ROLLING THUNDER 50." 108/

As the second-echelon policy group returned to its consid-
eration of the four options for U.S. policy (previously known as A, B-0,
B-P, and C), the weight of recent political instability shifted its focus
somewhat. When the group met again on Friday, April 16, at least three
papers were offered for deliberation. William Bundy's draft was titled,
"Basic Choices in Viet-Nam"; George Carver of CIA contributed "How We
Should Move"; and a third paper called "Politics in Vietnam: A ‘Worst'
Outcome" was probably written by John McNaughton.

Bundy began with a sober appraisal of the situation:

The political crisis in South Viet-Nam has avoided
outright disaster up to this point, but the temporary
equilibrium appears to be uneasy and the crisis has meant
at the very least a serious setback of the essential non-
military programs. 109/ .

But the closeness with which political disaster had been averted in the
South in the preceding week, "forces us to look hard at our basic posi-
tion and policy in South Viet-Nam. We must now recognize that three
contingencies of the utmost gravity are in some degree, more likely than
our previous planning had recognized...!'110/ The three contingencies Bundy
had in mind were: (1) a state of total political chaos and paralysis
resulting from an uprising by the Buddhists countered by the Catholics,
Army, etc.; (2) the emergence of a neutralist government with wide support
that would seek an end to the war on almost any basis and ask for a U.S,
withdrawal; and (3) a continuation of the present GVN but in an enfeebled
condition unable to effectively prosecute the war, especially the vital
non-military aspects of it. Bundy's estimate was that the third contingency
was the most likely at that moment, and that even the most optimistic
scenario for political and constitutional evolution could not foresee a
change within the succeeding three to four months. Nevertheless, he out-
lined the four possible U.S, lines of action much as they had been presented

before:

Option A: To continue roughly along present lines, but to
hope that the setback is temporary.

101 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
