———

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(3) Presentation of "some aspect of matter" to the
UN by one of the involved Asian states;

(4) A French guarantee of complete independence to
the Associated States, "including unqualified option to

Ww,

withdraw from French Union at any time... ;

(5) A French undertaking not to withdraw the
Expeditionary Corps from Indochina during the period of
united action in order to ensure that the U.S. would be
providing air and sea, but not combat troop, support;

(6) Franco-American agreement on the training of
native forces and @ new command structure during united
action (Admiral Radford was reported to be thinking in
terms of a French supreme command with a U.S. air command);

(7) Full endorsement by the French cabinet and
Assembly of these conditions to ensure a firm French
commitment even in the event of a change in government
in Paris.

It was further agreed that in the course of united action, the U.S.
would pursue efforts to broaden the coalition and. to formalize it
as a@ regional defense pact.

dad. Eisenhower Still Favors United Action

Eisenhower was still insistent on collective action, but
recognized that the British might not commit themselves initially and
that the Australians, facing a general election later in May, could. ~
only give “evidence” of their willingness to participate. A second
major problem was Indochinese independence. Dulles posed. the American
dilemma on this score: on the one hand, the U.S. had to avoid giving
Asia reason to believe we were intervening on behalf of colonialism;
on the other, the Associated States lacked the personnel and leader-
ship necessary to carrying on alone. "In a sense," said Dulles, "if
the Associated States were turned loose, it would be like putting a
baby in a cage of hungry lions. The baby would rapidly be devoured."

His solution was that the Associated States be granted (evidently,

orally) the right to withdraw from the French Union after passage of a
suitable time period, perhaps five or ten years. A final point con-
cerned Executive-Congressional relations once a French request, backed

by Parliamentary assent, reached Washington. The President felt he

should appear before a joint session of Congress and seek a Congressional
resolution to use the armed forces in Indochina. At Eisenhower's request,
Dulles directed that State Department begin working up a first draft of
such a Presidential message. 3/

A-17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
