Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a legal characterization of a situation rather than a factual description.
What we have in Viet-Nam is armed aggression from the North against the
Republic of Viet-Nam. Pursuant to a South Vietnamese request and consul-
tations between our two Governments, South Viet-Nam and the United States
are engaged in collective defense against that armed ageression. The
inherent right of individual and collective self-defense is recognized

in article 51 of the United Nations Charter.

"If the question is intended to raise the issue of legal authority
to conduct the actions which have been taken, there can be no doubt that
these actions fall within the constitutional powers of the President and
within the congressional resolution of August 196)."

24. “Pattern for Peace in Southeast Asia," Address by President Johnson
at John Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland on April 7, 1965 ,
Department of State Bulletin, April Bb, 1965, p. 607.

% &

"The confused nature of this conflict cannot mask the fact that it °
is the new face of an old enemy.

"Over this war--and all Asia--is another reality: the deepening
shadow of Communist China. The rulers in Hanoi are urged on by Peiping.
This is a regime which has destroyed freedom in Tibet, which has attacked
India, and has been condemned by the United Nations for aggression in
Korea. It is a nation which is helping the forces of violence in almost
every continent. The contest in Viet-Nam is part of a wider pattern.of
aggressive purposes.

"Why Are We in South Viet-Nam?

"Why are these realities our concern? Why are we in South Viet-Nam?

"We are there because we have a promise to keep. Since 1954 every
American President has offered support to the people of South Viet-Nam.
We have helped to build, and we have helped to defend. Thus, over many
years, we have made a national pledge to help South Viet-Nam defend its
independence.

"And I intend to keep that promise.

"Mo dishonor that pledge, to abandon this small and brave nation to
its enemies, and to the terror that must follow, would be an unforgivable
wrong. ;

"We are also there to strengthen world order. Around the globe,
from Berlin to Thailand, are people whose well-being rests in part on

D-31
