Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

its aggression to an end. Our demand would be that they cease
infiltration and all forms of support and also the activity
they are directing in the south.

b. We consider the UN Security Council initiative,
following another strike, essential if we are to avoid being
faced with really damaging initiatives by the USSR or perhaps
by such powers as India, France, or even the UN.

ec. At an early point in the UN Security Council initia-
tive, we would expect to see calls for the DRV to appear in the
UN. If they failed to appear, as in August, this will make
doubly clear that it is they who are refusing to desist, and
our position in pursuing military actions against the DRV would
be strengthened. For same reason we would now hope GVN itself
would appear at UN and work closely with US.

d. With or without Hanoi, we have every expectation that
any ‘talks' that may result from our Security Council initiative
would in fact go on for many weeks or perhaps months and would
above all focus constantly on the cessation of Hanoi's aggression
as the precondition to any cessation of military action against
the DRV. We further anticipate that any detailed discussions
about any possible eventual form of agreement returning to the
essentials of the 1954 Accords would be postponed and would be
subordinated to the central issue.

For your private guidance, the following draft language is
under consideration for Presidential announcement:

BEGIN QUOTE:

The aggression has continued. It has continued against the
Vietnamese, and it has continued against Americans. In support ;
of the independence of Vietnam, in the service of our nation,
and in fulfillment of the solemn public obligation of our nation,
and in our individual and collective self-defense, the Govern-
ment of the United States, with the Government of Vietnam, has
now decided that further action must be taken.

The actions we have agreed upon are three:

First and most important, we will continue and will intensify
still further our campaign against terror and violence in South
Vietnem itself. The establishment of civil peace and the disarm-
ing of the Communist forces are the first order of business for
poth our Governments. Our military and police actions will be
increasingly energetic and effective. We will also strengthen
and enlarge our efforts to move forward with the peaceful de-
velopment of a society set free from fear. We will never make

hg - + OP SECRET - Sensitive
