Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

As in the Navy, promotions and decorations are slow, and morale
and maintenance have both fallen off sharply in the past months. Pilots
particularly resent lack of ground facilities, and various safety devices
which those trained in the U.S. (over 50%) there learned to regard as
indispensables.

The Viet Minh

Opposed to the French forces are about 75,000 Vietnamese troops of
various political complexions, largely under Communist dominated leader-
ship. There is considerable French-furnished evidence of Communist
political commissars and indoctrination extending down to company
strength levels. It is certain that the disciplined Communist element
has been the largest factor in maintaining the vigor and cohesiveness
of the resistance. In this, they have been greatly helped by French
indecision and bad faith, and the terrorism of French troops.

In spite of arms captures and occasional defections, there is no
sign of large scale weakening of Vietnamese resistance abilities or
morale, The large areas under Vietnamese control lack luxuries and
medicines, but are wholly self-sufficient in the basic necessities
and tolerably well edministered, according to what few reports are
available. They continue to forma source of supplies and of fresh
troops that are only limited in numbers by the arms available,

Although there are rumors of a Chinese Communist treaty with Ho
Chi Minh, and of a Chinese Communist general and his staff in Northern
Tonkin, there is little evidence, as yet, that the Chinese are of any
considerable help in the resistance. French sources feel that there
is little danger of a Chinese Communist 5th column in Cochinchina, or
of an invitation on the part of Ho Chi Minh to the troops of the age-
old national enemy to enter Indochina in force, in spite of the Com-
munist link, All French military sources consulted, however, feel
that a large scale Chinese Communist invasion would make most, if not
all, of Tonkin, militarily untenable,

For many months past, observers feel that the resistance has not
put forth its maximum effort, perhaps because the leaders are waiting
for the outcome of political negotiations going on between the High
Commissariat, the French Government and the Xvan-Bao Dai elements. If
these should break down, the resistance will be greatly strengthened
by the adhesion of many now neutral or pro-French elements. If the
negotiations are successful, the resistance army is sure to be a
dominant factor in any form of Vietnamese self-government.

Comment

Having long since explored, and exhausted, the possibilities of a
final military victory in Indochina, there is little incentive for the
French military high command to plan beyond small scale operations of
limited scope, while waiting for the politicians in Paris and Mao Tze
TUNG in China to make the really decisive moves.

WHu/ jr
181
