Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But.despite the full use of his power to influence, the President
could not stop the critics. Condemnation of the bombing spread to the
campuses and to a widening circle of Congressmen. From many directions
the President was being pressed to make a major public statement wel-
coming negotiations.

Up to this time,, the official U.S. position had been unreceptive
to negotiations, although the President had paid lip-service tO His
willingness to "do anything and go anywhere in the interests of peace."
Past inaction he blamed entirely on Hanoi. It was, he said, Hanoi that
would not talk peace, Hanoi that was subverting South Vietnam, Hanoi
that was making it possible for the war to continue by funneling supplies
and manpower over the Ho Chi Minh trail. Washington was not to blame.
But now the formula no longer seemed adequate, and the President began
to look for a more spectacular way of dramatizing his peaceful intent.
He found it in-three ingrédients which he combined in his renowned Johns
Hopkins address of April 7th.

B. Ingredients for Johns Hopkins

Three elements combined to make the President's Johns Hopkins
speech an important initiative: First, a new formulation of U.S. readi-
ness to negotiate, in the shape of an acceptance by the President of the
spirit of the 17-Nation Appeal of March 15, which had called upon the
belligerents to start negotiations as soon as possible "without posing
any preconditions." Here are-the words of the speech which the Presi-
dent hoped would satisfy the principal demand of the doves:

We will never be second in the search for...a peaceful
settlement in Viet-Nam,

There may be many ways to this kind of peace: in dis-
cussion or negotiation with the governments concerned; in
large groups or in small ones; in the reaffirmation of old
agreements or their strengthening with’ new ones.

We have stated this position over end over again 50 times
and more to friend and foe alike. And we remain ready with
this purpose for uneonditional discussions. ;

A second key element of the speech was drawn from ideas long pro-
pounded by such old Southeast Asia hands as former U.S. Ambassador to
Thailand Kenneth Young, involving a massive regional development effort
for the area, based on the Mekong River basin. This was precisely the
Kind of hoveful and positive gesture the President needed to put a
bright constructive face on his Vietnam policy. Painting the picture

of a potentially peaceful five-nation area, the President said:
The first step is for the countries of Southeast Asia to

associate themselves in a greatly expanded cooperative effort
for development. We would hope that North Viet-Nem would

95 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
ir ee
