Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, India, Iraq, Kenya, Nepal, Syria, Tunisia, UAR,
Uganda, Yugoslavia, and Zambia.) The declaration blamed "foreign inter-
vention in various forms" for the aggravation of the Vietnam situation
and repeated Tito's call for negotiations without preconditions.

Yet another third-party peace initiative came from U.N. Secretary
General U Thant. U Thant proposed a three-month period in which there
would be "a temporary cessation of all hostile military activity, whether
overt or covert, across the 17th parallel in Vietnam."

McGeorge Bundy commented on these propositions in his April 1 "Key
Elements for Discussion" Memorandum in a manner suggesting that he had
very little expectation that any of these initiatives would lead to an
early conference:

We think the U Thant proposal should be turned off.
(Bunche tells us U Thant will not float it publicly if we
reject it privately). It is not clear that the trade-off
would be to our advantage, even if it could be arrenged,
and in any case, we prefer to use U Thant for private
feelers rather than public proposals. We can tell U Thant
that we have no objection on his sounding out Hanoi on this
same point, however, and that if he gets a response, we
would be glad to comment on it.

The 17 nation proposal is more attractive. We are in-
clined to propose to Quat that both South Vietnam and the
U.S. should accept it with a covering statement of our good,
firm, clear objectives in any such negotiation. The Presi-
dent has already made it clear that he will go anywhere to
talk with anyone, and we think the 17 nation proposal is
one to which we can make a4 pretty clear response. Tactically,
it will probably not lead to any early conference, because the
position of Hanoi and Peking will be that they will not attend
any meeting until our bombings stop. The Secretary of State
will elaborate on these propositions.

C. An End to "Reprisal"

In mid-morning of March 29, VC terrorists exploded a bomb out-
side the U.S. embassy in Saigon, killing and wounding many Americans and
Vietnamese. It was the boldest and most direct Communist action against
the U.S. since the attacks at Pleiku and Qui Nhon which hed precipitated
the FLAMING DART reprisals. Almost simultaneously, Ambassador Taylor
enplaned for talks in Washington--and both cities were instantly abuzz
with speculation that the war had entered a new and perhaps critical
phase.

Indeed, Admirel Sharp promptly urged the JCS to recommend a
forceful reply to the VC outrage, in the form of an out-of-turn

8h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
