Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

d. Coordinate with other influences on the DRV. So ~
long as full victory in the South appears likely, the effect
of the bombing program in promoting negotiations or a settle-
ment will probably be small. The bombing program now and
jater should be designed for its influence on the DRV at
that unknown time when the DRV becomes more optimistic about
what they can achieve in 4 settlement acceptable to us than
about what they can achieve by continuation of the war.

e. Avoid undue risks and costs. The program should
avoid bombing which runs a high risk of escalation into war
with the Soviets or China and which is likely to appall allies
and friends. 15/

Ge Incremental Fscalation

Secretary McNamara's 5 principles prevailed. The bombing
continued to expand and intensify, but there was no abrupt switch in
bombing policy and no sudden escalation. The high-value targets in
the Hanoi/Haiphong area were kept off limits, so as not to "kill the
hostage." Interdiction remained the chief criterion for target selec-
tion, and caution continued to be exercised with respect to sensitive
targets. The idea of a possible bombing pause, longer than the last,
was kept alive. 16/ The Secretary refused to approve an overall JCS
concept for fighting the Vietnam War which included much heavier
ROLLING THUNDER strikes against key military and economic targets
coordinated with a blockade and mining attack on NVN ports, 17/ and
he also continued to veto JCS proposals for dramatic attacks on major
POL depots, power plants, airfields, and other "lucrative" targets. 18/

The expansion of ROLLING THUNDER during the rest of 1965
followed the previous pattern of step-by-step progression. The approval
eycle shifted from one-week to two-week target packages. New fixed
targets from the JCS list of major targets, which grew from 94 to 236
by’ the end of the year, continued to be selected in Washington. The
number of these new targets was kept down to a few per week, most of
them LOC-related. Few strikes were authorized in the vital northeast
quadrant, north of 21° N. and east of 106° E., which contained the
Hanoi /Haiphong urban complexes, the major port facilities, and the
main LOCs to China. In addition, de facto sanctuaries were maintained
in the areas within 30 nautical miles from tne center of Hanoi, 10 from
the center of Haiphong, 30 from the Chinese border in the northwest (to
106° B.), and 25 from the Chinese border in the northeast. 19/

The scope of armed reconnaissance missions was also enlarged
but kept within limits. The boundary for such missions was shifted to
the north and west of Hanoi up to the Chinese buffer zone, but it was
kept back from the northeast quadrant; where only individually approved

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
