Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

northern provinces; he can attempt a thrust through the
Central Highlands from Base Area 609 toward the coast, he
can threaten Pleiku and Darlac; he can launch an offensive
from MR 10 toward Phue Tuy Province. Obviously, he can
combine several of these options. When he encroaches from
the sanctuaries in force, we must go to meet him. We can-
not permit him to win territory, intimidate the people, and
move freely about the countryside and thus, gain the
psychological victory he wants.

This enemy “peripheral strategy" has disadvantages,
too. He will have to move supplies from secure areas in
Laos and Cambodia to those units located deep inside SVN,
where once he might have supported them with relative
ease by sea. Weather conditions impose restrictions upon
his land lines of communication, especially during the
wet season. FOL and wheeled vehicle requirements are
increased as is his maintenance needs. Inside SVN, he
will be hard pressed to support large scale military opera-
tions along the coastal plains because of his long, insecure,
LOC's. Thus, he will find it difficult to make his main
force presence felt in the heavily populated areas. In
turn, this will reduce his access to manpower, taxes, rice
and other supplies normally procured from these populated
coastal areas.

SUMMARY

In summary, here are the significant elements of the
enemy situation as we see them:

1. His strategy of the war of attrition is unchanged,
and his determination to carry it out is evident.

2. He has been hurt, particularly in the coastal
areas of II Corps and around Saigon.

3. His Main Forces have not carried out their part
of the enemy's strategic plan.

4, His Main Force units require additional strength
to carry out their role.

5. The war is becoming more and more an NVA war, and
Taos and Cambodia are becoming increasingly important to him. 63/

The J3 briefing continually emphasized that a major redisposition

of U.S. forces had been redquired to take full advantage of the oppor-
tunities to engage the enemy.’ This was especially true in I, II and

204 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
