Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Another significant activity during the period, although not one
initiated by the United States forces, was the fall of the Special
Forces camp at A Shau, on the 10th of March.

Operations in the II Corps Tactical Zone in 1966 displayed a simi-
lar pattern. The two key areas of concern in II Corps were the coastal
plains in Binh Dinh Province and near Tuy Hoa, and the Central Highland
Plateau area around Pleiku. Although General Westmoreland appeared to
be. impatient to find the enemy and defeat him in the relatively sparsely
populated plateau area, most of the operations in the first half of the
year which resulted in significant contact with the enemy took place
near the Coastal Plains. The first operation of the year, which ran
from 28 January to } February, was Operation MASHER, renamed Operation
WHITE WING because of the concern over public reaction to the image
portrayed by the name "MASHER."

Operation WHITE WING continued until 6 March. This operation in
the Bong Son and An Lao Valley region made heavy contact with 1 VC and
1 NVA regiment. It was followed by DAVEY CROCKETT (4-16 May) and
CRAZY HORSE (17 May to 5 dune), both in the same area.

Other significant operations in the spring of the year were Opera-
tions VAN BUREN and HARRISON which, together, ran from 19 January through
2. March in the area around Tuy Hoa. These operations, conducted by the
ist Brigade of the 10lst Airborne Division, were designed to protect the
rice harvest in that area.

Operations in the III Corps area began with Operation MARAUDER in
Hau Nghia and Long An Provinces on 7 January; Operation CRIMP, along the
Hau Nghia/Binh Duong border; and Operation BUCKSKIN near ChuChi on
11 January.

In February, Operation MASTIFF into the Michelin Plantation, and
Operation MALLET in Phoue Tuy Province, were carried out. Neither
Operation produced substantial enemy kills, but hopefully they were
instrumental in breaking up VC supply and command and control facilities.
By 10 February, however, Operation ROLLING STONE had been kicked off and
by 20 September it had encountered a 1,000-man VC force in Binh Duong.

On 7 March, another search and destroy operation in Binh Duong, Operation
SILVER CITY, triggered a four-hour attack by the enemy against 173rd Air-
borne Brigade, one of the participating units. On 24 April, the center
of operations moved further north when BIRMINGHAM began a thrust into

Tay Ninh. The most significant part of BIRMINGHAM was the capture of
vast quantities of enemy supplies and facilities despite the small number
of enemy killed. By May of 1966, the 1st Cavalry Division was operating
in the Central Highlands, the 1st Infantry Division was in operation
north of Saigon, while the 25th Infantry Division had one brigade operat-
ing with the 1st Cavalry Division on the Central Plateau, with the other
brigades engaged in the III Corps area.

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
