Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

direction of vc/NVA forces. COMUSMACV requested a series of B-52 strikes
to support ground operations in the vicinity of Chu Pong Mountain. These
strikes were delivered on 16 November. Three U.S. infantry battalions

. were closely engaged, supported by tactical air sorties and artitlery.

The VC/INVA forces, which exceeded division strength, continued active
resistance to the U.S. forces from well-entrenched position. The battle
of the 3rd Brigade against numerically superior vc/iIvA forces continued
until 18 November in the vicinity of Chu Pong Mountain and Ia Drang Valley.
Fighting was often hand to hand with many small units temporarily cut off
from their parent organization. J

On 20 November, the 2d Brigade, 1st Cavalry Division, flew to Pleiku
to relieve the 3d Brigade. The VC/NVA had lost over 1,200 killed in
action while the U.S. losses were over 200. 32/

According to the MACV Command History, 1966:

"The overall NVN political strategy was aimed at the demorali-
zation of the RVN and the collapse of resistance in the south,
as well as the closely related contingency of US withdrawal from
Vietnam. In their planning to accomplish this strategy the NVN
‘leaders were influenced by their experience during the Indochina
War, when the Viet Minh had relied on the unwillingness of the
French people to continue to support a long and costly "dirty war."
Although the US was a more formidable enemy, NVN leaders appar-
ently believed that the same political strategy would succeed
again, and that their own will to fight would outlast that of the
Americans. The enemy expected that the high financial cost, the
loss of American lives, international pressures, and domestic
dissension inevitably would force the US Government -to withdraw
military forces from RVN. The enemy's long-range plan of military
strategy had three phases. The first phase called for the creation
of a political organization and a guerrilla capability, and the
initiation of guerrilla warfare. The second phase called for the
establishment of larger bases from which a "strategic mobility"
effort could be launched. The third phase called for the initi-
ation of the final large-scale attacks that would annihilate the
opposing forces. During the first phase of the NVN plan the Jao
Dong Party established a firm party organization by the creation
of the NLF. Concurrently, NVN began guerrilla-type operations,
established secure bases for larger operations, and began to force
the RVN into a defensive posture. Infiltration routes from NVN
were established and a system of logistic support for the base
areas was set up. In order to accelerate the transition to the
final phase of annihilation, NVN began to move regular NVA troops
‘ into the RVN. This activity was first indicated in April 1964,
when the 325th NVA Div began accelerated training in preparation
for deployment to the RVN.

19 TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
