Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

mediocre people would be squabbling among themselves for
power while the Conmunists took over. The Communists will
be more alert to exploit the next coup attempt.... 8

Lansdale's view was not immediately taken up, even though

Hilsman reports that his presentation impressed Kennedy enough to start
the President thinking about sending the General to Saigon as our next
Ambassador. 9/ Instead, Kennedy made what was under the circumstances
the easiest, least time-consuming decision, which was simply to let the
Ambassador he had inherited from the Eisenhower Administration go for-
ward and make a try with the plan and negotiating tactics already pre-
pared.

Durbrow's guidance specifically tells him (in instructions he
certainly found suited his own view perfectly):

+. considered U.S. view (is) that success requires im-
plementation entire plan...If Ambassador considers GVN
does not provide necessary cooperation, he should inform
Washington with recommendations which may include suspen-
sion U.S. contribution. 10/

ITI. NEGOTIATING THE CIP

Kennedy's approval of the CIP apparently was seen as quite a
routine action. None of the memoirs of the period give it any particu-
lar attention. And, although both Schlesinger and Hilsman refer to
General Lansdale's report as shocking the President about the state of
things in Vietnam, that report itself does not eriticize the CIP, or
the adequacy of its programs.

The guidance to Durbrow assumed agreement could be reached
"within two weeks." This choice of language in the guidance cable in-
plies that we believed Diem wovld quickly agree on the terms of the CIP,
and the question of using pressure against him ("suspension of U.S. con~
tribution") would only arise later, should he fail to follow through on
his part of the agreement. 11/

As it turned out, Durbrow's efforts took a more complicated
form. Even reaching a nominal agreement on the CIP took about 6 weeks.
Then, Durbrow recommended holding up what is constantly referred’ to as
"the green light" on increased aid until Diem had actually signed decrees
implementing his major promises.

On March 8 (in response to a Washington suggestion for stepping
up some aid prior to agreement on the CIP), Saigon cabled that:

---despite pressure of Embassy and MAAG, GVN has not

decreed the required measures and will continue to delay
unless highly pressured to act. 12/

13 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
