Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV.C.1.

TI. NSAM-288 - TONKIN GULF

1. General Character of the Period from NSAM-288 to Tonkin Gulf

In enunciating the policies of NSAM-288 we had rhetorically committed
ourselves to do whatever was needed to achieve our stated objectives in
South Vietnam. The program decided upon and spelled out in NSAM-288 re-
flected our recognition that the problem was greater than we had previously
Supposed and that the progress that we had previously thought we were mak-
ing was more apparent than real. The program constituted a larger effort
than we had undertaken before; it corresponded to our increased estimates
of the magnitude of the task before us. Nevertheless, we might have chosen
to do more along the lines of what we aid decide to do, and above all we
might have chosen to do some things that we specifically chose not to do
at this time (although we began to plan for some of these on a contingency
basis). If there were to be new or greater problems in the future it was
because we did not correctly appraise the magnitude of the problem nor fully
foresee the complexity of the difficulties we faced. There were indeed
some who believed that the program we decided upon was not enough, notably
the JCS who had gone on record that until aid to the VC from outside of
South Vietnam was cut off, it would be impossible to eliminate the insur-
gency there. But the program as decided upon in 288 did correspond to the
official consensus that this was a prescription suited to the illness as we
diagnosed it.

There were many inhibitions that discouraged doing more than the bare
necessity to get the job done. These inhibitions related to the image of
the U.S. in world affairs, to possible risks of over-reaction from the Com-
munist side, to internal American hesitancies about our operations there,
and finally to a philosophy concerning the basic social nature of what was
happening in Vietnam and how wise it was for the U.S. to become very deeply
involved. We had given serious thought to a program of pressures upon the
North, largely covert and intended more to persuade than to compel. This
was on the theory that the heart of the problem really lay not in South
Vietnam but in North Vietnam. But these measures, although far from for-
gotten, were put on the shelf in the belief, or at least the hope, that
they would not be needed,

The long year from March 1964 to April 1965 is divisible into three
periods that correspond to major modifications or reformulations of policy.
The first would be from March (NSAM-288) to the Tonkin Gulf affair in early
August 1964, the second would be from August 1964 to February of 1965, and
the third would be from February to April 1965.

From March to August 1965 we tried to make a go of it with the program
approved in NSAM-288, in hope that that program would carry us toward our
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

56
