{

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

over Southeast Asia and the likelihood that back-corridor discussions
of the Vietnamese problem would be an almost inevitable by-product.
In time such a procedure might be useful, but for the balance of 1964
it was to be avoided in order to promote GVN stability and encourage
a more vigorous GVN war effort. 51/

The pressure for a Geneva-type conference had been building ever
since the resumption of fighting in Laos in May. The chief protagonist
in the quest for negotiations was France, who first proposed reconvening
the 14-Nation Conference to deal with the crisis on 20 May. What made
French policy so dangerous to U.S. interests, however, was that its
interest in a Geneva solution applied to Vietnam as well. On 12 June,
DeGaulle publicly repeated his neutralization theme for all Indo-China
and called for an end to all foreign intervention there; on 23 July he
proposed reconvening the 1954 Geneva Conference to deal with the problems
of Vietnam.

The Soviet Union's return to the 14-Nation formula in July (it
had endorsed the original French proposal before indicating willingness
to support the 6-Nation approach) indicated solidarity in the communist
camp. The call was endorsed by North Vietnam on the following day.
Conmunist China first announced support for a 14-Nation Conference (on
Iaos) on 9 June, repeating this through notes to the co-chairman calling
on the 13th for an "emergency meeting." On 2 August, the Chinese urged
the USSR not to earry out its threat to abandon its co-chairman role,
apparently viewing such a development as jeopardizing the possibilities
for a Geneva settlement. 52/

Great Britain also urged the Russians to stay on, and during the
last days of July it attempted to make arrangements in Moscow to con-
vene a l-Nation assembly on Iao0s. The negotiations failed because
Britian insisted on Souvanna's prerequisite that the communists withdraw
from positions taken in May and was unable to gain Soviet acquiescence.
However, U.S. leaders were aware that Britain's support on this point
could not be counted on indefinitely in the face of increasing pressure
in the direction of Geneva. 53/

in the meantime, however, Laotian military efforts to counter the
communist threat to key routes and control points west of the Plaine
des Jarres were showing great success. As a result of a counteroffensive
(Operation Triangle), government forces gained control of a considerable
amount of territory that gave promise of assuring access between the
two capitals (Vientiane and Iuang Prabang) for the first time in three
years. 5h/

In effect, the government's newly won control of territory and
communication routes in Central Laos created a new and more favorable
balance of power in that country, which in the perceptions of the Admin-
istration should not be jeopardized. A threat to this balance from
either (1) communist reactions to additional pressure, or (2) Iaotian
insistence on extending their offensive into the Plaine des Jarres,was
cited to discourage proposals near the end of July to permit the VNAF to

. a7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
