Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

itself. I responded that reciprocal responsibilities were
involved. On the GYN side it was essential that a stable
government be established capable of directing affairs of
the Nation and particularly of directing the national paci- -
fication effort...Should his goverrmment demonstrate it was
capable of achieving satisfactory degree of government sta-
bility und effectiveness a widér range of possibilities
would undoubtedly be open for discussion...Huong indicated
his complete understanding of the situation." 50/

At this time another case of non-consultation blew up. RVNAF
reorganization plans had passed back and forth between the MRC and MACV
since July. Then, on November 10, the MRC produced a plan that differed
materially from the last one MACV had seen, Huong signed it, and it was
published on November 11 before MACV could review it. Westmoreland and
Taylor both protested to their respective contacts in the strongest terms;
the decrees were withdrawn, changed to MACV's satisfaction, and reissued. 51/

On November 26, Westmoreland squelched an apparent coup planned
by Ky. He heaxd of unusual activity at VNAF headquarters and asked Ky to
his office. Ky bluntly stated a case for a change of leadership. Westmoreland
said:

"After patiently listening to the foregoing, I informed
Ky in no uncertain terms that the U.S. government would not
support a change of command by other than orderly and legal
process. (This statement was cleared in advance with Ambassa- :
dor Johnson.) Ky was obviously impressed by my statement
and said that he would not take action for three months,
but if the situation continued to deteriorate he would be
constrained to act in national interest.” 52/

This episode was the first sign of Young Turk action against the new govern-
ment, and the first recorded sign of Ky's own ambitions. The U.S. reaction
underlined the USG’s opposition to sudden change without broad support,

even though it was expected that the military would return to power eventu-
ally.

8. A lecture And a Program For GVN

NSAM 314, September 10, which had called for actions to strengthen
GVN, had set wheels in motion toward spelling out a U.S. program within
SVN to complement the contemplated actions against the North. Taylor re-
turned to Washington for consultations at the end of November. In the
NSC, he argued that a strong message to GVN about its problems would most
likely produce the optimm response. He said 9 threat by the U.S. to
withdraw unless they improve would be too much of & gamble. There was
no discussion of intermediate leverage or sanctions between this extreme
threat and none at all. The discussion also highlighted the fear that
GVN might collapse or be replaced by neutralists who would ask the U.S.
to withdraw; all agreed that neutralism could not be accepted, and that

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
