Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

continue to help themselves. It is also noted that the
DPM contains no statement of military objectives to

be achieved and that current US national, military,

and political objectives are far more comprehensive and
far-reaching. Thus:

a. The DPM fails to appreciate the full implica-
tions for the Free World of failure to achieve a success-
ful resolution of the conflict in Southeast Asia.

b. Modification of present US objectives, as
called for in the DPM, would undermine and no longer
provide a complete rationale for our presence in South
Vietnam or mach of our effort over the past two years.

e. The positions of the more than 35 nations sup-
porting the Government of Vietnam might be rendered
untenable by such drastic changes in US policy. 121/

The strategy the DPM had proposed under option B was
completely anathema to their view of how the war should be conducted.
After having condemned the ground forces and strategy of the DPM as
a recipe for a protracted and indecisive conflict, the Chiefs turned
their guns on the recommended constriction of the air war to the DRV
panhandle:

Military Strategy for Air/Navel Wax in the North.

The DPM stresses a policy which would concentrate air
operations in the North Vietnamese "funnel" south of 20°.

The concept of a "funnel" is misleading, since in fact

the communists are supplying their forces in South Viet-

nam from all sides, through the demilitarized zone, Laos,

the coast, Cambodia, and the rivers in the Delta. According
+o the DPM, limiting the bombing to south of 20° might

result in increased negotiation opportunities with Hanoi.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that such a new self-
imposed restraint resulting from this major change in
strategy would most likely have the opposite effect.

The relative immunity granted to the LOCs and distribution
system outside the Panhandle would permit: (a) a rapid
recovery from the damage sustained to date; (b) an increase
in movement capability; (c) a reduced requirement for total
supplies ‘n the pipeline; (da) a concentration of air defenses
into the Panhandle; and (e) a release of personnel and equip-
ment for increased efforts in infiltration of South Vietnam.
Also, it would relieve the Hanoi leadership from experiencing
at first hand the pressures of recent air operations which
foreign observers have reported. Any possible political.
advantages gained by confining our interdiction campaign to
the Panhandle would be offset decisively by allowing North

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
