Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

“American ee ulate General,

HEMICRANDUM OF INDOCHINA POR NEV DELHI FOXEIGN SBRVICH CONFERESCe

SECTION IV. INDOCETEESE 3 ECONOMIC SITUATION 7

Ae General
5 again

Indochina has sn grea oo Ze 85 ,090 squaro miles = half t/os large a
France - ang a popuintion of about 26,000.000- The population is
largely concentratsd in the dcltas of the Red and Mekong Rivers and a
narrow strip nlong ths const. Large parts of the interior are pract
enlly uninhabitee. The economy of the country is primarily agri-
cultural and largely based on the growing, processing, and export of
rico. Rubber output wes increasing rapidly befors the war, and some
progress had been madc in developing the. country's mincral resources.

ua

Recovery since the war has been slow because of the practically
continuous guerrilla warfare. Even with the return of peace it will
probably take two yonrs for production in most fields to reach prowar
levels, and large capital investments would be necessary.

B. Resources
1. Apriculture

Rice is the minstay of the nativo dict and by far the most
important crop» Tonkin is only self supporting in exceptional years;
Annan and Cambodia usually eee even; while Cochinchina can produce

a large surplus for export and scldom suffers a crop failures Agri-
Cee mothods are primitive and yieids per acre are lows Cther
important crops arc corn, grown chiefly for export, sugar cane, beans,
cotton, tobneco, and vegetables. Copra and oil seeds mre of minor
Tee VA Hee as mre coffee, tea, and kapok.

Rubber planting bega ~ late in Inddchina and reached its greatest
development in the period 1925 - 1954. Present acreage is about 154,000
hectares, pernaps 2075 of which has boon mors or less seriously daumged
by the pucrriilas. Potential production is estimated at 100,000 tons,
but many plantations have been abandoned because of insecurity, ang the
balance Jack Imbor. Production in 1248 was only about 45,090 tons.
Rubber is almost ontirely in French hands and the great bulk in eee
plantations - the 35 largest contain 60% of tho total acreasee Frene
planters have been prompt to develop anc adopt modern methods, and over
40% of the trees are Prom catted and selected seed : a

all

i
stocad tnat cost of production is low compared with o

2. Animal Husbandry, Fishine, and Timber

In tho Vistnam, erttle and buffalo are raised chiefly for draft
animis, and their numbors are still below prewar totals. Cambodin

= #
raises _ fair mumbor of beef cattle. Hogs are the most important food
aninn] and in cortain Annamite provinces are an important source of
income. Gonts and sheep aro of minox importance. Fish forms an
4 82 important
_ Cd

ES TRICTED

