Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET — Sensitive

"d. The Secretary of Defense indicated that further U.S.
deployments must be accompanied by deployment of Koreans for
reasons of domestic reaction.

"e. After an exchange of views on the missions and
operating methods of U.S. forces the Secretary of Defense
stated that he was impressed with the adverse force ratios
and favored deployment of U.S. forces conditioned by:

"(1) political (psychological) absorption capacity
"(2) logistical absorption capacity

"(3) operational absorption -- (that is operational
requirements) ."

In his official reply to the JCS memorandum containing the three-division
plan, the Secretary said this: 143/

"I have considered the views of the JCS presented in
referenced memorandum. As you are aware the substance of
their recommendations was considered in the high-level
discussions which took place in connection with the recent
visit of Ambassador Taylor. I believe that the decisions
made at that time reflect the views of the JCS to the extent
required at this time."

It has already been pointed out that (after the NSC meetings of 1-2 April
1965) Mr. McNamara was interested in the JCS continuance of planning for
the. earliest possible introduction of the three divisions. 144/ In reply
to the JCSM of 30 April in which the Chiefs sumed up the results of the
Honolulu Conference and subsequent discussions and in which they made
another pitch for the three-division plan, the Secretary said in regard
to the latter: 145/

"The other deployments deseribed will be considered in
conjunction with continuing high-level deliberations on the
Southeast Asia situation and as further requested by the JCS."

In the files are several other-bits of information which, while perhaps
not always directly attributable to the Secretary's personal philosophy,
nevertheless are an indication of how he interpreted his guidance from

the President. On 1 March he sent this memorandum to all departments: 1h6/

: "I want it clearly understood that there is an mlimited
appropriation available for the financing of aid to Vietnam.
Under no circumstances is lack of money to stand in the way
of aid to that nation."

107 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
