I 
I
lJeciassified per Executive Order [3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 [6. By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
V.A Justification of the War ( II Vois.) 
Public Statements (2 Vols.) 
Volume II: D-The Johnson Administration 
-
~-~-
----
Declassified per Executive Order [3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 [6. By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
, 
\ 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
V. A. -
Vol II 
V. 
JUSTIFICATION OF THE iolAR -
R}BLIC S"fj:ATEHE.l:TS 
D. Johnson Admlnistretion 
, .' 
, 
PART v. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
JUSTIFICATION OF THE <TAR -- RJBLIC STATEMENTS 
Foreword 
This portion of the study consists of an examination of the 
public statements justifying U. S. involvement in Vietnam, 
Only 
official statements contained in either the U, S. Department of 
State Bulletins or the Public Papers of the Presidents were re-
viewed. 
Although conclusions are based primarily on the state-
ments of the President, the Secretary of State and the Secretary 
of Defense , the statements of other high- ranking government 
officials were also studied in ascertaining the policy context 
of the quoted material. 
This report includes analyses of the 
Johnson period. 
The statements are organized chronologically 
and are summarized for each year. 
1. 1964 
2. 1965 
3. 
1966 
4. 
1967 
i 
, . . 
.. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
J OHNSON. ADMINISTRATION - 1964 
Sffi.1NARY 
President Johnson succeeded to the Presidency upon the assassi-
nation of President Kennedy in November 1963 only three weeks after 
the ~ 
d ' etat which saw the Ngo Dinh Diem regime crushed and Diem 
himself murdered . 
Confronted ,·:ith a crisis, the U.S. renewed its 
pledge to support the military junta and the free government of 
Vietnam. 
The U.S. increased its support even as the GVN wavered 
through a series of government changes each reflecting the control 
retained by the military. 
U.S. involvement deepened with the in-
creased advisory strength and the introduction of combat troops in 
1964. The Tonkin Gulf crisis and the subsequent resolution became 
benchmarks for the U.S. commitment . 
The new Administration emphasized 
the following points : 
a . 
Organized aggression from the North obligated the United 
States to fulfill its commitments under the SEATO treaty. 
b. 
The strategic importance of SOutheast Asia to the security 
of the United States and the test of "wars of' liberation" there as im-
portant to the fUture peace and f reedom of South Vietnam. 
c. The Gul f of Tonkin a'Ction showed that "aggression by 
terrorll bad been joined by "open aggression on the high seas" against 
the United States and the r esolution ,~hich follO' ... ed justified measures 
to ""repel any armed attack. II 
d . 
The communist "appetite for aggressi on" through "wars of 
liberation" threatened not only other Asian countries} but also the 
United States if left unchecked. 
The U.S. se~ks no wider "far . 
e. 
Four basic themes govern U.S. policy, essentially un-
changed since 1954: America keeps h~r wOrd; the future of Southeast 
Asia is the issue; 
"our purpose is peace ; and, this war is a "struggle 
for fr eedoI:!.." 
D 
, 
v. D. 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
JUSTIFICATION OF THE HAR -- RJBLIC STATEt·!ENTS 
JOHNSOIl ADMnnSTRATION 
CONTENTS 
1. 
Secretary Rusk stated, "Our troops are there assisting the 
South Vietnamese because people in the north have been putting 
, 
pressures on Southeast Asia.!!. ... ... ..... . ... . .. . .. . ............ D-3 
2. 
President Johnson expresses support of President Kennedy' s 
belief in the "domino theory" .. . .......... ... '. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 
D-4 
3. 
secretary J·1cNe!llara cites organized aggression from NVN as r e-
quiring U.S. to fulfill its SEATO commitment . 
He emphasizes 
the strategic significance' of Southeast Asia in the fortvard 
defense flank and the importance of meeting squarely the I1test 
case for the nel{ Conununist strategy, II wars of liberation. . . . . . .. 
D-4 
4. 
Ambassador stevenson stresses the point that the U.S. presence 
i n Vietnam is in response to request from goverpJment of South 
Vietnam to assist in combatting aggression from the North . ..... . 
D-8 
5. 
secretary NcNanara discusses the forward defense nations and 
their relationship to U.S. secuI:ity......... . .......... . ..... . .. 
D-I O 
6. 
7· 
8. 
9· 
Secretary Rusk states that withdrawal from Vietnam would re-
sult in Tla drastic loss of confidence in the wiil. and capacity 
of t he free w'Orld to oppose aggression!! ... .. . . ...... . ....... ... . 
President Johnson cites four basic themes : (1) America keeps 
her \-/ord; (2) the issue is the future of Southeast Asia; (3) 
our purpose is peace and (4) this is a struggle for freedom . .• . . 
President Johnson tells the Nation, "Aggression by terror 
against the peaceful vi llagers of South Vietnam has now been 
joined by open aggression on the high seas against the United 
States of merica" .... .. . ... ................. : ........ .. ....... . 
President Johnson cites aggression, the commitments of his 
predecessors , SEATO, the attack on the 14addox and our es-
t ablished policy of assisting countries victi mized by 
aggression as leading to ·U.S. actions . .......... .. .. . . ..... . .. . . 
D-l 
D-ll 
D-ll 
D-12 
D- 12 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
10, 
President Johnson recalls SEATO commitment to South Vietnam 
in ·address to Congress; he stressed consistency in U.S. 
policy as enunciated on June 2 (D-7) .. , . . . .. , .. . .. .. . . . . •.. .. . .. D-l4 
ll. Secretary Rusk explains swiftness of U. S. response to Gulf 
of Tonkin attack as necessitated by act of war and the im-
portance of conveying to Hanoi the seriousness of the 
situation ........• ,. , .. . ..... . . . ................. . . . . . ... . ... . .. . D-l5 
l2. 
Gulf of Tonkin resolution cites the attack on an American ship 
in combination with aggressive acts of NVN in SVN as j usti-
fying "all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against 
the forces of the U.S. and to prevent further aggression
l1 ••
• •
• •• D-16 
, . 
13. 
Secretary Rusk states, n .. ,South Vietnam is a critical test-
case for new Communist strategy" . . . . . .. . . . .. . ...... .. . .. . . ..... , D-17 
14. 
William Bundy relates the fall of SVN and the success of the 
wars of liberation strategy t o the future of other Asian 
countr ies , including India and Japan, Australia and the under-
developed nations throughout the world . .... ... ..... . . . . . .... .. • , D-18 
15. 
Secretary Rusk suggests that U. S. security is threatened by 
persistent aggression which remains unchecked; while not 
supporting the "domino theory" designation, he points out the 
Communist appetite for revolution as expressed i n their 
proclamations . ... . ..... . . .. . . . .. . .. .. . ... . . . .. . . . .. . . . . ... . .. .. • D-18 
D-2 
1. 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 20 11 
D. 
Johnson Administration 
~S~e~c~r~e7t~ar~~R
~u~s~k~I~n~t~e~rv~i~e~w~e~d~o~n~v~o~i~c~e-co~f.A~m7er'~·i~c~aOL~1~~F~e~b~r~ua~r~~1~~4 , 
Department of Sta.te Bulletin, 2 Ma.rch 196 , D . 333 : 
* * * 
"MR. O' NEILL: 
ifell, Hanoi has just publicly now identified itself 
as supporting the guerrillas in South Vietnam and also threatening that 
Red China would intervene in any action against North Vietnam. 
Do you 
see any connection between that and the French recognition, or do you 
think this is an isolated developnent? 
, . 
"SECRETARY RUSK: 
I haven't seen anything that would lead me to say 
there was an organic connection between what Hanoi has just said and what 
Paris has done . It is true that Hanoi has made no secret of this policy 
since 1959. 
They have publicly declared that they are out to take over 
South Vietnam, and in this same statement to which you are referring they 
made it very clear that North Vietnam is not going to be neutralized and 
that their interest in South Vietnam is not so much neutrality as taking 
it over . 
So I think the issues have been drawn very clearly out there: 
"MR. O'NEILL: 
io1hile we are on that area, how is the fighting in South 
Vietnam? 
Are \ole goi ng to be able to win out, and do you have any idea as 
to how soon that might be? 
"SECRETARY RUSK: tolell, I think we will have to wait a bit before we 
can speak with complete confidence about it in the short ~un . 
In the long 
run, I have no doubt that the r esources , the ,,'ill, the material are present 
in South Vietnam to enable the South Vietnamese to do this job. 
We are 
d.etermined that Southeast Asia. is not going to be taken over by the com-
munists . 
We must insist that these basic accords be adhered to . And so 
we are in this to the point where the South Vietnamese are going to be 
independ.ent and secure . 11 
* * * 
"MR. \"rARD: 
f.tr . Secretary, I wish you ' d say something about this word 
'neutralization ' -- not ,,,hether Southeast Asia or some parts thereof should 
be neutralized, but what the word itself means . It seems to me there is 
a great deal of misunderstanding that flows from varied uses of the ~lord . 
"SECRETARY RUSK: Hell, the word. gets confused because it has meant 
so 'many different thip~s to different people . 
I suppose in the strictest 
sense a neutral is , in time of peace, a so-called 'unalined' country, that 
i t is not conmitted to one of the two major power blocs i n the world, the 
NATO bloc or the communist bloc . 
D-3 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"Well, now, we don ' t object to neutrals or policies of neutrality 
or neutrali~tion in that sense . 
There are a great many countries who are 
unalined with whom we have very close and friendly r elations . 
We are not 
looking for allies . 
We are not looking for military bases out in Southeast 
Asia. 
We are not even looking for a military presence in that part of the 
world. 
"Our troops are there assisting the South Vietnamese because people 
in the north have been putting pressures on Southeast Asia . If those pres-
sures did not exist , those troops wouldn ' t be there. 
But when one talks 
about neutralizing South Vi etnam in the present context, this means , really,! 
getti ng the Americans out . 
That is all that that means . 
nNow, North Vietnam 1s not going to be neutralized. It's going to 
remain a member of the communist camp . And from the time that it was estab--
lished, North Vietnam has broken agreeoents and has applied pressure on its 
neighbors, particularly Laos and South Vietnam. 
So that if anyone has i n 
mind that South Vietnam should be neutralized, meaning that Americans should 
simply go home and leave it exposed to takeover from the north, then this 
isn't going to happen. 
"Now, if South Vietnam were independent and secure, it would be per-
fectly free to pursue its own policy. It can be unalined, as far as we 
are concerned. n 
* * * 
2. 
TV Interview with Presi dent Johnson 
The Presidents , Johnson, 1 
3-6 
I u. 
4 Public Fa. ers of 
"MR. SEVAREID : 
l·1r . Kennedy said, on the subject of Vietnam, I think, 
that he did believe in the ' falling domino' theory, that if Vietnam were 
lost, that other countries i n the area would soon be lost . 
"THE PRESIDENT : 
I think it would be a very daJ".gerous thing, and I 
share President Kennedy' s view, and I think the whole of Southeast Asia 
would be involved and that would involve hundreds of millions of people , 
and I think it ' s -- it cannot be ignored., we must do everything that we 
can, we must be responsible, ""e must stay there and help them, and that 
is what we are goi ng to do ." 
* * * 
3· 
"United States Folic in Vietnam n b Robert S. McNamara Secretar 
of Defense, 26 March 1.... 
Department of State Bulletin, 13 April 1964, 
* * * 
D-4 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 1 I 
"At the Third National Congress of the Lao Dong (Communist) Party in 
Hanoi , September 1960, North Vietnam' s belligerency was made explicit . 
Ho Chi Minh stated , 'The North is becoming more and more consolidated and 
transformed into a firm base for the struggle for national reunification.' 
At the same congrrss it was announced that the party ' s new task was 'to 
liberate the South from the atrocious rule of the U. S. imperialists and 
their henchmen. ' 
In b~ief , Hanoi was about to embark upon a program of 
wholesale violations of the Geneva agreements in order to wrest control 
of South Vietnam from its legitimate government . 
"To the communists, 'liberation ' meant sabotage , terror , and assassi -
nation: 
attacks on innocent hamlets and villages and the coldblooded murder 
of thousands of schoolteachers , health workers , and local officiels vlho 
had the misfortune to oppose the communist version of 'l iberati on . ' 
In 
1960 and 1961 almost 3,000 South Vietnamese civilians in and out of gover n-
ment ",'ere assassinated and another 2, 500 ..,ere kidnaped.. 
The cocmunists 
even assfSsinated the colonel who served as liaison of'ficer to the I nter-
national Control Commission . 
"This aggression against South Vietnam ",as a major communist effort , 
meticulously planned and. controlled, and relentlessly pursued by the govern-
ment i n Hanoi . In 1961 the Republic of Vietnam, unable to contain the 
menace by itself, appealed to the United States to honor its unilateral 
declaration of 1954. 
Presiden~ Kennedy responded promptly end affirmatively 
by sending to that country additional American advisers , arms , and aid. 
"U. S. Objectives : 
"1 turn now to a· considera.tion of United. Ste.tes objectives in South 
Vietnam. 
The Uni.ted States has no designs ",ohatever on the resources or 
territory of the area. 
Our national interests do not require that South 
Vietnam serve as e. Hestern base or as a member of a vIes ter n alliance . 
Our concern is threefold .. 
"First, and most important , is the simple fact that South Vietnam, 
a member of the free world family , is striving to preserve i ts i ndependence 
from communist attack. 
The Vietnamese have asked our help. 
We have given 
it . 
We shall continue to give i t . 
"vIe do so in their interest; and we do so in our own clear self-interest . 
For basic to the pri nciples of freedom and self-determination which have 
sustained our country for almost two centuries is the right of peoples every-
where to live and.develop i n peace . 
Our own security is strengthened by 
the determination of others to remain free , and by our commitment to a~s ist 
them. 
We will not l et this member of our family doun, regardless of its 
distance from our shores . 
"The ultims.te goal of the United States in Southeast ASia, as in the 
r est of the world, is to help maintain free and independent nations which 
can d,evelop politically, economically, and socially and which can be re-
sponsible members of the world c oV~unity . 
In this r egion and. elsewhere 
D-5 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
many peoples share our sense of the value of such freedom and independence . 
They have taken the risks and made the sacrifices lined to the commitment 
to membership in the family of the free world. 
They have done this in 
the belief that we would back up our pledges to help defend. them . It 
i s not right or even expedient -- nor is it in our nature -- to abandon 
th~~ when the going is difficult . 
"Second, Southeast 'Asia has great strategic significance in the fOl'Vrard 
defense of the United States . Its location across east-west air and sea 
. 
lanes flanks the Indian subcontinent on one side and Australia, New Zealand., 
and the Philippines on the other and. d.ominates· the gateway between the 
Pacific co.nd Indian Oceans . 
In communist hands this area "rould pose a most 
serious threat to the security of the United States and to the family of 
free -world nations to which we belong. 
To defend. Southeast As i a , we must 
meet the challenge in South Vietnam. 
"And third, South Vietnam is a test case for the new- communist strategy. 
Let me examine for a moment the nature of this strategy. 
"Just as the Keml.edy administration "las coming into office in January 
1961, Chairman Khrushchev made one of the most important speeches on com-
munist strategy of recent decades . 
In his report on ~ party conference 
entitled ' For New Victories of the World Communist ~1ovement,
' Khrushchev 
stated.: 
'In modern conditions, the following categories of wars should 
be distinguished.: 
world ·';Tars, local ,,;ars , liberation wars and popular 
uprising.' 
He ruled out \'That he called 'world wars ' and 'local wars ' as 
being too dangerous for profitable indulgence in a world of nuclear wea-
pons . 
But with regard to what he called ' liberation v{ars ,' he referred 
specifically to Vietnam. 
He said, 'It i s a sacred war . 
We recognize such 
'" 
\olars .•. 
* * * 
"President Kennedy and Presid.ent Johnson have recognized , however , 
that our forces for the first two types of wars might not be applicable or 
effective against what the communists call 'wars of liberation,' or what 
is properly called covert aggression or insurgency. 
He have therefore 
undertaken and continue to press a variety of programs to d.evelop skilled 
speCialists , equipment , and. techniques to enable us to help our allies 
counter the threE'¥t of insurgency. 
"Communist interest in insurgency techniques did ~ot begin ",i th Khrushchev, 
nor for that matter with Stalin. 
Lenin' s works are fUll of tactical instruc-
tions, which were adapted very successfully by r.1ao Tse- tung, whose many 
writings on guerr~lla warfare have become class~c references . 
Indeed , 
l~o claims to be the true heir of Lenin ' s original prescriptions for the 
worldwide victory of co~munism . 
The North Vietnamese have taken a leaf 
or two :from 1-1B.o ' s book -- as well as Moscow ' s -- and added some of their 
own. 
D- 6 . 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"Thus today in Vietnam we are not dealing with factional disputes or 
the r emnants of a colonial struggle against the French but rather with 
a major test case of co~unism ' s new strategy. 
That strategy has so far 
been pursued in Cuba, may be beginning in Africa, and failed in t.1.alaya 
and the Philippines only because of a long and arduous struggle by the 
people of these countries with assistance .pr ovided by the British and 
the United States . 
t'In Southeast Asia the communi sts have taken .full advantage of 
geography -- the proximity to the communist base of operations and the 
r ugged, remote, and heavily foliated character of the border regions . 
They have utilized. the diverse ethnic , religious , and tribal groupings 
and exploited factionalism and legitimate aspirations wherever possible . 
And, as I said earlier, they have resorted to sabotage , terrorism, and 
assassination on an unprecedented scale . 
"Vlho is the r esponsible party -- the prime aggressor? First and fore-
most, without doubt , the prime aggressor is North Vietnam, ,· .. hose leader-
ship has explicitly undertaken to destroy the independence of the South . 
To be sure, Hanoi is encouraged on its aggressive course by Communist 
China. 
But Peiping ' s interest i s hardly the same as that of Hanoi . 
"For Hanoi, the immediate objective i s limited: 
conquest of the South 
and national unification, perhaps coupled with control of Leos . 
For Peiping, 
however , Hanoi ' s victory would be only a first step to\'lard eventual Chinese 
hegemony over the two Vietnams .and Southeast Asia and toward exploitation 
of the new strategy in other pal'ts of' the wor ld. 
"Communist China' s interests are clear : It has publicly castigated 
Mosco, .... for betrayi ng the r evoluti onary cause ",henever the Soviets have 
sounded a cautionary note . It has characterized the United States as a 
paper tiger and. has insisted that the revolutionary struggle for 'liberation 
and unification ' of Vietnam could be conducted without risks by, in effect, 
crawling under the nuclear and conventional defense of the free world. 
Peiping thus appears to f eel that it has a large stake in demonstrati ng 
the new strategy, using Vietnam as a t est case . 
Success i n Vietnam would 
be r egarded_ by Peiping as vindication for China' s views in the worldwide 
ideological struggle . 
"Taking i nto account the relationship of Vietnam to Indochina - - and 
of both to Southeast Asia, the Far East, and the fre~ world as a whole --
five U. S. Presi dents have acted to preserve free-world. strategic interests 
in the area . President Roosevelt opposed Japanese ~enetration in Indo-
china ; President Truman r esisted communist aggression in Korea; President 
Eisenhower backeh Diem's efforts to save South Vietnam and undertook to 
defend Taiwan; President Kennedy stepped up our counterinsurgency effort 
in Vietnam; and President J ohnson, in addition to r eaffirming last week 
that the United States will fUrnish assistance and support to South Viet-
nam for as l ong as it is required to bring communist aggression and ter-
r orism under control, has approved the ~rogram that I shall describe in 
a few minutes . 
D-"r 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"The U.S. role in South Vietnam, then, is first, to anS~Ter the call 
of the South Vietnamese, a member nation of our free -world family, to help 
them save their country for themselves; second, to help prevent the strate-
gic danger which would exist if communism absorbed Southeast Asia's people 
and resources; and third, to prove in the Vietnamese test case that the 
free-norld can cope with communist 'wars of liberation ' as we have coped 
successfully with commlfIlist aggression at other levels . " 
* * * 
4. 
"U. S. Ca.lls for Frontier Patrol to Help Prevent Border Incidents Between 
Cambodia and Vietnam" Statement b Adlai Stevenson to Securit Cou.,.'1cil, 
21 May 19 4, De'Oal'tment of State Bulletin , 
June 19 
p . 
* * * 
"First, the United States had no, r epeat ~, national military objective 
anywhere in Southeast Asia . United States policy for Southeast Asia is very 
simple . It is the r estoration of peace so that the peoples of that area 
can go about their own independent business in whatever associations they 
may freely choose for themselves ~rithout i nterference from the outside . 
"I trust my words have been clear enough on this point . 
"Second, the United. States Government 1s currently involved in the 
affairs of the Republic of Vietnam for one reason and one r eason only: 
because the Republic of Vietnam requested the help of the United States and 
of other governments to defend itsel~ against armed attack fomented, equipped, 
and directed from the outside . 
"This is not the first time that the United States Government has com~ 
t o the aid of peoples prepared to fight for their freedom and independence 
against armed aggression sponsored from outside their borders . 
Nor will 
i t be the last time unless the lesson is learned once and. for all by all 
agsressors that armed aggression does not pay -- that it no longer works 
that it will not be tolerated. 
"Tbe record of the past two decades makes it clear that a nation wi th 
the will for self-preservati on can outlast and defeat overt or clandestine 
aggression -- even when that internal aggression is neavily supported from 
t he outside, and even after significant early successes by the aggressors . 
I would r emind the members that in 1947, after the aggressors had gained 
control of most of the country, many people felt that the cause of the Govern-
ment of Greece ~'as hopelessly lost . 
But as long as the people of Greece 
were prepared to fight for the life of their own country, the United States 
was not prepared to stand by while Greece was o \~errun. 
"This principle does not change with the geographical setting . Aggression 
is aggression; organized violence is organized violence . 
Only the scale and 
the scenery change ; the point is the same in Vietnam today as it was in Greece 
D-8 
• 
Occlassilicd per Execlitive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 2011 
in 1947 and in Korea in 1950. 
The Indochinese Conmunist Party, the parent 
of the present Communist Party in North Vietnam, made it abundantly clear 
as early as 1951 that the aim of the Vietnamese Communist leadership is 
t o take control of all of Indochina . 
This goal has not changed -- it is 
still clearly the objective of the Vietnamese Communist leadership in Hanoi . 
"Hanoi seeks to act;:omplish this 'Purpose in South Vietnam through sub-
versive guerrilla warfare directed, controlled" and supplied by North Viet-
nam. ' The communist leadership in Hanoi has sought to pretend that the 
insurgency in South Vietnam is a civil war, but Hanoi ' s hand shows very 
clearly. 
Public statements by the Communist Party in North Vietnam and 
its lead.ers have repeatedly d,emonstrated Hanoi ' s direction of the struggle 
in South Vietnam. 
For example, Le Duan, First Secretar~of the Farty , stated 
on September 5, 1960, 'At present our Party is facing L~ momentous task: •. : 
to strive to complete .. . revolution throughout the country . . . ' 
He also said 
this : 
'Tbe North is the common r evolutionary base of the whole country.' 
Three months after the Communist Party Congress in Hanoi in Sent ember 1960, 
the so-called' NatioI'lal Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam' was set 
up pursuant to plans outlined publicly at that Congr ess . 
"The International Control Commission in Vietnam, established by the 
Geneva accords of 1954, stated in a special r eport which it issued in June 
1962 that there is sufficient evidence to show that North Vietnam has violated 
various articles of the Geneva accords by its introduction of armed personne'l, 
arms, munitions, and other supplies from North Vietnao. into South Vietnam 
with the object of supporting, organizing, and carrying out hostile activi-
ties against the Government and ermed forces of South Vietnam . 
"Infiltration of military personnel and supplies from North Vietnam 
to South Vietna~ has been carried out steadily over the past several years . 
The total number of military cadres sent into South Vietnam via inriltra-
tion routes runs into the thousands. 
Such infiltration is well documented 
on the basis of nunerous defectors and prisoners taken by the armed forces 
of South Vietnam. 
"Introduction or communist weapons into South Vietnam has also grown 
steadily . 
An increasing amount of weapons and a'UDlunition captured from the 
Viet Cong has been proven to be of Chinese Communist manufacture or origin . 
For example, i n December 1963 a large cache of Viet Cong equi pment captured 
in one of the Mekong Delta provinces in South Vietnam included recoilless 
rifles , rocket launchers , carbines, and ammunition ot Chinese Communist 
manufacture . 
"The United States cannot stand by "'lhile Southeast Asia is overrun by 
armed aggressors . 
As long as the peoples of that area are determined to 
preserve their own independence and ask for our help in preserving it, 
we will extend it. This, of course; is the meaning of President Johnson ' s 
request a few days ago for additional funds for more economic as well as 
military assistance for Vietnam, 
D-9 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"And if anyone has the illusion that my Govern."D.ent will abandon the 
people of Vietnam - - or that we shall weary of the burden of support that 
we are rendering these people -- it can only be due to ignorance of the 
strength and the conviction of the American people . 
5· 
* * * 
!'Tbe Defense of the Free World, lI Robert S. l-fcNamara , Secretary of Defense, 
before the National rnd Conf Ed 21 Ma 
1 4 De 
rtment of State Bulle-
t in , 8 June 196 , n. 895 : 
* * * 
"The 'Forward Defense' Nations : 
"Our military assistance program today is oriented mainly toward those 
countries on the periphery of the major communist nations where the threats 
are greatest and in which the indigenous resources are least . In the fiscal 
year 1965 program now before the Congress , about two-thirds of the total 
amount is scheduled to go to the 11 nations on the southern and eastern 
perimeters of the Soviet and Red Chinese blocs . 
These sentinels of the 
free world, in a sense, are in double j eopardy from potential military 
aggression from without and from attempted subversion from within. 
These 
countries are under the Red shadou . 
They face the major threat, and they 
are the ones most affected by the mode'rnization of communist forces . 
For 
this group \1e requested $745 million in military assistance . 
They best 
i llustrate the poi nts I \,,'ant to make . 
"Imagine a globe, if you will, and on that globe the Sino-Soviet bloc . 
' The bloc is contained at the north by the Arctic . 
To the '!lest are' the re-
vitalized nations of Hestern Europe . 
But across the south and to the east 
you find the 11 ' forward defense ' nations -- Greece , TUrkey, Iran, pakistan, 
India, Laos , Thailand, South Vietnam, the Philippi nes , and the Republics 
of China and Korea. 
These nations , together with stretches of the Pacific 
Ocean bearing the U.S. Fleet, describe an arc along which the free world 
dra\1s its frontlines of defense . 
liThe frontlines are there i n the i nterests of those 11 nations ; the lines 
are t here also in the interests of the United States and the rest of the 
f'ree ' .... orld. 
The areaswhich this ll-nation arc protects are of obvious stra-
t egic i mportance to the United States . 
Hore signific'ant, hOiiever, is the 
importance of the arc to the principle that nations have a right to be inde-
pendent -- a right to develop in peace , in freedom , and. according to the 
principle of sel.l.'-determination . United State.::; support of these r ights 
at the f rontiers thickens the blood of the free -i';orld fami ly; it strengthens 
our security at home . 
"We must recognize, however, that the United States does not have the 
resources to maintain a credible force by itself along all of this great 
arC of forward positions . 
Such a strategy would be unbearably costly to 
us in both money and human resources . 
T~e United States maintains major 
D-l0 
• 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
combat units ashore in ~orward positions only in Europe and in parts o~ 
the Far East . 
Such deployments are costly and hurt our balance-of-payments 
position . 
We do not now contemplate additional semipermanent deployments 
of forces abroad." 
6. 
* * * 
.IILaos and Viet-Nam -- A Prescriution for Peace " Address 
Rusk before the American Law Institute Hs.shin on D.C. 
De 
rtment o~ State Bulletin 
JWle 1 
890 : 
* * * 
"Four Alternatives in Vietnam: 
b Secretar 
22 Ha 
1 
, 
"You are all aware of the four principal alternatives in South Vietnam 
which have been referred to in recent discussion. 
The first would be to 
withdraw and forget about Southeast Asia. 
That would mean not only grievous 
losses to the free world in Southeast and southern Asia but a drastic loss 
of confidence in the will and capacity o~ the free world to oppose aggression. 
It would also bring us much closer to a major conflagration. 
Surely we 
have learned, in the course of the last 35 years , that a course of aggression 
means war and that the place to stop it is at its beginning . 
* * -* 
"At the meeting of the COWlcil of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organiza-
tion in Manila last month, seven o~ the eight members joi ned in declaring 
t he defeat of the aggression against South Vietnam to be 'essential not 
only to the security of the Republic of Vietnam, but to that o~ Southeast 
Asia . I And, they said, its defeat will also be convincing proof that com-
munist expansion by such tactics will not be perIni tted. II 
* * * 
7. 
"President Outlines BasiC Themes of U.S. Policy in Southeast Asia, " 
Statement b President Johnson at his News Conference on June 2 1 64 , 
Dc 
rtment of State Bulletin 22 June 1 4 u. 
lilt may be helpful to outline four basic themes that govern our policy 
i n Southeast Asia . 
"First , America keeps her word. 
"Serond, the issue is the future of Southeast Asia as a whole . 
"Third, our purpose is peace . 
"Fourth, this is not just a jungle war, but a struggle for freedom on 
every front of human activity . 
D-ll 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"On the point that America keeps her word, we are steadfast in a policy 
which has been followed for 10 years in three administrations." 
* * * 
8. 
"Address to The Nation b President Johnson II 4 A llst 1 4 Department 
of State Bulletin, '2 August 196 
p. 259: 
* * * 
"In the larger sense this new act of aggression, aimed directly at our 
own forces, again brings home to all of us in the United States the impor-
tance of the struggle for peace and security in Southeast Asia . 
Aggression 
by terror against the peaceful villagers of South Vietnam has now been 
joined by open aggression on the high seas against the United States of 
America ." 
* * 
iI' 
9· "Address b 
The President S acuse Universit 
rt-
ment of State Bulletin, 2 August 196 , p. 2 0 : 
* * * 
"Aggression - - deliberate, ~fillful, and systeoatic aggression -- has 
unmasked ;its face to the entire world . 
The v.-orld remembers -- the world 
must never forget -- that aggression unchallenged is aggression unleashed .. 
"We of the United States have not forgotten. 
That is why we have answered 
this aggression with action . 
"America ' s course is not without long provocation. 
"For 10 years , three American Presidents -- President Eisenhower, President 
Kennedy, and your present President - - and the American people have been 
actively concerned with threats to the peace and security of the peoples 
of Southeast Asia from the communist government of North Vietnam. 
"President Eisenhower sought - - and President Kennedy sought -- the 
same objectives that I still seek: 
-- That the'gover~ents of Southeast Asia honor the international 
agreements which apply in the area; 
That those governments leave each other alone; 
That they resolve their differences peacefUlly; 
That they devote their talents to bettering the lives of their 
peoples by working against poverty and d·isease and i gnorance . 
D- 12 
Occlassilicd per Execlitive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"In 1954 we made our position clear toward Vietnam. 
If In July of that year we stated we would view any renewal of the 
aggression in violation of the 1954 agreements 'with grave concern and 
as seriously three.tening international peace and security. ! 
"In September of that year the United States signed the Manila Pact , 
on which our participation in SEA'l'O is based. 
That pact recognized that 
aggression by means of' armed attack on South Vietnam would endanger the 
peace and the safety of the nations signing that solemn agreement . 
"In 1962 we ma.d.e our pOsition clear toward Laos. 
lore signed the Declara-
tion on the Neutrality of Laos . 
That accord provided for the withdra;.:al 
of all foreign forces and respect for the neutrality and independence of 
that little country. 
"The agreements of 1954 and 1962 were also signed by the government of 
North Vietnam. 
"In 1954 that government pledged that it would respect the territory 
under the military control of the other party and engage in no hostile act 
against the other party . 
"In 1962 that government pledged that it would 'not introduce into the 
Kingdom of Laos foreign troops or military personnel. I 
"That government also pledged that it would 'not use the territory of 
t he Kingdom of Laos for interference i n the internal affairs of other coun-
tries . ' 
"That government of North Vietnam is now willfully and systematically 
violating those agreements of both 1954 and. 1962. 
"To the south, it i s engaged in aggression against the Republic of 
Vietnam. 
"To the west, it is engaged in aggression against the Kingdom of' Laos . 
"To the east, it has now struck out on the high seas in an act of 
aggression against the United States of America . 
"There can be and there must be no doubt about the policy and no doubt 
about the purpOse ~ 
"So there can be no doubt about the responsibilities of men and the 
r esponsibilities of nations that are devoted to peace . 
"Peace cannot be assured merely by assuring the safety of the United 
States destroyer MADDOX or the safety of other vessels of other flags . 
D-13 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"Peace r equires that the existi ng agreements in the area be honored. 
"Peace requires that we and all our friends stand firm against the 
present aggressi ons of the government of North Vietnam. 
. 
liThe government of North Vietnao. is today flouting the will of the 
world f or peace . 
The world i s challenged to make its will against war known 
and to make it known clearly and to make it felt and to make it felt de-
cisively. 
"S0, to our friends of the Atlantic alliance , let me say this this morn- \ 
ing. 
The challenge that we face in Southeast Asia today is the same challeng'e 
that we have faced. with courage and that we have met with strength in Greece 
and Turkey, in Berlin and Korea, in Lebanon and in Cuba, and t o any who 
may be tempted to support or to widen the present aggression I say this: 
Ther e is no threat to any peaceful power from the !Jnited States of America. 
But there can be no peace by aggression and no i mmunity from reply . 
That 
is what is meant by the actions that we took yesterday. 
* * * 
10. 
"President I S Messa e to Con ress 
rtment of State 
Bulletin, 24 August 196 
1l. 261: 
* * * 
"Tbese latest actions of the North Vietnamese regime have given a new 
and grave turn to the already serious situation i n Southeast Asia . 
Our 
commitments in that area are well known to the Congress . 
They were fir st 
made in 1954 by Presid.ent Eisenhower . 
They were further defined in the 
Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty approved by the Senate in Febru-
e.ry 1955· 
"This treaty with its accompanying pr otocol obligates the United Ste.tes 
and other members t o act in accordance with their constitutional processes 
t o meet communist aggression against any of the parties or protocol states . 
"Our policy in Southeast Asia has been consistent and unchanged since 
1954. I summarized it on June 2 in four simple propositions : 
" 1. America keens her word.. 
Here as elsewher e , we must and shall 
honor our commitments . 
"2. 
The issue is the future o£ Southeast Asia as a whole . A threat 
t o. any nation in that r egion is a threat to all, and a threat to us . 
113. 
Our purpose is 
ambitions in the area. 
-peace . 
\fe have no military, political, or territorial 
D-14 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"4. 
This is not just a .jungle war, but a struggle for freedom on every 
front of human activity. 
Our military and economic assistance to South 
Vietnam and Laos in particular has the purpose of helping these countries 
to repel aggression and strengthen their independence . 
"The threat to the free nations of Southeast Asia has long been clear . 
The North Vietnamese regime bas constantly sought to take over South Vietnam 
and Laos . 
This communist regime has violated. the Geneva accords for Viet-
nam.· It has systematically conducted a campaign of subversion, which in-
clud€s the direction, training, and supply of personnel and arms for the 
conduct of guerrilla warfare in South Vietnamese territory. 
In Laos , the 
North Vietnamese regime has maintained military forces , used Laotian terri-
tory for infiltration into South Vietnam, and most recently carried out com-
bat operations -- all in direct violation of the Geneva agreements of 1962 . 
"In recent months, the actions of the North Vietnamese regime have 
become steadily more threatening. 
In May, following new acts of communist 
aggression in Laos, the United States undertook reconnaissance flights over 
Laotian territory, at the request of the Government of Laos . 
These flights 
had the essential mission of determining the situetion in territory where 
communist forces were preventing inspection by the International Control 
Commission. 
Hhen the cOImnunists attacked these aircraft, I r esponded by 
furnishing escort fighters with instructions to fire when fired upon. 
Thus , these latest North Vietnamese attacks on our naval vessels are not 
the first direct attack on armed forces of the United. States . 
!lAs Presid.ent of the United States I have concluded. that I should now 
ask the Congress, on its part , to join in affirming the national determina-
tion that all such attacks will be met , and that the United, States will 
conti nue i n its basic policy of assisting the free nations of the area to 
. defend their freedom. 
flAs I have repeatedJ.y made clear, the United States intends no r a-?hness , 
and seeks no wider war. 
vie must make it clear to all that the United States 
is united i n its determination to bring about the end of communist subversion 
and aggression in the area . 
We seek the full and effective restoration 
of the international agreements signed in Geneva i n 1954 , with r espect to 
South Vietnam, and e.ga-in i n Geneva in 1962 , with r espect to LaoS. '1 
* * * 
11. "Secretary Rusk Discusses Asian Situation on NBC Program, fI 5 August 
1964, Department of State Bulletin, 24 August 1964, p . 268: 
flFollowing is the transcript of an interview of Secretary Rusk by NBC 
correspondent Elie Abel, broadcast over natiorniid,e television on August 5. 
"MR. ABEL: 
Mr . Secretary, are we going to get through this situation 
without touching off a bigger war? 
D-15 
, 
• 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"SECRETARY RUSK: Hell, Mr. Abel, one can ' t be a reliable prophet when 
the other side helps to write the scenario . 
But I do want to insist upon 
one point, that the purpose o~ the United States in Southeast Asia for 
these past 10 years or more bas been a part of a general policy of the 
United States since World War II, that is, to organize a decent world commu-
nity in which nations \-till leave their neighbors alone and in which p..ations 
can have a chance to live at peace with each other and cooperate on a basis 
of their common interests . 
"Now, in Southeast Asia we have been saying over and over again, in 
conferences such as the Geneva conference of 1962 and elsewhere , that there 
is only one problem with peace in Southeast Asia and that is these pressures 
from the north, that if the north would leave their neighbors to the south 
alone, these peoples of that area could have their peace and could have 
a chance to work out their own lives in their own way . 
That is the problem, 
and to coce to the decision to leave their neighbors alone is a necessary 
decision which Hanoi and anyone supporting Hanoi must reach. 
I1Q . 
Why was it necessary, Mr . Secr etary, for us to strike as swiftly 
and abruptly as we did without taking time even to notify our allies? 
"A . 
Well, in the first place, we had some ships in the Gulf of Tonkin 
who were under attack, and they were dodgip~ torpedoes . 
Here is a vast 
expanse of international waters in which we have a perfect right to be . 
We had to strike immediately because we didn't expect to ask those ships 
to run a continuing gauntlet of torpedoes on their way back to the Gulf 
of Tonkin when their mission 'Has completed, nor were lI"e prepared, to have 
them denied international waters in the Gulf of Tonkin. 
"Further than that, if under these attacks there bad not been an imme-
diate and appropriate response , then Hanoi and those who might be standing 
behind Hanoi in this might well have come to a very formidable mistaken 
judgment about what is possible in the Southeast Asian situation. 
"Q. 
You mean their view that we are a -paper tiger might have been 
confirmed? 
"A . 
what the 
That ' s correct. 
They could have made a basic miscalculation about 
commitment of the United States means in a situation of this sort . 
* * * 
12. 
;T",e-"xtf.:,:O":f:,J'i-0""io;:;.tIT.'Ro:e~s:,o"l"u"tiii"o,-,n"-.!:A"u"""",s,,tc...l"--"De""1JS.,,,-rt,ment of State Bullet in , 
24 Au st 1 
'[). 2 
"To promote the maintenance of international peace and security in 
Southeast Asia . 
"\Olhereas naval units of the communist r egime in Vietnam, in violation 
of the principles of the Charter of the United Ne.tions and of international 
D-16 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
law, have deliberately and repeatedly attacked United States naval vessels 
lawfully present in international waters , and have thereby created a serious 
threat to international peace; and 
"Whereas :these attacks are part of a d.eliberate and systematic campaign 
of aggression that the communist regine in North Vietnam has been · .... aging 
against its neighbors ~nd the nations joined with them in the collective 
defense of their freedom; and 
"Whereas the United States is assisting the peoples of Southeast Asia 
to protect their freedom and has no territorial, military or political am-
bitions in that area, but desires only that these peoples should be left 
in peace to work out their own destinies in their own 'Hay: 
Now, therefore , 
be it 
"Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United 
States of America in Congress assembled , That the Congress approves and 
suppOrts the determination of the President, as Commander in Chief, to 
take all necessary measures to repel any aroed attack against the forces 
of the United States and to preyent further aggression . 
"Sec . 2. 
The United States regards as vital to its national interest 
and to world peace the ~aint enance of international peace and security in 
Southeast Asia . 
Consonant with the Constitution of the United States and 
the Charter of the United. Nations and in acc:ordance \{ith its obligations 
under the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, the United States is, 
therefore , prepared, as the President determines , to take all necessary 
steps, including the use of a~ed force, to assist any member or protocol 
state of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance 
in defense of its freedom. 
"Sec . 3. 
This resolution shall expire when the President shall deter-
mine that the peace and security of the area is reasonably assured by inter-
national conditions created by action of the United Nations or otherwise, 
except that it may be terminated. earlier by concurrent resolution of the 
Congress." 
13· 
"Freedom in the Postwar Horld n b 
Secretar Rusk before American 
Veterans of WWIIend, Korea Philadel hia 2 Au st l 6 
De 
rtment 
of State Bulletin, l4 September lQ6 
p . 3 5: 
* * * 
"In Southeast Asia the f'ree .... 'orld. suffered. a setback in 1954 when, after 
th~ def'eat at Dien Bien Phu, Vietr.a'U was divid.ed and a communist regime vIas 
consolide.ted in Hanoi. 
He helped South Vietnam to get on its feet and to 
build its military def'enses . 'It made remarkable progress for a few years --
which is perhaps why Communist North Vietnam, with the backing of Communist 
China, renewed. its aggression against South Vietnam in 1959. 
In 1961 
President Kennedy revie,.;red the situation, concluded that the assault f'rom 
D-17 
I 
Declassified l>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 201 1 
the narth had been ~~derest~ted , and substantially increased .our assistance 
to the Gaverrunent and peaple .of Sauth Vietnam. n 
* * * 
"Hanai and Peiping have nat yet learned that they must leave their 
neighbars alone , 
But this is a decision which they must reach . 
~le and 
our SEATO allies have declared that the cammunist aggressians in Southeast 
Asia must be de~eated . 
As yau said, Commander Gulewicz, in your statement 
to the platfarm committees of the twa major parties, ', . . we cannat afford 
to abandan the free peaple of Vietp~ . 
The world watches because South 
Vietnam is a critical test- case for new communist strategy. ,IT 
* * * 
14. 
"Progress and Problems in East Asia : 
An American Vie~:POint , " by 
William P. Bund 
Assistant Secretar for Far Eastern Affairs Address 
made befare the Research Institute af Ja n at Tak 0 
2 
Se~tember 1 
4, 
De 
rtment of State Bulletin 1 
October 1 
, 5 7: 
* * * 
ITA word further aoout the situation in Southeast Asia, especially in 
South Vietnam, 
Here the aim of our policy is to assist the Government of 
South Vietnam in ~~intaining its independence and its control over the terri-
tory allotted to it by the Geneva accords of 1954. 
We do not aim at overthrow-
ing the communist regime of North Vietnam but rather at inducing it to call 
off the war it directs and supports in Sauth Vietnam. 
"We believe it essential to the interests of the f'ree world that South 
Vietnam not be permitted to fall und_er communist control. 
If' it does , then 
the rest of Southeast Asia will be in grave danger of progressively disappear-
ing behind the Bamboo Curtain and other Asian countries like India and even 
in time Australia end your own nation in turn will be threatened. If Hanoi 
and Peiping prevail in Vietnam in this key test of the new communist tactics 
of 'wars of national liberation, ' then the communists will use this technique 
with growing frequency elsewhere in Asia, Africa, and Latin America . " 
* * * 
15. 
Secretar Rusk ' s News Conference of December 2 
Press Release dated 
23 December 196 , Department of Sta.":.e Bul.'.etin 11 Janua 
1 
5 
'0 . 
7 : 
* * * 
"American Interest in Vietnamese Independence : 
"Q. 
American 
~~ . Secretary, it is sometimes stated that one of the reasons for 
assistance to Vietn8.I:l is the fact that vital Hestern interests 
ru.8 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
are involved in the situation there . 
Now that we are once again confronted 
with what apparently is a critical situation, could you define for us the 
precise nature and extent of those vital Western interests , as you see them? 
"A. 
Well, our interest in Southeast Asia h~s been developed and expressed 
throughout this post ... rar period. 
.Before SEA.TO (Southeast Asia Treaty Organi-
zation) came into existence , we and Britain and France were in very close 
touch with that situation . 
SEATO underlined the importance we attached to 
the security of the countries of that area . 
"But actually the American interest can be expressed in very simple 
terms . 
Where there is a country ... rhich is ind.ependent and secure and in 
a position to work out its own policy and be left alone by its neighbors , 
there 1s a country whose position is consistent with our understanding of 
our i nterests in the world. It ' s just as simple as that. 
"If we have military personnel in Southeast Asia, it is because we feel 
that they are needed to assist South Vietnam at the present time to maintain 
its security and independence . If South Vietna~ ' s neighbors would leave it 
alone, those military people could come home . 
"\ve have no desire for any bases or permanent military presence in that 
area . 
He are interested in the independence of states . 
That is why we have 
more than 40 allies . 
That is why we are interested ~1 the independence and 
security of the nonalined countries . 
Because, to us , the general system 
of states represented in the United Nations Charter is our view of a world 
that is consistent with American interests . 
So our own interest there is 
very simple . 
"But it is very important , because we feel that we have learned in the 
last many d.ecad.es that a persistent course of aggression left to go unchecked 
can only l ead to a . general war and therefore that the independence of particu-
lar countries is a matter of importance to the general peace . 
"Pei ping' s f".1ilitant Doctrine : 
"Q. 
Mr . Secretary, could I put that question slightly differently? 
I n the last decade or so , over three or four administrations , this Govern-
ment has taken the position that the Indochina peninsula had an importance 
to this country beyond the actualities of the countries involved; that is , 
that it had a relationship to the American problem with China, and out of 
t his developed, over a long period of time, the so-called falling- domino 
theory. 
Could you tell us whether you subscribe to that theor y and whether 
you look upon our 'interest in Vietnam ane Laos -- or how you l ook upon our 
interest in Vietnam and Laos in relation to China? 
riA. 
Well, I would not myself go to the trouble of t r ying to outline 
a 'domino ' theory. 
The theory of the problem r ests in Peip ip~ . 
It r ests 
i n a militant approach to the spread of the world revolution as seen from 
the co~unist point of view , And we know , given their frequently and publicly 
D-19 
.' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
proclaimed ambitions in this respect and what they say not only about their 
neighbors in Asia but such continents as Africa -- Africa is r i pe for revo-
lution, meaning to them ripe for an attempt on their part to extend their 
domination into that continent -- there is a primitive , militant doctrine 
of world revolutinn that would attempt to destroy the structure of inter-
national life as written into the United Nations Charter. 
rTNow, these are appetites and ambitions that grow upon feeding . 
In 1954 
Vi etnam was divided. 
North Vietna.'ll became communist . 
The next result was 
pressures against Laos, contrary to those agreements ; pressures against 
South Vietnam, contrary to those agreements . 
In other words, until there 
is a determination in Peiping to leave their neighbors alone and not to 
press militantly their notions of 'H'orld revolution, then we are going to 
have this problem. 
!lAnd it ' s the SBJne :problem we have had in another part of the world in 
an earlier period in this postwar period in such things as the Berlin blockade, 
the pressures against Greece . 
Those things had to be stopped. 
They were 
stopped in the main. 
"Now the problem is out in the Pacif'ic . 
And we have a large interest 
i n the way these problems evolve in the Pacif'ic, because we have allies 
and we have interests out there . 
Southeast Asia is at the present time 
the point at which this issue of militant aggression against one ' s neighbors 
for i deological reasons is posed. " 
* * -)(. 
D-20. 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
JOHNSON ADJ.!TIlISTRATION -
1965 
SUMJI.ARY 
The level of war ,.;as escalated by introduction of increased U. S. 
combat troop strength and the initiation of air strikes against targets 
in North Vietna~. The Administration justified the escalation on the 
basis of increased infiltration of North Vietnamese units into South 
Vietnam and, in general, justified U. S. involvement using much the same 
rationale as the KeIUledy Administration. 
The "domino theory," however, 
was de- emphasized in light of communist proclamations and predictions 
for success . 
The role of Communist China was given more publicity. 
Tbe Administration's public pronouncements stressed the follo>-ling : 
a . 
The U. S. had been committed ten years before and had pl edged 
help to the people of South Vietnam. 
"Three Presidents have supported 
that pledge" and it would not be broken. 
The "integrity of the American 
commitment 11 is at the heart of the problem as a point of national honor. 
b. 
The security of the U. S . .. .ras tied closely to the expansion of 
communism in Southeast Asia: if the American counterinsurgency efforts 
are defeated in Vietnam, they can be defeated anywhere in the world. 
Failure to halt aggression through "wars of national liberation" would 
see increasing communist pressure on neighboring states and subsequently 
greater aggression. 
"These are big stakes indeed." 
c . 
The basic issue of the conflict was "letting the nations of the 
area develop as they see fit "; if South Vietnam fell to communist control 
i t would be difficult to prevent the fall of neighboring states . 
The "domino 
t heory" was not considered a suitabl e explanation for the SEA situation. 
d. 
"The confUsed nature of this conflict cannot mask the fact that 
it i s the new ~ace of an old enemy. 
Over this war - - and all Asia -- is 
another reality: 
the deepening shadow of Communist China. 
The rulers 
i n Hanoi are urged on by Peiping." 
, 
e . 
South Vietnam renresented a major test of the communism's new 
strategy of "wars of' libe~ation ." Veiled aggression under this strategy 
had its source in North Vietnam -- previously a privileged sanctuary --
and free nations had to defend themselves . 
liThe simple issue is that 
military personnel and arms have been sent across an international 
demarcation linE;. contrary to international agl eements and law . .. " 
D- 21 
v. D. 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
JUSTIFICATION OF THE HAR -- PUBLIC STATEMENTS 
J OHNSON ADHINISTRATIOll 
• 
CONTENTS 
16. 
Secretary Rusk again suggests one does not need t he domino 
theory to predict Communist threat ; Peiping proclamations 
and actions provide ample evidence of expansionist doctrine ; 
r elates validity of NATO commitment to U. S. response to 
aggressive acts to a SEATO protocol state .•••..• . . • .•..•.••.. D-25 
11 . 
President Johnson emphasizes again U. S. presence in r esponse 
t o request from SVN to help meet aggression and its relation 
to U. S . security interests................................... D- 25 
18. 
William Bundy relates actions in Korea to VN; spells out 
action initiated in 1954 by President Eisenhower and the 
support provided by Congress in terms of SEATO ratification 
and budget approvals . 
He cites effect of the outcome of VN 
struggle on neighboring states and on the prestige and po .... ,er 
of the Communist movement ' s new strategy, ... ·ars of liberation . D-26 
19. 
William Bundy cites the U. S.' s intent to permit nations to 
develop freely the potential consequences to neighboring 
cOW'ltries if SVN should fall under Communist control and the 
importance of demonstr ating that "wars of liberation" are not 
t o be tolerated as paramount among U.S. concerns ..• ••••..••.• D-21 
20. 
Secretary Rusk states the legal basis of U. S. bombing to be 
"sel f defense of SVN and the commitments of U. S. with respect 
t o the security and self-defense of SVN."... ...... . ........ . . D-28 
21. 
Ambassador Stevenson cites record of aggression in SVN in 
communication to UN • . •.... •.••.• , .• , .•. . , •.•. •••. .••. . .•. . • . . D-28 
22 . 
Secretary Rusk refers to lessons of World War II and SEATO 
pact as important reasons for meeting aggression i n SVN before 
it spreads fUrther .• , .•.•.•..•.. . . ••..•.••.•••.••. ... ..•..• , .. D-30 
23. Department of State statement cite3 Cons~itutional authority 
of President to meet Obligati on under SEATO i n response to 
aggression in SVN ... •.•..• ,., .• , ... ••.•• .• •• '.' •..••••••.••..• . D-30 
D-22 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
24 . 
President Johnson relates aggression in SVN as "part of 
wider pattern of aggressive purposes" urged on by Peipiog; 
vows to fulfill U. S. commitment supported by his three 
predecessors ...•.•......•..•. •..•..• .••. •...••.••.•...•.••.•.. D-31 
25 . 
Leonard Unger emphasizes strategic significance of region to 
·U. S. and "test case for ',Jars of liberation" strategy in ex-
plaining U. S. concerns in VIL ................ . .. . ............. D- 33 
26 . 
Secretary Rusk defines IIwars of liberation" as endorsed by 
Communist leaders, explains SVN ' s right of self-defense in 
legal terms and details the nature of the struggle in SVN .•.. • D- 35 
27. 
President Johnson cites aggression as requiring firm stand by 
U.S. 
Secretary McNamara in response to a question defines the 
IIwars of liberation" strategy as urged by COmmunist leaders ••. D- 39 
28 . 
Secretary Ball cites "wars of liberation" as threatening the 
existence of small states, everywhere .... • •. . .• . . •..•...•..•. " D-41 
29. 
President Johnson states the Communist aim in VN is to show the 
"American commitment is worthless!! ; success in that effort, he 
predicts , would remove the one obstacle standing between "ex-
panding communism and independent Asian nations . II • • ••••••••••• D- 41 
30. lHlliem Bundy explains myths surrounding the question of 
"reunification electionll and the relationship between the 
opposition to Diem and the Viet Cong; he documents U. S. con-
cerns regarding the Hwars of liberation!! threat .... .' .•..••.•.. D- 42 
31. President Johnson states Communist China ' s "target is not 
merely SVN, it is Asia" and their objective in VN is "to erode 
and to discredit America ' s ability to help prevent Chinese 
domination over all of Asia." .•....•.....• •.. •...•. • . : ..•••. .• D-46 
32. Hilliam Bundy discusses the threat of' Communist China which 
underlies the American presence in Asia, and the relationship 
of Hanoi to the Communist movement •. •••.•.•••..••. ••..•..•.••• D- 46 
33 . 
President Johnson states our failures in the 1930 ' s resulted 
from inaction rather than action ....••.•...••.••..•.•.. • • .•• .• D- 48 
34. 
Secretary Rusk discusses the fundamental r ole which American 
commitments play in maintaining world peace and the need t o 
find a "complete answer" to the problem of "wars of libera-
tion" threat .•. • . ••.•.••.•.••.••.•.••..•.•••.•... •.....•.....• D- 49 
D- 23 
• 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
35 . 
President Johnson indicates America learned the lesson in 
three earlier wars that aggression must not be tolerated 
whether in the form of massive armies or guerrilla bands ; 
American commitments given by four Presidents must be 
honored. ~ . . .•... • . . .. . . . . . •.. ..• .. • .. • • . .• ...••..... . .. . .• . .•. D- 50 
36 . 
Secretary liJ:cllamara refers to 1954 Eisenhower statement as still 
valid in explaining U.S . interest ; he further cites our stra-
tegic interests and the threat posed by "wars of liberation, 11 
supported in differing degrees by both Red China and Russia . . . D- 51 
37. 
Secretary McNamara emphasizes the political nature of the 
struggle but emphasizes again the importance of demonstrating 
the impracticality of using wars of liberation strategy for 
extending Communist power throughout the world . . .• •..... •. • •.. D- 53 
Secretary Rusk cites SEATO and other bilateral agreements as 
obligating U. S. involvement ; he stresses the need to honor our 
commitments as a deterrent to a militant Peiping . . . ... .. • ....• D- 55 
38 . 
Hilliam Bundy admits U. S. interest in Vietnam as "no longer 
guided .. . by particular military or economic concern ll but by a 
concern for the development of healthy national entities free 
from domination .. . .... . •• .... • .• • .. . ..•••. •• .. .• .. •.•.•.•.. . . . D-58 
39. 
President Johnson states, IIWe are there because .. . we remain 
fixed on the pursuit of freedom as a deep and moral obligation 
that will not let us go . " . •• .•.. • . .• ... . .. ... . • • . . . . .•..... . .. D- 59 
D-24 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
16. 
A Conversation with Deen Rusk, NBC News Program on January 3, 
1965, Department of Stete Bulletin, January 18, 1965, p . 64 . 
* * * 
"Secretary Rusk: •.•. NoW', when North Viet- Nam was organized as a 
Communist country, almost immediately its neighbor, laos, and its neigh-
bor, South Viet- Nam, came under direct pressure from North Viet- Nero. 
Now, this is the nature of the appetite proclaimed from Peiping. 
One 
doesn ' t require a 'domino ' theory to get at this . 
Peiping has announced 
the doctrine . 
It is there in the primitive notion of a militant world 
revolution which has been promoted by these veterans of the long march 
who now control mainland China . 
So ve believe that you simply postpone 
temporarily an even greater crisis if you allow an announced course of 
aggression to succeed a step at a time on the road to a major catas-
trophe . 
* * * 
"NOW, there are some in other countries, for example, who seem to 
be relatively indifferent to problems of this sort in Southeast Asia, 
and yet they are the first ones to say that if we were to abandon South-
east Asia, this would cause them to wonder what our commitments under 
such arrangements as NATO \lould mean . 
Do you see? 
"In other words, the issue here is the capability of halting a 
course of aggression at the beginning, rather than waiting for it to 
produce a great conflagration." 
17· 
* * * 
The State of the Union Address of the President to the Congress, 
January 4, 1965, Public Papers of the·Presidents, Johnson, 19b5, 
£.:..1. 
* * * 
" We are there, first , because a friendly nation has asked us for 
help against the Communist aggression . 
Ten years ago our President 
pledged our help . 
Three Presidents have supported that pledge . 
We 
will not break it nov . 
"Second, our own security is tied to the peace of Asia . 
Twice in 
one generation ve have had to fight against aggression in the Far East . 
To ignore aggression now would only increase the danger of a much larger 
war. 
"Our goal is peace in Southeast Asia. 
That 'W111 come only when 
aggressors leave their neighbors in peace . II 
* * * 
D-25 
18 . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
American Polic in South Viet-r!am and Southeast Asia, William P. 
Bund 
Remarks Hade Before the Weshi 
on 
Mo. 
Chamber of Com-
merce on January 23, 19 5, Department of State Bulletin, February 8, 
* * * 
"In r etrospect, our action in Korea reflected three elements : 
--8 recognition that aggression of any sort must be met early 
and head-on or it ¥ill have to be met later and in tougher circumstances . 
We had relearned the lessons of the 1930's- -fl.anchuria , Ethiopia, the 
Rhi neland, Czechoslovakia . 
-- a recognition that a defense line in Asia, stated in terms of an 
i sland perimeter, did not adequately define our vital interests, that 
those vital interests could be affected by action on the mainl and of 
Asi a . 
- - an understanding that, for the future, a power vacuum was an 
i nvitation to aggression, that there must be local political, economic, 
and military strength in being to make aggression unprofitable, but also 
that there must be a demonstrated willingness of major external power 
both to assist and to intervene if required. 11 
* * * 
IISuch was the situation President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles 
faced in 1954 . 
Tw~ things were clear : that in the absence of exter-
nal help communi sm was virtually certain to take over the Successor 
states of Indochina and to move to the borders of Thailand and perhaps 
beyond, and that ';rith France no longer ready to act, at least in South 
Viet- Narn, no power other than the United States could move in to help fill 
the vacuum. 
Their deciSion, expressed in a series of actions starting i n 
l ate 1954, was t o move in to help these countries . 
Besides South Viet-
Nam and more modest efforts in Laos and Cambodia, substantial assistance 
was begun to Thai land . 
liThe appropriations for these actions were voted by successive 
C,ongresses, and in 1954 the Senate l i kewise ratified the Southeast Asia 
Treaty, to which Thailand and the Philippines adhered along with the 
United states, Britain, France, Australia, New Zealand, end pakistan . 
Although not signers of the treaty, South Viet- Nem, Laos, and Cambodia 
could call on the SEATO members for help aga i ngt aggress i on. 
"So a canmitment was made, with the support of both political par-
ties, that has guided our policy in Southeast Asia for a decade now . 
It 
was not a commitment that envisaged 8 United states position of power in 
Southeast Asia or United States military bases there . 
We threatened no 
one . 
Nor was it a commitment that substituted United States responsibility 
D-26 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
for the basic responsibility of the nations themselves for their own 
defense, political stability, and economic progress . 
It was a commit-
ment to do what we could to help these nations attain and maintain the 
independence and security to which they were entitled--both for their 
own sake and because we recognized that, like South Korea, Southeast 
Asia was a key area of the mainland of Asia . If it fell to Communist 
control, this would e~ormously add to the momentum and power of the 
expansionist Communist regimes in Communist China and North Viet- Nam 
and thus to the threat to the whole free-world position in the Pacific . II 
* * * 
" •• .. In simple terms, a victory for the Communists in South Viet-
Nam would inevitably make the neighboring states more susceptible to 
COIl'l..mun1st pressure and more vulnerable to intensified subversion sup-
ported by military pressures . 
Aggression by 'wars of national libera-
tion ' ,",auld gain enhanced prestige and power of intimidation throughout 
the world, and many threatened nations might well become less hopeful, 
less resilient, and their will to resist undermined . 
These are big 
stakes indeed ." 
* * * 
19· 
* * * 
" . ... Why are \Ie there? What is our national interest? 
I think it 
was pretty well stated by Congress last August when it passed e resolu-
tion, follo~ing the Gulf of Tonkin affair, i n which it stated that the 
United States 'regards as vital to its national interest ~nd \lorld peace 
the maintenance of international peace and security in southeast Asia .' 
And that ' s the basic reason right there--peace in the ares, letting the 
nations of the area develop as they see fit and free from Communist exter-
nal infi ltration, subversion, and control. 
"Secondly, it 's obvi ous on the map that if South Viet- Nem were to 
fall under Communist control it would become very much more difficult--
l'm not using what's sometimes called 'the domino theory) ' that anything 
bappen6'automatic~1ly or quickly--but it would become very much more 
difficult to maintain the independence and freedom of Thailand, Cambodia, 
of V~laysia , and so on . 
And the confidence of other nations in the Whole 
perimeter of Southeast Asia would necessarily be affected J and the Com-
mUnists \lould think they had a winning game going f or them. 
So that ' s a 
very important, strategic reason in addition to the fact that we're belp-
i ng a nati on under aggression . 
D-27 
• 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 20 11 
"And thirdly1 this technique they 're us i ng--they call it 'wars 
o~ national liberation '-- is a technique that will be used elsewhere 
in the world if they get away with this one, and they 'll be encouraged 
to do that . 
"SO those are the three basic reasons why our national interest--
and basically our national interest in peace in this whole wide Faci~ic 
area with which we have historically had great concern and for which we 
~ought in World War II and in Korea--are deeply at stake in this conflict . 
* * * 
20 . 
Secretary Rusk ' s News Conference o~ February 25, 1965, Department 
o~ state Bulletin, l-1arch 15, 1965, p . 367 . 
* * * 
"Q. 
Mr. Secretary, what kind of legal basis did the United states 
have to bomb the targets of North Viet- Nam? 
"A. 
Self- defense o~ South Viet-Nam and the canmitments of the 
United states with respect to the security and the self -de~ense o~ South 
Viet- Nam. " 
* * * 
21 . statement Submitted By Adlai Stevenson to U.N. Summarizing a 
Significant Report Entitled, IIAggression From the North J the Record 
of North Vietnam' s Campaign to Conquer South Vietnam. II 
It wes 
released as Department of State Publication 7639, February 271 1965. 
"EXCEILENCY: 
For the information of the Members of the Security 
Council, I am transmitting a special report entitled Aggression From the 
North} the Record o~ North Viet- Ram ' s Cempaign To Conquer South Viet- Nam, 
which my Government is making public today. 
It presents evidence from 
which the following conclusions are inescapable : 
"First, the subjugation by force of the Republic of Viet- Nam by the 
regime in northern Viet- Nsm is the formal, offi cial policy of that regime; 
this has been stated and confirmed publicly over the past ~ive years . 
"Second, thE war in V1et - I~am is din.:cted by the Central Committee 
of the lao Dong Party (Comr.'llU1ist) which controls the government in 
northern Viet- Nam. 
"Third, the so-called People ' 5 Revolutionary Party in the Republic 
of V1et...:.Nam is an integral part of the lao Dong Party in North Viet- Nam . 
D-28 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order [3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 [6. By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
"Fourth, the so-called liberation front for South V1et- Naro is a 
subordinate unit of the Central Office for South Viet- Nam, an integral 
part of the governmental machinery in Henoi. 
"Fifth, the key leadership of the Viet- Cong--officers, specialists, 
technicians, intelligence agents, political organizers and propagandists--
has been trained, equipped and supplied in the north and sent into the 
Republic of Viet- Nam under Hanoi I s military orders. 
"Sixth, most of the weapons, including new tYJles recently intro-
duced, and most of the ammunition and other supplies used by the Viet-
Cong, have been sent from North to South Viet- Nam . 
"Seventh, the scale of infiltration of men and arms, including 
regular units of the armed forces of North Viet-Nam, has increased 
apprec1ab~ in recent months . 
"Eighth, this entire pattern of activity by the regime i n Hanoi 
i s in violation of general principles of international law and the 
Charter of the United rmtions, and is in direct violation of the Geneva 
Accords of 1954 . 
Such a pattern of violation of the treaty obligations 
undertaken at Geneva was confirmed by a special report of the Interna-
tional Control Commission in 1962 and it has been greatly intensified 
since then . 
tlThese facts about the situation in Viet-Nero make it wunistakably 
clear that the character of that conflict is an aggressive war of con-
quest waged against a neighbor--and make nonsense of the cynical allega-
tion that this is simply an indigenous insurrection . 
"I request that you circulate copies of the Report, together with 
copies of this letter, to the Delegations of all Member States as a 
Security Council document. 
"In making this information available to the Security Council, my 
Government wishes to say once more that peace can be restored quickly 
to Viet- Nam by a prompt and assured cessation of aggress i on by Hanoi 
against the Republic of Viet- Nam. 
In that event, my Government--as it 
bas said many times befcre--would be happy to withdraw its military 
forces from the Republic of Viet- Nam end turn promptly to an interna-
tional effort to assist the economic and social development of Southeast 
Asia . 
"In the meE..ntime, my Government aWaits tie first indication of' a_1y 
i ntent by the government in H8noi to return to the ways of peace and 
peaceful resolution of this international conflict . 
rrAccept, Excellency, the assurance of my highest consideration . 
"ADlAI E. STEVENSON. " 
D-29 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
22 . 
"Some Fundamentals o:f American Policy, " Address b 
Secretar Rusk 
Before 
e -. • Counci 
0 
1:; e 
ternatlona 
ham er Ot Commerce 
at r~ew York, Harch 4, 1965, Department of State Bulletin, r~arch 22, 
1965, p . 401. 
* * * 
"The defeat of these aggressions is not only essential if laos and 
South Viet-Nem are to remain independent; it is important to the security 
of Southeast Asie as a whole . 
You will recall that Thailand has already 
been proclaimed as the next target by Peiping . 
This is not something up 
in the clouds called the domino theory . 
You don ' t need that . 
Listen to 
the proclamation of militant, world revolution by Peiping, proclaimed 
with a harshness which bas caused deep division within the Communist 
world itself, quite apart from the issues posed for the free world . 
"The U. S. Stake in Viet- Naro 
"So what is our stake ? Whet is our commitment in that si tuation ? 
Can those of us 1n this room forget the lesson that we had in this i ssue 
of war and peace when it was only 10 years from the seizure of Manchuria 
to Pearl Harbor; about 2 years from the seizure of Czechoslovakia to the 
outbreak of vlorld War II in Western Europe ? Don ' t you r emember the hopes 
expressed in those days: that perhaps the aggressor will be satisfied by 
this next bite, end perhaps he will be quiet? Remember that ? 
You remem-
ber that we thought that we could put our Military Establishment on short 
rations and somehow we needn 't concern ourselves with peace in the rest 
of the world. 
But we found that ambition and appetite fed upon success 
and the next bite generated the appetite for the following bite . 
And we 
learned that} by postponing the issue} we made the result more terrible, 
t he holocaust more dreadful. 
We cannot forget that experi ence . 
"We have a course of aggression proclaimed in Peiping, very clear 
for all to see, and proclaimed with a militancy which says that their 
type of revolution must be supported by force and that ouch of the world 
i s ripe for that kind of revolution . 
We have very specific commitments--
the Manila Pact, ratifi ed by the Senate by a vote of 82 to 1, a pact to 
which South Viet-tlam is a protocol state . 
We have the deciSi on of Presi-
dent Eisenhower in 1954 to extend aid .••• II 
* * * 
23. 
IfViet - I~am Action Called 'Collective Defense Against Armed Aggression', II 
l Depertment statement read to news correspondents on ~1arch 4, 1965 
by Robert J . rlicClosz.ey, Director, Office of News?, Denartment of' 
State Bulletin, March 22, 1965, p . 403 . 
-
s 
tiThe fact that military hostilities have been taking place in South-
east Asia does not bri ng about the existence of a state of war, which is 
D-30 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 2011 
a legal characterization of a situation rather than a factual description . 
What we have in Viet-Hao is armed aggression from tbe Nortb against the 
Republic of Viet- Nero. 
Pursuant to a South Vietnamese request and consul-
tations between our two Governments, South Viet- Nem and the United States 
are engaged in cvllective defense against that armed aggression . 
The 
i nherent right of individual end collective self- defense 1s recognized 
in article 51 of the Onited Nations Charter . 
"If the question is intended to raise the issue of legal aut hority 
to conduct the actions which have been taken, there can be no doubt that 
these actions fall ..,Tithin the constitutional powers of the President and 
within the congressional resolution of August 1964 . 1\ 
24 . 
"Pattern for Peace in Southeast Asia," Address b President Johnson 
at John Hopkins UniverSity, Balt1mOre~ Maryland on April 7, 19 5, 
Department of State Bulletin, April 2 , 1965, p . 607 . 
* * * 
tiThe confused nature of this conflict cannot mask the fact that it . 
is the new face of an old enew~ . 
"Over this war- -and all Asia-- is another reality: 
the deepening 
shadoH of Communist Chino. . 
The rulers in Hanoi are urged on by Peiping . 
This is a regime which p~s destroyed freedom in Tibet, which has attacked 
India) and has been condemned by the United Nations for aggression in 
Korea . 
It is a nation Hhich is helping the forces of violence in almost 
eVery continent . 
The contest in Viet- Naro is part of a wider psttern.of 
aggressive purposes . 
"Why Are We in South Viet- Nam.? 
"Wby are these realities our concern? 
Why are we in South Viet - r~am? 
"We are there because lfe have a promise to keep. 
Since 1954 every 
American Presi dent has offered support to the people of South Viet- Nem . 
We have helped to build, and we have helped to defend . 
Thus) over many 
years, we have made a national pledge to help South Viet- Nem defend its 
i ndependence . 
"And I intend to keep that promise . 
"To dishono ... 
4 that pledge, to abandon this small and brave nation to 
its enemies} and to the terror that must follo~ , 
~ou1d be an unforgivab l e 
wrong. 
"We are also there to strengthen ~orld order . 
Around the globe} 
from Berlin to Thailand, are people whose well-bei ng rests in part on 
D- 31 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
the belief that they can count on us if they are attacked . 
To leave 
Viet-Nam to i ts fate would shake the confidence of all these people in 
the value of an fl~erican commitment and in the value of America ' s word . 
The result would be increased unrest and instability, and even wider 
war. 
"We are also there because there are great stakes in the balance . 
let no one think for a moment that retreat from Viet-Nam \,-ould bring 
an end to conflict . 
The battle would be renewed in one country and 
then another . 
The central l esson of our time is t~~t the appetite of 
aggression is never satisfied . 
To withdraw from one battlefield means 
on~ to prepare for the next . 
We must say in Southeast Asia- -as we did 
in Europe--in the words of the Bible: 
'Hitherto shalt thou come, but 
no further . ' 
rtThere are those who say that all our effort there will be futile- -
that China ' s power is such that it is bound to domi nate all Southeast 
Asia. 
But there is no end to that argument until all of the nations of 
Asia are s~llowed up . 
"There are those who "londer why we have a responsibility there . 
Well, we have it there for the same reeson that we have a responsibility 
for the defense of Europe . 
~'orld War II ..,as fought in both Europe and 
Asie, and when it ended we found ourselves with continued responsibility 
for the defense of freedom . 
"Our objective is the independence of South V1et- Nam end its free-
dom from attack . 
We want nothing for ourselves- - on1y that the people 
of South Viet- Nam be allowed to guide their own country in their mm 
way. 
We will do everything necessary to reach that objective, and "'e 
w111 do on~ what is absolutely necessary . 
"In recent months attacks on South Viet- Nam were stepped up . 
Thus 
it became necessary for us to increase our response end to make attacks 
by air . This is not a change of purpose . 
It is a change in what we 
believe that purpose requires . 
"We do t his in order to slow down aggression . 
''We do this to increase the confidence of the brave people of South 
Viet - Nam who have bravely borne this brutel battle for so many years 
with so many casualties ." 
* * * 
. n-32 
I 
25 . 
Address 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Leonard 
Assistant 
* * * 
rrThese objectives are not just pious generalities, nor is South-
east Asia just a configuration on e map . 
Distant though it may seem 
fram Detroit, that area has great strategic significance to the United 
states and the free world . 
Its location across east-west air and sea 
lanes flanks the Indian subcontinent on one side and Australia, New 
Zealand, and the Philippines on the other, and dominates the gateway 
between the Pacific and Indian Oceans. 
rrIn COnmlunist hands this area would pose a nost serious threat to 
the security of ,the United States and to the family of free-world natiOns 
to which we belong. 
To defend Southeast Asia, we must meet the challenge 
in South Viet- Nem. 
rrCommunist IWars of Liberation' 
rrEqually important, South Viet- Nem represents a major test of com-
munism ' s ne'lrT strategy of ' wars of liberation.' rr 
* * * 
rrAfter the Communists ' open aggression failed in Korea, they had to 
l ook for a more eff'ective strategy of conquest . 
They chose to concen-
trate on 'wars of national liberation' - - the label they use to describe 
aggression directed and supplied from outside s nation but cloaked in 
nationalist guise so that it could be made to appear an indigenous insur-
r ection . 
rrThat strategy was tried on 8 relatively primitive scale, but lias 
defeated in Malaya and the Philippines only because of a long and arduous 
struggle by the people of those countries, with assistance provided by 
the British and the United States . 
In Africa and Latin America such 
'wars or liberation ' are already being threatened . 
But by far the most 
highly refined and ambitious attempt at such aggression by the Communists 
is taking place today in Viet- Nem .•.. " 
* * * 
"In order to cope liith this veiled aggression, free nations must 
determine the real source of the aggression and take steps to defend 
themselves rrom this source . 
In Viet- Nem this has meant. ending privileged 
sanctuary heretofore afforded North Viet- Nam--tbe true source of the Viet 
Cong movement . 
D-33 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3,3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
liThe 'wars of national liberation' approach has been adopted as an 
essential element o£ Communist China ' s expansionist policy . If this 
technique adopted by Hanoi should be allowed to succeed in Viet - r~am , 
we ~ould be confirming Peiping ' s contention that militant revolutionary 
struggle is a more productive Communist path than Moscow ' s doctrine of 
peaceful coexistence .. We could expect 'wars of national liberation' to 
spread . 
Thailand has already been identified by Communist China as 
being the next target for a so-called 'liberation struggle.' Peiping ' s 
Foreign rUnister Chen Yi has promised it for this year . 
Laos, Malaysia, 
Burma--one Asian nation after another--could expect increasing Communist 
pressures . 
Other weakly defended nations on other continents would 
experience this new threat of aggression by proxy. 
IIEven the Asian Communists ha'fe acknowledged that Viet- Narn repre-
sents an important test situetion for indirect eggression. 
North Viet-
Nam' s Premier Fham Van Dong recently commented that : 
'The experience of our compatriots in South Viet- Nem attracts 
the attention of the world, especielly the peoples of South America . ' 
llGeneral /yo Ng.Jyeil Giap, the much-touted leader of North Viet-
Nam ' s amy, \fas even more explicit . 
In another recent statement, he 
said that, 
' South Viet- Kam is the ~odel of the national liberation move-
ment of our' time .•.. If the special warfare that the U. S. imperialists 
are testing in South Viet- Kem is overcome, then it can be de£eated every-
where in the world.,' 
"Our strong posture in Viet- Nam then seeks peace and security i n 
t hree dimensions : 
for South Viet- Nem, for the sake of Southeast Asia 's 
i ndependence and security generally, and for the other small nations 
that would face the same kind of subversive threat fr om without if the 
Communi sts were to succeed in Viet- Nam •••• " 
* * * 
"All this, of course, is contrary to the 1954 Geneva accords on 
Viet- Nem and the 1962 agreement on Laos . 
I mentioD the latter because 
it is an established. fact that Hanoi has been both threatening Laos 
and usi ng Laos as a corridor for supplying personnel and arms to the 
Viet Congo 
lIOur State Department has doc\lJD.ented the character and intensity 
of North Viet - J~am I s aggressive ef£orts since 1959 in the recent .... 'bite 
paper, and in the similar report issued in 1961. 
The 1962 report of 
t he International Control Commission for Viet- Nam also spelled out North 
Viet- Kam ' s aggressive actions in flagrant violation of the 1954 and 1962 
agreements . II 
~. * * 
D- 34 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"The Communists are fond of saying that whether the Viet Cong 
are born in the North or South, they are still Vietnamese and there-
fore an i ndigenous revolt must be taking place . 
Certainly, they are 
Vietnamese, and the North Koreans who swept across their boundary in 
1950 to attack South Korea were also Koreans . 
However, this did not 
make the Korean war en indigenous revolt from the point of view of 
either world security .or in terms of acceptable standards of conduct . 
"By the same token, if West Germany were to take similar action 
against East Germany, it is doubtful that the East Germans, the Soviet 
Union, and the rest of the Communist bloc would stand aside on the 
grounds that it was nothing more than an indigenous affair. 
"The simple issue is that military personnel and arms have been 
sent acrosS an international demarcation line (just as valid a border 
as Korea or Germany) contrary to international agreements and law to 
destroy the freedom of a neighboring people . II 
* * * 
" .••• It is for that reason, and because Ranoi has stepped up its 
aggression, that the Government of South Viet-I~ and the United States 
have been forced to increase our response and strike through the air 
at the true source of the aggression·-North Viet- Nero . 
This does not 
represent a change of purpose on our part but a change in the means we 
believe are necessary to ste~ aggreSSion . 
"And there can be no doubt that our actions are fully justified as 
an exercise of the right of individual and collective sel~- defense 
recognized by article 51 o~ the United Nations Charter and under the 
accepted standards o~ international law . 11 
* * * 
26. 
Address by Secreta~J Rusk, Made Before the Ameri can Society of 
International law on April 23, 1965, liThe Control of Force in 
International Relations, Department of state Bulletin, May 10, 1965, 
p . 697. 
* * * 
lIWhat Is a 'War of l'~ational Liberation'? 
lIWhBt 1s a 'war of national liberation '? It is, in essence, any war 
which furthers the Communist world revolution--what, in broader terms, the 
Communists have long re~erred to as a 'just ' war. 
The term 'war of national 
liberation ' is used not only to denote armed insurrection' by people still 
under colonial rule--there are not many of those left outside the Communist 
• .torld. It is used to denote any effort led by Communists to overthrow by , 
force any non- Communist governme~t . 
D-35 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"Thus the .... ar in South Viet- Nam is called a ' .... ar of' national libera-
tion .' And those .... ho .... ould overthrow various other non- Communist govern-
ments in Asia, Africa, and Latin America are called the 'forces of national 
liberation . ' 
"Nobody in his right mind would deny that Venezuela is not only a 
truly independent nation but that it has a government chosen in a free 
election. 
But the leaders of' the CODmlunist insurgency in Venezuela are 
.. 
described as leaders of a fight for 'national liberation' --not only by 
themselves and by Castro and the Chinese Communists but by the Soviet 
Communists . 
"A recent editorial in Pravda spoke of the ' peoples of Latin America 
••• marching firmly along the path of struggle for their national inde-
pendence ' 
and said, ' . • . the upsurge of the national liberation movement 
in Latin American countries has been to a great extent a result of the 
activities of Communist parties . ' 
It add~d : 
'The Soviet people have regarded and still regs'rd it as their 
sacred duty to give support to the peoples fighting for their independence . 
True to their international duty the Soviet people have been and .... ill 
remain on the side of the Latin American patriots .' 
"In Communist doctrine and practice, a non- Ccmmunist goverl'l.ment may 
be labeled and denounced as ' colonialist, ' 'reactionary, I or a ' puppet, ' 
and any state so labeled by the Communists automatically becomes fair game--
while Communist intervention by force in non- Communist states is justified 
as ' self-defense ' or part of the ' struggle against colonial domination. ' 
' Self-determination ' seems to mean that any Communist nation can determine 
by itself that any non- Communist state is a victim of colonialist domina-
tion and therefore e justifiable target for a 'war of liberation . ' 
"As the risks of overt aggression, whether nuclear or with conven-
t i onal forces , have become increasingly evident, the Communists have put 
increasing stress on the 'war of national liberation .' The Chinese Com-
munists have been more militant in language and behavior than the Soviet 
Communists . 
But the Soviet Communist leadership also has consistently 
proclaimed its commitment in principle to support wars of national libera-
tion . 
This commitment was reaffirmed as recently as Monday of this week 
by Mr . Kosygin LAleksai N. Kosygin, Chairman of the U. S.S. R. Council of 
Minister2! . 
"Internaticnal law does not restrict intf'rnal revolution within a 
state or revolution against colonial authority . 
But international law 
does restrict what third powers may lawfully do i n support of insurrection . 
It is these restrictions .... hich are challenged by the doctrine, and violated 
by the practice, of 'wars of liberation . ' 
"It i s plain that acceptance of the doctrine of ' 'Wars of liberation ' 
would enount to scuttling the modern international law of peace which the 
charter preseribes . 
And acceptance of the practice of 'wars of liberation} , 
D- 36 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
as defined by the Communists, would mean the breakdown of peace itself . 
"South Viet- nam ' s Right of Self- Defense 
"Viet- Nam presents a clear current case of the lawful versus the 
unlawful use of force : 
I would agree with General Ciap LYo Nguyen Ciap, 
North Vietnamese Commander in Chief7 and other Communists that it is a 
t est case for 
l wars of national liberation.' 
We intend to meet that test . 
"Were the insurgency in South Viet-Nam truly indigenous and self"-
sustained, international law would not be involved. 
But the fact is that 
i t receives vital external support-- in organization and direction, in 
training, in men, in weapons and other supplies . 
That external support 
is unlawful for a double reason. First, it contravenes general inter-
national law, which the United Nations Charter here expresses . 
Second, 
it contravenes particular international law: 
the 1954 Geneva accords 
on Viet-r.:am and the 1962 Geneva agreements on laos . 
, 
"In resisting the aggression against it, the Republic of Viet- Nam 
is exercising its right of self-defense . 
It called upon us and other 
states for assistance. 
And in the exercise of the right of collective 
self- defense under the United Nations Charter, we and other nations are 
providing such assistance . 
"The American policy of assisting South Viet- Nem to maintain its 
freedom was inaugurated under President Eisenhower and continued under 
PreSidents Kennedy and Johnson. 
Our assistance has been increased 
because the aggression from the North has been augmented . 
Our assistance 
no~ encompasses the bombing of North Viet-Nam . 
The bombing is designed 
to interdict, as far as possible) and to inhibit, as far as may be neces-
sary, continued aggression against the Republic of Viet- NBm. 
"When that 
i t will cease . 
aggression ceases, col~ctive measures 
As President Johns0n has declared : 
in defense against 
' •. • if that aggression is stopped, the people and Government 
of South Viet- Nam will be free to settle their own future, and the need 
for supporting American military action there will end . ' 
"The fact that the demarcation line between North and South Viet-
Nam was intended to be temporary does not make the assault on South 
Viet- Nem any less of an aggression . 
The demarcation lines between North 
and South Korea and between East and West Germany are temporary . 
But 
that did not ma&e the North Korean invesion 01 South Korea a permissible 
use of force . 
"let I S not forget the salient features of the 1962 agreements on 
Laos . 
Laos Yas to be independent and neutral. All foreign troops, regu-
lar or irregular, and other military personnel were to be withdrawn withi n 
75 days, except a limited nunber of French instructors as requested by 
D- 37 
• 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
the Leo novernment . 
r~o arms were to be introduced into Laos except at 
the request of that Government . 
The signatories agreed to refrain 'from 
all direct or indirect interference in the internal affairs ' of Laos . 
They promised also not to use Leo territory to intervene in the internal 
affairs of other countr ies--a stipulation that plainly prohibited the 
passage of anns and men from North Viet- Nam to South Viet- Kam by way of 
Laos . 
An International Control Commission of three was to assure com-
pliance with the agreements , 
"What happened? The non- Communist elements compli ed . 
The Communists 
did not . 
At no time since that agreement was signed have either the 
Pathet lao or the North Viet- Nem authorities complied with it . 
The North 
Vietnamese l eft several thousand troops there--the backbone of almost every" 
Pathet Lao battalion . 
Use of the corridor through Laos to South Viet- Nem 
continued. 
And the Communists berred the areas under their control both 
to the Government of Leos and the International Control Commission . 
"Nature of Struggle in Viet- Nam 
"To revert to Viet- Nem: 
I continue to hear ana. see nonsense about the 
nature of the struggle there . 
I sometimes wonder if the gullibility of 
educated men and the stubborn disregard of plain facts by men who are 
supposed to be helping our young to learn--especially to learn how to 
think. 
"Hanoi bas never made a secret of its designs , It publicly pro-
claimed in 1960 a renewal of the assault on South Viet- Nam. 
Quite ob-
viously its hopes of taking over South Viet- Nam from within had withered 
to close to zero--and the remarkable economic and social progress of South 
Viet- [am contrasted, n:ost disagreeably for the North Vietnamese Communists, 
with their own miserable economic performance . 
"The facts about the external involvement have been docUl1lented i n 
white papers and other publications of the Department or State . 
The Inter-
nati onal Control Commission bas held that there is evidence 'beyond r eason-
able doubt ' of North Vietnamese i ntervention . 
, 
"There i s no evidence that the Viet Cong has any si gnificant popular 
following in South Viet- Nam. 
It relies heavily on terror . 
Most of its 
reinf orcements in recent months have been rlorth Vietnamese from the North 
Vietnamese Army. 
"Let us be cleer about what is i nvolved today in Southeast Asia . 
We 
are not ir.volveC: with empty phrases or conceptions which ride upon the 
clouds . 
We are talking about the vital national i nterests of the United 
States in the peace of the Pacific . 
We are talking about the appetite 
for aggression--an appetite which grows upon feeding and which is pro-
claimed to be insatiable . 
We are talking about the safety of nations with 
whom we are allied--and the integrity of the American commitment to join 
in meeting attack • 
D-38 
'" 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
"It is true that we also believe that every small state has a 
right to be unmolested by its neighbors even though it is within 
reach of a great poyer. 
It is true that we are committed to general 
principles of law and procedure which reject the idea that men and 
arms can be sent freely across frontiers to absorb a neighbor . 
But 
underlying the general principles is the harsh reality that our o'm 
security is threatened by those who would embark upon a course of 
aggression whose announced ultimate purpose is our own destruction . 
, 
nOnce again "W"e hear expressed the views which cost the men of 
my generation a terrible price in World War II. 
We are told that 
Southeast Asia is far 8' ... ay- -but so were Manchuria and Ethiopia . 
We 
ere told that, if we insist that someone stop shooting, that is asking 
them for unconditional surrender . 
We are told that perhaps the aggressor 
. will be content with just one more bite . 
We are told that, if we prove 
faithless on one commitment" perhaps others would believe us about 
other commitments in other places. 
We are told that, if we stop resist-
ingJ perhaps the other side will have a change of heart . 
We are asked 
to stop hitting bridges and radar sites and ammunition depots without 
requiring that the other sid~ stop its slaughter qf thousands of civ-
ilians and its bombings of schools and hotels and hospitals and railways 
end buses. 
"Surely we have learned over the past tbree decades that the 
acceptance of aggression leads only to a sure catastropbe. 
Surely 
we have learned that the aggressor must face the consequences of his 
action and be saved from the frightful miscalculation that brings all 
to ruin . It is the purpose of law to guide men away from such events, 
to esteblish rules of conduct whi ch are deeply rooted in the reality 
of experience ." 
* * * 
27 . 
Statement b 
President Johnson at a News Conference at the t-lhite 
House on April 27, 19 5 and Transcript of Secretary of Defense 
Robert S. t·1diamara i s new Conference' of April 26, 1965 on the 
Situation in Viet- tlam, Department of State BulletinJ May 17, 1965, 
p . 748 . 
"Statement by President Johnson 
* * * 
nIndependent South Viet-Ham has been attacked by North Viet- Nam . 
The object of that attack i s conquest . 
"Defeat in South Viet - r~B!n ..... ould be to deliver a fri endly nation to 
terror and repression . It would encourage and spur on those who seek 
D-39 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
to conquer all free nations within their reach. 
Our own velfare and 
our own freedom would be in danger . 
"This is the clearest lesson of our time. 
From Nunich until today 
ve have learned that to yield to aggression brings only greeter threats--
and more destructive ~8r . 
To stand firm is the only guarantee of lasting 
peace." 
* * * 
"Viet Cong Weapons From External Sources 
"The latest step has been the covert infiltration of e regular 
combat unit o'f the North Vietnamese Army into South Viet- Nam . 
Evidence 
accumulated within the last month now confirms the presence in northwest 
Kontum Province--that is in the central highland area of South Viet-Nam, 
around Pleiku and north of Pleiku--recent evidence which .... e have received 
confirms the presence in that northwest Kontum Province of the 2d Battalion 
of the 325th Division o~ the regular North Vietnamese Army . 
It is impor-
tant to recognize} I think, that the great bulk o~ the weapons which the 
Viet Cong are using and with which they are supplied come from external 
sources ." 
* * * 
/ftecretary ~rcNamar~7 
"Communist strategy 
"Q . 
Mr . Secretary, a personal question. 
As the fighting has 
increased in Viet- Nan, more and more of the U.S . critics of the admin-
istration ' s policy have been referring to this as 'McNamara's war.' 
What is your reaction? Does this annoy you? 
!lA. It does not annoy me because I think it is a war that is being 
f ought to preserve the freedom of a ve~ brave people, an independent 
nation . 
It is a war which Is being 'fought to counter the strategy of the 
Communists, a strategy which Premier Khrushchev laid out very clearly in 
the very famous speech ~'h1ch he made on January 6, 1961 . 
"You may recall that at that time he divided all 'Wars into three 
categories . 
Re spoke of world wars, meaning nuclear wars; he spoke of 
l ocal wars) by which he meant large-scale conventional wars; and then he 
spoke of what he called 'wars of liberation.' 
"He ruled out world tlars as being too dangerous to the existence of 
the Communist states . 
He ruled out local wars because he said they could 
very easily escalate into nuclear wars which would lead to the ultimate 
destruction of the Communist states . 
But he strongly endorsed ' wars of 
D- 40 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
liberation' Bnd made it perfectly clear that it would be through applica-
tion of that strategy that the Communists would seek to subvert inde-
pendent nations throughout the world, seek to extend their domination, 
their political domination, of other nations . 
"It is very clea:( that that is the CommWlist Chinese strategy i n 
Southeast Asia . 
It is a strategy I feel we should oppose, and, while 
i t is not my war, I don ' t object to my name being associated with it •. " 
* * * 
28. 
statement by Secretary Ball on May 3, 1965 at the Opening Session 
of the SEATO Council Ministers 1 lOth Meeting st london, Department 
of State Bulletin, JWle 7, 1965, p . 922. 
* * * 
"We have, however, come to realize from the experience of the past 
years that aggression must be dealt with wherever . i~ occurs and no matter 
what mask it may wear . 
Neither we nor other nations of the free world 
. were alvrays alert to this . 
In the 1930 ' s Manchuria see..'1led a long way 
away, but it was only 10 years from Manchuria to. Pearl Harbor . 
Ethiopia 
seemed a long way away . 
The rearmament of the Rhineland was regarded 
as regrettable but not worth a shooting war. 
Yet after that came Austria . 
And after Austria, Czechoslovakia . 
Then Poland. 
Then the Second World 
War . 
"The central issue we face in South Viet- r.:am should, I think, be 
clear for all to see . 
It i s whether a small state on the periphery of 
Communist power should be permitted to maintain its freedom . 
And that 
is an issue of vital importance to small states everywhere . 
"Moreover, it is an issue that af fects the security of the whole 
free world . 
Never has that point been more succinctly stated than by 
one of the greatest of all Englishmen, Sir Winston Churchill . 
'The 
belief}' he said, 'that security can be obtained by throwing a small 
st ate to the wolves is a fatal illusion. ' 
And let us not forget that 
General IVa Nguye!l Giap, the head of the North Vi etnamese aI1iled forces, 
has ·said quite explicitly that if the so- called 'war of l iberation ' 
t echnique succeeds in Viet- Nam, it can succeed ' everyv.·here in the world . ' " 
* .. .. 
29 . 
Renarks by President Johnson at White House Before Rouse and Senate 
Committees on May 4, 1965J "Congress Approves Supplemental Appro-
priation for Vietnam, If Department of State Bulletin, May 24, 1965 1 
p. 817. 
"* * * 
"D- 41 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
ItThis is not the same kind of' aggression which the world has 
long been used to. 
Instead of' the sweep of' invading armies there 
is the steady and the deadly attack in the night by guerrilla bands 
that come without warning, that kill people while they sleep. 
"In Viet- Nem we pursue that same principle which has infused 
American action in the Far East for a quarter of a century. 
There 
are those who ask why this responsibility should be ours . 
The answer, 
I think, is simple . 
There is no one else who can do the job. 
Our 
power alone, in the final test, can stand between expanding communism 
and independent Asian nations . 
nThus, .... hen India .... as attacked, it looked to us for help, and 
we gave it immediately. 
He believe that Asia should be directed by 
Asians . 
But that means that each Asian people must have the right 
to find its own way, not that one group or one nation should overrun 
all the others . 
"Now make no mistake about it, the aim in Viet- Nam is not simply 
the conquest of the South, tragic as that would be . 
It is to show 
that American commitment is worthless, and they would like very much 
to do that, and once they succeed in doing that, the gates are down 
and the road is open to expansion and to endless conquest . 
Moreover, 
we are directly committed to the defense of South Viet- Nam beyond any 
question . 
"In 1954 we signed the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty 
end that treaty committed us to act to meet aggression against South 
Viet- N"am •••• " 
* * * 
.I 
30. Address b 
William p. Bun 
Before Dallas Council on World Affairs 
on Ma 
13 19 5 
Reality and 1-' . h Concernin South Vietnam 
Department of State Bulletin, June 7, 19 5, p . 
93 . 
< 
* * * 
''Myths on the South Viet- Nsm story 
"This is the simple basic story of ...... het has happened in South Viet-
Nam since 1954 . 
Let me now turn to certain myths that have arisen 
concerning that story . 
"First, there is the question of the attitude of' the South Viet-
namese Government and ourselves toward the reunification of' Viet- Nam 
through free elections . 
The 1954 Geneva accords had provided for free 
elections by secret ballot in 1956, and it has been alleged that the 
failure to proceed with these elections in some way justified Ranoi ls 
D-42 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
action in resorting to military measures, first slowly and then by the 
stepped- up infiltration beginning in 1959 and 1960. 
liThe facts, are quite otherwise . 
had fully suppo~ed the principle of 
supervision, in Viet- Nam as in other 
divided, Korea and Germany. 
The Eisenhower administration 
free elections under international 
situations where a country was 
IIA similar position was taken by President Diem of South Viet- Nam . 
For example, in January 1955 Diem ~~de it clear to an American corres-
pondent that : 
' The clauses providing for the 1956 elections are extremely 
vague . 
But at one point they are clear--in stipulating that the elec-
tions are to be free . 
Everything will now depend on how free elections 
are defined. 
The President said he would weit to see whether the con- . 
ditions of freedom would exist in North Viet-Nam at the time scheduled 
for the elections . 
He asked what would be the good of an impartial 
counting of votes if the voting had been preceded in North Viet- Nam by 
t he ruthless propaganda and terrorism on the part of a police state.' 
"I do not think any of' us would dissent from this description of 
whet is required for free elections . 
And the simple fact is that, when 
the issue arose concretely in 1956, the regime in Hanoi--whlle it kept 
calling for elections in its propaganda--made no effort to respond to 
the call of the Soviet Union and Great Britein, as cochairmen of the 
1954 Geneva con£erence, for the setting up of the appropriate machinery 
for free elections . 
liThe reason is not far to seek . 
For North Viet- Nam in 1956--and 
i ndeed today-- is a Communist state and in 1956 North Viet- Nero was in 
deep trouble . 
Its own leaders admitted as much in their~rty congress 
in the fall of 1956 in a statement by General /Vo Nguyenj Giap re~erring 
to widespread terror, failure to respect the principles- of faith and 
worship in the so- called land reform ~rogram , the use of torture as a 
normal practice, and a wbole list of excesses which even the Communists 
bad come to realize went too far . 
"50 the answer is, I repeat, Simple . 
There was no chance of' free 
el ections in North Viet- Nam in 1956. 
We sball wait to see whether there 
will ever be such a chance in the future . 
"Second, there is the myth that the Viet Cong movement has any 
significant relationship to the political oppcsition to PreSident Diem. 
I have referred already to the unfortunate trends that developed efter 
1959 in President Diem's rule . 
There was unquestionably opposition to 
him within South Viet- Nam, and that opposition included Dany distinguished 
South Vietnamese, some of whom vent into exile as a result . 
others 
stayed in Saigon, and some were imprisoned . 
D-43 
• 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
"But the point is this . 
The men who led the opposition to Diem 
are not today in the Viet Cong o On the contrary, the present Prime 
Minister, Dr. LPhan Huil Quat, and his group of so-called Caravellistes, 
all of whom opposed Diem, are today the leaders of the Government . 
These 
men, and their follo~ers , are nationalists an~ strongly anti- Communist; 
not one of the~, of any significance, went over to the Viet Congo 
"This brings me to the question of the so-called National Liberation 
Front, which is the political facade, made in Hanoi, for the Viet Cong 
. 
movement . 
I doubt if any of you can name a single leader of the National 
Liberation Front . 
But these are faceless men installed by Hanoi to give 
t he appearance of bourgeois and truly South Vietnamese support for the 
operation . 
"Lest you think I exaggerate, I refer you to the excellent recent 
account by Georges Chaffard, a French correspondent for L' Express i n 
Paris, who recently visited the Viet Cong and interviewed some of its 
"leaders." Chaffard describes vividly ... hat these men are, including 
their strong desire to find a replacement for the obscure lawyer n~ed 
Tho who is the titular head of the front and who apparent~ is the only 
figure Hanoi can find who was even in Saigon or participating in South 
Vietnamese political life during the latter Diem period . 
Chaffard ' s 
conclusion, which I quote, is that : 
'The Front for National Liberation structure is the classic 
structure of a 'National Front ' before the taking over of power by the 
Communists . ' 
"So there should be no doubt of the true natW'e of the Viet Cong 
and its Liberation ~ront , or that they are a completely different move-
ment from the political opposition to Diem . 
As to the latter, and its 
present emergence into a truly nationalistic amalgam of forces- - regional, 
religious, military, and civilian--I can perhaps best refer you to the 
excellent l ead article by l<1r . George Carver, an Pmerican with long 
experience in saigon, in the April is.sue of Foreign Affairs . 
~!r. Carver 
tells a fascinating story of the emergeoce of these new nationalistic 
forces i n South Viet- NSm, with all their difficulties and weaknesses, 
but with the fundamental and overriding fact that they ere the true new 
voice of South Viet- Nam and that they have never had anything to do wi th 
the Viet Cong . 11 
* * * 
liThe Korear' War also hed an important me"sage f or the Communists·--
and as a result we may have seen the l ast of the old classical war of 
open invasions . 
Korea proved to the Comcunists that they had to find a 
more effective strategy of conquest . 
They chose to refine a technique 
thet they had used on a primitive scale and to their ultimate defeat in 
Greece, Malaya, and the Philippines . 
I am referring to the so-called 
'war of national liberation. ' 
This is the label KhrUShchev employed in 
D-44 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1961 to describe Communist strategy for the future--aggression directed 
and supplied from outside a nation, but disguised in nationalist trap-
pings so that it might pass as an indigenous insurrection . 
* * * 
"The Communists have expanded upon their 'wars of liberation ' tech-
ni que . 
Africa scd latin America are already feeling the threat of such 
t hrusts . 
But by far the most highly sophisticated end ambitious attempt 
at such aggression by the Communists is taking place today in Viet- Nam. 
* * * 
"The ' wars of liberation 1 strategy is at this tllne an essential 
element of the expBnsioni st policy of Communist China and her Asian 
ally, North Viet- NBr.!. 
If' we allow it to succeed in Viet- Nem, we would 
be confirming Peiping ' s assertion that armed struggle is a more produc-
tive Communist course than Moscow's doctrine of peaceful coexistence . 
'Wars of national liberation ' would most certainly spread. 
Red China 
has already identified Thailand as the next target for a so-called 
1liberation struggle,' and its Foreign Minister Chen Yi has promised 
that i t will be launched before the end of this year . 
"The major test to date of this new Communist strategy 1s taking 
place today in Viet- Nam. 
Even the Asian Communists have acknowledged 
the larger implications of this confrontation. 
Not long ago General 
Giap, the wel l - knmm leader of North Viet-Nem I s army, declared that, 
' South Viet- Nero 1s the model of the national liberation move-
ment of our time ••.. If' the special warfare that the U.S. imper iali sts 
are testi ng i n South Viet- Nam is overcome, then it can be defeated 
everywhere in the world.' 
"In another recent comment, North Viet- Nam ' s Premier Pham Van Dong 
said t hat : 
'The experience of our compatriots in South V1et- Nam attracts 
t he attention of the world, especially the peoples of South ftmerica .' 
"The People ' s Daily, Pe1ping ' s official newspaper, echoed those 
st atements in an editorial on May Day this year. 
It said: 
'The Vietnamese people ' s struggle against U.S. imperialism 
bas become the roeal point of the international class struggle at this 
mo.'TIent . 
This is an acid test for all political forces in the world . ' 
"Our finn posture in 
t hree related dimensions : 
V1et- r:am, then, seeks peace and security in 
for South Viet- Nam, for the sake of Southeast 
n-45 
• 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
ASia ' s independence and security generally, and for the other small 
nations eve~Hhere that vould face the same kind of subversive threat 
from without if the CornmWlists were to succeed in Vietnam .•. . II 
31.. 
President 
* * * 
* * * 
of American 
, 
" ••.• Communist China apparently desires the var to continue what-
ever the cost to their allies . 
Their target is not merely South Viet-
Nam; it is Asia . 
Their objective i s not the fulfillment of Vietnamese 
nationalism; it is to erode and to discredit America ' s ability to help 
prevent Chi nese dooination over all of Asia . " 
* * * 
32 . 
Address by William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern 
Affairs, Before the Faculty Forum of the University of California 
at Berkele on Hey 27 
1965 
"A Pers ective on U. S. Policy in 
Viet- Nem,' Department of State Bulletin, June 21, 19 5, p . 1001. 
* * * 
"For the underlying fact is that there cannot be a balance of po ..... er 
in Asi a without us . 
Under the control of a Communist regime still at 
the peak of its ideological fervor, a unified mainland China today does 
threaten the outnumbered newly i ndependent nations of ASia, not merely 
i n the sense of influence but in the sense of domination and the denial 
of national self- determination Bnd independence--not necessarily drasti-
cally or at once, for the Chinese Communist leaders are patient; not 
necessari ly, or even i n their eyes preferably, by conventional armed 
attack, but surely and inexorably, as they see it, through the technique 
of spurious national mov~~nts deriving their real impetus and support 
f rom external and Communist sources . 
"And in this central Communist effort, the other Communist nations 
of Asia, north '"iet- Kam and North Korea, are uilling partners . 
They 
have their national character, they are not true satelli tes--indeed, 
deep down, they too fear Chinese domi nation . 
Yet, so long as the spoils 
are fairly divided, they are working together ~ ith Communist China toward 
a goal the opposite of the one we seek, subjugation of the true national 
i ndependence of smaller countries, an Asia of spheres of domination . II 
* * * 
D-46 
I 
• 
Declassified per E.xecuti ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"For South Viet-Nem is the outcome of a very particular slice of 
recent Asian history. 
Only in Viet- Nem was a genuine nationalist move-
ment taken over by Communist leaders and transmuted into the Communist 
state of North Viet- Nam. 
And so the French, :; nstead of yielding gradu-
ally or with the fullest possible preparation for self- government, as 
the British wisely did in India, Pakistan, and Malaysia, were effectively 
dri,ven out in 1954 and Viet- KEIm was divided . n 
* * * 
"By 1956, to paraphrase the same eminent scholar, Communist China 
and North Viet-Naro, all propaganda to the contrary notWithstanding, 
simply were not willing to risk the loss of South Viet- Nan in elections, 
and, perhaps most crucial, the conditions for free elections did not 
prevail in either North or South Viet- Nam. 
So the date passed, and the 
dividing line between the t wo Viet - r~ms became a political division as 
in Germany end Korea, with reunification left to the future . 
And in 
the course of time another 30- odd nations recognized South Viet-Nero, 
and recognize it today. 
"(By the way, the eminent scholar I have just been citing was 
Professor Hans J . Morgenthau, writing i n a pamphlet entitled 'Arr.erica 's 
Stake in Viet- Nem, ' published in 1956. 
One of the other participants in 
that conference was the then junior Senator from Massachusetts . 
He was 
a bit more downright than the professor, saying thet 'neither the United 
States nor Free Viet- Nem is ever going to be a party to an election ob-
viously stacked and subverted 1n advance . , ) 
"Since 1956 two different strands have dominated developments in 
South'Viet- Nem. 
One is a genuine nationalist internal political ferment, 
in vhich the South Vietnamese themselves are seeking a lasting political 
b~se for their country--in the face of the same problems other new 
nations have faced, but compounded by the colonial heritage of lack of 
training and divide-and- rule tactics . 
That ferment should not surprise 
us; almost every new nation has g6ne through it- -for example, Korea and 
Pakistan . 
Under Diem it drove many distinguished South Vietnamese to 
exile or prison, from 1962 until early this year it seriously weakened 
the defense of the nation) and it now has brought into power e regime led 
by men who were the real opponents of Diem and are something close to 
the true voice of South Vietnamese nationalism ~-men ,' too) who are already 
widening the base of support and holding local elections . 
* * * 
"The other, 'end entirely different, strand has been Hanoi's ei'fort 
to take over the South by subversive aggression . 
On this the facts are 
plain and have been fully set out, though still 1n summary form, in the 
white papers published 1n December of 1961 and February 1965 . If these 
D-47 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
do not convince you, read HanOi ' s own pronouncements over the years, the 
eyewitness accounts of the tons of weapons found just in recent months, 
the personal interrogation of a typical infiltrated Viet Cong by Seymour 
Topping 1n Sunday's New York Times, or the recent accounts by the french-
man, George Chaf:rard, ','ho concluded that the so-called National Liberation 
Front was a classic example of the type of Communist organization used to 
take over another country. 
!lIn short, North Viet- Nem has been from the start, quite proudly 
and unashamedly, what President Johnson has called the heartbeat of the 
Viet Congo As in Greece, the Viet Cong have won control of major areas 
of the country, playing in part on propaganda and the undoubted weak-
nesses of Diem and his successors, but re~ing basically on ~~ssive intimi-
dation of civilians . 
Over the years, the rate of civilian casualties--
deliberate action casualties, killed, wounded and k1dnaped--has been about 
40 a day in South Viet- Kern; civilian officials have been particular targets, 
with the obvious aim of crippling the government structure." 
* * * 
"! come now to the choice of methods . Till 1961 PreSident Eisenhower 
and President Kennedy limited our help to B massive economic effort and to 
the supp~ of military equipment under the terms of the Geneva accords . 
When, after 2 years of intensified effort from the North, the situation 
had become serious in late 1961, President Kennedy made the decision to 
send thousands of our military men for adviSOry and other roles short of 
the commitment of combat units . 
President Johnson intensified this effort 
in every possible way and only in February of this year took the further 
decision, urged by the South Vietnamese themselves, to do what would have 
been justified all along- - and had never been excluded- -engage in highly 
selective and measured military bombing of the North itself, still coupled 
with every possible effort to assist in the South in the struggle which 
only the South Vietnamese can win there. 11 
* * * 
33· 
* * * 
"In the 193) ! s we made our fate not by wh3t we did but what we . 
Americans failed to do. 
We propelled ourselves and all mankind toward 
tragedy, not by decisiveness but by vacillation, not by determination 
and resolution but by hesitancy and irresolution, not bY,action but by 
i naction . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"The fa ilure of free men in the 1930 I S wa s not of the sword but 
of the soul. 
And there just must be no such failure in the 1960 ' s . " 
* * * 
34 . 
Secretary Rusk's Interview re Vietnam on "Issues and Answers, " 
American Broadcasting Company Radio and Television on July II, 1965, 
With ABC Correspondents IUlliam H. la· .... rence and John Scali, Depert-
of State Bulletin, August 2, 1965, p . 188 . 
* * * 
'u . S. Obligation to Allies 
"Mr . Scali: 
Mr . Secretary, you have mentioned repeatedly, in 
explaining why we are fighting, that the credibility of American pledges 
i s at stake here and that if the Communists succeed in overrunning South 
Viet- Nam we will have trouble elsewhere in the world . 
What, specifically, 
could you foresee in the unlikely event we did lose this? 
llSecretary Rusk: 
Well, suppose that our 41 other allies--01' 42 
allies- - should find the~elves questioning the validity of the assurance 
of the United States • .... ith respect to their security? What would be the 
effect of that? If our commitment to South Viet- Nem did not mean any-
thing, .;hat \"ould you think if you were a Thai and considered what our 
commitments meant to Thailand? 'tlhat would you think if you were Hest 
Berli ners and you ~ound that our assurance on these matters did not 
amount to very much? 
"No-w, this i s utterly fundamental in maintaining the peace of the 
wor ld, utterly fundamental . 
South Viet- Nam 1s important in i tself, but 
Hanoi moved tens of thousands of people in there in the face of an Amer-
i can c~1tment of 10 years ' standing . 
Now, this is something that we 
cannot ignore because this begins·to roll things up allover the world 
if we are not careful here . 
''rJ.r. Scali : 
i n South Viet- Nem 
Is the converse not also true- - if 
that it will make it considerably 
enduring peace elsewhere? 
we stop the Communists 
easier to achieve an 
"Secr etary Rusk; 
Well, I think that one can say with reasonable 
confidence that both sides recognize that a nuclear exchange i s not a 
rational instrument of policy end that mass divisions moving across 
national front i ers is far too dangerous to use as an easy instrument of 
policy, but now we have this problem of 'wars of liberation ' and we must 
f ind a complete answer to that, and the other side must tealize that the 
use of militancy, of men end arms across frontiers in pursuit of what 
t hey call ' wars of liberation, ' also is too dangerous . 
IINow, there has been a big argument between Moscow and Peiping on 
n-49 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
this subject over the years, but Peiping must also begin to work its 
way back toward the idea of mutual coexistence . 
Otherwise there is 
going to be very great trouble ahead . II 
35· 
* * * 
statement by President Johnson at White House News Conference on 
July 28, 1965, "We iv1l1 stand in Viet-Nem, II Department of State 
Bulletin, August 16, 1965, p. 262 . 
* * * 
" . ••• Three times in my lifetime, in two world wers and in Korea, 
Americans have gone to fer lands to fight for freedom . 
We have learned 
at a terrible and brutal cost that retreat does not bring safety and 
weakness does not bring peace . 
tlIt is this lesson that has brought us to Viet- Nem . 
This is a 
different kind of '..rar . 
There ere no marching annies or solemn declara-
tions . 
Some citizens of South Viet- l-!am) at times with understandable 
grievances) have joined in the attack on their own government . 
"But we must not let this mesk the central fact that this is really 
war . 
It is guided by Narth Viet- Naro, and it is spurred by Communist 
China . 
Its goal is to conquer the South, to defeat American power, end 
to extend the Asiatic dominion of communism . 
"There are great stakes in the balance . 
'Nost of the non-Communist nations of Asia cannot, by themselves 
and alone, resist growing might and the grasping ambition of Asian com-
munism. 
"Our power, therefore, is a very vital shield . 
If we are driven 
from the field in Viet-Nam, then no nation can ever again have the same 
confidence in American promi se or in American protection . 
"In each land the forces of' independence would be considerably 
weakened and an Asia so threatened by Communist domination would cer-
tainly imperil the security of' the United States itself. 
"We did not. choose to be the guardians at tbe gate, but there is 
no one else . 
"Nor would surrender in Viet- Nam bring peace, because We learned 
from Hitler at Munich that success only feeds the eppetite of aggression . 
The battle ~ould be renewed in one country and then another country, 
bringiqg with it perhaps even larger and crueler conflict, as we have 
learned from the lessons of history . 
D-50 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"Moreover, we are in Viet- r;-sm to fulf'iil one of the most solemn 
pl edges of the American nation. 
Three Presidents--President Eisenhower, 
President Kennedy, Bnd your present President--over 11 years have com-
mitted themselve~ and have promised to help defend this small and valiant 
nation . 
"strengthened by that promise, the people of South Viet- Nam have 
fought for many long years . 
Thousands of them have died . 
Thousands 
more have been crippled and scarred by war . 
We just cannot now dis-
honor our toTord, or abandon our cor;!lD.itment, or leave those who believed 
us and who trusted us to the terror and repression and murder that would 
f ollow . 
"Thi s, then, my fellow A:nericans, is why "'e are in Viet- Nam. " 
* 
~. * 
36. 
Statenent by Secretary of Defense, Robert S. McNamara, Before the 
Subcommittee on De artment of Defense Ap ropriations of the Senate 
Committee on Appropriations on August ,19 5, 
Buildup of U. S. 
Forces in Viet- Nam, It Department of State Bulletin, August 30, 1965, 
p . 3@. 
* * * 
liThe issue in Viet- Nam is essentially the same as it was in 1954 
when President Eisenhower said: 
'I think it is no longer necessary to enter into a long 
argurr~nt or exposition to show the importance to the United States of 
Indochina and of the struggle going on there . 
No matter how the strug-
gle may have started, it bas long since become one of the testing places 
between a free form of government and dictatorsbip . 
Its outcome is 
goi ng to have the greatest significance for us, and possibly f or a l ong 
t ime into the future . 
, 
'We have bere a sort of cork in tbe bottle, the bottle being 
t he great area that includes Indonesia, Burma, Thailand, all of the sur-
r ounding areas of Asi a with its hundreds of millions of people . .• . T 
nWhat is at. stake there is the ability of t he f ree worl d to block 
Communist a~ed aggression and prevent the lo~s of ell of Southeast As i a, 
a loss wbich in its ultimate consequences could drastically alter the 
strategic situation in Asia and the Pacific to the grave detriment of 
our own security and that of Qur allies ..•• 
"The struggle tbere bas enormous implications f'or the security of 
the United States and the f'ree world end, f or thet metter, the Soviet 
D-51 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Union as well. 
The North Vietnamese and the Chinese Communists have 
chosen to make South Viet - r~m the test case for their particular ver-
sion of the so-called 'wars of national liberation . ' 
The extent to 
which violence sr,ould be used in overthrowing non- Communist governments 
has been one of the most bitterly contested issues between the Chi nese 
and the Soviet Communists . 
Although the former Chairman, tA.r . Khrushchev, 
fUlly endorsed 'wars of national liberation ' as the preferred meens of 
extending the sway of communism, he cautioned that 'this does not neces-
sarily ~ean that the transition to Socialism will everywhere and in all 
cases be linked ~lith armed uprising and civil war . •.. Revolution by peace-
ful means accords .... ith the interests of the ',!orking class and the masses . ' 
"Tbe Chinese Communists, however, insist that : 
'Peaceful co-existence cannot replace the r evolutionary struggles 
of the people . 
The transition from capitalism to socialism in any country 
can only be brought about through proletarian revolution and the dictator-
ship of the proletariat in that country .• .. The vanguard of the proletariat 
will remain unconquerable in all circumstances only if it masters all forms 
of struggle- -peaceful and armed, open and secret, legal and illegal, par-
liamentary struggle and mass struggle, and so forth . 
(Letter to the 
Central Committee of the Communist Perty of the Soviet Union, June 14, 
1963 . ) ' 
"Tbeir preference for violence ~ras even more emphatically expressed 
in an art i cle in the Peiping People ' s Daily of 1-1arch 31, 1964: 
'It is advantageous from the point of view of tactics to refer 
to the desire for peaceful tranSition, but it would be inappropriate to 
emphasize the possibility of peaceful transition ..•. the proletarian party 
must never substitute parliamentary struggle for proletarian revolution 
or entertain the illusion that the transition to socialism can oe achieve~ 
through the parliamentary road •. .. Violent revolution is a universal law 
of proletarian revolution . 
To realize the transition to social ism, the 
proletariat must wage armed s~ruggle, smash the old state machine and 
establish the dictatorship of the proletariat . ' 
" 'Political power, ' the article quotes Mao Tse-tung as saying, 'grows 
out of the barrel of a gun .' 
"Throughout the world we see the fruits of these policies and in 
Viet- r:am, partic\llarly, we see the effects of the Chinese Communists I 
more militant st~nce and their hetred of the free world. 
They make nn 
secret of the fact that Viet- rram i s the test cese, and neither does the 
regime in Hanoi . 
General Giap, head of the North Vietnamese army, recent~ 
said that 'South Viet- earn is the model of the national liberation move-
ment of our time •. • . If the spec iel warfare that the U.S. 'imperialists are 
testing 1n South Viet- Nam i s overcome, then it can be defeated everywhere 
in the -,.;orld.' tnd Pham Ven Dong, Premier of North Viet- Nem, pointed out 
that 'The experience of our comp~triots. in South Viet- Nam attracts the 
attention of the world, especially the peoples of South America .' 
D-52 
• 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
nIt is clear, therefore, that a Communist ~uccess in South Viet- Nam 
would be taken as positive proof that the Chinese Communists ' position 
i s correct and they ~ill have made a giant step forward in their efforts 
to seize control of the world Communist movement. 
Furthermore, such a. 
success would greatly increase the prestige of Communist China among the 
nonalined nati ons and strengthen the position of their followers every-
where . 
In that event .we would then have to be prepared to cope with the 
same kind of aggression in other parts of the world wherever the existing 
governments are weak and the social structures fragmented . If Communist 
armed aggress i on is not stopped in Viet- Nam as it was in Korea , the con-
f idence of small nations in America ' s pledge of support will be weakened, 
and many of them, in widely separated areas of the world, will feel unsafe . 
"Thus the stakes in South Viet- Nem are far greater than the loss of 
one small country to communism. 
Its loss would be a most serious setback 
to the cause of freedom and would greatly complicate tbe task of preventing 
tbe further spread of militant Asian communism . 
And, if that spread is 
not halted, our strategic position in the world wi ll be weakened and our 
national security directly endangered. 
"It was i n recognition of this fundamental issue that the United 
States, under three Presidents, firmly committed itself to help the 
people of South Viet- Nam defend their freedom . 
That is why President 
Eisenhower • .... arned at the time of' the Geneva conf'erence i n July 1954 
t hat 'any renewal of Communist aggression would be viewed by us as a 
matter of grave concern. I 
That is why President Johnson in his statement 
l ast Wednesday made it clear to all the world that we are determined to 
stand by our commitment and provide whatever help is required to fulfill 
it . " 
* * * 
" . ... We have also identif'ied at least three battalions of .the regu-
lar North Vietnamese army, and ther e are probably considerably more . 
At 
t he same time the Gover nment of South Viet- Nam has found i t increasingly 
difficult to make a commensurate increase in the size of its o~~ forces , 
which nml stand at about 545,000 men, including the regional and local 
defense forces but excl uding the national police . II 
, 
* *" * 
37 · 
"Mr . Reasoner: 
* * * 
D-53 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
"I ..rould like to begin by aski ng both Secretaries two basi c ques-
tions: First, how is our honor involved in Viet- Nem? And second, how 
i s our security involved in those rice paddies end r emote villeges? 
And since sometines in international rel ations security comes before 
honor, I will ask Nr . lifcNamara to answer first . 
"'..'by U. S. National Securi ty is Involved 
"Secretary McI';arnara : 
First, let me make clear, Mr . Reasoner, that 
this is not primarily a military problem. 
Above all else, I want to 
empbasize that . 
It is a battle for the hearts and the minds of the people 
of South Viet- Kam, and i t will only be won if we make clear to t hose . 
people that their longrun security depends on the development of a stable 
political institution and an expanding economy. 
That is our objective . 
"As a prerequisite to that, .... e must be able to guarantee their 
physical security. 
Ho .... does our physical security, our national interest, 
become involved in this? That is your quest i on . 
Secretary Rusk will 
elaborate on it, but let me say to start .... ith that it i s apparent that 
underlying the terror, the harassment, of the South Vietnamese by the Viet 
Cong i s the purpose and the objective of North Viet- Nam, backed by Communist 
China, to expend Communist control over the peoples of the ~ndependent 
nations of Southeast Asia and to use this as a test of their method of 
expanding control over independent peoples throughout the world in the 
undeveloped areas of Asia, Africa, and Latin Aoerica . 
The leaders of 
those two nations have on numerous instances stated this as their purpose . 
For example, General LYo Nguyen! Giap, who is the head of the North Viet-
namese military f orces, s!,!id not long ago that South Viet- r;em is the model 
of the national liberation movement of our time . 
If the. special warfare 
that the United States is testing in South Viet- Nem 15 overcame, then it 
can be defeated anywhere in the world. 
"And perhaps more pertinently in relation to latin ft..merica is the 
comment of' Pham Van Dong, who is the Prime Hinister of North Viet - Nam, 
who said recently: 
' Tbe expe~ience of our compatriots in South Viet- Nem 
attracts the attention of the .... orld, especially t he peoples of Latin 
America,' and the interests of tye Chinese Communists in advancing Asian 
communism by force are well known . 
"But I want to call your attention to two important statements 
emphasizing that . 
The Peiping People ' s Deily said about 12 months ago 
from Peiping, China : 
'It is advantageous Trom the point of vie .... of 
tactics to refer to the desire for peacp.ful t:rensiti on from capi:t;alism 
to communism, but it vould be inappropri ate to emphasize that possibility. 
The Communist Party must never entertain the illusion that the transition 
to communism cen be aChieved. through the parli amentary road . . •• Violent 
revoluti on is a universal law of proletarian revolution . 
To realize the 
transiti0n to communism the proletariat must wage armed struggle •.. . ' 
And, put even more succinctly, rifao Tse-tung said r ecently, 'Political 
po .... er grows out of the berrel of a gun.' 
D-54 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"That is why our national security is involved in South Viet':Nam . 
"Integrity of' A:,erican Commitment 
''t.1r. Reasoner: 
And the honor 1 Secretary Rusk? 
"Secretary Rusk: . Mr . Reasoner, the ans',.;rer to this quest ion is 
extremely simple and need not be complicated . 
"When President Johnson talks about our national honor, he is not 
using some empty phrase of 18th-century diplomacy. 
He is talking about 
the life and death of the Nation . 
Now} the essential fact from which we 
start is that North Viet-Nem has sent tens of thousands of men and large 
quantities of arms into South Viet- Nam to take over that country by force . 
We have a very simple commitment to South Viet- fi:am . 
It derives out of 
the Southeast Asia Treaty, out of the bilateral arrangements t~~t Presi-
dent Eisenhower made with the Government of' South Viet- Nam, out of regu-
lar authorizations and appropriations of the Congress in giving aid to 
South Viet- Nam, out of the resolution of' the Congress of last August, 
out of the most formal declarations of three Presidents of both political 
parties . 
"NO"', there is no need to parse these commitments in great detail. 
The fact is that we know we have a commitment . 
The South Vietnamese 
know we have a commitment . 
The CommWlist world knows we have a commit-
ment . 
The rest of' the world knows it . 
"Now, this means that the integrity of the JI..merican cotmnitment is 
at the heart of this problem . 
I believe that the integrity of the Amer-
i can commitment is the principal structure of' peace throughout the world . 
We have 42 allies . 
Those alliances were approved by overwhelming votes 
of our Senate . 
We didn 't go into those alliances through some sense of 
amiability or through some philanthropic attitude toward other nations . 
We went into them because we consider these alliances utterly essential 
f'or the security of our ovo nation . 
"NOW, if our allies or, more particularly, if our adversaries should 
discover that the American commitment 1s not worth anything, then the 
world ' .... ould face dangers of which we have not yet dreamed . 
And so it 
is important for us to make good on that American commitment to South 
Viet- Kam. 
' ~o1r . Kendrick: 
But, sir, don ' t you have to reckon honor at its 
cost? 
I mean 1 it is not an abst~act thing. 
It hes to be evalued end 
weighed according to what it costs you. 
And ~hat about di shonor? What 
about the world image that we now present? 
'lole are burning v111ages 1 we 
are killi ng civilians , 
Now, don ' t you weigh one against ,the other? 
"Secretary Rusk: 
Well, let me sey that you also weigh the costs of 
dishonor, that is, the failure of an American commitment . 
And I would 
hope that our aim Ameri can ne'Ws '!ledia YQuld go to some effort to present 
D-55 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
a balanced picture of what is going on in South Viet- Nam: 
the thousands 
of local officials who have been kidnaped, the tens of thousands of 
South Vietnamese civilians who have been killed or wounded by North 
Vietnamese mortars and by the constant depredations of these acts or 
violence against the civilian population . 
"No, there are c6sts involved in meeting your commitments of honor . 
There always have been, there always will be. 
But I would suggest, if 
we look at the history of the last 30 or 40 years, that the costs of 
Dot meeting your obligations ere far greater than those of meeting your 
obligations. 
"Political and Military Situation in Viet- Nam 
"Mr . Reasoner : 
Gentlemen, having set the stage, more or less, with 
your opening statements, I would like to start off first in the area of 
what we hope to achieve there this year and how we are doing militarily 
and politically . 
Peter? 
"Mr . Kalischer : 
Well, I would like to bring up the subject of who 
we are committed to. 
You mentioned the fact, Mr . Secretary, that \Ie 
have had a commitment to the Vietnamese Government . 
That government has 
changed some seven or eight times in the last 18 to 20 months, and when 
we say we have this commitment to this government, are we reasonably assured 
that this government represents the people of South Viet-Rem or even a 
large number of the people in South Viet-Nam? 
"Secretary Rusk: 
Well, we recognize, of course, that there are 
difficulties in the' top leadersbip in South Viet- Nam and have been over 
the months, but that does not mean that our commitment to the nation 
and to the people of South Viet- Nam is changed any more than the fact 
that 'We have had three changes of government in our own Government during 
the period of this commitment . 
"r.'i.r. Kalischer: 
In a slightly different form. 
"Secretary Rusk: 
The impression 'We have is that among the 14 million 
people in South Viet- Nam we do not f'ind any signif'icant group outside of 
the Viet Cong itself', relatively limited in numbers, that seems to be 
looking to Hanoi for the answer . 
The Buddhists are not, the Catholics are 
not, the other sects are not, the montagnards are not, the million Cam-
bodians living in South Viet- Nam are not . 
In other 'Words, \Ie, I think, 
would know very quickly, because we have lots of ~~ricans living through-
out the country~ide -- we would know very quickly if these people of' South 
Viet- Nem wanted the program of' the Liberation Front or wanted domination 
f'rom Hanoi . 
That we do not fi."1d . " 
* * * 
"Mr. Kendrick: 
* * • 
D-56 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 20 11 
II •
• • • I wonder, now, if we are still fighting the same war with 
Communist China that we were fighting in Koreaj is that really the enemy? 
"Secretary Rusk: 
Well, the present enemy on the ground is North ~ 
Viet- Nam and infiltration from North Viet- Nem, as far as we are con-
cerned. 
This appeal by the Liberation Front to Hanoi and Hanoi ' s res-
ponse to it ~imply repeats the factual situation . 
Hanoi bas been sending 
tens of thousands of men and large quantities of arms into South Viet-
Nam. 
This is not new. 
"Now, in terms of the more general problem, as you know, there have 
been very important disputes within the Communist world, and specifically 
between Moscow and Peiping, on the question of strategy and tactics in 
promoting the world revolution . 
Moscow has been more prudent, more 
cautious in this respect . 
Peiping has announced a doctrine of militancy 
which bas caused great problems even within the Communist world . 
NOW, 
if Peiping should discover that a doctrine of militancy is a successful 
policy through what happens to Southeast Asia, then the dangers througb-
out the rest of the world mount very quickly and very substantially. 11 
* * * 
"u. S. Commitment FUndamental to Peace 
, 
l1Mr . Reasoner: 
Secretary Rusk, I think JI.mericens somet1l!l.es have- -
while they support this policy--have trouble understanding just what we 
mean when we speak in the pattern of having to defend it here or we will 
have to fight in SOIr.e less suitable place . 
To be hypothetical, ' .... hat 
would happen ii' Secretary McNamara announced that we had done all we 
could and we were now 'Hithdraw1ng because we needed the boys at home and 
ve lett? What do you think would ensue? 
. "Secretary Rusk: 
I think that it would not be for me to answer 
that one directly. 
But imagine yourself to be a Thai, and ask what the 
American cOITmitment to Thailand would mean to you under those circum-
stances . 
Think of your self' .as a Hest Berliner, end ask yourself what 
the American commitment to you vould mean under those circumstances . 
"At the very heart, gentlemen, of the maintenance of peace in the 
world i s the integrity of the American commitment under our alliances . 
lIt-fr . Kendrick: 
Is it possible that it is an overcOlllInitment? 
"Secretary Rusk: 
Well, that can be argued . 
But it should have 
been argued at the time, at the various stages . 
I personally do not 
think so, because we heve made 42 allies, as you know, i n this postwar 
peri od, and at the time it seemed to be in the vital interest of the 
United States that these alliances be formed . II 
* * * 
D-57 
'. 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"So we do not have a worldwide commitment as the gendarme of' the 
universe, but lore do have 42 allies, and South Viet~Nam 1s 8 protocol 
state of the Southeast Asia Treaty and it does have a commitment from 
us . 
Therefore, the nature of that commitment is fundamental here if 
we are to maintain peace in the years ahead . 
11M!" . Rea soner: 
Secretary? Can you 
. 
Are we overcommitted 
handle everything you 
from your standpoint, Nr. 
foresee? 
"Secretary r,!cNemera : 
I believe so. 
The military forces of this 
country have been built up in strength, as you know. 
We do have 45 per-
r 
cent more conbat- r eady divisions today than we did 3 or 4 years ago . 
We 
do have nearly 50 percent more tactical fighter squadrons today than ~e 
did then . 
We have been building up our inventories in men and equipment . 
"I think the question is really more fWldamental than are we over-
committed . 
The question is, what kind of a world would we and our 
children live in if we failed to carry out the commitments we have or 
sought to reduce them?" 
* * * 
38. Address by William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern 
Affairs, Before the Chicago Council on Forei n Relations, on 
November 5, 19 5, 
A Perspective on U.S. Policy in Viet- Nem, II 
Department of State Bulletin, December 6, 1965, p . 890. 
"Our own objectives i n relation to the Far East are simple . 
There, 
as t hroughout the world, we wish to see independent nations developi ng as 
they see fit and i n accordance with thei r own traditions . 
We may hope 
that the development will be in the direction of governments based on 
consensus and increasi ngly on democratic processes,'riith economic sys-
t ems that enli st the initiatives of the individual . 
But we have long 
since outgrown any notion that we heve a blueprint for government and 
economic organizat10n that can be applied in any pat sense to other 
nations, particularly in the less developed state . 
"Moreover, our national interest is no longer gui ded in the Far E}3st 
by parti cular economic or military concern with individual areas, as ",as 
to a considerable extent the case before the war . 
~ve have a deep concern 
for expanded trade and cultural ties--which alone can in the end bind the 
worl d together--and we have military base rights and needs related to our 
r ole in assisting i n the security of the area . 
But neither of these 1S 
an end in itself: 
The first will, we believe, flourish if the nations 
of the area are able to develop in freedom; the second must now be main-
tained but will over time, we hope, bec~~e susceptible of reduction and 
i ndeed, wherever pOSSible, of elimination . 
• 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"Rather, we care about the total picture partly because a nat'ion 
~1th our traditions and our present power could hardly do otherwise, 
but partly because we know in our hearts that it makes a great deal of 
difference to our most concrete national interests that the vast poten-
tial and talent o~ the Par East should be deve]oped in healthy national 
entities and that the Far East should not go through a second stage--
as Europe had to do-- of waves of domination that must in the end be met 
at the cost of' vast human misery." 
39· 
* * * 
President Johnson ' s Telephone Remarks to the AF~CIO Convention 
l4eeting at San Francisco on December 9, 1965, IIWhy We Are in Viet~ 
rram, II Department of' State Bulletin, December 27, 1965, p . 1014 . 
* * * 
"We are there because for all our shortcomings, for aU our failings 
as a nation and a people, we remain fixed on the pursuit of freedom as e 
deep and moral obligation that will not let us go . 
"To defend that freedom--to permit its roots to deepen and grow 
without fear of external suppression--is our purpose in South Viet- Nam. 
Unchecked aggression against free and helpless people would be a grave 
threat to our o-.m freedom--and an offensive to our own consci ence . " 
* * * 
D-59 
, . 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
JOHNSON ADJ.mIISTRATION - 1966 
The Johnson Administration continued to employ the rationale of 
previous administrations throughout 1966 in justifying U. S. involvement 
in Vietnam. 
The Administration attempted continually to explain why 
the U. S. was involved . 
Significantly, the U. S. also sought to pUblicize 
the legal basis for the commitment as well as establishing firmly that 
the commitment under SEATO would be fulfilled . 
The themes initially 
stressed reassurance of the U. S. intent to remain in the struggle , later 
building on the legality of commitment, and finally, stressing American 
aims and objectives in Vietnam. 
Points emphasized were : 
a . 
The U. S. pledged ·to stay in Vietnam until aggression had 
stopped and to bonor coromi tments. 
!lOur stand must be as firm as ever . 11 
b . 
The question - - why are we in Vietnam? -- was repeatedly 
answered: to belp promote Vietnamese freedOI:l and ,,'orld security, to 
fulfill tbe SEATO obligation, to stop aggression and wars of liberation, 
to make Corranunist expansion unprofitable , and to prove that guerrilla 
wars cannot succeed. 
c . 
Legally, the U. S. involvement was traced from the Geneva 
Accords end the EisenhO'. .. er commitn-:nt in 1954 ("to assist the Government 
of Vietnam in developing and maintain a strong, viable state, capable of 
resisting attempted subversion or aggression through military means . II), 
t hrough SEATO ("collective self-defense against armed attack") to the 
Kennedy commi ments of ).961 . 
d. 
Asian communism was recognized repeatedly as a cl ear and 
present. danger -- "aggr-ession feeds on aggression" -- as "'ell as the 
fact that the security o~ Soutbeast Asia was eA~remely important to 
the security interests of the U. S. 
e . 
The fulfillment of the U.S. commitment had necessarily 
changed with tbe nature of the aggression requiring combat troops only 
because of the "escalation of aggression by the other side . n 
f . 
The U. S. aims in Vietnam ",'ere limited to the desire for a 
p6litical solution, to assure self-determination for t he people of South 
Vi etnam, and reunification of Vietnam deci ded by free choice . 
D-60 
V. D. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
JUSTIFICATION OF THE WAR -- PUBLIC STATEMENTS 
J OHNSON ADMINISTRATION 
CONTENTS 
40. President Johnson vows to .fulfill "America ' s solemn pledge to 
the cOWltries around the world" whose independence rests , in 
large measure, on confidence in America's word and in America ' s 
protection .•. " .•....•. •..••.•.••..•..•..•.....••...........••. D-64 
41. 
President Johnson states, "If we allow the COnuD.Wlists to win 
Vietnam, it ,<1'111 become easier and more appetizing for them to 
take over other countries in other parts of the world . ...•... .• D-64 
42 . 
Secretary Rusk explains relationship between U.S. presence in 
VN and i~s security in terms of oft spoken CommWlist threat of 
"wars of liberation" throughout developing world; SEATO com-
mitment and other mutual security pacts being tested ... ••.•.... D-65 
43 . President Johnson states the U.S. is in VN to prevent aggression 
as pledged by four Presidents and formally agreed to in the 
SEATO agreement .• •• ....•..... • ..•.••.......• ••.•.........•..• •. D-69 
44. A legal analysis of U. S. involvement in VN concludes "actions 
are in conformity with international law and with the Charter 
of the United Nations ." President ' s actions are in confor-
mance with Constitutional powers and consistent with both the 
SEATO commitment as approved by Senate and the joint resolution 
of August 10,1964 approved by Congress ...•..•. •••. . .•.•••.••. • D-70 
45 . Ambassador Goldberg suggests that the doctrine of "wars of li-
beration" represents a threat to independent nations throughout 
the world ••••• ••• ••..• •••..•.•.. • •.•..•.. •.• ••..•...•.•••.....• D-7l 
46. 
Vice President Humphrey explains U.S. position in VN is in-
tended lito restrain the attempt by Asian Communists to expand 
by force . ': .•.•.•..• •.•.•....•..•....••..•..• ..• •.....•...•...•. D-72 
47 . 
Vice President Humphrey cites U.S. efforts to check aggression, 
permit self-determination for SVN and to convince eXpansionist 
Asian Communists that force will not be tolerated in this 
nuclear era as requiring our firm stand in VN .. • .• •• .. .•. .• •• .. D-73 
D-61 
• 
• 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
48 . 
Secretary Rusk states , "1 have ahrays treated the SEATO 
Treaty ... as an important part of our commitment t o defend 
SVN . II 
He further states that repulsion of Communist ag-
gression is as valid an objective today es when our earlier 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53· 
54 . 
55. 
56. 
commitm.ents were made ••• • • • • • • •• •••••••• • •• • •••• •• •• • • ••• • •• •• • D- 75 
Leonard Unger discusses the national i nterests of the U.S. in 
Vietn8lll as related to checking the lIHanoi ventm'e" so as not 
to I1feed the fires of the clearly expansionist thrust of 
Communist. Chinese pOlicy. '.' • • •... •. . . •.. . . • . ••• • •• . .. • • • . •••••. . D- 76 
Ambassador Goldberg relates cl early that U.S . i nterest in 
Southeast Asia is motivated by its desire to see all the states 
of that region remain free of foreign dOmination ..••.••. .. ...• . D-77 
Secretary Rusk reviews the factors which relate the security 
of the U. S. to Southeast Asia: " . •. more than 200 million people 
in Southeast Asia, tbe geography of the area, the important 
natural resources • . . , the relationship of Southeast Asia to 
tbe total world situation and the effect upon the prospects of 
a durable peace . " 
He reviews the legal basis for U. S. actions 
as developed :in 44., above • •.• . •• . •.• •.. •.••• • • . .. • •.•• . .• •.•.. D- 78 
Secretary Rusk r ecalls the lessons of tolerating aggression in 
pre -~iorld Har II days as it bears on the current I'wars of 
liberation" strategy espoused by t-:oscow and Peiping; emphasizes 
the importance of SEATO in controlling aggression in Asia and 
the credibility of U. S. commitments in preventing it elsewhere . D-8l 
Vice President Humphrey emphasizes need of adapting to the new 
conditions of subversive ",arfare , if independent, non-CoI!lIllu-
nist states are going to grow an.d flo.urish .•• • •. • • . •• .. • • • . • •.. D-84 
President J ohnson states U. S. presence in VN is "buying time 
not only for SVN , but •.. for a new and a vital, growing Asia to 
emerge" while demonstrating that guerrilla warfare against 
weaker neighbors will not be tolerated •• . • . . ••• • •...• ••• •• . •• . . D-85 
President Johnson states this country will not err again as 
it has twice before i n ignoring aggression. 
He VOws to 
demonstrate clearly the futility of aggression in any form 
including guerrilla warfare . .. • . .... . •• .. .• •. • • •.. • . . .•• .• • . •• • D-87 
President Johnson cites U. S. intention to fulfill its promises ; 
be cautions that guerrilla .... 'arfare, if successf'Ul in \IN , pre-
sents a threat to Latin America, Africa and tbe r est of Asia • • . D-87 
D-62 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
57. 
President Johnson cites the need to fUlfill U. S. commit-
ments to provide a shield behind which weaker nations can 
develop without falling prey to Communist powers •• ••. ••• •.• : n-88 
58. President Johnson describes war as an "opening salvo in a 
series of bombar.dments, or, as they are called in Peking, 
"wars of liberation'.' ... .. .• •. •.• • .. .• . •• • . • •.••. . •• . .• . •• . .. n-89 
59. 
Ambassadol' Goldberg relates U. S. presence in VN to the use 
of violence by the North to upset the situation; he speci-
fically points out what the U.S. does not seek as a result 
of its presence . • . •.• . • •• •. •• . ••.. . ••.• •• ••••••..••.•. • .• • . • n-89 
60. Secretary Rusk emphasizes the concerns of four Presidents 
in preventing CO!lllll.tLTlist aggression to succeed in VN; he indi-
cates that the indigenous ele~ent in ~1N could be contrOlled 
~y SVN government, but NVN intervention requires U. S. pre-
sence . . • • . • . • . • • • . • • . • . • • • . • . • • • . . • • • . . . . • . • • • . . • . . . . • . . • . . • D-9l 
61. Secretary Rusk emphasizes SEATO agreement and similar mutual 
security treaties are the backbone of world peacej to remain 
effective, U. S. obligations must be fulfilled . 
He further 
recalls that "militant Asian Communists have proclailned the 
attack on SVH to be a critical test of this technique (wars 
of liberation) '! • • • • • . • . • • . . • • . . . • • • . • • • • . • • • • • . • • • • • • . • • . . •• n- 92 
n-63 
40. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3,3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
The State of the Union Address of President Johnson to the Congress 
Excerpts 
January 12, 19 
Department of State Bulletin, January 31 
19 ,p. 153· 
* * * 
"And we w111 stay until aggression has stopped . 
"We 1,ill stay because a just nation cannot leave to the cruelties 
of its enemies a people ~':ho have staked their lives and independence on 
America ' s solemn pledge--a pledge which bas grown through the commit-
ments of three American Presidents. 
rrWe will stay because in Asia--and around the world--are countries 
whose independence rests, in large measure, on confidence in America ' s 
word end in America ' s protection . 
To yield to force in Viet- Nam would 
weaken that confidence, would undermine the independence of many lands, 
and would whet the appetite of aggression . 
We would have to fight in 
one lend, and then ~e would have to fight in another--or abandon much 
of Asia to the domination of Communists." 
* * * 
41. 
Statement b President Johnson U. S. and South Vietnamese Leaders 
l-Ieet at Honolulu, February ,19 
Department of state Bulletin, 
February 28, 1966, p . 303. 
* * * 
If •••• We cannot 'accept their logic that tyranny 10, 000 miles auey 
is not tyranny to concern us, or that subjugation by an armed minority 
in Asia is different from subj~tion by an armed minority in Europe , 
Were we to follow their course, how many nations might fall before the 
aggressor? Where would our treaties be respe~ted, our word honored, 
and our commitment believed? 
"In the forties and fifties we took our stand in Europe to protect 
the freedom of those threatened by aggression . 
If we had not then 
acted, what kind of Europe might there be ~oday? Now the center of 
attenti on has sh~~ed to another part of the world where aggression is 
on the march and enslavement of free men is its goal . 
"Our stand must be as f inn as ever . 
If we allow the Communists to 
win in Viet- Kam, -it \/ill become easier and more appetizing for them to 
take over other ~ountries in other parts of th~ world . 
We will have to 
fight again someplace else--at what cost no one knows . 
That is why it 
i s vitally, important to every American that we stop the Communists in 
South Viet- Nero. II 
* 
i(. * 
. D- 64 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3,3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
42 . 
Statement by Secretary Rusk Before the Senate Caw~ittee on 
Foreign Relations, February 18, 1966, "The U.S. Commitment in 
Viet-Nam: 
Fundamental Issues" (Broadcast Live on Nationwide 
Television Networks) ; Department of State Bulletin, March 7, 1966, 
p . 346. 
* * * 
"Why are ve in Viet- Nam? 
Certainly we are not there merely 
because we have po' .... er and l ike to use it . 
We do not regard ourselves 
as the policeman of the universe. 
We do not go around the world look-
ing for quarrels in which we can intervene . 
Quite the contrary. 
We 
have recognized that, just as we are not gendarmes of the universe, 
neither are we the magistrate of tbe universe . If other governments, 
other institutions, or other regional organizations can find solutions 
to the quarrels which disturb the present scene, we ere anxious to 
have this occur. 
But we are in Viet- Nam because the issues posed 
there are deeply intertwined with our own security and because the 
outcome of the struggle cen profoundly affect the nature of the world 
i n which we and our children w'ill live." 
* * * 
"What are our world security interests involved in the struggle 
i n Viet- Nam? 
"They cannot be seen clearly in terms of Southeast Asia only or 
merely in terms of the events of the past few months . 
We must view 
t he problem in perspective . 
We must recognize that i.fhat we are seek-
ing to achieve in South Viet- Nem is part of a process that has continued 
for a long time--a process of preventing the expansion and extension of 
Communist domination by the use of force against the weaker nations on 
the perimeter of Communist power. 
"This is the problem as it looks to us . 
Nor do the Communists 
t hemselves see the problem in isolation . 
They see the struggle in 
South Viet- Nam as part of a larger design for the steady extension of 
CClllIllunist power through force and threat . II 
* * * 
IIBut the Communist world has returned to its demand for what it 
calls a 'yorld revolution,' a world of coercion in direct contradiction 
to the Charter or the United Kations . 
There ~ay be differences within 
the Communist world about methods, and techniques) and leadership within 
t he Communist ~orld itself, but they share a cammon attacPJnent to their 
'world revolution ' and to its support throu~h what they call ' wars of 
l i beration. ' 
D-65 
I 
I 
Declassified per E.xecuti vc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"SO what ',Ie face in Viet- Nem is '.(bat ',Ie have faced on many occa-
sions before--tbe need to check the extension of Communist power in 
order to maintain a reasonable stability in a precarious world. , ,', II 
* * * 
rrUnder Secretary ' Smith I S statement was only a unilateral declara-' 
tion) but in joining SEATO the United States took a solemn treaty 
engagement of far- reaching effect . 
Article IV) paragraph ~prov1des 
that ' each Party recognizes that aggression by means of armed attack . . . 
would endanger its own peace and safety, and agrees that it will in 
that event act to meet the common danger in accordance with its consti-
tutional processes ,' 
IIIt is this fundamental SEATO obligation that has f'ran the outset 
guided our actions in South Viet-Nam . 
liThe language of' this treaty is \olorth caref'ul attention , 
The 
obligation it imposes is not only joint but several . 
Tne finding that 
an armed attack has occurred does not have to be made by a collective 
determination before the obligation of each member becomes operative , 
Nor does the treaty require a collective decision on actions to be 
taken to meet the cammon danger . If the United States determines that 
an armed attack has occurred against any nation to wham the protection 
of the treaty applies, then it is obligated to 'act to meet the cammon 
denger' without regard to the views or ections of any other treaty 
member ," 
* * * 
"Our multilateral engagement under the SEATO treaty bas been 
r einforced end amplified by a series of bilateral comoitments and 
assurances directly to the Government of South Viet- Nam. 
On October 1, 
1954, President Eisenhower wrote to President Diem offering Ito assist 
the Government of Viet- Nam in developing and maintaining a strong, 
viable state, capable of reSisting attempted subversion or aggression 
through militarJ means .' 
In 1957 President Eisenhower and President 
Diem issued a joint statement .'hich called attention to 't~ large build-
up of Vietnamese Communist militery forces in North Viet- Nem ' and stated: 
' Noting t hat the Republic of Viet- Nam is covered by Article 
IV of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, President Eisenhower 
and President Ngo Dinh Diem agreed that aggression or subversion threat-
ening the political independence of the Repub~ic of Viet- Nem would be 
considered as endangering peace and stability,' 
• 
liOn August 2, 1961} President Kennedy declared that 'the United 
states is determined thet the Republic of Viet~Nam shall not be lost 
to the Communists for lack of any support which the' United States can 
render. I 
D-66 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
"On December 14, 1961, President Kennedy wrote to President Diem, 
recalling the United States declaration made at the end of the Geneva 
conference in 1954. 
The President once again stated that the United 
States was 'prep8red to help the Republic of Viet- Nam to protect its 
people and to preserve its independence . ' 
This commitment has been 
reaffirmed many times . since. 
"These, then, are the commitments we have taken to protect South 
Viet-Nam 85 a part of protecting our own 'peace and security.' 
We 
have sent A~erican forces to fight in the jungles of that beleaguered 
country because South Viet- Nam has, under the language of the S&~ 
treaty, been the victim of 
I aggression by means of armed attack . '" 
* * * 
"Up to this point I have tried to describe the nature of our 
canmitments in South Viet- Nam and why we have made them. 
I have sought 
to put those commitments within the framework of our larger effort to 
prevent the Communists from up.setting the arrangements which have been 
the basis for our securi ty. 
These policies have sometimes been atta~ed 
as static and sterile . 
It has been argued that they do not take account 
of the vast changes which have occurred in the world and are still in 
train . 
"These contentions seem to me to miss the point . 
The line of 
policy we are following involves far more than a defense of the status 
quo. It seeks rather to insure that degree of security which is neces-
sary if change and progress are to take place through consent and not 
through coercion . 
Certainly, as has been frequently po~ted out, the 
world of the mid - 2Ot~ century is not standing still . 
Movement is 
occurring on both sides of the Iron Curtain . 
Communism today is no 
longer mono11tb1c j it no longer Years one face but u~ny , and the deep 
schism between the two great po' .... er centers of the Communist world--
Moscow and Peking--is clearly one of the major political facts of our 
t ilne . 
"There has been substantial change and movement within the Soviet 
Union as wel1--end perhaps even more among the countries of Eastern 
Europe . 
These changes have not been i nhibited because of our efforts 
t o maintain our postwar arrangements by organizing the Western alliance . 
Tbey have taken place because of internal developments as well as 
because the Communist regime in Moscow has recognized that the Western 
al liance cannot ~ermit i t to extend its dominjon by force . 
• 
"Over time the same processes hopefully will work in the Far East . 
Peking--and the Communist states l i ving under its shadow- -must learn 
t hat they cannot redra .... the boundaries of the .... orld by force . 
"Wbat we are pursuing, therefore, 1s not a static concept . 
For, 
unlike the Communists, we really believe in social revolution and not 
D-67 
j 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
merely 1n power cloaked as revolution . n 
* * * 
"Our purpose is equally clear and easily d~fined . 
In his Baltimore 
speech of April 7 , 1965, President Johnson did so in the following tepns : 
'Our objective 1s the independence of South Viet- Nam and its 
freedom from.attack . 
We want nothing for ourselves-- only that the 
people of South Viet- Nero be allowed to guide their min country in their 
min way . I 
"This has been our basic objective since 1954 . 
It has been purf?ued . 
by three successive administrations and remains our basic objective today. 
"Like the Connnunists, \<I'e have secondary objectives derived from the 
basic one . 
We intend to show that the 'war of liberation, I far from being 
cheap, safe, and di6avowable, i6 costly, dangerous, and doomed to railure . 
We must destroy the myth of its invincibility in order to protect the 
independence of many weak nations which are vulnerable targets ror sub-
versive aggression--to use the proper term for the ' war of liberation.' 
We cannot leave while force Bnd violence threaten them . 
liThe question has been reised as to whether this clash of interests 
i s really important to us . 
An easy and incomplete answer would be that 
i t must be important to us since it is considered so important by the 
other side . 
Their leadership has made it quite clear that they regard 
South Viet- Nero as the testing ground for the 'war of liberation ' and that, 
after its anticipated success there, it will be used widely about the 
world . 
Kosygin told l·~r . Reston in his i nterview of last December: 
'We believe that national liberation wars are Just wars and 
t hey will continue as long as there is national Oppression by imperi-
alist po,,,ers . ' 
"Before him, Khrushchev, in January 1961, had the following to say: 
' NoW a word about national l i beration wars . 
The armed struggle 
by the Vi etnamese people or the war of the Algerian people serve as the 
l atest example of such wars. 
These are revolutionary wars . 
Such wars 
are not only admissible but inevitable . 
Can such wars flare up in the 
future? They can . 
The Communists fully support such Just wars and 
march i n the front rank of peoples waging liberati on struggles .' 
"General Giap, the Commander in Chief of the North Vietnamese forces, 
has made the following comment : 
' South Viet- Nam i s the model of the national liberation move-
ment of our time . If the special varfare that the United States tmperi-
alists are testing in South Viet- Nam is overcome 1 then it can be defeated 
anywhere in the world . I 
D-68 
• 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"The f.iinister of Defense of Cooununist China} J.£rshal Lin Piao} in 
a. long statement of policy in September 1965} described in detail how 
J.wo Tse-tung expects to utilize the 'war of liberation ' to expand com-
munism in Latin America} Africa, and Asia . 
"These test~.monials show that, apart fran the goal of imposing 
communism on 15 mdl1ion South Vietnamese} the success of the ' war of 
liberation ' is in itself an important objective of the Communist leade~~ 
ship . 
On our side} we can understand the grave consequences of such a 
success for us . 
President Eisenh~wer in 1959 stressed the military 
importance of defending Southeast Asia in the following terms . 
He said : 
' Strategically, South Vi et- Nam' s capture by the Communists 
would bring their pONer several hundred miles into a hitherto free 
r egi on . 
The remaining countries of Southeast Asia would be menaced b~ 
a great flanking movement •..• The loss of South Viet- Nam would set in 
motion a crumbling process that could, as it progressed, have grave con-
sequences for us and for freedom . ' 
"This view hes often been referred to as the 'domino theory.' I 
personalty do not believe in such a theory if it means belief in a law .-
of nature which r equires the collapse of each neighboring state in an 
inevitable sequence, following a Communist victory in South Viet- Nem . 
However, I am deeply impressed with the probable effects worldWide, not 
necessarily in areas contiguous to South Viet-Nam, if the ' war of libera-
tion r scores a signifi cant victory there . 
President Kennedy commented 
on this danger with moving eloquence : 
'The great battleground for the 
defense end expansion of freedom today i s the southern half of the globe--
Asia, !.atin America, Africa, and the J.iiddle East--the lands of the people 
who harbor the greatest hopes . 
The enemies of freedom think they can 
destroy the hopes of the newer nations and they a1m to do it before the 
end of this decade . 
This is a struggle of will and determination as 
much as one of f orce and violence. 
It is a battle for the conquest of 
the minds and souls as much as for the conquest of lives and territory. 
In such a struggle, we cannot fail to take sides .' 
"Gentlemen, I think a simple answer to the question, what are we 
doing in South Viet- Nam, is to say that for more than a decade we have 
been taking sides in a cause in which we have a vital stake." 
43· 
* * * 
Address by President Johnson at a Freedom House Dinner at New York, 
February 23, 1966, tlViet- Nam: 
The Struggle to Be Free," Department 
of State Bt.'lletin, l·!arch 14, 1966, p . 390.' 
* * * 
!lOur purpose in Viet- N"am is to prevent the success of aggression . 
It is not conquest; it is not empire; i t i s not foreign bases; it is 
not domination . 
It is, simply put, just to prevent the forceful conquest 
D-69 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
of South Viet- Nsm by North Viet-Nam. If 
* • * 
"The contest in Viet-Nem is confused and bard} and many of its 
forms are new. 
Yet our American purpose and policy are unchanged . 
Our 
men 1n Viet-Nam are there. They are there, as Secretary Dillon [former, 
Secretary of the Trea~ury Douglas DilloEl told you} to keep a promise that 
was made 12 years ago. 
The Southeast Asia Treaty promised} as Secretary 
John Foster Dulles said for the United States, that 'an attack upon the 
treaty area would occasion a reaction so united, so strong, and so well 
placed that the aggressor would lose more than it could hope to gain. I 
" .• • But we keep more than a specific treaty promise in Viet- Nero 
tonight . 
We keep the faith for freedom. 
If Four Presidents have pledged to keep that faith . It 
• • * 
44. 
• * * 
I1V. 
CONCLUSION 
I1South Viet- Nam is being subjected to armed attack by Communist 
North Viet- Nam, through the infiltration of armed personnel, military 
equipmen~ and regular combat units . 
International law recognizes the 
right of individual and collective self-defense against armed attack. 
South Viet- Nam, and the United States upon the request of South Viet- Nam, 
are engaged in such collective defense of the South. 
Their actions are 
in conformity with international law and with the Charter of the United 
Nation~ . 
The fact that South Viet- Nam has been precluded by Soviet veto 
from becoming a member of the United Nations and the fact that South 
Viet-Nam is a zone of a temporarily divided state in no way diminish the 
right of collective defense of South Viet- Nam . 
"The United States has cO!ll!llitments to assist South Viet- Nam in 
defending itself against Communist aggression from the North . 
The United 
states gave undertakings to this effect at the conclusion of the Geneva 
conference in 1954 . 
Later that year the United States undertook an inter-
national obligation in the SEATO treaty to defend South Viet- Nam against 
Communist arL~ed aggression . 
And during the past decade the United States 
has given additiQnal assurances to the South Vietnamese Government . 
"The Geneva accords of 1954 provided for a cease-fire and regroup-
ment of contending forces, a division of Viet-Ham into t .... o zones, and 
D-70 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 633 16. By: NWO Date: 20 I I 
a prohibition on the use df either zone for the resumption of hostllt-
t i es or to 'further an aggressi ve policy . ' 
Fram the beginning, North 
Viet- Naro violated the Geneva accords through a systematic effort to gai n 
contr ol of South Vi et- Nam by force . 
In the light of these progressive 
North Vietnamese violations, the introduction lnto South Viet- Nam begin-
ning i n late 1961 of substantial United States mili tary equipment and 
personnel, to ass i st i n the defense of the South, Yas fully justifi ed; 
substantial breech of an international agreement by one side permits 
t he other si de to suspend performance of corresponding obli gat i ons under 
t he agreement . 
South Viet - ~am was justified i n refusing to implement 
the provisions of the Geneva accords calling for reunification through 
f ree el ecti ons throughout Viet- Naro since the Communist regime in North 
Vi et- Nam created conditions i n the North that msde f r ee elections entirely 
impossible . 
"The President of the United states has full authority to commit 
United States forces in the collective defense of South Viet- Nam. 
Thi s 
author ity stems from the constitutional poyers of the Presi dent . 
However, 
i t is not necessary to rely on the Constitution alone as the source of 
the President ' s authority, since the SEATO treaty--advi sed and consented 
t o by the Senate and forming part of the law of the land-- sets forth 
a United States cOOllni tment to defend South Viet- Nem against armed attack, 
and since the Congress--in the j oint resolution of August 10, 1964, and 
i n authorizati on and appropriations acts for support of the U. S. mi l i tary 
effort in Vi et- Nam--has given .its approval and support to the President I s 
actions . 
Uni ted States acti ons in Viet- Nem, taken by the President and 
approved by the Congress, do not require any declaration of war, as shown 
by a l ong l i ne of precedents for the use of United Stetes armed forces 
abroad in t he absence of any congr e13s1onal declarati on of war ." 
45. 
Address by Ambassador Arthur J . Goldberg, U. S. Representative to 
t he United Nationsi Before the Pilgrim Society at London, England 
on r.1a.rch 4z 1966, 'Amer ica· and Britain : 
Unity of Purpose "; Depart-
m:nt of State Bulletin, April 4, 1966, p . 539 . 
* * * 
"The most unspoken and unutter ed--almost conceal ed--thought of some 
in t he fight against the Ameri can i nvolvement i n Southeast Asia i s : 
First, Amer ica cannot win the wa r 1n South Viet- Nam; second, while 
South Viet- Nam or, indeed, Southeast Asi a may be important to Ameri can 
inter ests, these areaS are not cruc i al to tho~e interests . 
Therefore, 
since we cannot win i n a war theater where the territory is peripheral 
to Amer ican interests, l et us r et reat, l et us withdraw wi th no furt her 
nonsense . 
II In my vi e· ... , t he compl ete answer is t hat there would be no greater 
danger to world peace tban to start segregating mankind and tbe countri es 
D-71 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
they live in 8S either peripheral or crucial . 
Perhaps in those halcyon 
days ~hen the Congress of Vienna was the supreme example of intelligent 
diplomacy, such distinctions had meaning . . The introduction of Marxism-
Leninism into world society and the visible determination by its mili-
tant exponents to implement that doctrine through 'wars of national 
liberation ' has today obliterated such distinctions . 
Sb has the expan-
sion of technology, wnich has made this a shri~k1ng world of inter-
dependent nations . II 
* * * 
IIATrITUDE OF COW-ruNIST CHrnA 
"But President Johnson bes spoken to ears which hear only the echo 
of their own doctrine . It 1s not Dennis Healey nor Robert McNamara but 
the Red Chinese Minister, Marshal Lin Piso, who wrote 6 months ago, and 
I quote: 
' We know that ""ar brings destructionJ sacrifice, and suffering 
on the people. 
(But) the sacrifice of a small number of people in 
revolutionary wars is repaid by security for whole nations .... wer can 
temper the people and push history forward . 
In this sense, war is a 
great school .. .. In diametrical opposition to the Khrushchev revisionists, 
the (Chinese) Marxist- Leninists ... never take a gloomy view of war.' 
IIMarshal Lin Piao's statement didn ' t come out of thin air . 
In bis 
book Problems of War and strategy Mao Tse-tung ~rote , and this was 
before 1949: 
'The seizure of power by armed forces , the settlement of an 
issue by war, is the central task and the highest fom of revolution.' 
"Wben Mao wrote these words, he lacked nuclear capability . 
Today 
the story is different, and the implications of his words and those of 
Marshal Lin are more dreadful. II 
46. 
• * * 
Vice President Humphrey Reports to President on Asian Trip, White 
House Press Release of' l>iarch 6J 1966; Department of State Bulletin, 
March 28, 1966, p . 490 . 
* • * 
"3. The significance of the struggle in Vietnam is not simply 
the defense of a small nation against powerful neighbors. 
Vietnam is, 
in a larger sense, the focus of e broad effort to restrain the attempt 
by Asian Communists to expand by force--as '.Ie assisted our European 
allies in resisting Communist expansion in Europe after Horld War II . 
D-72 
I 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"4. 
The Honolulu Deolaration emphasizing the defeat of aggression 
and the achievement of a social revolution could represent a historic 
turning point in American relationships with Asia . 
The goals agreed 
upon by President Johnson and the Chief of State and Prime Minister of 
the Republic of '!ietnam at Honolulu are taken -rery seriously: 
"to defeat aggression, 
"to defeat social misery, 
"to build a stable democratic government, 
"to reach an honorable, just peace . 
"5. 
Most Asian leaders are concerned 
militancy of Communist China ' s attitudes . 
country to fall under Communist domination 
cated nationalists . 
about the belligerence and 
None wishes to permit his 
in any form . 
All are dedi-
"6. 
.Among the leaders with whom I spoke, there was repeatedly 
expressed a concern as to whether our American purpose, tenacity and 
will were strong enough to persevere in Southeast Asia . 
I emphasized 
not only the firmness of our resolve but also our dedication to the 
rights of free discussion and dissent . " 
* * 
ii-
Address by Vice President Humphrey at the National Press Club, 
Washington) D. C. ) t-tarch 11, 1966, "United States Tasks and 
Res~onsibilities in Asia Ii; Department of State Bulletin, April 4, 
196 I p . 523· 
* * * 
" Why are we in South Viet-Nam? 
"We are in South Viet- Nam to repel and prevent the success of 
aggression against the Government and the people of that country. 
"We are there to help essure the South Vietnamese people the basic 
right to decide their o.m futures, freely and without int1midation . 
"We are there to help those people achieve a better standard of 
living for thems~lves and their children. 
"We are there to help establish the principle that, in this nuclear 
age, aggression cannot be an acceptable means e ither of settling inter-
national disputes or of realizing national objectives. If aggression is 
permitted to go unchecked, lie cannot in good faith hold out much hope 
for the future of small nations or of world peace . n 
* * *' 
D-73 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3,3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"ASIAN CO~:MUNISM, A CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER 
"At the beginning today, I said the conflict in Viet- Nem was the 
focus of a wider struggle taking place in Asia. 
"During my recent mission I was struck by the depth of feeling, 
among almost all Asian-leaders, that Asian communism had direct design 
on their national integrity and independence . ,Almost all cited examples 
of ~ubversion and in many cases direct military involvement by Communist 
troops within their countries . 
And none--\oTithout any exception- - ques-
tioned our involvement in Viet- Kem. 
There were questions about aspects 
of our policy there but none concerning the fact of our presence there 
and our resistance to aggression . 
"Among the leaders .;1th '..thorn I spoke, there was repeatedly expressed 
e deep concern as to whether our American purpose, tenacity, and will 
were strong enough to persevere in Southeast Asia . 
Public debate in 
America was sometimes i nterpreted as a weakening of purpose. 
I empha-
sized not only the firmness of our resolve but also our dedication to 
, 
the rights of free discussion and dissent. 
"For we know that John Stuart f.1ill ' s advice remains valid: 
' We can 
never be sure that the opinion we are endeavoring to stifle is a false 
opinion; and if we were sure, stifling it would be an evil still.' 
"Asian communism may be a' subject for discussion here . 
In Asia, it 
is a clear and present danger . 
No Single, independent nation in Asia has 
the strength to stand alone against that danger . 
"I believe that the time may cane when Asian communism may lose its 
fervor, when it may lose some of its neuroses, when it may realize that 
its objectives cannot be gained by aggression . 
But until that time I 
believe we have no choice but to help the nations of Southeast Asia 
strengthen themselves for the long road ahead . 
"I also said, at the beg:l.nning today, that some very basic principles 
of international conduct were under test in Viet- Nam. 
Some people think 
not . 
"Of them, I ask this ; 
Were ve to withdraw from Viet- Nam under any 
conditions short of peace, securi ty, and the right of self-determination 
for the South Vietnamese people, what conclusions would be drawn in the 
independent nations of Asia? In Western Europe? 
In the young, struggling 
countries of Africa? In the nations of Latin America beset by subversion 
and unrest? What conclusions would be drawn in Hanoi and Peking?" 
* * * 
D-74 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
48 . 
Address by Secretary Rusk at the Founder's Day Banquet of the 
Boston University School of Public Communications at Boston, 
Massachusetts on Harch 14, 1966, "Keeping Our Commitment to 
Peace"; Department of State Bulletin, April 4, 1966, p . 514 . 
" " " 
" ...• The lesson of World War II was that it was necessary to 
organize and defend a peace--not merely to wish for 1t-- and to 'unite 
our strength to maintain international peace and security.' 
and, 
like 
"Article 1 of the United Nations Charter is 
although some 
to remind you 
w~y think it old-fashioned 
of what it says : 
to 
utterly fundamental 
speak of it, I should 
'To maintain international peace and security, and to that 
end: to take effective collective measures for the prevention and 
removal of threats to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of 
aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by 
peaceful means, and in confonnity with the principles of justice and 
international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes 
or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace; . .. ' 
"Unhappily and tragically} the ink was not dry on the United Nations 
Charter before it ,became fully apparent that Joseph Stalin had turned to 
world r evolution and a policy of aggressive militancy. 
The first major 
issue before the Security Council was his attenpt to keep Russian forces 
in Iran . 
Then came guerrilla operations against Greece, pressure on 
Turkey, the Berlin blockade, and the Korean aggression. 
These moves 
led to defensive action by the free world and a number or mutual defense 
treaties-- the Rio Pact, NATO, the ANZUS treaty with Australia and New 
Zealand, and bilateral treaties with the Philippines and Japan . 
"Under President Eisenho .... er we concluded the Southeast Asia treaty, 
which, by a protocol} committed us to help the three non- Communist states 
of former French Indochina--South Viet-Nam, Laos, and Cambodia--to repel 
armed attacks, if they asked for help . 
Under Eisenhower we also entered 
mutual defense pacts with the Republic of Korea and the Republic of China 
on Formosa . 
"All of those commitments to appose aggression- -through the United 
Nations and through our various defensive alliances--were approved by the 
Senate by overwhelming majorities of both parties . 
And these and related 
obligations have been sustained over the years by authorizations, appr~­
priations, and other supporting measures enacted by bipartisan votes in 
both Houses of Congress . 
"THE BACKBONE OF WORLD PEACE 
"I have read that I have drawn ' no distinction between powerful 
D-75 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
industrial democratic states in Europe and weak and undemocratic states 
in Asia . I 
The answer is that} for the Secretary of State, our treaty 
commitments are a part of the supreme law of the land, and I do not 
believe that we can be honorable in Europe and dishonorable in Asia . 
"I do believe that the United States must keep its pledged word. 
That is not only a manter of national honor but an essential to the 
preservation of peace.-
For the backbone of world peace is the integrity 
of the commitment of the United States . " 
* * * 
"The fact is that I have always treated the SEATO treaty - - ~lh1ch 
the Senate approved ~ith only one dissenting vote--as an important part 
of our ccmmitment to defend South Viet-llam. " 
* * * 
"I do not regard our policy in Viet-Nam as based only on past 
commitments . 
I believe that it is now just as much in our interest--
and that of the free world- -to repel Communist aggression there as it 
was when we made those earlier commitments . " 
* * * 
* * * 
"Our national i nterest--I speak as an American--is no longer expli-
citly guided in the Far East, by particular economic or military concerns 
with individual areas, as was indeed to a considerable extent the case 
not only with 'ourselves but also with the British and others before 
World War II. 
We have a deep concern for expanded trade and cultural 
ties- - which alone can in the end bind the world together--and .'e have 
military base rights and needs related to our role in assi sting i n t he 
securi ty in the area . 
But neither of these is an end in itself. 
The 
first will, we believe, flourish if the nations in the area are able 
t o develop i n freedom; the second, the security role, must now be main-
tamed but uiIl over time, we hope, become susceptible of reduction and 
indeed, .... herever ;pOSSible, of eliminati on." 
* * * 
" . .. . In the fall of 1961. President Kennedy made the ,decision that 
the United States would have to go beyond the limits of the Geneva 
accords . That decision was a fully justifi ed response to the wholesale 
'D-76 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
violation o~ the accords by the other side . 
We raised our military 
personnel from the levels provided in the Geneva accords to 10, 000 
men in 1962 and to roughly 25, 000 men at the end of 1964. 
These men 
acted as advisers and assisted the Government of South Viet- Nam i n its 
logistics . 
They did not operate as ccmbat ground units . II 
* * * 
IIThere i s in addition the strategic stake, .for, without accepting 
the pat simplicities of 'domino ' theories, none of us could doubt that 
the preservation o~ the independence of Thailand, of Malaysia , of 
Singapore, of Burma, and beyond them in the long run of India, the 
Philippines, and Australia would become infinitely more difficult if 
this Communist venture were to succeed in South Viet- Nam . 
It is a 
Hanoi venture, but its success would feed the fires of the clearly 
expansionist thrust of Communist Chinese policy. 
That expansion must 
be contained so that over time there may emerge the latent moderate 
and constructive elements within Communist China . 
"There i s the world stake in defeating efforts to change the i nter-
national framework by f'orce, t.hether the attempt be, as in thi s case, 
by a Communist nation across a line that separates it from a non - C~unist 
country or across a line that divides countries where communism is not a 
part of the issue . 
These are the stakes as we see them . · We shall con-
tinue to do what is necessary to insure that South Viet- Nam will be able 
to stand on its O'WIl feet and determine its own future . !I 
50 . 
Address by Ambassador Arthur J . Goldberg, U. S. Representative to 
the United Nations, at the UniverSity of California, Berkeley, 
California on I·~arch 25, 1966, "The Quest for Peace ll ; Department 
of State Bulletin, April 18, 1966, p . 653 . 
* * * 
"Such principles are all very well. 
But between the idea and the 
reality fails the shadcrw- -the shado'" of Viet- Nam . 
Can this war be fitted 
into any wider concept of the search for better methods of peacekeepi ng? 
I think it cen. 
No thinking American would support it if' it could not . 
Let me begin by saying what this war i s not. 
"It i s not emphati cally 8 ',,'ar to establish an American 'imperialism' 
or an American 
' s~here of' influence ' in Asia . 
What exclusive interests 
have we there? 
Investment ? trade? settlement? None . 
"It is not a war to threaten or frustrate the l egi timate interests 
of the Chinese people--though it seeks to di scourage violence and aggres-
sion and play same part in persuading them that the imperialist world, 
once kno'..tn to the Central Kingdom, is dead and will not be resurrected. 
D-77 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 20 11 
"It 1s in part, if you like, to persuade them that the fact that 
l arge parts of ASie- - including all Soutbeast Asia and the bill states 
of the Himalayas- -once, supposedly, paid the emperors tribute is no 
reason why tbey sho1.tld revert to the status o'f vassal states i n the 20th 
century, 
"Again, this war is not a holy war against communi sm as an ideology , 
It does not seek unconditional sw'render--from North Viet- Nam or anyone 
else . 
It does not seek to deny any segment o'f South Vi etnamese opinion 
i ts part in pea@ully establishing a stable regime . 
• 
"It does, however, preclude retreat before two things- -'first, the 
program of the Viet Cong, strongly controlled by the North, to impose 
i ts will by violence; and second, its claim to be the 
I sale genuine 
r epresentative ' of a people, the vast majority of wham have rejected 
this claim. 
"This, I believe, i s the background against which to consider in 
posi tive terms what this Har is about . 
It i s, I suggest, another step 
in a l tm1ted operation of a pOLici ng type--an operati on designed to check 
violence as a means to settle i nternational disputes . 
"The vi olence is no less totel because it has been largely organized 
as a guerrilla operation . . • , II 
* * • 
51 . 
Statement b 
Secreta 
Rusk Before the Senate Coa~ittee on Forei 
Relations on May 9, 19 
, 
Background of U. S. Policy i n Southeast 
ASia"; Department of State Bulletin, Nay 30, 1966, p . 830 . 
* * * 
"I was myself in Government dw-ing the Truman administrat ion and 
well r ecall the discuss i ons whi ch were held at the highest levels of 
Gover nment i n the National Security Council as well as the strategic 
problems consi dered by the Joint Chiefs of Staff . 
"If the commi ttee wi ll search its own and the publ ic records on 
t hi s matter during that period and since, they could surely have no 
doubt that i t was the judgment that the security of Soutbeast As ia was 
. extremely important to the security interests of the United States . 
This was because of the more than 200 million people in Southeast Asi a , 
the geography of that area, the important natural r esources of t he 
countries i nvolved, the r elationshi p of Southeast Asia to t he total 
wor ld Situation, and the effect upon the prospects of a durable peace . 
!II emphasize the last point because the overri ding securi t y interest 
of the United States is in organizing a stable peace . 
The sacr ifices of 
World War II and the almost unimaginable losses of a world war III under-
l i ne this central objective of American ~olicy . 
D- 78 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"There was also involved the problem of the phenanenon of' aggres-
sion. 
We had found ourselves in the catastrophe of World War II 
because aggressions in Asia, in Africa, and in Europe had demonstrated 
that the aggressor ~uu1d not stop until compelled to do so . 
It was 
the determination of' the United States to leern the lessons of that 
experience by moving in the U.N. and otherwise to try to build an 
enduring international ·peace . It 
* * * 
"LEGALITY OF U. S. EFFORTS IN SOUTH VIET- NAN 
liVery briefly, on the second question, Mr . Chairman, the matter 
was raised with respect to the legal issues surrounding our efforts in 
South Viet- Nam. 
~le have made available to the committee an extensive 
legal memorandum on these matters, and the law officers of the Govern-
ment are available to discuss this in whatever detail the committee may 
vish . 
"In this brief statement today I shall merely outline the essence 
of our view . 
"t-tllitary actions of the United States in support of South Viet-
Nam, including air attacks on military targets in North Viet- Kam, are 
authorized under international law by the well-established right of 
collective s~lf -defense against armed attack. 
"South Viet-Uam is the victim of armed attack from the North 
through the infiltration of armed personnel, military equipment, and 
regular combat units. 
This armed attack preceded our strikes at mili-
tary targets in North Viet- Nam . 
ltThe fact that South Viet- Nam is not a member of the United Nations, 
because of the Soviet Union ' s veto, does not affect the lawfulness of 
collective self-defense of South Viet- Nam. 
The United Nations Charter 
was not designed to, and does not, limit the right of self- defense to 
United Nations members . 
"Nor does South Viet- Nam' s status under the Geneva accords of 1954, 
as one zone of a temporarily divided state, impair the lawfulness of the 
defense against attack from the other zone . 
"As in Germany and Korea, the demarcation line is established by 
an international 19reement, and international llw requires that it be 
respected by each zone . 
Moreover, South Viet- Nam has been recognized 
as an independent entity by more than 60 governments around the world 
and admitted to membership in a number of the specialized.agencies of the 
U.N. 
D-79 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"Nothing in the U.N. Charter purports to restrict the exercise of 
the right of collective self-defense to regional organizations such as 
the OAS LOrganization of American stateil. 
liAs required by the U.N. Charter, the United States has reported 
to the Security Council the actions it has taken in exercising the 
right of collective s~1f- defense in Viet- Nam. 
It has indeed requested 
the Council to seek a peaceful settlement on the basis of the Geneva 
accords, but the Council has not been able to ~ct . 
"Tbere is no requirement in international law for a declaration of war 
before the right of individual or collective self- defense can be exercised . 
"South Viet- tram did not violate the Geneva accords of 1954 by refus-
ing to e~ge in consultations with the North Vietnanese in 1955 with a 
view to holding general elections in 1956, as provided for in thos~ accords . 
Even assuming that the election provisions were binding on South Viet- Nam, 
which did not agree to them, conditions in the North clearly made impossi-
ble the free expression of the national will contemplated by the accords . 
In these circumstances, at least, South Viet- Nam was justified in declining 
to participate in planning for a nationwide election . 
liThe introduction of U.S . military personnel and equipment in South 
Viet- Nam is not a violation of the accords . 
Until late 1961 U.S. mili-
tary personnel and equipment in South Viet-Uam were restricted to replace-
ments for French military personnel and equipment in 1954. 
Such replace-
ment was express~ permitted by the accords . 
"North Viet-Na~ , hmo/ever, had from the beginning violated the accords 
by leaving forces and supplies in the South and using its zone for aggres-
sion against the South . 
In response to mounting armed infUtration from 
the North, the United States, beginning in late 1961, substantially 
increased its contribution to the South's defense . 
This was fully justi-
fied by the established principle of international law that a material 
breach of an agreement by one perty entitles another party at least to 
withhold compliance \-lith a related provision. 
"Tbe United states has commitments to assist South Viet- Nam i n 
defending itself against CooltIll..U1ist aggression: 
In the SEATO treaty--
which I have already mentioned and which is similar in form to our 
defense commitments to South Korea} Japan, the Philippines, Australia, 
New Zealand, and the Republic of Chlna--and even earlier in the Geneva 
conference ve had declared that we would regard a renewal of Communist 
aggression in V:1:et- Nam with • grave concern .' 
"Since 1954 three Presidents have reaffirmed our cOOlIlJ.itments to 
the defense of South Viet-Nero . 
"Finally} the President of the United States has full authority to 
commit U.S. forces in the collective defense of South Viet- Nam . 
This 
D-80 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
authority stems from the constitutional po~ers of the President as 
Commander in Chief and Chief Executive, with responsibilities as well 
for the conduct of foreign relations . 
However, it is not necessary 
to rely upon the Constitution alone as the source of the President's 
authority. 
The FEATO treaty, which forms part of the law of the land, 
sets forth a United States commitment to defend South Viet- Nam against 
armed attack, and the Congress, in a joint resolution of August 1964 
and in authorization and appropriation acts in support of the military 
effort in Viet-Nam, has given its approval and support to the Presi-
dent I s action . 
"The Constitution does not require a declaration of war for U.S. 
actions in Viet- If8Ill taken by the Presi dent and approved by the Congress . 
A long line of precedents, beginning with the undeclared war with France 
i n 1798-1800 and including actions in Korea and Lebanon, supports the use 
of U.S. armed forces abroad in the absence of a congressional declaration 
of war. II 
52. 
* * * 
Address by Secretary Rusk Before the COill1cil on Foreign Relations 
at Ne'., York, New York on fo.1ay 24, 1966, "Organizing the Peace for 
Man ' s Survival it; Department of State Bulletin, June 13, 1966, p . 926. 
* * * 
"And significant changes have occurred within the Canmunist world. 
It has ceased to be monolithic, and evolutionary influences are visible 
in most of the Communist states . 
But the leaders of both the principal 
Communist nations are committed to the promotion of the Communist world 
revolution, even while they disagree--perhaps bitterly--on questions 
of tactics . 
11 If mankind i s to achieve a peaceful world order safe for free 
insti tutions, it is of course essential that aggression be el iminated--
if possible by deterring it or} if it occurs, by repelling it . 
The 
clearest lesson of the 1930 ' s and __ 40 ' S is that aggression feeds on 
aggression . 
1'm aYare that Mao Bnd Ho Chi Minh are not Hitler and 
Nussolini, but we should not forget what we have learned about the ana-
t omy and physiology of aggression . 
We ought to know better than to 
i gnore the aggressor ' s openly proclaimed intentions or to fall victim 
to the notion that he will stop if you let him have just one more bite 
or speak to him e. little more gently. II 
* * * 
II •••• But what the COllliIlunists, in their tam.iliar ups~de down language, 
call 'wars of liberation I are advocated and supported by Moscow as well 
as by Peiping . 
And the assault on the Republic of Viet- Nam is a critical 
test of that technique of aggression . 
D-81 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"It is as important to deter this type of aggression in Southeast 
Asia now as it ',.;as to defeat it in Greece 19 years ago . 
The aggr~ssion 
against Greece produced the Truman Doctrine, a declaration of a general 
policy of ass1st!ng other free nations who were defending themselves 
against external attacks or threats . . .. 
"THE 'WHY' OF OUR Cot,IM1TMEUT 
"In the discussion of our commitment in ·Southeast Asia, three 
different aspects are sometimes confused--why we made it, how we made 
it, and the means of fulfilling it . 
"Tbe ' why' was a detenninat10n that the peace and security of that 
area are extremely important to the security of the United States. Tpat 
determination was made first before the Korean war by President Truman on 
the basis of protracted analysis in the highest councils of the Govern-
ment . 
The problem was reexamined at least twice during his administration 
and at intervals thereafter . 
And the main conclusion was always the same . 
It 
~~s based on the natural resources and the strategic importance of the 
area , on the number of nations and peoples involved, more than 200 million, 
as vell as on the relationship of Southeast Asia to the world situation 
as a whole and to the prospects for a durable peace . ... 
liTHE 'Emf' OF OUR COr.n-.Il'INENI' 
'~he ' hOW ' of the commitment consists of various acts end utter-
ances by successive Presidents and Congresses, of which the most solemn 
is the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, signed in 1954 and 
approved by the Senate in early 1955 with only one dissenting vote . 
r do not find it easy to understand how anyone could have voted for 
that treaty--or even read it- - vithout realizing that it Nas a genuine 
collective defense treaty. 
lilt says in article r.t that each party recognizes that 'aggression 
by means of armed attack in the treaty area ' - -which by protocol included 
the nations which came out of French Indochina--' would endanger its own 
peace and safety, and agrees that it will in tPBt event act to meet the 
common danger in accordance with its constitutional processes .' And, in 
his testimony before the Foreign Relations Committee, Secretary of state 
Dulles said specifically that this clause covered an armed attack 'by the 
r egime of Ho Chi Minh.! There .... as never any doubt about it when this 
treaty vas signed . 
Article r.t binds each party individually; it does not 
require a formal :!ollective finding . 
ft;n~. that too was made plain when 
the treaty was under consideration and has been reiterated on various 
occasions since then . 
"No.., the assertion that we have only recently discovered the SEATO 
Treaty is just untrue . 
I have r eferred to it frequently myself, begin-
ning with a public statement in Bangkok in ~larch 1961 that the United 
States would live up to its obligations under that treaty and would 
D-82 
Declassified l>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 201 1 
'continue to assist free nations of this area who ere struggling for 
their survival against armed minorities directed, supplie~and sup-
ported fran without, ' just as we would assist those under attack by 
naked aggression . 
President Kennedy referred to our obli gations under 
SEATO on a number of occasions, including his last public utterance, 
and Presi dent Johnson has done so frequently . 
!fIn April 1964 the SEATO Council of Ministers declared that the 
attack on the Republic of Viet- r-;am wes an aggression 'directed, sup-
plied and supported by the Communist regime ~ North Vietnam, in 
flagrant violation of the Geneva accords of 1954 and 1962 .' They 
declared also that the defeat of that 'Communist campaign is essential ' 
and that the members of' SEATO should remain prepared to take furtber 
steps in fulfillment of their obligations under the treaty . 
Only France 
did not join in these declarations . 
!fA f ew days later, i n this city, President J ohnson seid that : 
'The statement of the SEATO allies that Communist defeat i s 
' essential ' is a reality . 
To fail to respond ••. W'ould ref'lect on our 
honor as a nation, would undermine worldwide confidence in our courage, 
would convince every nation in South Asia that it must now bo'" to 
Communist terms to survive ..•• So let no one doubt (he sai d) that we are 
in this battle as long as South Viet-Nam wants our support and needs 
our assistance to protect i ts freedom.' 
"The r esolution of August 1964, which the House of Representatives 
adopted unanimously and the Senate with only two negative votes, said 
that 'the United States regards as vital to its national interest and 
to world peace the maintenance of i nternational peace and security in 
Southeast Asia. ' 
It also said that 'the United States i s, thereforej 
prepared, as the President determines, to take all necessary steps, 
including the use of' armed force, to assist any member or protocol state 
of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty r equesting assistance in 
defense or its freedom . ' 
"FULFILLING OUR COI~llTME!1r 
"Now the third. aspect i s the means of fulfilling our commitment . 
These have changed with the nature of the problem and as the dimensions 
of the aggression have grown . 
The decision to comm~t American forces 
into combat was made by the Presi dent with understandable sobriety and 
reluctance and only because it became necessary to cope with the escala-
tion of t he aggression by the other side . 
"I have no doubt that e large majority of' the governments of the 
free world are sympathetic to our efforts in Southeast Asi a and "'ould be 
deeply concerned were they to faiL •.. II 
* * * 
• 
D-83 . 
I 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
53 . 
Address by Vice President Humphrey at Commencement Exercises at 
the United States Kilitary Academy, 
~Test POint, New York on 
June 8, 1966, !!Perspective on Asia I ; Department of' State Bulletin1 
July 4, 1966, p. 2. 
* * * 
. "World peace and security will be threatened by propaganda, sub-
version, and agitation, by economic warf'are, ,by assassination of honest 
and able leaders, as well as by the naked use of armed force. 
nWorld peace and security tdll be threatened, above all, by the 
ve~ existence, for two-thirds of mankind, of conditions of hunger, 
disease, and ignorance . 
nWe must learn that the simple solutions of times past will not 
meet the present day challenges and new forms of aggression we face . 
"Our 'doves ' must learn that there are times when power must be 
used. 
They must learn that there is DO substitute for force in the 
face of a determined enemy who resorts to terror, subversion} and aggres-
sion} whether concealed or open. 
1l0ur ' hawks I must learn that military power 1s not enough . 
They 
must learn} indeed, that it can be wholly. unavailing if not accompanied 
by political effort and by the credible promise to ordinary people of 
a better lii'e. 
"And all of us must learn to adapt our military planning and actions 
to the new conditions of subversive warfare, the so-called 'wars of 
national liberation . , II 
* * * 
"America ' 5 role in Asia today is a direct product of the century 
that preceded World War II and of the uar itsel.:f . 
For with the end of 
that war} the responsibilities of victory imposed on us a stabilizing 
role in Japan and Korea. 
And with the beginning of the cold war, the 
Communist victory in Chins, and the outbreak of the Korean war, American 
power was the only shield available to fragile BDd n~wly independent 
nati ons in non- Communist Asia . " 
* * * 
"But what of the states of fonner French Indochina? There, of 
course} is the present focal point of war and revolution in Asia . 
And 
there we are tested as never before . 
We face a situation of external 
aggression and subversion against a postcolonial nation that has never 
had the breathing spece to develop its politics or its economy . 
D-84 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
. uIn South Viet- Ham botb defense and development--the war against 
the aggressor and the war against despair--are fused as never before. 
Viet- Nam challenges our courage, our ingenui ty} and Our ability to 
persevere . 
If we can succeed there--if we can help sustain an inde-
pendent South Viet- Nam) free to determine i ts own future--then our 
prospects, and the proppects for free men throughout ASia, will be 
bright indeed. 
"We knmI this . 
Our friends and allies kpow it . 
saries know it . 
That is why one small country looms 
everyone I S map of Asia . I! 
* * * 
And Our adver-
so large today on 
"War i s al'..rays cruel. 
But the war in Viet- Nam should not obscure 
for us the fact that behind the smoke and uproar is the testing of an 
issue vital to all of Asia and indeed the world . 
Can ind~endent , non-
Communist states not only survive but gron and flourish in face of 
Communist pressure?" 
* * * 
54. Address by President Johnson at Qnaha Munici 81 Dock on June 30 
19 6, 
~wo Threats to Peace : 
Hunger and Aggression 
Department 
of State Bulletin, July 25, 1966, p. 115 . 
* * *, 
"Now I want to point out to you that the conflict there is impor-
tant for many reasons ) but I have time to mention only a few. 
I am 
going to mention three specifically . 
"The first reason: 
We beli eve that the rigbts of other people are 
just as important as our avo . 
We believe that we are Obligated to help 
those whose rights are being threatened by brute force . II 
* * * 
"The Nmth Vietnamese at this hour are trying to deny the people 
of South V!et- Nam the right to build their own nation, the right to 
choose their own system of government) the right to go and vote in a free 
election and select their own people) the right to live and work in peace . 
"South Viet- Nam has asked us for help. 
r espect for the rights of other people could 
"VIET- NAM MID THE SECURITY OF ASIA 
Only if ~e abandon our 
we turn down their plea . 
"Second, South Viet- Nam is important to the security of the rest of 
all of Asia . 
D-85 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"A few years ago the nations ot' free Asia lay under the shadow of 
Communist ~hina . 
They faced a cammon threat, but not in unity . 
They 
~ere still caught up in their old disputes and dangerous confrontations . 
They were ripe for aggression . 
"No~ that pic·ture 1s changing. 
Shielded by the courage of the 
South Vietnamese, the .peoples of free Asia today are driving toward 
economic and social development in a new spirit of regional cooperation . 
"All you have to do 1s look at that map . and you will see inde-
pendence growing, thriving, blossoming, and blooming. 
"They are convinced that the Vietnamese people and the i r allies 
are going to stand f i rm against the conqueror, or against aggression . 
"Our fighting in Vlet- Nam, therefore, is buying time not only for 
South Viet-Nam, but it is buying time for a new and a vital, growing 
Asia to emerge and develop additional strength . 
"If South Viet- Nam were to collapse under Communist pressure from 
t he North, the progress in the rest of Asia would be greatly endangered. 
And don't you forget that ! 
"The third reason is : 
What happens in South Viet- Nam '\IllI detennine - -~ 
yes, it will determine- -whether ambitious and aggressive nations can use 
guerrilla w~rfare to conquer their weaker neighbors . 
"It will determine whether might makes right . 
"No~ I do not know of a single more important reason for our 
presence than this. 
"We are fighting in South Viet- Nam a different kind of ..... ar than ..... e 
have ever known in the past." 
* * * 
"If by such methods the agents of one nation can go out and hold 
and seize power where turbulent change is occurring in another nation, 
our hope for peace and order will suffer a crUShing blow allover the 
world . 
It will be en invitation to the would-be conqueror to keep on 
marching. 
That is why the problem of guerrilla warfare--the problem 
of Viet- Nam-- is a. critical threat to peace not just in South Viet- Nam, 
but in all of this world in which we liv~ . II 
* * * 
D-86 
55· 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
Address by President Johnson on Nationwide Radio and Televi~ion 
to the American Alumni Council on July 12, 1966, Hpour Essentials 
f"or Peace in Asian; Department of State Bulletin, August 1, .1966, 
p . 158 · 
* * * 
"Americans entered this century believing that our O"..m security 
had no foundation outside our own continent. 
Twice we mistook our 
sheltered position for safety. 
Twice·we were dead wrong . 
nIf we are wise now J we will not repeat our mistakes of the past. 
We will not retreat from the obligations of" freedom and security i n 
Asia . 
"MAKING AGGRESSION A I LOSlllG GAr.1E r 
"The second essential for peace in Asia is this : to prove to 
aggressive nations that the use of f orce to conquer others is a losing 
geme • " 
* * * 
"We are there because we are trying to make the Comnnmists of" 
North Viet- Nam stop shooting at their neighbors; 
- - because ve are trying to make this Communist aggression 
unprof"itable; 
--because we are tr,ying to demonstrate that guerrilla warfare, 
i nspired by one nation against another nation, can never succeed . 
Once 
that l esson i s learned, a shadow that hangs over all of" Asia tonight 
will begin, I think, to recede . " 
56. 
* * * 
Address by President Johnson at the White House, 15 August 1966, 
"The Enemy He Face in Viet_Nam li ; Department of State Bulletin, 
August 15, 1966, p . 227 . 
* * * 
"They may not look like vIe do. 
They don I t speak the same l anguage 
that we do . 
They may not even think lil:e we r.o. But they are human 
betngs . 
We promised them, by treaty, to help protect their independence, 
and America doesn It break its promises . 
We are going to stay there." 
* * * 
D-87 
Declassified per Executive Order [3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 [6. By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
"Second, a victory for the Communists in South V1et- Nam will be 
followed by new ambitions in Asia . 
"The Communists have taught us that aggression is like hunger: 
It obeys no law but its own appetite . 
For this reason they have 
gambled heavily on sus cess in the South. 
liThe leaders of free Asian nations know this better than anyone . 
If South Viet- Nam falls, then they are the next targets . 
North Viet-
Nam ' s efi'ort to impose its own system on South Viet- Nam is a neH form 
of colonialism. 
The f'ree nat i ons of Asia want it stopped now . 
Many 
of them are standing there by our side, helping us step them nOll . 
"Third, a Communist victory in South Viet- Nam would inspire ne .... 
aggression in the rest of the .... orld . 
"Listen to me While I repeat the words of North Viet- Nam ' stop 
mili tary commander . 
I want you to hear what he says: 
' The war has beccme (in his .... ords) the model of the national 
liberation movement of our time. 
If' the special warfare that the 
United States imperialists are testing in South Viet- Nam is overcome, 
t hen it can be defeated anywhere in the world. ' 
"Let me repeat to you those last words: 
' ... it can be defeated 
anywhere in the world. r 
"Now what he r~ally means is this :' If' guerrilla 
i n Asia , i t can succeed in Africa. 
It can succeed in 
It can succeed anywhere i n the ","orld ." 
* * * 
warfare succeeds 
Latin Pmerica . 
57 . 
Address b 
President Johnson before the Na 
lea 
e at r.1anchester 
N. H. 
A 
st 20, 1 
Our Ob ective in Vietnam '; De artment of 
state Bulletin, September 12, 19 
p . 3 
* * * 
" ... But I think most Ameri cans ... ant to knoW' why Viet- Nam i s important. 
"I think they kno ..... that communism must be halted in Viet- Nam, as it 
was halted in Western Europe and in Greece and Turkey and Korea and the 
Caribbean, if it is dete~ined to swallow up free peoples and spread its 
influence in that area trying to take freedom away from people who do 
want to select their o~ leaders for themselves . 
"I think that our people know that if aggression succeeds there , 
when it has failed in other places in the world, a harsh blow would be 
D-88 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
dealt to the security of other free nations in Asia and perhaps a blo~ 
to the peace in the entire world . II 
* * * 
liTo give them time to build is one reason that we are all there . 
For there are times when the strong must provide a shield for those 
on whom the Communists prey. 
We have provided that shield in other 
countries . 
We are providing it there . 
And this is such a time . 
rrWe are there for another reason, too, and that is because the 
United States must stand behind its word, even when conditions have 
added to the cost of honoring a pledge that was given a decade ago . 
"I do not have to remind you that our pledge was in 
by treaty to uphold the security of Southeast Asia . 
Now 
i s in jeopardy because people are trying to use force to 
South Viet- Nam. 
When adversity comes is no time to back 
ccnanitment, if we expect our friends around the world to 
our word. It 
fact 
that 
take 
down 
have 
given 
security 
over 
on our 
faith in 
58· 
* * * 
Address by President Johnson before the American Le~lon National 
Convention in Washin~on, D.C. on August 30, 1966, 
The True 
Meaning of PatriotisIDl; Department of State Bulletin, September 191 
1966, p . 425 · 
* * * 
"Make no mistake about the character of this war . 
Our adversar ies 
have done us at least one great service: 
They have described this war 
for what it 1s- - in unmistakable terms . 
It is meant to be the opening 
salvo in a series of bombardments, or, as they are called in Peking, 
I war s of liberation . ' 
"And i f it succeeds in South Viet- Nam, then, as 11arshal Lin "Piao 
says, 'The people in other parts of the world will see •.. that what the 
Vi etnamese people can do, they can do, too . III 
59 · 
* * * 
Statement b'~ Arthur J . Goldberg before th!'!: U. N. General Assembly 
on September 22, 1966, "Initiative for Peace"; Department of State 
Bulletin, October 10, 1966, p . 518 . 
* * * 
"OUR AFFIRviATIVE JUMS IN VIET- NAM 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"It is because of the attempt to upset by violence the situation 
in V1et- Nam, and its far-reaching implications elsewhere, that the 
United States and other countries have responded to appeals from South 
Viet- Nam for mil~tary assistance . 
"Our aims in giving this assistance are strictly limited. 
"We are not engaged in a ' holy war ' against cononunism. 
'~e do not seek to establish an American empire or a sphere of 
influence in Asia. 
"We seek no permanent military bases, no permanent establisPlllent 
of troops, no peTimanent alliances, no permanent American presence of 
any kind in South Viet- Nam . 
"We do not seek to impose a policy of alinement on South Viet- Nam . 
"We do not seek to overthroW" the Government of North Viet- Nam. 
"We do not seek to do any injury to mainland China nor to threaten 
any of its legitimate interests . 
"We do not ask of North Viet- Nam an unconditional surrender or 
i ndeed the surrender of anything that belongs to it . 
"Nor do we seek to exclude any segment of the South Vietnamese 
people from peaceful partiCipation in their country's fUture . 
HLet me state effinnatively and succinctly what our aims are. 
"We .... ant a political solution, not a military solution, to this 
conflict . 
By the same token, we reject the idea that North Viet-Nam 
bas the r i ght to impose a military solution. 
I1We seek to assure for the people of South Viet- Nam the same right 
of self-determination--to decide its own political dest i ny, free of 
force--that the United Nations Charter affi rms for all . 
"And. we believe that reunification of Viet- Nam should be decided 
upon through a free choice by the peoples of both the North and the 
South without outside interference) the results of whi ch choice we ere 
fully prepared to support ." 
* * * 
• D- 90 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
&:> . Address by Secretary Rusk before the George C. Marshall Memorial 
Dinner of the Association of the United States A 
at Washin 
on, 
D.C. on October 12, 19 , 
Requirements f or Or anizing the Peace j 
Department of State Bulletin, October 31, 19 
p . 
* * * 
"And early in 1950, after extended consultations 'W'ith his principal 
foreign policy and military advisers, President Truman determined that 
we had an important national security i nter est in keeping Southeast Asia, 
including Viet-Nam, 'W'ithin the free world . 
That finding was repeatedly 
r eviewed--by him, and then by PreSidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson--
always with the same conclusion . 
"I have heard it said or implied that President Kennedy did not 
regard the security of Southeast Asia generally, and of South Viet-Nam 
in particular, as important to the free world and the United States . 
If he ever had such vi ews--or even any doubts about the importance of 
our stake in that area- - he never revealed them to his Secretary of state . 
"In his news conference of September 12, 1963, President Kennedy 
summed up our objective in Viet- Nam in these~words ! 
' •. • we want the war to be won, the C~unists to be contained, 
and the Americans to go home •. . • But we are not there to see a war l ost, 
and we will follow the policy which I have indicated today of advancing 
t hose causes and issues which help win the war.' 
"The great decisions of President Truman in both Europe and Asia 
r emind us that the community of nat i ons must have the courage to resist 
aggression no matter what form it ta,kes . 11 
* * * 
"There is an indigenous element i n the war in South Viet- Nam, but 
relatively i t is even smeller than was the i ndigenous element in t he 
case of Greece . 
We c·onsider it well vithin the capacity of the South 
Vietnamese to handle . 
We and others are there because of aggression from 
the North--an aggression which the other side has repeatedly escalated 
and nov includes many r egiments of the regular army' of North Viet- Nam . 
And ve shall l eave 'When these invaders and arms from the North go home ." 
* * * 
"And) let me e:nphasize, we had better not forget the ghastly mis-
tekes which led to the Second World War . 
For, there won 't be any oppor-
t unity to apply any lessons after a third world war . 
We had better remem ~ 
ber what 'We know and see to i t that a third "World war does not occur ." 
D-91 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
" •.•• Prudence dictates that woe use enough force to achieve the 
essential purpose of deterring or repelling aggression . 
That has been 
the practice of all four of our postwar Presidents . 
That is the road 
which offers the best hope of reaching a reliable peace '. 
"For we can never forget that our objective is a secure peace . 
We ' 
want nothing else fr~ anybody, anywhere in the world . " 
* * * 
61 . 
Address by Secretary Rusk before the Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation of state Colleges and National Association of State Universities 
and Land- Grant Colleges at Washington, D. C., November 15, 1966, "The 
futW'e of the Pacific Community"; Department of State Bulletin, 
December 5, 1966, p . 838. 
* * * 
"AGGRESSION IN SOUTH vmr-NI\M 
"But indirect aggression by infi ltration of men end elmS across 
f rontiers is still with us . 
It \las tried in. Greece, in l.1alaya , in the 
Philippines, and nmr in South Viet- Nem. 
The label I civil war I or ' war 
of national liberation ' does not make it any less an aggression . 
The 
purpose is to impose on others an unwanted regtme . 
It substitutes terror 
for persuasion, force for free choice . 
And especially if it succeeds, it 
contains the inherent threat of further aggression--and eventually a great 
\lSr . " 
* * * 
'~he militant As i an Communists have themselves proclaimed the attack 
on South Viet- Nem to be a critical test of this technique . 
And beyond 
South Viet- Nam and Laos they have openly designated Thailand as the next 
t arget . II 
* * * 
"NOW, as a generation ago, some people are saying that if' you let 
an aggressor take just one more bite, he will be satisfi ed. 
But one of 
the plainest lessons of our times i s that one aggression leads to another--
but the initial aggressor and perhaps by others who decide there 'Would be 
profit i n emulating him. 
"SOOle assert that 'Je have no national sec:W'ity interest in South Viet-
Nam and Southeast Asia . 
But that is not the judgment of those who have 
borne the high responsibilities for the safety of the United States . 
Begi n-
ning with President Truman, four successive Presidents, after extended con-
sultation with their principal advisers, have decided that we have a very 
important interest in the security of that area . 
. 
D-92 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"There is a further end more specific reason why we are assisting 
South Viet- Nam : 
Out of the strategic conclusions of four successive 
Pr esidents came commitments, including the Southeast Asia Collective 
Defense Treaty. The Senate approved it with only one negative vote . 
!lOur commitments are the backbone of 'World peace. 
It is essential 
that neither our adversaries nor our friends ever doubt that we ~ill do 
what we say 'We 'Jill do . 
othe:n.'ise, the result is very likely to be a 
great catastrophe. 
!lIn his last public utterance President Kennedy reviewed t-lhat the 
United States had done to preserve freedom and peace since the Second 
World War} and our defensive commitments} including our support of South 
Viet- Nam . 
He said; 
' We are still the keystone in the arch of freedom, 
and I think we will continue to do as we have done in the past, our 
duty . •. • I" 
* * * 
D-93 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
• 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
J OHNSON AD~UNISTRATION - 1967 
SUmARY 
I n general, the justification of U. S. involvement in Vietnam in 
1967 centered on the determination of America to honor the commitment 
under SEATO . 
The continuation of the build- up of U. S. military strength 
was justified as necessary to fight the "limited war in Vietnam in an 
attempt to prevent a larger war .... II -- to stop what Secretary Rusk 
called the "phenomenon of aggression. II 
The national interests of the 
U. S. were enunciated to establish the "credibility" of U, S. diplomacy. 
J ustification for U, S. policy considered the following : 
a , 
The United States was in Vietnam because of the SEATO 
cononitment to the collective self-defense against armed aggression. 
This cO!ll!:::l.itment was necessary to eliminate aggression and build a 
durable peace . 
The ultimate aims are to protect the security of the 
U.S . and to resist aggression. 
b , 
The II domino theory" was not needed to explain the rut ure 
of Southeast Asia -- the world revolution of militant communiam pro-
claimed by Peking was the theory, that is, the IIphenomenon of aggression." 
c . 
The U.S . commitment has bolstered our allies, promoted a 
confidence factor in Vietnam, end provided the crucial test for "w'ars 
of national liberation" 'as a tool of ,communist revolution . 
d . 
U.S. policy has been guided by two basic propositions : 
that extension of hostile control by Asian communism vIas e threat to 
U. S. interests , and that a free and independent East Asian and Pacific 
r egion is essential to "forid peace . 
e . 
The U. S. involvement'has followed a legal course f ram the 
Eisenhm,>er commitments and "domino theory'1 of the 1950 1 s through the 
escalation of the 1960's . 
Senate epprovals of SEATO, various authoriza-
tions and appropriations, and the joint resolution of August, 1964, have 
supported Presidential action. 
f. 
l1Aggressive conduct if al1m.;ed to go unchecked and tUlche.l-
lenged , ultimately leads to war . n 
The appetite of aggression feeds on 
aggression -- the U.S. seeks to prevent a wider 1rar by challenging 
commtUlist expansion now in Southeast Asia -- as opposed to appeasement 
diplomacy of the 1930's • 
• 
V. D. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
JUSTIFICATION OF THE WAR .- PUBLIC srATEJ.!ENTS 
J OHNSON ADIIDITsrRKCION 
CONTENTS 
62 . 
Secretary Rusk emphasizes that the SEATO commitment necessi-
tates a U. S. response to North Vietnamese aggression in t he 
South if the lessons of World vlar II are recognized • . • • . ••.••• D-98 
63. President J ohnson cites U. S. determination to meet its SEATO 
obligation and to provide the right of self-determination 
for the people of SVN as requiring U. S. presence .. •• . .•.•.•• . • D-98 
64 . 
Secretary Rusk, while renouncing the domino theory,cites the 
aggressive acts nm" underway in SVN , Laos and Thailand in 
combination with the militant proclamations of support from 
Red China as constituting a serious threat to ~~rld peace •. • •• D-99 
65 . William Bundy points to the IIconfidence factor" as an impor-
tant product of the U.S. commitment to Vietnam • . .••• •••.••.. • . D-IOl 
66 . 
Secretary Rusk cites the inability of the UN to function in 
certain dangerous situations as necessitating collective de-
fense treaties which must be honored in response to aggressive 
acts if the future threats of."" "wars of liberation" are to be 
deterred . • . •• . • • . • . •• . • ••••• •. • . .•• . •• • • . • •• . •• •. .••.•• • ••... • D-I02 
67 . 
Secretary Rusk cites SEATO commitment as basis for U. S. pre-
sence ; China active in Thailand but not in SVN •.• • . ••• • • •.... • D-104 
68 . 
W. W. Rostow suggests "wars of liberation" str ategy for 
Communist revolution is being tested in Vietnam as is the 
willingness of U.S. to honor its treaty commitments •.. ••• • •• •• D-I04 
69. 
President J ohnson states the defense of Vietnam holds the key 
t o the political and economic future of free Asia •. •..• • .•.••. D-l07 
70. 
William Bundy states " . . • our actions i n Vietnam were not only 
important in themselves or in fulfillment of our commitment 
D-95 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3,3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
but were vital in the wider context of the fate of the free 
nations of Asia. " He f'urther cites self-determination, 
comntitments of four U.S. Presidents and SEATO and the "wars' 
of liberation" threat as justif'ying our presence............. . 
D - ~07 
71. Secretary Rusk states, "We are entitled under SEATO treaty as 
well as under the individual and collective security - - self-
defense arrangements of the UN Charter -- to come to the 
assistance of SVN upon their request "Tben ... subjected ..• to 
aggression . " 
He f'urther predicts, "If we get this problem of 
these 'I"rars of liberation" under reasonable control, we can 
look forward to a period of relative peace , •. •• " .•• • ••..• • •. •• D-l09 
72. Secretary Rusk describes aggressive acts of ~{ which led to 
U.S. decision to meet its obligation under SEATO treaty, a 
decision necessary if other treaty commitments were to remain 
meaningful. . . . .•.•.••.• •... .•. •.••. .. • .••••• • • • . • • •• .•. . ••• .. • D- Ul 
73. William Bundy provides t~e most comprehensive explanation of 
U.S. involvement from its inception . 
He summarized his views 
thusly, II .•• a strong Chinese Communist and North Vietnamese 
t hreat to Southeast ASia, a crucial link between the defense 
of South Vietnam and the realization of that threat, and the 
validity of non-ComnnUlist nationalism •• . • in Southeast Asia." 
IIMoreover . • . implications for our cor:ll:l.i tments elsewhere • . .• 
Vietnam still constituted major , per~aps even a decisive , 
test case of ••. • 'wars of liberation! ••. ': •. ••••.•.•• •• .• ••.. ..• D-l 12 
74 . President Johnson emphasizes "the key to all we have done is 
our ov:n security. " This) he states reflected the judglllent of 
his two predecessors as well as the U.S. Senate (by virtue of 
its ratification of SEATO tre~ty) . •.•...•..••.•• •. . • •• • •.. • •.. D-120 
75. 
Secretary Rusk emphasizes SEATO obligation and its relation 
to credibility of other such commitments as the basis for U.S. 
pr esence; cites the domino theory as "esoteric" and unneces-
sary in view of recent events in Southeast Asia ; suggests that 
a militant China represents a threat to the security of the 
world. 
(This conference produced the "yellow peril" reaction 
f rom the press . ) .. .••• •••. .•. . •• .•. .•. ••• • ••• • • • ••••• ••••••• • • D-123 
76. 
Secretary Rusk clarifies interpretations of earlier r emarks 
(75 . ) regarding China; he emphasizes again our alliances and 
t heir interrelationship arising from the credibility of U. S. 
commi tIlent . • • • . . • • • • . • . • • • • • . • • . • • . • • • . • • . • • • • • • • • • • . • • . • • . • • . D-126 
77. 
Under Secretary of stat'e Katzenbacn emphasizes the legal and 
moral soundness of our commitment to deter aggression in SVN . • D-129 
D-96 
• 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
78 . 
Eugene Rostow compares aggression in VN to that in South 
Korea, Greece , Iran and Berlin ; states our national 
interest demands fUlfillment of SEATO and other co;omit-
ments; emphasizes our importance as a Pacific power in 
influencing the future of Asian nations ~d cites the nod 
to prove the fut~lity of the "walS of liberation" strategy.. D- l30 
79.. Secretary Rusk restates U. S. involvement to a " solemn 
commitment" entered into because "the peace and security 
of Southeast Asia are vital to our national interest ." 
Further cites principle of self -det~~ination, need to 
avoid the mistakes that led to \~orld War II and the 
necessity of proving "war of liberationll strategy invalid.. D- l 32 
80. 
President Johnson responds to question of U. S. aims in 
Vi etnam thusly, "'i'Te think the security of the U.S . is 
definitely tied in with the security of Southeast Asia , II 
and "When we are a party to a treaty •.• , then we carry it 
out." • .. • ...••. • .. . ........... • •...•..•..•..•••.•. • . t. •••• •• 
D- 134 
D-97 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
62. Letter from Secretary Rusk to 100 Student Leaders, January 4, 1967; 
"Secretary Rusk Redefines United States Policy on Viet- Nero for 
Student Leaders," Department of State Bulletin, January 23, 1967, 
p. 133 · 
* * * 
. "There is no shado'ti of doubt in my mind that our vital interests 
ar e deeply involved in Viet-Nam and in Southeast Asia. 
"We are involved because the nation ' s ·tiord has been given that we 
would be involved. 
On February 1, 1955, by a vote of 82 to 1 the United 
States Senate passed the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty . 
That 
Treaty stated that aggression by means of armed attack in the treaty area 
would endanger our own peace and safety and, in that event, ' we would act 
to meet the common danger.' 
There is no question that an expanding armed 
attack by North Viet- Nem on South Viet- Nero has been under way in recent 
years; and six nations, \lith vital interests in the peace and security of 
the region, have joined South Viet- Nam in defense against that armed 
attack. 
"Behind the words and the commitment of' the Treaty lies the lesson 
l earned in the tragic half' century since the First World War . 
Ai'ter that 
war our country withdre"f f'rom effective ',rorld responsibility . 
When aggres-
sors challenged the peace in Manchuria, Ethiopia, and then Central Europe 
during the 1930 ' s , the ... rorld community did not act to prevent their success . 
The result was a Second World Har--which could have been prevented . " 
* " * 
"In short, \Ie are involved in Viet - Nam because w-e know from painful 
experience that the mininu.mJ. condition f'or order on our planet is that 
aggression must not be pennitted to succeed . 
For "hen it does succeed, 
the consequence is Dot peace, it 1s the further expansion of aggression . 
nAnd those who have borne responsibility in our country since 1945 
have not for one moment forgotten that a third world war \lould be a 
nuclear war . 11 
* * * 
63 . 
The State of the Union Address of President Johnson to the Con ress 
Excerpts , January 10, 19 7; Department of State Bulletin, January 30} 
19 7, p . 1>6. 
* * * 
''We are in Viet- rJam because the United States of America and our 
allies are corrmitted by the SEATO Treaty to 'act to meet the common dan-
ger ' of aggression in Southeast Asia . 
D-98 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
"We ar e in Viet- Nam because an i nternati onal agreement signed by 
t he United States, North Viet- Nam, and others 1n 1962 1s being systema-
tically violated by the Communists . 
That violation threatens t he inde-
pendence of all the small nations in Southeast Asia and threatens the 
peace of the entire region and per haps the wor~d. 
"We are there because the people of South Viet- Nam have as much 
right to remain non- Ccmmunist--if that is what they choose--as North 
Viet- Nem has to r emain Communist. 
"We are there because the Congress has pledged by solemn vote to 
t ake all necessary measures to prevent further aggress i on. 
"NO better words could describe our present course than those once 
spoken by the great Thomas Jefferson: 
'It is the melancholy law of 
human soci eties to be compelled sametioes to choose a great evil in 
order to ward off a greater,' 
"We have chosen to fight a limited war in Viet- Nero in an attempt 
to prevent a l arger war-- a '..rar almost certain to follow, I beli eve, if 
the Communists succeed in overrunning and taking over South Vi et- Nero by 
aggression and by force . 
I believe, and I am supported by same authority, 
that if they are not checked now the world can expect to pay a greater 
price t o check them later .1t 
* * * 
64 . 
Secretary Rusk Intervie\l on 'Today ' Program, January 12, 19671 
With Hu h Downs from New York and Joseph C. Harsch in Hashin on; 
Department of State Bulletin, January 30, 197, p. 1 
* * * 
"AGGRESSION III SOUTHEAST ASIA 
''Mr. Harsch: 
Thank you, Hugh. 
I'm glad I am here . 
"Mr . Secret ary, I 'd like to start it out by going back to the news 
conf'erence that Secretary- General U Thant of the United Nations did 2 days 
ago . 
In that there appeared to be considerable differences with American 
policy. 
For exampl e, he said, II do not subscribe to the generally held 
view t hst if South Viet- Nam falls, then country X, then country Y, then 
country Z will follo'..r. 
I do not agree with this so-called domino theory . I 
Is this a matter of difference .. dth our policy? 
IISecretEiry Rusk: 
Weil, I myself have never subscribed to something 
called the domino theory, because that suggests that we 're mereLy playing 
games with little ~{Qoden blocks ...,i th dots on them . Actually, the prob-
lem is the old problem of the phenomenon of aggression . 
D-99 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
"Country X, if you like, is South Viet-Nero . 
North Viet- Nam is 
trying to seize Souta Viet- Nam by force . 
"Country Y is, perhaps, Laos . 
We had an agreement on leos in 
1962 under which there would be no North Vietnamese forces in Laos . 
And Laos would not be used as a route of infiltration into South Viet-
Nam . That has not been performed . 
And the government that we agreed 
on ·in Geneva in 1962 hes not been permitted to exercise authority 
throughout Laos . 
And the International Control Commission has not 
been permitted to exercise its functions in the Communist- held areas 
of' Laos . 
So, undoubtedly, there are appetites witb respect to laos . 
"Country Z is, perhaps, already Thailand . 
The other side has 
announced that they are going af'ter Thailand . 
There are subversive 
guerrilla elements in northeast Thailand trained outside . 
There 's a 
Thai training camp now in North Viet- Nero preparing additional guerrillas 
to go into Thailand. 
"So, there's no need for something called the domino theory . 
"The theory is that proclaimed in Peking repeatedly, that the world 
revolution of communism must be advanced by militant means . 
Now, if' 
they can be brought toward an attitude of peaceful coexistence, if the 
second generation in China can show same of the prudence that the second 
generation in the Soviet Union has shown, then, maybe, we can begin to 
build a durable peace there . 
"Mr . Harsch: 
Mr. Secretary, the Secretary- General of' the U. N. also 
in that same ne'tfs conference said, 
I I do not subscribe to the view that 
South Viet-Naro is strategically vital to Western interests and vlestern 
security. ' 
What are our vital strategic interests in the area? Do you 
regard Viet-Nam as vital? 
"Secretary Rusk: 
Well, there are important geographical f'eatures , 
natural resources, large numbers of peopl e in Southeast Asia . 
"I think the heart of the matter i s, again, the phenOOLenon of' aggres-
And i f the momentum of aggression should begin to roll in that part 
world, stimulated or supported or engaged in by those who are com-
to the spread of the world revolution by violence, then that seems 
sian . 
of the 
mitted 
to put us back on the trail that led us into Horld War II . 
"W'oat i s important is that all nations, large and small, have a 
chance to live unmolested by their neighbors, as provided in the Uni ted 
Nations Charter. 
"Article 1 of the charter deals with acts of aggression, breaches of 
the peace, the necessity for peaceful settlement of disputes . Article 2 
of the charter is about the self- determination of' people . 
These are 
D- 1OO 
• 
I 
I 
Declassified per E.xecutive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
very important lessons derived from the events which led us into World 
War II. 
We feel thBt we 've got to bang on to those lessons, because 
if they l ead us i nto world war III, there won't be much left from which 
\o'e can' draw lessons and start over again . 
"THREAT TO IXJRABLE PEACE 
IINr . Harsch: 
Mr. ' Secretary, i s it not the quest i on so much of our 
vital interests, as of the threat to our vital interests? 
"No' ... , you said yesterday that f'our Presidents have identified th1s 
area as being strategically important to us . 
At the time thBt process 
started--we're talking about President Truman now and then President 
Eisenhower ' s time--there certainly did seem to be a major threat to our 
interests 1n that area . 
"What has happened to the nature of that threat? During the last 
year I had in mind the breach bet .... een lifosco'", and Peking. 
Is there not 
a diminution in the threat to our interests in that area because ~Iosco .... 
and Peking are no longer close together? 
"Secretary Rusk : 
Weil, Peking has the capability of mainta ining a 
major threat there, depending upon both its policy and its Bction . 
• 
"You see, we have a very strong interest 1n the organization of 
peace in the Pacific, just as ·we have in the Atlantic . 
We have alliances 
.... ith Korea and Japan and the Republic of China and the Philippines, Thai-
land, Australia, New Zealand. 
So, we are very much interested in the 
stability of the peace in the Pacific Ocean area and in East Asia. 
"No .... , if these aggressive pressures from Hanoi, ",ith the support of 
Peking, should move into Southeast Asia , not only are hundreds of mil-
lions of people involved and vital~esources involved, but the prospects 
for a durable peace dissolve. 
"And so we have a tremendous interest in establi shing 1n that area 
of the world, as we have done in the NATO area, the notion that the 
nations must be left alone and be allo;{ed to live in peace, as the 
Charter of the United Nations provides. " 
* * * 
65 . 
Address by Hilliam p . Bundy, Assistant Secretary of state for East 
Asiar. and Facific Affairs , before the COl'lIIlon''''ealth Club of California, 
at San FranciSCO, California, January 20) 1967; "East Asia Today, II 
Department of State Bulletin, February 27, 1967, p . 323 . 
* * * 
"THE CONFIDENCE FACTOR 
D-10l 
• 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
tlNow, in this broad picture I have already referred to our stand 
in Viet-Nam as having made a major contribution to the confidence factor. 
I wil~ not review here the current situati on i n Viet- Nam, because I think 
the interpretive reporting you get is on the whole good . 
III cane back to the central pOint: 
that what we have done in Viet-
Nam did have 8 major part in developing the confidence factor, the sense 
that progress is possible, the sense that security can be maintained in 
the nations of free Asia . 
To virtually all the non-Communist govern-
ments of the area --and they often say this as bluntly as President Marcos 
d1d in his opening address at the Nanila Con:ference--that security requires 
a continued United States ability to act, not necessarily an American 
presence, although that} too, may be required in individual cases, but an 
ability to Bct for a long time. 
And that we must--and, I think, shall--
provide, and we shall keep on in Viet- Nam, as the President has made com-
pletely clear . 
\olith:::>ut ..... hat we have done in Viet- Nam, without the regener-
ation of the spirit of cooperation among the Western nations, ourselves 
included, and the nations of ASia, I doubt very much if the favorable 
developments I have described could have taken place on anything like the 
scale that has ~n fact been happening. 
And I think that is the very 
strongly :felt judgment of responsible peopl~ in government and out, 
throughout East Asia . 
"If that' vast area with its talents and its capacity were to fall 
under domination by a hostile power or group of powers, or if it were 
to fall into chaos end instability, the result would be vast human misery 
and possibly a wider Yer. 
Hovever, today, I think, more than at any 
time in the 15 years that I have personally been associated with the area, 
East Asia offers the hope of becaning a region of stable nations, devel-
oping in their own way, each according to its own strong national and 
cultural heritage . 
And that is our hope and our fundamental national 
interest, both in Asia and throughout the rest of the world. II 
66. Address by Secretary Rusk before a Joint Session of the Legislature 
of Texas at Austin, Texas, January 26, 1967; "Building a Durable 
Peace," Department of State Bulletin, p. 269. 
* * * 
"Obviously, the first essential in building a dtlrable peace is to 
eliminate aggression--by preventing it, if possible, and by repelling it 
when it occurs or is threatened . ... 
liThe United Nations has helped to make and keep peace in many situ-
ations . 
We continue to support it and to seek vays of strengthening it . 
But because it has been unable to function in some of the most dangerous 
situations, the main job of preventing and repelling aggression has been 
accomplished by the defensive alliances of the free world-·-defensive 
D- 102 . 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
alliances organized and conducted in complete harmony with the U.N. 
Charter} which expressly recognizes the right of individual end collec-
tive ~elf -defense and also provides for regional organizations or 
agencies to maintain international peace and security . 
HUnder those alliances} the United States is specifically pledged 
to assist in the defense of more than 40 nations. 
Those commitments, 
and· the power that lies behind them, are the backbone of world peace . 
" .. . . But the principal Communist states remain publicly ccomitted 
to what they call ' wars of liberation' --the infiltration of arms and 
trained men . 
That is the type of aggression by '''hich Communist North 
Viet- Nem set out to conquer South Viet- Ham. 
It is en aggression which 
has become less and less indirect since the clOSing months of 19e+, '''hen 
North Viet-Nam began to move an entire division of its regular army into 
South Viet-Naro. 
"Four successive Presidents of the United States, after extended 
study in consultation with their chief advisers on defense and foreign 
policy, have concluded that the security of Southeast ASia, and of South 
Viet- Naro in particular, is very important to the security of the United 
States . 
Those who take a different view are at odds with the men who 
have borne the highest responsibility for the defense of the United States 
end the free world since the Second World War . 
"u.s. Co.'~ll'rMENTS III SOUTHEAST ASIA 
"In accordance with our national interest in the security of South 
Viet-NauI, the Government of the United States made commitments, of' which 
the most solemn was the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty . 
That 
treaty was approved by the United States Senate in 1955 with only one 
dissenting vote . 
It bound us to take action in the event of an armed 
attack on South Viet- Nam, among other nations . 
And Secretary of State 
Dulles told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that that commitment 
included the case of an attack by 'the regime of Ho Chi Minh in North 
Viet- Nam. ' 
"The United states cannot rlUl away from its commitments . 
If' either 
our adversaries or our friends should begin to doubt that the United 
States will honor its alliances, the result could be. catastrophe . 
"We are fighting in Viet- Nam because also we have not forgotten the 
lesson of the tragic 1930 1s, the lesson that was foremost in the minds 
of the authors vf the U.N. Charter; 
the lessvn that one aggression leads 
to another .... It 
* * * 
D- 103 . 
• 
67· 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Secretary Rusk Interview, Videotaped in Washington on January 31, 
1967 and Broadcast by the British Independent Television Network 
on February 1, 1967; "Secretary Rusk Discusses Viet- Nem in 
Interview for British Television, It Department of State Bulletin, 
February 20, 1967, p . 274 . 
* * * 
"PEKING AND SOUTHEAST ASIA 
"Q . 
Mr. Rusk; could He look at the objects of this war? 
There 
appears to us in Britain to be a certain confusion in your war aims . 
Is this e ,.;ar for the conta1.r>..ment of China, or is it Simply a war for 
the independence of South Viet Naro? 
Could you tell us precisely what 
your war aims are? 
"A. 
I don I t know that there is a choice between those two objectives . 
My guess is that if the authorities i n Peking '{ere to throw thei r weight 
behind peace in Southeast ABia, there would be peace in Southeast Asia . 
llBut, nevertheless, the innnediate events .... {hich brought our Armed 
Forces into South Viet- Nam were the movement of substantial numbers of 
North Vietnamese men in arms, including some now 20 regiments of their 
North Vietnamese regular army, into South Viet-Nam for the purpose of 
tmposing a political settlement on the South by force. 
Now, this cuts 
right across our commitments under the SEATO Treaty. 
Under article IV 
of that treaty, each Signatory determines what steps it will take to meet 
the common danger in the event of an aggression by means of armed attack; 
and it was specifically understood at the time that that would apply to 
an aggression by Ho Chi Minh, as well as to otbers . 
"Now, the Chinese are not actively involved in this situation in 
South Viet-Nem . 
He do know that tr;ey are trying to stir up problems 
for the Thais in the northeast section of T~siland. China has publicly 
announced that Thailand i s next on the list; but the key point is that 
if these countries "lould live at peace, we would be the first to give 
that our full support--leave these countries al one ourselves, get out 
of there . " 
* * * 
tB. 
Sir t-Ionta 
e Burton Lecture b 
W. W. Rostow 
The University of 
Leeds, Leeds, England, 23 February 19 7, 
The Great Transition: 
Tasks of th::! First and SeC'Ond postwar Ger>erat1ons
l1 ; White House 
Press Release, 23 February 1967 . 
* 
<j(. * 
"The post",ar Connnunist offensive had a certain shape and :t;bythm . 
D-104 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
There \Jas Stalin ' s thrust of 1946- 51, in association ..... ith ll.a.O, fran 
1949; Khrushchev's of 19~ - 62; finally, the offensive conducted over 
the past four years by Mao and those who accepted his activist doctrines 
and policies ..... ith respect to so-called 'wars of national liberation . · 
* * * 
"At one point after another this Chinese Communist offensive in 
the developing world fell apart, leaving the war in Viet Nam perhaps 
the last major stand of Mao·s doctrine of guerrilla warfare . 
IIThere 1s a certain historical legitimacy in this outcane . 
"For the better part of a decade, an important aspect of the strug-
gle within the Communist movement bet\Jeen the Soviet Union and Communist 
China had focused on the appropriate method for Communist parties to 
seize power . 
The Soviet Union bad argued that the transit of frontiers 
with arms and men should be kept to a minimum and the effort to seize 
power should be primarily internal . 
They argued that it \Jas the essence 
of ' \Jars of national liberation ' to expand Communist power without 
causing major confrontation \lith the United States and other major pOilers . 
The Chinese Communists defended a higher risk policYj but they were mili-
tarily cautious themselves . 
Nevertheless, they urged others to accept the 
risks of confrontation with United states snd Western strength against 
which the Soviet Union ~~rned . 
IIAlthough Hanoi I s effort to take over laos and South Viet Nam pro-
ceeded from impulses which were substantially independent of Communist 
China, its technique constituted an important test of whether l-ieo ' s 
method would work even under the optimum circumstances provided by the 
history of the area . 
As General Giap has made clear} Hanoi is conscious 
of this link: 
!South Viet !'Ism is the model of' the national liberation 
movement in our time •.. if the special warfare that the United States 
imperialists are testing 10 South Viet Naro is overcane, this means that 
it can be defeated everywhere in the world . ' n 
* * * 
"Similarly, a failure of the Vietnamese and their allies to see 
through the engagement to an honorable peace could destroy the emerging 
foundation for confidence and regional cooperation in Asia, with further 
adverse consequences on every continent . II 
* * * 
nOn the other hand, we are confident that what 'We are seeking to 
accomplish in Viet Nam is right end essential if we are to move success-
fully through the great transition. 
D-105 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"We are honoring a treaty which canmitted us to 'act to meet the 
cammon danger ' in the ~ace of 'aggression by means of armed attack' in 
t he treaty area . 
And this commitment is also being honored by Australia, 
Ne\,' Zealand, the Philippines, and Theiland-- as well as by the r emark-
able action of South Korea, uhich was not bOlU'd by treaty in this manner . 
"We are also dealing with the gross and systematic violation of an 
agreement, signed in 1962, which committed all parties, including Hanoi, 
to withdraw their military forces from Laos; to refrain from reintro-
ducing such forces; and to r efrain fram using the territory of Laos for 
interference in the internal affairs of other countries . 
"We are also encouraged by the efforts of the people of South Viet 
Nam to make a trans ition to orderly consti tutional government of the 
kind which the people of South Korea have accomplished wi th such notable 
success since 1961. 
nAnd we are ans''''ering, as we have had to ans'.l'er on other occasions, 
the question : 
Are the word and commitment of the United States reliable? 
For the United states cannot be faithful to its alliances in the Atlantic 
and l.U1faithful to its alliances in the Pacific . II 
* * * 
"But in the perspective I have presented toni ght, what i s old-
fashioned about Viet Nam is the effort by the leaders in Hanoi to make 
their lifelon~ dream of achieving control over Southeast Asia come to 
reality by the use of force . 
"It is their concept of ' wars of national liberation I that is old-
fashioned . 
It i s being overtaken not merely by the r esistance of the 
seven nations fighting there, but also by history end by i ncreasingly 
pervasive attitudes of pragmatism ~nd moderation . 
"History, I deeply beli eve, '",ill show i n Southeast Asia, as it has 
displayed in many other parts of the .... orld, that the international status 
quo cannot be altered by use of external force . 
That demonstration is 
costing the lives of many South Vietnamese, Americans, Koreans, Australians, 
and others who understand the danger to them of permitting a change in the 
territorial or political status quo by external violence -- who cherish 
the right of self-determination for themselves and for others . 
"If the argument I have laid before you is correct -- and if 'We 
have the common rill to hold together a4d get on with the job -- the 
struggle in Viet Nam might be the l ast great confrontation of the post-
war era . n 
* * * 
n-l06 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
69. Address by President Johnson before a Joint Session of the 
Tennessee State Le islature at Nashville, Tennessee on March 15, 
19 7; 
The Defense of Viet- Nam; 
Key to the FUture of Free Asia, n 
Departn:ent of state Bulletin, April 3, 1967, p . 534 . 
* * * 
"As our cOim!litment in Viet-Nam required more men and more equip-
ment, same voices were raised in opposition . 
The administration vas 
urged to disengage, to find an excuse to abandon the effort . 
nThese cries came despite grO" .. ing evidence that the defense of 
Viet-Nam held the key to the political and economic future of free Asia . 
The stakes of the struggle grew correspondingly. 
lilt became clear that if we were prepared to stay the course in 
Viet- Nam, we could help to lay the cornerstone for a diverse and inde-
pendent Asia, full of promise and resolute in the cause of peaceful 
economic development for her long-suffering peoples . 
nBut if we faltered, the forces of chaos would scent victory and 
decades of strife and aggreSSion would stretch endlessly before us ." 
* * * 
"The first answer is that Viet- Nam 1s aggression in a new guise, 
as far removed from trench warfare as the rifle from the longbow. 
This 
1s a war of infllt::t;'ation, of subversion, of ambush . 
Pitched battles 
are very rare, and even more rarely are they decisive . II 
* * * 
70 . 
Address by William P. Bundy, 'Assistant Secretary of state for East 
Asian and Pacific Affairs, before the National Executive Committee 
of the American Legion at Indianapolis, Indiana on May 3, 1967; 
11Seventeen Years i n East ASia, 11 Department of State Bulletin, ~ay 22, 
1967, p . 790 . 
* * * 
"This group hardly needs to be told why we are acting as we are 
in South Viet- Nam. 
We are acting to preserve South Viet- Nam !s right 
to work out its own future without external interference, including its 
r ight to make a free choice on unification with the North . 
We are 
acting to fUlfill a commitment that evolved through the actions of 
Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson and that was origina~ 
stated in the S:&.4.TO treaty, over.rhelmingly ratified by the Senate in 
1954 . 
And '.Ie are acting to demonstrate to the world that the Communist 
technique of lpeople 1s wars ' or ' wars of national liberation' - - 1n essence, 
D-107 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
imported subversion, armed terror, guerrillB action, and ultimately 
conventional military Bction- - can be defeated even in a situation 
~here the Communist side had the greatest possible advantages through 
an unfortunate colonial heritage, political difficulty, and the i"nherent 
'Weaknesses to ',.,hlch so many of the new Dations of the world are subject . If 
* * * 
nOur policies have been guided essentially by two propositions 
rooted deeply in our o',m national interest : 
"First, that the extension of hostile control over other nations 
or vide areas of ASia, specifically by Communist China , North Korea, and 
North Viet- Nem, would in a very short time create a situation that would 
menace all the countries of the area and present a direct and major threat 
to the most concrete national interests of this c.ountry. 
"Second, and directly related to the first propositi on, is the belief 
that an East Asian and Pacific region comprised of free and independent 
states "wrking effectively for. the welfare of their people is in the long 
run essential to preventing the extension of hostile power and also essen-
tial to the r egional and "/orld peace in which the United States as we 
knev i t can survive and prosper . 11 
* * * 
"But , of course, the situation in Viet- Kam in 1965 stood, alongside 
t he trend in Indonesia, as the major dark spot in the area. 
And in 
early 1965 it became clear that unless tbe United States and other 
nations introduced IlIDjor combat forces and t ook military action against 
the North, South Viet- Nam would be taken over by Ccmmunist f'orce . 
If' 
thet had happened, there cen be no doubt whatever that, by the sheer 
dynamics of aggression, Communist Chinese and North Vietnamese subversive 
efforts against the rest of Southeast Asia ~ould have been increased and 
encouraged, and the "'ill and capacity of the remaining nations of South-
east Asia to resist these pressures would have been drasti cally and prob-
ably f'atally reduced . 
IISO our actions in Viet- Nem '''ere not only important in themselves 
or in fulfillment of our commitment but were vital in the ~ 1de r context 
of the fate of' the free nations of Asia . 
The leaders of free Asie are 
f'ully aware of' the relationship between our stand in Viet- Nam and the 
continued i ndependence of their nations . 
The Prime l·finister of Malaysia 
has emphar,ized that if' South Viet- Nam ",'er e to fall before the Communists, 
his nation could not survive . 
The Prime Minister of Singapore has stated 
tpat our presence in Vi et- Nem bes bought time f'or the rest of the area . 
The Japanese Government has ~de known i ts conviction that ~e are con-
tributing to the security of the area . 
lIKorea, New Zealand, the Philippines, Australia , end Thailand have 
D-10B 
, 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
shown thei r convictions by sending military units to assist the South 
Vietnamese. 
Their efforts, joined ,lith ours and with the South Viet-
namese, have ended the threat of' a Communist military takeover . " 
* * * 
urn the broad pi::ture what 1s the role of Vlet- Nam? Behi nd the 
great and emerging changes I have sketched lies an atmosphere of gr owing 
confidence, a sensing by t he peoples of' free Asia t hat progress is pOSSi -
ble and that security can be maintained . 
Our acti on in Viet- Nam has been 
vital in helping to bring about that confi dence . 
For, as vi rtually all 
non-Communist governments in the area realize, their security requi res a 
continuing United states ability to act, not necessarily an Amer ican 
presence, although that, too, may be requi red in individual cases, but 
an ability to act for a long time . 
And that we must--a.nd, I think, shall--
pr ovide . 
"That i ncreasing confidence also depends deeply on the beli ef that 
essential economic assistance w11l continue to be provi ded . 
Without what 
lI .. e have done in Viet- Nem and the assistance we have provided throughout 
the region, I doubt very much lf a considerable number of the favorable 
developments I have spoken of would have occurred, and certainly they 
\lould not have come so r api dly. 
I think that responsible peopl 'e in 
East Asia would agree strongly with this j udgment . 
"I cermot too strongly stress this ' confidence factor . I 
It i s an 
intangible, the signifi cance of which is diffi cult to perceive unl ess 
one has vi si ted the countries of Asia recently or, better still} peri-
odi cally over an interval . 
"Today, the i ncrease in confidence among the non-Cofmnunist nations 
of Asia i s palpable. 
C~~un i st Chinese past fai lures and present diffi -
culti es play 8 part, but our Oim role in Viet- Nam 1s a maj or element 
even as the .... ar goes on . " 
* * * 
71. 
Secr etary Rusk Intervi e'W" by Paul Niven} Televised f rom t he Depart-
ment of State to 75 Affiliated stations of National Educat ional 
Televi sion on ?trey 5} 1967; itA Conversation with Dean Rusk, t! Depart-
ment of state Bulletin, May 22, 1967, p . 774 . 
* * * 
"Secr etary Husk: .... They have no busines3 being there . 
They have 
no right to try to seize South Viet- Nam by force . 
We ar e entitled under 
t He SEATO t r eaty ~s vlell as under the i ndividual and col lecti ve security-
self- defense arrangements of the U.N. Charter, t o come t o t he assi stance 
of South Vi et- Nam upon t heir request when they are subj ected t o t hi s kind 
of aggression . It 
D-l 09 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
* * * 
"In Southeast Asia 'We have treaty camnitments that obligate us to 
t ake action to meet the c~mon danger if there is an aggression by means 
of armed attack. 
That aggression is under way . 
ffIT these questiQns can be decided by people in free elections, 
perhaps we could all relax. 
I don't know anyone who through rree elec-
tiOllS, any great nation--ve have a particular State in India--that 
brought Communists to power with free elections . 
They are not mono-
lithic--they are not monolithic . 
"But all branches of the Communist Party that I know of are com-
mitted to what they call the world revolution . 
And their picture of 
that world revolution is quite contrary to the kind of world organiza-
tion sketched out in the Charter of the United Nations : 
flNow, they have important difrerences among themselves about hOH 
you best get on with that world revolution . 
And there is a contest within 
the Communist world bet'Neen those who think that peaceful coexistence and 
peaceful competition is the better way to do it and the militants, pri-
marily in Peking, who believe that you back this world revolution by force. 
flBut I think the Communist commitment to \forld revolution is pretty 
general throughout the Communist movement . 
"No,>", if they want to compete peacefully, all right, let ' s do that . 
But when they start moving by force to impose this upon other people by 
force, then you have a very serious question about where it leads and 
hoI¥' you organize a vorld peace on that basis . " 
* * 
i(-
"Mr . Niven : 
But some of our fonner diplomats and scme of the critics 
are forever contending that the Viet- Nam war places strings upon our 
alliances, it complicates and exacerbates other problems . 
"Secretary Rusk; 
I think that is nonsense--because if' you want to 
put some strain on our other alliances, just l et it became appa r ent 
that our commitment under an alliance is not worth very much. 
Then you 
viII see scme strain on our alliances . 
"Mr . Niven: 
other people ..,11 1 
You are suggesting if' ve don't uphold this 
lose faith in our commitments all over the 
canmitment 
world . 
"Secretary Rusk; 
And more importantly, our adversaries or prospec-
tive adversaries may make some gross miscalculations about what we ~ould 
do vith respect to those commitments . " 
* * * 
D-110 . 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"Secretary Rusk: 
* * * 
"But I thln:{ that the end of the aggressi::>n in Viet- Nam 'Would put 
us a very long step forHard tOHerd this organization of a durable peace . 
I think there is a general recognition in the \Torld that a nuclear 
excnange does not make sense, that sending massed divisions across 
national frontiers is pretty reckless today. If 'We get this problem'of 
these 
I wars of national liberation I under reasonable control, then maybe 
'We can look forward to a period of relative peace, although there will 
continue to be quarrels and neighborhood disputes and plenty of business 
for the Security Council of the United Nations ." 
* * * 
72. 
Address by Secretary Rusk before the National Conference of the 
U.S. Agricultural stabilization and Conservation Service at 
Washington, D.C., May 18, 1967; "Our Foreign Policy Commitments 
To Assure a Peace:ful EUture," Department of state Bulletin, June 12, 
1967, p . 874 . 
* * * 
"Secondly, I hear it said that Viet-Nam is just a civil war, there-
fore we should forget about it, that it is only a family affair among 
Vietnamese . 
Well, it ls quite true that among the Viet Cong and the 
National Liberation Front there is a large component of authentic 
Southerners who are in rebellion against the several authorities who 
have been organized in Saigon . 
"But those are not the people who explain the presence of American 
combat forces in South Viet- Nam. 
Because beginning in 1960 the author-
ities in the North activated the Communist cadres which had been left 
behind at the time of the division of the country . 
Then from 1960 onward 
they sent in substantial numbers of Southerners who had gone North, were 
trained in the North, and 'Were sent back as cadres and anmed elements to 
Join in seizing the country . 
And by 1964 they had run out of authentic 
Southerners and ~ere sending Northerners in increasing numbers, and late 
that year they began to send regular units of the North Vietnamese 
Regular Ar.my. 
Today there are more than 20 reg1ment~ of the North Viet-
namese Regular Forces in South Viet- Nam and substantial forces i n and 
Just north of the demilitarized zone in direct contact with our Marines . 
II It \las to'hat the North is doing to the South that caused us to send 
combat forces there} because we felt we had an obligation to do so under 
the S~4TO treaty, a treaty \lhich calls upon us to take steps to meet the 
common danger . 
And if the North would decide to hold its hand and not 
persist in its effort to seize South Viet- Naro by force, this situation 
could be r esolved peacefully, literally in a matter of hours . " 
D-111 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
* * * 
"The commitment of' the United states to its 40 or more allies is 
a very important element in the building of' a durable peace . 
And if' 
those who would be our adversaries should ever suppose that our com-
mitments are not worth anything, then we shall see dangers W'e have not 
yet dreamed of . " 
* * * 
73 · 
* * * 
liThe fifth set of American decisions came in this setting and indeed 
overlapped the period of the Geneva Conference. 
The first aspect of these 
decisions uas our leading role in the formation of the SEATO treaty, signed 
at Manila in September of' 1954 and ratified by our Senate in February 1955 
by a vote of' 82 to 1. 
In the SEATO treaty South Viet- Ham and its terri-
tory were specifically included as a 'protocol state ' ; and the signatories 
specifically accepted the obligation, if asked by the Government of South 
Viet- Nam, to take action in response to armed attack against South Viet-
Nam and to consult on appropriate measures if' South Viet- Nam ';fere subjected 
to subversive actions . 
The Geneva accords had, of course, already ex-
pressly forbidden aggressive acts from either half of Viet- Nam against the 
other balf, but there had been no obligation for action by the Geneva 
participating nations. 
SEATO created a new and serious obligation extending 
to South Viet- Nem and aimed more widely at the security of the Southeast 
Asian Signatories and the successor states of Indochina . 
"The second aspect of our decisions at this period was an evolving 
one . 
In late 1954 President EisenhoW'er committed us to furnish economic 
support for the new regime, in which Diem was already showing himself 
tougher and more able than anyone had supposed possible . 
And in early 
1955, without any formal statement, we began to take over the job of mili-
tary assistance to South Viet- Nam, acting within the numerical and equip-
ment limitations stated in the Geneva accords for foreign military aid. 
"In short, in the 1954- 55 period we movef. into a major supporting 
role and undertook a major treaty commitment involving South Viet- Nam . 
"These decisions, I repeat, are not mine to defend . 
In the mood. of 
the period, still deeply affected by a not unjustified view of monolithic 
communism, they were accepted with very wide support in the United States, 
as the vote and the debate in the Senate abundantly proved . 
1L~d the 
D-ll2 
). 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Senate documents prove conclusively that there was fUll understanding of 
the grave implications of the SEATO obligations, particularly as they 
related to aggression by means of armed attack. 
liThe :import"'nt point about these decisions--and a point fervently 
debated within the administration at the time, according to many 
participants--is that .they reflected a policy not merely toward Viet-
Nam but toward the vhole of Southeast Asia. 
In essence, the underlying 
basic issue was felt, and I think rightly, to be whether the United . 
States should involve itself much more directly in the security of South-
east Asia Bnd the preservation of the largely new nations that had come 
into being there since World \-lar II. 
"There could not be the kind of clear-cut policy for Southeast Asia 
that had by then evolved in Northeast Asia, where we had entered into 
mutual security treaties individually with Japan, Korea, and the Repub-
lic of China . 
Some of the Southeast Asian countries wished no associ-
ation '.lith an outside po· ... er; others--f1alaya, Singapore, and the northern 
areas of Borneo, which were not then independent-- continued to rely on 
the British aod the Commonwealth. 
So the directly affected area in 
'Which policy cruld operate comprised only Thailand, the Philippines, and 
the non-Communist successor states of Indochina-- South V1et- Nam, Laos, 
and Cambodia . 
"Yet it was felt at the time that unless the United States partici-
pated in a major way in preserving the independence and security of these 
nations, they would be subject to progressive pressures by the parallel 
efforts of North Viet-Nam and Coannunist China . 
liThe judgment that this threat of aggressi on 'Was real and valid 
was the first basis of the policy adopted . 
Two other Judgments that lay 
behind the policy ~ere : 
"(a) That a successful takeover by North Viet- Nam or Communist 
China of any of the directly affected nations Yould not only be serious 
in itself but would drastically weaken and in a short time destroy the 
capacity of the other nations of Southeast ASia, whatever their inter-
national postures, to maintain their own independence . 
"(b) That 'While 'We ourselves had no wish for a special position 
in Southeast Asia, the transfer of the area, or large parts of it, to 
Communist control achieved by subversion and aggression would mean a 
major addition t~ the power status of hostile and aggressive Communist 
Chinese and North Vietnamese regimes . 
It was believed that such a situ-
ation would not only doom the peoples of the area to conditions of domin-
ation and virtual servitude over an indefinite period but would create 
the very kind of aggressive domination of much of Asia that we had already 
fought the militarist leaders of Japan to prevent . 
It was widely and 
deeply believed that such a situation was profoundly contrary to our 
national interests . 
D-1l3 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IlBut there was still a third supporting judgment that, like the 
others, ran through the calculations or the period . 
This vas that the 
largely new nations or Southeast Asia were in fact valid national enti-
ties and that while their progress might be halting and imperfect both 
politically and economically, this progress wes worth backing . 
To put 
it another way, there was a constructive vision or the kind or Southeast 
Asia thst could evolve and a sense that this constructive purpose was 
worth pursuing as a matter of our own ideals, as a matter of our nati onal 
interest, and as a realistic hope of' the possibilities of progress if' 
external aggression and subversion could be held at bay . 
"These I believe to have been the bedrock reasons for the position 
we t ook in Viet-Nam and Southeast Asia at this time . 
They were overlaid 
by what may appear to have been emoti onal factors in our attitude toward 
communism i n China and Asia . 
But the degree of support that this major 
policy undertaking received at the time went far beyond those who held 
these emotions . 
And this is why I for one believe that the bedr ock 
reasons I have given were the true and deci sive ones . n 
* * * 
1' •••• Despite all that romantics like /Jea!:..7 Lacouture may say, what 
happened was that Hanoi moved in, from at least 1959 onward (Bernard Fall 
would say from 1957), and provided a cutting edge of direction, trained 
men from the Marth, and supplies that transformed internal discontent into 
a massive subversive effort guided and supported from the outside in 
crucial ways .11 
* * * 
" ••.• But those who believe that seri ous mistakes were made, or even 
that the basic policy was wrong, cannot escape the fact that by 1961 we 
were, as a practical matter} deeply engaged i n Southeast Asia and speci -
fically in the preservation of the independence of South Viet- Nam. 
11Presi dent Kennedy came to of'fice with a subversive effort against 
South Viet- Nam well underway and with the situation in laos deteri orating 
rapidly. 
And for a time the decisions on Laos overshadowed Viet- Nam, 
although of course the two were always i ntimately related . 
"In laos, President Kennedy in the spring of 1961 rejected the idea 
of strong military action in favor of seeking a settlement that would 
install a neutralist goverp~ent under Souvanna Phouma, a solution uniquely 
appropriate to Idos . 
Under Governor LV. Averel!7 Harriman's astute 
handling, the negotiations finally led to the Geneva accords of' 1962 for 
LaOS j and the process- -a point not adequately noticed--l ed the United 
States to a much more explicit and affi rmative endorsement of the Geneva 
accords of 1954, a position we hsye si nce consistently maintai ned as the 
best basi~ for peace in Viet-Nam. 
D-1l4 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 20 11 
"In Viet-Nrun, the situation at first appeared less critical, and 
the initial actions of the Kennedy administration were confined to an 
increase in our military aid and a small increase of a few bundred men 
in our military training personnel, a breach--it may be argued--to this 
extent of the limits of the Geneva accords but fully justified in 
r esponse to the scale of North Vietnamese violation of the basic non-
interference provis10~s . 
"Although the details somewhat obscured the broad pattern, I think 
any fair historian of the future must conclude that as early as the 
spring of 1961 President Kennedy had in effect taken a seventh United 
States policy decision; 
that we would continue to be deeply engaged in 
Southeast Asia, in South Viet-Nam and under new ground rules, in Laos 
as well." 
* * 
-i(. 
"No, nei ther President Kennedy nor any senior policymaker, then or 
later, believed the Soviet Union was still united with Communist China 
and North Viet- Nam in a single sweeping Communist threat to the world . 
But President Kennedy did believe two other things that had, Bnd still 
have, a vital bearing on our policy. 
"First, he believed that a weakening in our basic resolve to help 
i n Southeast Asia would tend to encourage separate Soviet pressures in 
other areas . 
"James Reston has stated, on the basis of contemporary conversations 
wi th the PreSident, t~~t this concern specifically related to Khr~shchev ' s 
aggressive designs on Berlin, which were pushed hard all through 1961 and 
not laid to rest till after the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 . 
At any 
rate, President Kennedy clearly did believe that failure to keep the high 
degree of commitment we had in Viet- Nam and Southeast Asia had a bearing 
on the validity of our commitments elsewhere . 
As Theodore Sorensen bas 
summarized it •.. : 
' •.. this nation's commitment (in South Viet-Nam) in 
January, 1961 .. ,vas not one that President Kennedy felt he could abandon 
without undesirable consequences throughout Asia and the vorld.' 
"Secondly, President Kennedy believed that the Communist Chinese 
vere a major threat to dominate Southeast Asia and specifically that a 
United States 'withdra"' ... al in the case of Viet- Uam and in the case of 
Thailand might mean a collapse in the entire area . ' 
Indeed, President 
Kennedy in one statement expressly supported the 'domino theory . ' 
"Ny own view, based on participation and liubsequent discuss i on with 
others, is that the underlying view of the relation between Viet-Nam 
and the threat to Southeast Asia was clear and strongly believed through-
out the top levels of the Kennedy administration. 
We kne'W, as we have 
alyays known, that the action against South Vi et- Nam reflected deeply held 
ambitions by Hanoi. to unify Viet- Nam under Communist control Bnd that 
D-1l5 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Hanoi needed and wanted only Chinese aid to this end and wished to be its 
own master:. 
And we knew, as again we always have, that North Viet- Nem 
would resist any Communist Chinese trespassing on areas it controlled . 
But these two propositions were not then, as they are not now, inconsistent 
with the belief t~at the aggressive ambitions of Communist China and 
North Viet-Nam--largely North Vietnamese in old Indochina, overlapping 
in Thailand, Chinese in the rest of Southeast Asia--would surely feed on 
each other. 
In the eyes of the rest of Southeast Asia, certainly, they 
were part of a cammon and parallel threat . 
"So, in effect, the policy of 1954-61 was reaffirmed in the early 
months of 1961 by the Kennedy administration . 
Let me S?y right here I 
do not mean to make this a personal analysis of President Kennedy nor to 
imply any view Whatever as to what he might or might not have done had he 
lived beyond November of 1963. 
But scene untrue things have been said 
about the 1961 period, and I believe the record tqtally supports the 
account of policy, and the reasons for it, that I have given . 
"sm-iMING THE NORTH VIETNAiI[ESE THREAT 
"We then CO!lle to the eighth period of decision--the fall of 1961. 
By then, the 'guerrilla aggression ' (Hilsman ' s phrase) had assumed truly 
serious proportions, and morale in South Viet- Nam had been shaken . 
It 
seemed highly doubtful that without major additional United States actions 
the North Vietnamese threat could be stemmed. 
"President Kennedy took the decision to raise the ante, through a 
system of advisers, pilots, and supporting military personnel that rose 
gradually to the level of 25, 000 1n the next 3 years . 
"I do not think it 1s appropriate for me to go into the detail of 
the discuss ions that accompanied this decision . 
Fairly full, but still 
incomplete, accounts have been given in various of the books on the 
period. 
What can be seen, without going i nto such detail, is that the 
course of action that was chosen considered and rejected, at least for 
the time being, the direct introduction of ground combat troops or the 
bombing of North Viet- Nam, although there vas no doubt even then--as 
Hilsman again makes clear--that the bombing of North Viet-Nam could have 
been sustained under any reasonable legal view in the face of what North 
Viet- Nam was doing . 
Rather, the course of' action which was adopted 
rightly stressed that the South Vietnamese role must remain crucial and 
primary . 
"In effect, it was decided that the United States would take those 
additional actions that appear ed clearly required to meet the situation, 
not knowing for sure whether these actions would in f'act prove to be 
adequate, trying--desp1te the obvious and always recognized effect of 
momentum and i nerti a--not to cross the bridge of still further action, 
and hoping strongly that what was being undertaken ~ould pr ove sufficient . 
D-1l6' 
• 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 2011 
"POLITICAL CHANGE TIl SOUTH VlRI'- NAM 
"This \las the policy .followed from early 19t2 right up to February 
of 1965. 
Within this period, however, political deterioration in South 
Viet- Nam campell~d, in the fall of 1963, deci~ions that I think must 
be counted as the ninth critical point of United States policymaking . 
It was decided at that time that "lrThUe the United States \lould do every-
thi~ necessary to support the war, it would no longer adhere to its 
.posture of all- out support of the Diem regime unless that regime made 
sweeping changes in its method of operation . 
The record of this period 
has been described by Robert Shaplen and now by H1lsman . 
Undoubtedly, 
our new posture contributed to the overthrow of' Diem in November 1963." 
* * * 
"In early 1964 President Johnson expressly reaffirmed all the 
essential elements of the Kennedy administration policies publicly 
through every action and through firm internal directives . 
It is simply 
not true to say that there was any change in policy in this period 
toward greater militar,y emphasis, much less major new military actions . 
Further actions i{ere not excluded--as they had not been in 1954 or 1961--
but President Johnson's firm object right up to Februar,y 1965 was to make 
the policy adopted in late 1961 \lork if it could possibly be done, inclu-
ding the f'ullest possible emphasis on pacification and the whole political 
and civilian aspect . 
. 
"The summer of 1964 did bring a new phase, though not a change in 
policy. The si tuation was continuing to decline, and North Viet-Nam may 
have been emboldened by the trend . 
Certainly, i nfiltration was rising 
steadily and, as \Ie now know more clearly, began to include substantial 
. numbers of native Horth Vietnamese . 
But, more dramatically, American 
naval ships on patrol i n the Gulf of Tonkin \lere attacked, and there were 
t wo responding United states attacks on North Vietnamese naval bases . 
IIThis led President Johnson to seek, and the Congress to approve 
overwhelmingly on August 7, 1964, a resolution--drafted in collaboration 
\lith congressional leaders- -that not only approved such retaliatory 
attacks but added that: 
'The United States regards as vital to its national inter est 
and to world peace the maintenance of international ~eace and security 
in southeast Asia . 
Consonant wi th the Constitution of the United States 
and the Charter of the United Nations and in accordance with its obliga-
tions und~r the Southeast Asia Collective Def~nse Treaty, the United 
States is, therefore, prepared, as the President determines, to take all 
necessary steps, including the use of armed force, to assist any member 
or protocol state of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting 
assistance in defense of its freedom .' It 
* " * 
D-1l7 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
"From late November onward, these choices were intensively examined, 
even as the military threat grew, the political confusion in Saigon 
deepened} and all the indicetors recorded increasing~ sha~ morale 
and confidence not only in South Viet- Nam but throughout the deeply 
concerned countries of Southeast Asia. 
B.y la~e January, it was the 
clear judgment of all those concerned with policy and familiar with 
the situati on that th~ first choice was rapidly becoming no choice at 
all~- and not, to use the phrase of one commentator, a 'constructive 
alternative .' 
To 'muddle through' (that commentator's phrase) was 
almost certainly to muddle out and to accept that South Viet- Nam would 
be turned over the Communist control achieved through externally backed 
subversion and aggression. 
"This was a straight practical judgment . 
It ran against the grain 
of every desire of the President and his advisers . 
But I myself am sure 
it was right judgment--accepted at the time by most sophisticated observers 
and, in the light of reflective examination, now accepted, I believe, by 
virtually everyone who knows the situation at all at first hand. 
"There were} in short, only two choices : to move toward withdrawal 
or to do a lot more} both for its military impact and, at the outset, to 
prevent a collapse of South Vietnamese morale and will to conti nue . 
"And as the deliberations continued within the administrati on, the 
matter was brought to a head by a series of sharp att.acks on American 
installations in particular . 
These attacks were serious in themselves, 
but above all, they confirmed the overall analysis that North Viet- Naro 
was supremely confident and was moving for the kill. 
And as they thus 
moved, it seemed clear that they would in fact succeed and perhaps in 
a matter of months . 
filet me pause here to clear up another current historical inaccuracy . 
The basis for the successive decisions--in February to start bombingj 
in March to introouce small numbers of combat forces; and in July to move 
to major United States combat forces- -was as I have stated it . 
It depended 
on an overall view of the si tuation and on an overall view that what had 
been going on for years was for all practical purposes aggression--and 
indeed this term dates from late 1961 or early 1962 in the statements of 
senior administration spokesmen . II 
* * * 
"But this historical point is less important than the :fundamental 
elements 01' the situation as it stood at the time . 
On the one band, all 
of what I have earlier described as the bedrock elements still remained: 
a strong Chinese Communist and North Vietnamese threat to Southeast Asia, 
a crucial link between the defense of South Viet- Nam and the realization 
of that threat, and the validity of non- Communist nationalism, whatever 
its imperfections, in South Viet- Noon and in the other nations of Southeast 
Asia • 
D-1l8 
Declassified per Executive Order [3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 [6, By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
"Moreover, the wider implications for our camnitments else ..... here 
appeared no less valid than they had ever been . 
Viet- Nam still con-
stituted a major, perhaps even a decisive, test case of vhether the 
Communist strategy of 'wars of national liberation ' or 'people's wars' 
could be met and countered even in the extraordinarily aifficult circum-
stances of South Viet-liam. 
Then as now, it has been, I think, rightly 
judged that a success ~or Hanoi in South Viet-Nam could only encourage 
the use of this technique by Hanoi, and over time by the Communist Chinese} 
Bnd might ... ,ell have the effect of drawing the Soviets into competition 
with Peking and Hanoi Bnd away fram the otherwise promiSing trends that 
have developed in Soviet policy in the past 10 years . 
"Finally, it was judged from the outset that stronger action by us 
in Viet-N~ would not operate to bring the Soviet Union and Communist 
China closer together and that the possibility of major Chinese Communist 
intervention could be kept to a ~nimum so long es we made it clear at 
all times, both by word and deed, that our objective was confined solely 
to freeing South Viet- Na.c from external interference and that we did not 
threaten Communist China but rather looked to the ultimate hope of what 
the Manila Declaration} of lest fall, called 'reconciliation and peace 
throughout Asia . I II 
* * * 
"INDEPElIDENCE OF SOUTHEAST ASIA 
"Other factors enter in, as I have tried to summarize, and despite 
their variations from time to time remain of major general importance . 
But i t is primarily'from the standpoint of Southeast Asia that I would 
like to close my remarks today. 
How do the bets I have describ'ed look 
today? 
"Southeast Asia surely matters more than ever. 
A region which may 
have held as few as 30 million inhabitants in 1800--end '..thich is car-
ried under the heading of 'peripheral areas r in same textbooks on East 
Asia--no# holds more than 250 million people, more than Latin Pmerica 
and almost as much as the population of Western Europe . 
The resources of 
this area are large, and its people, whlle not yet capable of the kind 
of dramatic progress we have seen in the northern parts of Asla, have 
great talent} intelligence, and i ndustry. 
Its geographical location, while 
it should not be in the path of great-power co11isions, is crucial for 
trade routes and in other respects . 
rrFrom the s ..... andpoint of our Olffl security ond the kind of world i r. 
which we wish to live, I believe we must continue to be deeply concerned 
to do whet we can to keep Southeast Asia from falling under external 
domination and aggression that would contribute to such domi nation .•.. 
liThe second part of our bet is that the independence of South Viet-
Nam critically affects Southeast Asia. 
South V1et- Nam and its 15 million 
D-1l9 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
people are important in themselves, but they assume an additional impor-
tance if the judgment is accepted that a success for aggresaion there 
would drastically weaken the situation in Southeast Asia and indeed 
beyond . 
That judgment cannot be defended solely by reference to the 
dynamiCS of major aggressive powers and their ~rospective victims in the 
past . 
I myself believe that those parallels have validi,ty, but the 
question is always what Justice Holmes called 'concrete cases .' In 
this concrete case I think the underlying judgment has been valid and 
remains valid today. 
"None of us can say categorically that the Communist Chinese would 
in due course move--if opportunity offered--to dominate wide areas of 
Southeast Asia through pressure and subversion. 
But that is what the 
Chinese and their maps say, and their Communist doctrine appears to add 
vital additional emphasis . 
It 1s what they are doing in Thailand today 
and, through local COllll1lunist aliies, in Buma, Cambodia, Malaysia, and 
Singapore . 
And it is what they would like to do in Indonesia again . " 
74. 
* * * 
Remarks by President Johnson to the National Legislative Conference 
at San Antonia, Texas on September 29, 1967; "Answering Aggression 
Jil. Viet-r;am," Department of State Publication 8305, East Asian 
and Pacif'ic Series 167, Released October 1967 . 
* * * 
I1Viet-Nam is also the scene of a powerful aggression that is 
spurred by an appetite for conquest , 
"It is the arena where Communist expansionism is most aggressively 
at work in the llorld today--where it is crossing international frontiers 
in violation of international agreements; where it is killing and kid-
naping; vhere it is ruthlessly attempting to bend free people to its will . 
"Into this mixture of' subversion and war, of terror end hope, America 
has entered--with its material power and with its moral commitment . 
"Why? 
"Why should three Presidents and the elected representatives of our 
people have chosen to defend this Asian nation more than 10,000 miles 
from American shores? 
"We cherish freedom--yes . 
We cherish self-determination for all 
people--yes . 
We abhor the political murder of any state by another and 
the bodily murder of any people by gangsters of whatever ideology . 
And 
for 27 years--since the days of lend-lease--we have sought to strengthen 
free people against domination by aggressive foreign powers . 
D-120 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3,3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"But the key to all we have done is really our own security. 
At 
t imes of crisis, before asking Americans to f~ht and die to resist 
aggression i n a foreign land, every American President has finally 
had to answer this question: 
"Is the aggression a threat not only to the immediate'victim but 
to the United States of America and to the peace and security of the 
entire world of which we in America are a very vital part ? 
"That is the question ..... hich D',dght Eisenhower and John Kennedy 
and lifndon Johnson had to answer in faCing the issue in Viet- Nam. 
"That is the question that the Senate of the United states answered 
by a vote of 82 to 1 .rhen it ratified and approved the SEATO treaty in 
1955, and to which the members of the United states Congress responded 
in a resolution that it passed in 1964 by a vote of 504 to 2: 
' .•• the United States is, therefore, prepared, as the Presi-
dent determines, to take all necessary steps, including the use of 
armed force, to assist any member or protocol state of the Southeast 
Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance in defense of its 
freedom . ' 
"Those who t ell us now that we should abandon our ccmmitment, that 
securing South Viet- Nam from armed domination is not worth the price we 
are payi ng, must elso answer this question . 
And the test they must meet 
i s this : 
What would be the consequence of letting armed aggression 
against South Viet-Nam succeed? Whet "'ould follow in the time ahead? 
What kind of world are they prepared to l i ve in 5 months or 5 years from 
tonight? 
" THREAT TO SCUTHEAST ASIA 
"For those 'Nho have borne the responsibility for decision during 
, 
these past 10 years, the stakes to us have seemed clear--and have seemed 
high . 
"President D' .... ight Eisenhower said in 1959: 
' Strateglca~ South Viet- Nam ' s capture by the Communists "'ould 
bring their power several hundred miles into e hitherto free region . 
The remaining countries in Southeast Asia would be menaced by a great 
flanking movement,. 
The freedo:n of 12 million people would be lost 1n:medi-
ately and that 0: 150 million in adjacen~ lend~ would be seriously endan-
gered . 
The loss of South Viet- Nam would set in motion a crumbling process 
that could, as it progressed, have grave consequences for us and for 
freedom. I 
"And President John F. Kennedy said in 1962: 
' • . • withdrawal in the case of Viet- Nem and i n the case of 
Thailand might mean a collapse of the entire area.' 
D- 121 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
"A year later, he reaffirmed that : 
'We are not going to withdraw fran that effort . 
In my opin-
i on, for us to withdraw from that effort would mean a collapse not 
only of South Vict- riam, but Southeast Asia . 
So '-Ie are going to stay 
t here . ' 
"This is not simply an American viewpoint, I would have you legis-
lative leaders know. 
I am going to call the roll now of those who live 
i n that part of the world--in the great arc of Asian and pacific nations- -
and who bear the responsibility for leading their people and the responsi-
bility for the fate of their people . 
. "The President of the Philippines had this to say: 
' Viet- Nem is the foc us of attention now ..• . It may happen to 
Thailand or the Philippines, or anywhere, wherever there is miser,y, 
disease, ignorance ., .. For you to renounce your positi on of leadership 
i n Asia is to allow the Red Chinese to gobble up all of Asia . I 
"The Foreign J.iinister of Thailand said: 
'£The AmericaEl decision will go down in history as the move 
that prevented the world from having to face another major conflagration.' 
"The Prime Minister of Australia said : 
' We are there because while Communist aggression pers i sts the 
whole of Southeast Asia is threatened . I 
"President Park of Korea said: 
'For the f i rst time in our history, we decided to dispatch our 
combat troops overseas •.. because in our belief any aggression against 
the Republic of Viet- Nero represented a direct and grave menace against 
the security and peace of free Asia, and therefore directly jeopardized 
t he very seclU'ity and freedom of our mm people . I 
liThe Prime lUnister of Malaysia warned his people that i f the 
United States pulled out of South Viet-NBm, it would go to the Commun-
ists, and after that, it would only be a metter of time until they moved 
agai nst neighboring states . 
"The Pr ime Minister of Ne'W Zealand sai d : 
'We can thank God that America at least regards aggreSSion in 
Asia with the same concern a.s i t regards aggression in Europe- -and is 
prepared to back up its concern with action , I 
D-122 . 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
"The Prime Minister of Singapore said: 
'I feel the fate of Asia--South and Southeast Asia--vill be 
decided in the next fev years by what happens out in Viet- Nam . ' 
"I cannot tell you tonight as your President- -with certainty- -that 
a Communist conquest of South Viet- Nam would be followed by a Communist 
conquest of Southeast Asia . 
But I do know there are North Vietnamese 
troops in Laos . 
I do know that there are North Vietnamese- trained 
guerrillas tonight in northeast Thailand. 
I do know that there are 
communist-supported guerrilla forces operating in Burma . 
And a Com-
munist coup was bare~ averted in Indonesia, the fifth largest nation 
in the world. 
"So your American President cannot tell you- -;.fith certainty--that 
a Southeast Asia dominated by Communist power would bring a third world 
war much closer to terrible reality . 
One could hope that this would 
not be so . 
"But all that we have learned in this tragic century strongly 
suggests to me that it would be so . 
As President of the United States, 
I am not prepared to gamble on the chance that it is not so . 
I am not 
prepared to risk the security--indeed, the survival--of this American 
Nation on mere hope and wishful thinking . 
I am convinced that by seeing 
this struggle through now we &re greatly reducing the chances of a much 
l arger war--perhaps a nuclear war . 
I would rather stand in Viet- Nam 
in our time, and by meeting this danger now and facing up to it, thereby 
reduce the danger for our children and for our grandchildren." 
* * * 
75· 
Secreta 
Rusk ' s News Conference of October 12 1 67 j De artment 
of State Press Release No. 227, October 12, 197· 
* * * 
"Our commitment is clear and our national interest is real. 
The 
SEATO Treaty, approved with only one dissenting vote by Our Senate, 
declares that ' Each party recognizes that aggress i on by means of armed 
attack in the treaty area • .• would endanger its own peace and safety, 
and agrees that it will in that event act to meet tne common danger .• . . ' 
The Treaty says ' each party ' vill act . 
The fidelity of the United States 
i s not subject to the veto of some other signatory -- and five signatories 
have engaged th~ir forces alongside Korean an~ South Vietnamese troops. 
Indeed, the proportion of non-U.S. forces i n South Viet- Nam is greater 
than non-U.S. forces in Korea . 
"In August 1964 the Congress by joint resolution declared, with only 
tvo dissenting votes, that 'The United States regards as vital to its 
national interest and to world peace the maintenance of international 
D-123 
• 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 2011 
peace and security in Southeast Asia .! This was not a new idea in 1964. 
It "Was the basis ~or the SEATO Treaty a decade earlier. 
It is no less 
valid in 1967. 
Our several alliances in the Pacific reflect our pro-
found interest ip peace in the Pacific, and in Asia where two-thirds 
of the world's people live, no less vital to us as a nation than is 
peace in our own hemisphere or in the NATO area . 
. "I have heard the ·,.rord 'credibility ' injected into our domestic 
debate. 
Let me say, as solemnly as I can, that those who would place 
in question the credibility of the pledged word of the United States 
under our mutual security treaties would subject this nation to mortal 
danger . If any "Who ~rould be our adversary should suppose that our 
treaties are e bluff, or w11l be abandoned if the going gets tough, the 
result could be catastrophe for all mankind ." 
* * * 
" •.. . I have never subscribed to the domino theoryj it ' s much too 
esoteric . 
There are North Vietnamese regiments today fighting in South 
Viet- Nam . 
There are North Vietnamese armed forces in Laos being opposed 
by laotian forces . 
There are North Vietnamese-trained guerrillas opera-
ting in Northeast Thailand . 
There are Communist dissident elements in 
Burma ~lho are being aided, encouraged, and helped from outside Burma 
across the Chinese ~rontler . 
UThere was a major Coormunist effort in 1965 to pull off a coup 
d'etat against Indonesia . 
You don't need the domino theory . 
Look at 
their proclaimed doctrine and look at what they' re doing about it ." 
* * * 
"Q. 
Mr . Secretary, one of the questions -- basic questions -- that 
seems to be emerging in this Senate debate is whether our national security 
is really at stake in Viet- Nam, and whether Viet- Nam represents an integral 
part of our defense perimeter in the Pacific. 
"Your earli er statement indicates that you think our security is at 
stake in Viet- tram.. 
I think it would help in this debate if you would 
perhaps elaborate and explain why you think our security is at stake in 
Viet- Nam. 
!lA. 
Within the next decade or two, there w11l be a billion Chinese 
on the Nainland, armed with nuclear weapons, with no certainty about ;.rhat 
their attitude tot{ard the rest of Asia . will be . 
"No", the free nations of Asia will make up et least a billion people . 
They don 't went China to overrun them on the basis of a doctrine of the 
world revolution . 
The militancy o~ China has isolated China, even within 
the Communist Horld, but they have not drawn back from it. They have 
D-124 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
reaffirmed it, as recently as their reception of their great and good 
fr~end, Albania, two days ago . 
"Now we believe that the free nations of Asia must brace themselves, 
get themselves set; with secure, progressive, Etable institutions of 
their own, with co-operation. among the free nations of Asia -- stretching 
from Korea and Japan right around to the subcontinent -- if there i s to 
be peace in Asia over the next 10 or 20 years . 
We would hope that i n 
China there would emerge a generation of leadership that would think serw 
iously about what is called 'peaceful co-existence, I that would recognize 
the pragmatic necessity for human beings to live together in peace, rather 
than on a basis of continuing warfare . 
"No'" from a strategic point of view, it is not very attractive to 
think of the world cut in two by Asian Communism, reaching out through 
Southeast Asia and Indonesia, which we know has been their objective; 
and that these hundreds of millions of people in the free nations of Asia 
should be under the deadly and constant pressure of the authori ties in 
Peking, so that their future is circumscribed by fear . 
"Now these are vitally important matters to us, who are both a 
Pacific and an Atlantic power . 
After all, World War II hit us from the 
Pacific, and Asia is where two-thirds of the world ' s people live . 
So 
we have a tremendous stake in the ability of the Free Nations of Asia to 
live in peace; and to turn the interests of people in Mainland China to 
the pragmatic requirements of their own people, and away from a doctrin-
aire and ideological adventurism abroad. 
"Q. 
Could I ask just one follow- up question on that, sir : 
liDo you think you can fulfill this very large commitment of con-
tainment and still meet the commitment of the f·tanila Conference -- to 
withdrav within six months after a peace agreement has been reached? 
"A. 
Oh, yes, I think so . 
'~bat does not mean that we ourselves have nominated ourselves to 
be the policemen for all of Asia. 
We have, for good reasons, formed 
alliances with Korea and Japan, the Philippines, the Republic of China, 
Thailand, Australia, and New Zealand; and South Viet- Nam is covered by 
the Southeast Asia Treaty . 
"That doesn' t mean that we are the general policemen. 
Today, the 
Laotian fOlces ale carrying the burden in Laos on the ground . 
The Thais 
are carrying the burden in Thailand; the Bunilese are carrying the burden 
in Burma; the Indians are carrying the burden upon their northeastern 
frontier -- the Sikkim border -- and ubatever other threat there might 
be in that direction . 
"But we have our part; we have accepted a share, and we have accepted 
that share as a part of the vital national interest of the United States . " 
D-125 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
"Q. 
t-1r. Secretary, would you describe the net objective here then 
as the containment of Chinese Communist militancy? 
"A. 
No . 
The central objective i s an organized and r eliable peace. 
"Now if' China pushes out against those 
then l.'e have a problem, but so does China . 
the Soviet Union, both China and the Soviet 
with wham we have alliances, 
If China pushes out against 
Union have a problem. 
"We are not picking out ourselves -- we are not picking out Peking 
as some sort of' special enemy . 
Peking bas nominated itself by proclaim-
ing a mi litant doctrine of' the world revolution, and doing something about 
it. This is not a theoretical debate; they are doing something about it. 
"Now we can live at peace -- we have not had a war with the Soviet 
Union, in 50 years of co-existence, since their revolution. 
We are not 
ourselves embarked upon an i deological campaign to destroy anybody who 
calls themselves Communist .. . . II 
76. 
* * * 
Intervie"\" with Secretary Rusk, Videotaped at USIA Studios in 
Washington, D.C. on October 16, 1967 and Later Broadcast Abroad; 
tiSecretary Rusk Discusses Viet- Nem in Interview for Foreign Tele-
vision, II Department of State Bulletin, November 6, 1967, p . 595 . 
* * * 
"Secretary Rusk: 
* * * 
"But in my press conference I pointed the finger at what I called 
Asian cormnunism because the doctri ne of canmunism as announced and 
declared in Peking has a special quality of· militancy, a militancy whi ch 
has largely isolated Peking within the Communist world, quite apart from 
the problem it has created with many other countries •... 
"Mr. Barnett : 
Mr . Secretary, since your last press conference, some 
of your critics have accused you of using the threat of 'yellow peril ' to 
j ustify the allied forces ' presence in South Viet- Nam . 
And, related to 
that also is the fact that many people have seen what they consider a 
shade different emphasis in your approach to this, that at one time 
American forces were there to justify the se~f' - dete:nnination of South 
Viet- I{am, and net .. you 're talking more in terms of giving strength to the 
non- Communist nations in Asia as a defense against Peking. 
Could you 
clarify this? 
IISecretary Rusk: 
Yes . 
In the f irst place, I put out a statement 
[On October l§7 in ,,[hich I rejected categorically any effort to put i nto 
D-126 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
my mouth the concept of 'the yellow peril, ' which was a racial concept 
of 60 or 70 years ago fostered by extreme journalism of those days . 
This is not in my mind . 
"I pointed out that other Asian nations, :-enging fran Korea and 
Japan on the one side around to the subcontinent of India on the other, 
are concerned about their ow~ safety over against the things which are 
being said and done in Peking and by Peking. 
These free nations of 
Asia' also are of Asian races . 
So that to me, this has nothing whatever to 
do with the sense of 'yellow peril ' that was built upon a racial fear and 
hostility 60 or 70 years ago in which the hordes of Asia were going to 
overrun the white race as a racial matter . 
"Now, as far as the difference in ellphasis is concerned, one of our 
problems is that people tend to listen to what we say on only one point 
at a t~e . 
We have spoken about our treaty commitments to Viet- Nam. 
We ' ve talked about our interest in organizing a peace in the Pacific, 
because of our other alliances in the Pacific as with Korea, Japan, the 
Republic of China, the Philippines, the SR~TO Treaty, and our ANZUS 
Treaty with Au:::;tralia and Ne~{ Zealand. 
"So '.le have a great stake in the integrity of the alliances which 
we have in the Pacific Ocean area . 
"NOW, we have also talked about our own national interest, our own 
security interests in Southeast ASia, and in these alliances . 
Now, we 
haven ' t shifted from one to the other; we speak about all of these things 
and have for 6 or 7 years . 
At times people seem to think we emphasize 
one, some the other. 
I think this is more based upon the way people listen, 
rather than the way i n which we state these underlying elements in our 
policy. n 
* .* * 
"Mr. De Segonzac : 
But by injecting the Chinese question in the whole 
affair of Viet- Nam as you have in your last press conference, aren't you 
making it more difficult to came to some form of solution, because you 're 
giving the impression now that the whole question of Viet- Nam is not so 
much to help a small power, as was explained previously, to come to its 
sel f -decisions, but now you 're putting it as a problem of China and the 
dangers of China in the Far East? 
"Secretary Rusk: 
Well, this is not something that is an opinion 
sol ely of ny owo . There are many countries in Asia who are concerned about 
Peking 8nd their attitude . 
I have no doubt that if Peking were strongly 
to support the reconvening of a Geneva conference that there might well be 
a Geneva conference, for example . 
At the present time) they bitterly oppose 
such a conference. 
"This is a question that affects many countries . 
There are more than 
D-127 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
20 regiments of North Vietnamese in South Viet- Nsm . 
There are North 
Vietnamese regiments in Laos, opposed there by Laotian forces . 
There 
are North Vietnamese-trained guerrillas now operating in the northeast 
of Thailand . 
He hear reports of Chinese assistance going to the guer-
rillas in Burma . 
The Indonesians charge that the Chinese were deeply 
involved in that attempted coup d'etat in 1965. 
We know the shooting 
that occurred recently along the Sikkim border between Indian and 
Chinese forces . 
liSa that these are--and we also have heard fran Prince Sihanouk in 
the last 2 or 3 weeks that he himself is .not veri" happy about what he 
thinks the Chinese are dOing in Cambodia . 
The Chinese are even quarreling 
with SWitzerland . 
They reach out to places like Kenya and Ceylon and 
other places . 
tilt' s not just their difficulties with the Soviet Union, India, the 
United states, United Kingdom. 
They find it difficult to get along with 
almost anyone, except their great and good friend Albania . 
liSa I don ' t think that we can pretend that the p'olicies of China and 
some of the actions being taken by China are a contribution toward peace 
in Asia . 
At least our Asian friends don ' t think so. n 
* * * 
rrMr. Ruge: 
Mr . Secretary, if the aim of U. S. policy 1s now mainly 
containment of China, how do you envision the future of Asia? 
Do you 
expect to have all the other Asian countries armed to the point where 
they're strong enough to resist China, or is that a permanent r ole for 
the United States in the Pacific as the gendarmes for a couple of billions1 
"Secretary Rusk: 
'I'lell] I myself have not used that tenn 'contain-
ment of China . ' 
It is true that at the present time we have an alli ance 
with Korea} Japan} the Republic of China on Taiwan, the Philippines, Thai-
land, Australia, and Ne'" Zealand. 
NOW] does that system of alliances add 
up to containment? That is something one can judge . 
"Would the detennination of India not to permit Chinese intrusions 
across its long frontier be containment? That is to j udge . 
Hy guess is 
that none of the countries of free Asia want to see themselves overrun by 
mainland China, and in the case of some of those countries we have an 
alliance. 
Now] we have not ourselves undertaken to be the world's police-
man, for all purposes, all around the globe . 
But we do have same alliances 
and those allial"ces are very serious to us and unless we take them seri-
ously] my guess 15 that some very serious dangers will erupt not only in 
Asia but in other places . " 
* * * 
"Secretary Rusk: 
Back i n 1964, in August 1964, our Congress with 
only two dissenting votes, declared that it 
~~s in the vital interest of 
D-128 
• 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
the United States and of yorld peace that there be peace in Southeast 
Asia . 
Ten years earlier the Senate had approved our SEATO Treaty Yith 
on~ one dissenting vote in the Senate. 
IINow, the b~sis for these alliances that '.Ie made in the Pacific 
was that the security of those areas was vital to the security of the 
United States . 
We did not go into these alliances as a matter of 
altruism, to do someone else a favor . 
We went into them because we 
f elt that the security of Australia and the United States, New Zealand 
and the United states, was so interlinked that we and they ought to have 
an alliance with each other, and stmilBrly with the other alliances we 
have in the Pacific, as with the alli ance in NATO. 
So that these alli-
ances themselves rest upon a sense of the national security interests of 
the United States and not just on a fellow feeling for friends in some 
other part of the world . " 
* * * 
77 . Address by Under Secretary of State Katzenbach b.efore the Fairfield 
Uni versit Progress Dinner at Fairfield Connecticut October 17, 
19 i(' ; 
'The Complex and Difficult Problems in Viet- Nam, 
Department 
of State Bulletin, November 6, 1967, p . 652 . 
* * * 
"These COImllitments- -both legal and moral--are so sOlidly fotmded 
t hat I cannot see how anyone can rightly argue that we should renege on 
them. 
"They are rooted 10 the Geneva Accords of 1954, at the conclusion 
of Mhich the United States formally stated that we 'would view any renewal 
of the aggression.,.with grave concern and as seri ously threatening inter-
national peace and security '; rooted 10 the SEATO treaty, which applies 
to South Viet- Nam through a protocol annexed to it; and roo~ed in numerous 
other assurances, i ncluding President Kennedy' s statement of August 2, 1961, 
t hat 'the United states i s determined that the Republic of Viet- Nam shall 
not be lost to the Communists for lack of any support which the United 
states Government can render . ' 
110ur commitments to South Viet- Nam are :far better groWlded than 
were those to South Korea at the time of the aggression there. 
For this 
reason, I am puzzled as to ~hy so many liberals who supported President 
Truman in a policy of limited war in Korea now oppose a parallel policy 
in Viet- Nem. . 
Tr.~ objectives of such a policy have sel.dcm been as clearly 
and preci sely stated as they were by Richard Rovere and Arthur Schlesinger 
(The General and the President, ' Farrar, Straus & Young) in 1951. 
They 
said: 
'The objective is not to destroy communism everywhere, a goal 
which ~ould involve an unlimited ideological crusade, or even to destroy 
D-129 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
the Soviet Union, a goal ~hich could not be brief~ attained ~ithout 
an atomic holocaust, the objective i s to punish aggression by lowering 
t he boom on individual experiments in aggression, while at the same 
time refusing to generalize from the individual case to the total war . 
Korea had to ren:ain a limited .... ar : 
limited il. its investment of 
American forces, limited in its goal. I 
"What Rovere and Schlesinger wrote about Korea in 1951, it seems 
to me, i s no less valid for Viet-Nem today . ... " 
* * * 
"One such irrelevancy-- one of the si1J.ier ones--has been the 
assertion made in the press in the last few days that the administration 
was evoking 'the yellow peril . I 
In discussing our interests in South-
east Asia at his press conference last week, Secretary Rusk pointed out 
that the free nations of the area fully share our determinati on to pre-
vent aggression . 
He said what everyone kno .... s, that these nations--which 
are also oriental--ere deeply concerned about their long-term security 
in the face of 8 militant, bostile, and rigid~ ideological Communist 
China ." 
* * * 
" NO~f 15 our starting point . 
Now is from ..... bere we must go on . 
But 
..... hile our current acti on is delimited by responsibilities and decisions 
carried over fram the past, it also gains by past experience . 
Significant 
to that experience, the experience of all of us who lived through the 
peri od between World Wars I and II, is the finding that armed aggression 
cannot be met sUnply by appeals to reason and virtue. 
Armed aggression 
i s not deterred by rhetoric or ..... 1shful thinking." 
* * * 
78. Address by Eugene V. Rosto ..... 1 Under Secretary of State for Politi cal 
Affairs before the Re ional Foreign Policy Conference at the 
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, October 17, 19 7; 
Another 
Round in the Great Debate : 
American Security in an Unstable World, II 
Department of" State Bulletin, November 6, 1967, p . 605. 
* * * 
"VIErNAM AND THE U. S. NATIONAL INTEREST 
"let me take up first the more specific arguments about Viet- Nam 
befor e returni ng to the broader pr oblem . 
"In the vie ..... of our Goverrunent, t he ...... ar in Viet - Nam i s like the 
attack on South Korea and earlier threats to Greece, Iran, and Berlin . 
D-130' 
I 
• 
Declassified per E.xecutive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
It constitutes a clear aggressi on by B Communist regime supported both 
by China and tbe Soviet Union--attempting to take over another country 
by force. 
Wbatever view one takes of the origins of the war--whether 
it 1s considered an insurrection against the authority of the South 
Vietnamese state aided by North Vlet- Nam or, as we believe, an infil-
tration and invasion from North Viet-r:am- -the issue in international 
law and politics 1s the same . 
In either view, North Viet- Nem is waging 
war,against South Viet-Kam. 
And South Viet- Nem has the right to ask for 
the help of the international community in resisting an attack mounted 
from beyond its borders . 
IINeither South Viet- Nam nor the United States vants to conquer 
North Viet- Nam or to overturn its Canmunist regime . 
The central issue 
of the war is whether North Viet- Nam will be allowed to conquer South 
Viet- Nam. 
" "What is America ' 5 national interest in South Viet- Nam? 
,Thy are 
we there? 
"There are several answers . 
"We are in Viet- Nam because we are obliged to be there specifically 
by the SEATO treaty and generally by the U.N. Charter i tself . 
"The obligations of the United Nations Charter are not suspended 
when permanent members o£ the "Security Council disagree or the Assembly 
cannot act . 
The principles of the charter condemn the attack of North 
Viet- Nem on South Viet-Nem and authorize the members of the organization 
to offer South Viet - ~am assistance in its efforts of self-defense . 
"Honoring these commitments is dictated by the most hardheaded 
assessment of our national interest . 
Three Presidents have concluded 
that the fate of Southeast Asia as a whole is directly related to the 
preservation of South Viet- Nam 's independence . 
And Congress has repeat-
edly affinmed their judgment . If South Viet- Nam were to be taken over, 
the expansionist forces of Communist China and North Viet- Nam would be 
encouraged, and resistance to them and to aggression generally throughout 
the world would be seriously weakened. 
"The United States is no less a Pacific than an Atlantic power. 
Our 
security demands an equilibrium of power in the Far "East as much as it 
does in Europe and in the r·iiddle East . 
That equilibrium depends on Viet-
Nam and the system of alliances it symbolizes . 
"Responsible opinion throughout Southeast Asia believes that the 
outcome in Viet - r~ will determine the fUture alinement of the whole 
region . 
Present events in Laos} Thailand, and Burma confirm this wide-
spread judgment. 
D- 131 . 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"Viet- Nero. is the test for a new technique of r evolution. 
As nuclear 
warfare is unthinkable and massed frontal attacks of the Korean type 
ere too dangerous to be tried, Communist leaders are drak~ to 'wars of 
national liberation. ' 
Indeed, they have developed an elaborate doctrine 
explaining the p~ace of these ventures in the1~ overall strategy. 
On 
their present scale, the hostilities in Viet- Nam could hardly continue 
for any length of time without large-scale aid from China and the Soviet 
Union . 
Deescalation of the fighting should follow logically if that 
a id were to be reduced . 
"But the Sovi et Union haS not so far responded to proposals of 
thiS kind . 
Iodeed, the Soviet Union still declines to join with the 
United Kingdom in reconvening the Control Commissions either for Laos 
or for Viet- Nam. 
"In summary, vIe are bound to Viet- Nam by specific and general com-
mitments and by our own national interest . 
"Above all, at this stage, whether one believes 'We 'Were right or 
wrong in getting i nto Viet-Mam in the first place, the hostilities in 
Viet-Nem have been made the test of America's resolve to maintain that 
network of security arrangements upon which the equilibrium of 'Worl d 
power has come to depend. 
There 'Would be little security to protect our 
interests anywhere in the world if America ' s promise faltered or failed 
when the going got rough . 
As President Kennedy once said: 
'The 1930 ' s taught us 
if allowed to go unchecked and 
This nation is opposed to war . 
a clear lesson: 
AggreSSive conduct, 
unchallenged, ultimately leads to war. 
He are also true to our word . ' " 
* * * 
"What pri nciple of ethics makes it immoral to protect the safety 
of the nation through methods which have the sanction of internati onal 
l aw and the United Nations Charter? 
In what way do we l essen our 
capacity to seek social justice at home by defending the cause of peace, 
stabilit y, and social progress abr oad?" 
* * * 
79· 
Address b Secreta 
made at Columbus, Indiana, 
October 30, 19 7; 
Firmness and Restraint in Viet- Nam, 
Department 
November 27, 1967, p . 703 . 
of State Bulletin, 
"We ' r e i n Viet- Nam today for several reasons . 
These reasons cannot 
be summarized in a single phrase or catchword. 
They are not r easons 
'Which shift from time t o.tjme but are always present . 
D-132 
• 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"Tbe first 1s that the peace and security of Southeast Asia are, 
as the Congress has put it, ' vital ' to our o~~ national interest . 
IIThat conclusion was first reached by President Truman before the 
attack on Korea J after thorough analysis in the highest councils of the 
Government. 
The question was reexamined after the Korean war began and 
again in the early mopths of President Eisenhower ' s administration . 
The conclusion was always essentially the same: 
that we had a vital 
nat"ional interest in the peace and security of Southeast Asia . 
That 
conclusion was based on such factors as the population of the area--
more than 200 million-- its natural r esources; and its strategic location 
ath .... art the gateway between the Pacific and Indian Oceans, with the 
Indian subcontinent on one flank and Australia and New Zealand on the 
other . 
The loss of Southeast Asia to a hostile power or powers would 
be a weighty shi1"t of the balance of pm.er to the disadvantage of the 
free world and would affect adversely the world situation as a whole . 
IIThat fundamental conclusion led the United States to join with 
others in signing the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, which 
t he United States Senate approved with only one dissenting vote . 
Article 
rl of that treaty says that ' Each party recogniz.es that aggression by 
means of armed attack in the treaty area . .. would endanger its own peace 
and safety ' and, in that event, .... ould 'act to meet the cammon danger. ' 
By a protocol signed and approved with the treaty, the protection was 
extended to the non- Communist states of former French Indochina : 
"So we are fighting in Viet- Nam: 
--because the peace and security of Southeast Asia are vital 
to our national interest; 
--because we made a solemn commitment Ito act to meet the 
cammon danger ' if South Viet- Nam were subjected to 'aggression by means 
of armed attack'; 
- -because i f those who Yould be our enemies should come to 
t hink that the defensive commitments of the United States--to more than 
40 allies--are j ust bluffs, ve would be on the slippery slope to general 
war; 
--because Asian C~unist leaders have pr~aimed the struggle 
in Vi et-Nam to be a critical test of a special technique for achieving 
Communist domination of the world: through whey they, in their upside-
dmID language, call ' wars of national liberation.' 
"We are in Viet-Nam because we believe that the -people of' Soutb Viet-
NarI should have a chance to determine their o""n government and their OVIl 
future by thei r own choice and not through force imposed by Hanoi . 
The 
idea of self-determination is fundamental to a nation which was founded 
D-133 
• 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
upon the notion that governments derive 'their Just powers from the 
consent of the governed . ' 
This does not mean that we are the world 's 
policemen, but it does mean that we take this factor into full account 
when we make treaties and undertake commitments beyond our borders . 
"And we are fighting in Viet-Nam because we are resolved not to 
repeat the blunders • .... hich led to the Second World War ." 
* * * 
80. 
President Johnson ' s News Conference, November 17,1967; Department 
of State Bulletin, December 11, 1967, p . 779 . 
* * * 
"Q . 
Mr . President, is your aim in Viet- Nem to win the war or to 
seek a compromised, negotiated solution? 
"The President: 
I think our aims in Viet- Nam have been very clear 
fram the beginning . 
Tlley are consistent with the SEATO treaty, with the 
Atlanti C Charter, and \"ith the many statements that we have made to the 
Congress in connection with the Tonkin Gulf resolution . 
The Secretary 
of State has made this clear dozens and dozens of times- -and I made it 
enough that I thought even all the preachers in the country had beard 
about it . 
"That is, namely, to protect the security of the United States . 
We think the security of the United States is definitely tied i n wi th the 
security of Southeast Asia . 
that 
"Secondly, t o resist aggression . 
says we wi ll do it, then we carry 
* * * 
When we are 
it out . " 
D-134 
a party to a treaty 
