Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

political activity under the Constitution (as the recon-
ciliation appeal now does). This latter appears to be the
position of the South Vietnamese Government, which--as
Tran Van Do has just stated in Geneva--argues that those
sympathetic to the Northern system of government should go
North, while those prepared to accept the Southern system
of government may stay in the South. Legally, the first
alternative is sound, in that Southerners who went North
in 1954 became for all legal and practical purposes Northern
citizens and demonstrated their allegiance. But if the
South Vietnamese prefer the second alternative, it is in
fact exactly comparable to the regroupment provisions of
the 1954 Accords, and can legally be sustained. But in
either case the point is that the South Vietnamese are not
obliged to accept as citizens people whose total pattern
of conduct shows that they would seek to overthrow the
structure of government by force and violence. 133/

The remainder of Bundy's comments were addressed to
importance of this last point. The U.S. could not consider withdrawing
its forces until not only the North Vietnamese troops but also the regroup-
ees had returned to the North. Nowhere in his comments does he specifi-
cally touch on the merits of the two military options, but his arguments
all seem to support the tougher of the two choices (his earlier support
of restricting the bombing thus seems paradoxical). He was, it is clear,
less concerned with immediate specific decisions on a military phase of
the war than with the long term consequences of this major readjustment
of American sights in Southeast Asia.

The only other reaction on the DPM from the State Depart-
ment was a belated memo from Katzenbach to Vance on June 8. Katzenbach's
criticisms were more focused on specific language and conclusions than
Bundy's. In general they did not reject the analysis of the DPM, how-
ever. With respect to the bombing, Katzenbach observed that, "...we
ought to consider concentrating on infiltration routes throughout North
Viet-Nam and leaving ‘strategic’ targets, particularly those in urban
areas alone." 134/ This departed slightly from the Bundy-Rostow-
McNaughton thesis of confining the bombing to the panhandle infiltration
network. As to the DPM's effort to cirecumscribe U.S. objectives in the
war, Katzenbach achieved 4 new low in understatement, "I agree with the
arguments for limited objectives. But these are not easy to define." 135/
In short, if the intent of the DOD draft had been to precipitate an
Administration-wide debate on the fundamental issues of the U.S. involve-
ment, it had certainly achieved its purpose.

61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
