Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

167. France indicates the "necessity for a clear-cut U.S.
guarantee that would protect the Associated States"
if the communists did not honor a Geneva settlement.
Mendes-France will resign if no cease-fire is reached.
Paris 233 to Dulles, Ti July aloo cnesenreccececesecteentsee 1003

168. Views of the U.K. on collective security of Southeast
Asia are summarized: (1) the British prefer a generalized
collective arrangement with as many states involved as
possible; (2) the preferred organization would have a
general council, a political/economic council, and a
military organization; (3) in the event of no Indochina
agreement, the British would move ahead with a military
arrangement to meet the threat. Admiral Davis Memoran-
dum for Secretary of Defense, 13 July 1954.....cecccccecceees 635

169. Secretary Dulles reports on the Paris meeting: (1) an
agreed French-United States position paper on Indochina
which has the United States respecting terms conforming
to a 7-point agreement; (2) the 7 points along the lines
which were agreed during the Churchill-Hisenhower con-
versations; (3) a Mendes-France to Dulles letter which
tellsDulles that his absence from Geneva would produce
an effect opposite to his intention; (4) a Dulles to
Mendes-France letter which informs him of General Smith's
return to Geneva; (5) and a letter from Eden to Mendes-
France reassuring him of Britain's support. Paris 179
£6, Dulles, Wut TOS. a siesecis seine'ce ovate sneesenséaccennee O50

170. Secretary Dulles reports on his trip to Paris at the
NSC meeting. Dulles had told Mendes that France's
troubles stemmed from lack of a decision on EDC and
the Soviets were successful in splitting France and
Germany. If the U.S. cannot guarantee the Geneva
Conference results or influence France to reject any
settlement, the U.S. will be blamed and put a major
strain on Franco-United States relations. NSC Minutes,
FS Felipe ae, aie gee Gay POE aos ae plies c cuore serie Mamtghe. Sie oisiemcee pareict 2 SOAE

171. Mendes-France is firm in a cocktail conversation with
Molotoy on Vietnam election dates. The French, how-
ever, conceive the military demarcation line and
regroupment of forces to be the major outstanding
issues. SECTO 626, 16 July 1954......cecercccccccccccccceece O46

172. At a meeting of Mendes, Eden, and Molotov, the outstand-
ing issues are summarized: (1) demarcation line for
Vietnam; (2) elections; (3) control arrangements; (4)

*

xxviii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
