Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The situation described above suggests that the course of
events in Vietnam during the next two years will be significantly
influenced by the following principal current trends.

"The war can be expected to increase in intensity, but
decisive military victory should not be expected. It will
be basically a war of attrition. Troop casualties should
increase on both sides, and civilian casualties and refugees
as well, The enemy can, if he chooses, increase still further
the rate of his semi-covert invasion and the level of combat.

"The enemy will continue to build up his forces through
infiltration from NVN and recruitment for main force VC units
in SVN to achieve a favorable relationship of forces.

"At the same time, he will continue to reinforce his capa-
bilities for political action in the urban areas, to exploit
anticipated future political disturbances, to increase his
terrorist acts in the cities, and to isolate the urban popule-
tion from the countryside.

"GVN control of the countryside is not now being extended
through pacification to any significant degree and pacification
in the rural areas cannot be expected to proceed at a rapid
rate. A new approach to pacification has been developed, but
it is too early to judge its effectiveness. In addition, im-
portant problems requiring resolution remain...

"The Vietnamese will continue to face grave problems in
creating an effective system of government. Under present
conditions we cannot realistically expect 4 strong GVN to
emerge over the planning period, nor can we expect political
unity or a broadening of the base of popular support. The in-
ereased American presence, rising inflation and an image of
considerable corruption are issues which will be increasingly
exploited by unfriendly and opportunistic elements. U.S. in-
fluence on political events continues to be limited while our
responsibility for Vietnam's future is increasing." 26/

The Task Force divided all activities in Vietnam into categories of
importance, and assigned them priorities in groups. Unfortunately, the
divisions were either too vague to be useful, or else they designated
specific activities, such as agriculture, to such a low position that
Washington found the selection unacceptable. In its first rank of in-

- portance the Task Force placed:

"1. Those activities designed to prepare a sound
pacification program primarily through strengthening
the human resources element of pacification, and
through coordinated planning...

82 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
