Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

12
ACCURACY OF DETAILS STILL QUESTIONED

Now, three and a half years later, there again seems to he debate
about the essential accuracy of the above account. The questions that
appear now to be raised are the same as those considered and settled
at the time:

Was the patrol in fact for legitimate purposes?”

Were the attacks unprovoked?

Was there indeed a second attack? . . ‘

If there was a second attack, was there sufficient evidence available
at the time of our response to support this conclusion ?

I would like to addvess these questions.

WAS PURPOSE OF PATROL LEGITIMATE?-

First, was the patrol in fact for legitimate purposes?

Patrols of the nature of those earried on by Madox ‘and Turner
Joy were initiated in the western Pacific in 1962. They were carried
out in international waters along the coastlines of Communist coun-
tries in that aren, They-were open patrols and no hostile actions were
ever taken by the U.S. forces involved. Provocative actions were
avoided. The purpose was to learn what we could of military activity
and environmental conditions in these parts of the world, operating
In waters where we had every legal right to be. The primary purpose
of the Maddox was to observe North Vietnamese naval activity in
those waters, in view of the evidence we had of infiltration by sea by
North Vietnam into South Vietnam. Other secondary purposes were
area familiarization and observation by visual and electronic means of
any other activity of military interest. We had the undisputed right
to do this. In view of our assistance to South Vietnam, such observa-
tions were needed.

The suggestion has appeared incidentally that because Maddox,
prior to commencement of its patrol, took abroad certain communica-
tions equipment, with personnel to operate this equipment, its patrol
had some different and prestunably more sinister purpose than others
which had preceded it. This is simply not true. The mission of observa-
tion which I hare outlined was to be fulfilled with the regularly in-
stalled equipment of the ships. The extra equipment brought abroad
Maddox consisted in essence of standard shipboard radio reecivers
added to the ship’s normal complement of such receivers in order to
Sive an added capability for detecting indications of a possible hostile
attack on the patrol. :

The Congress, at the time of the debates on the Tonkin Gulf resolu-
tion, was aware that visual and electronic surveillance of the area was
one of the purposes served by the De Soto patrol, Any suggestion
now that the installation of passive radio receiving equipment changed
the essential nature of the patrol is unwarranted. :

I might add that virtually all of the De Soto patrols, since their
commencement in 1962, had been outfitted with similar equipment for

the same primarily defensive purposes. °
WERE THE ATTACKS UNPROVOKED?

Second, were the attacks unprovoked?
Senator Munpr. Are you defining the De Soto patrol?
