Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SOF SECS eee

seemed to anticipate short-term impacts on South Vietnam, rather than
ultimate effects on the DRV. On the way to Honolulu, Secretary Rusk had
talked with Generel Khanh, who argued that South Vietnam could not win
against the Viet Cong without some military action outside its borders.

In particular, the General urged clearing out the communist forces in
eastern Laos, who might move across the border and attempt to cut South
Vietnam in two, with the implication that GVN forces could carry out the
task if given air support. He also favored attacks directly on North Viet-
nam, but said that they "should be selective and designed to minimize the
chances of a drastic communist response.”

At the conference's initial plenary session, Ambassador Lodge also
argued in favor of attacks on the North. In answer to Secretary Rusk’s
query about South Vietnamese popular attitudes, which supported Hanoi's
revolutionary aims, the Ambassador stated his conviction that most support
for the VC would fade as soon as some "counter-terrorism measures" were
begun against the DRV. He urged "a selective bombing campaign against mili-
tary targets in the North" and predicted this would "bolster morale and give
the population in the South a feeling of unity." When asked by Mr. McCone
how the political differences among Vietnamese leaders might be overcome,
he stated the opinion that "if we bombed Tchepone or attacked the fan
motor torpedo/ boats and the Vietnamese people knew about it, this would
tend to stimulate their morale, unify their efforts and reduce /their/
quarreling.” 100/

If other comments, either pro or con, were made at the plenary
session about the desirability of attacking North Vietnam, they were not
reflected in the record. General Westmoreland discussed the "military and
security situation” in South Vietnam and apparently did not mention the
potential impact of measures against the North. Similar discussions of
the military situations in Laos and Cambodia apparently did not include
the subject either. The discussion of North Vietnam, as indicated by the
record, was limited to assessments of the DRV's military capabilities,
particularly its air defenses, and their implications for the feasibility
of an air attack. Policy aspects of air operations against the North were
not mentioned, 101/

On the second day of the conference, possible pressures to be applied
against North Vietnam were a prominent subject. However, as reported by
William Bundy, the main context for the discussion was Laos -- what might
have to be done in the event the current diplomatic track failed or the
military situation deteriorated. Not contemplated, it seems, were initia-
tives against the North to relieve the current levels of pressure on Iaos
or South Vietnar. Rather, considerable attention was given to preliminary
steps that would need to be taken in order to prepare for actions necessary
within the context of a Laotian military contingency. 102/

One such step would be consultation with allies who might contribute
to a ground force contingent needed for the defense. of Laos. The UK and
other SEATO nations were cited as.particularly important contributors. The
conferees agreed, however, that contingency preparations for Laos should

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
