Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

believe that this is a war that the Vietnamese must
fight...I don't believe we can take on that combat task
for them. I do believe we can carry out training. We
can provide advice and logistical assistance."

-- To increase the pressure on the GVN to make the necessary
reforms and to make RVNAF fight harder by making the
extent and future of U.S, support a little more tenuous.
This was explicitly stated in State's instructions to
Ambassador Lodge on how to handle the White House state-
ment of October, 1963: "Actions are designed to indi-
cate to Diem Government our displeasure at its political
policies and activities and to create significant uncer~
tainty in that government and in key Vietnamese groups
as to future intentions of United States." In other
words, phased withdrawal was thought of as a bargaining
counter with the GYN,

-- To put the lid on inevitable bureaucratic and political
pressures for increased U.S. involvement and inputs into
Vietnam. It was to be expected and anticipated that
those intimately involved in the Vietnam problem would
be wanting more U.S. resources to handle that problem.
Pressures for greater effort, it was reasoned, eventu-
ally would come into play unless counteracted. What
Secretary McNamara did was to force all theater justi-
fications for force build-ups into tension with long-
term phase-down plans. On 21 December, 1963, in a memo
to the President after the Diem coup, Mr. McNamara urged
holding the line: "U.S. resources and personnel cannot
usefully be substantially increased...."

-- To deal with international and domestic criticism and
pressures. While Vietnam was not a front burner item,
there were those who already had begun to question and
offer non-consensus alternatives. During 1963, for
example, both General de Gaulle and Senator Mansfield
were strongly urging the neutralization of Vietnam.

It is difficult to sort out the relative importance of these varying
rationales; all were important. Paramount, perhaps, were the desires to
limit U.S. involvement, and to put pressure on the GVN for greater efforts.
And, the rationales were all consistent with one another. But they did not
appear as being wholly consistent with other statements of our national objec-
tives in Southeast Asia. for example, on July 17, 1963, President Kennedy
said: "We are not going to withdraw from foringing about a stable govern-
ment there, carrying on a struggle to maintain its national independence/.
In my opinion, for us to withdraw from that effort would mean a collapse
not only of South Vietnam, but Southeast Asia." He added: "We can think
of Vietnam as @ piece of strategic real estate. It's on the corner of main-
land Asia, across the East-West, trade routes, and in a position that would

ith Bel TOP SECRET - Sensitive
