Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnam blown up into a major war, with more than half a million U.S.
troops and « cost of more than $2 billion a month, and with no clear
end in sight, their patience with a restrained bombing program was
beginning to wear thin. But more was involved than a disagreement
over the conduct of the war. Some passionately held convictions had
been belittled, and some members of the subcommittee were on the
warpath. As the subcommittee subsequently wrote in the introduction
to its report, explaining the reasons for the inquiry:

Earlier this year many statements appeared in the
press which were calculated to belittle the effectiveness
of the air campaign over North Vietnam. Many of these
statements alleged, or at least implied, that all military
targets of significance had been destroyed, that the air
campaign had been conducted as effectively as possible,
and that. continuation of the air campaign was pointless
and useless--possibly even prolonging the war itself.

At the same time reports were being circulated that serious
consideration was being given in high places to a cessa-
tion of the air campaign over North Vietnam, or a sub-
stantial curtailment of it. Many of these reports were
attributed to unnamed high Government officials.

In view of the importance of the air campaign, on
June 28, 1967, the subcommittee announced it would conduct
an extensive inquiry into the conduct and effectiveness of
the bombing campaign over North Vietnam. 1

In July the President had decided against both an escala-
tory and a de-escalatory option in favor of continuing the prevailing
level and intensity of bombing. However, the prospect of having his
bombing policy submitted to the harsh scrutiny of the Stennis committee,
taking testimony from such unhappy military men as Admiral Sharp, must
have forced a recalculation on the President. It is surely no coinci-
dence that on August 9, the very day the Stennis hearings opened, an
addendum to ROLLING THUNDER 57 was issued authorizing an additional
sixteen fixed targets and an expansion of armed reconnaissance. Signifi-
cantly, six of the targets were within the sacred 10-mile Hanoi inner
circle. They included the thermal power plant, 3 rail yards, and 2
bridges. Nine targets were located on the northeast rail line in the
China buffer zone, the closest one 8 miles from the border, and con-
sisted of 4 bridges and 5 rail yards/sidings; the tenth was a naval
base, also within the China buffer zone. Armed reconnaissance was
‘authorized along 8 road, rail, and waterway segments between the 10-mile
and a t-mile circle around Haiphong, and attacks were permitted against
railroad rolling stock within the China buffer zone up to within 8 miles
of the border. 2/ But the power of Congress was‘not to be denied.
Where the military alone had tried unsuccessfully for so long to erode
the Hanoi/Heiphong sanctuaries, the pressure implicit in the impending
hearings, where military men would be asked to speak their minds to a

“91 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
