—
ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

13. At an appropriate time the United States should institute
checks to satisfy itself that the conditions set fortn in paragraph
12 above are being fulfilled. The United States should also con-
tinue to maintain the situation in Indochina under continuing
review and should be prepared to revise its policy when conditions
Coe

Warrant e

3. | an the event of overt attack by organized Chinese Communist
forces against Indochina, the United States should not permit itself
to become engaged in a general war with Comnunist China but should,
jn concert with the United Kingdom, support France and the Associated
States by all means short of the actual employment of United States
military forces. This support should include appropriate expansion
of the present military assistance progran.

15. Any appeal by France to the United Nations would, in all

“probability, be embarrassing for the Western Powers since the rule

of France over its colony is not likely to be well received by the
General Assembly of the United Nations. The USSR has recognized

the Viet Minh Government and, therefore, a veto by the USSR of any
assistance for France would have to be expected in the Security
Council, In view of the foregoing, unless the situation throughout
the world generally and in Indochina specifically changes materially,
the United States should seek to dissuade the French from referring
the Indochina question to the United Nations. i

16, Inasmuch as the United States-sponsored resolution,
"Uniting for Peace," has been adopted by the General Assembly of
the United Nations, and should a situation develop in Indochina in
& manner similar to that in Korea in which United Nations forces
were required, the United States would then probably be morally
obligated to contribute its armed forces désignated for service on
behalf of the United Nations. It is, therefore, in the interests
of the United States to take such action in Indochina as would
forestall the need for the General Assembly to invoke the provisions
of the resolution, "Uniting for Peace." Should France, however,
refer the question of Indochina to the United Nations, the United
States should give consideration to adopting a position favoring
early French withdrawal from Indochina and action by the Unite
Nations similar to that followed in the case of the Netherlands and
Indonesia.

17. It appears that, in view of the unrest in Southeast Asia
generally and in Indochina specifically, any military victory in
Incochina over the communists would be temporary in nature. The
long-term solution to the unrest in Indochina lies in sweeping
Political and economic concessions by France and in the ultimate
Self-government of the three Associated States within. the French
Union or their complete independence of France. From the viewpoint
of the United States, pressure on France to provide the much needed
leadership to initiate these reforms and to grant self-government
"lll prove less exoensive in United States lives and national trea-

Sura +1

ive than military commitments by us.

41> a , ts

“SC 64/1. TOP SECRET
Li6
