Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

against being misled in the future about the status of programs. With
respect to the Strategic Hamlet Program generally, it is evident that
there was apprehension concerning the questionable statistics that had
been used in the Diem regime's portrayal of the program. It was-hoped
that it would be possible to identify the requirements for a program
of on-going current assessments of the program as quickly as possible.
There was also an intention to publish an appropriate set of new
guidelines for the coordination of construction, civie action and mili-
tary programs, and, perhaps more important, to accomplish the consoli-
dation and correction of hamlet programs in the shortest possible time.
Five problem areas with respect to the strategic hamlet program were

‘ identified prior to the trip, these were:

&. What progréss is being achieved by the surveys
and when will the reports be available?

b. What specific actions were then underway to
coordinate the companion military, political and
social programs?

¢. When would the’new guidelines be published?

ad. What action was underway to indoctrinate the
newly assigned province officials to enable them to
pursue the program effectively?

€. Was itplain that one big problem woild be to

insure that the province and district officials
understood and executed vigorously their revised
programs? Had any thought been given to adding an
additional advisor or two, in the critical prov-

inces, to work at the district level and to insure

that the officials actually drove programs forward, 25/

A point to be noted in these is the growing idea of placing an
increasing number of advisors at the province and district level.

The Secretary made certain decisions of an immediate nature con-
cerning programs in Vietnam while he was still in Saigon; and imme-
diately upon his return he made his report to the President in which he
described the situation as he had found it, and made further recommenda-
tions that he had evidently not felt empowered tomact without Presiden-
tial approval, .

Among the actions agreed upon during the visit to Saigon on 19-20
December were the following:
1. The GV should be pressed to increase troop
density in six provinces in III Corps by about 100%
(ten infantry and three engineering batellions), in

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
