Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

stoppage of US military actions against them -- at the least,
a cessation of bombing. In this connection, Consul-General
Rice (Hong Kong 7581, 5/1/67) said that, in his opinion,

we cannot by bombing reach the critical level of pain in
North Vietnam and that, “below that level, pain only increases
the will to fight.” Sir Robert Thompson said to Mr. Vance

on April 28 that our bombing, particularly in the Red River
Delta, “is unifying North Vietnam."

With respect to interdiction of men and materiel, it
now appears that no combination of actions against the North
short of destruction of the regime or occupation of North
Vietnamese territory will physically reduce the flow of
men and materiel below the relatively small amount needed by
enemy forces to continue the war in the South. Our effort
can and does have severe disruptive effects, which Hanoi
can and does plan on and pre-stock against. Our efforts
physically to cut the flow meaningfully by actions in North
Vietnam therefore largely fail and, in failing, transmute
attempted interdiction into pain, or pressure on the North
(the factor discussed in the paragraph next above). The
lowest “ceiling” on infiltration can probably be achieved
by concentration on the North Vietnamese "funnel" south of
20° and on the Trail in Laos.

But what if the above analyses are wrong? Why not
escalate the’ bombing and mine the harbors (and perhaps
occupy southern North Vietnam) -- on the gamble that it
would constrict the flow, meaningfully limiting enemy
action in the South, and that it would bend Hanoi? The
answer is that the costs and risks of the actions must be
considered.

The primary costs of course are US lives: The air campaign
against heavily defended areas costs us one pilot in every 40
sorties. In addition, an important but hard-to-measure cost
is domestic and world opinion: There may be a limit beyond
which many Americans and much of the world will not permit
the United States to go. The picture of the world's greatest
superpower killing or seriously injuring 1000 non-combatants
a week, while trying to pound a tiny backward nation into
submissiom on an issue whose merits are hotly disputed, is
not a pretty one. It could conceivably produce a costly
distortion in the American national consciousness and in
the world image of the United States -- especially if the
damage to North Vietnam is complete enough to be "successful."

The most important risk, however, is the likely Soviet,

Chinese and North Vietnamese reaction to intensified US air
attacks, harbor-mining, and ground actions against North Vietnam.

L6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
