Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Copy for Griffin Mission

CONFIDENTIAL

To: SSECSTATE, WASHINGTON Date: March 13, 1950
No: 176, &6 to Paris
Code: Conf Charged to: Goe

Sent Dept 176 repeated Paris 86, Dept pass Paris CONFIDENTIAL
ROM GRIFFIN.

le Hission work till now has been limited to receivings requests
fr, Viets, Cambodians, Laotianse None of these coordinated yet by them
or us, although French have shovm at least part of their prorram as
devaloped here to Viets.e This has been time consuming process of many
meetings and postponements. No difficulty anticipated with relatively
Simple cambodian Laotian program as these people cooperate with French
anc are suspicious of Victs.

2- -Puzzled by paragraph five Deptel 156, March 9. Vy understanding
was that this ilission was instructed Cable program recommendations from
field after examination (fact finding) proposals and that subject had
urgencye ie have repeatedly informed French and Viets of our hope that
they have meeting of minds at least on essential and urgent items so that
US could act more promptly. We have not tried to force either party to
consolidate its program with the other and we have not urged any course
in the sense second sentence of your paragraph 4 In fact our concern,
clearly stated in Legtel reference, has been to preserve our government
from being put into such a position.

Se I understand that ours is an economic aid mission and our remarks
in sense of paragraph 2 above have been confined to economic aide However,
two programs should be mutually supporting and will possibly overlap to some
extent. Dept is entirely right in foreseeins grave friction on distribution
of military aid. The controversy on military aid which is budding without
any help from the mission could jeopardize success of economic oro-:ram.
(Legation believes Lepartment's views about not venturing any remarks on
subject reconciling views on military aid may be inconsistent with Deptels
122, warch 4 and 129, March 8). In view of effervescence in press and
French and Viet Govt circles over AFP report that all aid would be throuzrh
France, mission and Legation have thought opportune to let things simer
down before trying sell Bao Dai and Carpentier on views in referenced
Lestelse My denial of azency report should calm matters somewhat.

Py

290
