Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. U.S. Policy Towards Bao Dai.
@. Qualified Approval, 1947-1950

The "Bao Dai solution" depended on American support, During
the 1950 negotiations in Pau, France, Bao Dai's Prime Minister Tran Van Huu
was called back to Indochina by a series of French military reverses in
Tonkin. Tran Van Huu seized the occasion to appeal to the United States
"as the leading democratic nation," and hoped that the U.S. would

",.. bring pressure to bear on France in order to achieve
democratic freedom. We want the right to decide our own
affairs for ourselves." 15/

‘Tran demanded the Elysee Agreement be superseded by genuine
autonomy for Vietnam:

"It is not necessary for young men to die so that a
French engineer can be director of the port of Saigon. Many
people are dying every day because Viet Nam is not given
independence. If we had independence the people would have
no more reason to fight."

Tran's addressing the U.S. thus was realistic, if not judi-
cious, for the U.S. had already become involved in Indochina as one part
of a troubled triangle with France and Bao Dai's regime. Indeed, there
had been an American role in the "Bao Dai solution" from its inception.
Just before the Ha Long Bay Agreements, the French initiative had received
some support from a December, 1947, Life magazine article by William C.
Bullitt, former U.S. Ambassador to France. Bullitt argued for a policy
aimed at ending "the saddest war" by wimning the majority of Vietnamese
nationalists away from Ho Chi Minh and from the Communists through a
movement built around Bao Dai. 16/  Bullitt's views were widely accepted
in France as a statement of U.S. policy, and a direct endorsement, and
promise of U.S. aid, for Bao Dai. Bao Dai, whether he accepted the Bullitt
canard or not, seemed to sense that the U.S. would inevitably be drawn
into Southeast Asia, and apparently expected American involvement to be
accompanied by U.S. pressure on France on behalf of Vietnamese nationalism.
But the U.S., though it appreciated France's dilemma, was reluctant
initially to endorse the Bao Dai solution until it became a reality. The
following State Department messages indicate the U.S. position:

July 10, 1948 (Paris 3621 to State):
"... France is faced with alternatives of unequivocally and

promptly approving principle of/ Viet independence within

French union and /the/ union /of the/ three parts of Vietnam

or losing Indochina.”

A-11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
