Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that has ensnared us for the past three years. It actu-
ally gives the troops while only praying for their proper
use and for constructive diplomatic action. Limiting the
present decision to an 80,000 add-on does the very impor-
tant business of postponing the issue of a Reserve call-up
(and all of its horrible baggage), but postpone it is all that
it does -- probably to a worse time, 1968. Providing the
80,000 troops is tantamount to acceding to the whole West-
moreland-Sharp request. This being the case, they will
"accept" the 80,000. But six months from now, in will come
messages like the "470,000-570,000" messages, saying that
the requirement remains at 201,000 (or more). Since no
pressure will have been put on anyone, the military war
will have gone on as before and no diplomatic progress

will have been made. It follows that the "philosophy" of
the war should be fought out now so everyone will not be
proceeding on their own major premises, and getting us in
deeper and deeper; at the very least, the President should
give General Westmoreland his limit (as President Truman did
to General MacArthur). That is, if General Westmoreland is
to get 550,000 men, he should be told "that will be all, and
we mean it.”

McNaughton was also very deeply concerned about the breadth and
the intensity of public unrest and dissatisfaction with the war. To him
the draft paper underplayed a bit the unpopularity of the conflict
especially with young people, the underprivileged, the intelligentia,
and the women. He examined those lining up on both sides of an increas-
ingly polarized public and he did not especially like what he saw:

A feeling is widely and strongly held that "the
Establishment" is out of its mind. The feeling is that
we are trying to impose some US image on distant peoples
we cannot understand (anymore than we can the younger
generation here at home), and that we are carrying the
thing to absurd lengths. Related to this feeling is the
increased polarization that is taking place in the United
States with seeds of the worst split in our people in more
than a century. The King, Galbraith, etce., positions
illustrate one near-pole; the Hebert and Rivers state-
ments on May 5 about the need to disregard the First
Amendment illustrates the other. In this connection,

I fear that “natural selection" in this environment will
lead the Administration itself to become more and more
homogenized -- Mac Bundy, George Ball, Bill Moyers are
gone.. Who next?

147 ‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive
