Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The proposed increase added an estimated 1.1 billion piasters to the
1967 program for a total estimated cost of 46.7 billion estimated
additional costs for CY 68 under the projected programs would total
2.8 billion piasters, 1.2 billion coming during January through June
and the remaining 1.6 billion for July through December.

Westmoreland concluded the long request with an observation which
was to provide the basis for considerable dispute within the government.
He wrote:

"..-Whereas deployment of additional US forces in
FY 68 will obviate the requirement for a major expansion
of the RVMAF, selective increases are necessary to opti-
mize combat effectiveness. Regular forces proposed for
FY 68 total 328,322, an increase of 6,367 spaces of the FY
67 authorization. As US, Free World and RVNAF operations
are expanded, additional areas will be made available for
the conduct of Revolutionary Development operations. Based
on experience gained thus far, an increase of 50,000 RF/PF
spaces will be required to provide a planning figure of
350,000 spaces for this force. The increase will accom-
modate necessary support of Revolutionary Development and
concomitantly, will be compatible with requirements incident
to implementation of the constabulary concept. 22/

His emphasis upon RF/ PF sp2ces in lieu of expansion of the RVNAF which
could theoretically substitute for additional U.S. troops prompted many
who disagreed with the basic increases to ask why the US should meet
such expanded troop requirements when the Government of South Vietnam
would neither mobilize its manpower nor effectively employ it according
to US wishes. 23/

3. The JCS Take Up the March: The CINCPAC Force Requirements
Task Group and JCSM-218-67.

JCS reaction to the COMUSMACV message was predictably rapid. The
Chiefs realized that the general analysis provided in the original MACV
request would prove to be. inadequate for the SecDef to either assess the
validity of the requirements or the sufficiency of the means of meeting
them. Consequently, they directed that detailed analyses be submitted to
them from MACV/CINCPAC on a time~phased basis commencing on 26 March. 2h /
In a realistic reflection of the feasibility of the two proposals, the
JCS required that the minimum essential force be addressed in as much
detail as time permitted and that the optimum force be addressed in only
general terms. They asked thet the analysis include not only an expansion
of the concept but: (1) a listing of the force requirements additive to
OSD Program 4; (2) the rationale to validate these increased requirements;
(3) the service capabilities to provide validated force requirements;

.

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
