Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

necessary impact. In formulating a more effective program of
future attacks, I would be inclined to keep the rate as indi-
cated, maintain the weight on target as for recent strikes,
but begin at once a prosression of US strikes North of 19th
parallel ir a slow but steadily ascending movement. The tar-
gets in the area South thereof could be reserved largely for
VNAF and FARMGATE. It is true that the MIG threat will grow
as we move North but we have the means to take care of it.

If we tarry too long in the South, we will give Hanoi a weak
and misleading signal which will work against our ultimate
purpose.

General Westmoreland Concurs.

Taylor's dissatisfaction with the tempo of the air campaign was by
no means mitigated by the decision to launch the next scheduled attack,
ROLLING THUNDER VI on March 13, as another isolated, stage-managed joint
US/GVN operation. Notification of the decision to strike came to him
in the following FLASH message; 91/

Decision has been taken here to execute ROLLING THUNDER VI
during daylight hours Saturday 13 March Saigon time. If weather
precludes effective strike Phu Qui ammo depot (Target 10) on this
date, US portion of ROLLING THUNDER VI will be postponed until
14 March Saigon time or earliest date weather will permit effec-
tive US strike of Target 40. However if US strike weathered out,
VNAF strike (with US support) on its own primary or alternate
targets is still authorized to go. Request you solicit Quat's
agreement this arrangement.

If joint US/GVN strike goes...would expect GYN/US press
announcement be made in Saigon. NMCC has furnished time of
launch in past and this has proven eminently satisfactory.
Will continue this arrangement. .

If US strike weathered out and GVN strike goes, recommend
that GVN make brief unilateral press statement which would not
detract from already agreed US/GVN statement, which we would
probably wish use at time of US strike against Target 40. GVN
unilateral press announcement should indicate strike made by
GVN aircraft suoported by US aircraft. Would hope that announce-
ment, although brief, could also mention target, identifying it
as military installation associated with infiltration.

Request revly by flash cable.
Washington's anticipation that the strike might be weathered out

proved correct, and Taylor's pique at the further delay is reflected in
his reply:

68 - TOP SECRET = Sensitive
