Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Shortly following President Truman's entry into office, the U.S.
assured France that it had never questioned, "even by implication,
French sovereignty over Indo-China." The U.S. policy was to press
France for progressive measures in Indochina, but to expect France to
decide when its peoples would be ready for independence; "such deci-
sions would preclude the establishment of a trusteeship in Indochina
except with the consent of the French Government." These guidelines,
established by June, 1945 -~ before the end of the war -- remained
fundamental to U.S. policy.

With British cooperation, French military forces were reestablished
in South Vietnam in September, 1945. The U.S. expressed dismay at the
outbreak of guerrilla warfare which followed, and pointed out that while
it had no intention of opposing the reestablishment of French control,
"it is not the policy of this government to assist the French to reestab-
lish their control over Indochina by force, and the willingness of the
U.S. to see French control reestablished assumes that [the French claim
to have the support of the population in Indochina is borne out by future
events." Through the fall and winter of 1945-1946, the U.S. received a
series of requests from Ho Chi Minh for intervention in Vietnam; these
were, on the record, unanswered. However, the U.S. steadfastly refused
to assist the French military effort, e.g., forbidding American flag
vessels to carry troops or war materiel to Vietnam. On March 6, 1916,
the French and Ho signed an Accord in which Ho acceded to French re-
entry into North Vietnam in return for recognition of the DRV as a
"Free State," part of the French Union. As of April 1946, allied occu-
pation of Indochina was officially terminated, and the U.S. acknowledged
to France that all of -Indochina had reverted to French control. MThere-
after, the problems of U.S. policy toward Vietnam were dealt with in the
context of the U.S. relationship with France. (Tab 1)

In late 1946, the Franco-Viet Minh War began in earnest. A chart
(pp-A37 ff) summarizes the principal events in the relations between
France and Vietnam, 196-1949, describing the milestones along the route
by which.France, on the one hand, failed to reach any lasting accommo-
dation with Ho Chi Minh, and, on the other hand, erected the "Bao Dai
solution" in its stead. The U.S. during these years continued to regard
the conflict as fundamentally a matter for French resolution. The U.¢.
in its representations to France deplored the prospect of protracted war,
and urged meaningful concessions to Vietnamese nationalism. However,
the U.S., deterred by the history of Ho’s communist affiliation, always
stopped short of endorsing Ho Chi Minh or the Viet Minh. Accordingly,
U.S. policy gravitated with that of France toward the Bao Dai solution.
At no point was the U.S. prepared to adopt an openly interventionist
course. To have done so would have clashed with the expressed British
view that Indochina was an exclusively French concern, and played into
the hands of France's extremist political parties of both the Right and
the Left. The U.S. was particularly apprehensive lest by intervening
it strengthen the political position of French Communists. Moreover,

A-3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
