Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Conspired to betray Vietnamese "nationalist" students who
did not join his Youth League at Whampoa.

1927 Departed Canton in April with Borodin after break between
Chiang Kai-shek and Mao's communists. In Hong Kong transferred
leadership of Youth League.

1928 Attended Communist Congress Against Imperialism at Brussels.
Travelled to Thailand, and there often disguised himself as
a Buddhist monk. Acted as an agent of Third International.

1929 In July, Ho worked in a colony of Vietnamese emigres numbering
30,000 in Thailand. Organized Annamite Fraternity of Siam
(Hoi Than Ai Nguoi Annam 0 Xiem). Ordered to Hong Kong to
organize Indochina Communist Party. His own Youth League
the previous May had split into two factions -- one called
"Indochinese Communist Party"; the other, later, the Annamese
Communist Party.

1930 Ho arrived in Hong Kong in January. Fused Indochinese Communist
Party, Annamese Communist Party and Indochinese Communist Alli-
ance into Vietnam Communist Party (Viet Nam Cong San Dang) by
March. Central Committee transferred to Haiphong. In October,
per Comintern wishes, adopted new name of Indochinese Communist
Party (Dong Duong Cong San Dang). Ho attended Third Confer-
ence of the South Seas Communist Party in Singapore in April.
French sentenced Ho Chi Minh to death in absentia, probably
as a result of the aftermath of the Yen Bay insurrection in
February.

1931 Arrested by British in Hong Kong and imprisoned in June.
|British acted on French pressure which was suppressing comaunist/
nationalist unrest in Vietnam at the time. Entire apparatus
of Indochinese Communist Party was smashed.

1932 After series of trials in British courts (including appeal on
Hots behalf by Sir Stafford Cripps in England), Ho was released
from Hong Kong Prison in late 1932. Went to Singapore, arrested
again and sent back to Hong Kong. Admitted to hospital for
tuberculosis.

1933 Nguyen Ai Quoc reported dead in Hong Kong by French records.
Disappeared without a trace. Believed he was released to
work secretly for British Intelligence Service.

(Congress of ICP held in Ban-Mai, Thailand in April.)

| (Attempts to reconstitute ICP were under leadership of Tran van
| Giau, who had studied at Moscow's Oriental Institute.)

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
