Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

While this public identification of the inconsistency of
the positions taken by various members of the Administration was
embarrassing, a more serious problem was the massive anti-war demonstra-
tion organized in Washington on October 21. The leaders of the "New
Left" assembled some 50,000 anti-war protestors in the Capitol on this
October Saturday and staged a massive march on the Pentagon. While the
"polities of confrontation" may be distasteful to the majority of
Americans, the sight of thousands of peaceful demonstrators being con-
fronted by troops in battle gear cannot have been reassuring to the
country as a whole nor to the President in particular. And as if to
add insult to injury, an impudent and dovish Senator McCarthy announced
in November that he would be a candidate for the Democratic nomination
for President. He stated his intention of running in all the primaries
and of taking the Vietnam war to the American people in a direct challenge
to an incumbent President and the leader of his own party.

To counter these assaults on his war policy from the left,
the President dramatically called home Ambassador Bunker and General
Westmoreland (the latter to discuss troop levels and requests as well)
in November and sent them out to publicly defend the conduct of the war
and the progress that had been achieved. Bunker spoke to the Overseas
Press Club in New York on November 17 and stressed the progress that the
South Vietnamese were making in their efforts to achieve democratic self-
government and to assume 4 larger burden of the war. General Westmoreland
addressed the National Press Club in Washington on November 21 and out-
lined his own four-phase plan for the defeat of the Viet Cong and their
North Vietnamese sponsors. He too dwelled on the progress achieved to
date and the increasing effectiveness of the South Vietnamese forces.
Neither discussed the air war in the North in any serious way, however, and
that was the issue that was clearly troubling the American public the most.

Cc. New Studies
1. SEACABLY

In the early winter of 1967-68 several new studies of the
pombing were completed within the Government and by contract researchers
all of which had some bearing on the deliberations of February and March
1968 when the next major reassessment took place. The first of these
was entitled SEACABIN, short for "Study of the Political-Military Implica-
tions in Southeast Asia of the Cessation of Aerial Bombardment and the
Initiation of Negotiations." It was a study done by the Joint Staff and
ISA to specifically address the question of what could be expected from
a cessation of the bombing and the beginning of negotiations, a possibility
that seemed imminent at the time of the President's San Antonio speech
jin September. As it turned out, the time was not ripe. The study, how-
ever, was an important effort by the Defense Department to anticipate

such 2 contingency.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
115
