Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Following the de jure recognition of the 'Democratic Republic
of Vietnam’ by Communist China and the USSR, a general plan for
closer collaboration between the Chinese Communists and the Viet
Minh probably was formulated. As many as 10 to 20 thousand Viet
Minh troops are being trained in Communist China, There is evi-
dence that the Chinese Communists have supplied the Viet Minh
with significant quantities of material, probably confined to
small arms, ammunition, mortars, and light artillery. Access
to training facilities in Communist China, the expansion of
routes and facilities for supply, and the possibility of acceler-
ating recruitment give the Viet Minh the potential capabilities
for initiating a large-scale offensive against the French at an
early date,"

Capebilities of French-Controlled Forces (ORE 50-50

"French ground, naval and air forces in Indochina are under
the operational control of GHQ,-Armed Forces in the Far Hast
(FARO). As of 1 July 1950 French regular ground forces totalled
approximately 150,500 men. An estimated 66,700 troops in the
armies of the Associated States, although subject to the nominal
political control of these states, are under FARO operational control.
In addition there are 122,500 quasi-military and miscellaneous
indigenous troops under over-all FAHO control. Of these
local forces, only the Vietnamese army, at present week and
ineffective, has the potential for developing into a significant
force, French ground forces are capable of penetrating the
Viet-Minh held areas of Indochina but at the expense of
garrison strength engaged in pacification duties elsewhere, The
French have demonstrated a lack of aggressiveness. The French-
controlled ground forces have a dual problem - the elimination of
the Viet Minh forces and the defense of the China border, Indi-
cations are that current emphasis is on the former, Under these
circumstances, the most they can hope to achieve in the immeidate
future is the destruciton of enemy supply caches and the consequent
postponment of a large-scale Viet Minh offensive.

"The strength of the French Air Force in Indochina, which is
severe strained by its actions against Viet Minh forces, presently
totals 84 fighters and fighter-reconnaissance aircraft, 68
transports and 50 liaison planes, The level of serviceability
of fighter aircraft, now about 55 percent, will probably continue
to drop as maintenance shortages become more acute. Many of the
French air installations - few in mumber and generally in poor
condition - are Wilnerable to sabotage and some even to direct

+ Viet Minh attack,

CO FP X
