Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page —

216. The State Department's estimate of the political situa-
tion is that Hinh holds a veto power over Diem; “jockey-
ing for power and struggle for cabinet positions is
resulting in paralyzing impasse"; French reference to
"another structure of government" implies a “hankering
to reestablish a,political system" which might involve
direct colonial-type controls by France; and, unless
Diem receives U.S.-French support, his chances of
success appear slight. Paris TEDUL 11 NIACT, 21 Octo-

Er 1951 sc anne cuiciciewceuc ees esicies ecinee eee ces ce ene cso aeaer tor
217. This message contains the policy of the U.S. Government
and instructions to the Ambassador and Chief of MAAG in
Saigon necessary to carry out the provisions of NSC 5429/2
pertaining to training of Vietnamese armed forces.
Draft Joint State-Defense Message, 21 October 1954........... 783

218. The OCB draft recommendations on training in Vietnam
outline the U.S. role in assisting the reorganization
and training of the Vietnamese armed forces and
specifies the coordination required between the Am-
bassador and Chief, MAAG. The question of ultimate
Size of the Vietnamese forces and U.S. support is left
for “later determination.” NSC 218th Meeting, 22 Octo-
SUL Uae oer ee ra eer aes ana eee mares Peeks Fed

219. The Revort of the Van Fleet Mission to the Far Hast is
discussed with President Hisenhower. General Van Fleet's
views are "somewhat different from present policies."
As Van Fleet states the problem: "The problem before us
is the failure of U.S. leadership in the Far Rast....the
future will reveal other prices we must pay for the free
world defeat in Indochina.” White House Memorandum for
General Bonesteel, 25 October 1954. ....ceccvccccccncevenscces 192

220. Diem is insisting on getting rid of General Hinh.
- Eisenhower's letter to Diem is being interpreted as

superseding Washington agreements, that Diem has "full

rein" without meeting the precondition of "forming a

strong and stable government.” The President's letter

ean also be exploited by the Viet Minh and is causing

the French concern. State Memorandum of Conversation,

BGP CGHODePeLOG ya slate owiantea ee b wired a Halswauare'y calswawitneeee Ue

221. Secretary Dulles forwards the main points of General
Collins' recommendations regarding force levels in
Vietnam. Im summary, the points are: (1) it would
be disastrous if the French Expeditionary Corns (FEC)
were withdrawn prematurely; (2) the U.S. should continue
to subsidize the FEC; (3) the Vietnamese Army should be

xKEVL TOP SECRET - Sensitive
