Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

be terribly risky in the aftermath of Laos, even if the U.S. had someone
to overthrow him with. Further, although the paper explicitly conceded
first priority to military needs, there was a strong argument that mili-
tary efforts alone will not be enough.

It was apparently this equivocal attitude toward Diem (aside from
any personal considerations) that led to Lansdale's prediction that State
could never "win this battle." Thus in the main paper of the May 6 draft
the general political objective was stated as:

Develop political and economic conditions which will
create a solid and widespread support among the key polit-
ical groups and the general population for a Vietnam which
has the will to resist Communist encroachment and which in
turn stems from a stake in a freer and more democratic
society. 32/

Lansdale, in a pencilled comment to Gilpatric, complained:

The elected President of Vietnam is ignored in this
statement as the base to build upon in countering the
communists. This will have the U.S. pitted against Diem
as first priority, the communists as second. 33

Nevertheless, it seems that the May program went a very long way in
Lansdale's preferred direction: although the U.S. was expanding its con-
tribution to the Vietnamese effort it was no longer asking for any quid
pro quo. The U.S. envisioned "discreet pressure” but certainly not, for
then anyway, any hint of withholding aid. The U.S. flatly asserted that it
saw no “remotely acceptable alternative to Diem," for the time being, any
way. The U.S. thought it vital that Diem do better, but increasing his
confidence in the U.S. had top priority. The strongest guidance given the
new Ambassador was to "get on Diem's wavelength." 3}

More of this tentative adoption of the Lansdale approach can be seen
in the discussion of Vice President Johnson's trip (from the May 6 draft):

The Vice President's visit will provide the added
incentive needed to give the GVN the motivation and con-
fidence it needs to carry on the struggle. We believe
that meetings between the Vice President and President
Diem will act as a catalytic agent to produce broad
agreement on the need for accelerated joint Vietnamese-
U.S. actions to resist Communist encroachment in SBA.
These meetings will also serve to get across to Presi-

: dent Diem our confidence in him as a men of great stature
and as one of the strong figures in SEA on whom we are
placing our reliance. At the same time, these confer-
ences should impress Diem with the degree of importance

ty
2 7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
