Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

k, All-Out Conventional Bombing of North Vietnam,

Including Hanoi and Haiphong

China would probably be prepared to provide as
much logistical support and labor as the North Vietnamese
might need to keep society functioning in North Viet-
nam and to help Hanoi maintain the war effort in the
South. Peking would probably be ready to increase its
anti-aircraft artillery contingent in the South, (possibly
sending SAM batteries), and would probably supply the
North Vietnamese air force with MIG-19's from its own
inventory. Chinese airspace and airfields would be
made available, as and when necessary, as a refuge for.
North Vietnamese aircraft. There is a strong possibility
that Chinese pilots in MIG's with North Vietnamese
markings would engage US bombers over North Vietnam.
However, we would anticipate overt Chinese intervention
only if the scope of the bombing seemed intended to
destroy North Vietnam as a viable Communist state.

5. US Invasion of North Vietnam

Chinese reaction would depend on the scale of US
moves, on North Vietnamese intentions and on Peking's
view of US objectives. If it became evident that we
were not aiming for a rapid takeover of North Vietnam
put intended chiefly to hold some territory in southern
areas to inhibit Hanoi's actions in South Vietnam and to
force it to quit fighting, we would expect China to
attempt to deter us from further northward movement and
to play on our fears of @ Sino-US conflict, but not to
intervene massively in the war. Thus, if requested by
Hanoi, Peking would probably be willing to station infantry
north of Hanoi to attach some ground forces to North Viet-
namese units further south, and to contribute to any
"volunteer" contingent that North Vietnam might organize.
At home, China would probably complement these deterrents
by various moves ostensibly putting the country on a
war footing.

Tf the North Vietnamese, under threat of a full-
scale invasion, decided to agree to a negotiated settle-
ment, the Chinese would probably go along. On the other
hand, if the Chinese believed that the US was intent on
destroying the North Vietnamese regime (either because
Hanoi insisted on holding out to the end, or because Peking
chronically expects the worst from the US), they would
probably fear for their own security and intervene on a

massive scale. 28/

. 159 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
