Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

SECURITY is ORIASTION

operations designed to keep the enemy off balance", (» re-

orvanization ints regiments | and Gdivlston=Si.24e ULES “is (sbi bd
‘in the planning stages", -(c) there is "no sense of ur, eney in
the training of senior Vietnamese comnanders and staff officers"
(a) the organization ef a training command is awaitin: the solu-
tion of “political+problems" and (e) the “organization of the
amphibious command has not gone beyond the planning stages"

_

4. In order to accurately present current views of the Joint
Chiefs of Steff to the Secretary of State, it is suggested that
a new memorandum dated 25 August 1953, which is being forwarded
separately and which reflects the views expressed in the above
paragrapns, be substituted for the memorandum of 11 August as
an enclosure to your proposed memorandum to the Secretary of
State. In addition, in-order to point out more clearly het
military success in Indochina is dependent upon the manner —
in which operations are conducted, it is recommended that the
last paragraph of the draft letter to the Secretary of State
(Enclosure) be changed as-follows (changes indicated in the
usual manner):

"There is attached for your information a memorandum
to me from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, dated +i-AR@ayas-1553
28 August 1953, which stated states that the present Navarre
we oe L

concept & appears to correct the rmreviously indicated weakuesses
and from their viewpoint presents a marked improvement in
French military thinking concerning operations in Indochina.
of course, | the actual suecess of the oprrations in Indochina
will ve de spendent / upon the aBECCSSIVENCSS | and skill with whi ich

the French and 1 Vietnamese forces conduct their tuture opera-
tions. Aeeopdinai= Hovertheless, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
believe, as do I, that the necessary support should be pro-

vided to permit full and vigorous implementation of the

Navarre conecpt. conditioned upon continued implementation
of French support, demonstration ef French intent by actual
erformance in Indochina, and eontinued French will; infness

to receive and act upon U.S. military advice. Purther, the
Freneh snould be urged at all levels to support and vigor-

ously prosecute the Navarre concept to the maximum extent
of thelr ecapabillties. *

ror the Joint Chiefs of Sta

ek

ARTHUR RADFORD
Chaivnan,
JoOLnt Chiefs of Starr.

Enclosure «+ - ? gill as a
1 CECAET
SECUNITY IFURMATION
