Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

“MOP SECRET

(3) Develop cooperative measures through multilateral
or bilateral arrangements to combat Communist internal sub-
version.

(4) Appraise the desirability and the means of devel-
oping in Asia some form of collective security arrangements,
bearing in mind the following considerations:

(a) The reluctance of India at this time to join
in any anti-Communist security pact and the influence
this will have among the other nations of Asie.

(>) The necessity of assuming that any collective
security: arrangements which might be developed be based
on the principle of mutusl aid and on e demonstrated de-
sire and ability to share in the burden by all the par-
ticipating states.

(c) The necessity of assuring that any such secur-
ity arrangements would be consonent with the purposes of
any regional association which may be formed in accord-
ance With paragraph 3-a above.

(d) ‘The necessity of assuring that any such secur-
ity arrangement would be in conformity with the provi-
sions of Article 51 of the Charter relating to individ-
ual and collective self-defense.

c. The United States should encourege the creation of an
atmosphere favorable to economic recovery and development in
non-Communist Asia, and to the revival of trade along nultilat-
eral, non-discriminatory lines. The economic policies of the
United States should be adapted to promote, where possible,
economic conditions that will contribute to political stability
in friendly countries of Asia, but the United States should
carefully avoid assuming responsibility for the economic welfare
and development of thet continent. Such policies might be pro-
jected along the following lines:

(1) Vigorous prosecution of the Point IV program in
friendly countries of Asia, in an endeavor to assist them,
by providing technical assistance, to make ea start toward
the solution of some of their long-range economic problems,

(2) Maintenance of a liberal United States trade pol-
icy with Asie end stimulation of imports from Asie. The
special problems concerning trade with China are treated
in paragraph 3-f-(4) below.

(3) Execution of a stockn
materials, besed upon United $

285

NSE 48 /o WE: TOP SECRET

iling vo
tates n

=
er
