Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was getting really enthusiastic work without thought of self
from both Porter and Lansdale under present conditions. I felt
public announcements might make Lansdale feel less important’
without any gain for Porter who does not need or want a sense
of importance. I believe that Americans are pulling together
here as never before and that there is a spirit here which is
worth more than organization charts.

"But I can see the merit of the idea that a public desig-
nation of Porter as being in total charge of the American
aspects of the rural construction progrem would ‘constitute a
clear and visible sign to the Vietnamese and to our own people
that the Honolulu Conference really marks a new departure.’

"There are pitfalls to be avoided. For example, I assume
that if Porter's new allocation means that I am so taken wp with
U.S. visitors that I am in effect separated from ‘rural con-
struction,’ then we would take a new look at the whole thing.
Much of the most time-consuming job out here is not rural con-
struction but is the handling and educating of U.S. visitors.
Although it must be done at the expense of the war effort within
Vietnam, it is vitally importent. But it was not until the end
of January that I was free enough of visitors to start holding
meetings of U.S. ‘rural construction’ workers to probe and to
prod and to develop the ‘check-up’ maps which I showed you at
Honolulu.

"I suggest, therefore that I make the following announce-
ment: ‘I have today designated Deputy Ambassador William Porter
to take full charge, under my direction, of all aspects of work
of the United States in support of the programs of community
building, presently described as rural construction, agreed at
the Honolulu Conference. This includes overcoming by police
methods the criminal, as distinct from the military aspect of |
Viet Cong violence; and the training and installation of health,
education and agricultural workers and of community organizers.
Ambassador Porter will have the support of a small staff drawn
from all elements of the U.S. Mission, end he and I will continue
to have the help of General Edward Lansdale as senior liaison
officer and adviser. Ambassador Porter will continue to serve
as my Deputy in the full sense of the word, but he will be re-
lieved as far as possible of all routine duties not connected
with the Honolulu program. We are determined that this program
for peace and progress shall be carried forward with all the
energy and skill of a fully coordinated U.S, Mission effort,
always with full recognition that the basic task of nation-
pbuilding here belongs to the people of Viet Nam and to their
government.'

56 ‘ ~ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
