Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

18. American Policy in South Viet-Nem and Southeast Asia, William P.
Bun Remarks Made Before the Washington (Mo.) Chamber of Com-
merce on January 23, = Department of State Bulletin, February 8,

ec * O*

"In retrospect, our action in Korea reflected three elements:

--a recognition that aggression of any sort must be met early
and head-on or it will have to be met later and in tougher circumstances.
We had relearned the lessons of the 1930's-=-Manchuria, Ethiopia, the
Rhineland, Czechoslovakia.

.

--a recognition that a defense line in Asia, stated in terms of an
island perimeter, did not adequately define our vital interests, that
those vital interests could be affected by action on the mainland of
Asia.

«-an understanding that, for the future, a power vacuum was an
invitation to aggression, that there must be local political, economic,
and military strength in being to make aggression unprofitable, but also
that there must be a demonstrated willingness of major external power
both to assist and to intervene if required."

* * *

"Such was the situation President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles
faced in 1954. Two things were clear: that in the absence of exter-
nal help communism was virtually certain to take over the successor
states of Indochina and to move to the borders of Thailand and perhaps
beyond, and that with France no longer ready to act, at least in South
Viet-Nam, no power other than the United States could move in to help fill
the vacuum. Their decision, expressed in a series of actions starting in
late 1954, was to move in to help these countries. Besides South Viet-
Nam and more modest efforts in Laos and Cambodia, substantial assistance
was begun to Thailand.

"The appropriations for these actions were voted by successive
Congresses, and in 1954 the Senate likewise ratified the Southeast Asia
Treaty, to which Thailand and the Philippines adhered along with the
United States, Britain, France, Australia, New Zealand, and Pakistan.
Although not signers of the treaty, South Viet-Nam, Laos, and Cambodia
could call on the SEATO members for help against aggression.

"So a commitment was made, with the support of both political par-
ties, that has guided our policy in Southeast Asia for a decade now. It
was not a comnitment that envisaged a United States position of power in
Southeast Asia or United States military bases there. We threatened no
one. Nor was it a commitment that substituted United States responsibility

D-26
