ee oe ae pierre aE = ah ER ee eet

A

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

2 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

3. Southeast Asia Program Office, It is essential that the
Department of Defense has at all times a readily available and central-
ized bank of information with respect to the Southeast Asia build-up.
To this end, Dr. Enthoven is to establish a Southeast Asia Program
Office which is to be able to furnish Mr. McNamara and Mr. Vance

all information that may be required with respect to Southeast Asia.
Among other things, this unit is to be able to provide immediate
information on what overseas units are being depleted in order to
accommodate Southeast Asia needs, If there is any draw-down any-
where, Mr. McNamara wants to know it promptly. We must know the
full price of what we are doing and propose to do.

Mr. McNamara suggested that each Service Secretary establish
a Similar Southeast Asia Program Unit to bring together and keep current
data relating to that Service involving Southeast Asia, and that the Joint
Staff might establish a similar set-up, 1

Mr, McNamara said that it was mandatory that the situation be
brought under better control, For example, the Southeast Asia construc-
tion program was $1,2 billion in the FY 66 Supplement; yesterday at
Honolulu the figure of $2.5 billion was raised. Yet there is only the
vaguest information as to how these funds will be spent, where, on what,
and by whom, This is part of the bigger problem that there is no proper
system for the allocation of available resources in Vietnam, McGeorge
Bundy is to help organize the country team to deal with this problem,
including reconciling railitary and non-military demands.

4, Manpower Controls, Mr, McNamara designated Mr, Morris as
the person to be responsible for the various manpower requirements. He
is either to insure that the requirements are met or to let Mr, McNamara
know if they are not being met. Mr, McNamara wants a written state-
ment whenever we have been unable to do something that General West-
moreland says he needs for full combat effectiveness, (In this regard,
General Westmoreland recognizes that it is not possible to have 100
percent combat effectiveness for all the 102 battalions. For example,
there are not sufficient helicopter companies, Roughly, he estimates
he will get 96 Lattalion combat effectiveness out of the 102 battalions, )

Ball TOP SECRET - Sensitive
