Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_TOP SECRET - Sensitive

between 30,000 and 40,000 additional trained personnel will be
retained in the Army for each month of extension. For example,
during the first six-month period of extension of terms of
service, the Army would gain in excess of 500 helicopter pilots,
of which there is a critical shortease. OQther critical skill
shortages would be similarly affected.

"(2) Selective callup of individual Reservists. The
Army Immediate Ready Reserve contains 490,000 personnel, of
which more than 90 percent are in grades of E-4 and E-5. A
selective callup of individual Reservists, coupled with an
extension of terms of service, will alleviate virtually all of
the Army's current critical skill shortages.

"b. Marine Corps.

(1) Involuntary extension of enlistments of all
enlisted personnel would produce an average of 5,766 enlisted
men per month through June. Within this gain, an average of
1,728 experienced NCOs per month would be gained,

"(2) Selective recall of individual Reservists would
be necessary in order to bring mobilized units up, to provide
the essential rank and skills not contained in the organized
Reserve. Within the Marine Corps Reserve, but outside of the
organized units, there is an invaluable pool of key personnel:
noncommissioned officers, officers (particularly pilots), and
Marines possessing long lead time "hard skill" Military Occupa-
tional Specialties.

"o, Navy. In the deploying ships of the Navy, there is a
shortfall of 32,500 in officers and the top six enlisted pay
grades.

(1) Involuntary extension of Reserve Officers and
selected recall of Reserves would fulfill officer manning
requirements in one to three months.

"(2) Gancellation of early releases and selective
involuntary extensions, recall of Fleet Reserves, deferral of
transfers to Fleet Reserve, and recall of Ready Reserves would
achieve 100 percent enlisted requirements by rate/rating in
one to three months.

"q@, Air Force. If extension of terms of service were granted
the Air Force could, on a selective basis, hold approximately
20,000 skilled personnel out of a possible 70,000 that would
be discharged over a six-month period. Retaining these critical

skills would sustain the force at an acceptable level. Should

" 10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
