Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

15. President Kennedy's State of the Union Message, January 11, 1962,
Public Papers of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1962, p. 12:

* + *F

"A satisfactory settlement in Laos would elso help to achieve and
safeguard the peace in Viet Nam -- where the foe is increasing his tactics
of terror -- where our own efforts have been stepped up -- and where the
local government has initiated new progrems and reforms to broaden the
base of resistance. The systematic aggression now bleeding that country
is not a ‘war of liberation' -- for Viet Nem is already free. It is a war
of attempted subjugation -- and it will be resisted. :

16. President Kennedy's News Conference, Janu 15, 1962, Public Papers
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1962, vp. 18: :
eo 3

"Q. In the past it would seem that coalition governments lean towards
Communist control. Are we then taking a chance in supporting a coalition-
type government in Southeast Asia?

"A. We are taking a chance in all of Southeast Asia and we're taking
a chance in other areas.

"Nobody can make any predictions sure for the future really on any
matter in which there are powerful interests at stake. I think, however,
that we have to consider what our alternatives are and whet the prospects
for war are in that area if we fail in.our present efforts, and the geo-
graphic problems which would have to be surmounted in such a military en-
gagement where there is no easy entrance by sea and where the geographic
location is extremely -- a long way from us and very close to those who
might become involved. So that there is no easy sure answer for Laos.

"But it is my judgment that it is in the best interests of our country
to work for a neutral and independent Laos. We are attempting to do that
and I can assure you that I recognize the risks that are involved. But I
also think we should consider the risks if we fail. And particularly of
the possibility of escalation of a military struggle in a place of danger.
So we're going to attempt to work out this matter in a way which permits

us to try."

17. President Kennedy's News Conference, February 7, 1962, Public Papers
‘of the Presidents, Kenne 1962, Dp. 121;

"Phe Subterranean War

"QO, Mr. President, there seems to be some doubt, at least.on the local
level and in the region where this is going on, es to the right of the
American people and the rest of the world to know the extent of the battle

C-15
