Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of activity in late: Auril. and early May, which we will see was essentially
an offshoot of the Laos crisis which had come to a head at that time. A
much more thorough review was undertaken in the fall, following General
Taylor's mission to Saigon, which then led to an important expansion of the
American effort in Vietnam.

No fundamental new American decisions on Vietnam were made until
the Buddhist unrest in the last half of 1963, and no major new military
decisions were made until 1965. Consequently, the decisions in the fall of
1961 (essentially, to provide combat support -- for example, heli-
copter companies ~- but to defer any decision on direct combat troops) have
come to seem very important. This paper tries to describe what led up to
those decisions, what alternatives were available and what the implications
of the choices were.

The story is a fairly complicated one. For although it is hard to
recall that context today, Vietnam in 1961 was a peripheral crisis. Even
within Southeast Asia it received far less of the Administration's and the
world's attention than did Laos. The New York Times Index for 1961 has
eight columns of Vietnam, twenty-six on Laos. Decisions about Vietnam were
greatly influenced by what was happening elsewhere. In the narrow Vietnam-
ese context, the weaknesses and peculiarities of the Diem government had a
substantial, if not alweys obvious, impact on the behavior of both the
Vietnamese officials seeking American aid and the American decision-makers
pondering the nature and terms of the aid they would offer.

As it happens, the Eisenhower Administration was never faced with a
need for high-level decisions affecting the crisis developing in Vietnan
during 1960. A formal Counterinsurgency Plan, intended to be the basis of an
expanded program of assistance to Vietnam, was being worked on through most
of that year, but(presumably reflecting a subdued sense of urgency), it took
eight months to reach the White House. By that time, a new Administration
had just taken office, President Kennedy promptly approved the plan, but
this merely set off lengthy negotiations with the Vietnamese about whether
and when they would do their share of the CIP. In late April, though, a crisis
atmosphere developed, not because of anything fresh out of Vietnam, but
because of a need to shore up the Vietnamese and others in Southeast Asia
in the face of a likely collapse of the U.S. position in Laos. This led to
a U.S. offer to discuss putting American troops into Vietnam, or perhaps
negotiate a bilateral security treaty with the Vietnamese. When, however,
Vice President Johnson mentioned the possibility of troops to Diem in May, Diem
said he wanted no troops yet. The idea of a bilateral treaty similarly
slipped out of sight. Consequently, although the United States had itself
indicated a willingness in May to discuss a deeper commitment, the South
Vietnamese did not take up the opportunity, and the Administration had no
occasion to face up to really hard decisions.

But by October, the situation in Vietnam had worsened. The VC
were becoming disturbingly aggressive. Now, Diem did raise the question of

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
