fo:

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201!

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

These conclusions are as follows:

de

The battle against Communism must be joined in Southeast
Asia with strength and determination to achieve success
there -- or the United States, inevitably, must surrender
the Pacific and take up our defenses on ovr own shores.
Asian Communism is compromised and contained by the main-
tenance of free nations on the subcontinent. Without this
inhibitory influence, the island outposts ~- Philippines,
Japan, Taiwan -- have no security and the vast Pacific
becomes a Red Sea.

The struggle is far from lost in Southeast Asia and it is
by no means inevitable that it must be lost. In each
country it is possible to build a sound structure capable
of withstanding and turning the Communist surge. The will
to resist -- while now the target of subversive attack --
is there. The key to what is done by Asians in defense of
Southeast Asian freedom is confidence in the United States.

There is no alternative to United States leadership in
Southeast Asia. Leadership in individual countries -- or
the regional leadership end cooperation so appealing to
Asians -- rests on the knowledge and faith in United
States power, will and understanding.

SEATO is not now and probably never will be the answer
because of British and French unwillingness to support
decisive action. Asian distrust of the British and French
is outspoken. Success at Geneve would prolong SEATO's role.
Failure at Geneva would terminate SEATO's meaningfulness.

In the latter event, we must be ready with a new approach
to collective security in the area.

We should consider an alliance of all the free nations of

the Pecific and Asia who are willing to join forces in defense
of their freedom. Such an organization should:

a) have a clear-cut commend authority

b) also devote attention to measures and programs of
social justice, housing, lend reform, etc.

Asian leaders -- at this time -- do not want American troops
involved in Southeast Asia other than on training missions.

-American combat troop involvement is not only not required,

it is not desirable. Possibly Americans ~- fail to appre-
ciate fully the subtlety that recently-coloniel peoples
would not look with favor upon governments which invited
or accepted the return this soon of Western troops. To

22

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
