Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

II. A. UNITED STATES, FRANCE AND VIETNAMESE NATIONALISM
SUMMARY

It has been argued that even as the U.S. began supporting the
French in Indochina, the U.S. missed opportunities to bring peace,
stability and independence to Vietnam. The issues arise from the
belief on the part of some critics that (a) the U.S. made no attempt
to seek out and support a democratic-nationalist alternative in Viet-
nam; and (b) the U.S. commanded, but did not use, leverage to move
the French toward granting genuine Vietnamese independence.

The record shows that through 1953, the French pursued a policy
which was based on military victory and excluded meaningful negotia-
tions with Ho Chi Minh. The French did, however, recognize the require-
ment for an alternative focus for Vietnamese nationalist aspirations,
and from 1947 forward, advanced the "Bao Dai solution." The record
shows that the U.S. was hesitant through 1949 to endorse the "Bao Dai
solution" until Vietnam was in fact unified and granted autonomy and
did consistently support the creation of a genuinely independent, non-
communist Vietnamese government to supplant French rule. Nonetheless,
the fall of China and the deteriorating French military position in
Indochina caused both France and the U.S. to press the "Bao Dai solu-
tion." In early 1950, after French ratification of the Elysee Agreement
granting "Vietnam's independence," the U.S. recognized Bao Dai and
initiated military and economic aid, even before transfer of govern-
mental power actually occurred. Thereafter, the French yielded control
only pro forma, while the Emperor Bao Dai adopted a retiring, passive
role, and turned his government over to discreditable politicians.

The Bao Dai regime was neither popular nor efficient, and its army,
dependent on French leadership, was powerless. The impotence of the
Bao Dai regime, the lack of any perceptible alternatives (except for
the communists), the fact of continued French authority and control
over the GVN, the fact that the French alone seemed able to contain
communism in Indochina -- all these constrained U.S. promptings for
a democratic-nationalist government in Vietnam. (Tab 1)

The U.S.-French ties in Europe (NATO, Marshall Plan, Mutual Defense
Assistance Program) only marginally strengthened U.S. urgings that
France make concessions to Vietnamese nationalism. Any leverage from
these sources was severely limited by the broader considerations of
U.S. policy for the containment of communism in Europe and Asia. NATO
and the Marshall Plan were of themselves judged to be essential to our
European interests. To threaten France with economic and military
sanctions in Europe in order to have it alter its policy in Indochina
was, therefore, not plausible. Similarly, to reduce the level of

A-1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
