Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The seriousness with which these international efforts
were being treated within the U.S. Government is reflected in two memos
from the period of late April and early May. On April 27, Maxwell Taylor,
in his capacity as military advisor to the President, sent a memo to
the President entitled, "Assessment and Uses of Negotiation Blue Chips."
The heart of his analysis was that bombing was a "blue chip" like cease-
fire, withdrawal of forces, amnesty for vc/NVA, etc., to be given away
at the negotiation table for something concrete in return, not abandoned
beforehand merely to get negotiations started. The path to negotiations
would be filled with pitfalls, he argued,

Any day, Hanoi may indicate a willingness to negotiate
provided we stop permanently our bombing attacks against the
north. In this case, our Government would be under great
pressure at home and abroad to accept this precondition whereas
to do so would seriously prejudice the success of subsequent
negotiations. 138/

To avoid this dilemma, Taylor urged the President to clearly indicate
+o our friends as well as the enemy that we were not prepared to end
the bombing except in negotiated exchange for a reciprocal concession
from the North Vietnamese. His analysis proceeded like this:

To avoid such pitfalls, we need to consider what we will
want from the Comminist side and what they will want from
us in the course of negotiating a cease-fire or a final
settlement. What are our negotiating assets, what is their
value, and how should they be employed? As I see them, the
following are the blue chips in our pile representing what
Hanoi would or could like from us and what we might consider
giving under certain conditions.

a. Cessation of bombing in North Viet-Nam.

b. Cessation of military operations against Viet Cong units.

Cessation of increase of U.S, forces in South Viet-Nam.
d. Withdrawal of U.S. forces from South Viet-Nan.

_e. Amnesty and civic rights for Viet Cong.

f. Economic aid to North Viet-Nan.

The Viet Cong/Hanoi have a similar stack of chips representing
actions we would like from them.

a. Cessation of Viet Cong incidents in South Viet-Nam.

b. Cessation of guerrilla military operations.

dia TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘
