[0

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

prevent NvA/vc forces from sustaining the conflict at a significant
level -- and the Board would not estimate how many U.S. forces were
"enough" --

~+.they might believe it necessary to make a more
fundamental choice between resorting to political tactics
or enlarging the war. [But] We believe that it would take a
prolonged period of military discouragement to convince the
DRV and the VC, persuaded as they are of their inherent
advantages, that they had reached such a pass. 19/

Even if it found itself in such straits, however, the chances were close
to 50-50 that NVN would bring in Chinese forces rather than quit:

If this point were reached....Prudence would seem to
dictate that Hanoi...should choose...to reduce the effort
in the South, perhaps negotiate, and salvage their resources
for another day. We think that the chances are a little
better than even that this is what they would do. But their
ideological and emotional commitment, and the high political
stakes involved, persuade us that there is an almost equal
chance that they would do the opposite, that is, enlarge the
war and bring in large numbers of Chinese forces. 20/

The two CIA intelligence estimates of the probable con-
sequences of the proposed escalatory measures were apparently closely
held, but the available documentary evidence does not reveal how influ-
ential they may have been. Secretary McNamara's response to the JCS
was merely that he was considering their recommendations "carefully" in
connection with "decisions that must be taken on other related aspects
of the conflict in Vietnam." 21/ He was apparently not satisfied with
the estimate of reactions to the POL strikes, however, which was largely
confined to an estimate of political reactions, and asked CIA for another
estimate, this time related to two options: (a) attack on the storage and
handling facilities at Haiphong, and (b) attack on the facilities at
Haiphong together with the other bulk storage sites.

The new estimate was submitted by Richard Helms, then
Acting Director of CIA, on 28 December (with the comment that it had
been drafted without reference to any pause in the bombing "such as is
now the subject of various speculative press articles." 22/ The esti-
mate spelled out with greater force than before what "strains" the POL
strikes might create in the North and how they might "embarrass" NVA/VC
military operations in the South, and its tone was much more favorable
to carrying out the strikes.

The estimate made little distinction between the two

“options. Haiphong was by far the most important and most sensitive of

the targets and the closest to a major city; the attacks on the others were

70 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
