Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and was designed to bring the DRV to the negotiating table. If that
occurred the pressures were to be suspended--although with the threat of
resumption should negotiations break down.

In the course of the month, these options converged and the distinctions
between them blurred. In particular, option A was expanded to include some
low-level pressures against the North; the negotiations element of option B
was, in effect, dropped and the pressures were to be applied at a faster,
less flexible pace; and option C was stiffened to resemble the first incar-
nation of option B--the pressures would be stronger and the negotiating
position tougher. Thus, by the end of the month when the Working Group's
proposals were presented to the NSC Principals for consideration before
& recommendation was made to the President, all options included pressures
against the North, and, in effect, excluded negotiations in the short-run,
Since the terms and pre-conditions proposed in all three options were
entirely unrealistic. The policy climate in Washington simply was not
receptive to any suggestion that U.S. goals might have to be compromised.
And, in proposing pressures against the North, the Working Group was conscious
of the danger that they might generate compelling world-wide pressure on the
U.S. for negotiations. How large a role the specific perception of the
President's views, validated or unvalidated, may have played in the Working
Group's narrowing of the options is not clear. It seems likely, however,
that some guidance from the White House was being received.

During the last week in November, the NSC Principals met to consider
the Working Group's proposals. They were joined on November 27 by Ambassador
Taylor. Taylor's report on conditions in South Vietnam was extremely bleak.
To improve South Vietnamese morale and confidence, and to "drive the DRV out
of its reinforcing role and obtain its cooperation in bringing an end to the
Viet Cong insurgency," he urged that military pressures against the North
be adopted. His report had a considerable impact on the Principals and
later on the President. As the discussions continued through the several
meetings of that week, opinion began to converge in favor of some combina-
tion of an "extended option A" and the first measures against the North of
option C.

In the end, the Principals decided on a two-phase recommendation to the
President. Phase I would be merely an extension of current actions with
some increased air activity by the U.S, in Laos and tit-for-tat reprisals
for VC attacks on U.S. forces or other major incidents. During this period,
the GVN would be informed of our desires for its reform and when these
were well underway, phase IL, a campaign of gradually escalating air strikes
against the North, would begin. This proposal. was presented to the Presi-
dent on December 1, He approved phase I and gave assent, at least in prin-
ciple, to phase II. In approving these measures, the President appears to ~~
have been reluctant to grant final authorization for phase II until he felt
it was absolutely necessary. ;

Vv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
