Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and reinforce for winter-spring campaign operations. It
would be premature to assume that an apparent decrease in
activity in December just prior to holiday stand-downs is
indicative of a change in trend. Further, it would be
erroneous to. conclude that VC Main Force and NVA formations
are no longer dangerous, that their unit integrity has been
destroyed, or that their logistical capability has fallen
below that needed to sustain his war of conquest by attrition.

"CG. On level of battalion imbalance the enemy
has maintained throughout 19%6 is about 1 day in 30. /sic/ This
level is consistent with his strategy of conserving his
forces while attriting US/FWMA forces, and is within his
capability to support logistically. If forced to a higher
level such as 1 day in 15, he will encounter difficulty.

"D. It is probable that the enemy during the
coming year will attempt to infiltrate men and supplies
into SVN by sea, through Laos and Cambodia, and across
the DMZ to: Counter-balance the US/FWMAF build-up; main-
tain a credible threat posture, attrite friendly forces and
determination by inflicting casualties and prolonging the
conflict; maintain and promote expansion of the insurgency base
(intra-structure Kic/ and militia); and continue his pro-
tracted war to control the people of SVN." 16/

The emphasis in the assessment is unmistakable -- the crucial
strategic areas would continue to be the highland border areas, the
DMZ-I CTZ area and the sanctuaries of Laos and Cambodia. The 1966
MACV Command History reveals that the enemy camp envisioned the high-
lands of MR5 as a "killing zone" where the mountainous and juggled terrain
favored VC/NVA operations; additionally the area was comfortably close
to buildup areas near the DMZ and the secure areas in Laos and Cambodia. 17/

When General Westmoreland claimed to have "taken the initiative" he
usually appears to have referred to the manner in which FW forces (U.S.
in particular) had prohibited the shift by VC/NVA into what counterinsur-
gent scholars call the "final battle of annihilation phase." MACV evi-
dence indicated that ve/NVA were prepared to do this as far back as 1965.
However, as an alternative (and this remained an important MACV operating
assumption), MACV believed that the enemy was attempting to build up
large forces in certain geographically distunt areas =-- again in accordance
with Giap's version of "strategic mobility." These areas were Quong Tri
Province in I CTZ and the highland border areas in II CTZ. It also
appeared that the opponent might create a holding force between the Delta
and highlands (in III CZ) to pin down friendly units and prevent FWMAF
from reinforcing against the main threat in the highlands. 18/ An

30 TOP SECRET -. Sensitive
