Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

favored general concept but thought that de-
tailed figures should be looked into carefully.
Ambassador also believed that emphasis should

be placed first on 8 critical provinces surround-
ing Saigon... @

General Harkins noted that a mobilization
law was in fact in existence but that few people
knew about it. He pointed out that ARVN, CG and
SDC were not up to their authorized military
strengths. Khanh said that he realized this but
believed it still desirable to have a new law
setting forth a national service or mobilization
program. Harkins stated that MACV and other
elements of U.S. Mission would like to work
closely with Khanh...in developing such a law.
Khanh replied this well understood. McNamara
said it was agreed on American side that general
concept was a wise one and that we should pro-
ceed on this basis.

Khanh then inquired whether it was desirable
to raise CG to same relative status as ARVN as
regards salary, pensions, survivors benefits, etc.
He estimated that total cost would be in neighbor-
hood of one billion piasters. McNamara thought
this was highly desirable...

McNamara inquired how long...it would take
to recruit and train administrative cadre for
8 critical provinces near Saigon. Khanh estimated
approximately one month, in any event he believed
cadres could.be in place by end of April. Khanh
said GVN would aim for volunteers for this effort
and it was not necessary to await promulgation
of National Service Act.

In response Taylor's question as to how long
Khanh anticipated it would take to draft and
promulgate National Service Law, Khanh observed
that...law could be ready for his signature in
very short time. Taylor pointed to necessity
Give due regard to democratic forms in developing
and announcing a National Service Act. Khanh
agreec. and said that at same time a major effort
was being made to pacify the countryside. He
intended push for concurrent development of
democratic institutions and forms. McNamara
suggested that when Khanh ready announce a National
Service Act that he also re-emphasize related
actions...such as those for expansion of national

.

hs TOP SECRET - Sensitive
