Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

levels of government.

We applaud this evidence of determination on the part
of South Vietnam. Our first priority will be to support
their effort.

We shall accelerate the re-equipment of South Vietnam's
’ armed forces -~- in order to meet the enemy's increased fire-
power. This will enable them progressively to undertake
a larger share of combat operations against the Communists
invaders.

The token increase in U.S. troop deployments to South Vietnam which
presaged for the first time a limit to our commitment and pointed to a
change in ground strategy, an issue which had caused such great specula-
tion in the press and controversy in Congress and within the Administration,
received short mention in the speech. It seemed almost a footnote to the
dramatic statements which had preceded it.

On many occasions I have told the American people that
we would send to Vietnam those forces that are required to
accomplish our mission there. $0, with that as our guide,
we have previously authorized a force level of approximately
525,000.

Some weeks ago -~ to help meet the enemy's new offensive
-- we sent to Vietnam about 11,000 additional Marine and
airborne troops. They were deployed by air in 48 hours, on
an emergency basis. But the artillery, tank, aircraft, and
other units that were needed to work with and support these
infantry troops in combat could not accompany them on that
short notice.

In order that these forces may reach maximum combat
effectiveness, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have recommended to
me that we should prepared to send -- during the next five
months -- support troops totalling approximately 13,500 men.

A portion of these men will be made available from our
active forces. The balance will come from Reserve Component
units which will be called up for service.

The next portion of the President's speech detailed the cost of
the Vietnam War and made a plea for Congressional action to reduce the
deficit by passing the surtax which had been requested almost a year

before.

In summary, the President reiterated the U.S. objectives in South
Vietnam, end gave his appraisal of what the U.S. in pursuit of those
objectives, hoped to accomplish in Southeast Asie.

85 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
