Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

US-GVN RELATIONS: 1964 - JUNE 1965

SUMMARY and ANALYSIS :

In 1964 the U.S. tried to make GVN strong, effective, and stable,
and it failed. When the U.S. offered more aid, GYN accepted it without
improving; they promised to mobilize, but failed to speed up the slow
buildup of their forces. When the U.S. offered a firmer commitment to
encourage them, including possible later bombing of North Vietnam, the
GVN tried to pressure us to do it sooner. When the U.S. endorsed Khanh,
he overplayed his hand, provoked mob violence, and had to back down to
a weaker position than before. When Taylor lectured them and threatened
them, the ruling generals of GVN defied him, and allied themselves with
the street rioters. After several changes of government in Vietnam, the
U.S. could set no higher goal than GVN stability. During this period,
the USG was already starting to think about doing the job ourselves if
our Vietnamese ally did not perform.

At first the U.S. thought that the power of the Vietnamese generals
would make GVN strong and effective. In fact, the U.S. preference, at this
time, was for military leadership in the GVN. However, the generals proved
to be less than perfectly united. They found they had to bow to the power
of student and Buddhist street mobs, and they lacked the will and the
ability to compel the civil government to perform, Yet, the U.S. saw no
alternative but to back them -- to put up with Vietnamese hypersensitivity,
their easy compliance combined with non-performance, and their occasional.
defiance, Moreover, MACY was even less ready to pressure the generals
than was the Embassy and the Embassy less willing than Washington. MACV
controlled the resources that mattered most to the South Vietnamese.

Pacification lagged, and the military picture steadily worsened.
Planning of pressures ageinst the North became more urgent, and the pros~
pect of increasing U.S. inputs to all phases of the war loomed larger.

The U.S. was more and more abandoning the hope that the Vietnamese could
win the war by themselves. At the same time, the U.S. was preparing itself
internally (NSAM 288 with the objective of an "independent non-communist
Vietnam") and readying the American people (the Tonkin Gulf Resolution)

for deeper commitments.

The period saw six major changes of government. At the end of January,
1964, Khanh seized power from the Minh government. In August, after his
attempt to formalize military control, mob vio™ence forced him to give way
and to join a Triumvirate. It presided over formation of the civilian Migh
National Council, which wrote a Constitution and elected the civilian
President Suu and Prine Minister Huong to replace the Triumvirate. In
December the military dissolved the High National Council, end in January

1965 they dismissed Huong, replacing him by Kharh as caretaker, In February,

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
