Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Delta Pacification Plan" and said he would like to see it executed with-
out delay. 61/ Earlier, on 3 February, he had created by presidential
decree the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Strategic Hamlets (IMCSH),
comprising the heads of various ministries (Defense, Interior, Education,
Civic Action, Rural Affairs, etc.). 62/ The IMCSH was, as its membership
indicates, a coordinating body designed to give national direction and
guidance to the program. Its importance is not in its work -- for it
apparently did very little -- but as an indicator of Diem's early 1962
thinking of strategic hamlets as a national program and of the central
role which his brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, would play in this program.

Nhu was the real driving force behind GVN's uneven but discernible
movement toward adoption of the strategic hamlet theme as a unifying con-
cept in its pacification efforts. In the early period under discussion
he masked his central role, however. He was not announced as the Chairman
of the IMCSH (nobody was), but the committee was responsible to him. 63/
He did not, however, lead it actively. As two American observers remarked
at the time, "Nhu seems to have consulted the committee seldom and to have
shared his policy-making power with it even less frequently." 64/

C. HKarly Signs of GVN Expectations

But although brother Nhu was behind the scenes in late 1961 and
early 1962, an occasional fleeting glimpse of his thinking and the direction
in which he was heading has still managed to show through. A CIA report
from Saigon summarized Nhu's instructions to a dozen province chiefs from
the Delta in a meeting held on 14 December 1961. Primary emphasis was to
be placed on the strategic hamlet program, Nhu said, and this program was
to be coupled with a "social revolution" against "Viet-Nam's three enemies:
divisive forces, low standard of living, and communism." 65/ The CIA
Task Force ~ Vietnam observed, in forwarding this report, that Nhu's "social
revolution and strategic hamlets appear to be fuzzy concepts with little
value in the fight against the Communists." 66/

No doubt these concepts seemed fuzzy at the end of 1961. But
within another twelve months, as events would prove, they would be widely
recognized as the twin spearheads of GVN's counterinsurgent effort, fuzzy
or not. The strategic hamlet program would have broad support within the
U.S, government and financial resources to underpin that support. The
"social revolution" to which Nhu referred in December 1961 would be surfaced
as Diem's "personalism" drive. The important thing for the present analysis
is that all of the expectations of the several participant groups -- both
U.S. and GVN -- were identifiable by very early 1962 at the latest, and that
the concept of the strategic hamlet program in the broad sense had been
fully adumbrated. The skeleton -- the rationale -- was complete; the body --
operational programs -- had not yet taken form. Each group could, however,
work toward construction of a slightly different body (and for differing
reasons) and claim with some plausibility to be working from the same
skeleton.

17
TOP SECRET - Se. itive
