Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"With regard to the imminence of the need for those
divisions, I do not share the fear that the I and II Corps
areas are about to fall apart which is expressed in some of,
the traffic bearing on the logistic build-up. In any case,
if a debacle is going to take place in the next few months,
the time factors developed in the logistic studies indicate
that very little advance logistic preparation can be made in
time. In such an unlikely contingency, U.S. combat reinforce-
ments will have to deploy concurrently with their logistic
units and build their base as they go.

"While recognizing the importance of the current studies
in developing the logistic facts of life as they bear on the
reinforcement of SVN, I hope that they do not interfere with
essential work in preparation for less ambitious but more
probable developments. It was my understanding in Washington
that, if the Marines demonstrate effectiveness in operating
out of Da Nang in an offensive counterinsurgency role, other
offensive enclaves may be established along the coast and
garrisoned with brigade-sized contingents for employment
similar to the Marines. General Westmoreland is very anxious
to establish such a force as soon as possible in the Bien
Hoa-Vung Tau area. Qui Nhon is also well situated for similar
purposes. I would recommend that logistic preparations be
initiated at once to permit each of these two areas to receive
a U.S. brigade. Whatever is done for this purpose will assist
in accommodating any larger forces which may be subsequently .
introduced. It is important that this lesser program be
carried out rapidly enough to make a contribution to the situ-
ation which is now unfolding. This requires rapid-action." 52/

C. The Additional Marines Land

From the 11th through the lth of April the two Marine BLT's
approved by the President in NSAM 328 were deployed to Hue/Phu Bai and
Da Nang. Their landing brought the total number of U.S. maneuver
battalions in South Vietnam to four, all Marines. Although security
was no longer the only authorized mission for these units, it certainly
was their primary mission. The Marines set about consolidating and
developing their two coastal base areas, and, although they pushed their
patrol perimeters out beyond their tactical wire and thereby conducted
active rather than passive defense, they did not engage in any offensive
operations in support of ARVN for the next few months. (Major General
"Rip" Collins, UG III MAF, was on the scene wiile ARVN was being beaten
at Ba Gia at the end of May, and his Marine troops were almost committed
to that fight). 53/

D. Westmoreland Tried to Slide the 173rd in for Security

. As a kind of postscript to the strategy of security, it was used
by General Westmoreland as justification for an attempt to get some Army

62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
