Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -~- Sensitive

hk, U.S.-GVN Relations at Geneva
a. U.S. Refuses to Influence GVN for France

French readiness to accept a divided Vietnam -- a disposition
which before the end of June culminated in abandonment .of the enclave alter-
native in favor of a north-south partition -- was not communicated to the
GVN. To the contrary, then and throughout the conference, the GVN dele-
gation and government were informed of shifts in position, if at all, as
faits accomplis. During June, for instance, Chauvel on several occasions
approached the U.S. with news of the "underground" negotiations with the
Viet Minh and with the hope that, once partition had been fixed, the U.S.
would "sell" that solution to Saigon. 33/ In the same month, Chauvel,
evincing understanding that the U.S. would prefer to disassociate itself
from a partition settlement, nevertheless asked if the U.S. would soften
Bao Dai opposition by indicating it was the best solution obtainable.
Chauvel described Diem and Buu Loc as "difficult," unrealistic, and un-
reasonable in their opposition, and likely to upset the delicate negotia-
tions. 34/ The U.S. consistently reacted negatively to these approaches,
in the undoubtedly correct belief that the French were merely attempting
to identify the U.S. with the partition concept in Vietnamese eyes. For
example, Secretary Dulles instructed the U.S. Ambassador on 2 July concern-
ing Diem as follows:

"It seems to me that the new Vietnamese Prime
Minister, Ngo Dinh Diem, who has the reputation of
uncompromising nationalist, is quite in the dark about
developments critically affecting country he is trying
to lead. We fear that if results of French negotiations
with communists are revealed to him as a fait accompli,
the very reaction French wish to avoid will result.

You should therefore indicate our concern to the French
and. ascertain their own intentions with respect to con-
sulting him or minimizing his resentment and their views
with respect to plans and prospects for maintaining order
in South Vietnam.”

By refusing to act as intermediaries for the French, the U.S.
in turn kept free of entanglement in a "French solution" to the Vietnam
problem.

b. French Disregard U.S. Requests, Remain Aloof from GVN

French aloofness from the GVN continued into July. Despite
U.S. requests of the French delegation that the GVN be kept informed of
developments, the French remained wary of contact for fear of provoking
a GVN reaction that, in turn, might fracture the delicate French discus-
Sions with the Viet Minh. Chauvel consequently informed U. Alexis Johnson
that "he was handling this /liaison with the GvN/ through members of his
staff and was avoiding direct contact with Vietnamese in order not to have
to answer their questions." 36/ When Offroy, another member of the French

B-15 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
