Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Pros. Continued re-strikes would maintain the
conerete results already attained--the lights would
stay out iu Haiphong for the most part.

Continued re-strikes would tend to keep the "hawks"
under control. Indeed, without them, it would almost
certainly be asked why we had ever hit the targets in
the first place. This might conceivably happen without
re-strikes, but would be at least doubtful.

Most basically, Hanoi and Moscow would be kept at
least a little on edge. As we have noted earlier, fear
of ultimate expansion of the war is an element that tends
to impel the Soviets to maximize and use their leverage
on Hanoi toward a peaceful settlement. 95/

This significant convergence of opinion on bombing strategy
in the next phase among key Presidential advisers could not have gone
unnoticed in the May 8 meeting, but there being no record of what trans-
pired, the consensus can only be inferred from the fact that the 19 May
DPM did incorporate a bombing recomnendation along these lines. Inter-
vening before then to reinforce the views of the civilian Principles
were several CIA intelligence memos. Together they constituted another
repudiation of the utility of the bombing. The summary CIA view of the
effect of the bombing on North Vietnamese thinking was that:

Twenty-seven months of US bombing of North Vietnam
have had remarkably little effect on Hanoi's over-all
strategy in prosecuting the war, on its confident view
of long-term Communist prospects, and on its political
tactics regarding negotiations. The growing pressure of
US air operations has not shaken the North Vietnamese
leaders’ conviction that they can withstand the bombing
and outlast the US and South Vietnam in a protracted war
of attrition. Nor has it caused them to waver in their
belief that the outcome of this test of will and endurance
will be determined primarily by the course of the conflict
on the ground in the South, not by the air war in the North. 96/

As to the state of popular morale after two years of U.S. bombing, the
CIA concluded that:

Morale in the DRV among the rank and file populace,
defined in terms of discipline, confidence, and willing-
ness to endure hardship, appears to have undergone only
a small decline since the bombing of North Vietnam began.

e.> fol Se Sal ims

1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
