Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. Free general elections by secret ballot throughout
the territory of Vietnam. ;

3. No prosecution of collaborators.

4. Establishment: of economic and cultural relations
between France and the DRV.

5. Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos to respect the independence,
unity and internal regime of the other states.

6. Other political questions concerning Vietnam, Laos
and Cambodia must be settled at a later time in the interests
of consolidating peace and the guarantee of democratic rights
and national interests of the peoples of Indochina. 12/

dad. The DRV Agrees to a Separate Solution for Laos and Cambodia

The speech by Chou En-lai at this meeting seemed to support
the DRV view, although it was more mildly stated. In retrospect, however,
it appears that this meeting marked a turning point, at least for the DRV
on their insistence for including the Pathet Lao and Free Khmer in a
settlement. Chou's proposals, contrary to Pham Van Dong's, implied the
withdrawal of Viet Minh forces from Laos and Cambodia and also suggested
the postponement of a political settlement for those two states:

"I have stated, on several occasions at this conference,
that the situations in the three states are not completely
alike, That is to say, that the situation in Vietnam is not
completely the same as that in Laos, while the situation in
Laos is not completely the same as that in Cambodia. Therefore,
the concrete situations in Laos and Cambodia should be taken into
consideration in working out solutions for the problems of these
two countries." 13

Two days later, Pham Van Dong, in the fifteenth restricted
session, announced the decisive termination of efforts to include all of
Indochina in the political agreement:

".,.I would like to say there have been Vietnam volunteers
which fought on the side of the resistance elements of Laos
and Khmer. They have been withdrawn. Today if there are such
forces they will be withdrawn." 14/

e. The DRV Reluctantly Accepts Partition
_ In its early proposals, the DRV did not recognize the possi-
bility of partition, aiming instead at a unification of all Vietnam. In

conjunction with their demands for immediate elections, this was calcu-
lated to give them control of the whole country. Lacking support from

c-10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
