Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

$516. NDS 48: Telesram

The Acting Secretary of State fo the CRE. at Siagon (Reed)

SECRET Ww asutneron, September 9, 1946—2 p.m.
941. Intelliverce revorts of uncertain reliability stare USSR a)
anxious see Ho Chi Minh sueceed unite three Kys under Viet Nam
for possible eventual weapon against National Govt China and (0)
has instructed French Communists manoeuvre reliable French Officers
to Indochina for training cadres future Viet Nam army. Keep Dept
informed indications subservience to Party line by Ho and other:
leaders, relative strength Conununist and non-Communist elements
Viet Nam, and contracts with Conmiunists other countries. Inform

O'Sullivan. Sent Saigon. Repeated Paris * for info.

» As telegram 4650.
CnhayTox

§51G.00,'9-1146
The Ambassudav in eee (Cajfery) to the Secretary of Stute

~

CONFIDENTIAL : ~ Paris. September 11, 1946.
No. 6131 [Received September 17.]

Sin: I have fhe honor to renort that at his request T received a visit,
this morning from M. To Chi Minh, “President of the Republic of
Viet-Nam™, who confirmed the news published in the local press that
the Fontainebleau negotiations between the Viet-Nam representatives
and the French representatives have practically broken down and the
Viet-Nam delegation will be returning to Indochina w ithin ie. next
few days.

The principal point on which they failed to reach agreement con-
cerns Cochin China: the Freneh represeutatives insist that Cochin
China be an “independent” entity in an Indochinese federation, while
the Vief-Nam representatives insist that one central eovernment im
Indochina must dominate the whole country. He said that he and
his party aspired to Viet-Nam “independence” in an “Union Fran-
eaise”. Te said that they would like to receive some “help” from
us, but did not specify what he meant by that. Te took oceasion to
say that he was not a communist.

From the gener! fuzziness of his remarks, T eather ed that he would
like us fo eet into the game and he would he very pleased if he could
use ns i come way or other in his future negotiations with the French
authorities.

T expressed ovr interest in Indochina and the people of Indochina
but made vo commitments,

Respectfully yours, JEFFERSON CArrEeny
