Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in the fall of 1955, the time was approaching when Diem
had to reckon with communist reaction to a denial of their hopes for
peaceful political victory.

"Diem will almost certainly not agree to hold national
elections for the unification of Vietnam by July 1956.
Although Diem, under pressure from the Western Powers,
might reluctantly agree to indirect consultations with the DRV
concerning elections, he would insist on conditions which he
felt certain the Communists would be unable to accept. Aware
that such a position will probably cause the Viet Minh to
increase their efforts to destroy his government, Diem will
probably seek to bind the US more specifically to the defense
of Vietnam."

"The Viet Minh, despite their relative quiescence, present
the greatest potential threat to Diem. Should the Viet Minh
elect openly to invade the south with regular forces, they are
capable of defeating the VNA and any French forces (if committed)
now present in South Vietnam. Moreover, with an estimated
10,000 military personnel in South Vietnam the Viet Minh have
the capability to undertake local sabotage and terrorist actions,
and small-scale but widespread guerrilla warfare. The Viet Minh
can reinforce these forces by infiltrating into South Vietnam.
The Viet Minh apparently exerts political influence in ma
areas scattered throughout South Vietnam. NIE 63.1-3-55,
az Ochober-1955; yi). °«~°*~« St

11 October 1955, p. 1

“Should the Viet Minh initiate large-scale guerrilla
Operations supported by substantial infiltration from the
north, the South Vietnamese government would be hard pressed
to do more than maintain control in the Saigon-Cholon area and
in a few other major urban centers. If the operation were pro-
longed, the government probably could not survive without
military assistance from outside." (Ibid., p. 2)

Diem's greatest assets in this struggle were:
", . . his reputation for honesty and unsullied
nationalism, his control of the Vietnamese National Army,
and the moral and financial support of the U.S. In addition,
Diem has gained considerable popular following, especially
in urban centers and in recently pacified areas and has the
loyalty of the refugees from North Vietnam. However, should
he lose army or US support, his regime would probably
collapse." (Ibid., p. 3)

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
