Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

"At the Third National Congress of the Lao Dong (Communist) Party in
Hanoi, September 1960, North Vietnam's belligerency was made explicit.

Ho Chi Minh stated, 'The North is becoming more and more consolidated and
transformed into a firm base for the struggle for national reunification. '
At the same congress it was announced that the party's new task was ‘to
liberate the South from the atrocious rule of the U.S. imperialists and
their henchmen." In brief, Hanoi was about to embark upon a program of
wholesale violations of the Geneva egreements in order to wrest control
of South Vietnam from its legitimate government.

"To the communists, ‘liberation’ meant sabotage, terror, and assassi- ‘
nation: attacks on innocent hamlets and villages and the coldblooded murder
of thousands of schoolteachers, health workers, and local officials who
had the misfortune to oppose the communist version of ‘liberation.’ In
1960 and 1961 almost 3,000 South Vietnamese civilians in and out of govern-
ment were assassinated and another 2,500 were kidnaped. The communists _
even assésinated the colonel who served as liaison officer to the Inter-
national Control Commission.

"This aggression against South Vietnam was a major communist effort,
meticulously planned and controlled, and relentlessly pursued by the govern-
ment in Hanoi. In 1961 the Republic of Vietnam, unable to contain the
menace by itself, appealed to the United States to honor its unilateral :
declaration of 1954. President Kennedy responded promptly and affirmatively
by sending to that country additional American advisers, arms, and aid.

"gS. Objectives:

"I turn now to a- consideration of United States objectives in South
Vietnam. The United States has no designs whatever on the resources or
territory of the area. Our national interests do not require that South
Vietnam serve as a Western base or as a member of a Western alliance.
Our concern is threefold.

"First, and most important, is the simple fact that South Vietnam,
a member of the free world family, is striving to preserve its independence
from communist attack. The Vietnamese have asked our help. We have given
it. We shall continue to give it.

"We do so in their interest; and we do so in our own clear self-interest.
For basic to the principles ef freedom and self-determination which have
sustained our country for almost two centuries is the right of peoples every-
where to live and develop in peace. Our own security is strengthened by
the determination of others to remain free, and by our commitment to assist
them.. We will not let this member of our family down, regardless of its
distance from our shores.

"The ultimate goal of the United States in Southeast Asia, as in the
rest of the world, is to help maintain free and independent nations which
can develop politically, economically, and socially and which can be re-
sponsible members of the world community. In this region and elsewhere

D-5
