Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

e. Development of sufficient military power in selected
nations of the Eastern Mediterranean-Middle East area to prevent
Greece, Turkey, and Iran from capitulating to communism during
the ideological conflict; and in event of war, to retain for the
United States and its allies base areas in Turkey, to delay
materially any USSR advance, possibly to deny to the enemy the
oil resources and oil facilities of the Middle East and, with
allied support; to assure control by the western powers of the
Eastern Mediterranean and the security of base areas in Egypt;

f. Development of sufficient military power in South
Asia (India and Pakistan) to promote the internal security of the
area and to assure its Western orientation.

- Development of sufficient military power in selected
nations of the Far East* and the Western Pacific Ocean area, to
prevent further encroachment by communism in those areas; to
insure, with the United States support, that in event of war,
Japan, and the other Asian offshore islands, including the
Philippines, are available for military use in order to consti-
tute a multiple-front threat to the USSR, and by military action
to delay any Communist invasion in other Far East and southeast
Asia areas; and

h. Development of sufficient military power in Latin
America to insure the security of the area and its external lines
of communications and to furnish military forces for which United
States or other allied forces might otherwise be used.

In connection with the foregoing specific military objectives
for future military defense assistance programs, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
would reaffirm their view that military cooperation between Spain and
members of the North Atlantic security system would be in the security
interests of the United States. Western Germany, and Austria, when and
if granted authority to rearm, should be included in this security system.
In the security interests of the United States, sufficient military
assistance should be provided to Yugoslavia to insure continued resistance
to Moscow control since such an example of successful opposition might
encourage movements of resistance to Moscow control in other satellite
states.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff are unable to predict the finite
‘benefits to be achieved through the implementation of the Mutual Defense
Assistance Act of 1949. They expect, however, that, as implementation
progresses, the internal security situation of the recipient nations
should improve concurrently. In addition, from the standpoint of United
States military planning, increases in the armaments of the nations of

* For the purposes of this paper, Far Hast is defined as that part of
Asia east of India, including Burma, Malaya, Thailand, Indonesia,
Indo-China, China, Japan, and eastern Siberia.

Nuh Fete |

be “a fr Nia
bus
