Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

These statements amounted, then, to the contention
that just as the United States could not afford to initiate a bombing
pause that might fail to produce negotiation; and a de-escalation,
neither could it afford to initiate one that succeeded.

Bundy's memorandum of 1 December contained no recom-
mendations. Jt was a draft, sent out for comment to Under-Secretary
Ball, Ambassadors Thompson and Johnson, John McNaughton, and McGeorge
Bundy. Presumably, although there is no indication of it, copies also
went to Secretaries Rusk and McNamara. By 6 December, William Bundy
and Alexis Johnson were able to prepare another version, repeating
the same arguments in briefer compass, and this time making an agreed
recommendation. It stated: "After balancing these opposing considera-
tions, we unanimously recommend that you / i.e., the President/ approve
@ pause as soon as possible this month. The decision would, of course,
be subject to consultation and joint action with the avn." 3h / Thus ,
at some point between 9 November and 6 December (the available documents
do not reveal when), Secretary Rusk evidently dropped his objection to
a@ pause.

Getting the agreement of the Ky government to a pause
was no easy task. Ambassador Lodge reported that he himself opposed
the notion of a pause because of the unsettling effects it would have
on the South Vietnam political situation. Only by making very firm
commitments for large increases in American force levels during the
coming year, Lodge warned, could Washington obtain even Saigon's grudging
acquiescence in a pause. This is not the place to describe the process
by which the GVN's consent was obtained; it is sufficient to note that
nowhere in Saigon, neither within the government nor within the American
Embassy and Military Assistance Command, was the prospect of any relaxa-
tion of pressure on the North -- for any reason -- greeted with any
enthusiasm.

2. Resumption -- When and At What Level?

Implicit in the very notion of "pause," of course, is
the eventual resumption of the activity being discontinued. Among the
principals in Washington concerned with Vietnam, consideration of the
circumstances and conditions in which the bombing of North Vietnam would
be resumed went hand-in-hand with consideration of its interruption.
Relatively early in this process, in his Presidential memorandum of
3 November, Seuretary McNamara distinguished between what he termed a
Mpard-line" and a "soft-line" pause. "Under a ‘hard-line’ Pause," he
wrote, "we would be firmly resolved to resume bombing unless the Com-
munists were clearly moving toward meeting our declared terms....Under
“e 'soft-line' Pause, we would be willing to feel our way with respect
to termination of the Pause, with less insistence on concrete conces-
sions by the Communists." 35/

26 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
