Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 33
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

161. Dillon discovers that the U.S. complaints of not being
informed are proved unjustified on the French withdrawal
in Tonkin. Both State and Defense were notified via
Trapnell's hand-carried plans and diplomatic cables.
Public statements thus “can only serve tc make our
position here vis-a-vis Mendes and his government in-
ereasingly difficult and undermine the confidence of
both the French Government and people in our candor..."
Paris GL to Dulles, 7 Jiily L9S4 eeweacscs cagwoccasecsecrecocs: OL0

162. "I have never harbored any thought of wilful conceal-
ment...there is a certain lack of intimacy..." in re-
lations with the present government. The U.S. intends
to leave representation at Geneva but notBedell Smith
nor Dulles will return. The U.S. should ayoid a
"position at Geneva..." Dulles 85 to Paris, 8 July

CLSGSEE 5 Sea wcncesethiw'dea csasloret areca erate cai eo sears Mac tN area eee tavoipna le ecmiace ant aierdesa

619

163. The Chinese inform Ambassador Johnson that Chou En-lai
had a "very good meeting" with Ho Chi Minh and that
"results would be helpful to the French." The French
believe that the Sino-Soviet positions have been
coordinated with the Chinese views on Asian problems
being given major weight. SECTO 578, 9 July 1954............ 622

164. The Defense Department queries the State Department
regarding equipping three French light infantry
divisions for Indochina in view of (1) the Premier's
promise to end the war by 20 July and (2) the con-
siderable impact of equipment removal on NATO.
Pefense Letter to state, 9 Tnly LOS. ves cesscecectcvcsecseses O28

165. President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles indicate
firmly to President Mendes-France the rationale
behind not sending Dulles or General Smith back to
Geneva. Essentially, the rationale is based on fail-
ure of the U.S., U.K. and France to agree on a joint
position at Geneya and lack of agreement on a
"ynited action" proposal if the position is not
accepted by the communists. Dulles sees France and
U.K. enhancing a communist “whittling-away" procéss
by readily accepting less than the seven points,
Doldes My to Paris, WO Sully 1056 .c senses aim c0ie ce oucles ee cice eal CO

166. France views the Dulles decision as (1) making the
French bargaining position weaker and (2) that Europe
would interpret U,S. absence from Geneva as a step
in the "return to a policy of isolationism.” .
Paris 134 to Dulles, 11 July 1954...... ntdiecala oa Caco eee oom

xxViL TOP SECRET - Sensitive
