Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

years. As the intellectual godfather of the Strategic Hamlet Program has
put it, the concept's use as one of the measures to defeat communist insur-
gency "...has only meant that the lessons of the past had to be relearnt."

The administration of President Diem had relearned these lessons
much earlier than late 1961. There was, in fact, no need to relearn them
because they had never been forgotten. The French had made resettlement
and the development of "secure zones" an important element in their effort
near the end of the war with the Viet Minh. The government of newly-created
South Vietnam, headed since 195): by President Diem, had continued resettle-
ment schemes to accommodate displaced persons, to control suspected rural
populations, and to safeguard loyal peasants in the threatened areas.

None of these efforts involving resettlement had succeeded. Each had in-
spired antagonism among the peasants who were moved from their ancestral
lands and away from family burial plots.

Diem's actions in late 1961 were thus inescapably tied to earlier
actions by proximity in time, place, and the personal experiences of many
peasants. Chief among the earlier programs was that of the so-called
Agrovilles or "Rural Community Development Centers," leunched in 1959.

The Agrovilles, groupments of 300-500 families, were designed to afford the
peasantry the social benefits of city life (schools and services), to in-
crease their physical security, and to control certain key locations by
denying them to the communists. 2/ They were designed to improve simultane-
ously the security and well-being of their inhabitants and the government's
control over the rual population and rural areas.

The Agroville program was generally unsuccessful. The peasants
had many complaints about it ranging from clumsy, dishonest administration
to the physical hardship of being too far from their fields and the psy-
chological wrench of being separated from ancestral homes and burial plots. 3/
By 1960, President Diem had slowed the program in response to peasant com-
plaints and the Viet Cong's ability to exploit this dissatisfaction. d/

The transition from Agrovilles to strategic hamlets in 1961 was
marked by the so-called "Agro-hamlet" which attempted to meet some of the
peasants’ objections:

The smaller 100 family Agro-hamlet was located more
closely to lands tilled by the occupants. Construction was
carried out at a slower pace filled to the peasant's plant-
ing and harvesting schedule...By the end of 1961, the Agro-
hamlet had become the prototype of a vast civil defense
scheme known as strategic hamlets, Ap Chien Luoc. 5/

It was inevitable, given this lineage, that the strategic hamlet program

be regarded by the peasants as old wine in newly-lebelled bottles. The
successes and failures of the past were bound to condition its acceptance--
and by late 1961 the Diem government was having more failures than successes.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
