Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

These agency views were, however, read and assessed by the working
group and, although they were not furnished to the President, they were
part of the background of the deliberative process. It would be mis-
leading, therefore, to say that they were not considered or had no influ-
ence on the decisions taken. In any case, they provided some sense of
the ideas and alternatives being considered and debated during these few
frantic days of late February - early March, 1968.

The CIA furnished three papers which were considered in the reassess-
ment. The first, dated 26 February 1968, was prepared for the Director of
Central Intelligence prior to the formation of the Task Group. Entitled
"the Outlook in Vietnam," this paper stated the following conclusion:

We believe that the Communists will sustain a high level
of military activity for at least the next two or three
months. It is difficult to forecast the situation which will
then obtain, given the number of unknowable factors which
will figure. Our best estimate is as follows:

a. The least likely outcome of the present phase
is that the Communist side will expend its resources to such
an extent as to be incapable thereafter of preventing steady
advances by the US/GVI.

b. Also unlikely, though considerably less so, is
that the GVN/ARVN will be so critically weakened that it can
play no further significant part in the military and political
prosecution of the struggle.

c. More likely than either of the above is that the
present push will be generally contained, but with severe
losses to both the GVN and Communist forces, and that a
period will set in during which neither will be capable of
registering decisive gains. 20/

The second CIA paper, dated 29 February, was entitled "Communist
Alternatives in Vietnam." Two main military alternatives were identified,
as follows:

@. maintain widespread military pressure in Vietnam
at least for the next several months;

b. increase the level of military pressures by one
or more of the following measures:

(1) committing all of their reserves from NVN,
tantamount to an all-out invasion, to gain decisive results
as quickly as possible;

(2) committing two or three additional divisions;

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
