Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Several days later, the Clifford testimony was confirmed by the State
Department as the position of the U.S. Goverrment. This, then, was
the final public position taken by the Administration prior to the
launching of the Tet offensive by the enemy on January 30. While it
amounted to a further softening, it was still considerably short of
the unconditional cessation the North Vietnamese were demanding. In
the aftermath of the Tet attack, both sides would scale down their
demands in the interests of opening a direct dialogue.

2. The Tet Offensive

As planned, the Allies began a 36-hour truce in honor of
the Tet holidays on January 29. The order was shortly cancelled, how-
ever, because of fierce enemy attacks in the northern provinces. Then,
suddenly on January 31, the Viet Cong and NVA forces launched massive
assaults on virtually every major city and provincial capital, and most
of the military installations in South Vietnam. In Saigon, attackers
penetrated the new American Embassy and the Palace grounds before they
were driven back. Whole sections of the city were under Viet Cong
control temporarily. In Hué an attacking force captured virtually the
entire city including the venerable Citadel, seat of the ancient capital
of Vietnam and cultural center of the country. Everywhere the fighting
was intense and the casualties, civilian as well as military, were
staggering. Coming on the heels of optimistic reports from the field
commands, this offensive caught official Washington off guard and stunned
poth the Administration and the American public. The Viet Cong blatantly
announced their aim as the overthrow of the Saigon regime. But the
Allied forces fought well and the main thrust of the attacks on Saigon,
Danang, and elsewhere were blunted with the enemy suffering enormous
casualties. Only in Hué did the communists succeed in capturing the
city temporarily. There the fighting continued as the most costly of
the war for nearly a month before the Viet Cong were finally rooted out
of their strongholds.

The lesson of the Tet offensive concerning the bombing
should have been ummistakably clear for its proponents and critics alike.
Bombing to interdict the flow of men and supplies to the South had been
a signal failure. The resources necessary to initiate an offensive of
Tet proportions and sustain the casualties and munitions expenditures
3% entailed had all flowed south in spite of the heavy bombing in North
Vietnam, Laos end South Vietnam. It was now clear that bombing alone
could not prevent the communists from amassing the materiel, and infil-
trating the manpower necessary to conduct massive operations if they
chose. Moreover, Tet demonstrated that the will to undergo the required
sacrifices and hardships was more than ample.

The initial military reaction in Washington appears -to
ate peen addressed to the air war. On February 3, the Chiefs sent the

hh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
