Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

However, for the Communists to advance any further in the area would
render the defense problem very much more difficult, if not well-nigh
impossible. This is why the valiant struggle now being weged in South
Viet-Nem has implications far beyond the borders of that troubled
country.

"Our massive assistance to free Viet-Nam is designed to avoid just
such a catastrophe.”

x * s
31. President Kennedy's News Conference, April 24, 1963, Public Papers
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1963, p. 343:
* * *

"tPalling Dominoes’

"Q: Mr. President, on Laos again, severel years ago we heard a great
deal about the ‘falling domino’ theory in Southeast Asia,

"Do you look upon Laos in terms of that country alone, or is your
concern the effect that its loss would have in Thailand, Vietnam, and so
on?

"Would you discuss that?

"THE PRESIDENT: That is correct. The population of Leos is 2 million

and it is scattered. It is a very rough country. It is important as a
sovereign power. The people desire to be independent, and it is also im-
portant because it borders the Mekong River and, quite obviously, if Laos
fell into Communist hands it would increase the denger along the northern
frontiers of Thailand. It would put additional pressure on Cambodia and
would put additional pressure on South Vietnem which in itself would put
additional pressure on Malaya.

"So I do accept the view that there is an interrelationship in these
countries and that is one of the reasons why we are concerned with main-
taining the Geneva Accords as a method of maintaining stability in South-
east Asia. It may be one of the reasons why others do not share that
interest. i

32. President Kennedy's News Conference, Mey 8 1963, Public Papers of
the Presidents, Kenne

| "go, Back on the subject of Vietnam. Could you explain to us, sir,
why we have committed ourselves militarily in Vietnam but have not conmitted

C-30
