Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of the French position. The French wanted to "assure the State of Viet-
nam a territory as solid as possible," but the Viet Minh were unlikely
to make concessions in the Tonkin Delta, and the Vietnamese in Saigon
were likely to object violently to a partition arrangement. The French
government, therefore, hoped that the U.S. could find a way to assist it
in both directions: first, the U.S. and U.K. might issue a declaration
following their upcoming talks in Washington that would "state in some
fashion or other that, if it is not possible to reach a reasonable settle-
ment at the Geneva Conference, a serious aggravation of international
relations would result"; second, the U.S. might intercede with the Viet-
namese to counsel them against opposing a settlement really in their best
interests. 10/

b. U.S. and U.K. Issue Joint Statement

The second suggestion was never given serious consideration,
for the U.S. did not wish to be tied to a settlement that would cede
territory to the Viet Minh. The first, however, was acted upon when
Churchill and Eden arrived in Washington on 24 June. Four days later,
the U.S. and U.K. issued a joint statement which warned: "if at Geneva
the French Government is confronted with demands which prevent an accept-
able agreement regarding Indochina, the international situation will be
seriously aggravated." 11/

e. U.S. and U.K. Formulate "Seven Points" Agreement

Of more immediate consequence for the course of the negoti-
ations was the unpublicized agreement between the two countries on a set
of principles which, if worked into the settlement terms, would enable
London and Washington to "respect" the armistice. The principles, known
subsequently as the seven points, were communicated to the French. They
were: 12

(1) Preservation of the integrity and independence of
aos and Cambodia, and assurance of Viet Minh withdrawal from those
countries;

(2) Preservation of at least the southern half of Vietnam,
and if possible an enclave in the Tonkin Delta, with the line of demarca-
tion no further south than one running generally west from Dong Hoi;

(3) No restrictions on Laos, Cambodia, or retained Vietnam
"materially impairing their capacity to maintain stable non-Communist
regimes; and especially restrictions impairing their right to maintain
adequate forces for internal security, to import arms and to employ
foreign advisers”; ,

(4) No "political provisions which would risk loss of the
retained area to Communist control";

A-37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
