— =
le we a

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Well-informed French and Annamese sources state that the Gentral
Committee has been negotiating with local Japanese military au-
thorities for the purchase, of guns and ammunition, with the in-
tent of using them, should either the French or Chinese attempt
to reoccupy their areas. The Indo-Chinese fear a Chinese reoc-
eupation because they feel the Chinese will become squatters
living off the land, pillaging, raping, and looting. The French
concur in this opinion only in so far as to wish exclusive ad-
ministrative rights for themselves. The leader of the Annamite
Kuomintang Party in China and a direct representative of the
Central Liberation Committee in Hanoi, made the following state-
ment on 15 August: 7

"Should the French attempt to return to Indo-China with the
intention of governing the country, and to act once more as
oppressors, the Indo-Chinese people are prepared to fight
to the end against any such reoceupation. On the other
hend, if they came as friends to establish commerce, in-
dustry and without aspirations to governmental rule, they
will be welcomed the sane as any other foreign power. The
Central Committee wishes to make known to the United States
Government that the Indo-Chinese people first of all desire
the independence of Indo-China, and are hoping that the
United States, as a champion of democracy, will assist her
in securing this independence in the following manner:

(1) Prohibiting, or not assisting the French to enter Indo-
China; (2) keeping the Chinese under control, in order that
looting and pillaging will be kept to a minimum; (3) send-
ing technical advisors to assist the Indo-Chinese to ex-
ploit the resources of the land; and (A) developing those
industries thet Indo-China is capable of supporting.

tin conclusion, the Indo-Chinese would like to be placed on
the same status as the Philippines for an undetermined per-

-iod."

The French representative in Kunming, Major Sainteny, is how re-
ceiving material aid from the Section Liaison Prencaise--Extreme
Orient (SLEWO) Caloutta in making arrengements and readying per-
Sonnel for the re-entry into Indo-China. His group were pre- _
pared to leave on the morning of 17 August. However, on arrival

+ aa ‘
