Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In May, 1949, Secretary of State Acheson admitted that as a "theoretical
possibility" the establishment of a "National Communist state on pat-
tern Yugoslavia in any area beyond reach [ot the/ Soviet Army," but
pointed out that: ae

"Question whether Ho as much nationalist as Commie is
irrelevant. All Stalinists in colonial areas are nationalists.
With achievement national aims (i-e., independence) their
objective necessarily becomes subordination state to Commie
purposes and ruthless extermination not only opposition groups
but all elements suspected even slightest deviation...."

When, in early, 1950, Ho's DRV lay within reach of Mao's Chinese Amny,
and Ho had openly embraced communism, Secretary Acheson declared that
bloc recognition of the DRV "should remove any illusion as to the
nationalist character of Ho Chi Minh's aims and reveals Ho in his true
colors as the mortal enemy of native independence in Vietnam."

But Ho's behavior in 1949-1950, however convincingly it endorsed
U.S. policy at that juncture, does not necessarily explain away his
earlier eagerness for U.S. and U.N. intervention in Vietnam, nor other-
wise gainsay the "Tito" hypothesis as applied to the 1945-1947 period.
Of that period, it can be sald that the U.S. offered Ho only narrow
options. He received no replies to his appeals. After 1946, not only
were Ho's direct communications with the U.S. cut, but also the signals
he received from the U.S. were hardly encouraging. By the time the
Indochina war began in earnest in late 1946, U.S. military equipment
had already been used by French forces against the Vietnamese, and the
U.S. had arranged credit for France to purchase $160 million worth
of vehicles and miscellaneous industrial equipment for use in Indochina.
Secretary of State George C. Marshall's public comment on the outbreak
of war in January, 1947, was limited to a hope that "a pacific basis
for adjustment of the difficulties could be found,” and within six months
the Marshall Plan threw even greater U.S. resources behind France.

The simple truth seems to be that the U.S. knew little of what was
transpiring inside Vietnam, and certainly cared less about Vietnam than
about France. Knowing little and caring less meant that real problems ~
and variety of choices were perceived but dimly. For example, the U.S.
could have asked itself -- "Did we really have to support France in
Southeast Asia in order to support a non-communist France internally
and in Europe?" Another question we could have asked ourselves was -~
"Tf the U.S. choice in Vietnam really came down to either French coloni-
alism or Ho Chi Minh, should Ho automatically be excluded?" Again, "If
the U.S. choice was to be France, did France have any real chance of
succeeding, and if so, at what cost?"

Even before World War II was over, Washington had placed the decision
on Ho's fate in the hands of France. It can be argued, nonetheless,

c-5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
