Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

After meeting with the President this morning, we believe
it wise for General Johnson to go to Saigon to meet with you
and General Westmoreland...Purpose of trip is to examine with
you and General Westmoreland what more can be done within
South Vietnam. He will bring with him a list of additional
actions which has been developed for your consideration,

Would appreciate*your developing a similar list for discussion
with him. In developing list, you may, of course, assume no
limitation on funds, equipment or personnel. We will be pre-
pared to act immediately and favorably on any recommendations
you and General Johnson may make. The President is continuing
to support such action against North as is now in progress but
does not consider such actions a substitute for additional
action within South Vietnam. The President wants us to examine
all possible additional actions -- political, military, and
economic -- to see what more can be done in South Vietnam... go /

General Johnson returned from his survey mission on March 14 with a
21-point progrem which he submitted to the JCS and the Secretary of
Defense and which was reviewed by the President on March 15. General
Johnson's recommendations included but went beyond: Westmoreland's pre-
scriptions. With respect to the use of air power in South Vietnam, he
proposed more helicopters and 0-1 aircraft, possibly more USAF fighter-
pombers (after further MACV evaluation), better targeting, and acceler~
ated airfield expansion. These proposals were in keeping with recom-
mendations that had been made previously by COMUSMACV, and especially
insistently by CINCPAC, to expand the use of US airpower in SVN. For
example, on February 26, in an exclusive message to General Wheeler,
Admiral Sharp had written: "...the single most important thing we can
do to improve the security situation in South Vietnam is to meke full
use of our airpower. 95/

For Laos, General Johnson favored reorienting BARREL ROLL operations
to allow air strikes on infiltration routes in the Lao Panhandle to be
conducted as a separate program from those directed against the Pathet Lao
and North Vietnamese units. This program was subsequently authorized
under the nickname STEEL TIGER (see below, p. 76).

With respect to air action against the North, the Army Chief of Staff
made two recommendations (designated as points 5 and 6 in his 2l-point

program) :

5. Increase the scope and tempo of US air strikes against
the DRV. Tis action could tend to broaden and escalate the
war. However, it could accomplish the US objective of causing
the DRV to cease its support and direction of the Viet Cong
aggression. To date, the tempo of punitive air strikes has
been inadequate to convey a clear sense of US purpose to the
DRY.

HO TOP SECRET - Sensitive
