Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a ia

LODGE vs. DIEM: AUGUST 20 - OCTOBER 2

Au The Pagoda Raids and Repercussions

Shortly after midnight on August 21, six days after Nolting’s
frustrated departure, Nhu, shattering any remaining illusions about the
GVN's conciliatory approach to the Buddhists, and betraying Diem's
parting pledge to Nolting, staged a general assault on Buddhist pagodas.
In Saigon, Hue, and other coastal cities, the regime's private shock
troops -- the U.S,-trained Special Forces -~ and the combat police
invaded the pagodas and arrested hundreds of Buddhist monks, effectively
destroying an American policy and marking the beginning of the end of the
Diem regime,

On August 18, ten senior generals had met and decided that they
would ask Diem for a declaration of martial law to permit them to
return Buddhist monks from outside Saigon to their ow provinces and
pagodas, hopefully reducing tensions in the capital. 1/ Among those
in attendance at the meeting were General Ton That Dinh, military
governor of Saigon and commander of III Corps surrounding it, and
General Huynh Van Cao, IV Corps commander, both of whom owed their
positions to their loyalty to the regime, Either or both of them
probably reported the outcome of this meeting to Diem and Nhu.

In any case, Nhu had decided to eliminate. the Buddhist opposition,
and to confront the U.S. with a fait accompli on Lodge's arrival; he
assumed the U.S, would protestingly acquiesce, as it always had in the
past. On the afternoon of the 20th, Nhu met with a small group of
generals, including Don, Khiem, and Dinh who presented the martial
law proposal to him. Nhu, his own plans for the raids now far advanced,
told them to take their proposal to Diem. At a meeting later that
evening, Diem acquiesced in the generals' plan and at midnight the
decree was published under the signature of General Don, Chief of the
Joint General Staff. 2/ Meanwhile, unbeknown to the generals, Nhu had
already alerted Colonel Tung's Special Forces and the combat police.
Once the facade of martial law was in place, so the army would be blamed
for the raids, Nhu gave the word and the crackdown began. To further
implicate the army, some of the combat police wore paratroop uniforms.
Pagodas were ransacked in all the major South Vietnamese eities, and
over 1400 Buddhists, primarily monks, were arrested. 3/ In the raid on
Xa Loi pagoda in Saigon about thirty monks were wounded or injured,
and several were subsequently listed as missing; exact casualties were
never established. 4/ Diem had approved the martial law decree without
consulting his cabinet, but it was never established whether he knew of
and approved Nhu's plans for the pagoda raids. Significantly, he never
subsequently sought to dissociate himself from Nhu or the raids.

We TOP SECRET - Sensitive
