Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

f. U.S. Again Requests Independence for Associated States

The ticklish problem of bringing France to concede the
vitalness of granting full independence to the Associated States occupied
center stage once more. On 27 May, the State Department, acknowledging
France's hesitancy to go too far on this score, still insisted on cer-
tain "minimum measures,” the most important of which was that France
announce, during or immediately after the signing of the latest draft
treaties, 16/ that she would willingly withdraw all her forces from
Indochina unless invited by the governments of the Associated States
to maintain them or to establish bases. The U.S., the Department added,
would be prepared to make a similar declaration if it committed forces.
Beyond that step, the French were also asked to permit Indochinese
participation in the programming of economic aid, and their direct
receipt of all military aid; to find ways to broaden participation
of the Vietnamese defense ministry and armed forces in national de-
fence; and to push for the establishment of "representative and au-
thentic nationalist governments" at the earliest possible date. 17/

g. French Response is Encouraging

The French responded. with surprising affirmativeness to
these proposals. Dillon was able to report from Paris on 29 May,
following a conversation with Laniel, that the two perhaps "had now
reached accord in principle on political side." Laniel, he reported,
urged. immediate military talks to complete arrangements on training of
the Vietnamese, a new command structure, and war plans. 18/ Inas-
much as Ely and O'Daniel in Indochina had reached general agreements
on American assumption of responsibility for training the VNA, the
way was apparently cleared for bilateral military talks in Washington
to take place simultaneously with, and therefore disguised by, the
five-power staff negotiations. 19/

h. Question of Chinese Air Attack Again Arises

Dillon's optimism was cut short rather quickly. When he
reported on talks with Schumann, Dillon had added Schumann's and. Pleven's
concern about Chinese air intervention, which they felt would be so
damaging as to warrant a deterrent action in the form of a Presidential
request to the Congress for discretionary authority to defend the Delta
in case of CCAF attack. The French wanted a virtually instantaneous
U.S. response, which would be assured by a Presidential request before,
rather than after, overt Chinese aerial intervention. 20/ The State
Department's retort was that the French first had to satisfy the pre-
viously reported conditions before any such move by the President could
be considered.

i. Dillon Outlines French Position
Dillon was no less disappointed by Washington's reply

than the French. He cabled back that there apparently was an "ex-
tremely serious misunderstanding between U.S. and French": 21/

A-21 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
