Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that this will of necessity be so; it is also possible
that the level of activity in the vicinity of the DMZ
will require the comnitment of comparable forces to that
area whether or not construction of the obstacle system
envisaged by COMUSMACV is undertaken. Furthermore, pro-
ceeding now with the actions required to provide additive
assets for support of the MACV plan does not, in my view,
rule out a subsequent decision to utilize these assets in
other ways should the turn of events so require. Thus,
it is my view that proceeding now with preparatory actions
to implement the COMUSMACV plan may enhance rather than
inhibit the flexibility available to comusmacv." 41/

In other words, the Chairman was displaying considerably more
prescience than his military colleagues. Either this or he was the
only one who really believed the MACV-CINCPAC reports of activity and
assessment of the threat in I CTZ. He anticipated that events might

outrun the requirement for decision on the barrier troop issue -- an

apprehension which materialized in rapid fashion.

The next day, the Central Intelligence Agency published a study
entitled "Significance of Cambodia to the Vietnamese War Effort" in
which it, too, disagreed with the assessment the military commanders
had been making. 42/ Although the availability of Cambodian territory
was granted to be of considerable psychological and military advantage
to the Communists, and the access to the Cambodian rice surplus had
evidently obviated any need to move substantial quantities of food
down the Laotian route system to feed Communist forces in the rice-
deficit Vietnamese highlands and Laotian panhandle, the study concluded:

"Denying the Communists the use of Cambodian terri-
tory and supplies would make life more difficult for them;
it would not constitute a decisive element in their ability
to conduct military operations in South Vietnam." 43/

The caveat added to this rather surprising conclusion noted that
probably during 1967 Communist use of Cambodia would increase primarily
due to;

"The logistic burdens imposed on the Communists by their
own military build-up and the increasing pressures imposed
by allied forces." h/

If this were true, then, a very good argument could be made that as

of the moment denial of Cambodia "would not be decisive," but as the weight

of U.S. military pressure increased, and the Cambodian sanctuary and sup-
ply aspects increased in importance to the enemy, then it may become
decisive. The decisive nature of denial of Cambodia to the VC/NVA WOU:
be a function of its increasing value to them.

\ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
a
