Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ambassador Taylor -- make it clear that, in general outline at least,
the concept submitted by the Principals was accepted by the President.
However, as will be seen, it is also clear that he gave his approval
to implement only the first phase of the concept.

In addition to Ambassador Taylor's report, the meeting dealt
mainly with two subjects: (1) Taylor's consultations with South Viet-
nanese leaders and (2) conversations with other U.S. allies who had an
interest in the Vietnamese situation.

The President made it clear that he considered that pulling
the South Vietnamese together was basic to anything else the United
States might do. He asked the Ambassador specifically which groups
he might talk to and what more we might do to help bring unity among
South Vietnam's leaders. He asked whether we could not say to them
"we just can't go on" unless they pulled together. To this, Taylor
replied that we must temper our insistence somewhat, and suggested that
we could say that “our aid is for the Huong government, not necessarily
for its successor." The President asked whether there was not some way
we could "get to" such groups as the Catholics, the Buddhists and the
Army. Possible additional increments of military aid were then discussed
as means of increasing U.S, leverage among military leaders. The Presi-~
dent also asked about "the Commmists" in South Vietnam. Taylor's reply
was noted rather cryptically, but the impression given is that the
Conmunists were being used already, but that he questioned the desir-
ability of trying to pressure then. He apparently stated that they were
"really neutralists," but that the French were "not really bothering"
to use them. The President observed that the situation in South Vietnan
"does look blacker" to the public than it apparently was. He wondered
if something could not be done to change the impression being given in

the news. 152/

Toward the end of the discussion of consultations with the
South Vietnamese, President Johnson stated his conviction that the GVN
was too weak to take on the DRV militarily. He acknowledged that the
South Vietnamese had received good training, but emphasized that we
"must have done everything we can" to strengthen them before such a
conflict ‘occurred. 153/ This attitude was reflected in the guidance
given to Ambassador Taylor and in the statement he was authorized to make
to the GV. The statement contained a passage asserting that the U.S.
Government did not believe

.

"that we should incur the risks which are inherent in any
expansion of hostilities without first assuring that there
is &@ government-.in Saigon capable of handling the serious

. problems involved in such an expansion and of exploiting
the favorable effects which may be anticipated...."

The statement went on to emphasize that before the-United States could
move to expand hostilities, the GVN would have to be capable of

55 - OP SECRET - Sensitive
