He

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The meeting resulted in consensus among the principals on certain
courses of prompt action to put additional pressure on North Vietnam.
The following measures were recommended to the President for his decision:

"1. U.S. naval patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin should be
resumed immediately (about September 12). They should operate
initially beyond the 12-mile limit and be clearly dissociated
from 34A maritime operations....

"2. 34A operations by the GVN should be resumed immediately
thereafter (next week). The maritime operations are by far the
most important....

"3. Limited GVN air and ground operations into the corridor
areas of Laos should be undertaken in the near future, together
with Lao air strikes as soon as we can get Souvanna's permission.
These operations will have only limited effect, however.

"hk. We should be prepared to respond on a tit-for-tat basis
against the DRV /against specifie and related targets/ in the event
of any attack on U.S. units or any special DRV/VC action against svn. "96/

The purposes for these measures were conceived as: (1) "to assist morale
in SVN," (2) to "show the Communists we still mean business," and (3)"to
keep the risks low and under our control at each stage."

INPLEMENPING ACTIONS

These recommendations (and presumably the purposes) were approved
by the President and became the basis for a program of limited (though
not continuous) pressures exerted against North Vietnam from mid-September
to mid-December 1964. On 10 September, the White House issued a National
Security Action Memorandum which authorized immediate resumption of the
DE SOTO Patrols and prompt discussions with the Government of Laos to
develop plans for cross-border operations. It also authorized resumption
of 34A operations following completion of the DE SOTO Patrol, with the
additional guidance that "we should have the GVN ready to admit that they
are taking place and to justify and legitimize them on the basis of the
facts of VC infiltration by sea." 97/ It is significant that although

_ this order, in effect, authorized the initiation of Phase III (October

through December) of the covert operations under OPLAN 34A, it specified
contrary to the provisions of Phase III that "we should not consider air
strikes under 34A for the present."

Naval Operations. The resumption of naval patrol and covert

maritime operations off the coast of North Vietnam did not proceed exactly

as planned. The destroyers U.S.S. Morton and U.S.S. Edwards embarked on
the third DE SOLO Patrol on 12 September. On the night of the 18th, while
on a southeasterly heading, the ships made a surface radar contact which
was observed to split into two images, increase speed and close rapidly.

: at TOP SECRET - Sensitive
