Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in the South appears likely, the effect of the bombing
program in promoting negotiations or a settlement will
probably be small. Thus, because of the present balance
in the South, the date of such a favorable DRV change of
mood is not likely to be in the near future....

11. Elements of a compromise program. There is a

conflict between the objective of “persuading Hanoi,"

which would dictate a program of painful surgical strikes
separated by fairly long gaps, and the objective of inter-
diction, which would benefit from continuous heavy bombings.
No program can be designed which optimizes the chances of
achieving both objectives at the same time. The kind of
program which should be carried out in the future therefore
depends on the relative importance and relative likelihood
of success of the objectives at any given time. In this
eonnection, the following questions are critical:

a. How likely is it that the Communists will
start talking? The more likely this is, the more emphasis
should be put on the "pressure/bargaining counter" program
(para 10 above). The judgment is that the Commmists are
not likely to be interested in talking at least for the
next few months.

b. How important to the military campaign is

infiltration and how efficiently can we frustrate the
flow? The more important that preventable infiltration
is, the more emphasis should be put on the interdiction
program (para 5 above). Unfortunately, the data are not
clear on these points....

12. Reconciliation. The actions which these con-
siderations seem now to imply are these, bearing in mind
that our principal objective is to promote an acceptable
outcome:

a. Spare non-interdiction targets. Do not

bomb any non-interdiction targets in North Vietnam, since
such strikes are not consistent with either of the two
objectives. Such painful non-interdiction raids should

be carried out only occasionally, pursuant to the rationale
explained in para 10 above.

b. Interdict. Continue an interdiction program
in the immediate future, as described in para 5 above, since
the Commmists are not likely to be willing to talk very
soon and since it is possible that the interdiction program
will be critical in keeping the Communist effort in South
Vietnam within manageable proportions.

40 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
