Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Land reform efforts should be pushed forward...

We ask that construction material and cement be sent to
Vietnam as soon as possible so our school programs can
be developed...

The training of officials at hamlet and villege levels
is vital... %/

Secretary Freeman, who was about to make his first trip to Vietnam,
summarized for the Americans:

"Having spent a good deal of time yesterday listening to
the very eloquent presentations by the Chairman and the Prime
Minister, as well as by Minister Ton, this is pretty much what
we would call a nuts and bolts discussion session.

"One thing that was decided for United States purposes, for
purposes of phraseology, was that the word ‘pacification' really
did not have the right tone. The term ‘social construction'
might better be used...

"There was some discussion, considerable, about the selection
of province chiefs. It was strongly emphasized that it was im-
portant that the men be of integrity and ability, and that they
be selected and maintained and backed up.

"The Prime Minister, General Thieu, and then General Thang
both said that you [General Thieu/ were personally interested in
this, and that you were going to select them shortly, that they
would have a duration of at least a year, but would be carefully
reviewed and would be changed if they didn't do the job, but
wouldn't be changed for other reasons, which we thought was ex-
tremely important and we were gratified to find it out.

"You also explained to us, your associates General Ky and
General Thang, the change of command, saying in the past they
were confused, and that they were now clear, so that everyone
knew exactly what their function would. be.

"Then you discussed the training of the cadre...

"T went to review the REA question and find out a bit more
about why that seemed to have some lag.

"Finally, we discussed the possibility of a joint training
program for the village and hamlet chiefs who presumably would
be elected, but that some background in the philosophy, purpose
and aims of government, and the techniques of governing and ad-
ministration, were felt to be needed by those people. 8/

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
