Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the individual Vietnamese, typically a rural peasant, to
support willingly the GVN. The critical actions are those
that occur at the village, district, and provincial levels.
This is where the war must be fought; this is where that
war and the object which lies beyond it must be won. The
following are the most important specific actions required
now:

-- Concentrate U.S. operations on the provincial level
to include the delegation of command authority over
U.S. operations to the Senior U.S. Representative at
the provincial level.

-- Reaffirm Rural Construction as the foremost US/GVN
combined effort to solidify and extend GVN influence.

-- Authorize more direct U.S. involvement in GVN affairs
at those administrative levels adequate to ensure the
accomplishment of critical programs.

-- Delegate to the U.S. Ambassador unequivocal authority
as the sole manager of all U.S, activities, resources,
and personnel in-country.

-- Direct the Ambassador to develop a single integrated
plan for achieving U.S. objectives in SVN.

-- Reaffirm to the world at large the precise terms of
the ultimate U.S. objective as stated in NSAM 288:
A free and independent non-communist South Vietnam..." 19/

Beyond this frank and direct summary, the study had hundreds of recom-
mendations, ranging from the specific and realizable to the vague and
hortatory.

In summary, the PROVN was a major step forward in thinking. Although
as mentioned above, its value was reduced for a long time by the restric-
tions placed on its dissemination, the candor with which it addressed
matters was probably possible only because it originated within a single
service, and thus did not require the concurrences of an inter-agency

study.

For exemple, the PROVN study addressed directly a point of such potential
embarrassment to the U.S. Government that it is quite likely an inter-agency
group would not have addressed it except perhaps in oblique terms:

"A PROVN survey...revealed that no two agencies of the U.S. Govern-
ment viewed our objectives in the same manner. Failure to use that
unequivocal statement of our fundamental objective -- a free and
independent, non-communist South Vietnam -- set forth in NSAM 288,
hinders effective inter-agency coordination and the integrated appli-
cation of U.S. support efforts." 20/

ia TOP SECRET - Sensitive
