Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

climate of South Vietnam, as well as the image of the GVN in the United
States. This involved, the memorandum indicated, a readiness for the

U.S. to make specific demands upon the GVN in order to get it to take a

wide range of decisions and actions. Among those things considered essential
and feasible, the following actions were listed:

1. Mobilization - The Vietnamese Armed Forces should be
increased to the maximum. As a first step, present plans to
increase Vietnamese forces by 65,000 men should be amended to
provide for an additional 30,000 men under arms by the end of
1968. The draft of 18 and 19 year olds should proceed as
presently scheduled. This should be consistent with the ability
to train and supply the forces, but avoid undercutting the
need for key civilians in other governmental functions by
diversion of skilled personnel.

2. The Thieu-Ky Relationship and Unity of Leadership -
The failure of Thieu and Ky to cooperate fully and apply
their individual talents to the needs of the situation has
continued to plague the effective management of the Vietnamese
effort. In turn this has had ramifications down the line in
poth the military and civilian chain of command. It has also
complicated the chances of rallying the various elements in
the society, as the rivalry translates itself into interference
with attempts at forming a national anti-communist front.

Thieu and Ky and their followers, as well as other
elements in the society not associated directly with them,
must be brought to realize that we are no longer prepared to
put up with anything but the maximum effort on their part.

A clear and precise role for Ky should be defined. Thieu

and Ky must bring their followers into line. The government
should be prepared to engage the services of people with
administrative and executive talent who are now not participating
in the common task. Our expectations in this regard have to

be made crystal clear to each and every Vietnamese leader in

and out of Government. Without this fundamental change in

the attitude and dedication of the leadership, the necessary
reforms and the necessary inspiration of the Vietnamese people
Will not be forthcoming quickly or sufficiently.

3. Getting the Govermnent Back into the Countryside -
We must win the race to the countryside, go on the offensive,
re-establish security in the rural areas, and restore the
government's presence in the villages. The ARVN and other
security forces must deploy aggressively, the RD cadre must
return to-their tasks, and governmental services reach out

from the province capitals.

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
