Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

A_PROPOSAL FOR EXTRA-BURFAUCRATIC ADVISORS

If the deteriorating situation and the potential breadth of the
military's view of the pacification process both augured for at least the
short run primacy of security considerations, that still left the question
of how best to enhance security and to lay the groundwork for the govern-
mental programs which would, Hopefully, begin to operate behind a geo-
graphically expanding security sereen. These questions were addressed,
but in @ rather one-sided way. An approach to U.S, advice-giving and
the organizational context in which it should proceed was tabled as a
radical proposal. First the approach, then the organizational framework
were struck down. The U.S. decided to take an opposite advisory approach
in avery different organizational context as much because of disagree-
ment with the debated proposals as because of reasoned elaboration of the
benefits to be realized from the course which was eventuslly followed.

In the process, the difficult question of U.S, leverage got shunted off
to the side. GVN reform was simply stated as an expected quid pro quo for
increased U.S, aid. What the U.S, should do if no reforms materialized
was apparently a subject too unpleasant to be considered.

The radical proposals were first floated in January 1961 by a uniquely
qualified professional military officer serving in Secretary McNamara's
office: Brigadier General Rdward Lansdale. Although an Air Porce officer,
Lansdale had worked closely in the Philippines with Ramon Magsaysay in the
latter's successful campaign against the Huk rebellion and served later as
head of the U,S. intelligence mission in South Vietnam in the mid-50's. He
knew President Diem well and was trusted by the GVM leader. He had gained
some notoriety as the real-life hero of the pseudo-fictional best seller,
"The Ugly American." His views on counterinsurgency commanded attention.

Iansdale's proposals lend themselves to summarization, not to compre =
hensive description. That is, he put forward a proposed attitude of mind
which should govern U.S, actions, not a program in the usual sense. The
thrust of his argument pertaining to advisors was that the U.S. should
select dedicated Americans with empathy for the Vietnamese and send then
to advise GVN "with sensitive understanding and wisdom." 34/ The course
of action he recommended was to get such men on the scene, give them total
responsibility to match their total commitment, and free them from the
encumbrances of the regular bureaucratic machinery (be it military or
civilian) in order that they might operate effectively according to the
situation:

When there is an emergency, the wise thing to do is to pick
the best people you have, people who are experienced in dealing
with this precise type of emergency, and send them to the spot
with orders to remedy the situation. When you get the people
in position and free them to work, you should then back then up
in every practical way you can. The real decisions will be made
in little daily actions in Vietnam, not in Washington, ‘that's

ES) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
