Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ominous enemy countermoves. An assessment of probable Soviet responses
to the evolving U.S. "pressures" policy, cabled to the Department by -
Foy Kohler in Moscow, 81/ was moderately reassuring and indeed quite
perceptive:

1. Soviets will make noises but not take decisive action
in response to specific retaliatory strikes in southern areas
DRV, probably including -- after publication "White Paper" --
strike against DRV sealift capabilities in this area. Indeed,
Soviets likely to read our failure to continue carry out such
strikes as confirmation their estimates re weakness our basic
position in SVN.

2. Soviet military aid program in DRV is probably defen-
sive in nature and Soviets would wish to keep it that way.
However, if attacks on DRV become general, particularly if
they are extended to industrial or urban targets and areas
beyond border zone. Soviets will reassess our intent as well
as basic politico-military situation. If reassessment leads
them to see U.S. aim as ending existence of DRV as socialist
state, Soviets will not only step up defensive aid but supply
means of counterattack, e.g., aircraft for raids on SVN cities
and heavy ground equipment. While aware of risk that this
might bring Peiping actively into picture, Soviets will not
hold back if existence of DRV seems threatened.

3. There seems no possibility of change in present hard
Soviet posture at least until after March 1 CP meeting and its
aftermath or until they somehow convinced of real danger of
major escalation and direct confrontation.

h. Major factor underlying Soviet position is conviction
that in Vietnam situation, unlike Cuban crisis, we are almost
alone among allies and even U.S. public opinion seriously
divided; any real and publicized improvement in this picture
would correspondingly influence Soviet policy.

5. Apert their estimate as to our relative isolation,
Soviet failure move toward negotiations on any pasis con-
ceivably acceptable to USG also reflécts DRV and CPR posture
and Moscow's unwillingness or inability to impel DRV to call
off activities in SV or yield control of territory they now
hold. To extent Soviets can influence communist attitude
toward negctiations, they might in face cf increasingly
dangerous situation decide to work toward settlement based
on coalition Govt in SVN, convincing own allies that this
only temporary situation.

6. Major Soviet Dilemma - Imperatives of commitment and

~ position in communist world vs. interest in developing rela-
tions with US and West - will versist during Vietnam crisis.

62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
