Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

VI. THE SITUATION IN SEPPEMBER

So far as the available record shows, there was no sense of imminent
erisis in the official reporting to Washington as fall of 1961 began. An
NIE published in mid-August concluded that Diem faced a "prolonged and
difficult struggle" against the insurgency, and noted that "the French with
their memories of the Indochina that was and the British with their experi-
ence in Malaya tend to be pessimistic regarding GVN prospects for combating
the insurgency." 14/ But the NIE also reported that Diem's army had been
performing better in 1961 than in 1960. Warning of possible trouble looked
months, rather than weeks, ahead. The danger foreseen was a coup: "if the
fight against the Viet Cong goes poorly during the next year or the South
Vietnamese Army suffers heavy casualties, the chances of a military coup
would substantially increase." 15/

The judgment of the NIE on the effects of such a coup was entirely
negative:

If there is a serious disruption of GVN leadership as a result of
Diem's death or as the result of a military coup, any momentum of
GVN's counterinsurgency efforts had achieved will be halted or re-
versed, at least for a time. The confusion and suspicion attending
a coup effort could provide the communists with an opportunity to
seize control of the government. 16/

There is no mention of any offsetting hope for a coup leading to more
effective prosecution of the war. The overall impression left by the NIE
is that Diem is not a very effective leader, but that he is getting along
well enough to make the risks of a coup look more dangerous than the risks
of the war being unwinnable under his leadership. In particular, a coup
(or Diem's death) were seen as the only thing that could bring a quick col-
lapse of the Saigon regime, as opposed to the loss over time of a "prolonged
and difficult" struggle.

MAAG Chief McGarr, in a report dated September 1, spoke of the "enhanced
sense of urgency and offensive spirit now present within both the RVNAF and
the Government of Vietnam..." Under the heading "Outlook for Next Year,”
he reported:

. With the increased effectiveness of the Armed Forces beginning
to be demonstrated by the recent operations in the Delta Region and
the manifest intent of the U.S. to continue and even step up its
vital support of the Vietnamese in their struggle against Communism,
there is a spirit of renewed confidence beginning to permeate the
people, the GVN, and the Armed Forces. 17/

The political reporting from Saigon was less optimistic. Generally,
these reports argued that Diem was not doing much to strengthen his support.

a ie
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
