Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In placing these additional troop commitments in a larger context,
an edditional appendix concluded:

No matter what the result in South Vietnam itself, we will
have failed in our purposes if:

a. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where it is
a major conflict leading to direct military confrontation
with the USSR and/or China;

b. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where we
are so committed in resources that our other world-wide
commitments -- especially NATO -- are no longer credible;

ec. The attitudes of the American people towards "more
Vietnams"” are such that our other commitments are brought
into question as a matter of US will;

d. Other countries no longer wish the US commitment
for fear of the consequences to themselves as a battlefield
between the East and the West.

Under these circumstances, we recommend that under the leader-
ship of the State Department, with the assistance of the Office of
the Secretary of Defense, the JCS, and the Treasury, a review of
our Vietnamese policy in the context of our global politico-military
strategy be undertaken with a due date of May 15. 65/

Thus, the net result of this period of frantic preperation, consul-
tation, writing, and reassessing was similar to all previous requests
for reinforcement in Vietnam. The litany was familiar: "We will furnish
what we can presently furnish without disrupting the normal political and
economic life of the nation, while we study the situation as it develops."
No startling reassessment of strategy was indicated, although for the
first time it was recognized that such a reassessment was needed, that a
limit to U.S. involvement in SVN had to be determined, and that any
number of U.S. troops could not achieve our objectives without-significant
improvement in the ability of the GVN to win popular support and to
fight aggressively for their own security.

5. Recommendation to the President

This draft memorandum was discussed again within the Defense
Department on 3 March, and several changes were made. The 4 March draft
memorandum for the President was apparently approved by the Secretary
of Defense and forwarded to the President. The paper which was forwarded
+o the President bore a great resemblance to the 3 March draft, although
the Systems Analysis influence on the 4 March paper was evidenced by its
greater detail, especially concerning actions to be required of the GVN.

gill TOP SECRET - Sensitive
