Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

We underlined many times the very high level of the US
commitment and said that we could not make this commit-
ment unless we had /an/ iron-clad guarantee that the GV
would live up [to] the foreign exchange agreement...we
stated that this was the minimum the US could accept. h2/

Hard bargaining continued, including another Hanh trip to Washington. 43/
Preliminary to the Conference, Washington considered several steps which
might be taken:

«+1. Agreement on a piaster/dollar rate of 118 for official
US purchases.

2. US use of all counterpart over P-30 billion.
3. Increase of Assistance In Kind from GV.

hk, Possible trensfer of some official purchases from the
80 to a 118 exchange rate without changing the official
rate.

5. Transfer of Do) contracts to the 118 rate.
6. Tying all 80 rate dollars to US procurement.
7. 100% US use of PL 480 sales. 4h/
Saigon's opinion was that for these negotiations there were two main routes:
(1) A switch of counterpart funds from.their use to ours, and
(2) A change in the exchange rate.

The first seemed preferable because it was more negotiable. The second
might be counter-productive by “simply angering Hanh without moving him."45/
On February 20, GVN merely agreed to work on en "interim memorandum of
understanding which would include actions to implement the foreign exchange
agreement of last November."46/ When Komer went to Saigon later in
February to negotiate, he found it necessary to threaten specifically to
reduce the CIP program to force down GVii's dollar balances, noting that
once the program was cut Congress would be unlikely to restore the cuts.
The negotiations amply demonstrated the truth of Hanh's remark that
Orientals only act after much bargaining. As Komer started to walk out

the door after a meeting, Hanh hinted at a raise in the official purchase
piaster rate from 80 to 118, but made no other concession. 47/ (At no
time did the USG threaten explicitly to buy piasters in the open market,

as Porter and DASD (Economics) had earlier proposed, a procedure that would
knock down GVN dollar balances to whatever extent we wanted while using
fewer dollars to get the required piasters.) In an exchange of letters
early in March, Hanh said he understood the US was willing to

5, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
