Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Vou can think of our involvement in South Viet-Nem in terms of a
moral commitment. The Vietnamese, on the frontier of the free world,
are fighting not just for themselves but for all men who wish to remain
free. I believe the 300-500 casualties they suffer each week is a
precious contribution to the security of the whole free world.

"you can think of the American role in South Viet-Nam in terms of
our SEATO [Southeast Asia Treaty Organization/ commitment. You can re-
gard it as a fulfillment of the implied obligation which we as a nation
undertook when we said at the Geneva Conference in 1954 that we would
regard any renewal of aggression in violation of the Geneva Agreements
with grave concern and as seriously threatening international peace and
security.

"You can think of South Viet-Nam as a test case; there is good
reason to believe that this is the view of the Communist bloc. In Viet-
Nam we are determining whether or not the free world can help a nation
defend itself against the subversion and guerrilla warfare which meke up
the ‘war of national liberation’ tactics. I think it is fair to say that
we have largely stopped the Communist thrust all around the world in con-
ventional and nuclear terms, We are now confronted by a new kind of
threat, and we have to a degree invented a new kind of response to meet
it. All of the underdeveloped nations of the world are watching the
event. If South Viet-Nam falls, their will to resist this kind of ag-
gression will be weakened and the whole fabric of free-world strength
and determination demaged thereby.

“Perhaps, in more human terms, you may want to think of our support
to Viet-Nam as American help to the nearly 1 million Vietnamese refugees
who fled North Viet-Nam in 1954 and 1955 to avoid living under a Communist
regime." ‘

ee

37. President Kennedy's TV interes September 2; 1963, Department of
State Bulletin, September 30, 1963, p. 499:
%¥ % *

"Mr. Cronkite: Hasn’t every: indication from Saigon been that Presi-
dent Diem has no intention of changing his pattern?

"President Kennedy: If he does not change it, of course, that is his
decision. He has been there 10 years, and, as I say, he has carried this
purden when he has been counted out on a number of occasions.

* “Our best judgment is that he can't be successful on this basis.
We hope that he comes to see that; but in the final analysis it is the
people and the Government itself who have to win or lose this struggle.
All we can do is help, and we are masking it very clear. But I don't agree

c-ho
