Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and to take steps necessary to maintenance of world peace
which is being endangered by French efforts to reconquer
Indochina. He asserts that Annamese will fight until
United Nations interfere in support of Annamese indepen-
dence. The petition addressed to major United Nations
contains:

"A. Review of French relations with Japanese where
French Indochina allegedly aided Japs:

"B. Statement of establishment on 2 September 1945
of PENW /sic/ Democratic Republic of Viet Minh:

"CG. Summary of French conquest of Cochin China begun
23 Sept 1945 and still incomplete:

"D. Outline of accomplishments of Annamese Government
in Tonkin including popular elections, abolition of un-
desirable taxes, expansion of education and resumption as
far as possible of normal economic activities:

"ER. Request to 4 powers: (1) To intervene and stop
the war in Indochina in order to mediate fair settlement
and (2) to bring the Indochinese issue before the United
Nations organization. The petition ends with statement
that Annamese ask for full independence in fact and that
in interim while awaiting UNO decision the Annamese will
continue to fight the reestablishment of French imperial-
ism. Letters and petition will be transmitted to Depart-
ment soonest." 37/

There is no record that the U.S. encouraged Ho Chi Minh thus to submit
his cause to the U.S., beyond the 0.8.8. support he received during
and immediately after World War II; nor does the record reflect that
the U.S. responded affirmatively to Ho's petitions. Rather, the U.S.

_ Government appears to have adhered uniformly to a policy of looking

to the French rather than to Vietnamese Nationalists for constructive
steps toward Vietnamese independence. On 5 December, 156, after the
November incidents, but before the fighting broke out in earnest, State
instructed the U.S. diplomatic representative in Hanoi as follows: 38/

A-29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
