Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Saigon Embassy views. Ambassador Taylor opposed the views
of his former military colleagues on most issues. Prior to the Sep-
tember meeting, he expressed objections to the idea of surfacing or
leaking to the press the nature of CVN maritime operations. He also
opposed tit-for-tat retaliation bombing for the reason that it was
"likely to release a new order of military reaction from both sides,
the outcome of which is impossible to predict." He saw enemy ground
assaults as a greater threat to U.S. bases in South Vietnam than enemy
air attacks and supported the deployment of U.S. ground force units
for base security purposes. This was to occur after the beginning of
GvN/U.s. ground and air cross-border operations into Laos. However,
not unlike the Chiefs, one of the criteria he employed in shaping his
recommendation was the avoidance of a major U.S. ground force commit-
ment. 1h1/

Ambassador Taylor's views were apparently based on an under-
lying rationale that actions to counter the VC/DRV aggression should not
outstrip the GVN and that if it could be avoided, the conflict should not
be escalated to a level beyond South Vietnamese capacities to manage it.
Although believing firmly that the United States would have to apply
direct pressure against North Vietnam eventually, to force her to
abandon her objectives, he felt that the major burden of this effort
should be borne by the GVN. Thus, his support for U.S. base security
deployments was based in part on concern lest ARVN units be tied down | ;
in such roles and, thus, unavailable for more free-ranging combat. Simi-
larly, in August, the Enbassy favored immediate initiation of B-57
‘training for the VNAF to enable it to play a substantial role in the
overt air attacks envisioned for 1965.

This training -- like Saigon's discouragement of U.S. eagerness
to negotiate in Iaos -- was also advocated for its value in bolstering
the GVN's morale and determination to continue fighting against its
communist enemies. This same consideration was at the root of the
Ambassador's belief that any negotiations which affected South Vietnam
should be avoided until North Vietnam was subjected to more forceful
military pressures. He also felt that communication with Hanoi should
be preceded by a thorough discussion and understanding of our limited
war aims with the GVN. 1)2/

The Ambassador's basic concern that the GVN be capable of
and committed to Supporting the evolving levels of war effort against
the communists was indicated in his response to the political upheaval
in Saigon. Earlier, his recommendations had included the option of
opening "the [aix] campaign against the DRV without delay," in the event
of threatened collapse of the Khahn Government. The objective was to
have been "to avoid the possible consequences of a collapse of national
morale." At the September meeting and subsequently, however, after
Khahn had already been forced to step down from GVN leadership once
and his new government was even shakier than two months earlier, the
Ambassador opposed overt action against North Vietnam as too risky and
urged instead that further measures to strengthen the GVN be taken first. 143/

39 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

- *
‘
