Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

12.3:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

immediate questions about intelligence and such, Taylor was expected to
",.erecommend long-range programs, including possible military actions, but
stressing broad economic and social measures." Furthermore, the Times was
told,

Military leaders at the Pentagon, no less than General Taylor
himself are understood to be reluctant to send organized U.S.
combat units into Southeast Asia. Pentagon plans for this area
stress the importance of countering Communist guerrillas with
troops from the affected countries, perhaps trained and equipped
by the U.S., but not supplanted by U.S. troops. 14/

In the light of the recommendations quoted throughout this paper, and parti-
cularly of the staff papers just described that led up to the Taylor Mission,
most of this was simply untrue. It is just about inconceivable that this
story could have been given out except at the direction of the President, or
by him personally. It appears, consequently, the President was less than
delighted by Diem's request for troops. He may have suspected, quite reason-
ably, that Diem's request was prompted by the stories out of Washington that
Taylor was coming to discuss troops; or he may have wished to put a quick
stop to expectations (and leaks) that troops were about to be sent, or both.
This does not mean the President had already decided not to send combat units,
Presumably he had not. But he apparently did not want to have his hands tied.

The Times story had the apparently desired affect. Speculation about
combat troops almost disappeared from news stories, and Diem never again
raised the question of combat troops: the initiative from now on came from
Taylor and Nolting, and their recommendations were very closely held. .

III. CINCPAC RECOMMENDS "NOT Now"

On the way to Saigon, Taylor stopped off in Hawaii to talk to Admiral Felt
at CINCPAC. Felt did not give Taylor a flat recommendation on combat troops at
the time. But a couple of days later he cabled Washington a list of pros and

cons:
A. Pro

(1) Presence of U.S. forces in SVN, particularly if de-
ployed to important defensive areas such as plateau region, would
mean to Communists that overt aggression against SVN will involve
US forces from the outset. This eliminates possibility of sudden
victory by overt aggression in SVN before US could react. This
would settle the question for SVN, and SE Asians as a whole, as to
whether we would come to their help. Further, agreement by SEATO
to principle of force introduction would strengthen SEATO in world
eyes.

88
