Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

re} TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The current enemy build-up...constitutes a direct threat
to uUS/Fw GVN forces in I CTZ and to the security of Quang Tri
and Thus, Thien Provinces. The seriousness of this threat
underscores the importance and urgency of utilizing all prac-
ticable means to prevent the enemy from generating a major
offensive designed to 'liberate' the provinces in question
and to inflict maximum casualties on us/Fw/GvN forces....The
enemy is consolidating his position in northern I CTZ and,
according to my J-2, the 324th B Division is reinforced by the
34ist Division and being further reinforced by possibly two
additional divisions, one now in the vicinity of the DMZ and
one on the move south. He continues to use the DMZ as a troop
haven and as a supply head for his forces moving into northern
I CTZ....The size of his build-up, disposition of forces, forward
stockage of supplies, AA weapons systems being deployed southward,
and depth of patrol penetrations indicate by all accepted stan-
dards that the enemy is developing en offensive as opposed to
defensive posture. By October, the weather in Laos will be
clearing and the enemy may be expected once again to move person-
nel and supporting materiel in quantity through the area, thus
permitting him to engage our flank in Quang Tri Province fron
the west. Conversely, worsening weather in the coastal plain
of I and II C?Z's would work to the enemy's advantage in attacks
on friendly positions in these areas. Utilizing traditional
routes through the Laos panhandle he will be able to reinforce
large-scale diversionary attacks further south in coordination
with a main assault through the DMZ and against the Western
flank. The success of our efforts in coping with enemy initi-
atives has been based upon spoiling attacks by ground and air
forces to disrupt the plans before he is capable of completing
preparations for attack. He has thus been kept off balance from
mounting a successful offensive. It now would appear, however’,
that because of our approach the enemy is employing a new tactic

entailing use of sanctuaries in the DMZ and north thereof in an
‘effort to prevent spoiling attacks. Since we are unable to

exercise the initiative in moving ground forces into the DMZ or
NVN we are left with fire power alone as the instrument for attack.
I consider it imperative in this regard that we utilize aerial
delivered fire power and naval gun fire in this situation if we
are to thwart the enemy's pending offensive as discussed above.”

He concluded by requesting employment of B-52's against the North
Vietnamese forces infiltrating through the DMZ.

On 16 September General Westmoreland sent a message to Admiral
Sharp 36/ in which he presented his concept for handling infiltration
through the Lactian panhandle. As General Westmoreland put it, "With
the arrival of the NE monsoon season weather in Laotian panhandle will
be clearing and enemy is expected to infiltrate personnel and supporting

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
