Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECREL - Sensitive

On 7 March 1963, the JCS accepted the MACV CPSVN in toto and for-
warded it to the Secretary of Defense. They recommended approval, and
proposed that it be the basis for both revising the FY 6} MAP and develop-
ment of the FY 65-69 MAPs. They requested an early decision on the CPSVN
because the greatest increase would occur in the FY 6} MAP. The JCS fully
supported the higher costs of the CPSVN above the DOD dollar guidelines. 13/

In OSD, the proposed CPSVN underwent staffing review in ISA MA Plans
and elsewhere. Draft responses to the JCS were prepared and then with-
drawn. Secretary McNamara was not satisfied with either the high funding
levels or the adequacy of the plan regarding exactly how the RVN forces
were to take over from the U.S. to effect the desired phase-out of the
U.S. military commitment. In mid-April he decided to withhold action
pending full review of the CPSVN at another Honolulu conference which he
expressly scheduled for that purpose for 6 May. Meantime, the various OSD
agencies concerned were instructed to prepare detailed analyses and back-~
ground studies for him. 1)

The main focus of interest of the Secretary of Defense was on the policy
objective behind the CPSVN, namely, to reduce systematically the scale of
U.S. involvement until phased out completely. However, the beginnings of
a counter-current were already evident. New demands for increases all
around were to overwhelm the phasing out objective. Ad hoc requirements
for more U.S. forces were being generated piecemeal, each in its own right
sufficiently reasonable and so honored. This current, counter-current
dynamic ean be illustrated well by Mr. McNamara's decisions of late March.
As part of the Secretary's policy of demanding strict accounting and tight
eontrol on authorized U.S. in-country strength ceilings, he asked for the
latest reading on projected U.S. military strength to be reached in Vietnam.
He was reassured by the Chairman, JCS, that the estimated peak would not
exceed 15,6140 personnel. Yet, on this very same day, the Secretary approved
a substantial force augmentation, requested earlier, for FARMGATE and air-
lift support, involving 111 additional aircraft and a total of approximately
1475 additional personnel. 15/ Other similar special requirements and ad

hoe approvals soon were to follow.

Assessments of continuing favorable developments in the improving
Vietnam situation in the spring of 1963 seemed to warrant more than ever
going ahead with the planned phase out. The general tenor of appraisals
at the USMACV level were that the RVNAF had regained the initiative from
the VC and that the GVN position had improved militarily, economically,
and politically. Evaluations expressed in the "Summary of Highlights"
covering the first year of MACV's existence cited in detail the record of
the increasing scale, frequency, and effectiveness of RVNAF operations,
while those of the VC were declining. Casualty ratios favored RVNAF by
more than two to one, and the balance of weapons captured vs weapons lost
had also shifted to the GVN side. Cited as perhaps the most significant
progress was the Strategic Hamlet Program. The future looked even brighter,
e.g., “...barring greatly increased resupply and reinforcement of the Viet
Cong by infiltration, the military phase of the war can be virtually won
in 1963." 16/ ‘

11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
