Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

ec. Development

The NLF rapidly took on organizational reality-from the
Central Committee down through a web of subordinate and associated groups
to villages all over Vietnam. Pike estimates that within a few months of
its founding in December, 1960, its membership doubled, doubled again by
autumn, 1961, and then redoubled by early 1962, at which time 300,000
Vietnamese were on its roles. 178/ These were members of the "liberation
associations," NLF per se, Of which there were administrative associations
(e.g., provincial headquarters) and functional associations (e.g-, Youth
liberation Association); or, they belonged to one of several political
parties, including the communist party, affiliated with the WLF; or, they
served in the Liberation Army. Normally, each man, woman and child belonged .
to many organizations simultaneously. A French analysis of Viet Minh
organization aptly described the NLF:

"The individual is enchained in several networks of inde-
pendent hierarchies...a territorial hierarchy...running from
the family and the block to the interprovincial government, and
associations that incorporate male and female youth groups, groups
of mothers, of farmers, factory, and plantation workers’ syndicates...
they could just as well include clubs of flute players or bicycle
racers; the essential thing is that no one escapes from this enroll-
ment and that the territorial hierarchy is erossed by another one,
which supervises the first and is in turn supervised by it, both
a overseen by police or ganizations end the [Communist Party..."
L179

The key operational components of the NLF were the
Liberation Army and the People's Revolutionary Party, as the communists
within the NLF termed themselves. The former had a lien on the services
of every NLF member, man, woman or child, although functionally its missions
were usually carried out by formally organized and trained paramilitary or
full-time units. All "Viet Cong" units were, from 1961 on, regarded as
part of the Liberation Army.

There can be little dovbt that communists played a major
role in organizing the NLF. Although Diem's Communist Denunciation
campaign had foreclosed "Front" activity, the communists of South Vietnam
possessed the leadership, tight subordination and conspiratorial doctrine
necessary for them to survive; moreover, they were, as Milton Sacks
characterized them, “the most persevering, most cohesive, best-disciplined,
and most experienced political group in Vietnam. "180/ The People's Revolutionsr:
Party was not formed until January, 1962; it was explicitly the "Marxist-
Ieninist Party of South Vietnam," and it purported to be the "vanguard of
the NLF, the paramount member.” 18)/ In 1962, it had some 35,000 members. 182/
The Lao Dong Party had continued low level overt activity, as well as covert
operations, in South Vietnam throughout the years 1955 to 1962. For example,
deaflets were distributed over the Lao Dong imprimatur. 183/ But the PRP
denied official links with the Lao Dong Party of the DRV beyond "fraternal
ties of communism." 18h / The denial implies the question: what role

[oO TOP SECRET - Sensitive
