Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. Damage to peaceful image of the US, A price

paid for because of our program of bombing the North

has been damage to our image as a country which eschews
armed attacks on other nations. The hue and cry corre-
lates with the kind of weapons (e.g., bombs vs. napalm),
the kind of targets (e.g., bridges vs. people), the loca-
tion of targets (e.g., south vs. north), and not least the
extent to which the critic feels threatened by Asian com-
munism (e.g., Thailand vs. the UK). Furthermore, for a
given level of bombing, the hue and cry is less now than
it was earlier, perhaps to some extent helped by Communist
intransigence toward discussions. The objection to our
"warlike" image and the approval of our fulfilling our
commitments competes in the minds of many nations (and
individuals) in the world, producing a schizophrenia....

ec. Impact on US-Soviet detente. The bombing

program -- because it appears to reject the policy of
"peaceful co-existence," because it involves an attack
on a "fellow socialist country," because the Soviet
people have vivid horrible memories of air bombing, be-
eause it challenges the USSR as she competes with China
for leadership of the Communist world, and because US
and Soviet arms are now striking each other in North
Vietnam -- has seriously strained the US-Soviet detente,
making constructive arms-control and other cooperative
programs more difficult....At the same time, the bombing
program offers the Soviet Union an opportunity to play a
role in bringing peace to Vietnam, by gaining credit for
persuading us to terminate the program. There is a chance
that the scenario could spin out this way; if so, the
effect of the entire experience on the US-Soviet detente
could be a net plus.

d. Impact on Chicom role in DRV- So long as the

program continues, the role of China in North Vietnam

will inerease. Increased Chinese aid will be required

to protect against and to repair destruction. Also, the
strikes against North Vietnamese "sovereign territories,"
py involving their "honor" more than would otherwise be the
case, increases the risk that the DRV would accept a sub-
stantially increased Chinese role, however unattractive
that may be, in order to avoid a “national defeat" (failure
of the war of liberation in the South).

e. Risk of escalation. The bombing program --
especially as strikes move toward Hanoi and toward China
and as encounters with Soviet/Chinese SAMs/MIGs/vessels-
at-sea occur -- increases the risk of escalation into a

38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
