Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-- The DRV had specific political, as well as military,
objectives in returning the Southerners, including the
overturning of Diem, and eventually, reunification.

The interrogations of the regroupees also indicate that the DRV viewed
the regroupees as a long-range political asset, establishing special
schools and educational programs for Southern children. A captured
Viet Cong Lieutenant Colonel stressed this point, and quoted Phan Hung
of the Lao Dong Politburo, speaking at the Third Party Congress in
September 1960:

"The Party has tried to develop 10,000 teenage children
regrouped from the RVN into a cohesive group of engineers,
doctors, professors, and other specialists for the future.
This is proof that the Party has looked out for the welfare
of the South Vietnamese too." 108/

The informant stressed that at least until he left North Vietnam in
November, 1961,. none of this shadow national elite had been conscripted:
in his view, the DRV had yet to use a powerful political force, a cadre
for South Vietnam whose attitudes had been carefully conditioned by more
than a decade of education in the DRV, the Soviet Union, or other com-
munist countries. As of 1968, there is no information that the DRV had
committed these cadres in South Vietnam.

In early 1967, at the request of the Secretary of Defense,
an interagency study group was convened from CIA, DIA, and the Department
of State for a comprehensive review of U.S. intelligence concerning: "The
North Vietnamese Role in the Origin, Direction, and Support of the War
in South Vietnam." 109/ ‘The resultant study validates the foregoing
observations on the regroupees in all respects, as do other captured docu-
ments and interrogation reports. Taken together, available evidence
indicates that infiltration of regroupees from North to South Vietnam
began as early as 1955. For example, a U.S. intelligence report of November,
1955 reported on the arrival of 50 regroupees in October, 1955; and the
Lieutenant Colonel mentioned above, an intelligence officer, described
trips to South Vietnam and back in 1955, 1956, and 1958.

However, from all indications, the early infiltration was
quite small scale, involving mo more than a few hundred persons in all.
There are no reports indicating DRV preparations of an apparatus to handle
large-scale, systematic movements of people and supplies before 1958.
Early in that year, according to one prisoner, Montagnards from Quang Tri
and Thua Thien Provinces began to receive training in North Vietnam in
the establishment and operation of way-stations and guide systems in laos
and South Vietnam; the prisoner left North Vietnam in March, 1959 with a
group of other cadre to organize tribesmen for those missions. He testified
that thereafter he made several inspection trips along the routes to check
on the building of troop shelters in the encampments. 110/ Several other
POW have disclosed that in early 1959 they were chosen to man "special
border-crossing teams" for moving drugs, food, and other materiel across

3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
