Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

. The impression is that Taylor visualized graduated air opera-
tions having primarily psychological impact on the forth following
logically from successful political efforts in the South -- but that
he also wanted an (perhaps somewhat stronger) air cempaign held in
readiness as a punitive measure in the event of a critical reversal in
the South. This impression is strengthened by his earlier comment
about U.S. alternatives and by the second of "three principles” which
he recommended to the Principals;

"a. Do not enter into negotiations until the DRV is
hurting.

"db. Never let the DRV gain a victory in South Viet-Nam
without having paid a disproportionate price.

"ce. Keep the GVN in the forefront of the combat and the
negotiations," 129/

Involving the GVN in all phases of our operations was an im
portant aspect of the Ambassedor's thinking about next courses of action.
He stressed that before making a final decision on the course we would
follow, it would be necessary to obtain the reactions of Prime Minister
Huong and General Khanh to our various alternatives. He explained:

“They will be taking on risks as great or greater than
ours so that they have a right to a serious hearing, We
should make every effort to get them to ask our help in
expanding the war. If they decline, we shall have to re-
‘think the whole situation."

“nt, as is likely, they urge uss Taylor added, we should take advantage
of their enthusiasm "to nail down certain important points" on which we
want their agreement. Included were GVN pledges to maintain military
and police strength, to replace incompetent officials, and to suppress
disorder and agreements to stipulated divisions of responsibility for
conducting military operations. 130/

Taylor's briefing made clear his commitment to limited U.S. ob-
jectives in Southeast Asia and his believe in the necessity of assuring
the DRV of this limitation, Further, he made explicit his expectation
that the DRV would not accept U.S. offensive actions without some inten-
sified military reaction in the South and thet any DRV submission to our
demands might well be temporary.

d. Discussions with Ambassador Taylor. Following the briefing,
the Principals commented on a number of the Ambassador's observations
and discussed further the question of future courses of action. Secretary
Rusk asked what could be done to make the GVil perform better.’ Taylor
replied that he must be able to convey a strong message but that we

es) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
