Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in "implementation" later associated with the strategic hamlet program
were already discernible in the administration of the agrovilles by
the Diem regime.)

One dissent by the Department from Durbrow's recommenda-
tions was on the Can Lao:

"As to surfacing or abolishing Can lao suggest that to ask
for this and removal Nhus and Tuyen simultaneously would be too
much . . . If considered necessary, question could be raised
later." (Ibid.)

On 14 October, Ambassador Durbrow had his opportunity for
frank discussion alone with Diem. He began by reading, in French, a
14-page paper containing the suggestions agreed to by the Department.

". . ». Before reading text I stated that on October 13 I
had been in Viet-Nam for three and one half years, had found
my assignment edifying, interesting, and most worthwhile.
I mentioned solid and worthwhile progress I had noted in country
Since 1957 and congratulated President on his many fine accom~
plishments. I then stated that since I admired his courage
and determination I personally desired to do all I could to
help him, particularly in these trying times. I added I
personally, and other friends of his here as well as those in
Washington, have been giving much thought about how we might
be helpful to him. Results of our thinking led to conclusion
that we could be most helpful if we should make several sug-
gestions which I could put to him in a frank manner as a friend.
I then read the paper.

" . . . When I finished reading President stated that most
of suggestions I had made conformed to his basic ideas, but added
as much as he would like to put these into effect, stepped-up
activities of the Viet Cong made it most difficult. He added
that many people have been intimidated by Viet Cong and some
had been won over so that it would be difficult to carry out
some of steps regarding countryside. I replied while I realized
difficulties I was firmly convinced after most careful considera-
tion that it essential now to take many if not all of these. sug-
gested steps on a calculated risk basis in order to creat the
psychological shock which I believed essential at this time.
President made no further comment except to tell me that he would
consider the suggestions I had given hin.

"I then again begged his indulgence and asked if I could
bring up a most sensitive and delicate matter which I felt in
his interest and in interest of Viet-Nam I should discuss very
frankly. From notes in French which I read but did not leave

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
