Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

LY. B. 5. THE OVERTHROW OF NGO DIN DIEM

MAY-NOVEMBER 1963

1

INTRODUCTION

In the spring of 1963, the regime of Ngo Dinh Diem seemed to exhibit
no more signs of advanced decay or imminent demise than might have been
discerned since 1958 or 1959. Only in hindsight can certain developments
be identified as salient. Of these, certainly the steadily increasing
influence of the Nhus was the most ominous. Nhu came more and more to
dominate Diem in the last year of the Diem rule. But as his power
increased, Nhu's grip on reality seems to have slipped and he was
reported in that last year to have been smoking opium and to have been
mentally iil, a7; Meanwhile, Mme. Nhu was developing a power obsession
of her own. The catastrophic effect of their influence during the ensuing
erisis, however, was impossible to have predicted, As one perceptive
observer noted, the Ngo family "had come to power with a well-developed
persecution complex and had subsequently developed a positive mania
for survival," 2/

Another source of concern should have been the regime's self-
imposed isolation from the populace. It had left the peasants apathetic,
a cause for real concern in a struggle with the zealous, doctrineire
Viet Cong; but, more importantly, it had alienated large portions of
the restive urban population who felt most directly the impact of the
regime's arbitrary rule. The regime, in fact, had no real base of
political support and relied on the loyalty of a handful of key military
commanders to keep it in power by forestalling any overthrow. The loyalty
of these men was bought with promotions and favors. Greft and corruption
should also have drawn concern, even if governmental dishonesty was
endemic in Asia, and probably not disproportionate at that time in South
Vietnam.

it was not, however, the strains that these problems had placed
on the Vietnamese political structure that were ultimately decisive.
The fundamental wealness of the Diem regime was the curious rigidity
and political insensitivity of its mandarin style in the face of a
dramatic erisis of popular confidence.

With regard to the war, the consensus of the U.S. military mission
and the U.S. intelligence community in the spring of 1963 was that the
military situation in South Vietnam was steadily improving and the war
was beginning to be won. A National Intelligence Estimate in April 1963
eoncluded that the infusion of U.S. advisors had begun to have the
desired effect of strengthening the ARVN and increasing its aggressive-
ness, 3/ The Viet Cong retained good strength, but could be contained

1 TOP SECRET ~ SENSITIVE
