Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

August 1964, Mr. McNamara further explained the policy: "We have said --
as a matter of fact, I say today -- as our training missions are completed,
we will bring back the training forces."

Quite apart from what was actually accomplished by the phase-out
policy and the costs in terms of domestic political perceptions of Adminis-
tration statements on Vietnam, there are some important lessons to be
learned from this exercise. What was the U.S. rationale behind the policy?
Was it sound, feasible, and consistent with statements of national objec-
tives? By what policy and programmatic means were we trying to bring
about the desired results? Were these, in fact, the most appropriate
and effective vehicles? How did the intelligence and reporting system
in Vietnam help or hinder policy formulation? Why was not the Diem coup
in its darkening aftermath grasped as the opportunity to re-examine policy
and unambiguously to decide to phase out, or to do whatever was deemed
necessary?

The rationale behind the phased withdrawal policy was by and large
internally consistent and sensible.

-- To put Vietnam in the perspective of other U.S.
world interests. Vietnam, at this time, was not
the focal point of attention in Washington; Berlin
and Cuba were. Part of this exercise was to make
clear that U.S. interests in Europe and in the
western hemisphere came first. Even in terms of
Southeast Asia itself, Laos, not Vietnam, was the
central concern. So, the phase-out policy made
the kind of sense that goes along with the struc-
turing of priorities.

-- To avoid an open-ended Asian mainland land war.
Even though violated by U.S. involvement in the
Korean war, this was a central tenet of U.S.
national security policy and domestic politics.
The notion of the bottomless Asian pit, the
difference in outlook about a human life, were
well understood.

-- To plan for the contingency that events might force
withdrawal upon us. Seen in this light, the planning
process was prudential preparation.

-- To treat the insurgency as fundamentally 4 Vietnamese
matter, best solved by the Vietnamese themselves.
Most U.S. decision-makers had well-developed doubts
about the efficacy of using "white faced" soldiers
to fight Asians. This view was invariably coupled
publicly and privately with statements like this
one made by Secretary McNamara: "I personally

a i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
