Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Militarily, Unger reasoned, Option B-O would call for
continuation of current efforts, perhaps with a modest increase in
ground forces but with no step-up in the air war. Total refusal to
talk on the part of the Communists would, however, Unger wrote,

...leave us with a question of what kind of stick we
have to substitute for the proferred carrot and this might
bring us up against the judgment of whether intensification
and extension of our bombing in North Viet-Nam, coupled with
whatever greater military efforts could be made in the South
would bring the Communists to the table.

McNaughton's papers do not contain his original memorandum
setting forth the pessimistic version of Option B. One can, however,
infer its outlines from various other pieces in the McNaughton collection.

The difference between McNaughton and Unger presumably did
not concern the objective -- negotiating out. It lay in McNaughton's
expressing less confidence in an outcome not involving Communist control
of South Vietnam. On the first Monday in April, he had talked with
Michael Deutch, freshly back from Saigon. His notes read:

1. Place (VN) in-unholy mess.

2. We control next to no territory.

3. Fears economic collapse.

4. People would not vote for ‘our ride.’

5. Wants to carry out economic warfare in VC.

6. This is incorruptible and popular. Chieu /sic/
is best successor for Ky.

7. Militarily will be same place year from now.
8. Pacification won't get off ground for a year.

If McNaughton himself accepted anything like this estimate, he would
have been pessimistic indeed about prospects for the GVN's survival.
Even if he did not take quite so gloomy a view, he probably felt, as he
had intimated in one of his January memoranda, that the United States
should prepare to accept something less than the conditions which Unger
sketched. What practical consequences followed from this difference in

view, one can only guess.

96 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘
