ran

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

3- Lodge's Attention Turns to Inflation

: While Generel Westmoreland's attention was being increasingly
drawn towards the problems of infiltration from sanctuaries outside the
borders of Vietnam, Ambassador Lodge's attention was being increasingly
drawn towards the problem of inflation inside the borders. As Ambassador
Porter in Saigon wrote to Komer on 17 August:

Fiscal year 1966 was a year of inflation. Money supply
rose by 72% and Saigon working class cost of living index by
92). Near of end of year (June 18) the piaster was devalued
from 60 piasters per dollar to 118 piasters per dollar and
six weeks later at time of writing, prices had begun to
stabilize....It appears at this writing (Aug 11, 1966) that
devaluation of June 18 has been successful surgical operation.
It has increased by nearly 100% the number of piasters with-
drawn from circulation for each dollar of imports, and this
has sopped up enough demand to stabilize prices and actually
reduce the total monetary circulation. Retail price indices
have shown little change for last five weeks. Black market
price of green dollars appears to have levelled off at a
level of about 185-195, and price of gold also declining.
There remain, however, number of threats to this newly estab-
lished and so far fragile stability. 38/

He then listed five primary threats: The first was wage stability. There
had been a general round of wage increases since devaluation, but it was
not yet certain that labor demands had been satisfied.

Second was mounting U.S. expenditure:

US military build-up has tendency to generate continu-
ously greater piaster expenditure, both by US DOD officially,
and by our troops as individuals. Current total rate of
expenditure around 36 billion piasters a year. In US, DOD
programming rise to rate of over 7 billion piasters was orig-
inally foreseen for fiscal year 1967. This order of increase
would tend very definitely to upset the stabilization effort.
Budget of 36 billion piasters for total DOD generated expen-
diture in FY 1967 has now been ordered, but this may prove
very difficult to implement.

The third danger was seen to be an increased GVN budget. The
total GVN civil and military expenditures were about 55 billion piasters
_in FY 1966, and they might rise to 70 billion or more in FY 67.

On 15 September the Saigon Embassy 39/ forwarded their latest
computation of the inflationary gap, based upon programs and budgets

_ which had been submitted for CY 67.

69 — TOP SECRET - Sensitive
