Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

a massive army, and modernizing it with Communict bloc aid. 79/ The
ICC, discredited in its attempts to cope with observance of Article
14(a) of the "Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities..." regarding
refugees, was further devalued as a stabilizing influence when forced
to admit that it was impotent in inspecting compliance with Articles
16, 17, 18, and 19: 80/

"Article 16...the introduction into Viet-Nam of any
troop reinforcements and additional military personnel
is prohibited....

"Article 17...the introduction into Viet-Nam of any
reinforcement in the form of all types of arms, munitions,
and other war material, such as combat aircraft, naval
craft, pieces of ordnance, jet engines and armoured
vehicles, is prohibited....

"Article 18...the establishment of new military bases
is prohibited throughout Viet-Nam territory.

"Article 19...no military base under the control of a
foreign State may be established in the regrouping zone of
either party; the two parties shall ensure that the zones
assigned to them do not adhere to any military alliance
and are not used for the resumption of hostilities or to
further an aggressive policy."

In June, 1958, the ICC issued the following statement
concerning its inability to enforce the provisions of Articles 16
and 17: 81/

"The persistence of the Parties in not accepting the
Commission's interpretation of the provisions of the Agree-
ments and their failure to implement the recommendations
made to them by the Commission have rendered it difficult
for the Commission to supervise the implementation of the
Articles concerned. The Commission will, as hitherto, con-
tinue to discharge its duties under the Geneva Agreements,
but would like to emphasize that the lack of cooperation from
the Parties seriously affects the effectiveness of its super-
vision and control. The Commission can, therefore, discharge
its responsibilities only to the extent permitted by the
Parties, and not as decided by the Commission in accordance
with the Geneva Agreements. ‘The Commission hopes that in
the future a larger measure of cooperation will be forth-
coming from the Parties and the difficulties which have
persisted so far will cease to hinder its activities."

The test of the Geneva Agreement also allowed for the rotation of

personnel, and the replacement of "destroyed, damaged, worn out or
used up" material, arms, and munitions, provided that advance notice

19 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
