/07

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

' As a test case for the ever popular oil blot theory of pacifica-
tion, Hop Tac left much to be desired. It did, however, point up some
of the difficulties to be encountered in any attempt to implement this
appealingly simple--and perhaps simplistic--concept. The oil blot theory,
dike all abstract analogies, emphasizes the similarity between phenomena
end ignores the differences. ‘The important similarity of the pacification
problem to the oil blot is the expressed goal of progressively extending
the secure zone until it embraces the entire country. Unlike a blank
piece of paper, however, the environment in which pacification must take
place is neither neutral nor passive; and unlike the oil blot, the
pacification forces are not impervious. Moreover, implicit in the theory
is the notion that the secure area, like the oil blot, will expand in all
directions simultaneously, at roughly the same speed, and that expansion
is irreversible and irrevocable. Further, the analogy fails to take into
account unique problems of terrain or variances in government and insurgent
strength in different areas. One need not belabor the point; the concept
is fine as a theory, but not as a program design. In fairness, it must
be said that the idea does focus the need for concentration of resources
in priority areas, All this notwithstanding, III Corps was less than the
optimum place to test such a program. It contains several longtime Viet
Cong strongholds and base areas and is extraordinarily sensitive to polit-
ical changes in Saigon (28 of 31 district chiefs were replaced during the
lifetime of Hop Tac).

The most important reason for the failure of Hop Tac, however, was
the lack of South Vietnamese support for it. From its inception to its
demise, it was an American idea, plan, and program. While the GVN adopted
it, esteblished a high-level council to supervise it, and committed some
troops and other resources to it, this was seen as a way of appeasing the
Americans. The South Vietnamese never accorded Hop Tac a high priority
in their own thinking. Moreover, its low status was further emphasized
by the massive U.S. force build-up. As this U.S. build-up became rela-
tively routinized, however, the issue of pacification reasserted itself.”
When it did so, the primary U.S. concern came to focus on the issue of how
best to organize the military, paramilitary, and civilian advisory efforts.
Since even the civilian advisors in the field were military personnel on
loan in many instances, the account of the military advisory build-up
cot be became essentially an account of organizing advice for pacifica-

jion.

* See Task Force Paper, Vol. IV.C.8., Reemphasis on Pacification: 1966 -
1967.

69 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
