Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In a related effort to overcome delays in the Vietnamese pacifica-
tion program, MACV acceded to its advisors' recommendations and, in
October, created a separate contingency fund of 50,000 piasters for
each subsector advisor to be used for urgent projects. Sector advisors
were also given access to special funds. The program was highly suc-
cessful and toward the end of the year consideration was given to
permanent establishment of such revolving funds. 176/ ‘The plan was
abandoned, however, after the four-month trial period due to the strong
opposition of the GVN Minister for RD, General Thang, who contended
such funds were undermining the legitimate efforts of his organization
to meet urgent province needs. They would encourage, he said, Vietnamese
dependence on the U.S, 177/

But USOM did experiment successfully with one new form of direct,
selective leverage in the late summer of 1965. ‘The Province Chief of
Binh Tuy Province, Lt Colonel Chi, was accused of misusing some $250,000
in AID funds. When USOM pressure on the GVN for his removal produced no
results, aid to the province was suspended on September 23, and USOM
field personnel were withdrawn. In spite of Chi's friendship with the
Defense Minister and Deputy Premier (General Co) Premier Ky removed him
six weeks later. Aid to the province then resumed, but Ambassador Lodge
made it clear to the Mission Council that he disapproved of the action
and did not went it repeated (particularly the press coverage). 178,

As already indicated, both Ambassadors Taylor (after his experience
in December 1964) and Lodge preferred not to force thé GVN or attempt
to use high-level pressure to reach solutions we felt necessary. The
fragility of the political arrangements in Saigon at any point in time
seemed to dictate against any U.S, action that might precipitate coups
or disruption from elements even less disposed to be cooperative than
the current group, whoever they might be. In this view, the successive
Ambassadors were strongly supported by the State Department. 179/ The
one consistent Washington advocate for an increased use of leverage was
Secretary McNamara. 180/ But the Secretary of Defense's views did not
prevail in this issue as they did in so many others. The overall U.S.
approach to advice in South Vietnam continued to be dominated by the
felt U.S. need to avoid undercutting governmental stability. U.S. sup-
port was figuratively regarded as a rug which if pulled out from under
the GVN would cause it to fall, not as a lever whose use might spur
increased effectiveness.

THE INCONCLUSIVE DEBATE OVER LEVERAGE
————— ELE I UG

This persistent U.S, avoidance of the planned use of leverage was,
until about 1966, paralleled by an equally persistent avoidance of any
candid examination of the whole pandora’s box which was conjured up by
the mere mention of the subject. But during 1966, and continuing into
1967 and beyond, there were repeated attempts by lower echelons within
the policymaking apparatus to promote an internal examination of the issue.

9h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
