Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"optics" of militarizing the effort, and the need to check with Lodge as
reasons against actions.

AID agreed that the present program had its faults, but resisted the
idea of a MACV takeover. Instead, they proposed a complex system of com-
mittees and deputies for RD, who would report to a Deputy Ambassador for
Pacification. 4o/

The JCS found that the proposal “provides an excellent rationale for
an approach to the problem of appropriately integrating the civil and
military effort in the important field of pacification" and concurred
in the idea of a Deputy COMUSMACV for RD. 41/

CIA and USIA both opposed the reorganization, although their written
comments ere not in the files. 42/

Komer weighed in with a lengthy rationale supporting the idea. Although
he may not have known it at the time, he was talking about the organizational
structure he was going to fit into later. After agreeing that the need
to get pacification moving was great, and that “the military are much
better set up to manage a huge pacification effort," he said that 60-70%
of "real job of pacification is providing local security. This can only
be done by the military..."  Komer then raised some additional points:

1. The Ambassador should remain in overall charge.

2. MACV should not assume responsibility for everything, only
the high payoff war-related. activities.

3. Logistic support should remain a multi-agency responsibility. 43/

As the discussions on the subject continued, Deputy Ambassador Porter
arrived. in the United States for a combined business-personal trip. When
he found out what was being considered, he immediately made strong repre-
sentations to McNamara, Komer, and Rusk. He also sent & personal cable
pack to Lodge, alerting him for the first time to what was afoot in Washing-
ton:

"Principal topic under discussion here is DOD proposal
to bring both U.S. military and U.S. civilian resources
needed to advance RD program under direction of Deputy
COMUSMACV. This plan will be discussed with you during
McNamara visit. It would detach all civilian field opera-
tions from direct control of Saigon civilian agencies and
would place them under Deputy COMUSMACVY for RD. In addi-
tion to controlling civilian field resources, latter would
also manage U.S, military resources with view to increasing
their effectiveness in furthering RD programs. Deputy
COMJSMACV would be responsible to Ambassador or Deputy
Ambassador through COMUSMACV. This at least is my under-
standing of proposal which is being strongly pushed here.

93 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
