|
|

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In May, General Abrams established a Program Review and Analysis
System for RVNAF Progress. This was essentially an internal MACV
effort to examine the problems facing RVNAF in order that MACV might
structure its advisory assistance to make the most headway against
these problems. The first published review, covering the January-June
1967 period, appeared in September. Like many similar efforts it was
a long catalogue of RVNAF deficiencies by U.S. standards. 202 The
benefits of these reviews were supposed to be reaped as they were brought
to bear during the quarterly RVNAF self-review called for in the Com-
bined Campaign Plan. There is no available information as to how effec-
tively this has worked in practice. This plethora of programs and
activities through which we sought either to improve the effectiveness of
RVNAF directly or to promote it indirectly by improving the lot and life
of the soldier received a full-blown exposition during Secretary McNamara's
trip to Saigon in July. 203/ With respect to improving RVNAF morale --
in addition to the pay scale adjustments, improved rations, and provision
of dependent housing -- the U.S. has helped the South Vietnamese develop
a miniature U.S. style Commissary/PX system.

The leadership problem received very detailed attention by MACV during
the course of 1967. Prior to the Secretary's departure for Vietnam,
Alain Enthoven, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis,
sent McNamara a memo that flatly stated, "There are & number of reasons
for the ineffectiveness of many of the RVNAF units, particularly ARVN
combat battalions, but the primary one is the quantity and quality of
the leadership." 204/ After itemizing the contributing factors to this
deficiency, he recommended that the Secretary query MACV in detail on
leadership problems during his visit. In the briefings for Secretary
McNamara in July, fourteen different MACV/JGS actions or programs were
cited as ways in which this problem was being addressed. These ranged
from better officer career management to regular merit promotion proced-
ures and the publication of leadership materials. 205/ One example of
the lengths to which we have gone in efforts to remedy the leadership
deficit in RVNAF is the replication in South Vietnam of the U.S. elite
officer schooling system -- a four-year Vietnamese Military Academy,
enlarged Command and General Staff College, and, most recently, a National
Defense College.

THE LATEST EXPANSION OF ADVISORS

COMUSMACYV faced difficult choices in determining whether he wished
to emphasize more U.S. advisors for RVNAF -- or advisors for new functions --
or to stress a build-up of the number of U.S. combat forces in-country.
RVNAF strength had increased by 152% from 1960 to 1966, going up by over
100,000 in the 18 months preceding the beginning of 1967. The table below
shows the growth and distribution of RVNAF over the 1965-1967 period. The
slight decline in forces from January to April 1967, reflects efforts to
weed out absentee personnel still being carried on padded unit rolls.

107 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
