Fay
rd

~~,

(

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

in Viet-Nam, which in the first 5 months of this year alone resulted in
the death of more than 9,000 people, are planned, caused, and led by
the Communist authorities in North Viet-Nam. These are the conclusions
of the Commission's Legal Committee;

1,...there is evidence to show that armed and unarmed
personnel, arms,-munitions and other supplies have been sent
from the Zone in the North to the Zone in the South with the
object of supporting, organizing and carrying out hostile
activities, including armed attacks, directed against the
Armed Forces and Administration of the Zone in the South... ‘
there is evidence to show that the PAVN /People's Army of
Viet-Nem/ hes allowed the Zone in the North to be used for
inciting, encouraging and supporting hostile activities in
the Zone in the Bees aimed at the overthrow of the Adminis-—
tration in the South.'

"Phe Commission accepted these conclusions of the Legal Committee
that there was sufficient evidence to show "beyond reasonable doubt' that
the authorities in Communist North Viet-Nam committed these violations.
The Commission also cited the Republic of Viet-Nam for its activities in
importing military equipment and personnel above the limits imposed by
the 1954 Geneva Accords. The report clearly demonstrates, however, that
these actions were taken by South Viet-Nam as part of its. effort 6 defend
itself against aggression and subversion from the North. In December of
last year President Diem requested increased military assistance from the
United States. We have responded to this request.

"President Diem and President Kennedy have both stated that they
look forward to the discontinuance of the present level of military
assistance when the Communist North Vietnamese halt their campaign to
destroy the Republic of Viet-Nam. The report of the International Control
Commission takes note of this position. The United States welcomes the
Commission's report and recommends it for world attention. We hope that
the Commission will continue its efforts to restore peace in Viet-Nam.”

~~
27. President Kennedy's Annual Message to the Congress on the State of
the Union, January 14, 1963, Public Papers of the Presidents,
Kennedy, 1963, p. 17:

e

"Third, wha> comfort can we teke from the increasing strains and
tensions within the Communist bloc? Here hope must be tempered with
caution. For the Soviet-Chinese disagreement is over means, not ends.
A dispute over how best to bury the free world is no grounds for Western
rejoicing.

"Nevertheless, while a strain is not a fracture, it is clear that
the forces of diversity are at work inside the Communist camp, despite
all the iron disciplines of regimentation and all the iron dogmatisms

C-25
