Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Under Secretary of State W. Bedell Smith's Special Committee
on the U.S. and Indochina, to which the Erskine working group had
reported, issued a study on April 2. This report went beyond the question
of holding Indochina and agreed that whatever that area's fate, the U.S.
should begin developing a system of mutual defense for Southeast Asia.
For the short term, the Smith Committee favored American sponsorship of
a mutual defense treaty directed against Communist aggression in Indo-
china and Thailand. In the long run, it recommended promotion of a
"regional and Asian mutual defense arrangement subscribed and under-
written by the major Furopean powers with interests in the Pacific." 13/

The State Department's thinking in early April 1954 was not
greatly at variance from that of Defense and the Smith Committee.
Perhaps more so than Defense, State was concerned about the Chinese
reaction to a U.S. military intervention. It urged caution and sug-
gested that in any type of "united action” the U.S. make clear to both
the Chinese and the allies that the intervention would not be aimed at
the overthrow or destruction of the Peking regime. State recommended:
(1) no U.S. military intervention for the moment, nor should it be
promised to the French; (2) planning for military intervention continue;
(3) discussions with potential ‘allies on possibility of forming a
regional grouping in the event of an unacceptable settlement at Geneva. 1/

a. Presidential Decision to Support Only "United Action"

Meanwhile, the President decided, following a meeting of
Secretary Dulles and Admiral Radford, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, with
Congressional leaders on April 3, that the U.S. would not undertake a
unilateral intervention. Any U.S. military involvement in Indochina
would be contingent upon (1) formation of a coalition force with U.S.
allies to pursue "united action"; (2) declaration of French intent to
accelerate independence of Associated States; (3) Congressional approval
of U.S. involvement (which was thought to be dependent upon (1) and (2)).

These policy guidelines undoubtedly influenced the NSC which,
at a meeting on April 6, developed the somewhat incompatible objectives
that the U.S. (a) "intervene if necessary to avoid the loss of Indochina,
but advocate that no steps be left untaken to get the French to achieve
a successful conclusion of the war on their own" and (b) support as the
best alternative to U.S. intervention a regional grouping with maximum
Asian participation. 15/ :

The President accepted the NSC recommendations but decided
that henceforth the Administration's primary efforts would be devoted
toward: (1) organizing regional collective defense against Communist
expansion; (2) gaining British support for U.S. objectives in Southeast
Asia; (3) pressing France to accelerate its timetable for Indochinese
independence. The President would seek Congressional approval for U.S.
participation in a regional arrangement, if it could be put together,
and meanwhile contingency planning for mobilization would commence. 16/

B-12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
