Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20! 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

report to the Mission Council on August 24. The group was once again -
interagency, and it produced a paper of considerable value -- indeed, a
paper which could well have served as a basic policy document for the
Mission and Washington.

The Study Group made 81. recommendations, of which 66 were acceptable
to all agencies of the Mission. But even these 66 were not immediately
adopted as basic doctrine. Because of inertia and weariness, rather than
deliberate sabotage, the recommendations were never treated as basic policy,
and simply were carried out or not depending on the drive and desire of the
individual officials associated with each individual recommendation.

The report began, as almost all Vietnam studies seem to, with a defini-
tion:

"Revolutionary Development consists of those military
and civil efforts designed to liberate the population of
South Vietnam from communist coercion; to restore public
security; to initiate economic and political development;
to extend effective GVN authority throughout SVN; and to
win the willing support of the people to these ends." 28/

From there it developed the most logical and coherent approach to re-
turning an area to GVN control and then gaining its support that had yet
been produced by a group in either the Mission or Washington. The report
was hailed by Porter, by Komer, and by various mid-level officials. Jacobson
himself was to be named Mission Coordinator four months later, a position
from which he could present his ideas directly to the Ambassadors.

While, as mentioned above, the recommendations were never issued as
Mission policy in a group, many of them found their way into the main
stream of the Mission through other means. Some of the more controversial
ones -- for example: "that Division be removed from the RD Chain of Com-
mana” -- remained as potent ideas to be discussed within the government and
with the Vietnamese, and to be acted on slowly.

Since the report foreshadowed several major developments in pacifica-
tion, and since it still has today an intrinsic value of its own, it is
worth quoting some of its major points:

"High hopes are now pinned on the RD cadre, as the criti-
cal element of success in RD. Unfortunately, there is a
real danger it is being regarded as a panacea with curative
powers it does not, of and by itself, possess. The intro-
duction of 2D Cadre cannot alone achieve success in any of
the tasks discussed above. Even cadre such as may be avail-
able in six months...cannot compensate for the current fail-
ings and limitations of other fundamental elements bearing
directly on the RD process.

"\.«-RD demands for its success’ radical reform within
the GVN including its Armed Forces. This reform must start

8h TOP SECRET - Sensitive °.
