Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

152
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

series for the month of May, which ordinarily would have been ROLLING
THUNDER 51, but the decision was to extend ROLLING THUNDER 50 until
further notice, holding the POL question in 2%beyance. 153/ On May 3,
McNaughton sent Walt Rostow a belated list of questions, "to put into

the 'ask-Lodge' hopper." The first set of proposed queries had to do
with the bombing program and included specific questions about attacking
POL. Whether Rostow did, in fact, query Lodge on the matter is not clear
from the available cables, but in any case, Rostow took up the matter of
the POL attacks himself in an important memorandum to Rusk and McNamara
on May 6. Rostow developed his argument for striking the petroleum
reserves on the basis of U.S. experience in the World War II attacks on
German oil supplies and storage facilities. His reasoning was as follows:

From the moment that serious and systematic oil attacks
started, front line single engine fighter strength and tank
mobility were affected. The reason was this: it proved much
more difficult, in the face of general oil shortage, to
allocate from less important to more important uses than the
simple arithmetic of the problem would suggest. Oil moves
in various logistical channels from central sources. When
the central sources began to dry up the effects proved fairly
prompt and widespread. What look like reserves statistically
are rather inflexible commitments to logistical pipelines. 15h/

The same results might be expected from heavy and sustained attacks on
the North Vietnamese oil reserves,

With an understanding that simple analogies are danger-
ous, I nevertheless feel it is quite possible the military
effects of a systematic and sustained bombing of FOL in North
Vietnam may be more prompt and direct than conventional intel-
ligence analysis would suggest.

I would underline, however, the adjectives ‘systematic
and sustained.' If we take this step we must cut clean
through the POL system--- and hold the cut -- if we are looking
for decisive results. 155/

On May 9, recalling that the VC had recently attacked three
South Vietnamese textile factories, Westmoreland suggested that to deter
further assaults against South Vietnamese industry, the U.S. should strike
a North Vietnemese industrial target with considerable military signifi-
cance such as the Thai Nguyen iron and steel plant. 156/ Concurring with
the basic intent of the proposal, CINCPAC recommended that the target be
the North Vietnamese POL system instead. “Initiation of strikes against
NVN POL system and subsequent completed destruction, would be more mean-
ingful and further deny NVN essential war making resources. 157/

119 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
