Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

steps were taken: quite aside from the Administration's strong feelings
that we had to deal with the challenge of wars of national liberation,

the program adopted seems quite minimal as a response to what was -- even
after the cease-fire was confirmed -- a serious setback in Laos. No one in
the government, and no one of substantial influence outside it, questioned
the need for some action to hold things together in Southeast Asia.

For the fact was that our stake in Vietnam had increased because of
what had been happening in Laos, quite aside from anything that we did
or said. Collapse in Vietnam would be worse after Laos than it might have
seemed before. And to do nothing after Laos would not really have made
the U.S. look better if Vietnam fell; it would only have increased the like-
lihood both that that would happen, and greatly increased the extent to which
the U.S. (and within U.S. politics, the Kennedy Administration) would be
blamed for the collapse,

The Laotian situation did not even provide, then, a precedent for
seeking to settle the Vietnamese situation through the same coalition
government route. For in Laos, the pro-U.S. faction was plainly being
defeated militarily in open battle despite a good deal of U.S. aid. The
only U.S. alternative to accepting the coalition solution was to take over
the war ourselves. Further, there was a strong neutralist faction in Laos,
which could provide a premier for the government and at least a veneer of
hope that the settlement might be something more than a face-saving way of
handing the country over to the communist faction.

Neither of these conditions held for Vietnam, aside from all the other
factors reviewed in the introduction to this paper which left the Adminis-
tration no realistic option in the neutralist direction, even assuming that
there was any temptation at that time to move in that direction. To have
simply given up on Vietnam at that point, before any major effort had been
attempted to at least see if the situation could be saved at reasonable cost,
seems to have been, even with the hindsight we now have, essentially out of
the question.

That is why, in the context of the time, the commitments Kennedy
actually made seem like a near-minimal response which avoided any real deep-
ening of our stake in Vietnam.

There is far more of a problem with the things that we decided to talk
about (troops, and a formal treaty with Vietnam) than with the measures
Kennedy fully endorsed, Certainly putting troops into Vietnam would in-
crease our stake in the outcome, rather than merely help protect the stake
we already had. So, surely, would a formal trecty, even if the treaty nomi-
nally required U.S. support only in the case of overt invasion. How much
so would depend on the nature of the troop commitments and the nature of the
treaty. But, as we will see in the next chapter (in reviewing Vice President
Johnson's visit) Diem turned out to want neither troops nor a treaty for the
time being. And so these issues were deferred until the fall.

h6 -
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
