Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

reputation. In his view the latter was the more importent of the two.
Sharing the State view that South Vietnam was being lost ("this means
that a government not unfriendly to the DRV will probably emerge within
two years"), he believed that the U.S. reputation would suffer least

"if we continue to support South Vietnam and if Khanh and company con-
tinue to behave like children as the game is lost." However, he pointed
out that "dogged perseverance" was also recommended because the situation
might possibly improve. 233/

In specific terms, McNaughton defined perseverance as including
the following course of action:

"ae Continue to take risks on behalf of SVN. A reprisal
should be carried out soon. (Dependents could be removed at
that time.)

b. Keep slugging away. Keep help flowing, BUT do not
-increase the number of US men in SVN. (Additional US sol-
diers are as likely to be counter-productive as productive.)

ce. Do not lead or appear to lead in any negotiations.
Chances of reversing the tide will be better and, if we don't
reverse the tide, our reputation will emerge in better condi-
tion. .

d. If we leave, be sure it is a departure of the kind
which would put everyone on our side, wondering how we stuck
it and took it so long."

In the event of inability to prevent deterioration within South Vietnam,
he urged the development of plans to move to a fall-beck position by
helping shore-up Thailand end Malaysia. 234/

An OSD assessment made immediately after the Khanh coup in late
January adds perspective to this viewpoint. In it, McNaughton stated
and Secretary licl/amara agreed, "U.S. objective in South Vietnam is not
to ‘help friend' but to contain China." In particular, both Malaysia
and Thailand were seen as the next targets of Chinese aggressiveness.
Neither official saw any alternative to "keep plugging” insofar as U.S,
efforts inside South Vietnam were concerned. However, outside the
borders, both favored initiating strikes against North Vietnam. At first,
they believed, these should take the form of reprisals; beyond that, the
Administration would have to “feel its way" into stronger, graduated
pressures. Melldughton doubted that such strikes would actually help
the situation in South Vietnam, but thought they should be carried out
anyway. NMcliamara believed they probably would help the situation, in
addition to their broader impacts on the U.S. position in Southeast
Asia. 235/

79 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
