Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

northern areas. If they did so, this could ease the pressure
where it is most potentially serious. If they did not, then
this would give us a clear field for whatever actions were
then required.

d. In view of weather limitations, bombing north of
the 20th parallel will in any event be limited at least for the
next four weeks or so -- which we tentatively envisage as 4
maximum testing period in any event. Hence, we are not giving
up anything really serious in this time frame. Moreover, air
power now used north of 20th can probably be used in Laos (where
no policy change planned) and in SVN.

e. Insofar as our announcement foreshadows any possi-
bility of a complete bombing stoppage, in the event Hanoi
really exercises reciprocal restraints, we regard this as
unlikely. But in any case, the period of demonstrated restraint
would probably have to continue for a period of several weeks,
and we would have time to appraise the situation and to consult
carefully with them before we undertook any such action. 66/

. It is important to note that the Administration did not
expect the bombing restraint to produce a positive Hanoi reply. This view
apparently was never seriously disputed at any time during the long month
of deliberations within the Government, except by ISA. The fact that the
President was willing to go beyond the San Antonio formula and curtail the
air raids at a time when few responsible advisors were suggesting that such
action would produce peace talks is strong evidence of the major shift in
thinking that took place in Washington about the war and the bombing after
Tet 1968. The fact of anticipated bad weather over much of northern North
Vietnam in the succeeding months is important in understanding the timing
of the halt, although it can plausibly be argued that many advisors would
have found another convenient rationale if weather had been favorable.

Finally, the message concluded with an invitation for the
respective governments to respond positively to the announcement and with
an apology for the tardiness with which they were being informed of this
momentous action. "Vital Congressional timing factors” was the rather
Jame excuse offered, along with the need for "full and frank" consultation
with the GVN before the decision (contradicting the impression the GVN put
out after the announcement). The stage was thus finally set for the drama

of the President's speech.
2. The Speech
At 9:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time on Thursday March 31

‘Tyndon Johnson stepped before the TV cameras in the Oval Room of the
Waite House and began, in grave and meqsured tones, one of the most

196 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
