Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Neither the situation in SVN nor the failure of Hanoi to acquiesce
to our threats diminished the basic U.S. commitment. NSAM 288 expounding
the need to do what was necessary to preserve an "independent non-communist
South Vietnam" was the guiding policy document. At no time in this period
was the NSAM 288 commitment brought into question. Rather, American con-
cern was focused on how the U.S. could retrieve the situation. The usual
palliatives -- more aid, more advice, more pressure on the GVN to reform,
and more verbal threats to Hanoi -- were no longer seen as satisfactory.
Nor did it appear to U.S. decision-makers that we faced a stark choice
between complete U.S. withdrawal from the struggle or a large scale intro-
duction of U.S. ground forces. Nor did the leadership in Washington believe
that a massive bombing campaign against the North need be seriously con-
sidered -~’ although such @ program was proposed by the JCS. With all these
alternatives implicitly ruled out at this time, the choice was both obvious
and inevitable. Although it did not take the form of decision, it was agreed
that the U.S. should at an unspecified date in the future begin an incre-
mental series of gradually mounting strikes against North Vietnam. The only
real questions were precisely what actions should be taken and when? None
of these early fall discussions in Washington really confronted the hard
issues of what a bombing campaign would buy and what it would cost. These
hard-headed discussions, to some extent, took place in the last few months

of 196).

The key events in this period were the Tonkin Gulf incidents of
August 2nd and 4th and the U.S. reprisal on North Vietnam PI boats and
bases on August 5th. ‘The explanation for the DRV attack on U.S. ships
remains puzzling (perhaps it was simply a way of warning and warding off
U.S. patrols close to North Vietnam borders). The swift U.S. reaction was
to be expected. While there was some momentary uncertainty about the
actuality of the second attack on August kth, confirming evidence of the
attack was received before the U.S. reprisal was launched. The U.S. reprisal
represented the carrying out of recommendations made to the President by his
principal advisers earlier that summer and subsequently placed on the shelf.
The existence of these previous recommendations with planning down to
detailed targeting made possible the immediate U.S, reaction when the crisis
came.

At the same time as U.S, reprisals were taken, President Johnson decided
to act on another recommendation that had been under consideration since at
least May -- a Congressional resolution of support for U.S, policy. Whereas
in the earlier discussions, such a resolution had been proposed as a vehicle
for mobilizing Congressional and public support behind an escalating campaign
of pressures against the North, the President, in the midst of an election
campaign, now felt impelled to use it to soliaify support for his overall
Vietnam policy. On August 5th he sent a message to Congress on the Tonkin
incidents and asked for passage of a joint resolution endorsing his policy.
The resolution itself was ove prepared by the Administration and introduced
on its. behalf by the Chairmen of the Foreign Affairs Committees in the two
Houses. It was passed with near unanimous support on August 7th.

ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
