Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

1S}.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ii. FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS

On November 8, McNamara sent the following memorandum on behalf of
himself, Gilpatric, and the JCS:

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

The basic issue framed by the Taylor Report is whether the
U.S, shall:

‘a. Commit itself to the clear objective of preventing
the fall of South Vietnam to Communism, and

b. Support this commitment by necessary inmediate
military actions and preparations for possible later actions.

The Joint Chiefs, Mr. Gilpatric, and I have reached the
following conclusions:

1. The fall of South Vietnam to Communism would lead to the
fairly rapid extension of Communist control, or complete accom-
modation to Commmism, in the rest of mainland Southeast Asia and
in Indonesia. The strategic implications worldwide, particularly
in the Orient, would be extremely serious.

2. The chances are against, probably sharply against, pre-
venting that fall by any measures short of the introduction of
U.S. forces on a substantial scale. We accept General Taylor's
judgment that the various measures proposed by him short of this
are useful but will not in themselves do the job of restoring
confidence and setting Diem on the way to winning his fight. .

3- The introduction of a U.S, force of the magnitude of an
initial 8,000 men in a flood relief context will be of great help
to Diem. However, it will not convince the other side (whether
the shots are called from Moscow, Peiping, or Hanoi) that we mean
business. Moreover, it probably will not tip the scales decisively.
We would be almost certain to get increasingly mired down in an
inconclusive struggle. -

4, The other side can be convinced we mean business only if
we accompany the initial force introduction by a clear commit-
ment to the full objective stated above, accompanied by a warning
through sone channel to Hanoi that continued support of the Viet
Cong will lead to punitive retaliation against North Vietnam.

d- If we act in this way, the ultimate possible extent of our
military commitment must be faced. The struggle may be prolonged
and Hanoi and Peiping may intervene overtly. In view of the

2e
neo TOP SECRET - Sensitive
