Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The presence of this regular North Vietnamese unit, which had been first
reported as early as February, was a sobering harbinger of things to come.

The storm broke in earnest on 11 May when the Viet Cong attacked the
capital of Phuoc Long Province, Song Be, using more than a regiment of
troops. The enemy overran the town and its MACV advisory compound, caus-
ing heavy casualties among the U.S. and Vietnamese defenders. After holding
the, town for a day, the Viet Cong withdrew. Subsequent ARVN operations
revealed that the enemy also had suffered heavily in the battle.

Significantly, while the Viet Cong were preparing their attack on
Song Be, the GVN was pushing to completion a new Special Forces camp at
Dong Xoai not far away on the NW corner of War Zone C. 14/ That camp
was opened in May, and in less than a month the enemy was to reveal his
interest in it. F

Before May was over, however, the Viet Cong appeared again in strength,
this time in Quang Ngai Province in the northern I Corps. Near the small
outpost of Ba Gia a few kilometers west of Quang Ngai City, a battalion of
the ARVN 51st Regiment was ambushed and overrun. Although the size of the
enemy force was unknown, the ARVN commanders in the area rushed reinforce-
ments out to the scene only to have them ambushed in turn. The battle
dragged on for several days and ended in total defeat for the ARVN. Two
battalions were completely decimated and, what was worse, the ARVN senior
commanders on the scene had displayed tactical stupidity and cowardice in
the face of large enemy forces. From Ba Gia came a sense of urgency, at
least among some of the senior U.S. officers who had been witness to the
battle. 15 / The very real possibility of ARVN collapse had been made
manifest.

On the 7th of June, shortly after Ba Gia, General Westmoreland sent
to CINCPAC this message (LIMDIS 19118, 070335Z Jun 65):

"As indicated Ref A /COMUSMACV 041133Z NOTAL/, a broad review
of force requirements has been conducted in light of the changing
situation in Southeast Asia and within RVN.

"There are indications that the conflict in Southeast Asia
is in the process of moving to a higher level. Some PAVN forces
have entered SVN and more may well be on the way. Additional
jet fighters and some jet light bombers have been deployed in
the DRV. i

"Specifically, elements of the 325th PAVN Division are in
the northern zone of II Corps. It is quite possible that the
major portion, if not all, of the Division is now deployed in
the Kontum, Pleiku, Phu Bon area. Elements of the 304th PAVN .
Division are suspected to be in the panhandle and, therefore, 7

bys TOP SECRET - Sensitive
