Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

have been seen by Peking as a way of keeping the French "in" and the
. Americans out. The rapid collapse of France could create a vacuum into
which the U.S. would be forced to move.

The Chinese were disturbed about the prospect of Cam-
bodia, Laos, and the State of Vietnam becoming members of the proposed
U.S. security treaty system for Southeast Asia. 7/ When, for example,
Chou met with the Cambodian Foreign Minister (Nong Kimny) on 17 July,
the Chinese Premier implicitly warned against Cambodian participation
in a Southeast Asia pact or acceptance of foreign bases. The consequences
of either move by Cambodia, Chou said, would be very serious for Cambodian
independence and territorial integrity. And he specifically stated that
his remarks applied equally to Laos and Vietnam. 8/ Peking was not in-
terested in new territorial acquisitions; but neither would it tolerate
an American military threat close by.

(4) China Attempts to Enhance the Image of "Peaceful Coexistence”

A final Chinese objective was to enhance China's image
as an Asian power sincerely dedicated to peaceful coexistence. The policy
of "peaceful coexistence” was framed in terms of the five principles:
mutual friendship, mutual non-interference in internal affairs, non-aggression,
equality and mutual respect for territorial integrity. The Chinese invested
much time and travel in convincing their Asian neighbors of Peking's sin-
cerity. Seen in this larger context, the Indochina settlement, for which
Chou must be credited with a major share, bolstered Peking's image asa
dedicated worker for peace whose voice had to be heeded in Asian councils.
Not inconsequentially, China's stock in the communist bloc must have risen
as well.

2. USSR and China Serve as Moderating Influences on the Viet Minh
a. Opening Position of Both Countries Supports DRV Hard Line

For a variety of reasons the Soviets and Chinese found it in
their respective interests to work for a peaceful settlement of the Indo-
china War. Although giving the impression, at first, of being fully be-
hind the Viet Minh negotiating position, Molotov and Chou En-lai gradu-
ally moved toward accommodation with the French. The two chief communist
delegates were in fact instrumental in gaining concessions from the Viet
Minh and in proposing acceptable alternatives to the French. ‘At the out-
set of the Conference, Molotov and Chou outwardly supported without quali-
fication Pham Van Dong's proposal for a political settlement to be followed.
by a cease-fire. When it became clear that the French were not going to
accept that proposal, they evidently agreed that further progress required
@ separation of military from political discussions. Molotov's suggestion
at the first restricted session of 17 May along these lines, and Chou's
remark to Eden on 20 May that a cease-fire should have priority, repre-
sented. real breakthroughs and probably were the cause of Pham Van Dong's
willingness to engage in private military discussions with French General
Delteil.

C-21 | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
