Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

By this time (1:00 o.m. March 13, Moscow time), though Kohler was
not aware of it, the bombing pause had already been in effect for
seventeen hours. It had gone into effect as planned at 2400 on May 12,
Saigon time, and the Department so informed Kohler. The Department also
decided, in spite of Kohler's confidence thet the U.S. "oral" communica-
tion had reached Hanoi, to make doubly sure by asking the U.K. Govern-
ment to instruct its Consul in Hanoi to transmit the seme message, in
writing, to his normal contact in the DRV. Informed by the Department
that this step was about to be taken, Kohler exoressed his dissatisfac-
tion with the character and tone of the communication by recommending
that, in any resubmission, the message be shortened and softened:

«+. would recommend we shorten and revise wording of
"oral" communication to DRV if we plan resubmit through
British Consul Hanoi. If cast is present form, I think we
are simply inviting rebuff, end exercise-Heanoi would prove
as fruitless es our efforts in Moscow. Something along
lines following would get essential message across:

BEGIN TEXT. The highest authority in this Government
has asked me to inform Hanoi that there will be no air
attacks on North Vietnam for a period beginning at noon,
Washington time, Wednesday, Mey 12 and running into next
week,

In this decision the United States Government has
taken ‘account of repeated suggestions from various cues
ters, including public statements by Hanoi representatives,
that there can be no progress toward peace while there are
air attacks on North Vietnam.

The United States Government expects that in consequence
of this action the DRV will show similer restraint. If this
should not prove to be the case, then the United States .
Government will feel compelled to take such measures as it
feels are necessary to deal with the situation in Vietnem.
END TEXT. 136/

Kohler's recommendation was not accepted, and the message was trans-
mitted to the DRV by the British Consul in Hanoi in its original form.
As in the Moscow case, the message was shortly thereafter returned to
the sender, ostensibly unopened.

As a footnote to the "unopened letter” episodes, it may be worth
noting that Canadian ICC Commissioner Blair Seaborn, on an early-June
visit to Hanoi, was approached by the Czech Ambassador to the DRV, who
recounted to him the story of Kohler's unsuccessful effort to deliver
the messege to the DRV Ambassador in Moscow, with the message having been
returned ostensibly unopened. The Czech Ambassador said "everybody" in
Henoi. knew the story. 127/

Lpy- TOP SECRET - Sensitive
