Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

92 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

large increase or decrease in our interdiction sorties would
substantially change the cost to the enemy of maintaining
the roads, railroads, and waterways or affect whether they
are operational. It follows that the marginal sorties --
probably the marginal 1,000 or even 5,000 sorties -- per
month against the lines of communication no longer have a
significant impact on the war. . ;

When this marginal inutility of added sorties against
North Vietnam and Laos is compared with the crew and air-
craft losses implicit in the activity (four men and aircraft
and $20 million per 1,000 sorties), I recommend, as a minimum,
against increasing the level of bombing of North Vietnam and
against increasing the intensity of operations by changing
the areas or kinds of targets struck.

Under these conditions, the bombing program would continue
the pressure and would remain available as a bargaining counter
to get talks started (or to trade off in talks). But, as in
the case of a stabilized level of US ground forces, the
stabilization of ROLLING THUNDER would remove the prospect of
ever-escalating bombing as a factor complicating our political
posture and distracting from the main job of pacification in
South Vietnam.

At the proper time, as discussed on pages 6-7 below,
T believe we should consider terminating bombing in all of
North Vietnam, or at least in the Northeast zones, for an
indefinite period in connection with covert moves toward
peace. 57/

As an alternative to further escalation of the bombing, McNamara recom-
mended the barrier across the DMZ and Laos:

Install a barrier. A portion of the 470,000 troops --
perhaps 10,000 to 20,000 -- should be devoted to the construc-
tion and maintenance of an infiltration barrier. Such a
barrier would lie near the 17th parallel -- would run from
the sea, across the neck of South Vietnam (choking off the
new infiltration routes through the DMZ) and across the trails
in Laos. This interdiction system (at an approximate cost
of $1 billion) would comprise to the east a ground barrier
of fences, wire, sensors, artillery, aircraft and mobile troops;
and to the west -- mainly in Laos -- an interdiction zone
covered by air-laid mines and bombing attacks pin-pointed
by air-laid acoustic sensors.

164 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
