20.

22.

2Bs

2h.

25.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Secretary of State Byrnes requests information on

conditions in Indochina and especially on the

status of French-Viet Minh negotiations. Byrnes

PRM BANEROR CO, SAMUELS LOAG. sieves wax disihivalin be islewe wales ahwa DS

Gen Gallagher, OSS, reveals that, in his view of
Indochina, “one or two modern French divisions could
defeat the Annamese" and that after de Gaulle's
October pronouncement of colonial policy, the
Amnamese (Ho Chi Minh) refused to negotiate with
the French and became hostile. "Ho himself will

not deal with the French...and will be behind any
continuing Annamese movement." The Viet Minh
administration was young and inexperienced but

"the demand for independence is widespread and

even in the villages the peasants refer to the
example of the Philippines...however, the Viet Minh
should not be labeled full-fledged doctrinaire com-
munist."” Memorandum of Conversation by R.L. Sharp,
SRA Arfaivs,. 30) Tanwary TONG 6 oes oa» caw ew sroeniee va vielolele oles Soe 53

Landon reports that d'Argenlieu-Ho Chi Minh nego-

tiations have been proceeding and may be completed

in two or three weeks, and that only temporary and

local Franco-Chinese agreements have been realized.

Landon (Saigon) 0927 to Byrnes, 5 February 1946............ 58

Caffery informs Byrnes that the present French

government "will try to follow a conciliatory and

moderate policy in Indochina and will be more pro-

gressive in its outlook than de Gaulle." Caffery

S05 to Byrnes, (6 February TOG occ eescews epaeneercore acta 59

Tandon states that: "It seems certain that Annamese

plan desperate resistance to French. Ho Chi Minh

stated that he considering petitioning all United

Nations to mediate Annamese independence and prevent

extensive bloodshed." Landon (Hanoi) 2 to Byrnes,

HGURPLEDELY. TONG wins pone raed saslenes ts bused keledebee etre etielesel LOG

Tandon refers to two letters to President Truman from

Ho Chi Minh which request the USA as UN member to

support Armamese independence according to the exemple

of the Philippines. Landon summarizes the points in

Ho Chi Minh's petition to the United Nations which

includes a review of French conquests, Ho's govern-

mental accomplishments, and requests for intervention

by the Big Four. Tandon (Hanoi) to Secretary of State,

undated (received 27 February 1945)... cciccesseccesccecesaes GL

Vv TOP SHGRET-Sensitive
