Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

the scarcity of dock facilities and the shipping jam up in Saigon). Once

these problems had been surmounted, the barrier then became the level at
which the reserves would have to be called up. This barrier became very
real in early '66 when General Westmoreland's desires for numbers of men
and rates of deployments began to exceed the capabilities of the services
to provide them without a reserve call up. In this speculative explana-
tion of military bargaining strategy, the reserve call-up could have been
viewed. as a barrier that should be breached in order to fight the conflict
in South Vietnam along more rational-professional lines.

An alternative explanation is that no one really foresaw what the
troop needs in Vietnam would be and that the ability of the DRV/VC to
build up their effort was consistently underrated. During the period
under review this explanation seems with some exceptions, to be reasonable.
The documents from the period around July 1965 seem to indicate that MACV
had not given much thought to what he was going to do in the year or years
after 1965. The words of the MACV History for 1965 indicate something of
this. "Phe President's 28 July announcement that the U.S. would commit
additional massive military forces in SVN necessitated an overall plan
clarifying the missions and deployment of the various components.
COMUSMACV's Concept of Operations was prepared to fulfill this need."

If this is a true reflection of what happened it would indicate the MACV's
plan of what to do was derived from what would be available rather than
the requirements for manpower being derived from any clearly thought out
military plan.

A compromise explanation of the origins of the numbers is that
the military may have had a visceral feeling that a large (somewhere above
500,000) number of troops would be needed to win the war, but were unable
to justify their requirements in terms clear or strong enough to persuade
the President, who had an interest in keeping the domestic effects of war
as small as possible.

Tay TOP SECRET - Sensitive

——
