Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But was not likely to break Hanoi's will:

Although there presumably is 4 point at which one more
turn of the screw would crack the enemy resistance to
negotiations, past experience indicates that we are unlikely
+o have clear evidence when that point has been reached....
Though granting that each increase of pressure on the DRV
bears with it the possibility that it may be decisive, we
do not believe the bombing of the Haiphong facility is likely
+o have such an effect. 26/

With the exception of State's INR, other intelligence
agencies appeared to look with favor upon escalating the bombing. In
a SNIE issued on 10 December, they agreed that intensified air attacks,
beginning with POL facilities and key power plants and extending to
other targets in the Hanoi /Haiphong area end mining the harbors, would
not bring about any basic change in NVN policy but would in time hamper
NVN's operations and set a lid on the war in the South:

We believe that Hanoi's leaders would not decide to
quit and that PAVN infiltration southward would continue.
Though damage from the strikes would make it considerably
more difficult to support the war in South Vietnam, these
difficulties would not be immediate. Over the long run,
the sustained damage inflicted upon North Vietnam might
impose significant limitations on the numbers of PAVN and
VC main force units which could be actively supported in
South Vietnam from North Vietnam. 27/

Mining the ports, despite the dilemma created for the Soviets, would
probably succeed in blocking all deep-water shipping:

The difficulty of clearing such mine fields and the
ease of resowing would virtually rule out efforts to reopen
the ports. The Soviets would protest vigorously and might
try for some kind of action in the UN. We do not believe,
however, that the Soviets would risk their ships in mined
Vietnamese harbors. Peking and Hanoi would try to compensate
by keeping supplies moving in shallow-draft coastal shipping

and overland. 28

NIA, NSA, and the 3 Service intelligence agencies even
recorded a judgment that the intensified air strikes, combined with the
_projected build-up of U.S. ground forces in SVN to about 350,000 troops
by the fall of 1966, might ultimately result in a change of heart in

Hanoi. In a footnote to the SNIE they said they believed:

72 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
