Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

VI. INITIATION OF "ROLLING THUNDER" -- 18 DAYS OF MANEUVER AND DELAY

A. The Presidential Decision and Taylor's Response

The formal Presidential decision to inaugurate what eventually
emerged as the ROLLING THUNDER program’ was made on Sunday, February 13.
It was reported to Ambassador Taylor in a NODIS cable 62/ drafted in
the White House and transmitted to Saigon late that afternoon. The full
text of the message follows:

‘fhe President today approved the following program for
immediate future actions in follow-up decision he reported to
you in Deptel 1653. /The first FLAMING DART reprisal decision./

1. We will intensify by all available means the program of
pacification within SVN.

2. We will execute a program of measured and limited air
action jointly with GVN against selected military targets in
DRV remeining south of 19th parallel until further notice.

FYI. Our current expectation is that these attacks might come
about once or twice a week and involve two or three targets on
each day of operation. END FYI.

3. We will announce this policy of measured action in
general terms and at the same time, we will go to UN Security
Council to make clear case that aggressor is Hanoi. We will
#lso make it plain that we are ready and eager for 'talks' to
bring aggression to an end,

4. We believe this 3-part program must be concerted with
GVN, and we currently expect to announce it by Presidential
statement directly after next authorized air action. We believe
this action should take place as early as possible next week.

5. You are’ accordingly instructed to seek immediate GVN
agreement on this program. You are authorized to emphasize our -
conviction that announcement of readiness to talk is stronger
diplomatic position than awaiting inevitable summons to Security
Council by third parties. We would hope to have appropriate GVN
concurrence by Monday /Feb lith/ if possible here.

In presenting above to GVN, you should draw fully, as you
see fit, on following arguments:

a. We are determined to continue with military actions

regardless of Security Council deliberations and any 'talks' or
negotiations that may ensue, unless and. until Hanoi has brought

L8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
