Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

position regarding communism must have been a constant temptation, not
always resisted, for other parties to ery “red" and thus to manipulate
the U.5.3 (2) dependence on official French sources for intelligence and
other information was potentially misleading; (3) reliance on the high-
level mission technique for gathering information to be used as a direct
input to policy decisions proved unsatisfactory. 54

f. Costs Not Weighed

Finally, there is little indication that U.S. policymakers,
their thoughts dominated by the objective of containing the monolithic
communist bloc, faced up to the costs of winning the Indochina war, even
while direct U.S. intervention was being considered. 55/ Nor does the
evidence suggest that consideration was given to the tangible and intangi-
ble costs of providing U.S. military assistance to a power losing a war,
including the potential impact on the U.S. position in Asia. And, finally,
available documents fail to reveal any consideration given to the notion
of sunk costs. There were, of course, voices in the wilderness. An un-
signed, undated memorandum posed eight key questions to be answered by
the NSC during the spring of 1954. 56/ Comment on the following four.
questions, in relation to the time at which they were raised, is unneces-
sary:

-- Just how important is Southeast Asia to the security
interests of the U.S.? Is the analysis in NSC 5405
still valid? Is the area important enough to fight for?

-- How important is Indochina in the defense of Southeast
Asia? Is the "domino theory" valid? Is Indochina im-
portant enough to fight for? If not, what are the stra-
tegic consequences of the loss of all or part of Indochina?

-- If the U.S. intervenes in Indochina, can we count on the
support of the natives? Can we fight as allies of the
French and avoid the stigma of colonialism?

-- Is there a strategic concept for the conduct of a war in
Indochina which offers promise of early success...?

The decision of the United States to provide assistance to France and
the Associated States during the Indochina War is usually treated lightly,
if at all, in current histories. Yet, both the taking of the decision and
its implementation were significant for and remarkably similar to subse-
quent U.S. experiences in Vietnam.

‘ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
9
