Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. Shift to Support of Bilateral French-DRV Discussions is

. Apparent Early

The Soviet and Chinese delegations -- much more than the
Viet Minh -- were more anxious for direct Franco-Viet Minh discussions.
The fact that Soviet officials on 30 March and again 5 May told Western
officials that bilateral talks would be the most profitable form of nego-
tiations for a cease-fire 9/ suggests that the communists’ initial back-
ing of Pham Van Dong's proposal may have been simply a trial balloon.
Once the French, supported by the U.K. and U.S., refused to budge from
their call for an immediate, closely inspected cease-fire, Chou and Molotov
were left free to initiate talks in the direction of compromise.

e. USSR and China Change DRV Approach to Cease-fire

The pressure that the Chinese and the Soviets were able to
bring to bear apparently forced the DRV to acquiesce in a cease-fire prior
to a military settlement. Pham Van Dong had argued for a plan which would
have made a cease-fire throughout Indochina contingent on the satisfaction
of Viet Minh conditions for general elections and the formation of three
united governments. But at the first restricted session of the Confer-
ence on 17 May, Molotov pointed out that French proposals up to that point
had dealt only with military matters, and proposed therefore that these
be dealt with before going on to political arrangements. 10/ The Chinese
agreed. with this approach. In a conversation with Eden, Chou En-lai con-
curred in the separation of military from political matters, with priority
to a cease-fire. 11/ When, therefore, Hoang Van Hoan reportedly told
Le Monde on 24 May that the DRV posed "not a single prior political condi-
tion,” he was reflecting. the views of the Soviets and Chinese as much as
paying the way for Dong's initiative of the next day.

d. DRV Responds to Sino-Soviet Pressure on Partition

There is evidence to believe that both the Chinese and the
Soviets were instrumental in bringing about a series of Viet Minh concessions
on the issue of where to draw the demarcation line between North and South
Vietnam. The possibility of partition had been suggested initially to
U.S. officials as early as 4 March by a member of the Soviet Embassy in
London, apparently out of awareness of Franco-American objections to a
coalition arrangement. 12/ The partition line mentioned at that time
was the 16th parallel, which would have placed Tourane (Da Nang) in the
hands of the Viet Minh (the 16th parallel crosses a few miles south of
the port). It was also the Soviets who, on the opening day of the con-
ference, approached the U.S. delegation on partition -- this time averring
that the establishment of a buffer state to China's south would be suffi-
cient satisfaction of China's security needs. 13/

"In late June, after several rounds of secret Franco-Viet Minh
military talks had failed to make headway, Ta Quang Buu (Vice Minister of
National Defense) was still insisting on the 13th parallel, which strikes
the coast just south of Tuy Hoa, as the partition line. 14/ As suggested.

c-22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
