Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

situation in order to formulate a program which we felt would be
essential, and in October 1959, the armed struggle was launched.

"Was the armed struggle slow in coming? We realize that it was
not possible to launch the arms struggle too soon, before the situ-
ation had ripened. At any rate, a short period of time was lost
because although many areas were engaged in armed propaganda [terror-
backed persecution/ up to this time, it was limited to armed propa-
ganda and insufficient strength existed to maintain continued opposition
to the enemy. Although slow in coming, it was not too slow because
there was still time to transform the situation into one where the
proper conditions existed. However, if the change had been even
slower, even more difficulties would have been encountered and the
change in the movement would not have been as easy.”

"The Resolution of the 15th Conference of the Central Committee
officially and concisely specified the responsibilities and strategic
aims of the South Vietnam revolution.

"But problems still existed: how were these responsibilities, aims,
and progress of the South Vietnam revolution to be implemented? What
must the main forms and procedures of the struggle be? Although the
Resolution outlined some of these factors, at the time of the Conference,
the details of the South Vietnam movement as well as revolutionary
experiences of friendly nations were not sufficient enough for the
Conference to formulate a precise program. Only 2 years later, were
there sufficient factors available, based partly on the experiences ‘ \
of Laos but mainly on the experiences of the South Vietnam revolu-
tionary movement, the Central Committee was able to formulate a
clear and concise program concerning these problems...."

The latter reference is to a January, 1961, Resolution of the Central Com-

mittee of the Lao Dong Party, which directed concentration on peasant problers,
Lb

stressed political action--"The political aspect is truly the basic one,” said

the CRIMP history--and warned against "revisionism." The Lao Dong newspaper
carried an editorial, broadcast by Radio Hanoi on 13 January 1961 which des-
cribed the 1961 Resolution as a document which:

"Reaffirms and sheds more light on the thesis of the Declara-
tion of 1957 concerning the forms of transition from capitalism
to socialism in different countries and clearly points to the
dines and methods of struggle of the communist parties of capi-
talist counvries....

"As for the colonial countries, the statement points out that
the struggle for national independence should be waged through armed
struggles or by non-military methods, according to the specific
conditions in the country concerned. The working class, which plays
a major role in the national liberation struggle, is determined to

70 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
