Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

PACOM not later than end FY 1968. The forces would include
one and one-third Army divisions, three US Air Force TFS,
one Marine division/wing team which includes two TFS, the
major portion of the mobile riverine force, naval patrol
forces, and most of the required support forces for SVN;
three US Air Force TFS in Thailand; one additional 8" gun
cruiser and five additional destroyers." 41/

Prominently identified in each of these cases were issues revolving
around requirements for calling up of the Reserves and extension of terms
of service, end strength increases above current force levels, expansion
of the CONUS sustaining base, additional funds in the FY 68 budget, draw-
down of the war reserve and preposition stocks and partial mobilization
of the industry. Fundamental to the development of the service plans was
the effort to minimize the impact on the overall U.S, military posture but
even the Chiefs concluded that:

"Considering our current worldwide commitments a
Reserve callup for a minimum of 2: months and involuntary
extension of terms of service for twelve months are the
only feasible means of meeting the additional FY 1968
requirements in the stipulated time frame. The effect of
a 2i-month limitation on callup of Reserves is that the
Armed Forces would expend their major reserve assets by
end FY 1972 as a result of successive callup end commitment
of Reserve units. This would be avoided if Reserve units
were held for the duration of the emergency. Authority
to do this and to extend terms of service SOT en Y
would require Congressional action." 42/

and consequently recommended that:

"a. The military strategy for the conduct of the
wer in Southeast Asia, as described in npn A, be
approved in principle.

"b. The list of forces in Appendix C, Case II [es
Divisions, approx. 71,000 Army and 5 TFSs/ less forces
approved on 8 April 1967, be approved for deployment.

"6. Authority be obtained for a Reserve callup for
@ minimum of 24 months and involuntary extension of terms
of service for twelve months in order to meet FY 1968 force
requirements and to prepare for possible future requirements.

"ad. To support the preceding recommended actions,
authority be granted to provide for:

"(1) Access to equipment from sources in the
following priority:

76 = TOP SECRET - Sensitive
