Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(5) What help should be sought from SEATO nations
in relation to the situation (a) in Laos? (b) in SVN?" 95/

Just prior to the conference, the JCS also submitted their views,
to which General Taylor did not subscribe. 96/ Expressing concern over
"a lack of definition” of U.S. objectives, the JCS asserted that it was
"their first obligation to define a militarily valid objective for South-
east Asia and then advocate a desirable military course of action to achieve
that objective." With its basis identified as "military considerations,"
they then made the recommendation that:

",..the United States should seek through military
actions to accomplish destruction of the North Vietnamese
will and capabilities as necessary to compel the Demo-
eratic Government of Vietnam (DRV) to cease providing
support to the insurgencies in South Vietnam and Laos.

Only a course of action geared to this objective can
assure that the North Vietnamese support of the subver-
sive efforts in Laos and South Vietnam will terminate." 97/

However, the JCS went on to note that "some current thinking appears to dis-
miss the objective in favor of a lesser objective, one visualizing limited
military action which, hopefully, would cause the North Vietnamese to de-
cide to terminate their subversive support..." Drawing @ distinction be-
tween destroying DRV capability to support the insurgencies and "an enforced.
changing of policy...which, if achieved, may well be temporary," they stated
their opinion that "this lesser objective" was inadequate for the current
situation. They agreed, however, to undertake a course of action to achieve
this lesser objective as an "initial measure."

What the JCS proposed, as this "initial measure" were a pair of sus-
tained attacks to destroy target complexes directly associated with support
of the communist efforts in Laos and South Vietnam. Military installations
at Vinh, which served as a major resupply facility for transshipping war
materiel into Laos, and a similar facility at Dien Bien Fhu were recommended.
In support of these operations, which would require U.S. participation to
achieve "timely destruction" as necessary to achieve the objectives, the
JCS stated a need to demonstrate forcefully that our pattern of responses
to Hanoi's aggression had changed. They argued:

We should not waste critical time and more re-
sources in another protracted series of "messages,"
but rather we should take positive, prompt, and
meaningful military action to underscore our mean-
ing that after more than two years of tolerating
this North Vietnamese support we are now determined.

: that it will stop.

Aside from the JCS, whose views were not shared by their spokesman
at Honolulu, the main voices in support of the idea of attacking the North
in early June 1964 seemed to come from Saigon. But this source of advocacy

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
