Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The failure of the special effort to obtain Wilson's support
must have been disappointing, but it did not stop the onward flow of
events. Available information leaves unclear exactly how firmly the
President had decided to act and gives no specific indication of the
intended date for the strikes. A package of staff papers prepared by
McNaughton suggests that the original date was to have been June 10.

A scenario contained in the package proposes a list of actions for the
period 8-30 June and begins with strike-day minus 2. The suggested
scenario was as follows:

s-/Strike/ day minus 2: Inform UK, Australia, Japan

S-day minus 1: Notify Canada, New Zealand, Thailand, Laos,
Philippines (Marcos only), GRC (Chiang only), Korea

S-hour minus 1: Inform GVN

S-hour; Strike Hanoi, Haiphong

S-hour plus 2: Announce simultaneously in Washington and
Saigon

S-hour plus 3-5: SecDef press backgrounder (depends on
strike timing and completeness of post-strike reports) 163/

The package also included a draft JCS execute message, a draft State

eable to the field on notifying third countries, a draft public announce-
ment, a talking paper for a McNamara press conference, a list of anticipated
press guestions, and maps and photographs of the targets.

The circle of those privy to this tentative Presidential decision
probably did not include more than a half dozen of the key Washington
advisers. Certainly the military commanders in the field had not been
informed. On June 5, Westmoreland urged that strikes be made against POL
at the "earliest possible" moment, noting that ongoing North Vietnamese
dispersal efforts would make later attacks less effective. 164 Admiral
Sharp took the occasion to reiterate to Washington that the strikes,
besides underscoring the US resolve to support SVN and increase the pres-

=" sure against NVN, would make it difficult for Hanoi to disperse POL,
complicate off-loading from tankers, necessitate new methods of trans-
shipment, "temporarily" halt the flow to dispersed areas, and have a
"direct effect" on the movement of trucks and watercarft -- perhaps (if

_ imports were inadequate) limiting truck use. Sharp called the POL targets

the most lucrative available in terms of impairing NVN's military logis-
tics capabilities. 165/ Two days later, in reporting the results of a
review of the armed recce program, CINCPAC again urged that POL be
attacked. He particularly noted the importance of,

.--the effort being made by the NVN to disperse, camou-
flage and package things into ever smaller increments. This
is particularly true of POL....This again emphasizes the
importance of souce /sic/ targets such as ports and major
POL installations.

122 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
