Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

on the agenda. 715/ In preliminary communications, Geners1 Taylor, Chairman
of the JCS, assumed that their mission would be to supervise unit training,
operational performance, and operational planning of para-militery units

in the districts; but he also suggested discussion of other ways in which
military personnel could be used to advantage in forwarding the pacifica-
tion program. 76

The month ended with a Rusk-Khanh meeting that re-emphasized the
accepted priorities of U.S. policy, and unquestionably confirmed to the
Vietnamese how far we were thinking of going. First, Rusk emphasized to
Khanh the effect of Vietnamese quarreling on the U.S. and on other poten-
tie. allies in the struggle. Second, they discussed immediate extensions
of the war, such as attacking the Laotian corridor, and the various further
extensions that might follow. ‘Third, Khanh pushed hard on the idea, which
es noted above had already been discussed in Washington, that he could
not win without extending the war. Finally, Khanh pledged to keep all these
matters secret until the U.S. agreed to overt statement or action. ,

The language of the cable reporting this meeting is candid and
revealing:

"1, Solidarity Within South Vietnam :

"...Secretary /Rusk/ steted one of main problems
President faces in justifying to American people whatever
course of action may be necessary or indicated as matter
of internal solidarity of SVN. Secretary noted that if
struggle escalates, only U.S. will have the forces to cope
with it.

"This basic reality means President has heavy
responsibility of making vital decisions and leading American
public opinion to accept them. Difficult to do this if SVN
appears hopelessly divided and rent by internsl quarrels.

",..Secretary seid he wes not thinking in terms of
displaying solidarity so as to convince Paris that struggle
could be won, but rather was thinking in terms of sustain-
ing the faith in the possibilities of ultimate success of
our Vietnamese effort among those nations we hoped ‘would
be in the foxholes with us* if escalation became necessary
and if enemy forces reacted in strength. For example, UK,
Australia, New Zealand. Solidarity and unit of purpose in
SVN was keystone of whole effort. Was General Khanh doing
all he could to bring about such national unity?

"Khanh replied affirmatively, saying he fully aware of
importance of unity. His recent handling of the case of the
arrested Generals showed this. His clemency showed he was
primarily interested in protecting unity of Army. But there
were many problems. Underlying structure and heritage of coun-
try was such that only Army could lead Nation in unity. Only

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
