Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

General Wheeler fought back with arguments contained in two docu-
ments. The first was a backchannel message from COMUSMACYV, dated
2 March, which answered specific questions concerning the planned use
of additional forces. These questions had been asked by General Wheeler
in a backchannel message the previous day. The first question concerned
the military "and other" objectives additional forces were designed to
advance. General Westmoreland was ambitious, indeed, and stated that
these objectives were to:

(1) Defeat and evict from SVN the new NVA units now
present in Western Quang Tri and Central Thua Trien provinces,
to include the Ashau Valley and base areas 131 and 11h.

(2) Maintain positive governmental and military control
over Quang Tri and Thua Thien provinces, particularly the
populous areas of the coastal lowlands and the DMZ area. Be
prepared to block or interdict the infiltration/invasion routes
from NVN through Laos.

(3) Destroy VC/NVA main force units and base areas in the
remainder of I Corps and in the northeastern coastal and north-
western Laos border areas of II Corps.

(4) Reduce the "calculated risk" currently entailed in our
economy of force posture in II and ITI Corps by providing the
added flexibility and "punch" of an armored cavalry regiment.

(5) Conduct aggressive and continuing offensive campaigns
throughout the coastal areas of ITI Corps and into traditional
enemy base areas and sanctuaries in ITI Corps along the
Cambodian border; especially in war zones "C" and "D". Restore
the offensive combat and pacification momentum lost in III Corps
as a result of the enemy's TET offensive and the requirement
+o transfer the 101st Airborne Division (-) to I Corps to stem the
NVA incursion into Quang Tri.

(6) Be prepared for contingency operations if required.
The second question asked by General Wheeler was:

Question B: What specific dangers are their dispatch to
SVN designed to avoid, and what specific goals would the
inerement of force aim to achieve -

In the next 6 months?

Over the next year?

dd TOP SECRET - Sensitive
