U4.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

week or so earlier (probably prior to Diem's request) titled "Limited Holding
Actions in Southeast Asia.“ This earlier paper discussed various steps
short of major troop deployments. }/

The impression is that both papers were part of contingency planning
(short of major intervention in Laos ) for saving something in Southeast Asia
should the Laos negotiations continue to drag on with no satisfactory reso-
lution. Thus although the timing of the Vietnam paper was surely influenced
and probably triggered by Diem's request for a treaty, it looks essentially
like a suggestion (but not a formal recommendation) to the President that if
he is unwilling to intervene to try to save Laos, he should at least take
strong and unambiguous action to make sure that Vietnam would not also be
dost. In this interpretation it is easy to make sense of the emphasis on 4
deteriorating situation in Vietnam, and the implied warning that it might be
best to set this plan in motion before a settlement is reached in Laos,
when it seemed relatively easy to provide a politically plausible basis for
the action.

(In a recent colum, Joseph Alsop quoted Averill Harriman as telling
him that Kennedy had told Harriman to get whatever settlement he could on
laos, but that the U.S. really intended to make its stand in Vietnam.) 5/

At the end of the Vietnam paper there is a list of "Specific Actions
to be Taken Now" which goes no further (on Vietnam) than to list:

Use of U.S. naval aircraft and ships to assist GVN in inter-
diction of sea traffic, to assist self defense of GVN. This is to
some extent camouflagable.

If necessity arises, use of U.S. military aircraft for logistic
support, including troop lift within Laos and South Vietnam.

Further, there is a long list of pros and cons, with no judgment
stated on the balance.

This (and other statements to be cited below) suggests, again, that
the paper was prepared for a discussion on Southeast Asia planning in the
NSC, rather than in response to a request for a set of recommendations.

Three other points need to be mentioned:

1. The paper, although nominally presenting a SEATO plan,
explicitly assumes that "planning would have to be on the basis of proceed-
ing with whichever SHATO Allies would participate."

' Le The paper warns (in the balance of the paragraph quoted

earlier) that the ultimate force requirements would “much depend" on the
capabilities and leadership of the SHEATO forces...

19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
