Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

e. Periodic visits by U.S. forces into the area as
demonstrations of intent, and for joint and combined training
exercises. - : =

f. Availability of appropriate mechanism for the
employment of U.S. forces in support of friendly indigenous
forces in support of friendly -indigenous forces in the general
area. t

6. The concept of prompt retaliatory attacks does not
envisage attacks on targets within the aggressor country other
than on military targets involved in the direct sunvoort of the
aggressor action, £ authorized, atomic weapons would be used,
even in a local situation, if such use will bring the eggression
to a swift and positive cessation, and if, on a balance of
political and military consideration, such use will best advance
U.S. security interests. Under the alternative assumption that
authority to use atomic weapons cannot be assured, the above
concept would not require change, but this assumption would not
permit the most effective enployment of U.S. armed forces, and
consequently might require greater forces than the U.S. would
be justified in providing from the over-all point of view. St/

The clear intent of this concept -- in accordance with SEATO
objectives -- is deterrence of and response to overt aggression against
South Vietnam, among other countries; in view of limited U.S. resources,
and of the recognition of this problem in NSC 162/2, which "envisages
reliance on indigenous ground forces to the maximum extent possible," 58
and in view of the psychological pressure generated by the powerful VPA,
the logical consequence of assignment of the mission "to countery ex-
ternal aggression" to local South Vietnemese forces is virtually unevoid-
able. Therefore, the JCS stated their view -- and held to it throughout
the period 1954-1960 -- "that the ultimate objectives of the military
forces of the Associated States should be:

VIETNAM -- to attain and maintain internal security and to _
deter Viet Minh aggression by a limited defense of the Geneva
Armistice demarcation line, 59/

Although it was not until the publication of NSC 5612/1 in mid-
1956 that approved U.S, policy recognized this mission by stating that
the U.S. should "assist Free Vietnam to build up indigenous armed forces,
including independent logistical and administrative services, which will
be capable of assuring internal security and of providing limited initial
resistance to attack by the Viet Minh," €0/ unofficial U.S. policy, fron
the JCS in Washington through the MAAG in Vietnam, €1/ had set in motion
programs which implicitly assigned a mission of limited. initial resistance
to Vietnamese forces which attempted to be both responsive to SEATO re-
quirements and cognizant of -U.S. resource limitetions.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
12
