Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I. Threads That Met At Honolulu
A. Hop Tac

The first was the hold-over program from 1964-1965 -- pacification's
one priority even then, the Hop Tac program. It had been suggested first
by Lodge on his way home from his first Ambassadorship, and Taylor and
Westmoreland had given it recognition as a high priority program. Although
Westmoreland judged it repeatedly as a partial success, it appears now to
have been a faultily conceived and clumsily executed program. It was con-
ceptually unsound, lacked the support of the Vietnamese, created disagree-
ments within the U.S. Mission which were never resolved, and then faded
away. So unsuccessful was it that during its life span the VC were able
to organize a regiment -- 165A -- in the Gia Dinh area surrounding Saigon,
and thus forced MACV in late 1966 to commit three U.S. infantry battalions
to Operation FAIRFAX to protect the capital. No one analyzed Hop Tac
before starting FAIRFAX. With the beginning of FAIRFAX, Hop Tac was buried
quietly and the United States proceeded to other matters.

B. Ambassador Lodge and the True Believers

Henry Cabot Lodge returned as Ambassador in August of 1965, and im-
mediately began to talk of pacification as “the heart of the matter." In~-
telegrams and Mission Council meetings, Lodge told the President, the GVN,
and the Mission that pacification deserved a higher priority. Because he
saw himself as an advocate before the President for his beliefs rather
than as the overall manager of the largest overseas civil-military effort
in American history, * Lodge did not try, as Ambassador Maxwell Taylor had
done, to devise an integrated and unified strategy that balanced every
part of our effort. Instead, he declared, in his first month back in Viet-
nam (September, 1965), that "the U.S. military was doing so well now that
we face a distinct: possibility that VC main force units will be neutralized,
and VC fortresses destroyed soon," and that therefore we should be ready to
give pacification a new push. While his involvement was irregular and
inconsistent, Lodge did nonetheless play a key role in giving pacification
a boost. His rhetoric, even if vague, encouraged other advocates of paci-
fication to speak up. The man he brought with him, Edward Lansdale, gave
by his very presence an implicit boost to pacification,

C. The ITI Marine Amphibious Force

Meanwhile, to their own amazement, the Marines were discovering that
the toughest war for them was the war in the villages behind them near
the Da Nang air base, rather than the war against the main force, which
had retreated to the hills to build up. In the first 12 months of their
deployment, the Marines virtually reversed their emphasis, turning away

* No other American Ambassador has ever had responsibility and authority
even close to that in Saigon; only military commands have exceeded it
in size.

iii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
