Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the rule of the imperialists and feudalists; our country is
still temporarily divided into two zones ..- -

"The Vietnamese revolution has moved into a new position.
Our people must endeavor to consolidate the North, taking it
toward socialism, and carry on the struggle for peaceful reunifica-
tion of the country and completion of the tasks of the National
People's Democratic revolution throughout the country.

"In the last few years, our peoples in the North have
achieved many big successes in economic rehabilitation and
cultural development. At present, socialist transformation
and construction are being successfully carried out.

"Meanwhile, in the South, the U.S. imperialists and their
henchmen have been savagely repressing the patriotic movement
of our people. They have been strengthening military forces
and carrying out their scheme of turning the southern part of our
country into a colony and military base for their war prepara-
tions . . . But our southern compatriots have constantly
struggled heroically and refused to submit to them. The
people throughout the country, united as one, are holding
aloft the banners of peace, national unity, independence,
and democracy, resolved to march forward and win final
victory. The cause of the peaceful reunification of the
Fatherland will certainly be victorious." 202/

Strangely, even so formal a statement of aims escaped attention in the.
West, even though the deteriorating situation in Southeast Asia had
now become sufficiently grave to cause concern throughout the world. |
Within the U.S. Government, extensive reappraisals of U.S. policy were
launched. Aid to Laos was stepped-up, and the U.S. country team in
Vietnam was directed to prepare a counter-insurgency plan for bringing
U.S. aid more efficiently to bear the GVN's internal defense. The
inflamed situation in Laos and South Vietnam were among the major
international irritants toward which hopes for the Summit Conference in
Paris in May, 1960, were directed. The breakdown of the Paris talks,
and the subsequent hardening of relations between the United States
and the USSR, formed the backdrop against which the Soviets moved

into deeper commitment to support of the DRV, and the DRV into more
open support of the insurgents in South Vietnam.

In early September, 1960, the lao Dong Party held its
Third Congress, and passed the following resolution:

"In the present stage, the Vietnamese revolution has
two strategic tasks: first, to carry out the socialist
revolution in North Viet-Nam; second, to liberate South
Vietnam from the ruling yolk of the U.S. imperialists and.

65 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
