Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV.C Evolution of the War (26 Vols.) 
Direct Action: The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968 
(16 Vols.) 
2. Military Pressures Against NVN (3 Vols.) 
c. November - December 1964 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
.' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV . C, 2, (c) 
EVOLUTION OF THE FAR 
NOVl!;;\1BER - DECDffiEF. 1964 
PART III 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Sec Dei" Cent Nr. 
'295 
x-____________ ~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
en 
C i 
::0 
< 
> 
Z > 
r-
< 
(I) 
(I) 
( 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
~LITARY PRESSURES AGAINST NVN: 
NOVEJvIBER - DECEMBER 1964 
SUMMARY and A}~LYSIS 
In the late fall of 1964, President Johnson made a tentative decisi on 
in favor of limited military pressures against North Vietnam. 
He acted on 
the consensus recommendation of his principal advisors, a consensus achieved 
by a process of compromising alternatives into a 10l-Test·'common- denominator 
proposal at the sub-cabinet and cabinet level, thereby precluding any real 
Presidential choice among viable options. 
The choices he was given all 
included greater pressures against North Vietnmn . 
The Presidential decision 
itself was for a limited and tightly controlled two-step build-up of pressures . 
The first phase involved an intensification of existing harassment activities 
w·ith reprisals; the second, which was approved in principle only, iVas to be 
a sustained, slo"ldy escalating air campaign against the North . 
The spectrum 
of choice could have run from (a) a judgment that the situation i n the South 
"lvas i rretrievable and, hence, a decision to begin the withdravTal of U. S. 
forces ; to (b) a judgment that the maintenance of a non-cow~unist South 
Vietn8m was indispensable to U. S. strategic interests and, therefore, required 
a massive U.S. intensification of the war both in the North and in the South. 
The extreme wi thdra,val option "I'TaS rej ected almost "I'Ti thout surfacing for 
consideration since it was in direct conflict with the independent, non-
communist SVN commitments of NSfu~ 288 . 
The opposite option of massive involve-
ment, which was essentiaJ.ly the JCS recommendation at an early point in these 
deliberations, was shunted aside because both its risks and costs were too 
high . 
Short of those extremes, hmvever, were two other alternati ves that 
were briefly considered by the Horking Group as fal lback positions but 
r ejected before they "I,rere fully explored . 
While both came into some con-
flict with the cor~mitments to South Vietn~m of N&A-M 288, they could have 
been justified as flol-ring from another long-standing U.S . conviction, 
namely that ultimately the "lvar would have to be won in the South by the 
South Vietnamese. 
These fal lback positions Ivere outlined in the follol-Ting 
m~rmer
: 
"1 . 
To hol d the situation together as long as possible so that 
we have time to strengthen other areas of Asia . 
"2 . 
To take forceful enough measures in the si tuation so that 
\ve' emerge · from it , even in the worst case , with our 
standing 8,S the principal helper against Communist expan-
sion as little impaired as possible . 
"3. 
To rrLq,ke clear .. . to nations, in Asia particularly, that 
failure in South Vietnmll, if i.t comes, ,'Tas due to special 
l ocal factors that do not apply to other nations we are 
cow.mi.tted to defend .. . . " 
i 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In operational terms the first would have meant holding the line--placing 
an immediate , 101<7 ceiling on the number of U.S . personnel in SVN, and 
taking vigorous efforts to build on a stro!l.-ger base else .... rhere, possibly 
Thailand . 
The second alternative would have b~en to undertake some spec-
tacular, highly visible supporting action like a limited-duration selective 
bombing campaign as a last effort to save the South; to have accompanied 
it with a propaganda campaign about the unwim1ability of the .... rar given the 
GVN ' s ineptness and ; then, to have sought negotiations through compromise 
and neutralization .... rhen the bombing failed . 
Neither of these options was 
ever developed . 
The recommendation of the Principals to the President left a gap 
between the maximum objective of NSJLM 288 and the marginal pressures against 
the North being proposed to achieve that objective. 
There are two by no 
means contradictory explanations of this gap . 
One explanation is the I·ray in which pressures and the controlled use 
of force were viewed by the Principals . 
There is some reason to believe that 
the Principals thought that carefully calculated doses of force could bring 
about predictable and desirable responses from Hanoi. 
The threat j~pli cit 
in minim1..lJu but increasing amounts of force ("slo .... r sQueeze" ) would , i t "ras 
hoped by some, ultimately bring Hanoi to the t able on terms favorable to the 
U.S. 
Underlying this optimistic view was a significant underestimate of 
the level of the DRV commitment to victory in the South, and an overestimate 
of the effectiveness of U.S. pressures in weakening that resolve . 
The 
assumption ~,as that the threat value of limited pressures coupled wi th 
declarations of firm resolve on our part would be sufficient to force the 
DRV into maj or conc.essions . 
Therefore, the U. S. negotiating posture could 
be a tough one . 
Another factor which, no doubt, corr@ended the proposal to 
the Administration was the relatively low-cost--in political terms--of such 
action. 
F1..rrthermore , these limited measures would give the GVN a temporary 
breathing spell, it was thought, in which to regroup itself, both politicall y 
and militarily should stronger action involving a direct confrontation between 
the bro Vietna..lJls be reQuired at some future date . 
And l astly, it ,.,as the 
widely shared belief that the recommendation was a moderate solution that 
did not foreclose future options for the President if the measures did not 
fully achieve their intended results. 
The JCS differed from this vievl on 
t he grounds that if ,.,e were really interested in affecting Hanoi 's will, 
we would have to hit hard at i ts capabiliti es . 
A second explanation of the gap bet .... reen ends and means is a more simple 
one. 
In a phrase , we had run out of alternatives other than pressures. 
The GVN vras not r eforming, ARVN .... las being hit nard , further U. S. aid and 
advice did not seem to do the trick, and som~thing was needed to keep the 
GVN afloat until \<7e .... rere ready to decide on further actions at a l ater 
date. 
Bombing the North would fit that bill, and make it look l ike we tried. 
ii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
It 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The President vlaS cautious and equivocal in approaching the decision; 
Indicative of his reluctance to widen the U.S. cOfimitment and of his desire 
to hedge his bets Ivas the decision to make phase II of the new policy 
contingent on GVJlT reform and i mprovement . 
P..mbFl.ssador Taylor was sent back 
to Saigon in December after the White House meetings with the understanding 
that the U. S. Government did not believe: 
"that I·re should incur the risks . which are inherent in any 
expansion of hostilities without first assuring that there is 
a government in Saigon capable of handling the serious problems 
involved in such an expansion and of exploiting the favorable 
effects which may be anticipated .... " 
As with the discussions of the preceding six months , the decisions at 
the end of 1964 marked another step in the U. S. involvement in Vietnam. 
The follO'lving is a sUIlllllary of the November - December, 1964 and January, 
1965 deliberations. 
On the eve of the November election, and after the decision not to 
r etaliate against the North for the VC attack on the Bien Hoa airbase on 
November 1, the President appointed an inter-agency working group and asked 
i t to conduct a thorough re-examination of our Vietnam policy and to present 
him ,'lith alternatives and recormnendations as to our future course of action . 
That such a review should have been undertaken so soon after the policy 
deliberations and decisions of September is at first glance surprising . 
The President , hO'\'lever , Ivas now being elected in his OHn right with an 
over"rhelming mandate 
and all the sense of opportunity and freedom to recon-
sider past policy and current trends that such a victory invariably brings. 
In retrospect, there appears to have been, in fact, remarkably little l ati-
tude for r eopening the basic questions about U. S. involvement i n the Vietnam 
struggle . 
NSAM 288 did not seem open to question. 
In Vietnam, our now sub-
stantial efforts and our public affirmation of resolve to see the war through 
to success had failed to reverse either the adverse trend of the '\'lar or the 
conti,nuing deterioration of South Vietnamese political life. 
The September 
deliberations had produced only a decision against precipitate action and 
had done nothing to redress the situation. 
Significantly, however , they had 
revealed the existence of an Administration consensus that military pressures 
against the North vloul d be required at some proximate futUre date for a 
variety of reasons . 
Now, in November, vli th a nei·r electoral mandate and the 
abundant evidence of the i nadequacy of current measures , the President was 
once again looking for new i deas and proposals--a l ow-cost option with 
prospects for speedy, positive re sults. 
The Working Group ' s first job had been to exrunine U.S. interests and 
objectives in South Vietnam. 
This subject stirred some of the most heated 
debate of the entire Working Group project . 
At the outset, the maximum 
statement of U.S. i nterests and objectives in South Vietnam was accompanied 
by t,vo fallback positions--the first a compromise , the second merely rational-
izations for withdra,·ral. 
The JCS representati ve took testy exception to 
iii 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
i ncluding the fallback posl~lons in the Group's paper and cited JCS 
Memoranda on the critical importance of South Vietnam to the U.S. position 
in Asia. 
His forceful objections were effective and they were downgraded 
in the final paper w'hich, while also pointedly rej ecting the "domno theory" 
as over-simplifi ~d, nevertheless, went on to describe the effect of the 
fall of South Vietnam in much the same terms . 
Specifically pointing up 
the danger to the other Southeast Asian countries and to Asia in general, 
the paper concluded: 
"There is a great deal we could still do to reassure these 
countries, but the picture of a defense line clearly breached 
could have serious effects and could easily, over time, tend to 
unravel the whole Pacific and South Asian defense structures ." 
In spite of these concessions, the JCS refused to associate itself with 
the final formulation of interests and objectives, holding that the domino 
theory Has perfectly appropriate to the South Vietna'1lese situation . 
One of the other important tasks assigned to the Working Group was the 
intelligence assessment of the. effectiveness of measures against the North 
in improving the situation in the South. 
The initial appraisal of the 
intelligence community Has that "the basic elements of Cornmunist strength 
in South Vietnam remain indigenous ," and that "even if severely dama,ged" 
the DRV could continue to support a reduced level of VC activity . 
While 
bombing might reduce somewhat the level of support for the VC and give the 
GVN a respite, there was very little likelihood that it would break the will 
of Hanoi . 
The estimate was that Hanoi was confident of greater staying 
power than the U,S. in a contest of attrition . 
These views were challenged 
by the JCS member who stressed that the military damage 'of air strikes would 
appreciably degrade DRV and VC capabilities. 
In deferen~e to this view, the 
final Working Group estimate gave greater emphasis to the military effecti ve -
ness of strikes , although it was pessimistic about the extent of damage the 
DRV leaders woul d be ,'lilling to incur before reconsidering their obj ecti ves. 
It concluded with the assessment that there ,vas very little likelihood of 
either Chinese or Soviet intervention on behalf of the DRV i f pressures 
were adopted by the U.S. 
As the Working Group toiled through November i n i ts effort to develop 
options , it focused on three alternative courses of action. 
Option A was 
essentially a continuation of rrilitary and naval actions currently underway 
or authorized in the September decisions , i ncluding prompt reprisals against 
the North for attacks on U.S. forces and VC "spectaculars". It also 
included a resistance to negotiations until the North had agreed in advance 
to our concli tiom . 
Option B augmented c11Trent policies ,vi th systematic, 
sustained mil itary pressures against the North and a r esistance to negoti-
ations unless I'Te could carry them on I'lhil e continuing the bombing. 
Option C 
proposed only a modest campaign against the North as compared with option B 
iv 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and was designed to bring the DRV to the negotiating table. If that 
occurred the pressures were to be suspended--although with the threat of 
resumption should negotiations break down. 
In the course of the month, these ' options converged and the distinctions 
behreen them blurred. 
In particular, option A was expanded to include some 
10'lv-level pressures against the North; the negotiations element of option B 
was, in effect, dropped and the pressures vTere to be applied at a faster , 
l ess flexible pace; and option C was stiffened to resemble the first incar-
nation of option B--the pressures would be stronger and the negotiating 
position tougher . 
Thus , by the end of the month when the Working Group ' s 
proposals were presented to the NSC Principals for consideration before 
a recommendation viaS made to the President, all options included pressures 
against the North, and, in effect, excluded negotiations in the short-run, 
since the terms and pre-conditions proposed in all three options were 
entirely unrealistic . 
The policy climate i n vlashington simply was not 
receptive to any suggestion that U.S . goals might have to be compromised . 
And, in proposing pressures against the North, the Working Group was conscious 
of the danger that they might generate compelling vTorld-vride pressure on t.he 
U.S. for negotiations . 
How large a role the specific perception of the 
President's views, validated or unvalidated, may have played in the Working 
Group~s narrowing of the options i s not clear. It seems likely, however , 
that some guidance from the White House was being received . 
During the last week in November , the NSC Principals met to consider 
the Working Group ' s proposals. 
They were joined on November 27 by Ambassador 
Taylor. 
Taylor ' s r eport on conditions in South Vietnam was extremely bleak. 
To i mprove South Vietnamese morale and confidence, and to "drive the DRV out 
of its reinforcing role and obtain its cooperation i n bringing an end to the 
Viet Cong insurgency," he urged that military pressures against the North 
be adopted . 
His report had a considerable i mpact on the ~rincipals and 
l ater on the President . 
As the discussions continued through the several 
meetings of that week, opinion began to converge in favor of some combina-
tion of an "extended option A" and the first measures against the North of 
option C. 
In the end , t he Principals decided on a two-phase recommendation to the 
President. 
Phase I would be merely an extension of current actions with 
some increased air activity by the U.S. i n Laos and tit-for-tat r eprisal s 
for VC attacks on U.S . forces or other major incidents. 
During this period, 
t he GVN would be informed of our desires for its reform and I'Then these 
were 'Ivell undervTay, phase II, a campaign of gradually escalating air strikes 
against the North, vTOuld begin. 
This proposaJ, VTas presented to the Presi-
dent on December 1. 
He approved phase I and gave assent, at l east in prin-
ciple, to phase II. 
In approving these measures, the President appears to 
have been reluctant to grant final authorization for phase II until he felt 
it was absolutely necessary. 
v 
. TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
If a consensus vTas reached within the Ad.rninistration in favor of mili-
tary pressures against the North, it certainly reflected no commonly held 
rationale for such action. 
Generally speaking the military (MACV, CINCPAC, 
JCS) favored a strong campaign against the North to interdict the infiltra-
tion routes, to destroy the overall capacity of the North to support the 
insurgency, and to destroy the DRV's will to continue support of the Viet 
Congo 
'I'he State Department (vTith the exception of George Ball) and the 
civilian advisors to Secretary McNamara favored a gradually mOULDting series 
of pressures that would place the North in a SlO\'T squeeze and act as both 
carrot and stick to settling the war on our terms. 
As would be expected, 
State was also concerned with the international political i mplications of 
such steps. 
Bombing the North '\wuld demonstrate our resolve, not only to 
the South Vietnamese but also to the other Southeast Asian countries and 
to' China, vThose containment Has one of the important justifications of the 
entire American involvement . 
Walt Rostow, the Chairman of State's Policy 
PlaPJling Council, took a slightly different vievr, . emphasizing the importance 
of pressures as a clear signal to the North and to China of U.S. determina-
tion and r esolve and its willingness to engage the tremendous power at its 
disposal in support of the 1954 and 1962 Geneva agreements. 
Ambassador 
Taylor supported strikes against the North as a means of reducing infil-
tration and as a way of bolstering South Vietnamese morale. 
As is readily apparent, there "l'TaS no dearth of r easons for striking 
North. 
Indeed, one almost has the i mpression that there "l'Tere more reasons 
than were required. 
But in the end, the decision to go ahead with the 
strikes seems to have resulted as much from the lack of alternative pro-
posals as from any compelling logic advanced in their favor. 
By January, 
for example, Hilliam Bundy, ,'Thile still supporting the pressures, could 
only offer the following in their favor: 
lion balance we believe that such action l'Tould have some faint 
hope of r eally improving the Vietnamese situation, and, above all, 
would put us in a much stronger position to hold the next line of 
defense, namely Thailand. II _ffind it would put us in a better posi-
tion in our Asian relationq-" since ,ve \'Tould have appeared to Asians 
to have done a lot more about it." 
It is interesting to note that during the deliberations of September 
one of the preconditions to such strikes had been generally acknolvledged 
as a unity of domestic American opinion in support of such Presidentially 
authori zed action. 
During the November debates, this is no longer an 
important factor. 
Indeed, it is openly conceded that such action is likely 
to evoke opposition in both domestic and international public opinion. 
Another in te:?:'esting aspect of this policy debatE" I'Tas that the question of 
Consti tutional authority for open acts of ,var against a sovereign nation 
"l'TaS never seriously raised. 
Phase I of the ne,vlY approved program "l'Tent into effect in mid-December. 
The BARREL ROLL "armed recce" by U.S. aircraft in the laotian panhandle 
began on a limited scale on December 14. It had been foreseen that the 
vi 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
nwnber of sorties would slo'\·rly increase '\'ri th each succeeding week. 
How'-
ever, once the first week I s level of tVI'O missions of four aircraft each 
was determined by Secretary McNamara, it became the guideline for the 
remainder of ,December and January. 
Covert GVN operations along the North 
Vietnamese coast were continued at about the level of the previous months 
and JCS proposals for direct U.S. air and naval support were rejected. 
Furthermore, the public disclosure of inforID~tion on DRV infiltration into 
the South was deferred at the request of Secretary McNamara . 
On December 24, 
the Viet Cong bombed aU. S. officers billet in Saigon killing hro Americans. 
MACV, CINCPAC , the JCS, and Ambassador Taylor all called immediately for a 
reprisal strike against the North of the kind authorized under phase I. 
For ,reasons still not clear, the Administration decided against such a 
r eprisal. 
Thus, in purely military terms, the phase I period turned out 
to be little more than a continuation of measures already under'l'ray. 
(The 
BARREL ROLL activity apparently was not differentiated by the DRV from 
RLAF strikes until well into January.) 
One of the explanations for this failure to ftl1ly implement the 
December 1 decisions was the political crisis that erupted in South Vietnam. 
Ambassador Taylor had returned to South Vietnam on December 7 and i mmedi-
ately set about getting the GVN to undertake the reforms we desired, making 
clear to both the civilian and military leaders that the implementation of 
phase II was contingent on their efforts to revive the flagging war effort 
and morale in the South . 
For his efforts, he 'Ivas re,\,larded with a military 
purge of the civilian govern~ent in late December and rumored threats that 
he '\'rould be declared personna non grata . 
The political crisis boiled on 
into January with no apparent solution in sight in spite of our heavy 
pressure on the military to return to a civilian regime. 
And, while Taylor 
struggled '\vi th the South Vietnamese general s , the war effort continued to 
decline. 
At the same time that Taylor had been dispatched to Saigon a vigorous 
U.S. diplomatic effort had been undertaken with our Asian and NA.TO allies 
to inform them of the forthcoming U. S. intensiInication of the war, with 
the expected eventual strikes against the North . 
The fact that our allies 
nO,\,T came to expect this action may have been a contributing reason in the 
February decision to proceed with phase II in spite of the failure of the 
South Vietnamese to have complied with OUY requirements. 
In any case, it 
added to the already considerable momentum behind the policy of striking the 
North. 
By the end of January 1965, William BQndy, McNaughton, Taylor and 
others had come to believe that we had to proceed with phase II irrespective 
of vThat the South Vietnamese did. 
Clear indication that the Administration was considering some kind of 
escalation came on January 25. 
Ambassador Taylor ,'las asked to cormnent on 
a proposal to wi thdravT U. S. dependents from Saigon so as to "clear the 
decks." Previously, this action, "rhich VTas nOlV approved by the JCS, was 
always associated vTith pressures against the North. 
While there is no 
indication of any decision at this point to move into phase II; it is clear 
that the preparations were already unde~Tay. 
vii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
(") 
:I: 
e3 
z o 
5 
G> 
< 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
MILITA.."RY PRESSURES 'AGAJNST NORTH VIETNAM : 
l-TOV 1964 - JAN 1965 
IV.C. 
DATE 
16 Oct 64 
21 Oct 64 
27 Oct 64 
1 Nov 64 
3 Nov 63 
CHRONOLOGY 
EVE:N'T OR 
DOCUMENT 
Embassy Saigon 
Message} JPS 303} 
Taylor to the 
President 
JCSM 893 -61~ 
JCSM 902-64 
Viet Cong Attack 
Bien Hoa Airbase 
White House Decides 
Not to Retaliate 
Civilian Named 
Premier 
First Meeting of 
NSC Working Group 
viii 
DESCRIPTION 
Ambassador Taylor reports greatly 
increased infiltration from the 
North} including North Vietnamese 
regulars} and a steadily worsen -
ing situation in the South. 
The JCS urge Secretary McNamara to 
back military measures to seize 
control of the border areas of South 
Vietnam and to cut off the supply and 
direction of the Viet Cong by direct 
measures against North Vietnam. 
On the basis of the new intelligence 
on infiltration levels} the JCS 
again recommend direct military pres -
sures against the North. 
I n a daring strike, the Viet Cong 
staged a mortar attack on the l arge 
U. S. airbase at Bien Hoa} killing 
four _~ericans } destroying five 
B-57s, and damaging eight others . 
Concerned about possibl e further 
North Vietnamese escalation and the 
uncertainty of the Red Chine se re-· 
sponse} the White House decides} 
against the advice of Ambassador 
Tayl or} not to retaliate in the tit-
for-tat fashion envisaged by NSAM 
314. 
As a result of the attack} how-
ever} an i nteragency Working Group 
of the NSC is established to study 
future courses of U.S. action under 
the Chairmanship of 1-Til liam Bundy} 
Assistant Secretary of State for 
Far Eastern Affairs . 
Tran Van Huong i s named Premier in 
SVN. 
The NSC Working Grou:p held its f irst 
meeting .. Other members are Michael 
Forrestal and Marshall Green from 
TOP SECRET - Sensi ti.ve 
DATE 
3 Nov 64 
4 Nov 64 
14 Nov 64 
17 Nov 64 
18 Nov 611. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR 
DOCUMENT 
President Re -
elected 
JCSM 933-64 
CGCS Memorandum to 
SecDef, CM 258-64; 
and JCSM 955-64 
Working Group Circu-
lates Draft 1I0ptionsll 
for Comment 
JCSM 967-64 
ix 
DESCRIPTION 
State, John McNaughton from l SA, 
Harold Ford for CIA, and Admiral 
Lloyd Mustin from JCS. 
Work con-
tinues for three weeks . 
In a l andslide victory, President 
J ohnson is re -elected with a nelf 
Vice President, Hubert Humphrey. 
The JCS place in writing their re-
quest for r eprisal action against 
North Vietnam in retaliation for 
the Bien Roa attack . 
Failure to act 
may be misinterpreted by the North 
Vietnamese as a lack of will and 
determination in Vietnam. 
In separate memos to the Secretary, 
the JCS r ecommend covert GVN air 
strikes against North Vietnam and 
additional U.S. deployments to South 
East Asia to m~ke possi ble implemen -
tation of U.S. strikes should these 
.be approved. 
The Working Group circulates its 
draft paper on the 1I0ptionsll avail -
able to the U.S. i n South Vietnam. 
They are three : 
(A) continuation 
of present pol icies in the hope of 
an improvement in the South but 
strong U.S. resistance to negotia-
tions; (B) strong U. S. pressures 
against the North and resistance of 
negotiations until the DRV was 
ready to comply with our demands; 
and (C) l imited pressures against the 
North coupled lvi th vigorous efforts 
to get negotiations started and 
recogni tion that Ife Iwuld have to 
compromise our objectives. 
Option B 
is favored by the Working Group . 
The JCS reneT.fS i ts recommendation 
for strikes against the North tem-
pedng it slightly in t erms of "a 
controlled program of systematically 
increased military pressures ." 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
21 Nov 64 
23 Nov 64· 
24 Nov 64 
27 Nov 64 
28 Nov 64 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OF 
DOClJliIENT 
Revi sed . v!orking 
Group Draft 
ROstOlv Memo to Sec 
State 
NSC Principals Meet-
ing 
Taylor Meets with 
Principals 
NSC Principals Meet-
ing 
x 
DESCRIPTION 
Having received comments from the 
different agencies, the Working 
Group revises its draft slightly, 
takes note of different viewpoints 
and submits its work to the NSC 
Principals for the consideration. 
.Ta.1dng a some,vhat different tack, 
the then Director of State's 
Policy Planning Staff,W. W. Rostow, 
proposes military pressures against 
the North as a method of' clearly 
signaling U.S. determination and 
commitment to the North. 
No consensus is reached, but Option 
A is generally rejected as promis-
ing only e.-v'"entual defeat. 
Option B 
is favored by the JCS and CIA, while • 
State and OSD favor Option C. 
No 
firm conclusion is reached on the 
issue of sending ground troops to 
South Vietnam. 
Having returned for consultations, 
Ambassador Taylor meets in th the 
NSC Principals and after giving a 
gloomy report of the situation in 
South Vietnam, recommends that to 
shore up the GVN and improve morale 
we take limited actions against the 
North but resist negotiations until 
the GVN is improved and the DRV is 
hurting. 
He proposed an extended 
Option A with the first stages of 
Option Co 
This proposal was adopted 
by the PrinCipals as the recormnenda-
tion to be made to the President. 
In a follow-up meeting, the Prin-
cipals decide to propose a hTO 
phase program to the President. The 
first phase would be a thirty-day 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
30 Nov 64 
1 Dec 64 
3·Dec 64 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OF 
IXlCUME.N'r 
NSC Principals 
Meeting 
White House Meet-
i ng 
Taylor Meets 
PreSident 
xi 
DESCRIPTION 
period of slightly increased pres -
sure such as the resumption of the 
DE SOTO patrols and U.S . armed 
recce on the Laotian corridor iv-bile 
we tried to get reforms in South 
Vietnam. 
The second phase would 
involve direct air strikes against 
the North as in Option C. 
Wi lliam 
Bundy was charged with preparing a 
draft NSAM to this effect and an 
i nfiltration study was commissioned. 
Meeting to revievT the draft prepared 
by Bundy, the Principals decided not 
t o call it a NSAM. 
Its provisions 
are those recommended on 28 Nov. 
Phase I I woul d be a graduated and 
mounting set of primarily air pres -
sures against the North coupled 
wi th efforts to sound out the DRV on 
r eadiness to negotiate on U. S. terms . 
A !ecommendation on linking U. S. 
actions to DRV infiltration is de -
leted. 
Whil e the exact decisions made at 
thi s meeting of the Pri ncipals ,vi th 
the President are not availabl e , it 
i s clear that he approved in general 
t erms the concept outlined i n the 
Bundy paper. 
He gave his approval 
f or implementation of only Phase I, 
however. 
The President stressed 
t he need for Taylor to get improve -
ment from the GVN and the need to 
brief our allies on our new course 
of action, and to get more assist-
ance from them in the conflict . 
The President meets privatel y with 
Tayl or and gives him instructions , 
that he is to explain the new pro-
gram to the GVN, .indicate to its 
leaders that the Phase II U. S. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
'j 
DATE 
4 Dec 64 
7 Dec 61~ 
. 7 -, 9 Dec 64 
9 Dec 64 
10 Dec 64 
11 Dec 64 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OF 
DOCUMENT 
Cooper Report on 
Infiltration 
Taylor Meets \ri th 
Premier Huong 
Prime Minister 
Wilson briefed 
Second Taylor-Huong-
Khanh Meeting 
Souvanna Phounla Ap-
proves U. S. Laos 
Strikes 
GVN Announces Greater 
Efforts 
xii 
DESCRIPTION 
strikes against the North are con-
tingent on improvement in the South, 
and explain that these will be 
cooperative efforts . 
A thorough study on North Vietnamese 
infiltration as commissioned by the 
Principals is submitted to the NSC 
and later fonrarded to Saigon . 
De-
cisions on its release are continu-
ally deferred. 
The day after his return to Saigon, 
Tayl or meets with Premier Huong and 
wi th General Khanh and outlines the 
new U.S. policy and states the re -
quirements this places on the GVN . 
In Washington on a state visit , 
British Prime Minister Wilson is 
thoroughly briefed on the forth-
coming U.S. actions . 
On 4 Dec., 
William Bundy had gone to New Zea-
land and Australia to present the 
'new policy and seek support. Other 
envoys were meeting with the re -
maining Asian allies . 
At a second meeting with Huong and 
Khanh, Taylor presents a detailed 
set of actions he desires the GVN 
t o take to L"'llprove the situation 
and r eceives agreement from the hro 
leaders. 
The U. S. proposal for armed air 
recce over the Laotian corridor is 
presented to Souvanna Phouma i-rho 
gives his assent . 
Complying with Taylor ' s request, the 
GVN announces stepped-up efforts to 
improve the campaign against the VC 
and to reform the government . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
. 12 Dec 64 
14 Dec 64 
18 Dec 64 
19 Dec 64 
20 bec 6l~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OF 
DOCUMENT 
SecDef Approves 
JCS Proposal for 
Naval Actions 
NSC Principals 
Approve Armed 
recce in Laos 
BARREL ROLL Begins 
Level of Laotian 
Missions Set 
NSC Principals 
Meeting 
Khanh Purges Civil-
i an Government 
Taylor Meets With 
ARVN Leaders 
xiii 
DESCRIPTION 
The Secretary approves a JCS pro-
posal for shore bombardment, naval 
patrols and.offshore aerial recce 
for the first thirty days . 
A de -
cision on the Phase II ioTaS deferred. 
As 'planned, the NSC approved armed 
air recce over t·he Laotian corridor 
with the exact number and frequency 
of the patrols to be controlled by 
SecDef. 
The first sorties of U.S. aircraft 
in the 'armed recce" of the Laotian 
corridor, knOlID as BARREL ROLL, 
take place . 
They mark the begin-
ning of the thirty-day Phase I of 
the l imited pressures . 
Secretary McNamara sets bm mis -
sions of four aircraft each as the 
weekly l evel of BARBEL ROLL activ-
ity. 
The NSC Principals approve McNamara' s 
r ecommendation that BARRELL ROLL 
missions be held at constant levels 
through Phase I. It is revealed that 
adverse sea conditions have brought 
inaritime operations against the DRV 
to avirtual· balt. At McNamara ' s in-
sistence it is agreed that the infil-
tration study vall not be made public . 
Late in the evening, the military 
high command, led by Khanh, moved to 
remove all power from the civilian 
r egime of Premier Huong by dissolv-
i ng the High National Council. Khanh 
assumes power . 
In a meeting with the leading South 
Vietnamese military officers, Taylor 
once again outlined the actions 
TOP SECP~T - Sensitive 
DATE 
22 Dec 64 
24 Dec 64 
29 Dec 64 
31 Dec 64 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
. TOP SECRET - Sensi ti ve 
Khanh Publicly 
Repudiates Taylor 
Rumors of Taylor!s 
Expulsion 
u.s. BOQ Bombed; Em-
bassy Saigon Message 
1939; CINCPAC Message 
to JCS, 262251Z Dec; 
JCSM 1076-64 
NBC Principals Meet-
ing 
Embassy Saigon 
Message 2010 
CJCS Memo to DepSecDef) 
CM 347-64 
xiv' 
DESCRIPTION 
required from the GVN by the U.S. 
before Phase II could be started. 
After having given initial appear-
ances of understanding the difficulty 
that the miE tary purge placed the 
U.S. in, Khanh on Dec. 22 holds a 
news conference and states that the 
military is resolved not to carry out 
the'policy of any foreign power. 
Rumors are received by the Embassy 
that Khanh intends to have. Taylor 
declared personna non grata. Vigor-
ous U.S. efforts to dissuade him 
and the use of Phase II as leverage 
cause Khanh to reconsider. 
In a terror attack this Christmas 
Eve, the VC bomb a U.S. BOQ in 
Saigon. 
Two U.S. officers are 
killed, 58 injured. 
Taylor urges 
reprisals against the North. 
He is 
supported by CINCPAC and the JCS. 
At the meeting of the NSC Principals, 
a decision against reprisals for the 
barracks bombing is taken in spite 
of the strong recommendations above. 
At the same meeting, ISA reported 
the readiness of the Phillipines, 
ROK, a:.rl.d GRC to send military assist-
ance to South Vietnam. 
Taylor proposes going forward In th 
the Phase,II U.S. strikes against 
the North in spite of the political 
crisis in the South and under any 
concei vable U. S. relations in th the 
GVN short of complete abana.onmeni.,. 
The JCS recommend the addition of 
several air missions to already ap-
proved operations, including hro air 
stri.."kes by unmarked VNAF aircraft 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
3 Jan 65 
4 Jan 65 
5 J a..'Yl 65 
6 Jan 65 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVEIITT OF 
DOCUMENT 
Rusk TV Inter-
view 
Soviets call for ne,v 
Conference on Laos 
NSC Principals Meet 
William Bundy Memo 
to Rusk 
xv 
DESCRIPTION 
against the North, and U.S. air 
escort for returning GVN naval 
craft. 
Secretary Rusk appears on a Sun-
day TV interview program and 
defends U.S. policy, ruling out 
either a U.S. vQthdrawal or a 
majqr expansion of the 'l-Tar. 
The 
public and Congressional debate on 
the war had heated up considerably 
since the Army take-over in South 
Vietnrun in December. 
The debate 
continues through January 'Ivith 
Senator Morse the most vocal and 
sharpest critic of the Administra-
tion. 
Renewing their earlier efforts, the 
Soviets call again for a conference 
on the Laotian problem. ' 
The Principals disapprove the JCS 
recommendation for VIITAF strikes 
~th unmarked aircraft against the 
North. 
The JCS voice concern at 
the failure to begin planning for 
Phase II of the pressures program. 
But no decision to go ahead is 
taken. 
In view of the continued deterior-
ation of the·situation in the South 
and the prevailing vie'l-T that the 
U.S. vas going to seek a way out, 
Bundy recommended some limited meas-
ures, short of Phase II (i.e. recce, 
a reprisal, evacuation of U.S. de-
pendents, etc .), to strengthen our 
hand. 
There vTere risks in this 
course but it would i mprove our 
position ~th respect to the other 
SEA nations if things got rapidly 
'l-TorSe in SVN and vTe had to con-
template a 'VTi thdrawal. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
8 Jan 65 
9 Jan 65 
11 Jan 65 
14 Jan 65 
17 Jan 65 
22 Jan 65 
23 Jan 65 
27 Jan 65 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OF 
OOCUME]\lT 
First Korean Troops 
Go to South Vietnam 
Generals A..rlllounce 
Return to Civilian 
Govenunent 
US-GVl~ Aid Discus-
sions Resume 
u.S. Laotian Opera-
tions Revealed 
Buddhist Riots 
Soviets Mfirm Sup-
port of DR\T 
USIS Library Burned 
in Hue 
McNaughton paper, 
If Observations re 
South Vietnam Mter 
Khanh's 'Re-:-Coup,1f 
xvi 
DESCRIPTION 
The first contingent of 2,000 South 
Korean troops leave for South 
Vietnam. 
Under U.S. pressure, the South Viet-
namese generals announce that mat-
ters of state will be left in the 
future in the hands of a civilian 
gov~rnment. The joint Huong-Khanh 
cow~unique promises to convene a 
const:i,tuent assembly. 
With the return to civilian govern-
ment, the U.S. resumes its discus-
sions with the GVN on aid and 
measures to improve the military 
situation. 
A UPI story reveals the U. S. BARREL 
ROLL armed recce missions in Laos 
and tells the story of the YANKEE 
TEiuVI armed escort for the RLAF. 
. Shortly after the GVN announcement 
of increased draft calls, Buddhist 
protest riots brea.."k. out in several 
cities against the allegedly anti-
Buddhist military leaders. 
Disturb-
ances continue through the month. 
In letters to Hanoi and Peking, 
Gromyko affinns Soviet support for 
the DRV struggle against American 
imperialism. 
Rioting Buddhists burn the USIS 
library in Hue. 
The U.S. stakes in South Vietnam 
were defined as holding buffer land 
for Thailand and Malaysia and main.:. 
taining our national honor. 
They 
required continued Ferseverance in a 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
'7 
DATE 
28 J an 65 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OF 
DOCUMENT 
Generals Withdraw 
Support from Huong 
General Oanh Named 
Premier 
xvii 
DESCRIPTION 
bad situation, taking some risks 
such as reprisals. It was impor-
tant to remember that our objec -
tive was the containment of China 
not necessarily the salvation of 
South Vietnam. 
I n thi s effort, hOlf-
ever, we should soon begin reprisal 
strikes against the North. 
They 
,wuld not help the GVN much but 
\-Touid have a posi ti ve overall effect 
on our policy in SEA. 
The generals under Khanh !s leader-
ship act once again to eliminate 
the civilian government . 
This time 
they succeed in · their coup and the 
U.S. only protests . 
General Nguyen Xuan Oa..."lh is named 
acting Premier by General Khanh. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I. 
II. 
III. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
MILITARY PRESSURES AGAINST NORTH VIETNA.Ivf 
NOVEMBER 1964 - JANUARY 1965 
POLICY DEBATE Hr KOVEMBER ••••.••..•.•.•••••• ~ ••• ; •.•••••••. 
1 
1. 
Immediate Antecedents.................................. 
1 
2. 
Formation of the NSC lilorki ng Group ....•...••.••.•...... 
5 
3. 
Ivorking Group Assessments of the utility of 
Pressures .......................... -................... . 
6 
a. 
Sense of Ur gency. . . . . . . . . . • • . . . . . . . . . . • • . • • . . • • . . . . 
7 
b. 
Vi ews of DRV Susceptibility ........................ . 
8 
4. 
Perceptions and Development of U. S. Pressure Options ... 
12 
a. 
Perception of U. S. Obj ectives and Interests . ·....... 
12 
b. 
Evolution of Options ..... ". • . . . . • . . . • . . • • . . . . . . • . . . . 
18 
c. 
Significance of Negotiations.. . • . . . . . . . . • • . • • • • • . • . 
23 
d. 
Perceived React ions to Options ..................... 
27 
5. 
Vielvs from Outside the NSC Ttlorking Group . .•..••.....•.. 
31 
a. 
JC S Views .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
32 
b. 
Rostow Vi ews . • • • • . •.• . . . . . . • . . . . • . . • . . • . . . . . • . . • • • . • 
35 
POLICY DEC ISIONS ....•.•••.•.•..••....•••.....••..•....•••.. 
38 
1. 
Reactions of Principals to Ivorking Group Analyses . • • • • . 
38 
a. 
Consensus llIllong NSC Officials .......•••.•...••....•• 
b. 
Vie\vs Backing Consensus .....•..•...•.•••...•.•••..•. 
c. 
Policy Vievls From Saigon ........................... . 
d. 
Discussions ~'Ti th Ambassador Taylor ...•.••••...•.••. 
38 
41 
42 
45 
2. 
Courses of Action Approved in the White House. ......... 
54 
n ,IPLEMEFTTNG THE POLICy .••......•.....••...•......••••... •• 
59 
1. 
Early Actions . . . . . .•• • • . • • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . • . . . • • . . • . • • 
59 
a. 
GV1'T Maritime Operations... ......................... 
59 
b. 
Armed Reconnaissance in Laos....................... 
61 
c. 
Surfacing Infiltration Evidence.................... 
63 
d. 
Consultations 'iTith "Third Countries" ..... . ......... 
65 
TOP ·SECRET - Sensitive 
a 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET' - Sensitive 
2. 
Relat i ons \-Ti th the GVI~ ..•••• ~ . . • • • . • • • • • . • • • • • • . . • • • . • • 
67 
a. 
J oint Planning ....•.••••••••.•..•..•....• ~ •..•....• 
b. 
G"VN" Crises ........................................................... .. 
C.. 
Joint Reprisals ................................................................ . 
68 
69 
72 
3. 
Policy Vie1,vs in January......... • . • . . . • • . • • • • . . • • . • . • . . 
73 
a. 
Public Debate ..... ;................................ 
73 
b. 
Policy Assessments ................................. 
75 
b 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV.C . 2. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1. 
POLICY DEBATE IN NOVENBER 
In their Southeast Asia policy discussions of August-October 1964, 
Administration officials hacl accepted the view that overt military 
pressures against North Vietnam probably "\wuld be required. 
Barring 
some critical developl:lents , hOlTever , it I·Tas gener2,11y conceded that 
these should not begin lli~til after the nevT year . 
Preparations for 
applying such pressures yrere made in earnest during November . 
1. 
IL1ffiediate ~ntecedents 
In Adrninistration policy discussions, the tiw developments most 
often cited as perhaps \·rarranting i mpl ementation of OVeI·t military pres-
sures before 1965 I're:ce: 
(1) i ncreased levels of infiltration of guerrillas 
into South Vietnam and ( 2) serious deterioration of the GVN . 
Evidence of 
both ,.,ras repol'ted to Washingtqn during October . 
National intelligence est~nates gave t he G\~T little hope of sur-
Vl vlng the apathy and discouragement yii th "Thich it 'was plagued . 
They 
reyol'ted , tlGovernment ministries in Saigon are close to a standstill, 
with only the ::nost routine 0p'erations going on.tI 
U.S./GVJ.\f planning "Tas 
not being folloi·red by G-VN action. 
A coup by disgruntled South Vietnom.ese 
military figures ,ms believed irrminent (one had been attempted unsuccess-
fully on 13 September) . 
Moreover, the civ2-.lian government ,vhich General 
Khanh ·had promised for the end of October was seen as unlikely to bring 
about any r eal improvement . y 
. 
A threat of GVN ca-oitulation to the NLF , in the form of accept-
ing a coalition government,- I·ras also seen as a: real possibility. 
Citing 
lInume:cous signs that Viet Cong agents have played a role in helping sus -
tain the level of civil disorder ... in the cities,tI intelligence reports 
estlinated that it was the COF~unist intention to seek victory through a 
tlneutralist coalitiontl rather than by forc e of arms . 
Perhaps straining 
a bit, an estimate stated, tiThe pl'incipal GVN leaders have not to our 
knowledge been in recent contact uith the Corrrrnunists , but there has been 
at least one instance of informa l contact bet<:reen a lesser governmental 
official and members of the HLF. tI '?J 
Anot~2r estlinate portrayed the 
DRV and Chinese as regarding South Vi etnam as a tldeveloping political 
yaCmUll , tI soon to be filled tlv i th a neutralist coalition government 
dominated by pro-Conr.nunist elements. tI 1/ 
Reports of increasing infiltr2.tion began arrlvlug in mid-October . 
Ambassador Taylor cabled on the 14th that he had received. indications of 
a tldefinite step-up in infiltration from North Vietnam, particule.rly in 
the northern provinces . •• . tI 
He 'trent on to report : 
.1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IIA recent 2.nalysis suggests that if the present rate of 
infiltration is me-intained the annual figure for 196Lf uill 
be of the order of 10,000. 
Furthermore ... "voTe ar e finding 
more and more ' bona fide ' North Vietnames e soldiers among 
t he i nfiltrees . 
I feel sure that Ive must soon adopt nelV 
and drastic methods to reduce and eventually end such infil-
tration if ,ve are ever to succeed in South Vietnam . Il~/ 
A similar report 'Ha s cabled directly to the i'lhite House on 16 October . 
I n it, P~bassador Taylor repeated his co~~nents on infiltration and 
advised the President of the steadily 'Iwrsening situation i n South 
Vietnmn . 
The Ambassador reported the infiltration of northern-born 
conscripts and relayed GVN claims that they ,'rere coming in organi zed 
uni ts . 
He pointed out that with the advent of t he dry season, the 
problem ,;"QuId B.ssume even greater magnitude and urged that it be given 
immediate attention . ~ 
The Taylor estimates of end-year infiltration totals probably 
"rere quite alarming . 
If accurate they indicated that the rate had 
risen sharply during September and early October: 
The tote-l nl®ber of 
infiltrees for 1964 as of 1 September 'Ivas then estimated as 4 ,700 . 6/ 
Of particular concern, no doubt , was the apparent 8J.'11phasis on reinr'orc -
i ng Communist units in the Central Highlands and in the northern 
provinces of South Vietnmo.. 
These vrarnings came hard on the heels of 
widespread press r eports of badly weakened GVl\J' control in three portions 
of the country . 11 
The J CS seized on these fresh reports and resubmitted their pro-
posals for taking prompt measure s 9-gainst Horth Vietnam . 
On 21 October , 
t hey argued : 
"Application of the principle of i solating the guerrilla 
force f rom its reinforcement and support e-nd then to frag-
ment and defeat the forces has not been successful in Vietnam 
••. oThe principle must be applied by control of the national 
boundari es or by eliminating or cutting off the source of 
supply and. direction . n §j 
On the 27th they submitted a major proposal for II strong mil itary actions ll 
to c01l..l1.ter act the trends cited in the national intelligence estimates 
Emd in the Taylor cables . 
I n l anguage identical to that used in t .w 
August memol'anda. and at the September strategy meeti ng, they stated that 
such actions vlere "required nOi'~ in order to prevent the collapse of the 
U. S. position ir Southeast Asia . Il 
They then recommended a program of 
actions to support the follO'.·ling strategy: 
a . 
Depriving the Viet Cong of out of country aSSls~ance by 
applying military pressUl'es on the ... DRV to the extent necessary to 
cause the DRV to cease support and direction of the i nsurgency . 
TOP SECREI' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
b . 
DeprivL'1g the VC of assistance \-rithin SVN by expanding the 
cOQnterinsurgency effort - - military, economic , 
~nd political -- within 
~~ . 
. 
c . 
Continuing to seek a viable effecti ve government i n SVN 
based on the broadest possible consensus . 
that : 
d . 
Maintaining a military readiness posture in Southeast Asia 
(1) 
D~nonstrates the U. S. will and capabil ity to escalate 
the action if required . 
( 2) 
Deters a major Comrrnmist aggression in the area . 2./ 
The program recommended by the JCS included a list of actions 
to be taken ,d thin South VietnaJn and. a separate list of actions outsid.e . 
The Chiefs had listed them in orcler of increasing intensity, and they 
requested authority lito implement now· 1I the first six actions w~ thin the 
c ountry and the first eight outside . 
The latter i ncluded air strikes 
by GVW/FAPJvIGATE aircraft agc.inst Communist LOC I S in Laos and i n the 
southern portion of North Vietnam . "J:.O/ 
I n the context of the reported ,vorsening situs.tion in South 
Vietnam, the JCS proposal Has gi ven serious considere.tion in OSD . 
Since Ambassador Taylor had e~cpressed concern over initiating overt 
pressures against North Vietnam "before ,Ie have a r esponsible set of 
authorities to \lO1'l( with in South Vietnarn , II a copy of the JCS paper 
,.laS fon-larded to him for revie-,l and comment . 
The OSD I S stated i ntent ion 
,vas to consider the Ambassador I s v:Levls before developing a p1'oposal t o 
present to President Johnson . ~ 
While this proposal ,'las still under consideration (1 November 
1964) , Viet Cong forces atte.cked U.S . facilities at the Bien Hoa airbase 
ivi th 8lrr.rrru mortar fire . 
Four Amer ican servicemen ,.lere kill ed, and f i ve 
B- 57 tactical bombers \"ere destroyed, and major damage was i nflicted on 
eight others . 12/ 
Administration attention vIas focused immediatel y on the question 
Qf "That the United States should do in response to the Bien Hoa provoca-
t ion . 
I t ;,.rill be recalled that such an eventuality had been discussed 
at the September strategy meeting . 
The Presidential directive which 
r esu~ted from it stated : 
"'Vie should be prepared to respond as appro -
priate age.inst t.he DRV in the event of 8.ny att,acl( on U. S. units or any 
special DRV/VC action against SVN ." 13/ 
As of the end of Oct ober ( in 
anticipation of resumed DE SOTO Patrols ), elements of our Paci fic forces 
,Tere reported as I!:poised and ready'! to execute x'eprisals fo1' any DRV 
attacks on our naval vessels . 
Thus , there vias a rather l arge expectancy 
aJQong Administration officials that the United States would do somethi ng 
i n retaliation . 
3 
TOP SECRET - Sensi t i ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TO.P SECRET - Sensitive 
Apparently, the decision I'ras made to do nothing -- at least not 
of a retaliatory nature . 
At a White House meeting to discuss possible 
courses of action, on 1 November , "concern \'Tas expressed that proposed 
U. S. retaliatory punitive actions could trigger North Vietnamese/CHICOM 
air and ground retaliatory acts 0" 
Q.uestions I'ere raised about "increased 
security measures and precautionary moves of U. S. air and ground Qnits 
to protect U. S. dependents, units and installations against such retali-
ation . 14/ 
Folloi'Ting the meeting, a White House ne,o[s release announced 
that the President had ordered the destroyed and ba.dly damaged aircra.ft 
replaced . 
Administration officials stated that "the mortar attack must 
be vieloTed in the light of the Vietnamese vrar' and of the I-Thole Southeast 
Asian situation. If the United states is to retaliate against North 
Vietnam in the future, It they reported ly 
said, " i t must be for broader 
reasons than the stril\:e against the Bien Hoa base . It 
Moreover , they 
eirev, a contrast bet\oreen this incident and the Tonkin Gulf attacks where 
our destroyers vrere "on United states business . II 15/ 
Source docUlnents avails,ble do not indicate that any further 
decisions ','fere made on the Bien Hoa me,tter . 
A second meeting to discuss 
possible U.S. actions was Ittentatively scheduled lt for 2 November , but 
the available materials contain no evidence that it vTaS held . 16/ 
P"resident Jormson ,'TaS scheduled to appear in Houston that afternoon , 
for his final pre-election address, and it may be that the second White 
House meeting I·Tas called off. 
In any event, unofficial reports from 
Saigon, two days later , stated that most of the B- 57s had been vii thdrmm 
from the Bien Hoa base . 
While acknowledging that II some lt had been 
removed to Clark Air Base, in the Philippines , official spokesmen in 
Saigon refused to comment on whether or not a 'Ivholesale Ivithdrmral had 
t aken place . 17/ 
O.ne thing is certain; there ,rere no retaliatory 
strikes authorized follm'ring the attack on the U. S. bomber base . 
HOvTever , retaliatory measures were proposed, 
O.n 1 November , 
t he J CS suggested orally to Secretary McNamara that air strikes be 
authorized on key COIDm11..'I1ist targets in both Laos and North Vietnam . 
According to the JCS plan those in Laos ,vould be hit yri thin 2~· -36 hours 
-
, 
after approval , with .forces already in place, and. ,these atta,cks would 
divert attention from the preparation necessary for the stronger actions 
t o follOl'T , 
The latter 'Hould include a B-52 night attack on Piluc Yen 
airfield (outside Hanoi), to be followed by a da"rn strike by USAF and 
Navy tactical aircraft against other airfields and PO.L storage in t he 
Hanoi- Ha.iphong area . 18/ 
Ambassador Taylor immediately cabled a Saigon ErfibassY-MACV 
recommendation for 
IIretaliatory b anbing attacys on selected DRV targets 
by combined U. S. /V1~itF air forces and for a policy statement that '\ve ,vi II 
act similarly in like cases in the futur e . 1I 'J:2/ 
In a later cable he 
made specific refer ence to lithe retaliatory principle confirmed in 
NSAlvf 314,1' stating that if his initial recommendation ,vas not accepted 
at least a lesser alternative shortld be adopted . 
This he described as 
' 4 
TO.P SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"intensifying 3~·-A ope:cations and initiating air opere:GlOnS against 
selected targets as an interim substitute f'or more positive l."leasures ." 20/ 
On 4 November, the JCS repeated in \·rri ting their recommendations 
of the 1st, adding some explanatory comment and ta.king issue \vith certain 
aspects of' the Taylor re conrrnendat ions 0 
They e=~plained that they con-
sidered the VC attack on Bien Hoa airf'ield !! a deliberate act of' escala·· 
tion and a change of' the ground rules under '"hich the VC heNe operated 
1.1;> to nm,r ." 
They cautioned aga.inst ''tmdue delay or restraint " in making 
a response, since it "could be misinterp:r:eted by our allies in Southeast 
Asia, as ,,,ell as by the DRV and Commu.nist China " and "could encoura.ge 
the enemy to conduct additional attacks •... " 
Referring to P..robassador 
Taylor ' s recon~~endat ion to announce a policy of reprisal bombing, the 
JCS denounced a t:tit-for-tat" policy as "u.'l1duly restrictive" and tending 
to "pass to the DRV SUbstantial initiatives "rith respect to the nature 
and timing of' further U. S. actions." ?:J:./ 
They concluded: 
"Early U. S. military action against the DRV ,-:auld l essen 
the possibility of' misinterpretation by . the DRV and Com.mu.'1ist 
China of' U.S. determination and intent and thus serve to deter 
further VC attacks such a's that at Bien Hoa . " 
In the meantime, there had been created vThat may have been the 
only concrete result from the high-leve l policy deliberations f'ollm'7ine 
the Bien Hoa incident . 
1m interagency task fo:cce, lmo'l-m as the NSC 
I-Torking Group, had begu.."l em intensive study of future U. S. courses of 
action. 
Recommendations from the JCS and othe:cs 'i·rere passed on to that 
group for incorporation in their vTOrlc 22/ 
2. 
Formation of the NSC Wo:tking Group 
The "NSC Working Group on S'VN/SEA" held its first meeting at 
0930 hOlITS, 3 November, thus placing the decision to organize such a 
group at som.etime earlier -- probably on 2 November or perhaps even at 
the high-level meeting on 1 November . 
Its chal~tel~ \Tas to study 
" limnecliately and intensively" the f'uture courses (If' action and alterna-
tives open to the United States in Southeast Asia and to report as 
appropriate to a "Principals Group" of NSC members. 
I n turn, this g:coup 
of senior officials i'70uld then recommend specific courses of action to 
the President . 
Initially, the Iwrking group vTaS given approximately 
one I'Teek to ten days to cOT!lnlete its Hork . 23/ 
Actually, it developed 
and recast its reports over~ a period of tp..ree i·reeks or more . 
Four 8,gencies '.'Tere l'epresented in the formal membership of the 
group . 
The Department of state contingent included Assistant Secretary 
B1?-Ddy (Chairman), Me.rsh8.11 Green , Michael Forrestal (both of the Bureau 
of Far Eastern Affairs ), end Robert Johnson (of the Policy Planning 
Council) . 
Assistant Secretei'y (ISA) 1-1cNaughton represented OSD . 
Vice 
Admiral Lloyd' Mustin iTas the ,YCS member 0 
The CLl\. Vias repTese.:1ted by 
Harold Ford. 
Other staff members from these agencies assisted in work 
on specific topics. ?}:j 
5 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEC?.ET .. Sensitive 
The Horking Group's efforts were apportioned among seven tasks, 
the initial input for each being 8.ccomplished by a particular member or 
subcommittee, as follmls :. 25/ 
TODIC 
Assessment of the current situation 
in South Vietnam, including policy 
direction of interested pOVlers . 
U. S. objectives and stal~es in South 
Vietne.m and Sout heast As ia . 
Broad options (3) available to the 
Uni ted States . 
Alternative forms of ~ossible 
negotiation . 
Analyses of different options 
vis-a-vis U.S. objectives and 
interests . 
Im 
.... nediate actions in the period 
prior to Presidential decision 
on options. 
RESPONSIBILITY 
Intelligence 
community 
\\Tilliam Bundy 
Bundy and ISA 
state/Policy Planning 
Counci l 
JCS to propose specific 
actions; Policy Planning 
Council to examine po-
litical impacts of the 
most violent option 
first. 
State/Far East Bureau 
Nost inputs '\Tere made in the form of either (1) draft papers 
treating fully a topic intended for inclusion in the Iforking Group ' s 
final submission 01'-(2) memoranda cormnentil}g on an initial draft paper 
and suggesting alterations . 
Because of the unique responsibilities and 
advisory processes of the JCS, t heir member apparently chose to make 
initial in:puts largely thro'l~gh references to or excer?ts from regular 
JCS documents; he also contributed to the redrafting of the option 
analyses. 26/ 
The initial papers on each of the topics were circulated 
among the VIorking 
Group members , revie"red in consultation '\Vi th their 
parent organizations and modified . 
Some positions passed through as 
many as three drafts before being submitted to the Principals . 
3. ,\<Torking Group Assess:n.ents of' the Utility of Pressures 
The NSC Iforking Group approached its '_Tork "\ i th the general 
assessment that increased pressures against North Vietnam '\wuld be both 
useful and necessary. 
Ho\vever , this assessment embraced a "'ide ral'J.ge 
of considerations stemming from the developing situation in South Viet-
nam and a variety of vie\rpoints concerning \'That kinds of pressures 
\wulcl be most effective . 
6 
TOP SECRET' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
a . 
Sense of Urgency . 
As the I'Jorking Group began its delibera-
tions, an avrareness that another Bien Hoa could occur at any time "\-Tas 
prominent in both the official and the public mind o The t enuous security 
of U. So bases in South Vietnam had received "dde publi city. 27/ 
More -
over, t he nellS services ,Tere reporting the tin'eat of civil protest 
against the new Saigon government , and the increased l eve l of 8uerrilla 
i nfiltration from the North I·ras being publicly e.ired. ?!}) 
These develop-
ments l ent an added sense of urgency to the Group!s Iforl\:o 
The Chairman 
of the Working Group Has sensiti ve to these developments and to related 
attitudes l·rUhin the Administration . 
For example , he indicated that the 
i n telligence (J,gencie s ,'Jere tt on the verge of . o. agreement the,t infi 1 trat ion 
has i n fact mounted , If and that the Sai gon missi on Ivas tturging that I'le 
surface this by the end of this I'Teel\: or earl y next I'Teek . tt 
He stressed 
that tithe President i s clearly thinking in tenns of maximum use of a 
Gulf of TOTL~in Lreprisaf! rationale . tt 
The ne,ture of such a decision IvaS 
expected to be : 
either for an action that would shm1 toughness and hold 
the line till ."..,e can decide the big issue , or as a basis 
for starting a clear course of action under .• obroad 
options 0 
He implied that OUl~ intention to stand firm i n South Vietnalll "\-laS being 
cm..municated to the USSR ('!Secretary Rusk is talking today to Dobryninf!) 
and i ndicated the desirability of President Johnson signalling something 
similar rather soon through the public media . 
This vras seen as particu-
larly important 
If to cOtmter any SVN fears of a softening i n ou:r policy, If 
presumably in viel'l of our not r esponding to the Bien Hoa attack 0 29/ 
Chairman Bundy i'Tas cl,\-mre also of t he significance attached by 
some observers to t he first U.S o actions aft er the ?.cesidential election . 
As vras poi nted out to him, lIall Vietnamese and other interested observers ll 
,.;auld be "\-latchLl1.g carefully to II see Hhat posture the ne"idy mandat ed 
Johnson Administration ,vill assume . If 
For this l~eason, William H. Sullivan, 
head of the interagency Vietnam Coordinating Committee ( and soon to be 
appointed the nel'T U. S. Ambe,ssador to Laos), urged !Ithat our first action 
be .•• one whi ch give s the appearance of a detenaination to t ake risk s i f 
necessary to maintain our position in Southeast Asi a .
1I 
An immediate 
retalie.tion for any repetition of the Bien Hoa attacl~ and armed recon-
naissance missions i n the Laotian Panha...ndle uere cited as specific 
exar.o.ples . 
He vTent on to r ecorn.illend to I'h' . Bundy: 
"I feel t hat it is i mportant ... that t he Administration go 
on record fairly soon placin8 our policy in Viet Nam '\.;ithin 
the larger persnective of OlIT' noli ci es in the Hestern Pacific , 
especi ally as t hey i nvolve confrontation ,·Tith Communist China. If 30/ 
A sense of urgency for the Worki ng Group ! s efforts i'Tas also de-
rived from asse s SLlent s of the trends vTi thin South Vietnam . 
For example, 
. 
/ 
the i ntelligence panel composed of CIA , DIA, and State/INR members S2.n 
TOP SECREf - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
Sens~ 
little prospect for an effective GVN despite an ac}mmrledged slmling of 
Il adverse political trends . II 
In their vi~i'T the political situation lTaS 
"extremely fragile, II ivi th the Saigon administration IIp l agued by con- . 
fus ion, apathy and poor mOI'e.le lJ and the new l eadership hampered by the 
older factionalism . -
The security situation i n the countryside ',ms 
assessed as having continued to deteriore,te , w' i th "Viet Cong control 
•• • spreading over areas heretofore controlled by the government .
1I 
Although indicating IIbetter than evenll che.nces that the GVN coulE: I'hcmg 
on for the nea:c future and thus e.fford a platform upon vThich .•• Lt9..7 
prosecute the vTar and attemnt to tUTn the tide, II the panel painted a 
grim pictu:re of its prospects . 31/ 
This 8,ssessment Ivas probabl y 
instrumental in prompting Assistant Secretary HcNe.ughton IS cry-ptic 
observation that "Progress inside SITN i s important , but it is unlikely 
despite our best i deas and efforts . 1I 
Besides , he observed , if it came 
at all it ivould t a..1<:.e 
II at l east several months . If 
I n his vie"T, the efforts 
of the Horking Group , could in some meaSUTe compensate for this slOi'T 
progress i nside South Vietnam: 
IIAction age.inst North Vietnam is to some extent a sub-
stitute for strengthening the government i n South Vietnam. 
That i s, a less active VC (on ol'ders from DRV) can b e 
handled by a less efficient GVN (vThich "Te expect to have). II 32/ 
b. 
Vie,vs of DRV Susceptibility. 
The extent to ,,,rhich "e.ction 
against North Vietns..m.1f might affect that nation IS sUP:90rt of the con-
flicts i n SoUtl1 Vietnam a..nd Laos i'TaS a matter on i"Thich mero.bers of the 
\forking Group did not fully agree . 
The i nt elligence panel members 
t ended tow'ard a pess:iJnistic vievl . 
They pointed out t he.t lithe basic 
ele.i1lents of Commu..ni.st strength in South Vietnaro. remain i ndigenous , II 
and that lI even i f severely dall1ag~dlf the DRV could continue to support 
the insu:rrection at a l essened l evel. 
Therefore , they stressed the.t 
t he U.S. ability to compel a halt to the DRV support depended on erod-
ing Hanoi IS \vill and persuading the DRV: 
that the p:C'ice of m01mting the insurrection in the South 
at a high level would be too great and that it vmuld b e 
preferable to reduce i ts ai d . .. and direct at l east e. 
t emporary reduction of V.C. activity . 
As the panel members Salt, it , this respite ,·rould then provide an oppor -
tuni ty to stabilize e.nd inlprove the GVN . 
But, in their Hords , 
If Even 
so, l asti ng success Hould depend. upon 2" substantial im:.orovement in the 
energy and effectiveness of the RVN government and paci fication machi n -
ery ." 33/ 
HOI.rever, the int elligence pa.nel did not concede very strong 
chances for breaking the vTill of Hanoi . 
They thought i t quite likely 
that the DRV Has "Tilling to suffer diilll2.ge lIin the COUl'se of a test of 
"rills uith the United States over the COUTse of events i n South Vietnam. II 
To SUppOl't this vie-v!, they cited Hanoi I s belief that internationa l 
8 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
pressure would develop against deliberate U. S. expansion of the "lar . 
Further , that given present trends in South Vietnam, both Hanoi and 
Peking had good reason to expect success vrithout haying to ini~iate 
actions carrying the risk of the kind of Ivar vrhich would ~'(pose them 
to lithe great ,·!ei.ght of superior U. S. weaponry . II 
The panel also viewed 
Hanoi as est:ilnating that the U. S. \vill to maintain resistance in South-
east Asia could in time be eroded -- tha t the recent U. S . election vrou~d 
provide the Johnson Administration with "greater policy flexibilityll 
than it previously felt it had. 34/ 
This vie,v vlaS challenged by the 1'Torking Group ' s JCS member as 
being too "negative .
1I 
Interpreting the panel 1 s non-s:pecific reference 
to IIpolicy flexibility" in an extreme sense, he wrote : 
IIIf t his means that Hanoi thinks we are nm'T i n position 
to accept vlOrld-wide humiliation "ivi th respect to our formerly 
stated obj ectives in Vietnam, this is another reason why i t 
i s desirable that 
Vie take early measures to disabuse their 
t hinking . II 
Moreover, he indicated the JCS vie"T that the slightly improved hopes for 
government stability (aclmmlledged by the panel) i'iere good reason ivhy 
"early and positive actions ll should be taken . 
This point was reinfol"Ced 
by his judgment that (in contre.st with its impact on eSlll"it and political 
effectiveness) the mm ' s "principal task is to e,fford the platform upon 
';-,hich the RVN armed forc es , vTith U. S. assistance, prosecute the vrar. 1I 221 
I n criticism of the intelligence panel ' s emphasis on the need 
t o i nfluence DRV "r:i,ll, ACLlliral M:ustin indicated that enemy capabilities 
r epresented a more appropriate t arget . 
He stated the JCS assessment 
t hs.t : 
"a. 
The actual U.S . requirement "i-'lith respect to the DRV 
i s reduction of the rate of delivery of support to the VC ~ 
t o levels belmo[ their minimum necessary sustaining leveL • . 
lib. 
I n the present unstable situation something far less 
t han total destruction may be all that i s required to accom-
plish the above . 
A very modest change in the government ' s 
[ftvrj] favor ... may be enough to turn the tide and lead to a 
successful solution . 
Of course it is not possible to predict 
in advance ... the precise l evel of measures ... rhich will be 
r equired to achieve the above . 
This is the reason for de-
signing a }1rogram of progressively increas ing squeeze ." 
One of the factors encouraging JCS optimism, he pointed out, was t he. 
assessment accepted by the panel that both H~Doi and Peking wanted to 
avoid direct conflict "ldth the United Stdes . 
This 'liould act as a ' de-
terrent to Comm.unist persistence, pe..rticularly if by a program of 
. 9 
TOP SECRET - Sensit i ve 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
milita..ry pressures vTe ,',ere able to revise their asse ssment that they could 
vlirt lI,vithout much risk of having to feel the vreight of U.S. response." 361 
Apparently as a result of these criticisms and their influence 
on other \-Torking Group members, the Group ' s fi:1al assessment of DRV 
susceptibility to milital'y pressures was sorneo,vhat modified. 
\-Thile con-
tinuing to emphasize that a,ffecting Hanoi ' s vTill ,-Tas important , the cri t-
i ca.lity of it was obscured by concessions to the possible :iJ:npact of 
damage to DRV capabilities and by greater reliance on _conditional phras-
i ng . 
For example : 
"the natUre of the "mr in Vietne.m is such that U. S • ability 
to compel the DRV to end or reduce the ve insurrection rests 
essentially upon the effect of the U.S . sanctions on the will 
of DRV leadership to sustain and enlarge that insurrection, and 
to a lesser extent upon the effect of sanctions on the capabili-
ties of the DRV to do SO .II 
Although giving explicit recognition to "a r lslng rate of infiltration ,1I 
and continuing to acknowledge limits to U. S. abilities to prevent the 
DRV ' s material support for the VC, the assessment stated that "U.S._ 
inflicted destruction in North Vietnam and Laos Kould reduce these sup-
porting increment s and. damage DRV Ive morale . II 
It qualified this state-
ment, how'ever , by pointing out that the degree to ,-Thich such damage 
vTould provide the GVN \Vi th a breathing spell would depend l argely on 
IIvThether any DRV' 'removal' of "i ts direction and support of the ve "were 
superficial or iIhole . II 
If sU-:::Jerficial or Itlimi ted to gestures ..• that 
r emoved only the more Visible-evidences of the DRV increment,fJ t he 
report continued, Itit would probably not be possible to develop a viable 
and free government in South Vietnam." 371 
In general, the final assessment of DRV susceptibility to 
pressw'es vms less discom'aging than the intelligence panel ' s initial 
submission, although it could not be considered particularly encouraging 
either . 
The reference to U. S. Itpolicy flexibility, 1t to which the JCS 
took such violent objection, was removed, and the follOl'Ting non-co::nmi tting 
statement i'laS used instead : 
"Hanoi ' s i,1TInediate estimate is probably that 
the passing of the U.S . election gives \~ashington the opportunity to take 
new mili ta:cy actions against t he DRV and/or ne,,! cliplomatic initiatives. " 
I f ne", military pressures Here applied, t he report i ndicat ed that Hanoi ' s 
l eaders would be faced Idth a basic question: 
Ills the U. So determined 
to continue escalating its pressures to achieve its announced obj ectives 
••. or is t he U.S . escalation essentially a limited attempt to improve the 
U.S. negot:"ating position?tl It continued: 
"Their decision ..• ,vould be affected by the U. S. military 
posture in the area, by the extent and nature of the U. S. 
escalation, the ch~cacter of the U.S. communication of its 
intentions , and thei:c reading of da:uestic Uo S. and inter-
national.reactions to the inauguration of UoS . attacks on the 
North . It 
10 
TOP SSCRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The report made no attempt to nredict hOyT the DRV might anSl'i"er the "basic 
question" given alternative as;essments of the variables i n the quoted 
paragraph. 
HOi'rever, it did offer the caveat that "comprehension of the 
other I s intentions iiOuld al1r.ost certainly be difficult on both si'des , 
and especially S0 as the scal~ of hostilities m01.Ll1.ted." 38/ 
In assessing Hanoi I s ability and willingness to sustain U. S. 
attacks in order to pursue its goals, the report continued its balanced 
but slightly pessimistic approach : 
"~{e have many indications that the H8.J."'1oi leadership i s 
acutely 8...11cl nervously a"\'rare of the extent to vThich North 
Vi etnam I s transportation system and industrial :Dlan is vul-
nerable to 2.ttack . 
On the other hand , North Vietnam I s 
economy is oven"helmingly agriculture and, to a large extent , 
decentralized ...• Interdiction of imports and e!>.'tensive de-
struction of trans~ortation facilities and. i"ndustrial plants 
would cripple DRV industry. 
These actions vTOuld also seriously 
r estrict DRV milita:!:"'y ca?abilities, 8.J."'1d '.{Quld degrade, though 
t o a lesser extent} Hanoi I s capabilities to support. guerrilla 
"\>Tarfare i n South Vietna.."lll ·a..11d Laos . •. • 1;.7e do not believe that 
attacks on industrial targets vTould so greatly exacerbate 
current economic difficulties as to creat Q11IDanageable control 
problems . • . • DRV leaders .•. w'ould probably be i'rilling to suffer 
some damage to the cOQntry in the course of a tp.st of ifills 
1iTith the D. S. over the course of events in South Vietnam." 39/ 
The assessment concluded with estimates of likely Chinese Com-
munist and Soviet efforts to offset pressures directed to"Harcl North 
Vietnam. 
The Working Group recorded its belief "that close cooperation 
eXlS""GS behTeen Hanoi and Peiping and that Hanoi consults Peiping on 
major decisions regarding South Vi etnaJD.." Because the VC i nsurrection 
served IIPeiping l s interests in undermining the U. S. position in As i a " 
and because of the SinO-Soviet dispute , the group thought i t likely that 
t he Chinese "Tould "feel compelled to demonstrate their readiness to 
suppor~ " Hanoi i n mai ntaining pressure on South Vietnam. 
HOi,rever , i t 
vms no-ted that "Chinese COIDmQnist canabilities to aug:.lllent DRV offensive 
and defensive capabilities are slight ," being l imited largely t o modest 
quantities of air defense equipment, additional jet fighters and naval 
patrol craft . 
On the other hand, t he group believed " MoscovT ' S rol e i n 
Vietnam is likely to remain a relatively mi nor one . " 
Khrushchev ' s 
successors "Were beli eved unuilling to run substa...'1tial r i sks t o undermine 
the GVN . 
Citing Hanoi' s desire for continuing Soviet military and 
econonic aid , thp. report stated an ironic judgment concerning the l ess-
milit~~t of the large Coronunist powers : 
"MoscOlv" I s ability to influenCe decisions in Hanoi t ends 
consequently to be proportional to the North Vietnamese 
r egime I s fears of AmericB-n action against it, ~ising in 
'11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
moments of crisis and diminishing in quieter periods . 
Moscow 's 
willingness to give overt backing to Hanoi, hm·rever, seems to 
be in inverse proportion to the level of threat to North Vi~t­
nam.!1 40/ 
(Underlining added) 
4. 
Perce)tions and Development of U.S. Yressure Options 
The NSC Horking Group began its deliberations i-d th a variety of 
U.S. actions in mind and vlith an appaxently flexible approach to the 
objectives that the Administration might reasonably s ecl~ to achieveo 
As 
ideas "Tere exchanged and debc:..tecl, hm·rever, objectives became someHhat 
l ess flexible and options seemed to narrm·! . 
Such a process could have 
resulted from either: 
(1) preconceptions on the part of particularly 
influential members; ( 2) a bureaucL'atic tendency to comp"-'omise; or (3) 
simply the limited availability of pr8,ctical alternatives . 
A combination 
of these f actors may even have been e.t vrorlc in the case of the Horking 
Group. 
lLn asses~~ent of this nature is beyond the scope of this pri-
marily doc1)Juentary research effort . 
Still, the question is an important. 
one to reflect on in tracing the development of \~orldng Group recommen-
dations 0 
a. 
Perception of U.S. ObjectiVeS and Interests. 
National ob-
jectives in Southeast Asia I,rere regarded in t,.,,-o categor i e s: 
eXlS'c,lng 
( sometimes called !!initialfl ) policy obj ectives and those comprising a 
possible fallback position. 
The former did not change and did not 
tLndergo a.ny reinterpret a.tion dUl"ing the course of the Horking Group I s 
study. 
These Here seen 8.S (1) IthelpL'1g a government [Of South vietna::!=7 
defend its independence ," and ( 2) fI,;orking to preserve fJ.n Laoil an 
international neutralized settlement . 11 
Three basic flfactors fl I'rel'e 
recognized as II standing behindlt these policy objectives:. 
Ilao 
The general principle of helping cOlmtries that try 
to defend their mm freedom against cOInmunist subversion and 
attack. 
lib. 
The specific consequences of conrrntLYlist control of 
South Viet-Na:m and Laos for the secuTi ty of, successively, 
Cambodia, Thailand (most seriously), Nalaysia , and the 
Philippines -- and resulting increases in the t hreat to 
India and -- more in the realm of morale effects in the short 
term -- the threat to [Other nations in Asi~7 . 
It c . 
South Viet-Nam, &'1d to a l esser extent , Laos, as test 
cases of cO;':Itnunist I\mrs of n 8.tiona l 
lib e-~ 8.tionlt 'rTorld-l,·ride . It 41/ 
Current U.S. obj ectives in South Vietnmu and Laos \Vere seen as 
an integl'al part of the "overall policy of resisting Communist expansion 
\'Torld-vide, II and particula:"ly a part of the Ifpolicy of resisting t he 
expans ion of COIDmtLnist China and its allies, North Viet-Nam and North 
. 12 
TOP SECRET -. Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Korea . If 
Thus, I~or South Vietnam to come under Communist control, "in 
any form," was seen as 
"a major blO':" to our basic Dolicies. 
U.S. prestige is 
heavily cormni tted to the maintenance of a non-Cormnunist 
South Viet-N~~, and only less heavily so to a neutra-
lized Laos," 42/ 
Unlike the ClU'rent obj ectives, those comprising a fall-back 
position dealt only with South VietnalTI . 
Moreover, they I'lere mod.ified 
during the course of the iforking Group 's efforts . 
The modifice,tions 
occurred in the \'lay the objectives were presented -- in the context of 
the presentation -- rather than in their specific phrasing . 
The words 
remained the same throughout: 
"1. 
1 
'bl 
To hold the situation together as 
ong as POSSl 
e 
so that "ltIe have ti.rne to strengthen other areas of Asia. 
"2. 
To ta.~e forceful enough measures in the situation 
so that We emerge from it, even in the worst case, 1dth our 
standing as the principal helper against Communist expan-
sion as little impaired as possible. 
"3. 
To make clear .•• to nations in Asia particularly, 
that failure in South Viet-Nam, if it comes , vTaS due to 
special 10c2.1 factors that do not apply to other nations 
we are committed to defend __ that, in short , our will and 
ability to help those nations defend themselves i s not im-
paired." 43/ 
At first, these fall-back objectives for South Vietnam were pre-
sented as Possible alternatives __ to be considered in conjunction lvith 
a reassessment of the costs and risks associated vTith currently ac-
knm-rledged obj ectives. 
Follovring its recognition of the extent to i'Thich 
U. S. prestige had been committed even the second draft (8 November ) 
t 
' 
, 
s a"ced : 
"Yet •.. "!;OTe cannot guarantee to mai ntain a non-Communist 
South Viet-NaTa short of committing ourselves to iThatever 
degree of military action vTOuld be required to defeat North 
Viet-Ham a..l1d probably Communist China militarily. 
SUch a 
commitment ;'70uld involve high risks of a major conflict in 
Asia, 'Hhic~1 could not be confined to air and naval action 
but Would almost ineVitably involve a Korea.l1-scale ground 
action and possibly even the use of nuclear I'Teapons at some 
point." 
Despite 
al)art, " 
initial 
11 th " 
. .
' 
.Lh V· til. '.L 
t ' 11 
a 
lS, l"C vTaS aclmo"dledged, SOUt" _ le "nam 
mlgnt... S l_ 
come 
leaving the United State s deeply committed but i<li th much of its 
justification disintegrated . 
"Hence ," the evaluation continued, 
13 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
~OP SECRET - Sensitive 
II •.• we must consicier realistically "That our over-all obj ectives 
and stakes are, and just "ilhat ciegree of risk and loss ':Te should 
be prepared to make to hold South Vietnam, or alternatively~ to 
gain ti."".e and secure our further lines of defense in the 'Horld 
and specifi~ally in Asia. n 44/ 
Significant, in shedding lig!:lt on the subt.le changes that 
occurred in this rationale during the ensuing three or four i·reeks , i'Tas 
its treatment of the third fall -back objective . 
Observing that IImost 
of the lwrld he.d written off" both South VietnalU 3.nd Laos in 195~, an 
early draft acknm?ledged that neither had acquired the international 
standing of such former targets of Con:rr:lUnist aggression as Greece, Iran 
and South Korea . 
It '\lent on to point out several historical characte:c-
istics of South Vietnam and Laos that made them such unique cases, in-
cluding : 
(l)!!a bad colonial heritage!! &nd i nadequate preparation for 
self-government; (2) a "colonialist lIar fought in half- ba.ked fashion 
and lost!!; and (3) !!a nationalist movement tali:en over by Communists 
ruling in the other half of an ethnic2.11y and historically u"Yli ted 
country .• 0 
• II 
It then added : 
IIl'f1h 
b 
. 
J... 
h 
.J. e 
aSlC point, of course, is thaI" vTe 
ave never 
thought 1;.1e could defend a government or a yeople that had 
ceased to care strongly about defending themselves, or that 
'Here unable to maintain the fundamentals of goyernment . 
And the oven{helTr:.ing "iorld im:;Jression is that these are 
l acking elements in South Viet-·IJam ••.. !! 
Moreover , the commentary noted that there ,{as "Tidespread expectancy 
that i f South Vietnam i'rere lost it i-TOuld be due to its lack of these 
elements. Lf5/ 
Subse<;,uent to circulation of the initial draft of the lIobjectives 
and national interest!! Section 
a number of critical or related conTInents 
i'Tere directed tOi{ard Group Chairman Bundy. 
On Lf November , Michael 
Forrestal suggested thc.t Ilan important fle.Yor!! .laS lacking in the original 
analysis -- namely, lithe role of China!! and her need for !!ideological 
successes abl'oad .!! 
In his vie,'T, given Chinese :policy , "thE! effect of 
our i'Tithdra1{al from a situation in 1;Thich the people we \{ere trying to 
help seemed unable to help themselves" 'liTOuld be more politically pervasive 
in Asia than if China did not exist . 
He thought the U. S. object should 
be to "contain" Chinese political and ideological influence "for the 
longest possible period," thus providing tiDe to create "at the very 
least, Titoist regimes on the p~riphery of Chinao 0 •• " 
L~6/ 
On 6 November, 
\'iilliam Sullivan also urged :i.) l~cing U. S. :policy in Viet-Nam in the 
"larger perspecti ve" of the Dolitical confrontation with Commu"Ylist China . 
In an attached , longer eX'position of :policy rationale for the Western 
Pacific, he presented con~eptions of the U. S. problem quite similar to 
those advocated by Forrestal. 
The Doli tical future of the peoples of East 
Asia 'IoTas portra,yed as de2.)encling largely on a struggle behreen Washington 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and Peking . 
Chinese political and ideological aggressiveness 1TaS viei'led 
as a threat to the ability of these peoples to determine their OVD 
futures, and henc'e to develop along 'I'lays compatible ,vi th U. S . interests . 
The U. S. commitment to defeat North Vietnamese aggression, even at the 
risk of IIdirect m.ilitary confrontationll "ith Co:tnl"J.unist China, I'las pel~ ­
ceived as part of the longer-term policy of establishing conditions 
which permit the independent nations of the region to develop the ability 
and confidence lito co;e "vith the emerging and expanding pOl'Ter of China . lI!:!J} 
These cOlliIDents may have influenced that part of the 8 Nove,l1ber version 
which referred to current U. S. objectives as par t of the broader policy 
of "resisting the expansion of Co::mnunist China and its allies .• • • 
11 
The JCS member also stressed the importance of not falling bac1\. 
from current policy aims . 
He stated that "in the eyes of the i'lOrl d
l1 the 
United States 1vaS committed to its i ni tir.l obj ectives lias matters of 
natione.l prestige, credibility, and honor . II 
Furthel", that U. S retention 
of lIa measure of free-,\'/Orld leadership" required II successful defense " in 
South Vietnam against the I-lar s of national liberation strs.tegy. 
Adriliral 
Mustin criticized the Bundy draft for overstating lIthe degree of diffi-
culty associated 'I'lith succe ss for our objective s in S-VN . " 
He asserted: 
"Our first objective is to cause the DRV t o termine.te 
support of the SEA insu::'gencies .•.. To achieve this objective 
does not necessarily require that vTe tdefeat North Viet-NaIll, I 
and i t alnlOst certainly does not r equi.re that I-re defeat 
Corr.anu.n.ist China . 
Hence our commitment to svn does not i nvolve 
a hi gh probability, let alone ' high r i sks , I of a major conflict 
i n Southeast Asia." 
He characterized the draft Ts expression of concern over r i sks and costs 
as an inference "as though the harder 'I,;e try the more '\ve stand to risk 
and to lose. 
On the contrary, he stated, the IIbest hope for minimi zing 
risks, costs , and losses i n achieving our objectives" could be attained 
t hough lIa l'esolute course of action. II L:-8/ 
Admiral Nustin also attacked the i mplicati on that there was 
II some alternative to our holding South Viet-Nam. 
There is none, " he 
stated, adding : 
Il\ole have no further fall-back posi tion in Southeast Asia 
i n the stated vievr of t he Joint Chiefs of Staff. " 
Specifically, he vlarned 
that to 8.ttempt to strengthen other are8.S of Asia, "in the context of our 
having been pushed out of SVi'J , Fould 'I:le a thoroughly non-productive effort 
mili tarily .... It 
Moreover , chare.cteri zing the draft I s concessions to the 
u.n.ique difficulties in Laos and South Vietnam as II sour gra:;:>es, " he 
att e.cked i ts assumptions that '\-re could convince other nations that 
failUTe in South Vietnam HaS due to stl'ictly loca l factors . 
He warned 
that othel' nations vTould regal'd any such explanation on our part as 
"completely tl'ansp3.:cent . " 
Concerning any lack of GVJlT '\o!ill to defend 
i tself, he commented, "A resolute United States '\Tould ensUTe ... that this 
l ack "Jere cLUoed, as the alternative to accepting the loss . " 
The JCS 
member pOTtrayed a U. S. failuTe in South VietnC'm as an Ifabject h1.IDliliation ,1f 
. 15 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
that "i;Tould be disastrous in sh<L'k:.ing the faith and resolve of the non-
Communist nations \-rho rely on the United States for major help against 
Communist aggression . 
In that event , he sm.1' little possibility for 
effective U.S. reassurances . 49/ 
The impact of these criticisms can be seen i n the Working 
Group's final assessment of U.S. interests in Southeast Asia . 
In ex-
plaining the need to cons ider a fall-back position, the statement 
stressed the need merely to assess "the dre.wbacks!! associated I'lith 
i t . 
Lending to this judgment Here admissions that "there is some 
chance that South Vietnam might come apart l.mder us 'whatever course 
of action 'He pursuell and II strong military action necessarily involves 
some risl\:s of an enlarged and even conceivably major conflict in Asia . " 
Then follovred the statement : 
!!These problems fo:rce us to 'I-reight i n our analysis the 
dravTbac};:s anel, Dossibili ties of success of various options , 
Including the-.'d.Tc;\.,bacl;:s of acce;>ting only the fall-back 
obj ectives· set forth be loll" . 
(Underlining e.dded) 
Missing vlaS the earlier draft 's reference to potential costs 8.c'1d risks 
involved in pursuing current objectives . 
Missing also vTaS <Ll1y sugges-
tion that the Afuainistration might find some advantage in seclcing an 
alternative to these objectives. 50/ 
'1'he Working Group Ivent on to assess , in terli1s almost identical 
to those in the initial draft, the likely consequence of COnIDllli1ist con-
trol of South Vietnam for different l,wrld areas of interest to the 
United States . 
The' group sav.r important distinctions bet"reen the likely 
impact on U. S. interests in Asia and thOSe in the 1l0rld at large . 
For 
the l atter , the most significant variable I'TaS seen as the degree to 
which adverse developments in Southeast Asia might produce domestic 
public revulsion against all U,S, commitments overseas : 
"Hithin NATO ( except for Greece and Turkey to some degree), 
the loss of South Vietnam probably ,voulcl not shc,ke the faith 
and resolve to face the t hreat of Communist aggression or con-
fidence in us for major help . 
This is so provided we carried 
out any military actions in Southeast Asia 'without taking 
forces from NATO and vlithout generating a 'ilave of !!isolation-
ism!! in the U. S. 
In other areas of the iwrld, either the 
nature of the Corr.!lU.Q.l1ist threat or the deg:::'e2 of U, S. commit-
ment or bot~ are so radically different than in Southeast Asia 
that it is lifficult to assess t~e linpe.ct. 
The question ,wuld 
be I,[hether the U. S. was in fact able to go on ,'lith its present 
policies . If 51/ 
For Asia, other than Southeast ASia, the vTor~cing Group's assessment 'iTent 
as follovTs : 
'16 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
liThe effects in Asia generally "rould depend heavily on 
t he circumstances in which South Vietnam. Has lost a..n.d on 
1-rhether the loss did in fact greatly \·Tea.~en or l ead to the 
early loss of oth2r areas in Southeast Asia. . 
Nationa.l 
China. 0 ., S0uth Korea , and the Philippine"3 ivou.ld need 
maximum reas sura.."lce • 
I'Thile J an an I 13 faith in our military 
posture and determination might not be sh91l:en, the gl'oi"ling 
feeling that CO:rr'J'lllllist China must somehOiv be lived ldth 
might Hell be 2.ccentuated. 
I ndia 8....Yld I :can appear to be the 
Asian problem cases outside the Far East . 
A U.S . defeat 
could lee.cl to serious re"oercussions i n these cOli...'1tries . 
There is a great deal we- could still do to reassure these 
countries, but the picture of a defense line clearly breached 
could have serious effects and could .easil y , over t ime , t end 
to unravel the whole Pacific and South Asian defense struc-
tures ." 52/ 
The consequences for Southeast Asia of Cmill.:1Uni st control in 
South Vietnam -vrere seen as highly di fferentiated and by no means auto-
matic . 
The I1clomino theory" was vie 
... red as "over-s:Lmpli fied . f! 
The 
Working Group felt that it might apply lIif , but only i f , Communist 
China . 0 
• entered Southeast Asia in force and/or the United States 1'.Tas 
forced out of South Vietnam, in circumstances of military defeat . " 
Nevertheless the group judged ths.t l1almost iIr.medi atel y ," Laos \vou.ld 
become extremely hard to hold and Cambodia ,,;ould be Ilbending sharply 
to the Conmnmist side . II 
These developments i·re:ce seen as placing great 
pressure on Thailand and encouraging Indonesia to increase its pressure 
on Mala;y-sia . 
Thai land, it I'TaS noted, had l1 an historic t endency to make 
' peace' with the side that seems to be "Tinning,11 and Malaysi a. ' s " a h-eady 
serious HaJ"a~"-· C~1inese prOblem" was cited . 
The Horking Group concluded: 
"We could do more i n Thailand and ,vith the British in 
Malaysia to reinforce the defense of these countries, the 
ini tial shoc..'k "rave 1-rould be great . .. f! 
This assessment vle.S quite close to that made in the 8 November draft in 
which Bundy had gone -on to point out that even if vIe succeeded in over-
coming t he shock we.ve in Thail and and Malaysi a , "the struggle '\vould b e 
uphill for a long time to come . f! 
But in neither case vTaS much credence 
placed i n the domino theory-. 2J../ 
It should be noted that Admiral Mustin and the JCS did not agree 
vTith this assessment . 
The Admiral commented that t he JCS believed the 
so-ce.lled domino theory "to be the most r ealistic estimate for Cambodia 
and 1'hailand, :probably BlLrma, possibly Malaysia . ". In the conte:x-t of 
l {ite 196~ , these nations \Tere exuected to colla:pse "plai nly and simply 
as t he corollary to our 1-1i thdraw~ l. I! 541 
Accordingly, a specific no-
tation of the differing vie1.'point of the J CS vTas pl aced in the I'lorking 
Grou~o 's f'l' n 1 
t 
5 I 
-
__ 2. 
re:por. 
5 
.17 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - S:cnsitive 
In summarizing its assess~ent of the consequences of COIT@unist 
control in South Vietnam, the \'lorking Group stated: 
"There are enough 
I ifs I in the above analysis so that it 
cannot be (;)ncluded that the loss of South Vietne.m. 'would soon 
have the totally crippling effect in Southeast Asia and Asia 
generally that the loss of Berlin "[ould have in Europe; but it 
could be that bad, driving us to the progressive loss of other 
areas or to t aking a stand at some point 180 tha!7 there would 
almost certainly be a major conflict and perhaps the great risk 
of nuc:j..e ar war . " 2§j 
b. 
~rolution of Options . 
The alternative courses of action 
perceived by the Working Group went through a fairly rapid evolution. 
As conceived by Chairman Bundy and John McNaughton , who apparently 
collaborated in their initial formulation, the ontions vould offer a 
,vide range of military actions and diplomatic postures . 
As the vieivs 
of other members and interested officials ~ere expressed , and as it 
becaIile more apparent hOi, little flexibility was perceived i,rith respect 
to national ob<l ecti ves, subtle changes occurred . 
The effect \Vas to 
narrOiv somei'That the range of effects which the different options might 
achieve and to t end to b 1m' the distinctions bet\'Teen them . 
Hm·rever, 
the process occurred so early in the life of the Working Group that it 
is difficult to pin-point the changes and someifhat presumptuous, relying 
only on documentary ~vidence, to explain them. 
The perceived options i,rere three in number , label ed A, B, and 
C. 
Option A essentially- ifas a continuation of military and naval actions 
currently unden-ray· or previously authorized, to include prompt reprisals 
for attacks on U. S. facilities or other VC 
IIspectaculars" in South 
Vietnam . 
These i{ere to be accompani ed by continued resistance to a 
negotiated settlement unless stringent preconditions, amounting to 
agreement to abide by U. S. interpret ations of the Geneva. Accords, it[ere 
met. 
Option B consisted of current nolicies plus a systematic program 
of prog:cessi vely h eaV\J military pr es~ures against North Vietnam, to be 
continued until current objectives 'were met . 
Negotiations were to be 
reSisted , as in itA," although to be entered ultimately, but they were to 
be carried on in conjunction vlith continued bombing attacks . 
Option C 
combined current policies idth (1) additional - - but somewhat milder - -
military pressures against North Vietnam and (2) a declared "lilillingness 
to negotiate . 
Once negotiations \'Jere begu.l1, the military p:cessures >Tere 
to stop, although the threat to resume itlaS to be kept alive . 
In a g"neral sense , these distinctiol' S remained constant thrrmgh-
out the Horking. Group I s effort . 
Hm-lever, subtle changes occurred . 
In 
the initial concept j.on of tlB, 71 it Ivas perceived as 
Ilmeshing at some :point 
itTi th negotiations, II based on an underlying assumption that negotiations 
Ttlould probably be unavoidable . 57/ 
The full analysis of this earliest 
forrD. of "Bf! (discussed more full;{ later) makes it clear that SOIc.e kind 
of international discussions '. ~ould pro'oably begin fairly early and con-
tinue as the intensity of our militax'y ·pressures mounted. 58/ 
Moreover, 
18 
TOP SECRET -
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
it is evident that these pressuxes vlOuld be applied deliberately to permit 
1 
t · 
f 
,-
, 
t' 
".L' 1 f 
f "B" 
. 
eva ua -lon 0 
resul-cs at each step . 
Ye-c, 
ne lnllJla 
onn 0 
1vaS In-
tended to embrace high intensity options -- in Mctlaughton ' s terminology, 
a "full squeeze ." It vTill be recalled from the discussions earlier in 
the fall, that t'1is t erm vms al)plied to gradu&~ed operations that included 
mining harbors, bombing bridges and LOC t argets and eventually attacking 
industries. 59/ 
As Option B developed, hovrever , it became associated "lith 
prolonged resistance to a neo-otiated settlement. 60/ 
Moreover, although 
. 
b 
_ 
the intensity of the military operations it e.1nbraced remained about the 
s EHne, they Here perceived as being applied at a faster, less flexible pace . 
For example, in a comment about this option on 11+ Nove...'llber, Admiral Mustin 
1Hote: 
" ••• while the Joint Chiefs of Staff offer the capability 
for pursuing Option liB" as defined, they have not explicitly 
re con~mended that the operat ions be conducted on a basis 
necessarily that infle;:ible. All implementing plans ..• would 
permi t 
s~spension vThenever desired by national authority." 61/ 
Perceptions of Option C became more like liB." Initially, the 
additional pressures in "c" "Jere conceived as lTacLditional forceful measures 
and military moves ." 62/ 
They included such operations as extension of 
the current G.rmed escort of reconnaiss2 .. Ilce flights in Laos to full- fledged 
armed route reconnaissance __ gradually leading to similar attac1\:s against 
infiltration routes in the southern border regions of North Vietnam . 
The 
initial Option C also provided for authorization of the already planned 
for cross-border ground o~er ations in Laos and possibly in Cambodia . 
By 
8 November, hOI,rever, the pressure -cortion of this option 'Has perceived as 
(1) including eventual attacks against other-than-infiltration targets in 
North Vietnam and (2) giving ITthe impression of a steady deliberate 
approach, II the pace of v:hich could be quickened if necesse.ry . 
.Moreover, 
in this later development of ftC " the U.S. negotiating position would be 
to insist from the outset on fuil acceptance of the cUIrent U.S. objectives . 
Ini tiaUy this position iwuld incorpor~te certain additional bargaining 
elements that could drop out in the- course of discussion. 6~/ 
This modification of the pressure and negotiation aspects of "C 'I 
led other members of the Horking Group to express reservations. 
Robert 
J ohnson stated that this "proposed stiffer version" ',TaS little different 
" 
' II 
.. 
~ 
( 
) 
from B. 
He argued that the only real differences nO'iT 1-Jere 
1 
a 
declared vlillingness to negot.iate and (2) our m:n·;illingness under "C!! 
to carry the action through to its ultimate conclusions ." 
He cautioned 
that the nev; version 'Has unlikely to produce the hoped for advantages of 
IIpure C" a:1d tha:1; it could convince the Communists that our negotiatory 
spirit Has not sincere . 64/ Enclosed 1,vith his comments ,'Jere the views 
of the CIA member , "Tho also believed there vlOuld be confusion beti-Jeen "BI! 
and the nev; "c" -- particularly as observed by the DRV. 
Other reser-
vations '..rere expressed by Assistant Secretary IvkNaughton, v7ho urged that 
the proposed pace of the nev !lC" be slo~-red dO'dIl. 
This '{QuId be accomplished 
by dividing the additional press'LlTe oper;:ltions into distinct phases, id th 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
only the armed reconnaissance in Laos as Dart of the first phase . 
The 
OSD r epresentati.ve also urged not yielding to pressures to participate 
in a Geneva conference lLT1til after several military actions had been 
t~~en against the DRV. 65/ 
Of all the reservations stated above , only 
the last (delaying Geneva participation) was reflected in subsequent 
descriptions of Option C. 
Even Option A \Vas altered to some extent. 
The mai n emphasis for 
"A'l continued to be the currently adopted !,lolicies . 
At some time prior 
to 8 November (when the final analysis ivas drafted), interest I'Tas sho~rn 
in an Ilextended A." 
This version retained the poli cy of resisti ng nego-
tiati ons in hope that the situation ,wuld :L.m!,lrove, but it incor:porated 
l OY1- level pressure actions akin to the early stages of "C." 
The t Y'pe 
and intensity of the actions '\lOuld vary i n direct proportion to our 
success in convincing the lvorld and our mID public of the truth about 
Hanoi I s support , direction and control of the VC. II 
It might begin v!ith 
armed recon..na j.ssance in Laos , include greater naval activity along the 
coast, and gradually pha.se into strikes against LOC tal'Gets in North 
Vietna.m. 
I n t erms of military actions alone , extended trAil resembl ed 
closely the initial version of "C." 
Hm.,rever, it lvaS conceded that even 
an extended Option A did not offer a very promising means f or moving 
t m.,ra.rd negotiations . 66/ 
. 
Why did these changes t ~~e place? 
The avai lable doct~entary 
materlals do not make this entirely clear . 
One f actor ,vhich may have 
influenced the modifications in all three of the options vTaS recognition 
of the problem of conflicting signals that could result frOYIl reprisal 
actions . 
If reprisals Here designed to be forceful and :puni tive and 
intended to match the seriousness of VC provocations, they might be so 
strong as to interfere lrith the messages to Hanoi vlhich it ,-1as originally 
i ntended l\[QuId be conveyed by t he graduated pressures . 
I ndeed, it 'was 
pointed out that operations orders already developed by CINCPAC for 
retaliations in reS)Xlnse to attacks on DE SOTO Patrols 
( sho1J~d they be 
resumed) vlere "of m~gnitude vrhich Hould not be politically viable " except 
under extremely serious p:covocations . 67/ 
Moreover, it vTaS feared that 
improperly orchestrated reprisals might create lLndue international 
pressU2.'es for negotiations that could upset the negotiati ng strategy 
appropriate for the selected option. ~ . 
Both "A" and liB" may have been altered as a result of changes 
made i n "C. 11 
The objections raised to the ne"l "c" may have encouraged 
Chairman Bundy to i nclUde an extended "A" that \Tas closer i n the mi litary 
sense to his and MclJaughton I s original concept of graduated pressures . 
Ivloreoever , i t had been 'oointed out that the same negotiating si tue.tions 
s een as appropriate for- "e" (to include discussions of Laos and/or 
Cambodia as Hell as South Vietnam) could also apply to eventual negotia-
tions al':cived at th...rough "A." 69/ 
Besides , ioTith the stiffening of the 
"e" negotiating Inormula, the distinctions betvTeen the respective bar-
gaining :positions for "A" and "elf had become someiolhat blurred . 
Option B IS 
20 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive 
faster pace in its later versions may have been an attempt to mc~e a 
clear distinction bet'Jeen it and the nei'T "C." 
Use of the term 
"fast/full squeeze" in reference to ODtion B began concurrently v.ri th 
descriptions of the stiffer version of Option C. 70/ 
In addition, it is possible that the emphasis on a fast-paced 
IIB,II with its harsher measures , was motivated in pai't by a desire to 
make this option unattractive to higher authority. 
This may explain the 
rather perplexed tone of the previously cited Mustin comment comparing 
the JCS and Working Group approaches . 
Other than the JCS member, YLost 
of the 'Ivorking Group members appee.r to have favored less intensive 
pressures than those being advocated by the military . 
Despite a sense 
of high stakes in Southeast Asia, which vas shared by several members 
and other interested officials, many of these persons did not vrant the 
United States to plunge ahead vrith deeply committing actions as long as 
there vras some doubt a,bout the GVN I s durability and. commitment . 71/ 
Not incompatible vri th the forego i ng argument is a possible 
additional explanation for the stiffening of Option C. 
As U. S. obj ec-
tives came to be vie,fed some1Vhat less flexibly, it is possible that 
dominant elements in the Working Group thought it 8,dvisable to make 
IIC
II into a tougher position . 
There is little question that Option C 
vms the natural heir of the concept of graduated pressures coupl ed with 
a negotiated settlement advocated at several points earlier i n the year. 
Several of the Working Group memoe1's had been instrument al in shaping 
those proposals and lTere quite naturally attached to them conceptucdly. 
Now, advocates of the graduated approach 'VJere confronted with: 
(1) 
grea,ter pressu'ces from the JCS and their ljJ~e -t hinkers in the Congress; 
(2) recognition of little flexibility among Administration officials 
regarding interpretations of national interest and objectives; and (3) 
an increasingly critical situation in South Vietna~m. It is lL~ely that 
that these individuals viewed it necessaTY to stiffen their preferred 
approach in order to improve its compatibility '\-lith the current policy 
climate . 
'Iihatever the reasons , the options for reviei'T and discussions 
'tTere somewhat more closely a,like than the original conceptions had been. 
Option A provided for intensified efforts to improve the situation in 
South Vietnam and for somei'lhat intensified militery actions in line i'lith 
current policy. 
Inside South Vietnam it provided fo1' improvements i n 
the GVN administrative performance ~nd for strengthening different ele-
ments of the pacification p:.'ogram. 
These internal actions ,rere stressed 
as necessary r egardless of 'whatever other measures i'rere decided on. 
Option Als provi~ions for measures outside the country included: 
(1) 
continuing ~nd increasing the G~f ' s covert maritime harassment program; 
(3) resuming the DE SOTO Patrol opel'ations; (3) increasing the scope of 
Laotian T- 28 attacks on infiltration targets in Laos and (4) ivhen feasible , 
undertaking sme,ll-scale cross-border GV1T ground and air operations i nto 
.21 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
,.--------
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the Laotian Panhandle . 
The option also included individual U. S. reprisal 
actions "not only against such incidents as the Gu.lf of Tonkin 8.ttacks 
but also against any recurrence of VC 
I spectaculars I such as Bien Hoao I' 
The aim of these actions \-Tould be to deter repetitions of and to p 1.mish 
for such a.ctions in South Vietnem, "'out not to a degree that Iwuld 
create strong i nternational negotia.ting pressures ." 
Basic to O::,'tion A I'laS its provision for "continued rejection of 
negotiation in the hope that the . situation will improve ." 
Hmvever , i t 
i ncluded recognition that "the GVN itself, or i ndividual South Vietnamese 
in potentially pouerful positions" mi ght initiate "discussions "lith :rIa.noi 
or t he Liberation Front ." If a coalition govcrTl.ment ,,,ere thus arr2nged, 
the Horking Group believed, the odds "Tere t hat it Hould eventually I!be 
t aken over by the Comnnmi st element ." 
I n the event of such discussions , 
t he U.S. r esponse under Option A might be either (1) "stand aside," thus 
disassociati ng the United States f rau such a settlement, or (2) "seek to 
cover a retreat by accepting negotiations " tll..rough som~thing like s 
Geneva conference ) \-rhich might buy additional t ime . ]Jj 
Option B provided for everything i ncluded in "A" plus a program 
of U. S. military preSS1.U'es against North Vietnam . 
These were to con-
tinue "at a f airly rapid pace and Hithout i nterruption" UIltil the DRV 
agreed to stop supporting and direct ing the Ivar in South Vietnam and 
Laos . 
The pressures Ivere to begin itTi th attacks on inf iltration t argets 
and increase i n i ntensity; hOI'lever , the option included provision t hat 
an early attack on Phuc Yen airfi el d and certain key bri dge s in the 
northern part of North Vietnam might be required "to reduce the chances 
of DRV interference YTi th the spectrum of actions" that were contemplated 0 
Although our 'Public position on negotiations \vould be "totally 
i nflexible'l under Opt i~n B, it provided for recognition of the need to 
negoti at e eventually. 
Under B, this Ivould occur simul taneously wit h a 
continuation and escal ation of the pressures and Iwuld be based on 
", fl 
'bl 
' 
'.L. 
' 
~
' 
"
1\" 
th 1 
"B" 
In 
eXl 
e lnSls~ence on our present obJec·~lves
. 
~~ever _e ess , 
aclmmdedged the need "to deal 1¥ith cha.nnels of ffnternationay 
communi-
cation, the UN, a.nd perhaps __ despite our strong opposition -- a 
reconvened Geneva Conference of some sort l! even before l-re agreed to 
enter i nto settlement taL~s
. 
Moreover, ~Thile r esisting negotiati ons, 
the option provided for (1) ma..~ing lithe strongest possible public case 
of the importance, increase , 8Jld present intolerabl e level of DRV i n -
filtration" and (2) "strengthening t he picture of a military situation 
in South Vietnam requiring the application of systematic military for ce o If']]/ 
Option C provided f or every military act ion i ncluded i n !tA" plus 
"graduated military moves against i nfilt ration targets, first i n Laos and 
then in t he D3.V, B-Yl.d t hen against otb.er t a.rgets in North Vi etn21ll.. II 
The 
air strikes on i nfil tl'ation ::::'outes 'ilit hi n North Vietnam vlere to be pre-
ceded by 10l7-level reconnaissance flights over. t he s ame general area o 
Advantage Has seen in i nitiating such meaS1.U'es "fol1m·.'ing eithe:r; additional 
· 22 
TOP SECF~T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
VC ' spectaculars' 01' at least strona additional eVlClence of major infil-
o 
tration.fI Moreover , Option C made provision for the possibility of 
making a flsignificc:.nt grolilld deploYillent to the northern part of South 
Vietnam, either in the form of a U. S. combat force or a SEATO-members 
force
fl &s an e..d.chtional bargaining counter . 
1.1 any event, flCfI "lms 
intended. to fI give the im:oression of C'. steady delibere.te approe,chfl and 
fldesigned to give the D. So the option at any time to proceed or not, to 
escalate Or not, and to quicken the pace or not . I! 
In "c fI 
. 1 . t 
' b" 
"'n ' d b-
II o-rm'u'''n; 
, 
ml_l ary pressures i-Tere""Co 
e aCCOll!.po. le 
y 
c 
J..U.1 
u..J. 
_
-
cations -vrith Hanoi and/or Peiuingll indicating in essence lI a 'willi ngness 
to negotiate in a.n. affirmativ~ sense . I! 
From the outset ''\.Te -vTOuld be .•• 
accepting the possibility that 
-VTe might not achieve our full obj ectives . II 
Accordingly, the concept for IICI! included provision for an initial nego-
t iating position that ~dded II certain bargaining el ements " to t he basic 
U. So obj ectives . 
Once negotiations started the :milit ary pressures i'lOuld 
cease . 
As in fiB," these i'lOuld be preceded by a vigorous program of 
public information efforts and political consultations "lvith Congress i onal 
leadel's and foreign allies , surf-a.cing information on DRV i nfiltration and 
explaining our rationale for action . 
The latte:!.' \vould be IIthat docum.ented 
DRV illegal infiltration of armed and trained. insurgents , and over-all 
DRV direction and control of VC insu:cgency, had nO-VT ree.ched en i ntolerable 
l evel Emd that it was nOl! necessary to hit at the infiltration . 00 and to 
bring pressure on Hanoi to cease this infiltration and direction .
1I 7~/ 
Co 
Significance of Negotiations . 
One of the most significant 
aspects of the NSC Horking Grau]) , s ancQyses vas its emphasis on a 
negotiated settlement as the final outcome of cont~mplated U. S. actions . 
Regardless of the option selected or the pressUYe actions 6uployed, inter-
national negotiations in some form \'Te"-'e perceived as the means by 'vhich 
the situation in Southeast Asia Hould ultimately be r elieved . 
Even in 
the event of a unilateral GVN or a South Vietnamese splinter negotiat ion 
"lith t he NLF, under circulllstances of a re18.ti vely shalloYT U. S. commit-
ment (Option A), negotiation under a Geneva format ';TaS regarded as e. 
prefere.ble outcome 0 75/ 
HOI-leVer , it i s also clear the.t a parallel aim 
"laS to insure that pressures on behalf of such negotiations did not be-
come compelling before the U.S. bargaining position could be improved. 
Also Significant i s the fact that the kind of settlement which 
,vas seen as the purpose of negotiation I'Tas one vhich would end North 
Vietnam's participation in the conflicts in Southeast Asia -- and con-
currently, also end tile United States ' direct participation (as it Ivas 
in 1964) i n those conflicts . 
In vie"l" of thE: preval ent Administration 
perception of No_'th Vietnam as instig8.tor and 3.ggl'essor in the conflict 
.. Ii thin South VietnG1l1, it is i ronic that the Horking Group I s considera-
tions of a negotiated settlement did not include the problems of a poli-
tical settlement in tb.e South. 
I n the available source materials , this 
subject YTas r e.ised only once and even then Has not dealt 1-lith further . 
Theone i nste.nce "Tas in the context of Robert Johnson ! s analysis of 
. Option B. 
In it he pointed out thc.t if a fully successful "B" negotiation 
23 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
resulted (one in 'which the DRV in f act complied ivith our de~ands to the 
extent that we ceased OU!." pressure act.ions) '\ore "muld then have t o 
. 
consieler . o • \vbether or not to mal~e compromises -- such as, for example, 
accept less than perfection for international supervisory mechanism, 
agree to permit ~he NLF to become a l egitlluate political party in the 
South, or agree to Doli tical consultations behTeen GVN and DRV . It 76/ 
In other 'Horels) at the level of the Horking Group ' s 2.nalysis, the-
poli ~ical stakes for i'lhich the game in Vietnam vTaS really being played. 
and "che very pO~'Terful and relevant cards held by the DRV and the VC 
ivere not really considered. 
To continue the analogy, the Working Group 
concerned itself only I-!ith the various opening bids the United States 
might make in order to 8.chieve a position from i-Thich it coulel attempt 
a finesse . 
The main problem apparently recognized by the Ivorking Group 
Ivas that, given its current objectives the United States had fevT bar-
gaining points ivith Ivhicb to ne.o·otiate ~ 
In essence, it vTaS primarily 
to fill this lack that many gro~n members and Administration officials 
favored initiation of direct military pressures against North Vietnam . 
To ~ome, bombing atte.cks Here something that might then be removed as 
an lnducement for the DRV to StOD or to reduce its support of the mili-
tary operations in South Vietnam~ and Laos . 
To others, such vigorous 
measures might at least serve as a demonstration of U. S. resolve to 
combat external aggression but also 2"S a screen behind vThich to extract 
ourselves should the situation in South Vietnam deteriorate further . 
Gaining maximum bargaining advantage from the military measures 
contemplated u...'1der each of the options vTaS one of the major emphases in 
t he Working Group ' s analyses . 
For example, llilder itA, tI emphasis was 
placed on obtaining moxiro.um levere.ge from exploiting the th...reat of 
further escalation -_ to be demonstra:ted primarily through reprisal 
actions a.l'1d deployments . 
Under tlB, tI a similar kind of psychological 
levera~~ ,<TaS to be achieved through the clearly ascending nature' of 
the aC~lons , particularly i f some tble were penaitted to assess results o 
Under ltC, tI tbe effect vIaS to be achieved by the combined effects of 
(1) me..ximizing the t:h..reat of imnending escalation after each graduB.ted 
and ca:cefully pCl.ced step and (2) minimizing the COIT!lnunist gove:cnlllents I 
problems of tl face" as thev moved to"{ard ne.aotia;tion . 77/ 
u 
' 
Q 
_ 
. I t vTaS the recognized lack of strong bargaining points that l ed 
t he Horking Group to consider the introduction of ground forces i nto the 
no:ctheTn provinces of South Vietnam. 
In advancing this proposal, the 
State POlicy Pla~ning Council member pointed. out that tI,'Thatever the 
stated U. S. intentions, It the Co:rnmul1ists -wouJ_d proo8.bly expect to put en 
end to all air and naval attacks on Horth Vietnam merely by ag:reei ng t o 
enter negotiations . 
In that event , he pointed out, the Unit.ed States 
could.n~t use these pressures (or the promised relief from them) as a 
ba:-galnlng COll..i1ter during negotiations . 
I I~ ground forces vTere deployed 
prlor to an Obvious need to combat invadLl'1g enemy troops , this dis-
position could be used as such a counter . 
Their deployment tlwould, 
'24 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
moreover, carry with it the threat of subsequent ai r and naval ,attacks 
against North Vietnam . 
And,1I he continued, IIthreat may be as important 
as execution ... in producing desired Comn1.Unist react ions. II 78/ 
Althoug:1 initially advocated, as a vaLlable ba,rgaining piece 
for all the options, the concept of c1ep19ying ground forces for this 
pur'pose became associated ,Iii th Options A or C. 
In the former case , it 
\'Ta~ urged \'lith recognition that IIAII offered little l everage for be,rgain-
ing other than hoped for ~~provement in the GVN's i nternal ailininistration 
and pacification efforts. 
For' IIC II it vms peJ;'ceived much in the sense in 
'Hhich it \'ms originally proposed __ serving as an additional negotiating 
ploy before it might be needed as an o~erational military capacity. 
Such 
a fOl'ce 'Has seen as taking either of t~o forms : 
(1) a U.S. como8,t force, 
probably of division strength, or (2) a force composed of contingents 
from cer't8.in SEATO members (Austre.lia, New Zealand, the UK, Thailand and 
the Philippines). 
Inter'esting, in vieI'T of subsequent events, is the fact 
that participation by South Korea and the Republic of China specifically 
was not to be sought, 
(This may also h8.ve been significant of the Ad-
ministration's tendency at the time to vievT Corrrrnunist China as co-insti-
gator of the Vietnamese aggression .) 
The contemplated ground force 
deployment also 'I'las seen as serving some au.xillary functions: 
(1) to 
deter DRV ground force deployments i nto South Vietnam; (2) by t aking 
blocking positions, to reduce the infiLtration into the South thr'ough 
Laos; and (3) (in the case of the multi.,national force) to improve the 
int ernational picture of our 8.ctions in South Vietnam by virtue of 
visible international par'ticipation . 121 
As stated pr'eviously, the primary bargaining element in Option B 
''las the application of clearly ascending military strikes against North 
Vietn81n. 
These vrould be halted only in return for demonstrated DRV com-
plia.'I1ce "Tith demands that it stop supporting and directing military 
operations in South Vietnam and Laos. It vTaS pointed out that DRV 
compliEmce under pressure '\vould be tanta.rnolmt to surrender . 
Further, 
if 'we insisted that compliance i nclude calling off all acts of VC 
ter'rorism and of resistance to pacification efforts in South Vietnam, 
it \oJ'Ould mean IIvirtual unconditional surrender . II 80/ 
To obtain such 
high stakes, the group recogni zed that intensive pr'essures ,wuld be re-
quired. 
BOliever, it also recognized that the combination of extreme 
demands and harsh actions vTould be most likely to produce adverse inter-
national reaction and incre8.sed pressur'es for an early cease-fire and 
negotiations . 
The basic political obj ective perceived for Option B 'was to 
IIprevent internAtional consideration .•. from if'terfering with our continu-
ing pressures against the DRV u.'I1til the DRV has taken the actions vie 
desire of it. II 
In vie'i'l of the eX'oected demands for an early cease-fire, 
it 'Has believed advisable to pres~nt the U. S. case in the United Nations 
at the time IIBII military oper'ations i'Jere initi2.ted. 
This, it vIas felt, 
v!ould chal'h"1el some of the international pressures into a controlled 
, 25 
TOP SECREf -
Se~sitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
~OP SEC~ET - Sensitive 
envirolliaent I'There the ensuing discussions "Tould likely consume considerable 
time. 
.Moreover, ta.king such initiatives "Tould avoid the defensive posture 
that the United states ,<TQuld be placed in if our milit ary actions vTere 
introduced for condemnatory purposes by another governmento 
The vlorking 
Group stressed t~lat under Option B, the Uni teo. states should firmly resist 
a Geneva-·type conference until it heed obtained assurances of DRV compli-
ance "lith its demands. 
Should the pressures for negotiation become too 
fOrmidable to resist ancl discussions begin before a Co:rmnunist agreement to 
comply, it '\vas stressed that the United States should define its negotia-
ting position "in a vray Ilhich makes COYlIrmmist acceptance unlikely . " 
In 
this manner it vlOuld be made lIvery likely that the conference vTould breall: 
up rather rapidly, II thus enabling our military pressures to be reSUIDGc'L . §lj 
The only option that provided for bargaining in the usual sense 
of the vTord 'vas Option C. 
The Working Group intended that ,'iith the ini tia-
tion of this option and the U.S. declaration of willingness to negotiate, 
the Administration "lOuld have embarked on a ba:cgaining course . 
In the 
group IS vievT, 'Ife 'Iwuld stick to our full obj ectives 8.t the outset Ilbut 
"re would have to accept the possibility that, as the vThol e situation 
developed, 'He might not 8.chieve those full objectives lIDless He "Tere pre-
pared to take the greater risks envisaged under Option B. " 
In such cir-
cumstaJ1CeS, it acknOl'Tledged , "it might become desirc,ble to settle for less 
than complete assurances on our key objectiveso" 82/ 
. 
Accepting in principle the possible need to compromise the initial 
U. So position under Option C, . the Working Group specified a somevJhat 
hardened definition of that position. 
The initial negotiating objective 
( lithe complete termination of DRV support to the insUJ.'gency .•. II ) was 
refined to specify that it incorporated three fundamentals: 
( a ) that the 
DRV cease its assistance to and direction of the VC; (b) that an indepen-
dent and secure GVN be reestablished; and (c) that there be adequate 
international supervising machinery'. il Specific areas of IIgi veil for the 
bargaining process 'were identifiec:' 8,S the question of free elections and 
the degree of verification vTe vlOuld require 0 
The group further provided 
tha.t during negotiations the intensity vTi th 'I>Jhich the United States ,[ould 
pursue its initial objectives "Tould vc.ry ,-lith the extent of improvem.ent 
within the GlnJ . 
If the situation in South Vietnam got better the United 
States vlOuld press haTder for acceptance of its initial position . 
If the 
situation grew' vlOrse, !lIve ,vould ha~e to decide whether to intensii"y our 
military actions, mOdif'Jr our negotiating positions, or both . II 83/ 
Because of a declared "Tillingness to negotiate from the outset, 
the approach to a negotiating situation under Option C 'ivas vie"led by the 
'-Jorking Gr,:mp as considerably different from that under Option B. 
vlhereas , 
in the latter case it i'Tas believed that the UN iwuld provide the most 
useful medium for discussions , the preferred approach uJlder Option C ,vas 
till'ough a. Geneva-ty-pe meet ing. 
The channels, both dil"ect fu'1d indiTect, 
to Hanoi I'jere not believed useful for negotiating purposes . 
Although po-
tentie.lly helpfUl in relaying impressions of current c..ttitudes and 
negotiating positions in Hanoi and Peking, the Soviet government '-TaS not 
26 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
seen as a. useful negotiating i ntermediary . 
The UN vTas viewed as present-
ing a special proble~ because of the approaching annual issue of Con$nunist 
Chinese membership. 
For this reason the Horking Group felt that it \-!auld 
not provide an effective negot i ating forum until late February or March 
1965, although i+. aCf"illOldedged the necessity of presenting the U. S. case 
before the Security Coul:1cil. 
In view' of these considerations the Working 
Group vie,·red it most desirable to yield to the expected pressures for a 
Geneva conference -- but only after conducting "a number of military 
actions against the DRV . 11 84/ 
d . 
Perceived Reactions to Options . 
The Working Group evaluated 
the relative advantages and disadvantates of the three options and con-
cluded that Option C provided the most promising course of action . 
The 
evaluation 'lias based on three general criteria: 
(1) likely reactions of 
allied and non-aligned foreign governments ; (2) reactions I·rithin South 
Vietnam.; and (3) effectiveness in bri..11.ging desired responses from the 
Communist government. 
With. respect to the first, the group reported: 
I1011tion A vTOuld cause no adverse reactions but if it failed 
it Iwuld l eave a considerable after-taste of U. S. failuT e and 
i neptitude; Option B wouid run major risks of sharply expressed 
condenmation , which i{Quld be erased only if the course of action 
succeeded quite clearly and in reasonable tline ; Option C would 
pr obably be in bet"'reen in both respects . II 
With respect to the r emaining criteria, Option A seemed likely to achieve 
little more than buying some t ime , and in some respects it appeared 
counterproductive . 
While Option B was viewed as standing l1a greater 
chance than either of the other t"lo[Q of attaining our obj ective s," it 
also was seen as running "considerably highe:c risks of major military 
conflict with Hanoi and possibly COlYl.Inunist China . " 
On balance , Option C 
was considered "more conti-ollable and less risky of major military action" 
than "B" and more likely "to achieve at least part of our obje ctives" than 
"A. " 85/ 
The Working Group reported that Option A appeared to offer "little 
hope of getting Hanoi out or an independent South Vietnam re-.established . II 
I t was recognised that the actions included in this option could not 
physically affect the extent of infiltration from the North and vTould not 
be likely to affect Ha11.oi ' s determination to continue its policies . 
At 
best, the group believed, "they might • • • keep the DRV from engaging in 
further spectaculars, ~11.d thus keep the scale of the conflict in the south 
vTithin some limits 0 
" 
Hm-Tever, Option A \-Tas conceded little chance of con-
tributing to an improved G\~, in the short period of additional time its 
effects might possibly make available . 
The group recognized sagging morale 
ap.d doubts concerning U. S. intentions as the "most i..rmnediate problem" in 
South Vietnam. 
Several members f elt that without fill'ther U. S. actions, 
political collapse '\'Tas irruninEmt -- that to add only reprisals for VC 
spect a.culars might lift morale immedi ately thereaft~r , as in the case of 
. 27 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the Tonkin Gulf reprisals, but 1-TOuld not have lasting effect . 
At best , 
under "A, II it I'las believed that the gradual deterioration in the c01.mtry-
side of South Vietnam would continue. 86/ 
Althoug~ the \{orld.ng Group vie,fed a c:~cision to continue Option A 
indefinitely as ruling out either "B" or IIC , " i t di d suggest the possi-
bility of extending I'A" to its limits and gradually phe.sing i nto opera-
tions like those in Option C. 
It \Vas suggested that tllis might , over 
time , generate "favorable, or at least not uJlfavorable , II domestic and 
international reaction ",hich along ,{ith the increasing cost of gradual 
disruption in I~orth Vietnam might cause Hanoi to slow down its i nfi ltra-
tion . 
However, the result of this process, at best, vmuld be a gradual 
improvement of the Do S. positi on ,{ithout advancement toward a meaningful 
settlement . 87/ 
Lacking a deliberate attempt to phase i nto something 
like "C, " Option A 'vas vielved as "an indefinite course of action ." As 
such, its IIs01e advantages " I'Tere seen as: 
" ( a ) 
defeat vmuld be clearly due to GVIJ failure, an<l 
,{e oUTselves Ivould be less :Lrnplicated than if 've tried 
Option B or Option C, and failed; 
"(b) 
t 
t he most likely result I'Tould be a Vi e namese-
negotiated deal, QDder which an evehtually unified 
Corrnnunist Vietnam "TOuld reassert its traditional hos-
t ility to Communist China and limit its mffi ambitions 
t o Laos and Cambodia . " 88/ 
The group r S assessment VTent on to indicate that should this occur , Thai -
l and ,Tould likely conclude that "we simply could not be counted on, and 
"Tould accommodate somehm-T to Commlmist China even '.vi thout any marked 
military move by Cormmmist China." 89/ 
The Horking Group reported that the actions in Option B offered 
a number of unique advantages relative to the othel' options : 
"1 O' 
t h 
. 
ption B probably stands a greater chance . an 
e i ther of the other t'ITO of attaining our objectives 
vis-a-vis Hanoi and a settlement in South Vietnam. 
" 2 . 
0 
d ' 
. 
t . 
ld 
ur 
lsplay of reC'ol muscle ln ac lon 1-TOU 
un-
doubtedly have a salutary effect on the morale of t he 
r est of non-Communist Asia . 
"3 . 
Th~ course of military events vis-a-vis Communi st 
China might give us a defensible case to destroy the Chinese 
ComnrlL.'1.ist nuclear production capability." J2J 
Hmvever Option B was also seen to present some unique problems 
and to possibly lead to some undesirable results . 
For example, most of 
, 28 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive. 
the group believed O~otion B "rould risk an impaiTment of the ItU. S. stand-
ing in the NATO and European fTe.me'iwrk . It 
The option "Tas believed likely 
to produce 8. majoT conflict and these effects "ifere seen as quite probable 
if it Itproduced anything less than an early and completely satisfactoTY 
outcome . It 91/ 
=-".coblems '\<Tere also perceived aJu home . 
It \las pointed 
out that a..YJ.Y U. S. -initiated militaTY pTessures against North Vietnam 
should be consistent "Tith the provisions of the Joint Congressional 
Resolution passed follm.Ting th~ Tonkin Gulf incidents, but that Option B 
would be difficult to justify under the authorities cited in this resolu-
tion . 
ItCharacteTizing the use of force in the context of this 
alternative as a legitimate exercise of the right of indi-
vidual OT COllective self-defense in res'oonse t o an "armed 
attacklt from the North would be a major public relations 
effort . II 
Noreover, given the pace and IH~ely intensity of escalation in this option, 
it was suggestecl that lithe constitutional preroga.tives of the Congress, 
for exa.m;>le, to declare "i'lar '/youl{j become - peTtinent . It ~ 
As seen by the Working Grou~ the most disturbing aspect of 
Option B ,·;as its almost irreveTsible commitment to a major military 
effort, the ultimate nature of which vTaS difficult to predict . 
That 
Hanoi would yield to U.S . demands at an early stage of ItB II 1-TaS considered 
unlikely. 
,The chances vTere considered II significantly g.ceaterlt that the 
DRV would TetaUa.te , either by air attacks on the South or a ground offen-
sive either in Laos or into South Vietnam. 
It 'Nas considered most likely. 
hOI Tever , that Hanoi 'Hould continue to hold firm, thus requiring the Uni tecl 
States to "up the ante militarily." Hi th further increases in our mili-
tary pressure, the group argued , lithe odds would necessari ly start to 
increase that Hanoi. . olwuld either start to yield by some real actions 
to cut dmm, or 'iTould move itself to a more drastic military responseo It 
The Working Group then cautioned: 
ItWe could find ourselves dravTl1 into a situation I'There 
such miU tary actions as an amphibious la...YJ.ding i n the DRV 
- - proposed as one of our further actions -- moved us very 
far to'.la.Td continuing occupation of DRV soil. Alternatively, 
t he volmne of international noise ... could reach the point 
i'There , in the interest of our \wrld-i'iide obj ect ives , 've iwuld 
have to consider accepting a negotiation on terms that "TOuld 
r elatively but not necessarily be "rholly favorable to the 
attainment of our fu~l obj ectives . I I 2~ 
Option C ,vas pa:cticularly attractive to the Horking GTOUp because 
it '!,Tas beli eved to be more controllable and, therefore , l ess deeply com-
l!litting than "Bc II 
MOTeover , in the event of a GVN collapse (recognized 
as a danger lU1cler all of the options), the group aTgued, trour ha.ving taken 
strongel' meaSUTes I-Tould still leave us a good deal better off than under 
29 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Option A "lith respect to the confidence and \'lillingness to stand firm of 
the nations in tb~ next line of defense in Asia . II 
9L~/ 
The r eactions to "CIf expected by the Horking Group differed 
from "B" primarily as 8. resuit of the U. S. negotiating posture . 
The 
initial strikes 2.gainst ta,rgets in North Vietnam ,{ere seen as a "first 
break-point, II marking the beginning of major international pressures for 
negotiation. 
Communist reactio~s to the early pressures i·jere regarded 
as little different from "B . II 
Some chance of a milite.ry response Iras 
conceded, but it I-Tas thought more li};:ely that the DR'! 1-Tould IIhold :firm 
ylhile stimulating condemnation of fihe United StateEJ by world opinion, 
and , if in negotiations) take a tough position." 
Under IIC," hOi-lever, 
our r esponse ,muld not necessarily be an irn.medie.te increase in press~e . 
If the GVN situation had improved "yle Kould try to capitalize on [J.y 
•. • by pressing h2.rder for acceDtance of our initia l negotiating position ." 
Ba,r:ring success, the pl'essures - yTOuld continue,' &Dd the Horking Group 
recognized that the likely dragging out of the "Jar at this point would 
probably lead to a resumption of deteriorating trends in South VietnaJn . 
I t stated : 
If In this case 
\Ve iwuld have to decide i'Thether to intensify 
our military actions, mOdify our negotiating positions or both." If 
U. S. military- measures 'I:ere increased at this point it was expected the,t 
11th 
1 
. 
C 
.
, 
er e ,-lOU d be a prog-.cessi vely increasing chance of maJor 
orr..munlSt; 
military response) II such as those considered tUlder liB." 
I f the U. S. 
negoti ating position were modified at this point , the group perceived 
a Ilmajor problem., in that key nations on both sides Kould suspect t hat 
,ve wel"e getting ready :for a "ayout ." Therefore, i t suggested that 
additional military actions, possibly including greater deplo;;'.'Irlents to 
Southeast Asia, vlOuld need to accompany the modifying moves . 95/ 
The major disadvant ages of Option C ack:lO\dedged by the Horking 
Group 1,'iaS its tendency to tlstretch- out" the confrontation and expose 
the United States to an increasing variety of pressures Gild criticism . 
For exaraple, the group e,c}mowl edged that GVH mOl.'ale and effectiveness 
ivere likely to suf':fer 2.t several Doints in the course OI~ the options : 
(1) upon initial U. S. agreement t~ enter negotiations; (2) as it became 
clear that the war ,vas dragging on; and (3) "lith modification of t he 
U. S. negoti2.ting position . 
It also recognized several measures that 
the Cormnunists might t~~e during a prolonged, indecisive period to 
reduce our initial advantage : 
(1) improving air defenses i n North 
Vietnam; (2) deyloying Chinese groul1d forces southvmrd; and (3) hard-
ening their prOpagand2. . 
Whi le i ncreasing t he enemy ' s publ ic commitment 
to its current line of policy, these measures \wuld not serv-e as clear 
acts of escalation . 96/ 
These difficulties and other u..l1certainties encompassed by 
Option C illustra.te the intensity yTith T.-Thicn most members of the NSC 
Ivorking Group iHnted the United States to couple limited military com-
mitments \-li th a negotie.ted settlement to relieve our position in Vietnam. 
The fact that the group judged "c II as preferable to ".qn or liB, II despite 
its rather obv~ous inherent problems makes this evident . 
(One ~ight also 
30 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
have -viel1ed it as evidence that United Sta.tes 'policy in Southeast Asia 
was fraught 'l'Ti th real contradictions,) 
For <2-X21l1:91e, the one feature 
that gave O.ption HCI! its most distinctive character -- early willing..l1.ess 
to negotiate -vri thout the concurrent effects of continually mount{ng 
military pressures -- ';'Tas its most uncert2.in a 'peet . 
This pe..rticular 
part of the analysis 'Has revised tHice bet',veen the final drafting of 
the group I s findings and their consideration by the Principals . 
More -
over, the Working Group had received at least one informed judgment 
to the effect tnat , given H2,noi I s high stakes in South Vietnam and its 
perceived opportunity to deal the United States a major blow, the DRV 
would not be likely to negotiate in response to any of the options . 211 
On the eve of the initial meeting "ith the Principals, Chairman Bundy 
called. early negoti ations I!the least satisfactory part of the present 
script . II 
In particula.r it ~ms recognized as difficult to IIkeep up our 
ShovT of determination and at the same tline listen for nibbles . II 98/ 
In many respects Oution C see.rns to have been favored primarily 
for "That it incorporated -_ for the means i t employed -- rather than 
for vhEl.t it might achieve . 
It certainly vTas not presented as an opti-
mistic a.lternative . 
Under IlC,U the group perceived that I!at best ..• 
the DRV might feign compliance and settle for an OPPOl't unity to subvert 
t he South another day . Il 
This stood in marked contrast to 'I .. hat it per-
ceived as the "at best" outcome of I!B, II namely that Hanoi "might be 
r eady to sit dO\m and Horle out a settlement in some form that '\'lOuld give 
a restoration of the 1954 agreements, !! hopefully Hith firmer guarantees . 
Moreoyer, with IIC, I! the group believed that i n behveen the best and 
'Horst outcomes , the United states "might be faced ',vi th no improvement 
i n the internal South Vietna1l1 situation and ivith the difficult decision 
whether to escal ate on up to major conflict vTith China .!! 99/ This ldnd 
of outcome promised little more than the group perceived, as available 
through "A" - - and l'rithout the additional commitment of national pres-
tige and military force . 
But it 'Ivas an outcome readily perceivable 
from a policy that clu..l1g tenaciously to rather major objectives but 1.iaS 
reticent to accept major risks . 
5. 
Vieus From Outside the NSC ~I}'orking Grou? 
Vlhile the NSC 'Horking Group vTaS preparing its findings for sub-
mission to the Principals, other sources of influential opinion 'l'Tere 
communicating their vie-i'Ts to these individuals . 
In addition, it is im-
portant to consider that members of the vTorking Group ivere most likely 
communicating their r espective impressions of group :prog-..cess to the 
principal Official in the agencies they representedo 
ThUS, William 
Blmdy no doubt s~ared i dea.s "Tith Sec:cetary Rusk; John I.lcNaughton 'I'lith 
Secretary l<1cNanl£'..ra; Harold Fo:cd ,OTi th CL'i. Directol' ~llcCone ; and Admiral 
Mustin "lith General Wheeler, 
Some of these F-..cincipals no doubt had 
injected particular ideas i nto the gl'OUp ' S deliberations . 
~I}'hatever the 
source , these high officials i'rere exposed to a ve.riety of suggestions and 
vieupoi nts before reacting directly to the 'Horking (}r oup I s submissions . 
31 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The follO\'ling seC-Glons deal .lith two rather significant sources 
of ideas \>Those communications reached Secrete.ry j\lcNa.mara . 
HO\"ever, their 
vim'Ts "Tere kno,'ffi to other members of the Principals Group as 1;7ell, 
through the normal interdepartmental coordination p~ocedures . 
Tliese 
propose.ls are si:;;nificant also because of their rather contending vie'w-
points on the subject of D.S . courses of action . 
a . 
JCS Vie,.rs . 
On four different occasions during the period of 
the \'lorking Group ' s existence, the JCS submitted. formal proposals for 
direct military strikes against North Vietnamese targets . 
On each 
occasion they took pains to remind the Secretary of Defense and other 
readers of their earlier recommendation for a preferred course of action, 
ivhich involved a systematic pattern of air attaci>.s on major t argets . 
On 14 November , tva such recornnendations Ivere made. 
One vTaS 
intended to bring about expansion of the GVN's covert operations, to in-
clude "air strikes by ur.Qna~ked aircraft" of the V'NAF. 
It specified that 
these vTere to be 'Isenarate and distinct from larger (more decisive) air 
stri..~e actions reco~ended . .• on 1 November 1964." 
The JCS stated that 
such smaller attacks vwuld be useful in: 
(1) continuing the pressure on 
the DRV; ( 2) encouragi ng GVN ieaders; (3) p~oviding useful air defense 
data; and (4) demonstrating patterns of DRV/Chinese reactions that could 
be helpful in planning larger operations. 100/ 
The other recorr~mendations 
came in response to Secretary Mcl'Janlara ' s request to examine possible 
DRV /CHICQI/I military reactions to U. S. air strikes against North Vietnam. 
In ansvTer, they discussed various Cor:mmnist military alternatives and 
Do S. means to counter them, and they described "Ilhat they vie-Iled as the 
most likely enemy reactions. 
These, they felt, ,,[ould be primarily in 
the propaganda and diplomatic spheres because of \'That vras perceived as 
China ' s general reluctance to become directly involved in conflict with 
the United Sta.tes o 
In addition, the JCS repeated their recommendations 
of 1+ November (with respect to the VC attacks on Bien Hoa) as r etaliatory 
actions equally applicable to any other serious ?rovocations . 
They ,{ent 
on to recol2Hnend deployments "to improve capabilities to conduct the 
program of air strikes" reco;ll1lJ.ended on L~ November 1964 . 101/ 
Four de.ys later they submitted another P1oOpOS8.1, in response 
to Secretary }i1cNa..."nara ' s interest in a possible program of graduated U. S. 
pressures against North Vietne.m . 
This possibility "Nas described as 
"a controlled progra'!l of systematically increased military pressures 
against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) applied in coordina-
tion vi th appl'opriate poll tical pressures . II 
(Interestingl.y, the Secre-
t ary ' s i nterest "Tas expressed on the sa.me day as NcNaughton ' s reactions 
to the dra.ft analysis of Option C.) 
The JCS refe10red to their statements 
of 4 and 14 November , describing their preferred course of action for 
cp,using the DRV "to cease supporting and directing the insurgencies II in 
South Vietnc.m. and Laos. 
HOI'lever, they also proposed an alterna.tive 
series. of specific actions, llshould a controlled program of systematically 
increased p:cessUJ'cs . .. be directed . 11 
Moreover, they recommended a set of 
operational objec:t:i.ves ,vhich they termed "appropriate" for such a gradu-
ated program, as follOi'TS : 
. 
32 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
lIao 
Signal the ',villingness and deterBination of' the 
United States to em~loy incYeasing f'orce in support of ... an 
independent and stable noncommunist govermnent in RVN and 
a f'ree and neutral Laos ..•. 
"b. 
Reo.uce, progl.'essively, DRV support of the insur-
gencies in Rv}: and Laos to the extent necessary to tip the 
balance clearly in favor of the Governments of RVN and Laos 
by: 
"( 1) 
Reduction of the arnou,,"1t of support avail2.ble 
through destruction of men , material, and 
suppo:l'.'ting facilities; 
"(2) 
.. . jj.ng through diversion of DRV Y0S01JYCeS to 
i ncreased homeland defenses and alc:::ts ; and 
"(3) 
Reduct ion of the rate of delivery of e.v ailable 
support through destruction of bridges and 
other LOC choke points •.. and throug~1 interrup-
tion of movements • ... 
"c. 
ful1.ish the DRV for DRV - supported milit ary act i on s 
by the Viet Cong/Pathet Lao ... 0 
lid . 
Terminate the conflict i n Laos and RVN only under 
condi tions 'tThich ~'iOuld result in the achiev6TI.ent of U. S. 
objectives ." 102/ 
The final JCS proposal to be subnitted relative to the "courses 
of action
ll debate in Fovember 1964 came in direct response to the NSC 
Working G)~OUp' s draft papers, circulated to interested agencies for 
comment on 17 November . 103/ 
Criticizing the group ' s assessment of U. S. 
stakes and interests, the JCS called Southeast Asia lIan area of major 
strategic importance to the United States , t he loss of vrhich woul d l ead 
to grave political and nilitary consequences in the entire Western 
Pacific, and to serious political consequences 'Iwrld-vTicle ." 
They r e j.t-
erated their vie'.·r that the best probability of success in attaining the 
currently recognized U,S. obj ectives in that region 'i'TOuld be "by achiev-
ing the prerequisite objective of causing the cessation of DRV support 
and direction of the insUl'gencies i n RVN and Laos . II lO~/ 
The JCS also critici2ed the three options described by the Work-
i ng Group and outlined five alternatives to them, in an ascending order 
of intensity : 
1. 
Te:cminate commitments i n South Vietnam and Laos and 'i'Ti thdraw' 
as gracefully as possible . 
The JCS called this "implicit in the content 
of the NSC I{orking Group paper but ... not clearly identified as a separate 
and distinct option .1! 
·33 
TOP SECr~T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
2 . 
Cont inue act ions contained vTi thin pre sent poli cies , inc lud-
ing reprisals fo~ VC provocations . 
The JCS identified this a.s the 
. 
group ' s Option A but sta.ted that the added demands it placed on t.he DRV 
. 
" 
. 
. 
R1T11T
" 
I 
were 
nO"G commensurate \·rith those imposed by DRV or .l v~,
. 
n essence , 
they agreed "vith the Horking Group ' s evaluatio:1 t hat this alternative 
would neither accomplish our objectives nor alleviate the critical 
situation in South Vietnam . 
3. 
Undertake graduated military and political initiatives to 
apply additional preSSlITeS against the DRV, 
v-Tithout necessarily determining in 8.dvance to I"hat 
degree lye \'rill comIui t oUl'selves to achieve OUT ob-
jecti ves, or at ';ihe.t Doint He might stop t o nego-
tiate, or "That our negotiating obj ecti ves might be 0 
The JCS stated that this alternative corresponded to the NSC 'Horking 
Group's Option C, I.".hieh they criticized for its !Iuncertain pace" and 
because it did not include " a clear determination to see things through 
l' n full 0 
" 
T' 
" 
1
'
" 
t ' 
11 
uld 
' t 
ney argued that such an 
inconc. USlve 
op lon 
co 
perTlll 
~11d encou'''''' 
" 
II 
"t' u 
" .
' 
t' 
Col 
...... age enemy bUlld-ups "GO counter OllY' mm, 
ana 
n s 
1 alse 
ne 
risks and costs to us of ea~h separate military unclel'taldng." 
4. 
Undertake a II controlled program" of graduated. military and 
political pressures, based on an l1 advanced decision to continue military 
pressures, if necessary, to the full limits of ,vhat military actions Ca.l1 
contribute to;.vard U. S. national objectives . " 
The JCS called this 
11 80 
vari ant and logical extension" of Option C and cited their proposal of 
18 November as a detailed description of it . 
5. 
Undertake a "controlled program of int ense military pres-
sures . .. designed to have major milite.:cy and psychological impact from 
the outset, and accompe.nied by appropriate political pressUTes ." 
The 
JCS offered this alternative i n lieu of the 'Horking Group ' s Option B 
I'Thich they stated lIis not a valid formulation of any authoritative 
vieHs kno
1,m to the JCS. 11 
In particular , they specified that their in-
tensive program vlould 
be undertal~en on the basis t hat it 'I-1Oul6. be carried 
t hrough , if' necessary, to the full lL~i.t of what 
military actions can contribute towm'd national ob-
j ectives; it vlould be designed, hmiever , for sus -
pension short of those lirni ts if objectives ,!;Tere 
earlier achieved .. 
For a full description of this alternative, they r eferred to their pro-
posal of' 14 November . 105/ 
Of the five alternatives , the JCS stated tbeir belief that only 
the last til'O offered II a probability of achieving [current U. S ~7 obj ecti ves . II 
. 34 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In addition to providing for stronger, more determined actions, these 
alternative s also provided for sizeable force build-ups th2.t "should , 
make miscalculation of U. S . resolve less likely. " 
Option C "ras objec -
tionabl e in their vie,'T because it did 'not permit "a clear set of agreed 
military objecti res" and because it urovided fJr "the contingency that 
as developments are analyzed, it may·be thought expedient to settle for 
less than complete achievement of our objectives for RVN and Laos c IT 
It 
is important to note that in outlining the l ast tv!O options, the JCS 
stressed that they called for "controlled" programs . 106/ 
In the 
mode of AcllJ1.iral Must in ' s memorandUt""TI, referr~d to earlier , they were 
apparently attempting to combat the Horking Group's inferences that the 
more intensive actions ',-rhich the JCS advocated were not controllable . 
It is f airly clear that group m~"11bers favori ng OI)tion C had tagged the 
extreme Option B loTi th a JCS l abel. 
. 
b . 
Rost01'i Vie'Ts . 
W"hereas the JCS emphasized daLlaging actions , 
des~gned to affect HanOi's will be destroying a significant portion of 
then 
capability, \'laU RostO"l'r urged a different approach . 
In his vicI"T, 
~~~h~sis should have been placed on signalling to Hanoi and Pcl~ing our 
COl11J.Ultment to Use our vast resources to whatever extent requLced to 
reinstate effectively the provisions of the 1954 and 1962 Geneva Accords . 
. 
W"ith r espect to military moves most useful for this purpose , 
Ros-covl comi'llUJlicated to Secretary HcNmne,ra. his concern that "too much 
thought is being given to the actual damage I,re do i n the North) not 
e~o~gh thought to the Signal "T,ve Ivish to send." Outlining a concept 
slllnlar to the earliest Option C) he urged that the initial use of 
additional force against N01'th Vietnam I! should be as limited and unsan-
guinary as Possible" and that it 
"should be deSigned merely to install the principle 
that Lthe DRy] ,'Till, from the present fon/arel , be 
vUlnerable to ... 8.ttack ..• for continued violations 
of the 1954 and 1962 Accords . 
In other ,-TOrds , T,'re 
would Signal a shift from the principle involved 
. 
th 
" 
/ 
In 
e Toru~in Gulf response . 
107 
Eve~ ~ore imJ?ortant, in his vie,'r, 1/TOuld be the Signals communicated by 
addltlOnal mllitary moves in the Southeast Asia region. 
He urged de-
ploying U. So ground forces to South Vietnam and large-scale retaliatory 
forces into the Hestern Pacific . 
Besides their value as a bargaining 
counter , Rosto", S2;';'T a ground force commitment as a clear signal that 
"1'e are prepared, to face dO'l-rn 2.ny form of escalation North Vietnam might 
mount on the ground . " 
He argued the.t sv,ch a Irove l-TOuld rule out "the 
possibility of Lthe Com.munist~ re.dically extending their position on 
the gro1.L.'1d at the cost of air and naval damage alone." 
He stated that 
the increased r etaliatory forces ,'Tould signal: 
"that ,{e are putting in pl ace a capacity subsequently 
to step up direct and naval pressure on the north, 
. 
, 
, 35 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
" , 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
if that should be required; {an~ that we are putting 
forces into place to exact retaliation directly against 
CommQDist China, if Peiping should join i n an escalator~ 
response from Hanoi . II 1081 
The broader context of Rostol'T IS vie1j'Ts O!l military actions \las 
described for Secretary Rusk on the eve of the first meeting of the 
Principals to discuss the vTorking Group findings . 
Stating his agreement 
with those portions of the latest intelligence estimate -~lhich stressed 
the Asian Communist pO-Hers r desire not to become involved in a direct 
conflict Ivi th the United States, he framed . the "most basic rr U. S. problem 
as follo'ITS: 
II ••• how to persU!lde ithe Connmmist~ that a cont~nua~ion 
of their present policy will risk major destr'.1Ctlon In 
North Viet Nam ; that a preemptive move on the groQDd as 
a prelude to negotiation will be met by U. S. strength on 
the groQl1d; and that Communist Chi:r..a ,dll not be a sanc-
tuary if it assists North Viet Nam in counter-escal ation ." 
He then. repeated his prescriution of military moves earli er urged on 
Secretary EcN amara . 
Hm'lever -
he stre s sed that t hese move s ,·rould not, 
", 
th 
1 
' 
II
·
' 
' f ' 
t
' 
I n 
- emse ves, constitute a decisive signal. 
:..:ore Slgtll lcan 
In 
Communi st eyes, he felt, would be signals to ansver the question . 
"Is the President of the United St[1tes deeply committed 
to reinstalling the 1954-62 Accords; or i s he putting on 
a demonstration of force that "Tould save f a ce for, essen-
tially a U. S. political defeat at a diplomatic conference?" 
~091 
In ROStovl
l s vi e"T , the CommQDists vTould not accept a setback until 
they "Tere absolutely certain that the United states really meant business 
-- an assessment that could only come as a result of firm public commit-
ments on the part of the President and appropriate follol-T-throug..'1. actions 0 
He stated : 
. "I have no doubt '.ve have the capacity to achieve a rein-
stallation of the 1954-1962 Accords if we enter the exercise 
with the same determination and staying pover that vre entered 
the long test on Berlin and the short test on the Cuba. 
missiles. 
But it vlill take that kind of Presidential commit-
ment and staying pOiver . II 
Acknowleding that the kind of conflict He faced lent itself to :9rolonged 
uncertainties and that the Communi sts could pretend to call off the 
guerrilla war , only to reviv~ it again, he stressed the need to maintain 
pressure on them for some time . 
The i nstallation of ground forces and a. 
II 
, "  
, 
non-sangulnary naval blockade ,'iere suggested as p;9.rtlcularly useful for 
. 36 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
this purpose . 
Rosto,,! urged trying lito gear this ,:rhole operation loTi th 
the best cou..l1terinsurgency effort vie can mou..l1t "\OTith our Vietnamese 
friends ..• and not withdrmv U. S. forces from Viet lITem until the Ivar is 
truly under control. It 110/ 
In closing, Rostow outlined a scenario of action that ,vould 
follmv from the kind of Presidential decision described above . 
This 
would include, in sequence: 
(1) 
Immediate movement of relevant forces to the Pacific . 
' (2) 
Immediate direct communication to Hanoi ..• including 
a clear statement of the limits of our objectives 
but our absolute cormnitment to them. 
(3) 
Should this first communic ation fail (as is likely) 
i nstallation of our ground forces and naval blockade , 
plus first attack in North, to be accompanied by 
publication LOf a r e~ort on infiltr at io~ and Presi-
dential speech . 111/ 
. 
Thus, in their communications to senior officials in the latter half of 
November, both Walt Rostow and the JCS stressed a similar point . 
Al-
t~o~g~ advo~at ing different solutions, they both em~h 8 sized that the 
A~lnlstratlon could not expect to dissuade H~~oi and Paking from con-
tlnued ? ursui t of the DR'iI ' s inmortant and strongly-held comilli tments 
without making correspondingly-strong commitments to resist them. 
The 
JCS, for their Oim re asons , sought to avoid a commitment of ground 
forces to Vietnam and argued instead for punitive air and naval actions . 
Rostow felt that by forceful and meaningful de.t'llonstra-ciQns of national 
r~solve, including the commitment of ground forces to South Vietnam, 
dlrect Use of force against the Communist nations need be minimal. 
. 37 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
II . 
POLICY DECISIONS 
The efforts of the NSC Working Group vrere intended to be completed 
in preparation for a major policy revie'w' late in November 1964. 
Plans 
'vere made for Ambassador Taylor to return to \-!ashington from Saigon to 
join in a series of strategy meetings . 
The expectations vrere that the 
meetings would result in a Presidential action order to supersede the 
one issued following the high-level conference in September (NSAM 314) . 
Meetings with the President Ivere scheduled for the vleek following 
Thanksgiving , '\vhen he returned from his '\vorking holiday at the r anch . 
Preliminary meetings between Ambassador Taylor and the principal officials 
from agencies ,'lith national security interests in Southeast Asia vrere 
held during the preceding Iveekend, 27-29 November . 
The. Ivh01e episode 
took place amid i'lidesnread speculation that a major POllCY cha..'1ge was 
imminent and rumors that Taylor had returned to insist on the bombing 
of infiltration targets in Korth Vietnam and Laos . 
Public and Congress-
i onal speculation ra..'1 so high on the eve of the meetings that the Hhite 
House and State Department sought to dampen it ,'lith statements that 
Taylor T s reported comments !!vlere not policy!! and that his return did not 
mean that II any great, horrendous decision!1 ",ould result . 112/ 
1. 
Reactions of' Principals to Horking Group Analyses 
Before their meetings i-lith Taylor and the President, the Prin-
cipals in 1ATashington met to consider the \\forking Group T s findings and 
to assess the major issues affecting ruture U. S. courses of action. 
Just 
prior to their initial gathering, on 24 November , ~\Tilliam Bu..ndy had for-
"larded a list of questions and comments pertaining to the \\forking Group T s 
findings, and these served as a kind of agenda. 
Included were such issues 
as: 
( 1) Vlhether the relative advantages among the t hree options vlere 
actually as evident as the group had found; (2) ,-Thether or not the papers T 
assessment of U.S . stakes in Southeast Asia should be revised in the di-
rection of JCS attitudes; (3) whether the actions associated with the 
various options could in fact be carried out to achieve the results ex-
pected; and (4) whether a deployment of ground forces to South Vietnam 
vrould in fact provide any advantages. 2:13/ 
(TAB A) 
a . 
Consensus Among NSC Officials. 
As the Principals meeting 
opened, Secretary Rusk raised an issue that vlaS high among Administration 
concerns -- namp.ly that the J..lllerican public ivas '\'mrried about the chaos 
in the GVN, and particularly vlith respect to its viability as an object 
of an increased U.S. commitment . 
Secretary McNamara and General Hheeler 
conceded th e plopriety of this concern but '\'larned t hat the situation in 
the GVIiJ Hould only get i-TOrSe if additional steps' were not taken to reverse 
present trends. 
Rusk then presented a question '\-Thich seemed basic to the 
. 38 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
,vhole rationale for contem~lated U. S. courses of action . 
He asked 
whether the situation in South Vietn~ could be improved i n time to 
save it if the DRV ivere now to ,dthdraw its support. 
CIA Director 
McCone conceded that the VC "'{QuId still have plenty of capability 
remaining but eX:9ressed the vie-~T that the situation could be coped 
,·rith from the st and~o int of internal security criteria. 
At this point 
Under Secretary of State George Ball asked if bombing North Vietnam 
could improve the situation in South Vietnam directly. 
IftcNarnara re-
plied that it could not unless the bombing actually cut down the infil-
tration into the South. 
After agreeing with a Rusk comment that the 
struggle i<!Ould be a long one, even with the DRV out of it, the group 
reached consensus that South Vietnam could be made secure , provided the 
Saigon government could maintain itself. 114/ This was the first of 
several major policy judgments reached in the course of the meeting. 
Other points of clear consensus ("\"lith no more than a single 
dissenting opinion) were as follQ1ivs: 
( 2) 
'l'hat the situation in South Vietnam would deteri-
orate further under Option A even vri th reprisals, 
but th~1.t there was a "significant cheXlce" that the 
actions proposed under "B" or "c" would result in 
. 
f 
d " ak 
'bl " 
an lffiproved G~{ per ormance an 
m -e POSSl 
e 
an 
improved security situation (George Ball indicated 
doubt ) . 
(3) 
That any negotiating outcome under Option A (;tTith · 
. or vIi thout U. S. negotiating participation) probably 
~<!Ould be clearly iwrse than under Option B or C. 
(4) That it was doubtful (contrary to the view expressed 
i n the t-lorking Group papers) that Option B "\"lOuld 
have the best chance of achieving the full U. S. ob-
jectives (General ~vheeler expressed agreement with 
the Working Group st atement) 0 
(5) 
That the requirement of Option C, "that we maintain 
a credible threat of major act ion ,vhile at the same 
time seeking to negotiate," could be carried out 
despite acknQ1ivledged public pressures. 
(6) 
That the Administration could safely aSsltme that 
South Vietnam could "only come apart for morale 
reasons , and not in a military sense, II as a result 
of intensified VC effort . 
(7) 
That early military actions against North Vietnam 
under Option C should be determined , but low in 
scale -- that at this stage, strong damaging actions 
. 39 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
should be limited to reprisals (General Hheeler dis-· 
sented, stating that our losses might be higher in 
the long run with such an approach) . 
(8) 
That the loss of South Vietnam would be more serious 
than stated in Section II of the I'lorking Group's 
draft papers and tha.t the Administration ' s assess-
ment should be revised at least in the direction of 
the JCS vieupoint (George Ball argued against this 
judgment) . 115/ 
The context of the Principals' discussion of this last point 
contained some significant expressions of opinion . 
Secretary Rusk stated 
the vievlpoint that the confidence of other nations in the United states 
l'lOuld be affected by the loss of South Vietnam despite their poss i ble 
indifference to the political struggle in Southeast Asia . 
He added that 
i f I'!e did nothing to c.ffect the course of eve:'lts' in Vietnam it Il"Ould 
have the effect of giving more to de Gaulle . 
Hm-lever, Rusk did not accept 
the \'lorking Group's rationale that ,,·re would obtain international credit 
merely for trying . 
In his vielv, the harder vie tried and then failed, the 
Iwrse our situation "IlOuld be . ' McGeorge Bundy disagreed with this last 
point , except to acknmrledge that to attempt something like Option Band 
then quit 'YTould clearly be damaging. 
Secretary Mcl'Tamara seemed to support 
the (McGeorge) Bundy vi el'! , stating that "B" foll o'Yied by failure would 
clearly be '1lOrse than Option C follov!ed by a compromise settlement. 
George Ball expressed strong agreement 1(Tith the last Rusk point , saying 
that de Gaulle 'would portray us as being foolish and reiterating that the 
d&."Uage to U. S. prestige vlOuld be 'YTorse if 'YTe tried either liB" or "C
II and 
failed . 
General Hheeler stated the opinion that to do little or nothing 
at this point would be an act of bad faith . 
~IT. McCone pointed out a 
perpetual dilemma i f the Administration continued to act despite South 
Vietnamese deterioration; hence , he urged great care. 116/ 
I t i s interesting to note the views and associations of the two 
occasional dissenters in the series of consensus judgments rendered by 
the Principals. 
General Hheeler , Chairman of the JCS, expressed vieH-
points consistent throughout with the recorded JCS views on future courses 
of action . 
On the other h and , George Ball, Under Secretary of State, had 
no obvious j urisdictional or institutiona.l influences to affect his .iudg-
ments . 
l';evertheless, kno,'Tll to Administration observers as lithe devil ' s 
advocate , " he had developed something of a reputation as an independent 
thinker . 
At about the time of the Horking Group deliberations , for 
example, he developed a paper suggesting U. S. diplomatic strategy in the 
event of an i mmi_nent GVN collapse . 
In it , he advocated i·mrking tl1..rough 
the U.K., i'rho \'iould i n turn seek cooperation from the USSR , in arranging 
a,n international conference (of sme.ller proportions tha.Yl those at Geneva) 
at I'Thich to vlOrk out a compromise political settlement for South Vietnam. 
117/ 
In addition, Ball's prevalent occupation Ivith European affairs may 
have influenced. him to viei·r Southeast Asia as of lesser importance to the 
U. S. national interest . 
. L~O 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
b. 
Views Lacking Cor-sensus . 
Also discussed at the 24 November 
Principals meeting were several issues on which consensus was not reached. 
Nost of these related to immediate U. S. actions that vlOuld need to be 
taken irrespective of the option selected, or to problems faced in carry-
i ng out a particular option . 
Since earlier a~reements had indicated 
little interest in Option A, only "B" and "C II were examined further. 
Di scussions of Option B dealt primarily with questions of the 
intensity of blOl'iS that might be struck at Korth Vietnam. 
With r espect 
to 1vhether DRV airfields should be struck early or as a part of a more 
gradual sequence, General Hheeler pointed out that early strjJ~es on air-
fields were what made liB" operations so different . 
It ,>JaS these strikes 
at potential DRV capabilities to interfere with U. S. attacks , or to 
r etaliate, that made systematic, intensive air operations possible . 
In 
re sponse to a specific questi on from the v·jorking Group , the possibili ty 
of using nuclear "reapons "JaS al so discussed. 
Secretary McNamara stated 
that he could not imagine a case where they "rould be considered. 
McGeorge 
Bundy observed that under certain circumstances there might be great 
pressure for their use both from the military and from certain political 
circles . 
General iilheeler stated that he "rould not normally vote for their 
use - - never, for example, i n an interdict ion role. 
Ho,,;ever, he suggested 
that they might be considered in extremis -- for example, to hold off 
an enemy to save a force threatened ,lith destruction, or to knock out a 
special target like a nuclear weapons facility. 
In response to Secretary 
Rusk 's query as to their potential for cordoning off an area, both 
.McNa."l1ara and vTheeler anm'Jered negatively. 118/ 
Discus sions of Option C dealt with the problem of early negotia-
tions and, at greater length , with that of deploying ground forces to 
South Vietnam. 
On the former, there was little interchange noted i n the 
proceedings . 
Desp ite the Horking Group 1 s admitted frustration "rith this 
particular i ssue, only two Principals 1 comments were r ecorded . 
McGeorge 
Bundy stated t he vie"i" that we should let negotiations come i nto play 
slowl y . 
Secretary Rusk expressed concern that the G~~ would be very 
sensi tive on the issue of a negotiating conference . 
Earlier, hmrever, 
he indicated his opinion tha.t pressure for a conference would not be a 
serious problem as long as military actions continued . 119/ 
On the issue of sending ground forces to South Vietnam i n the 
early stages of Option C, there was no firm conclusion. 
Secretary 
Mcl~amara stated that there w-as no military requirement for ground forces 
and that he would prefer a massive air deployment . 
In response to 
General Hheeler's suggestion that some ground forces could be justified 
for air defense and base security purposes, he ackno1.dedged that I\le 
might do both." Mr . McCone stated the opi nion that U. S. ground forces 
would help stabilize South Vietnam, similar to their effect on Lebanon 
i n 1958. 
They might even provide a general security force in the South. 
Mc:Namara disagreed . 
Secretary Rusk and McGeorge Bundy suggested their 
utility in proving a "preemptive effect," presu-.m.ably to deter IJorth 
Vietnamese offensive moves i nto the South. 
To this McCone added thd 
41 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
these forces might be equipped in ways to show our determination. 
In 
the end, it "i'laS agreed to raise this issue vlith Ambassador Taylor, at 
the Principals next meeting. 
Significantly, the value of grolli~d forces 
as a bargaining counter apparently was not discussed, thus providing 
one more indication of the Principals reticen"e to deal with the issue 
of negotiations. 
(It is interesting to note in this respect that 
William Bundy ' s memorandlli~, formally sUY&narizing the points of consensus 
and disagreement, does not deal 1vith the early negotiating problem 
despite its being a specific agenda item which he had suggested as 
Chairman of the Horking Group.) 120/ 
The only basic issue between the options on uhich the Principals 
did not arrive at a consensus "ivas the question of the relative risks of 
major conflict entailed by Options Band C. 
General 'Ivheeler stated that 
there was less risk of a major conflict before achieving success under 
Option B than under Option C. 
Secretary McNamara believed the opposite 
to be true. 
Secretary Rusk argued that if IlBIl were selected, there 
"iwuld be no chance to apply the JCS variant of IlC, t1 '\'lhereas under the 
Working Group's IlC, II this would still be left available. 
He observed 
that entry into the JCS variant of IIC II would feel something like the 
Cuban - issile rlSlS. 
McNamara then suggested a four-vTeek program of 
actions follo'lving the general pattern of Option C. 
Mr . McCone stated 
that they sounded IIfine,!! but that in his opinion the !!negotiating mood!! 
interfered "Ti th their potential effects . 
He agreed to attempt a paper 
to deal more directly with the relation of risk to likely success, as 
beh'Teen the two options. 
In the end, the only c onc Ius ion that could be 
ill'awn was that there was not complete agreement that liB!! ran a higher 
risk of major conflict than 
"C,!! as alleged by the Horking Group. 121/ 
During the meeting of 24 November there vTaS no clear decision 
as to 'Ivhich option VIas favored by the Principals. It seems likely that 
IIAII VTaS favored by Ball. Hheeler clearly favored IlB,11 and he may have 
had support from NcCone, although this is far from clear. 
On the basis 
of either their participation in the ~vorking Group or from statements of 
preference made at the meeting, it is clear that IIC II was favored by 
McNamara, McHaughton, Rusk , and the Bundy brothers. 
However McGeorge 
Bundy and 1-1cl'\amara apparently preferred a !!firm C,!! whereas the other 
three wanted a more restrained, incremental approach. 122/ 
' 
c. 
Policy Views from Saigon. 
The same group of Principals 
t hat met on the 24th re-assembled on 27 lTovember for their first meet-
i ng with Jtmbassador Taylor. 
Present also was Michael Forrestal \oTho had 
gone to Saigon to help prepare Taylor for the forthcoming stra.tegy meet-
ings and t,o app!'ise him of the ':Torking Group efforts. 123/ Taylor led 
off with a prepared briefing on the current state of affairs 1Vithin 
South Vietnam. 
Ambassador Taylor's estimate of the situation in South Vietnam 
was rather ble~~. Confirming many of the assessments made weeks earlier 
42 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
in intelligence estimates, he reported continued deterioration of the 
pacification program and continued ,veakness in the central government. 
The former was portrayed as. related to i ncreased direction and support 
of VC operations from Hanoi and increasing VC strength despite "very 
heavy losses ini licted almost daily" by the ASVN . 
Particular areas of 
concern were i dentified as the area surrounding Saigon and the northern 
provinces , which ,{ere !Inm. in deep trouble." Taylor related GVH weak-
ness to political factionalism , mounting war weariness and hopelessness , 
"particularly in the urban areas," and a lack of "team play or mutual 
loyalty" among many central and provincial officials . 
Calling such 
chronic weakness "a critical liability to future plans , " he ivarned that 
l ack of an effective central government caused U.S . efforts to assist 
South Vietnam to have little impact . 124/ 
To alter the course of what Taylor called "a losing game in 
South Vietnam," he recommended three measures : (1) "establish an adequate 
government"; (2) improve the counterinsurgency effort ; and (3) "persuade 
or force the DRV" to stop aiding and directing the insurgency. 
With 
respect to the first , Taylor allovTed that it was "hard to decide vlhat is 
the minimu .. "'U government which is necessary to permit reasonable hope" of . 
success . 
However, he stated: 
" ... it is hard to visualize our being willing to make 
added outlays of resources and to run increasi ng political 
risks without an allied government Ivhich, at least , can 
speak for and to i ts people, can maintain law and order in 
.the principal cities, can provide local protection for the 
vital military bases and installations, can raise ~nd sup-
port Armed Forces, ru~d can gear its efforts to those of the 
United States . 
Anything less than this \wuld hardly be a 
government at all, and under such circmnstances, the 
United States Government might do better to carry forward 
the war on a purely unilateral basis . 
Wi th regard to the counterinsurgency effort, he opined, "iVe cannot do 
much better than '\'That we are doing at present until the government 
improves. " 125/ 
.Ambassador Taylor saw U. S. military actions directed at the DRV 
as fulfilling a twofold purpose . 
On t he one hand, he believed that even if 
an effective government were established, "we will not succeed in the end 
unless ive drive the DRV out of its reinforcing role and obtain its cooper-
ation in bringing an end to the Viet Cong i nsurgency. " 
On the other hand , 
he sa,T actions ·)utside South Vietnam as a meac1.S to improve GV1'~ morale and 
confidence . 
Acknm'lledging that using our aid, advice and encouragement 
on behalf of programs to stabilize the goverr~ent would probably be insuf-
ficient for this purpose, he suggested additional measures : 
"One way to accomplish this lift of moral e imuld be to 
increase the covert operations against l\orth Viet iiam by sea 
43 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and air and the counterinfiltration attacks within the Laotian 
corridor. Ivhile the former ""ould be covert •.• knmdedge of 
their occurrence could be made knm-m ... to give the morale l ift 
which is desired. 
Additionally 'VoTe could engage in reprisal 
bombings , to repay outrageous acts of the Viet Cong in South 
Viet ram .••• tt 
HovTever, be added that even all these actions might not be sufficient 
lito hold the present government upright, tr in which case we 'Ivould have 
to reconsider our policies . 
Our alternatives, he said, would be either 
to support one form or another of a replacement govermnent or to "limit 
our contribution to military action directed at North Viet-J'Tam.
1I 126/ 
In addition to t he military actions already identified with 
morale-raising purposes, Taylor suggested: 
" ••• we could begin to escalate progressively by attack-
i ng appropriate targets in North Vi et-Nam. 
If we justified 
our action prlinarily upon the need to reduce infiltration, 
it 'would be natural to direct these attacks on infiltration-
related targets such as staging areas, training facilities, 
communications centers and the like .. . . 
In its final forms , 
this kind of attack could extend to the destruction of all 
important fixed t argets in liorth Viet-x/am and to the inter-
diction of movement on all lines of communication . 127/ 
Ambassador Taylor ' s views regarding the circumstances under which 
such escalatory actions should be initiated were not entirely clear i n his 
briefing to the Principals . 
After reiterating the 'necessity of stepping 
up the 34A operations , i ncreasing those in Laos , and undertaking reprisals 
as part of the efforts to raise morale and strengthen the GVI~, he stated 
tlvo somewhat different, although not necessarily contradictory, viewpoints 
on the question of stronger mil itary actions : 
"If this course of action is inadequate, and the govern-
ment falls , then we must start over again or try a neii 
approach.... In any case, 'Voce shoul.d be prepared for emer-
gency military action against the Eorth if onl y to shore up 
a collapsing situation. 
"If, on the other hand ... the government mai ntains and 
. proves itself, then i'le should be prepared to embark on a 
methodical 'Program of mounting air attacks in order to 
accomplish our pressure objectives vis-a-vis the DRV .... " 
He then proposed a scenario for controlled escalation, the actions i n YThich 
were quite similar to an extended Option A or a low-order Option C without 
declared negotiating y/illingness. 128/ 
. 44 
TOP SECREl' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
. The impression is that Taylor visualized graduated air opera-
tions having primarily psychological impact on the Horth following 
logically from successful political efforts in the South -- but that 
he also ,'mnted an (perhaps somevlhat stronger) air c2.1ll.paign held in 
readiness as a punitive measure in the event of a critical reversal in 
the South. 
This impression is strengthened by his earlier comment 
about U. S. alternatives and by the second of "three principles" which 
he recommended to the Princinals ' 
~ 
. 
"a. 
Do not enter into negotiations until the DRV is 
hurting. 
"b. 
Never let the DRV gain a victory in South Viet-Ham 
without having paid a disproportionate price . 
. " c. 
Keep the GVH in the forefront of the combat and the 
negotiations." 129/ 
Involving the GVN in all phases of our operations ",as an im-
portant aspect of the Ambassador's-thinking about next cOur£es of action. 
He stressed that before making a final decision on the course we "Tould 
follm" , it 'VGuld be neces sary to obtain the reactions of Prime Minister 
Huong and General Khanh to our various alternatives . 
He explained: 
"They will be t aking on risks as great or greater than 
ours so that they have a right to a serious hearing. 
He 
should make every effort to get them to ask our help in 
expanding the war . 
If they decline, we shall have to re-
. think the whole situation." 
"If, as is likely, they urge us " Taylor added, ,'Te should take advantage 
of their enthusiasm "to nail do~n certain important point.s " on which we 
vlant their agreement . 
Included were Gvi'J pledges to maintain military 
and police strength, to replace incompetent officials, and to suppress 
disorder and agreements to stinulated divisions of responsibility for 
conducting military operations: 130/ 
Taylor's briefing made clear his commitment to l imited U.S. ob-
jectives in Southeast Asia and his believe in the necessity of assur i ng 
the DRV of this limitation. Further, he made explicit his expectation 
that the DRV "muld not accept U. So offensive actions "Tithout some inten-
sified military reaction in the South and that any DRV submission to our 
demands might well be temporary. 
d. 
Discussions vrith Ambassador Taylor . 
Following the briefing, 
the Principals commented on a number of the J\mbassador' s observations 
and discussed further the cuestion of future courses of action. 
Secretary 
Rusk asked what could be d~ne to make the G~ T perform better .. Taylor 
replied that he must be able to convey a strong message but that we 
. 45 
TOP SECRE"I' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
couldn lt threaten the Saigon government. 
For example, a threat to 
I\vithdrm'l unless" l'lOuld be "quite a gamble . II 
The issue of neutralism 
was raised and "Ambassador Taylor noted that I neutralism , as it existed 
in Saigon appeared to mean thrm-ring the internal political situation 
open and thus inviting Communist participation." 
Mr . Ball observed 
that a neutralist state could not be maintained unless the VC were 
defeated and that the GVN must continue to be free to receive external 
aid until that occurred. 
Therefore, "neutralism in t he sense of with-
drm·ral of external assistance" did not seem to be a hopeful alternative. 
In apparent reply to Taylor's briefing comments to the effect that the 
United states might continue military action against North Vietnam de-
spite a GVl'J collapse, Rusk commented that he "couldn't see a unilateral 
war" in this event. 
Taylor indicated that he meant "only punitive 
actions. II 
Secretary :McNamara agreed with Rusk , but added that if the 
GVN continued to veaken we would need to try Option C or A. 
"The con-
sensus was that it 1tTas hard to visualize continuing in these circum-
stances jJ.f the GVIT collapsed or told us to get ouy, but tha.t the 
choice must certainly be avoided if at all possible. II 131/ 
After a discussion of same of the administrative problems in 
the GVN, "Ambassador Taylor noted that General Hestmoreland had pre-
pared a report of the military situation" in South Vietnam. 
(The 
report 1'1as l ater distributed to the group .) 
He indicated that 
"Hestmoreland I.;as generall y more optimistic than he (Taylor) II and that 
he ' sal'l better mora,le , i ncreased defections and the like as signs of 
improvement in the military situation. 
Further, he stated that 
Westmoreland would be inclined to wait six months before taking further 
actions in order to have a firmer base for them. 
HOvTever, Taylor added 
t hat "he himsel f did not believe that vle could count on the situation 
hold i ng together that long, and that we must do something sooner than 
this. II 
Secretary NcI-Jrunara also disagreed 'tTith Westmoreland's vie'v, 
expressing doubts that the military situation vTould improve. 
In answer 
to specific questions, McNamara stated his opinions that (1) no, the 
political situation ivould not become stronger, but (2) yes, vTe would 
be justified in undertaking Option C even if the political situation 
did not improve. 
Taylor replied that II stronger action iwuld definitely 
have a favorable effect II i n South Vietnam, "but he was not sure this 
would be enough really to improve the situation." Others, including 
McHamara, agreed with Taylor's evaluation, but the Secretary added that 
lithe strengthening effect of Option C could at least buy time, possibly 
measured in years. II 132/ 
' 
A..mbassador Taylor then urged that "over the next tvlO months 
vTe adout a progl'<:m of Option A plus the first stages of Option C. II 
He argued that the GVI'T i,'as badly in need of same "pul.motor treatment, II 
t hat any other alternative "rould probably result in a worsened situation 
-- perhaps militarily. 
He added that the likelihood of GVN improvement 
see..med so doubtful that livre should move into C right away . II 
Secretary 
Rusk asked if Option C \'lOuld give Tayl or the "bargaining leveragell 
46 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
needed with the G'If':·~ . 
The Ambassador replied by suggesting cer'Galn details 
of the message he would propose passing to the Saigon government. 
In 
effect these called for the GVr~ to agree. to the kind of internal. policies 
and command arrangements suggested in his briefing, in return for a 
prompt U.S. implementation of 1I0ntion A plus ll and acknmdedgment of the 
intention to go further if the GVT~ stabilized itself. 133/ 
It is im-
portant to note that the official memorandum of the foregoing discussion 
implies agreement among the Principals that Option A plus early stages 
of C should be reconunended. 
The memorandum states, lilt "ras urged that 
II and lito get what improvements ,.".e could it "TaS thought that we should 
move into some parts of C soon. 1I 
There followed a discussion of the infiltration evidence, during 
which Mr . McCone indicated that an intelligence team bad made a further 
investigation of it. 
"It ,iaS agreed that State and Defense should check state-
ments made by Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara , and General 
iVheeler on this subject, so the.t these could be related to 
the previous MACV and other estimates and a full explanation 
developed of hO"T these earlier estimates had been made and 
"Thy they had been 'wrong in the light of fuller evidence. Il 134/ 
Before the meeting adjourned (with agreement to meet again the 
next day), ..A.mbassador Taylor r aised a number of questions ,.".hich he 
thought the Horking Group papers had not covered adeque.tely (TAB B) . 
Only a few received answers during the meeti ng, and he agreed to furnish 
the Principals with the complete list . 
Hm·rever, it "Tas i ndicated that 
Option B or C could be initiated. from a flstanding start" -- presumably 
with no incidents necessarily occurring first . 
The G'lfN .were acknowledged 
to have flplenty of capabilities ll to participate -- even before arriving 
at the intended four-squadron strength of A-I aircraft. It vTaS stressed 
that the VrAF role would be in :North Vietnam only -- not in Laos -- and 
Secretary t.icFamara indicated a strong role for them against targets belmv 
the 19th Parallel. 
Finally, a time-span of three to six months vTaS indi-
cated as the expected duration for Option C. 135/ 
On the follovting day, when the Principals reas sembled, I'lilliam 
Bundy circulated a draft scenario of actions proposed in the event a 
decision were made to Qndert~~e measures like those contained in Option A. 
It had been agreed at the end of the initial meeting that these would 
be revie'fed by the group "Ti th the assumption that they could be imple-
mented ''vTith or without a decision to move into the full Option C program 
at some ti::ne thereafter. Il 136/ 
(It is i mportfmt to note hOloi r eadily the 
attention of the Principals focused on the similarity of preparatory 
a.ctions and early military measures in t he various options , apparently 
without regard to the particular negotiating rationale vrhich each option 
i ncorporated. ) 
Bundy 's scenario of early military, political and diplO-
matic actions Was based on a similar assumption IIthat a decision is or 
is not fi,oing to b:=.7 taken to go on '''ith Option C thereafter if Hanoi does 
47 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
not bend or the GVF come apart. II 
He i ndicated , hOl'lever, that the Horki ng 
Group believed I!that at least a contingent decision to go on is now re-
quired. fl 
To facilitate discussion on the part of the Principals, "Tork-
sheets indicating proposed language or procedures were distributed, -Co 
include the folL)"ling action c<l.tegories. 137/ 
. 
.--
1. 
U.S. public action 
a. White House statement follOidng 1 December meeting 
b. 
Background briefing on infiltration 
c. 
Congressional consultation 
d. 
Major Presidential speech 
e. 
Public report on infiltration 
2. 
Consultation Ivith the GVl\ 
3. 
Consultation with key allies 
4: 
Communications with Communist nations 
5. 
EXisting forms of military actions (including recon-
naissance and RLAF strikes i n Laos, GVH maritime 
operations , etc.) 
6. 
Reprisal actions resulting from DE SOTO Patrols and 
"spectaculars " 
7. 
Added military and other actions 
Certain of these topics received more attention than others in 
the course of the meeting, with empbasis being placed on "spelling outl! 
the exact steps that the Principals 1wuld be aski ng the President to 
approve. 
Hith respect to actions aimed at the n. S. public, McGeor ge 
Bundy stressed that the Presidential speech must both (1) affirm U.S. 
determination and (2) be consistent with the infiltration evidence . 
General Hheeler stated that earlier i nfiltration reports could be defended 
because of their small data base and suggested that the discrepancies 
could be used to explain how the VC operated. It "laS determined that one 
man should be put in charge of assembling the available infiltration data 
for public release, and Chester Cooper Ivas suggested for the job. 
Hith 
respect to coordination "rith the GVE , Ambassador Taylor pointed out the 
need to prepare a draft statement to the GVN for the President I s reviel'T 
and agreed to pr.epare a table of the specific GVr: actions needed. 
Secretary Rusk c ckn01'Tledged the possible desil-ability of delaying unt~_l 
GVN leadership issues were resolved, but that I!anything now would cause 
problems. I! 
Mr . Ball reminded that it 'l'lould be necessary to query the 
GVI": regarding release of some of the i nfiltration evidence .133/ 
. 48 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Military and other related actions were also discussed: 
Secretary Rusk indicated the need to surface the GVi:'; maritime operations, 
and Ambassador Taylor suggested that they and other morale-raising ac-
tions could be made public "in one package." 
In discussing the possible 
need for additional airfields in the northern part of South Vietnam, it 
was pointed out that a new jet field might ta.ke t"ro years . 
Secretary 
McNamara said he thought there Fere enough fields to suppcrt Option C 
no"r if certain readily accessible improvements ',Tere added. 
He and the 
generals (Hheeler and Taylor) r eminded the group that stopping the move-
ment of U. S. dependents to South Vietnam or withdra"ring those already 
there could not be concealed and that this problem must be resolved 
promptly -- certainly within the initial 30 days. 
Taylor cautioned that 
actions regarding denendents could not be taken until our full course 
"ras decided, presumably because of potential GVi.'T fears of a U.S. with-
drawal. The quest ion of resumed DE SOTO Patrols was raised with the 
reminder that CINCPAC vanted them for intelligence purposes. 
Taylor, 
NcNamara and NcGeorge Bundy opposed the idea, while General )'Theeler 
strongly supported it. 
ITotes of the meeting indicate resolution to the 
effect that the patrols should not be r esumed during the first 30-day 
period. It Ivas -;;'lso agreed to . recommend joint U. S/GVH planning of 
reprisal actions and of further escalatory measures. 139/ 
At some point during the meeting it was detenni ned that William 
Bundy "rould undertake preparation of a draft national security action 
paper containing policy gui dance for the approaching period. 
The paper 
was to describe the strategic concept, outline the actions to be taken 
during the initial 30-day period, and indicate likely follow-on measures 
and the conditions under which they might be implemented. It was decided 
that the paper would be revie~ed at another meeting of the Principals on 
30 November , before submission to the President. 
A Hhite House meeting 
had been scheduled for the follo"ring day. 140/ 
On the afternoon of the 30th, in Secretary Rusk 's conference 
room, the Principals met again. 
Bundy's draft paper had been distri-
buted to them earlier after being generally approved (re format ) by Rusk 
and revielved for substance by I.~essrs . Hcl:aughton and Forrestal. 141/ 
In describing the basic concept, the paper presented U.S. objec-
tives as "unch nged,rt although giving primary emphasis to our aims in 
. South Vietnam. 
HOlvever, getting the DRV to remove its support and direc-
tion from the insurgency in t he South, and obtaining their cooperation 
in ending VC operations there, were listed among the basic objectives 
not presented as a strategy for attaining them. 
The oqjectives \{ere 
to be pursued in the first 30 days by measureL including those contained 
in Option A, plus U. S. armed route reconnaissance operations in Laos. 
They were linked with _~bassador Taylor's rationale that these actions 
'.;Quld be intended primarilyltto help GVN morale and to increase the costs 
and strain on HanoL" The concept also included Taylor 's emphasis on 
. 49 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive 
pressing the GVN to mru~e itself more effective and to push forward its 
pacification efforts . 
For the period beyond the first 30 days, the 
concept provided that 
It ••• fil st-phase actions may "be contirlued without change , 
or additional military measures may be taken i ncl uding 
t he wi thdrm-ral of dependents and the possibl e i ni t i ation 
of strikes a short distance across the border against the 
i nfil tration routes from the DRV. 
In t he l atter case 
this '\wuld "become a transitional phase . It 142/ 
The kind of actions that the transition "Tould l ead to "rere de -
scribed in a carefully qualified manner : 
n •• • i f the GV1\, i mproves i ts effectiveness to an acceptable 
degree and Hanoi does not yield on acceptable terms, or if 
the GVN can only "be kept going by stronger acti on, the U. S. 
is prepared -- at a time to be determined -- to enter i nto 
a second phase progrrun ... of graduated military pressures 
directed systematically against the DRV." 
The concept continued with a mixture of suggested actions and r ational e 
similar to that in Option C. 
The air strikes would be flprogressi vely 
more serious" and "adjusted to the situation. fI 
The expected duration 
was indicated as "possibly r unning from t'\vo to six months ." "Targets 
i n the DRV.would start wi th i nfiltration targets south of the 19th 
Parallel and vlOrk up to targets north of that point." The approach 
would be steady and deliberate, to give the United states the opt i on 
"to proceed or not, to escalate or not, and to quicken the pace or not .1t 
It concluded with the following: 
It Concurrently , the U. S. wO'Ll.ld be alert to any sign of 
yielding by Hanoi , and would be prepared to explore 
negotiated soluti ons that attain U.S. objectives i n an 
acceptable manner • . The U. S. woul d seek to control any 
negotiations and would oppose any independent South 
Vietnrunese efforts to negotiate .!! 143/ 
Blmdy ! s draft ESAM also i ncluded a summation of the recommended 
JCS alternative concept and a brief description of the various military, 
political and diplomatic measures to be taken during the first 30 ':lays 
following implementation of the concept. 
Significantly, t he l atter 
i ncl uded reprisal actions flprefer ably within 24 hours
lt for a wide r ange 
of specified VC provocations. It also contained a s:pecifi c provision 
t hat DE 80T0 Patrols ,{Quld not be resumed during the i nit i al 30-day 
period, but would be considered for the follm,-on period. 
In the documents available there was no r ecord of the proceed-
i ngs of the meeting on 30 I';ovember . 
The only evidence avail abl e "ras 
. 50 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the notations appearing on the original draft NSAJ1, filed with other 
papers from the I\!"SC l'lorking Group at the State Department . 
Therefore, 
the follo"l'ring assessment of l<That occurred is limited to inferences 
from that sparse evidence. 
~oreover , based on this evidence , it is 
not absolutely certain that the change s indicated came as a result of 
the PrinCipals meeting . 
Several changes apparently were made in order not to ask the 
President to commit himself unnecessarily (e.g., the language was 
changed from "take " to "resume" a snecific action in the second phase 
to lIbe prepared to take," etc.). Others had policy implications. 
The 
only significant change in the first category ,,,as to remove any reference 
in the title to )\i"SAivI and to call it merely a "position paper ." 
In the 
latter category, several changes seem significant . 
For example, keeping 
the GV1~ going through the effects of stronger U. S. action 'vas deleted as 
one of the circumstances under ·which vTe might initiate a program of 
"graduated military pres sures 11 against the DRV . 
Apparently based on 
Secretary Mc)\T81nara ' s comment, reference to the United States seeking to 
control the negotiations and blocking South Vietnamese efforts in this 
direction Ivas removed. 
The summary of JCS vieiVs vlaS also r emoved from 
the concept, in effect presenting a united front to the President . 
From 
the description of 30-day actions, all reference to the intent to pub-
licize infiltration evidence or present it to allied and Congressional 
leaders was eliminated, including the intention to link reprisal actions 
to DRV infiltration to develop 
If a com.rnon thread of justification." Also 
removed was reference to a major Presidential speech, apparently on the 
advice of McGeorge Bundy. 144/ 
Although there is a bare minimum of rationale or explanation 
for these changes i n the available evidence, the pattern described by 
the changes themsel ves is significant . 
In effect, Option A along with 
the lowest order of Option C actions ",·ere being recommended by the 
Principals in a manner that 'lTould represent the least pos sible additional 
commitment. This represented a considerable softening of the positions 
held at the end of the first Principals meeting, on the 24th. 
It also represented a substantial deviation from the findings 
of the vlorking Group. 
It 1.vill be recalled that the group conceded 
Option A little chance of contribut i ng t o an improved Gv}; and saw its 
l ikely impact on South Vietnamese morale as no more lasting than the 
effects of the Ton.kin Gulf repri sals . 
Horeover, even extended l1A" was 
believed "at best" to be canable of little more than an improved U. S. 
position -- ceri:.ainly not of a meaningful settlement. 145/ In effect, 
the Principals "rere returning to the initial concept of Option C held 
in the Harking Group by Bundy, Johnson and McITaughton -- but without the 
initially flexible attitude tow·ard national interest and objectives in 
Southeast As ia. 
51 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
It is important to consider the factors that may have brought 
about the change . 
(1) It mav have resulted as a reaction to the 
persuasiveness of General Taylor's arguments . 
(2) It may have repre-
sented a genuine mellow'ing of i ndividual vie"-Tpoints after the oppor-
tunity to consi c'..er other judgments and weigh--"ll the factors. 
(3) It 
may have resulted from the Principals ' uneasiness with the negotiating 
track included in Option C. 
(4) It may have reflected concern over 
public pressure for harsher measures that could have resulted from too 
much public emphasis on the increased infiltration. 
(5) It may have 
represented an attempt to enhance the chance.s of the President 's 
approving some kind ;f stepped up U.S. action outside of South Vietnam. 
With regard to the latter, McGeorge BlL.'1dy, as the President 's Assistant 
for National Security Affairs ,¥as in a position to convey President 
, 
' 
. 
Johnson s mood to the group. 
Moreover, notes taken at the ~..Jhlte House 
meeting tend to confirm that the President 's mood vTaS more closely akin 
to the measures recommended than to those in Option B or full Option C. 
Then again, it may be that all of these factors operated on the Prin-
cipals in some measure. 
Also significant, in the series of discussions held by the 
Principals, I'las their apparent lack of attention to the policy issues 
related to negotiations. 
Despite the f act that Option C measures 'Here 
stipulated for the second phase of U. S. actions, the early negotiating 
posture intended to accompany that option ,<las apparently paid little 
heed. 
According to the meeting notes, the only reference to our bar-
gaining capability ' .. JaS Secretary Rusk 's concern as to ,,[hether Option C 
actions vTOuld enable Ambassador Taylor to bargain in Saigon. 
Among the 
documents from the Principals meetings , the only reference to Hanoi 's 
interest in negotiating occurred in Bundy 's draft NSAM, ,'.'here he re-
flected apparent Administration expectations that after more serious 
pressures "Tere applied the DRV would move first in the quest for a 
settlement. 146/ 
In retrospect, the Principals appear to have assumed rather low 
motivation on the part of the DRV. 
Either this or they viere overly opti-
mistic regarding the threat value of U.S. military might, or both. 
For example, P~bassador Taylor ' s perception of how a settlement 
might be reached -- which apparently produced little unfavorable reaction 
among the others -- indicated the assun~tion that DRV concessions to 
r ather major demands could be obtained I'Ti th relatively "Teak pressures. 
In bis suggested scenario (acknmlledged as "very close" to the concept 
accepted by the Principals), 147/ the U.S. negotiating posture accom-
panying a serie i of attacks , limited to infiltration targets "just north 
. of the Dl-iZ, II vIaS intended to be as follo'lls: 
" ... in absence of public statements by DRV, initiate no 
public statements or publicity by ourselves or GVN. 
If 
DRV does m~~e publis statements , confine ourselves and 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
GVlJ to statements that GVlJ is exercising right of self-
defense and we are assisting .•.. disclose to selected 
allies, and possibly USSR , U.S./GVN terms for cessation 
of attacks as follOl·1S: 
--_._-
A. 
Demands: 
1. 
DRV return to strict observance of 1954 Accords 
with respect S~~ -- that is, stop infiltrat ion 
and bring about a cessation of VC armed i nsur-
gency. 
B. 
In return: 
L 
U. S .. ,,,,ill return to 1954 Accords with respect 
to military personnel in GVN and GVE vTould be 
willing to enter into trade talles looking 
toward normalization of economic relations 
between DRV and GVN . 
2. 
Subject to faithful compliance by DRV·with 1954 
Accords, U.S. and GVT{ would give assurances that 
they not use force or support the use of force 
by any other party to upset the Accords ','Ii th 
respect to the DRV. 
3 ••.• the GVN would permit VC desiring to do so to 
return to the DRV without their arms or would 
grant amnesty ... " 
Taylor went on to suggest that 'Iif and I-Then Hanoi indicates its accep-
tance'lthe United States should avoid (1) the rlanger of a cease-fire 
accompanied by prolonged negotiations and (2) 
IImaking conditions so 
stringent II as to be impracticable. 148/ 
SignificantJ_y the terms were to be conveyed to Hanoi private~. 
'I'hey did not consti tut~ a declaratory policy in the usual sense of that 
term. 
Hence, it must be assumed that they would be presented to the DRV 
with the attitude of "acceptance or else" -- that they were not per-
ceived pri.marily as conveying a firm public linage. 
Moreover , the terms 
.. Jere designed to accompany '''hat became knOlm as IIphase two, II the gradu-
ated pressures of Option C __ not the 30-day actions derived from 
Option A. 
They were meant to represent the lIearly negotiating" posture 
of the United S· ... ates __ not the Ilno-negotiati0n" posture associated with 
Option A. 
This general attitude to,,,,ard negotiations \'Tas apparently shared 
by other Principals. 
This is indicated by changes made in Option C 
procedures, in the Summary of the Tilorking Group I s findings, following 
53 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the first Principals meeting. 
Essentially, these involved an adamant 
. t 
t 
fl 
fl 
reS1S ance 
0 
any formal Geneva Conference on Vietnam. 
Formerly, 
such a conference was regarded as the flbest forurnfl -- after conducting 
a number of military actions against the DRV. 
Under the revised 
approach, the U.S. Government would merely "wl1.tch and listen closelyfl 
for signs of 'veakening from Hanoi and Peking. 
If the DRV held firm in 
r~sponse to initial military actions against North Vietnam and if along 
,nth these actions an improvement had occurred in the GVTJ , the Adminis-
tration vlOuld press harder for acceptance of the initial negotiating 
position. 149/ 
Thus, it is fairly clear that the policy position 
formulated by the Principals before presentation to the President in-
cluded no provision for early bargaining at the conference table. 
2. 
Courses of Action Approved in the '\'Thite House 
On 1 December the Principals met with President Johnson and 
Vice President-elect H~phrey in the Fhite House . 
During a meeting 
that l asted t'll"O-and-a-half hours !unbassador Taylor briefed the Presi-
dent on the situation in South vietnam, and the group revie,\qpd. the 
evidence of increasing DRV support for the conflicts in South Vietnam 
and Laos. 
Ways of cOQDtering the impact of infiltration and of im-
proving the situation viere discussed. 
At the conclusion of the meeting 
Secretary Hc1'!amara ''I'as reported to have been overheard saying to the 
President, "It would be impossible for Max to talk to these people 
Lwaiting reporters7 .. dthout leaving the impression that the situation 
is going to hell.O Accordingly, Ambassador Taylor slipped out the 
'Hhi te HOuse rear entrance, and only a brief, formal statement was gi v~n 
to the press. 150/ 
The source documents available at the time of this writing do 
not indicate the precise nature of the President 's decisions. 
Since a 
NSAM was not issued follmoJ'ing the meeting, one would have to have access 
to VIhi te House case files and l'~at ional Security Council meeting notes 
to be certain of what was decided. 
Even then , one might not find a 
clear-cut decision recorded. 
However, from hand,vri tten notes of the 
meeting, from instructions issued to action agencies, and from later 
reports of diplomatic ~Dd military actions taken, it is possible to 
reconstruct the approximate nature of the discussion and the decisions 
reached. 
. 
The revised flDraft Position Paper on Southeast Asia, rr contain-
ing the t'\w-phase conc ept for future U. S. policy and the proposed 30-day 
action program, provided the basis for the Hhite House discussions. 
Hand'Kritten notes of the proceedings refer to various topics in approxi-
mately the sa.. .. 'ue order as they are listed in that portion of the position 
paper dealing with the 30-day action program. 
There is no indication 
that the over-all concept 1-TaS discussed . 
HOIvever, it is evident from 
the notes that the various actions under discussion were considered in 
terms of the details of their implementation. 151/ This fact --
together with the content of the formal instructions later issued to 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Ambassador Taylor -- make it clear th~t, in gener~l outline at l east, 
the concept submitted by the Principals was accepted by the President. 
However , as will be seen, it. is also clear that he ge..ve his appr.oval 
to implement only the first phase of the concept . 
In addition to P~bassador Taylor ' s report, the meeting dealt 
mainly with hro subjects : 
(1) Taylor ' s consultations with South Viet-
nalllese leaders and (2) conversations with other U. S. allies who had an 
interest i n the Vietnalllese situation. 
The PreSident made it clear that he considered that pulling 
the South Vietnamese together 'tras basic to anything eJ se the United 
States might do. 
He asked the Ambassador specifically i-Thich groups 
he might talk to and whe..t more we might do to help bring unity alllong 
South Vietnalll's leaders. 
He asked whether we coul d not say to them 
"we just can It go on" unless they pulled together . 
To this , Taylor 
replied that we must temper our insistence some .. ·,'hat , and suggested that 
we could say that !lour aid is for the Huong government, hot necessarily 
for its successor." 
The President asked whether there was not some vray 
we could !Iget to" such groups as the Ce..tholics, the Buddhists and the 
Army. 
Possible additional increments of military aid were then discussed 
as means of increasing U.S. leverage alllong military l eaders . 
The Presi-
dent also asked about "the Connnunists" in South Vietnalll. 
Taylor ' s r eply 
vIas noted rather cryptically but the impression given is that the 
Cor:.m.~ists were being used already, but that he questioned the desir-
ablllty of trying to pressure them. 
He apparently stated that they were 
11 
11 
t 
. 
"t 
II b t' 
. 
" 
rea 
y neu rallsts, " but that the French I{ere 
no 
rea Y 
0 nerlng 
to use them. 
The President observed that the situation in South Vietnalll 
"does l ook blacker
l1 to the public than it apparently i<Tas . 
He wondered 
if something could not be done to change the impression being given i n 
the ne1,vs. 152/ 
Toward the end of the discussion of consultations viith the 
South Vietnamese, President Johnson stated .hi s convicti.on that the GVH 
was too weak to take on the DRV militarily. 
He ac1mowledged that the 
South Vietnalllese had received good trainina , but emphasized that we 
tt 
( : ) .  
must have done everything Ife can!l to strengthen them before such a 
conflict occurred. 153/ This attitude y;'as reflected in the guidance 
given to Ambassador Taylor and in the statement he viaS authorized to make 
to the GV}IJ . 
The statement contained a passage asserting that the U. S. 
Government did not believe 
"that vie should incur the risks I·Thich are inherent i n any 
expansion of hostilities yritho~lt fir~t assuring that there 
is a government·.in Saigon capable of handling the serious 
problems involved in such an expansion and of exploiting 
the favorable effects vrhich may be anticipated ...• " 
The statement vrent on to emphasize that before the· United States could 
move to expand ho st ili tie s, the GVN '\wuld have to be capable of 
55 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Itmaintaining law and order,lI of ensuring that its plans for further 
operations ,vould be carried out 
and of coping "lith lithe enemy reactions 
,,'hich must be expected to result II from changes in the current pattern of 
operations . 1:.54/ 
The 'i'Ihite House discussions of U. S. consultation ",ith other 
allies ,vere prefaced by the President ' s strong affirmation that we needed 
"ne,v dramatic, effective" forms of assistance from several of these 
c?untries. 
Australta, New Zealand, Canada and the Philippines were syeci-
f1c all~ mentioned. 
8ecretary Rusk added that the U. K. also could do more . 
A poss1ble Republic of China contribution "TaS discussed, but the Secretary 
expressed concern that introduction of G-RC combat units would tend to 
merge the problem of Vietnam ,vith the conflict betvTeen the two Chinese 
regimes . 
Apparently, the Principals' proposal to send a representative 
to the govermnents of Australia, I'.;ew Zealand, and the Philippines "TaS 
approved. 
In each case, the representative ';vas to explain our concept 
~nd~proposed actions and request additional contributions by Ifay of forces 
1n Ghe event the second phase of U. S. actions '.-rere entered . 
Vice President-
elect Humphrey "laS suggested for consultations with the Philippine govern-
men~ . 
The President asked about the possibility of a \;Test German contri-
but1on, but Secretary McHe.mara e!n:phas i zed that German political problems 
l{Quld inhibit such a pledge from BOD-l1 . 
Finally, it was a.greed that Am-
bassador Taylor lvauld cable the particula.r kind of third country assis-
tance that would be 'welcomed after he had a chance to consult ,·!ith the 
GVH. 155/ 
. 
At the close of the meeting, the 1iThi te House released a press 
statement which contained only t "ro comments regarding any determinations 
that had been r eached . 
One reaffir med "the basic United States policy 
of P~o:iding all poss ible and useful assistance" to South Vietnam, 
spec1f1cally linking this policy ,vith the Congressional Joint Resolution 
of 10 August. 
The other stated: 
"The President instructed Ambassador Taylor to consult 
urgently with the South Vietnamese Government as to 
measures that should be taken to improve the situation 
in all its aspects." 156/ 
During the subsequent press briefing, George Heedy indicated 
to reporters that Taylor iw.uld be vmrking on the specific details of his 
fort hcoming conversations in Saigon "for another two to three days" and 
"muld have at l east one more meeting with the President before his 
~etur~.!21/ 
Em.rever , it seems clear that most of "That he would say 
\:'0 GVI, offic i al , ,,:as settled during the initLLl 'White House meeting . 
A 
~ro~osed text was appended to the Principals' draft position paper, and 
1 t 1S clear that this "Tas discussed on 1 December. 
Apparently, the only 
change made at that time iTas to relllove a proposed U. S. pledge to furnish 
air cover for the GVN maritime operations against the North Vietnamese 
coast .' 158/ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SZCRET - Sensitive 
After the meeting, the statement v-Tas r ecast in the form of 
Presidential instructions to Ambassador Tayl or -- v[ith specific authori-
zation for the Ambassador to alter the phrasing as he thought necessary 
t o insure effective communications with the GVT-i' . 
Hm/ever , the concept 
and the specifi .. points for conrrn1Ll1.ication were unchanged . 
The instruc-
t ions made s pecific provision for him to inform senior GVN offi cials of 
the U. S. YTillingness (1) to cooperate in intensifying the GVF maritime 
operations and (2) lito add U. S. airpower as needed to r estrict the use 
of Laotian territory as an infiltration route i nto SVI:Y . 11 
These pl edges 
were prefaced by statements to the effect that U. S. actions di rectl y 
against the DRV could not be taken until GVN effectiveness was assured 
along certain specified lines . 
The statements made explicit the policy 
v i ew that lI"re should not i ncur the risks "Thich are i nherent i n such an 
expansion of hostilities" until such improvements w'ere made . 
As evidence 
of our desire to encourage these developments, hOI-rever , the rational e 
stressed that the Administration Has "wi lling to strike harder at the 
i nfil trati on routes in Laos and at sea. " 15,2/ 
The i nstructions al so included syecific pr ovi s i on that the U. S. 
Mission in Saigon 'Nas to work ,o/ith the GY}\; i n developing joint p l ans for 
r eprisal operations and for a i r operations appropriate fo r a second 
phase of ne"T U. S. actions . 
The general relationship behleen the t,w 
c ?nt~mplated phases was explained, and the Phase THO purpose "of con-
VlnClng the leaders of DJ.11 that it is to their i nterest to cease to aid 
the Viet Cong" 'vas stated . 
The joint character of the "progressively 
mounting
ll air operations o.gainst liorth Vietnam, should they be decided 
on later , was emphasized. 160/ 
As i ndicated earlier there "las no NSAlt1 i ssued folloHing the 
. 
, 
strategy meeting of 1 December . 
The reasons vThy are cl ear . 
In effect , 
the actions recommended by the Princi pals and approved by the President 
did not constitute a significant departure from the actions authori zed 
i n NSM1 314 (9 September 19(4). 
That doctiIDent had already provided f or 
d iscussions with the Laotian governrnent leading to possible U. S. armed 
r econnaissance operations along the infiltrat i on routes . 
Further , i t 
had provided for resumption of the 34.11.. maritime operations , which had 
continued throughout the fall. In .effect , the December strategy meeting 
produced l ittl e change except to make more concrete the concept of poss i b l e 
future operations agai nst North Vietnam and to authorize steps to i ncl ude 
the GVI; in preparations for these possibilities . 
It i s c l ear that the President did not make any commitment at 
thi s point to expand the "Tar tl1..Yough future operati ons against north 
Vietnam. 
The assurances intended for the GW. in this regard ",ere con-
dit i onal at best . 
The extent to '"hich the :?resident was committed t o 
such a course i n his mind, or i n discussions vli th his leading advisors , 
was not made explicit in the 
sources available . 
It i s implied , hOI-lever, 
i n brief notes which "Tere apparently intended to summarize the mood of 
the meeting on 1 December . 
In "vhat may have been a summation of the 
President ' s expressions, these notes indicate several themes : (1) i t is 
necessary to Iveigh the risks of careful action versus the risks of l oss 
57 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(of South Vietnam? ) ,v-ithout action; (2) it may be necessary to act from 
a base not as strong as hoped for; (3) it is not certain, however, how 
public opinion can be handled; and (4) it is desirable to send out a 
II some'iThat stronger signal." In addition, a comment not entirely legi-
ble stated "Mea.-ures can ' t do as much 
(1) U. N. and (2 ) 
i nternational [riegotiations?7 . If 
In the context of the discussions, the 
impression left by these notations is that the vihi te House 'iiaS con-
siderably less than certain that future U. S. actions age.inst Horth Vi et-
nam would be t aken, or that they 'ilould be desirable . 161/ 
58 
TOP SE CR~T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECP~T - Sensitive 
III 
IMPI.ErBI-iTH;G THE POLICY 
When Ambassador Taylor next met with the President on the afternoon 
of 3 December, McGeorge Bundy was the only other official present. 
Prior 
to· this occasion, Taylor had sat with t he other Principals to review 
specific features of the Administration 's position ~nd to work out details 
of the scenario that was about to . go into production. 
I'l"hen he left the 
President's office, presumably having received the final version of his 
i nstructions, the Ambassador told reporters that he ,-las going to hold 
"across-the-board ll discussions 1,.,ri th the GVi:i . 
Asserting that U. S. policy 
for South Vietnam remained the s~me, he stated that his aim would be to 
improve the deteriorating situation in South Vietnam. 
Although he hinted 
of changes "in tactics and method, " he quite naturally did not disclose 
the kind of operations in which the United States was about to engage or 
any future a.ctions to which ill.m.ediate activities could lead. 162/ 
1. 
Early Actions 
Phase One actions to exert additional pressures against North 
Vietn~m were c:.uite limited. 
Only tlW, the GV1:J maritime operations and 
U.S. armed reconnaissance missions i n Laos, were military actions . 
The 
others involved stage-managing the public release of evidence of the 
increased Communist infiltrat ion into South Vietnam and the acquisition 
of additional assistance for that country from other governments . 
a. 
GVn l·iaritime Operations . 
.,laritime operations under OPLl\H 34A 
represented nothing new. 
These had been underway steadily since 4 October, 
and their Fovember schedule ,-las in the process of being carried. out at the 
time the decisions on immediate actions were being made. 
On 25 Hovember, 
six Pl'F craft bombarded a barracks area on Tiger Island "l'ri th 8JJmn mortars, 
setting numerous fires. 
Moreover, a proposed schedule for December had 
been submitted by cO?rJm01"cv on 27 F ovember. 
Thi s i ncluded a total of 15 
maritime operations involving shore bombardments, a jur>.k capture, a kidnap 
mission, and a demolition sortie against a coastal highway bridge. 164/ 
According to the concept, these lv-ere to be i ntensified during Phase One. 
Soon after the decisions had been made to begin Phase One, the 
JCS tasked COMUs.;,1ACV with developing a revised December 34A schedule to 
better reflect the ne\·rly adopted pressure concept . 
CIKCPAC was requested 
tb submit revised 34A plans so as to arrive in TiT aShington not later than 
8 December. 
The i nstructions specified that these I'Tere "to i nclude pro-
posed sequence and timing for increased frequency of maritime opera.tions ll 
in tlW packages. 
The first vTaS to begi n on 15 December , extend over a 
period of 30 days and provide for "shallow penetration r aids ... on all 
59 
~OP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
types of targets y!hich yTould provide the greatest psychological benefits 
" 
Destructive results and mili tary utility 1"ere to be strictly 
secondary considerations. 
Package Tvro vras to add 4 to 6 u. S. aircraft 
to afford protective cover and incorporate action against certain Forth 
Vietnamese coastal targets above the 19th Parallel. 
This package was 
intended to begin approximately 30 days follmdng initiation of the 
first, although the i nstructions cautioned that the plans should be 
IIprepared to provide for an i ndefinite period" of operations under 
Package One. 165/ 
}lillCV ' s new proposal for maritime operations was submitted on 
5 December, vrith proposals for psychological operations and aerial 
resupply/reinforce missions following close behind. 
On the lOth, appro-
val for the l atter t"ro was cOll1.nunicated back to the field. 
At the time , 
the MAROPS proposals were still under consideration 1tlithin the JCS. 166/ 
On the 12th, t he JCS submitted their two-package proposal. Included in 
their first 30-day package were coastal bombardment of radar Sites, 
barracks , and PT boat bases Dlus a maritime equivalent of aerial armed 
route reconnaissance. 
Patrol boats '{QuId mak~ "fire svTeepsll along the 
coast against "targets of opp·ortunity ." In addition, upon their return 
from bombardment missions, it 'faS proposed that the GV1'J PT boats attempt 
the ca:pture of NV.N jmLl<;,s and Sl-lATml craft . 
~'T i th the single exception of 
the coastal fire sweeps, all of these i ni tia.l package operations were 
approved by OSD , and instructions ,-rere issued to implement the initial 
increment of such oDerat ions on or about 15 December . 167/ 
~ 
---
In accord with the i nstructions initially issued regarding inten-
sified maritime operations, OSD decisions on the proposed second package 
were deferred. 
The J CS i ndicated that the addition of U. S. air cover, 
and the necessary cornnand and control procedures needed to support such 
operations, could be implemented on or about 15 January . 
They went on 
to recommend that if this were decided , the "maritime operations should 
be surfaced ... prior to [impl ement ation 0!...7 Package Two." 168/ 
The JCS were disconcerted over disapproval of the fire s,,,eeps 
along the l~orth Vietnamese coast . . Hm·:ever, their conce r n stemmed not so 
much from the lack of support for those particular operations as from 
their vie,,; that the disapproval removed from the package the only signi--
ficant intensification beyond the level already attained before the 
President ' s Phase One decision. 
At a Principals meeting on 19 December, 
Acting JCS Chairman, General Harold K. Johnson, pointed out that ,vith the 
modificat ions nOH made to it, the 34A program vTaS , in effect, not inten-
sified at all. 
I'ioreover , as discussion revealed, seasonal sea conditions 
were nmV' so severe that no maritime operation had been completed sucess-
fully during t he previous three ,,,eeks . 169/ 
In effect, therefore, . the 
"intensified" December schedule of approved maritime operations still 
remained to be implemented as the month dre'" to a close. 
60 
TOP SECRE'r - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
For January, the JCS urged that several air missions be added 
to the kind of operations already approved. 
Included were two Vl:~AF air 
strikes, using unmarked aircraft a..nd U. S. air escort for returning 
surface craft. 170/ 
Hmlever both of these items 'N'ere disapproved ; 
'-
, 
only the air oPerations in support of psychological and resupply opera-
tions gained acceptance . 171/ 
Apparently there was little addi tional 
MAROPS activity during January, 1965; the normal documentary sources 
include very little for this period. 
b . 
Armed Peconnaissance in Laos. 
Like the maritime operations, 
armed reconnaissance in Laos 'Was , in some respects , a continuation of 
operations that had been unden-ray for some time . 
At least, U. S. aircraft 
had been operating over Laos since the previous Eay, performing r econ-
naissance ftillctions and nroviding armed escort for these and ( since 
October ) the RL~ strike-missions . 
Of course , armed escort was carried 
out under strict r ul es of engagement that permitted attacking ground 
targets only in response to hostile fire . 
Given the operational code 
YAil1illE TE.AJl.1, these carrier and land-based missions had been following 
a constant pattern for several months . 
This had included roughly four 
daylight reconnaissance flights in the Plaine des Jarres - Route 7 area 
every two weeks , and during a like period, approximately ten r econnaissance 
fli ghts in the Panhendle , and two night-reconnaissance flights along 
Route 7. 
Complementing these efforts were those of the RLA..F , \vhose T- 28 ' s 
harassed the Pathet Lao, ga.Ne tactical air support to Royal Laotian Army 
units, interdicted Route 7 and the Panhandle, and performed armed route 
reconnaissance i n Central Laos . 
During the period 1 October-30 December , 
there \vere a total of 724 T-28 sorties i n the Panhandle alone . 
These had 
already precipitated several comnlaints from the DRV, al leging UoS.-
sponsored air atta'cks on Korth vietnamese territory. 172/ 
The intended U.S . policy was discussed with Premier Souvanna 
Phouma on 10 December by the new U. S. Ambassador to Laos, Hilliam 
Sullivan. 
He reported that Souvanna Ilfully supports the U. S. pressures 
program and is prepared to cooperate in full." 'l'he Premier particularly 
wanted interdiction of Routes 7 , 8, and 12, but he insisted on making no 
public ad..rnission that U. S. aircrar:t had taken on new missions i n Laos. 
The Administration had i ndicated to the Vientiane Embassy a few days 
earlier that it 'lished the RLCl..F to i ntensify its strike program also , 
particularly "in the Corridor areas and close to the DRV border ." 173/ 
In the meantime, the JCS developed an air strike program to 
complement the Y.AI::~E TEJU1 operat ion i n accordance with current guidance , 
and had instructed CETCPAC to be prepared to carry it out. 
The program 
included missio;lS against targets of opportunity along particular portions 
of Route 8 and Routes 121 and 12 . 
It also i ncluded secondary targets for 
each T,lission that i ncluded barracks areas and military strong points . 
The second missj on ivas to be flmw not earlier than three days follmving 
the first . 174/ 
The progr21U 'was briefed at a l~ December meeting of the 
. 61 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Principe.ls by Deputy Secreta.ry Vance and 'I'las approved by them with one 
exception. 
They amended the ordnance instructions vrhich had been pre-
pared for CIKCPAC to specifically exclude the use of napalm. 
For its 
first use against targets in Laos, they felt, the RL~ would be t he 
only appropriatl. user. 
McGeorge Bundy stated that the amended program 
"fulfilled precisely the President 's ''fishes,'' and that he (Bundy) would 
so inform the President . 
He further stated that, barring separate ad-
vice to the contrary, the program should be executed . 
It was also 
agreed at this meeting that there .. rould be no public statements about 
armed reconnaissance operations in Laos unless a plane were lost. 
In 
such an event, the Pri~cipa ls stated, the Government should continue to 
insist that 'ie were merely escorting reconnaissance flights as requested 
by the Laotian GoverD~ent . 175/ 
Armed reconnaissance operations in Laos, called BARR6L ROLL, 
got undervlay on 14 December. 
This first mission was flo'tTn by {,SAF jet 
aircraft along Route 8 . 
It vras follm,red on the 17th by carrier-based 
A-l and jet aircraft, striking along Routes 121 and 12. 
On the 18th , 
this pattern of tivo missions by four aircraft each ,{as determined by 
Secretary of Defense or higher authority to be the 'veekly standard --
at least through the third .. reek . 176/ 
Just a day earlier, the JCS had 
proposed a second 'tTeek ' S program. that included repetition of the first 
vreek ' s operations plus missions along Route 7, 9 and 23 . 
Their proposals 
were prepared id th a statement of JCS understanding "that a gradual 
increase in i ntensity of operations is intended for the second week." 
Recalling Souvanna Phouma '~ reported requests for such operations, they 
also included a strong recommendation that Route 7 be struck as part of 
the second week's missions . 177/ 
This same r ationale was voiced by General Johnson in the Prin-
cipals meeting on 19 December . 
He pointed out that the BA-J.'\REL ROLL 
program briefed there by Deputy Sec;etary Vance did not represent any 
intensification beyond the previous 'iveek ' s effort . 
Vance confirmed that 
not intenSifying the pro gr~ had been one of the criteria applied in 
selectir,g the second "i{eek ' s missions. 
Consensus ,-ras reached by the 
Principals that the program should r emain about the same for the next 
two weeks, in accordance with the most recent guidance. 178/ 
At the end of December, .. rhen there viaS serious question about 
the efficacy of maintaining the direction of U.S. policy in South Vietnam, 
Defense Officials requested an evaluation of the BARREL ROLL program. 
In particular, they were concerned as to "vThy neither the DRV nor the 
Communist Chine£e have made any public mention of or appeared to have 
taken cognizanc3 of our BARREL ROLL operations." 179/ 
In response, a 
DIA assessment i ndicated that the Communists apparently had made no 
"distinction bet,';een BLRREL ROLL missions on the one hand and the 
Laotian T-28 strikes and YAlY.EE ':CEAJ"i missions on the other." Attributing 
all stepped up operations i n Laos to the Uni ted States and its fllackeys ," 
they had lumped all operations together as "U.S. armed i nterference in 
62 
TOP Sj!,';CREl' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP S7,CnET - Sensitive 
Laotian 's LSiiJ affairs , gross violations of the General Agreements, and 
events which are causing a grave situation in Laos and Indochina." 
DIA 
went on to obser,re that "it ,vould be most difficult to distinguish. 
between YI\NKEE TE.A.2,1 with its flat suppression aircraft from the BAIillEL 
ROLL missions." 
Further, the assessment observed t hat "Bi\..RREL ROLL 
strH:.es have followed T-28 strikes by varying periods of time and have 
been of l esser intensity. 
They probably appear to be a continuation of 
the Laotian program." It concluded: 
"On balance, therefore, while the communists are apparently 
aware of some i ncreased use of U. S. aircraft, they probably 
have not considered the BP~REL ROLL strikes to date as a sig-
nificant change i n the pattern or as representing a ne,v threat 
to their activities." 180/ 
Despite the lack of discernible Communist reaction to BARREL 
ROLL by the end of the year and considerable concern among the JCS, there 
was little change in the operation during eal"ly January. 
On the ~th, 
CINCPAC "ras authorized to go ahead "rith the fourth "reek 's program: 
"One U.S. armed reco~naissance/pre-briefed air strike 
missions in Laos for the "reek of 4-10 January 1965, is ap-
proved. 
Additional missions "Till be the subject of later 
message." 
(Underlining added) 
The approved mission called for night armed reconnaissance along Route 7, 
the fi~st of its kind. 181/ 
Attlle"time , the JCS "Jere avaiting a decision 
on thelr proposals for a complementary mission, but the Department of State 
had objected to their choice of a secondary target because it was located 
near Cambodian territory. 
Earlier in the series, the Tchepone barracks 
had been deleted as a seconda.ry mission by the '\<ihite House because a Hanson 
Baldvrin article had named it as a likely target. 
On 5 January, the JCS 
representative r eminded the Principals t hat the currently approved 
BA."RREL ROLL mission constituted the fourth veek of these operations and, 
therefore, vrould terminate the ini ti.al 30-day period of Phase One pres-
sure s . 
The JCS were quite concerned that there had not yet been plans 
made for a "transition phase" of .stepped up attacks to begin around mid-
January . 182/ 
c. 
Surfacing Infiltration Evidence . 
An integral part of the 
Administration 's pressures policy, particularly if U.S. forces were to 
be involved in direct 8.ttacks on l'Torth Vietnam, 'liaS the presentation to 
the public of convincing evidence of DRV responsibility for thE. precarious 
situation in So"\.'th Vietnam . 
As seen earlier, a former i ntelligence 
specialist, Chester Cooper, was selected to compile a public account of 
the i nfiltration OI
n trained cadre and guerrilla fighters, to be used for 
this pur.pose. 
His account was to be developed from the various classi-
fi ed reports that had been produced and was to l ay particular stress on 
the alarming increase in th~ rate of infiltration in the l atter half of 
1964 . 
63 
TOP SECRE1' - Sensitive 
, . t 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Cooper submitted his report on 4 December. 
It was based on 
(1) a State-sponsored updating of the so-called Jorden Report , which 
described also the DrtV's direction, control and materiel support of 
the insurgency (this had been discussed during the policy discussions 
in the Spring and i nitiated during the Summer); (2) the MACV i nfiltra-
tion study, based on interrogations of VC prisoners and completed in 
October; and (3) reports from a DIA/CIA Il';-R team who \Vent to Saigon 
in mid-Eovember to evaluate the M.''l.CV report (they confirmed its validity). 
Hi's report consisted of four items: 
(1) a s ummary statement and a more 
detailed public discussion of VC infiltration LTAB~; (2) a list of 
possible questions and suggested anSl.ers for use with the press or the 
Con~ress; (3) 
II a reconciliation , or at least an explanation of past low 
estlIDates of infiltration given in Congressional testimony and to the 
press"; and (4) a listing of available documentary evidence and graphic 
materials to aid in public presentations. 
In his covering memorandum, 
Cooper urged that the materials be fOTIvarded to Saigon so as to make 
J·1A_CV and tJubassy Officials fully aI-Tare of the proposed approach and to 
make consistent its Use by U. S. and GVN personnel. 183/ 
The Cooper materials were forwarded for review to the Saigon 
Embassy on 8 December, and to the Principals on the 9th. 184/ 
Shortly 
thereafter, Secretary Rusk cabled Ambassador Taylor, express i ng his 
concern that early release of the infiltration data '\vould generate 
pressures for actions beyond what we nOl'T contemplate. II 
He sought 
'I'aylor I s advice as to '..rhether release \vould be 'wise. 
In the Ambassador IS 
reply,he urged early release. 
He stated, III do not feel that, at this 
point, the substance of the release ivill generate pressure for extreme 
action. II 
Moreover , he expressed the viel' that release would serve to 
quiet the currently rife speculation among ne\Vs correspondents and parts 
of the GVn concerning I-That the United States ,ms intending to do in SVH. 
Citing a HeYl York Daily Helvs article (7 December) as an example of I'That 
he felt Here increasingly likely leaks , he expressed his desire to ma...'ke 
planned deliberate announcements of "That the United States lvaS nOl·T doing 
and I-That might be done in the future . 
He expressed his i ntention to 
have the GVh release the report on i nfiltration , complete I-rith press 
briefings and statements, betl-Teen 10-17 December. 185/ 
Despite strong recow~endations from the field to release the 
inf iltration data, the Principals determined that it should not yet be 
made pUblic. 
During the first part of December, the chief advocate for 
not releasing it Has Secretary McIJamara. 
At their meeting on 12 December, 
Mr . Vance stated that I.1r. Hcramara ,vanted to I-Ti thhold the infiltration 
data for the tirne being . 
His rationale "TaS not recorded in the minutes. 
The State Depar~ment opinion in response was that the Department "did not 
consider i t of any great moment ." Thereafter , the Principals decided 
that release should be ,dthheld, at least until their next meeting, 
19 Dece~ber . 186/ 
By the tL'1le they met again, a ,veek l ater , several expressions 
of support for r eleasing the data had b,een received. 
On the 14th 
64 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECP.ET - Sensitive 
Ambassador Taylor recalled that the ARVN intelligence chief had review'ed 
the original ·P.,ACV infiltration report and the proposed press release and 
had "concurred in cormnending declassification." 
On the 16th J-\mbassador 
Sullivan praised the Cooper report and suggested passing it to Souvanna 
Phouma prior to "lhat he hoped "muld be a proml)t public release . 187/ 
At the Principals meeting these vie"Ts "Tere cited in a strong statement 
by William Bundy concerning the problems of keeping the infiltration 
evidence out of the press. 
General Johnson, Acting Chairman, JCS , 
favored release as a morale boost to U.S. personnel in South Vietnam . 
HcGeorge Bundy and Carl Rowen ( USIA) favored gradual or p i ecemeal release . 
However, Nr . Vance repea.ted Secretary r.lci:Tamara I s wish to continue sup-
pression of the infiltration reuort __ possibly for an i ndefinite period. 
'i'his vie'\v finally prevailed, as ~ the Principals agreed not to release the 
Cooper report either in Saigon or 'iTashington. 
Instead, they felt that 
the President might disseminate some of the information through such 
vehicles as his State of the Union message or in a contemplated Christmas 
address to U. S. forces in Saigon . 188/ 
Follo'"ing the meeting, but before recelvlng reports concerning 
the current political upheaval in Saigon, the State Department cabled 
the Administration's decision not to meke a formal GV1(/US release of the 
infiltration data . 
It gave as rationale the feeling that fonnal release 
"COUld be misinterpreted and became vehicle [fo!,7 undesirable speculation, It 
and suggested alternative procedures. 
Stating that "general background 
briefings •.. should continue to indicate infiltration has incre ased "Ii th-
out getting into specifics,"it indicated that under pressure, the Saigon 
Embassy tlcould have one or more deep background sessions with fihiJ 
America,n forces. 11 
The cable cautioned , however, that specific numbers 
and comparisons "ti th previous years t estimates should be avoided . 
These 
would not be released, it ,{as advised, until late in January after senior 
Administration officials he,d testified to Congress in a scheduled inquiry. 
The current aim was stated "to get general picture into survey stores 
such as Grose article of Fovember 1 rather than as spot news cormnanding 
wide attention. 11 
The cable conc luded by acknowledging a "just received
1l 
Taylor Dlessage and approving his stated judgment to proceed with periodic 
background briefings in Saigon, along lines outlined above . 189/ 
Follo"dng the rift betl,reen the South VietnameRe military leaders 
and the American Embassy, resistance to the release of infiltration data 
hardened. 
In cables of 24 December, P~bassador Taylor was instructed to 
avoid background briefings on the infiltration increases wltil the po-
l itical situation clarified. 
~e was cowlseled that release of the data 
'\-TOuld be "umvise 1l unless he "rere to obtain evidence that the South Viet-
namese military was planning to go ahead witll a unilateral release . 1.90/ 
These instructions prevailed until well into J-anuary, 1965 . 
--
d. 
Consultations 1dth "'l'hird Countries. I I 
In the days irmnediate1y 
following the policy decisions of 1-3 December , several U. S. allies >{ere 
consulted concerning the intended U.S. approach in Southeast Asia . 
In 
TOP SECRgl - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
accord vTi th the F-..cincipals' vie"rs, the govern.'nents of Thailand and Laos 
were briefed by the respective U.S. Ambassadors to those countries . 
Foreign f,::i nister Thuan 
Khoman later visited the President in 'i;.rashington 
and pres1.l1l1ably :pursued the matter further . 
The Canadians were conta.cted 
in both Ottalva a:ld ·Hashington. 
l'iilliam Bundy lleld discussions in Kew 
Zealand and Australia on 4-5 December. 
Prime .Minister Hilson of the 
United Kingdom vas thoroughly briefed during a series of meetings in 
Hashington, 7-9 December. 
Later, William Bundy told the Principals that 
the U.K., Australia and New Zealand received the full picture of immediate 
U.S. actions and its sti'Oulations to the GV1I: and the potential two -phased 
concept of graduated Dre~sures on Horth Vietnam. 
The Canadian Government 
Vias told slightly les; . 
The Philippi nes , South Korea and the Republic of 
China 
i'Tere briefed on Phase One only. 191/ 
One of the aims stressed by President Johnson in the meeting of 1 and 
3 December , and continually thereafter, vTas obtaining increased assistance 
for the GVH and for our efforts on its behalf from our allies . 
During the 
12 December Principals meeting, for ex.amyle, vTilliam. Bundy related the 
President's recent i{ish to obtain assistance even from governments vTithout 
strong Southeast Asia commitments, like Denmark, "Jest Germany and India . 
This was mentioned in the context of a summary report on current "third-
country assistance of all kinds to South Vietnam." 192/ 
At the tir!l.e , ho,;>,ever, not only general assistance from many countries 
but specifically militarv assistance from a select few '\.laS particularly 
sought . 
D~~ing the cons~lt at ions with allied goverlli~ents, both Australia 
and Few Zealand were pressed to send troop units to assist ABVN . 
Both 
supported the u . S. policy decisions as probably necessary, but neither 
vTas "\-Tilling at the ·time to make a commitment . 
l':ell Zealand officials ex-
pressed grave doubts that Phase II ",!ould lead to negotiations , predicting 
instead that the DRV would only increase the clandestine troop deployments 
to the South. 
They eXDressed doubts about the advisability of sending 
allied ground forces i~to South Vietnam. 193/ 
The concept under 11lhich the allied troop deployments 'were believed 
desirable was related to that 'which the NSC II)'0rking Group had recomr::tended 
as deserving further study . 
Contemplated vTaS an international force 
built around one U. S. division, to be deployed just south of the DMZ in 
conjunction with stepped-up uS/GVn air operations a gainst North Vietnam. 
In essence,therefore , it Was a Phase ~~ro concept, dependent in some 
respects on the degree of success achieved during Phase One activities . 
The concept was examined in detail by the Joint Staff in early December , 
and their staff study was fonra.rded to the services and the Joint Pacific 
Headquarters I1f(r comment and recommendations " on 10 December . 
The pur-
poses cited for such a fo~ce deployment by the Joint Ste.ff were stated as 
follows : 
(1) to deter groUIld invasion by the DRV; (2) to hold a "blocking 
position agai nst DRV attacks dmoJD the coastal plain and make more difficult 
DRV efforts to bypass"; and (3) to be "capable of holding the defensive 
positions against attack until reinforcements a,rrive if required . " 194/ 
66 
TOP SSCRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The degree to which the international force vTas believed to offer a 
useful option seems to have been in question. 
Hhile the State Department 
and other non-military agencies apparently favored it, the Department of 
Defense was less than enthusiastic. 
At t he 19 December Principals meet-
ing, for example, all of those present agreed t hat " suitable planning 
to-ward such a force should go fon-Tard!! except Assistant Defense Secretary 
McNaughton . 
He stated that he thought the idea had been shelved. 195/ 
Later, in their reviel,'T of the ,Toint Staff's study, the services expressed 
reservations concerning the concept . 
They questioned its military 
utility, due to the deployments being framed essentially within a narrOH 
deterrent context. 
They r ecommended i nstead a continued adherence to the 
deployment concept in the approved SEATO plans, which in their totality 
>'i'ere aimed at the military defense of all southeast Asia. 
The Army, in 
particular, expressed concern regarding routes and modes of possible DRV 
advance i nto South Vietnam that differed from those assumed by the study's 
belovr-the-m,1Z concept. 
The Air Force pointed out that the international 
force concept conflicted with the JCS concept for deterring and dealing 
.. lith overt DRV/CHICOM aggression as submitt~d on 14 November (JCSH-955-64). 
196/ 
:Hr. McNaughton 's comments on 19 December seem to have been correct. 
The case files containing the service comments on the international force 
concept indicate no further action by the JCS after mid-J~nuary. 
In the meantime, however) a different approach to attracting wider 
allied participation in the military defense of South Vietnam appeared 
promising. 
On 29 December, OSD/ISA reported readiness on the part of 
the Philippi ne , ROK and GRC Governments to provide various forms of assist-
ance to South Vietnam. 
Included in the available Philippine and Korean 
packages were an assortment of military forces. 
The ROK Joint Chiefs of 
Staff offered a combat engi neer battalion, an engineer field maintena.n.ce 
team, an Army transportation company, and a Marine Corps combat engineer 
company. 
The Philippine Government stated its ,dllingness to send a 
reinforced infantry battalion, an engineer construction battalion, and 
some Special Forces units. 197/ 
2. 
Relations with the G~~ 
Following his second meeting with President Jo~~son, Ambassador 
Taylor returned to Saigon . 
He arrived on 6 December amid press specula-
tion concerning the details of his i nstructions and subsequent UoS. 
actions. 198/ The bas ic charge given him by the President had been vTell 
publicized since their meeting on the 1st : lito consult urgently ''lith the 
government of P:rime Hi nister Tran Van Huong a~ to measures to be taken 
to improve the situation in all its aspects. II 
Hmiever, such a diplo-
matically worded statement left much room for imaginative interpretation 
-- particularly in view of the AmbCJ.ssador' s "unannounced stopover in 
Hong Kong to get a briefing by U. S. 'China watchers' in that listening 
post." Several correspondents speculated on the likelihood of air action 
TOP SECREr - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
age.inst the Eorth. 
One, with an apparent inside source, even reported 
that these would be held in abeyance pending the outcome of strikes in 
Laos and the Gvn reactions to U. S . suggestions for improvement . 198/ 
a . 
Joint Planning. 
In the days immediately follmving his 
r eturn, PJnbassador Taylor! s schedule precipitated press reports of fran-
t i c activity within the Embassy and other parts of the U. S. Mission in 
Saigon. 
Taylor first briefed his Embassy Council and the Embassy staff 
on the policy discussions in Hashington and the joint US/GVN courses of 
action which it was hoped ,,;ould be follo.red in South Vietnam during 
ensuing Iveeks. 
On 7 December, he met "rith Premier Huong and his senior 
ministers and .li th General Khanh. 
On these occasions he outli ned the 
military and diplomatic actions which the U.S. Government intended to 
take during Phase One and explained hml the Adlliin:is tration related the 
possibilities of Phase Two actions to GVI~ perform,once. 
The Ambassador 
described in general terrns the .kinds of administrative improvements and 
joint planning activities which U. S. officials thought the GVR should 
undertake . 199/ 
Similar sessions 1,jere held during the next few days, as the details 
for the joint GVU/US efforts .rere Iwrl\:ed out . 
On the evening of the 8th, 
Ambassador Taylor held a reception for niemoers of the High ra.t ional 
Council and General ~'lestmore land hosted the top A?VN generals at dinner . 
At both occasions, Taylor briefed the assembled on U. S. attitudes toward 
the GV:r-; and, presumably, on the Administration ' s calculations of U. S. 
risk relative to G'll; capability. 
On the follmring day, he held a lengthy 
session .rith Premier Huong, Deputy Premier Vien and General Khanh . 
On 
this occasion, he distributed a paper outlining nine specific actions 
which the U. S. Government believ~d-,'rere needed to strengthen the GVN a.nd 
i n vlhich the local U. S. mission "las committed to help . 
Taylor reported 
that the rI:oaper was generally well received ll and that II specific joint 
action responsibilities" had been agreed on . 
These were to be confirmed 
i n writing on the follmdng day . 
On tha,t same day, he submitted a pro-
posed GVH press release, describing in general terms the nature of the 
new U. S, assistance to be given and the nei'J areas of GVN and joint G~/US 
planning, designed to improve the situation in South Vietnam. 200/ 
On the 11th, having obtained AcLministration approval, an official 
GVH statement I{as re l eased to the press~ It related that lIa series of 
discussions with the U.S. Mission ll had just been completed and that the 
U.S , Government had offered additional assistance rlto improve the execu-
tion of the Govermnent ' s progrelliS and to restrain foot ' offset ' as 
originall~T '10rd"~7 the mounting infiltration of men and equipment ll from 
l'iorth Vietnam. 
Among military measures, it s::.:>ecified that U. S. support 
\vould enable rI increased numbers of ffiouth Vietname siJ mili tary, p ara-
military and police forces rl and 'would permit lithe strengthening of the 
air defense of South Vietnam." It also mentioned assistance IIfor a 
variety of forms of industrial, urban and rural development ll and promised 
' 68 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
a GVH effort to improve "security and local government in the rural areas.
1I 
The statement closed with the follOl'Ting bro paragraphs, which subsequent 
events made to appear ironic but which "Tere juxtaposed with great care: 
"TogetLer, the Government of Vietnam and the United States 
mission are making joint plans to achieve greater effectiveness 
against the i nfiltration threat. 
"In the course of the discussions, the United states repre-
sentatives exuressed full suuuort for the duly constituted 
Government of~ Prime Hinister· }IUong." 201/ 
As the follmdng section '''ill shmo[, the joint plarming that had just 
gotten unden-ray for reurisal actions and Phase II operations was soon to 
be halted. It 'Has def~rred for a period of about three 'veeks during the 
forthcoming GV::J crisis. 
However, as implicit in the quoted paragraphs 
above , its resumption provided'effective U. S. leverage to help bring about 
an accommodation bet"lveen the milit ary dissidents and the civilian regime. 
b. 
GVN Crises . 
Late in the evening of 19 December, high-ranking 
South Vietnamese military leaders, l ed by General Khanh, moved to remove 
all power from the civilian regime of Premier huong . 
The move came in 
the announced dissolution of the High national C01mcil, "I-!hich had been 
serving as a provisional l egislature pending adoption of a permanent con-
stitution , and the arrest of some of its members. 
Aiy Commodore Ky , acting 
as spokesman for the military, claimed that their intent was "to act as a 
mediator Fo resolviJ all differences in order to achieve national unity. II 
The immediate apparent conflict was with the Buddhists who had been demon-
strating and threatening to provoke civil disorders in protest against the 
Huong government . 
In P..:mbas sador Taylor I s vie\v, hmvever, the under l ying 
motive \V'as grmving antipathy \-lith particular members of the High I'I8.tional 
Council, brought to a head by the Council's refusal to approve a military 
plan to retire General (Big) Minh from active service (and thus remove 
him from a position to contend ,dtb the ruling military clique). 
Moreover, 
the military had become quit e impatient with the ci vili an offic ials. 202/ 
The general consensus among the _lJUbassador, General Westmoreland 
and State Department officials \Vas that Gener a l Khanh I s relationship "lith 
the other inf luential generals and younger officers was rather uncertain. 
Therefore, they sought to bolster Premier Huong 's resolve to remain in 
office on the basis of an lmderstanding ,lith the generals -- even to the 
extent of seeking Khanh I s resignation or dismissal. 
T:Jhen presented with 
U.S. views, Khanh gave i nitial appearances of recognizing that the mili-
tary seizure ha<..i. directly defied the U. S. pollcy position and the stipulatei 
basis for continuing joint GVlT/US efforts, and of accepting the need to 
vri thdralv. 
Hm'lever, he quickly attempted to turn the crisis into a direct 
confrontation betv.'een himself and j\mbassador Taylor . 203/ 
On t he 22nd, 
he i ssued a strong public affirmation of the military~aders' actions, 
. 69 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
of the need to avoid situations "favorable to the common enemies /Commu-
nism and colonialism in any foril," and of the military's resolve-"not 
to carry out the policy of any foreign country." 
On the 24th, informa-
tion '.vas received that he intended to pressure Premier Huong into 
declaring Pilllbassador Taylor personna non grata. 204/ 
Administration r eaction to this challenge indicated that it con-
sidered Khanh 's defiance as a threat to the fOQndations of U.S . policy in 
South Vietnam. 
Alubassador Taylor vTas instructed to inform Huong t hat the 
U. S. GoverIl.ment regarded the Pl~G issue as a "matter of gravest importance," 
and that "any acceptance of ffihanh'i/ demand or hesitation in rejecting 
it would make it virtually impossible ..• to continue support LOf th~7 GVD 
effort." Suggesting that. :Iuong might asked if he thought the "Aluerican 
People could be brought to support continued U.S. effort in S~~ in face 
LOt! E';G action against trusted i~.mbassador ," the Administration urged 
persistence in encouraging Huong to seek an accommodation with the other 
military l eaders . 
Moreover, high-ranking HACV personnel were urged to 
exploit their close relationships with South Vietnamese counterparts to 
encourage such an arrangement. 
As leverage , Taylor 1tlaS encouraged to 
emphasize the intended directions of U.S. policy, subsequent to a 
strengthened and stable GVH . 
Specifically, he was urged to point out 
that joint reprisals for unusual VC actions and "any possible future 
decision to initiate !Jh~7 second phase" ;;.;ere impossible as long as 
current conditions persisted. 
He was told, ";;.;ithout offering anything 
beyond tenns of your instructions you could use these to their fullest 
to bring jj;.y and the other generali! around." 205/ 
There is no indication in the available sources that this advice 
was directly employed. 
It is evident, h01tTeVer, that .A.1l1bassador Taylor 
had explained the dependency of further U.S. actions on G~~ progress very 
clearly to the key military leaders on 8 and 20 December. 206/ 
Therefore, 
they were vlell a\.;are that continued U. S. assistance along the pOlicy line 
explained to them I'las predicated on their cooperation, and this ,·.'as 
demonstrated early in the crisis. 
Even before Khanh ' s public declaration 
of independence from U. S. policy, it became knmm that joint talks con-
cerning increased aid to the South Vietnamese war effort had been sus-
pended. 
A fei'T days later that fact 1tlaS given additional circulation, 
with emphasis that this suspension i ncluded p~ticularly any discussions 
of mea,sures to reduce the infiltration from Laos and North Vietnam. 2117/ 
The degree to which the suspensions of joint planning actions 
affected the judgments of the South Vietnmnese generals is, of course, 
not clear. l>lhat is apparent, hm ever, is that this factor together 1tTi th 
careful Embassy and Administration efforts to clarify possible misunder-
standings l ed the generals to reconsider. 
By 28 December, _kmbassador 
Taylor Fas reporting encouraging signs of an accommodation. 208/ 
On the 
29th, Secreta.ry Rusk advised the President that the "gener als 1tTere having 
second thoughts" and that "he hoped to see signs of political unity in 
Saigon soon." 
'l'hese comments 1tTere made in close cooperation with reports 
70 
./ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
that the Administration now' felt that Prew.ier Huong ' s cabinet might 
require broader representation. 
Finally, on the 9th, the generals 
pledged to return to terms agreed to during the previous August vThereby 
matters of state would be left in the hands of a civilian government. 
The joint commurlique issued by Huong and Khanh also promised to speedily 
convene a representative constituent assembly to replace the High l'iational 
Council. 209/ 
The generals ' reassessments ".rere no doubt helped by a strong 
U.S. public statement, directed toward the South Vietnamese press, ex-
plaining the U. S. policy position to"Tard that country's political situ-
ation. 
In l anguage strikingly similar to the President's draft instruc-
tions to Taylor , it included the follmling: 
liThe primary concern of the United States Government and 
its representatives is that there be in Saigon a stable 
government in place, able ·to speak for all its components, 
to carry out plans and to execute decisions. 
'iTithout such 
a government, United States cooperation ,¥ith and assistance 
to South Vietna..rn cannot be effective. 
" ... The sole object of United States activities has been 
and continues to be the reestablish.ment as quickly as possible 
of conditions favorable to the more effective prosecution of 
the war against the Vietcong. II 210/ 
Consistent "lith the expressed U. S. policy position, discussions betlveen 
U.S. and G~ : officials concerning expanded assistance to the South 
Vietnamese war effort I'Tere resumed on 11 January. 211/ 
However, the apparent reconciliation of South Vietnam's military 
and civilian leadership was short-lived. 
Close on the heels of an 
announced G\ft\T decision (17 January) to increase its milit ary draft calls 
-- long advocated by the U. S. l1ission -- student and Buddhist riots 
s'vept through Hue and Dalat . 
On the 20th, as arrangements "Tere completed 
to appoint four leading generals to Premier Huong's cabinet, a leading 
Buddhist official issued a proclamation accusing the Huong Government of 
attempting to split the Buddhist movement . 
On the 21st, Tri Quang issued 
a statement charging that the Huong Government could not exist ,dthout 
U.S. support, a charge that . gained in intensity in the days to follow. 
On the 23rd, i3uddhist leaders ordered a military struggle against the 
United States . 
Denouncing Premier Huong as a lackey of the U. S. Ambassa-
dor, they accused Taylor of seeking to wipe out Buddhism i n Vietnam. 
In 
Hue , student-·lee.:. demonstrators sacked the USIJ." library and destroyed dJl 
estimat ed 8 , 000 books. 
THO days later, riots and strikes were in progress 
in Rue, Saigon and Da r'Tang, and Hue "TaS placed under martial law. 
Mean-
"Thile, military leaders I'Tere attempting to convince Buddhist spokesmen 
to call off their demonstrations against the C::VK and the United States. 
Finally, on the 27th, the generals withdrew their support from the Huong 
. 71 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR~T - Sensitive 
Government, and General Khanh issued a statement that he vlaS resuming 
power !tto resolve the political situation." 
Soon after, the Buddhist 
leaders is sued orders to their follOlvers to halt their demonstrations, 
at least until they had sufficient opportunity to observe the perfor-
mance of the nevi regime . 212/ 
Thus, in late January, the United states Government was faced 
with a dilemma. 
In December it had spoken out quite clearly to the 
, 
-" 
effect that its continued assistance along previously determined policy 
lines was dependent upon the effective functioning of a duly constituted 
South Vietnamese Gove;nment . 
By its actions and state~ents during the 
initial December crj_sis, it had indicated that what it had in mind "as 
a civilian regime governing without interference from any particular 
grou:p . 
Now', less than a month from the settlement of the former crisis 
along lines compa,tible with the preferred U. S. solution, it I'las faced 
with another military coup . 
A time for reassessing former policy 
decisions and taking stock of the shifting debits and assets in the U.S. 
position had arrived. 
c. 
Joint Reprisals. 
~.Ieanwhile, an issue of great significance 
to the Administration, as ','Tell as to future relations with the GVN, \'las 
adding to the grovring dissatisfaction with progress achieved in other 
Phase One actions. 
One of the basic elements in Phase One policy Ivas to 
have been joint GV:iTjus reprisa l actions in response to any lIunusual 
actions " by the VC. 
Hhen faced .dth a significant provoc8,tion at the 
end of December, t he Administration failed to authorize such actions. 
At the time, the circumstances in South Vietnam provided cogent reasons 
for not doing so, but it nevertheless represented a significant departure 
from the agreed policy position. 
At the height of the first government crlsls, on Christmas Eve, 
the Brink D. S. officers billet in d01i'.'l1to'ilD Saigon was bombed and severely 
damaged. 
TIVQ jI,mericans were killed and 58 injured; 13 Vie tnamese also 
were injured . 213/ 
Ko suspicious person vlaS observed near the building, 
so the reponsible party "Tas unkno"m. 
In reporting the incident, Am-
bassador Taylor treated it as an occasion for reprisal action. 
The 
i mmediate Administration assessment \,.'as that und.er current political 
circumstances , neither the American public nor international opinion 
might believe that the VC had done it. l'!;oreover, with clear evidence 
lacking, it felt that a reprisal at this time might appear as though 
",·re are trying to shoot ourvJay out of an internal political crisis . !t 
Given the Political disunity in Saigon, the Administration believed !lit 
would be hard for ifhi/ P,merican people to understand action to extend 
Ith::..7 war. II 
ThE: refore, so the reasoning vTent , it would be undesirable 
to underta.~e reprisals at that time. 
However, in cabling this e,ssessment, 
Secretary Rusk added : 
:'but we are prepared to m8ke quick decision if 
you !jaylo!] make recommendation ,dth different assessment of above 
factors or ';lith other factors not covered. above.!l 214/ 
72 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP S~CBET - Sensitive 
Recommendations to take reprisal action came from several quar-
ters. 
Citing "Ihat it called lIa further indication!! of Viet Cong respon-
sibili ty, and cautioninG ao'ainst adding the Brink affair to the Bien Hoa 
o 
'" 
instance of unreciprocated enemy provocation, CIECPAC urged a reprisal 
atta.ck. 
He argl.'ed that the Ilbombing of Brink BO,< .. TaS an act aimed 
directly at U. S. armed forces in R~!li: 1I and that failure to respond would 
only encourage further attacks. 215/ 
.Ambassador Taylor' forwarded what 
he termed lIa unanimous recommendation ll by himself and members of the U.S. 
Mission Council IIthat a reprisal bombing attack be executed Las soon as 
possibl~f1 on a 
specified target tlaccompanied by statement relating this 
action to Brink bombing." 
He stated that !lno one in this part of the 
vlOrld has Eh~ slightest doubt of VC guilt ll and pointed out that the NLF 
was publicly taking credit for the incident. 216/ 
Citing Taylor T s 
request and concurring in his recow~endation,-even to the specific target 
selection, the JCS added their 'voices to those arguing for reprisals. 
In 
their proposed execute message to CIFCPAC, they proposed a one- day 
mission by 40 strike aircraft against the Vit Thu Lu Army barracks. 
Further , ·they recommended that the -~\AF should participate if their 
state of readiness and tnne permitted. ~17/ 
In spite of these strong r ecommendations, the decision was made 
not to retaliate for the Bri nk bombing incident. 
On 29 December, the 
follo'l'ling message was dispatched to the U. S. embassies in Southeast Asia 
and to CmCPAC : 
!!Highest levels today reached negative decision on proposal ' 
••• for reprisal action for BOQ, bombing . 
T'Je vrill be sending 
fuller statement of reasoning and considerations affecting future 
actions after .Secretary's return from Texas tonight." 218/ 
Available materials do not include any further explanation. 
3. 
Policy Views in January 
As the new year began, the Administration vTaS beset ,"'lith frus-
tration over an apparent l ack of impact from Phase One operations, over 
its failure to take reprisals after an attack on U.S . personnel, and 
over the still troublesome crisis within the G~\ . 
In this mood, U.S 
policy vIas subjected to various kinds of criticism and comment. 
Some 
came from within the Administration, various reactions came from outside 
it •. 
a. 
Pub~ Debate. 
At the height of the GV'::.~ cn.sls, a D"Lunber 
of newspapers al1.d periodicals joined vIit.h the already committed (in 
opposition) and influential Eew' York Times an.d st. Louis Post Dispatch 
in questioning U. S. objectives in Southeast Asia and/or advocating U:S. 
withdra'\ml from the entanglements of South Vietnam. 219/ 
In the midst 
of this kind of public question.ing, a major debate arose among members 
of Congress and enmeshed, on occasion, l eading officials in the Adminis-
tration. 
Leading off in opposition (26 December) was Senator'Church, 
"73 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
vTho criticized U. S. i nvolvement in South VietnCLm and urged a shift of 
policy i n support of the neutralization of all Southeast Asia . 
Senator 
Dirksen voiced agreement (2 JCLrlUary) with the need for a policy reassess-
ment, preferably involving both the Administrat ion and bi-partisan 
Congressional leadership, but he stated his own view that lito give up in 
Vietnam means a loss of face throughout the Orient.
1I 222./ 
The debate blossomed in January. 
In a particularly active 
television day, Sunday, 3 January, Secretary Rusk defended Vietnam 
p?~icy in the context of a year-end foreign policy report. 
Ruling out 
enher a U. S. "rithdra"ral or a major expansion of the war , Rusk gave 
assurances that 'with internal unity and our aid and persistence the 
South Vietnamese could themselves d~feat the insurgency. 
On another 
netlvork, three Senators expressed i mpatience vli th U. S. policy in Vietnam 
and urged a public reevaluation of it. Senator Eorse criticized our in-
volvement in South Vietnam on a unilateral basis, "rhile Senators Cooper 
and Monroney spoke in favor of a full -fledged Senate debate t o IIcome to 
grips II Ivi th the situation there . 
Senator f.~ansfi e ld al so appeared on the 
3rd, to urge consideration of Church's neutralization idea as an alterna-
tive. to current policy but in keeping " ith the President I s desire n~ither 
to Inthdraw nor carry the war to l':orth Vietnam. 22~/ 
On the 6th, In 
re sponse to an Associated Press survey, the views i n the Senate ,\Tere 
shown to be quite divided. 
Of 63 Senators commenting, 31 suggested a 
negotiated settlement after the anti-communist bargaining positions were 
improved, while 10 favored negotiating imrnediately. 
E i ~ht others favored 
commitment of U.S. forces against North Vietnam, 3 urged immediate with-
drawal of U. S. advisers and military aid , and 11 stated that they didn 't 
know .. ,rhat should be done other than to help strengthen the Gvl~ . 
On 
11 January, Senator Russell r eacted to a briefing by CIA Director McCone 
wi th a statement that flu'P 1l...l1til no,,! we he.ve been l osing ground instead 
of gaining i t . " 
He urged reevaluation of the U. S. position in South 
Vietnam, cautioning that unless a more effective government devel oped i n 
Saigon the situation ,-rould become a prolonged stalemate at best . 222/ 
. 
On 14 January, as a result of repor~s of the loss of two U.S. 
Jet combat aircraft over Laos 
accounts of U.S. air operations against 
Laot~an infiltration routes g~ ined "ide .circulation for the first time . 
O~e In particular, a U. P. I . story by Arthur Domraen, in effect blew the 
lld ?n the entire YANKEE 'J:'EAl-l operation in Laos since May of 1964. 223/ 
Desplte Official state or Defense refusal to comment on the nature of the 
Laotian air miSSions , these disclosures added new fuel to the public 
policy debate . 
In a Senate speech the following day, in which he ex-
pressed his uneasiness over "recent reports of Punerican air strikes in 
Lao~ and l:orth Vietnam," Senator iilcGovern criticized '\That he called !lthe 
pollcy f, nO.'tl gairdng support in ~1ashington , of extend~ng ~he war to the 
north. 
He denied that bombing l:orth Vietnam could serlously 'l,veaken 
guerrilla fighters 1,000 miles awayll and urged seeking a "political 
settlement ll ''lith Hortn Vietnam. 
On the 17th, Senator Saltonstall told 
a radio aUdience that he thought bombing the supply lines in Laos was 
~OP SEC3ET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive 
was lithe right thing to do. II 
Senator Long and Congressman Ford indicated 
on a TV program that they didn't feel that such operations ,'Tere lIa par-
ticularly dangerous course" for the nation to follow and that they were 
the kind of actions that could help protect OUI forces i n South Vietnam. 
Senator :',Iorse criticizei the bombi~g~ as part of the Administration IS 
IIforeign policy of conceal1nent i n Southeast Asia . IT 
On the 19th, in the 
Senate, he reyeated his blasts, charging that the air strikes ignored 
the 1962 Geneva P-ccords and violated the nation ' s belief in II substi tuting 
the rule of l avT for the jungle law of military might . II 
Broadening his 
attack he vlarned that "there is no hope of avoiding a massive .. Tar in 
Asia" if the LJ . S. policy tov~ard Southeast Asia w'ere to continue uithout 
change. 224/ 
b . 
Policy Assessments . 
The intensifying public debate and the 
event.s and forces "Thieh ureciuitated it brought about an equally search-
ing reassessment of pOli~y within the Administration. 
Hhile there is 
l i ttle evidence in the available materials that shmTs any serious ques-
tioning of former policy decisions among the Principals, questioning did 
o ccur vrithin the agencies vThich they represented. 
It i s clear that some 
of the judgments and alternative approaches were discussed ,vith these I'SC 
members, and presumbably, some fOQ.'l:i their v~ay into discussions with the 
President . 
One very significant and probably influential viewpoint '\\-as 
registered by the Saigon Embassy. - In a message (':lAB E) described as 
the reflections of Alexis Johnson ar.d l\.Illbassador 'J:'aylor on '\lhich 
General Hestmoreland concurred, the thrust of the advice seemed to be 
to move into Phase T,;'Q, almost in spite of the pol:i.tical outcome i n 
Saigon. 
After listing four possible "solutions" to the then-Q.'1settled 
GVl': crisis, Taylor identified either a military takeover coupled vrith 
Huong ' s resignation or a successor civilian gover~~ent dominated by the 
military as equally the '\wrst possible outcomes. 
(It is important to 
note here that , depending on hOlv one interprets the structure of the 
January 27th regime, one or the other of these vTaS in fact the cas e at 
the beginning of the air strikes in February, 1965.) 
In the event of 
such an outcome, Taylor argued that the United States could either 
"carryon about as we are nm'Tll or llseek to ' disengage from the present 
intimacy of relationship ,.;ith the GVY" i"hile continui ng "to accept re -
sponsibility for fJ.tiJ air and maritime defense .. • against the DRV. " 
In 
the case of disengagement , he argued, the United states could offset the 
danger of South Vietnamese leaders being yanicked into making a deal 
,'lith the NLF l!if we '\fere engaged in reprisal attacks or had i nitiated 
Phase II operations against DRV . " 
The message then summarized the three 
different eondit ions l.Ulder which the l,1iusion I )fficials thought Phase 'l"wo 
operations could be undertaken : 
' 
'~ . 
In association with the G~~ after the latter has proved 
itself as a reasonably stable gover nment able to control 
its armed forces . 
, 75 
TOP S~C~ET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR~T - Sensitive 
B. 
Under a situation such as now as an emergency stimulant 
hopefully to create unity at home and restore failing 
morale. 
C. 
As a unilateral U.S. action to compensate for a reduced 
in-colliltry U.S. presence .
1f 
(Underlining added) 
'In other words, under any conceivable alliance condition short of complete 
U.S. abando~ment of South Vietnrun 
Aniliassador Taylor and his top-level 
. 
, 
assoclates in Saigon saw the graduated air strikes of Phase Two as an 
appropriate course of action . 
As they concluded, II\r{ithout Phase II opera-
tions, we SE.e slight chance of moving toward a successful solution." 225/ 
Within the more influential sections of the State Department, 
policy reexamination took a Similar, though not identical, tack. 
Rather 
than adjust the sUbstance or projected extent of the pressures policy, 
the t endency vTaS to recalculate and adjust the conditions under which it 
was considered appropriate to apply it. The motivation for a reassess-
me~t ''las the sense of impending disaster in South Vietnam. 
lilhat the 
Salgon Embassy reports appear to have portrayed at the time as concrete 
instances of foot-dragging , political maneuvering, and sparring for ad-
vantage among political and military leaders seem to have been interpre-
ted in Washi ngton as an imuendin.a sell-out to the NLF . 
For example, the 
Assistant Secretary for Fa~ :i.<::ast~rn Affairs, "I'iho had been an important 
pa;-ticipant in the policy a.nd decision-making processes through most of 
1904, of'fered the following prognosis: 
11 ••• the situation in Vietnam is now likely to come apart 
more rapidly than we had anticipated in ~T ovember. 'de would 
still stick to the estimate that the most likely form of 
coming apart 'ivould be a government or key groups starting to 
negotiate covertly with the Liberation Front or Hanoi, perhaps 
not asking in the first i nstance that 'de get out, but "Ti th 
that necessarily follo"l1ing at a fairly early stage. II 226/ 
The perceived impacts of a collapse in Saigon on other nations --
perhaps even more than the political fortunes of South Vietnam itself -_ 
were a significant part ' of the State Department calculations (Tab F) . 
If · 
a unilateral "Vietnam solution" v;ere to be arranged, so the thinking "I'Tent 
in Janua.ry 1965, not only would Laos and Cambodia be indefensible, but 
Thailand I s position i.;ould become unpredictable. 
Bundy "rrote : 
If Most seriously, there is grave question whether the Thai 
i n these ci.rcumstances "rould retain any confidence at all in 
our continued SUpport .... As events have developed, the Ameri-
can public would prooably not be too sharply critical, but the 
r eal question would be whether Thailand and other nations were 
weakened and taken over thereafter." 
TOP SECRZT - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR.ET - Sensitive 
The reasons why this kind of inmact was believed likely \'Tas related tD a 
perceived lack of realism or effectiveness i n U. S. policies during the 
late autunm. 
Bundy reflected an apparently 1ddel y sbared concern that 
Administration actions and statements since the election had convinced 
the Vietnamese and other Asians that the U. S. Government did not intend 
to take stronger action and was "possibl y looking for a way out. 1I 
ltIoreover , he saw this impression being created by our !linsisting on a 
more perfect goverlli~ent than can reasonably be expected, before we con-
sider any additional action -_ and that we might even pullout our 
support unless such a government emerges. lI 227/ 
To ch~Dge this impression and reverse the disturbing trends , 
Bundy and others i n state ~uggested stronger actions, even though recog-
nizing that these actions incurred certain risks. 
HOI·rever the irn..mediate _ 
actions suggested fell somewhat short of Phase rr..TO (a term that was not 
used i n the correspondence). 
They i ncluded: (1) lIan early occasion for 
reprisal action .•• "; (2) "possibly beginning 10H-l evel reconnaissance of 
the DRV ... II; (3) 11 an orderly 'wi thdralval of our dependents, II which was 
termed !I a grave mistake in the absence of stronger action"; and (4) 
l1introduction of limited U.S. ground forces into the northern area of 
South Vietnam ... concurrently with the first air attacks i nto the DRV. 11 
They downgraded the potential of further intensifying the air operations 
in Laos, i ndicating that such actions ""TOuld not meet the problem of 
Saigon morale" and might precipitate a "Coronn.mist i ntervention on a 
SUbstantial scale i n Laos .... 11 
The perceived risks of' the suggested 
actions were: (1) a deepened U. S. commitment at a time "l-lhen South 
Vietnamese "rill appeared weak ; (2) the likelihood OI~ provoking open 
opposition to U. S. policies in nations like India and Japan ; (3) the 
uncertainty of any meaningful stiffening effort on the GIn' ; and (4) the 
inability of "limited actions against the southern DEVI1 to sharply reduce 
infiltration or !Ito induce Hanoi to call it off.11 228/ 
If the gra.duated, !lprogressively mounting, II air operations of 
Phase II were implied by these suggestions , it a~)pears that they vrere 
perceived as being entered rather gingerly and with little intent to 
intensi fy them to whatever extent might be required to force a decision 
in Hanoi. Rather , the expectancies in State vTere quite different: "on 
balance ive believe that s~ch action would have some faint hope of really 
improving the Vietnamese situation, and, above all, ~ould put us in a 
much stronger position to hold the next line of defense, namely Thailand." 
Moreover , Bundy and others felt that even vTi th the stronger actions, the 
negotiating process that they believed vTaS bound to C0me about could not 
be expected to bring about a really secure and independent South Vietn8.l.11. 
Still, despite '"his shortcoming, they reasonel that their suggested 
I1stronger actions" "TOuld have the desirable effect i n Southeast Asia: 
" ••. we vlould still' have appeared to Asians to have done a lot more about 
it.11 229/ 
~ 
, 77 
TOP SECP~T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Underlying the State Department IS concerns over the impact of 
U.S. Vietnam policy on the rest of Southeast Asia were current develop-
ments i n the commQDist world. 
For one thing, the Soviet Union h&d 
re-entered Southeast Asian politics in an active way, after a period of 
nearly three yeaLs of dilig~nt detacD...ment . 
Fo~_lO\'ling a reported Soviet . 
pledge in l';ovember to increase economic and military aid to Horth Viet-
nam, the Administration held a series of conversations in December ,d th 
rep:esentatives of the new Soviet regime . 
During at least one of these 
-- 1.n addition to exchanging the nOl, standard respective lines about II'ho 
violated the Geneva Accords __ Secretary Rusk stressed the seriousness 
of the situation created by Hanoi's and Peki ng 's policies, implying 
strongl y that '.;'e ",Tould remain in South Vietnam until those policies 
changed or had resulted in "a real scrap. I. 
Soviet Foreign Hinister 
Gromyko replied that if the enited states felt so strongly about improv-
ing the situation in Vietnam ' it should be Hilling to attend an inter-
national conference to discu~s Laos and Vietnam . . HO':Tever , he would not 
agree ",ith Eusk I s request for assurances that Laos "Tould be represented 
by Souvanna Phouma. 230/ 
Hi thin a fe,.r Tdeeks of this conversation , Hr. Gromyko sent 
assurances to the DRV that the Soviet Union T,wuld support it in the 
face of aggressive actions by the United States . 
Further, he expressed 
the official Soviet vie,,, that it 'was the duty of all participants in the 
Geneva agreements to take the stens necessary to fiustrate U. S. military 
plans to ext €.ond the ,,,ar in Indo-China. 
This note , sent on 30 Dece..mber, 
was made public in a renevled call on 4 January for a conference on Laos, 
to be convened without nreconditions 
On 17 January, Pravda carried an 
authoritative statement- ''larning that "the provocations of the armed 
forces of the United States and their Saigon puppets against ]'Torth Viet-
nam" carried dangers of "large armed conflict," and citing naval attaclcs 
on the D~V coast and U.S. air attacks in. Laos as eXall1ples. 
On the 22nd, 
i n l~tt~rs to both nanoi and Peking, Gromyko reiterated the Soviet pledge 
to a1.d Lorth Vietnam in resisting any U.S . military action . 231/ 
In addition to rene',ved Soviet activity in Southeast Asia, that 
o~ ?ommunist China also appeared ominous. 
Fenned by Sukarno I s abr~p~ 
vT1.tndr a\\~al of Indonesia IS particination in the U. i'L, some U. S. off1.c1.als 
voiced concern over the develonme~t of a "Peking-Jakarta axis
ll to promote 
revolution in ASia . 
.I':"orth Vietnam, together "Tith l';orth Korea, were seen 
as n:~, ural allies ,Tho might join in to form an international grouping 
exert"lng an attraction on other Asian states to cOlU1t.er that of the U. N. 
Peking I'Tas vie'.ved as the inst i gator and prime benefactor of such a group-
ing. 23 ~/ 
Complementing the State Depa,rtment policy assessments, were those 
in OSD . 
For example, in early January, Assi stant Secretary J.Icr:aughton 
regarded U.S. stakes in South Vietnam as: (1) to hold onto IIbuffer real 
estate " near Thailand ani Ealaysia and (2) to maintain our national 
·78 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECr~T - Sensitive 
reputation . 
In his view the l atter was the more importa.nt of the two . 
Sharing the State view that South Vietnam was being lost (tlthis means 
that a government not unfriendly to the DRV will probably emerge within 
t,m yearstl), he believed that the U. S. reputation would suffer least 
lIif we continue to support South Vietnam and jf Khanh and company con-
tinue to behave like children as the game is lost . tI 
}Ioy,ever, he pointed 
out that tldogged perseverance ll 1N'as also recommended because the situation 
might possibly improve. 233/ 
In specific terms, 
I .lc]\~aughton defined perseverance as including 
the follmdng course of action: 
tla . 
Conti nue to take risks on behalf of SVlT. 
A reprisal 
should be carried out soon. 
(Dependents could be removed at 
that time.) 
b. 
Keep slugging away. 
Keep help flowing, BUT do not 
. increase the number of US men in SVI'J . 
(Additional US sol-
diers are as likely to be cOQnter-productive as productive.) 
c. 
Chances 
reverse 
tion . 
Do not lead or appear to lead in any negotiations . . 
of reversing the tide 'I·rill be better and, if we don It 
the tide our reputation "rill emerge in better condi-
, 
-
d. 
If we leave , be sure it is a departure of the kind 
.. [hich· would Pllt everyone on our side, \vondering ho"r we stuck 
it and took it so 10ng. 1I 
In the event of in~bili ty to prevent deterioration \d thin South Vietnam, 
he urged the development of plans to move to a fall-be.ck position by 
helping shore-up Thailand and f.ialaysia . 234/ 
An OSD assessment made immediately after the Khanh coup i n late 
January adds perspective to this view-point. 
In it, McNaughton stated 
and Secretary licl,'amara agreed , tlU. S. objective in South Vietnam is not 
to 
I help friend I but to contain China. II 
In particular, both ~.lalaysia 
and Thailand "\vere seen as the next targets of Chinese aggressiveness. 
I'Te i ther official smv any alternative to IIkeep plugging
ll insofar as U. S. 
efforts inside South Vietnam "rere concerned. 
Hm·rever , outside the 
borders, both favored i nitiating strikes against ~ ·;orth Vietnam. 
At first, 
t.hey believed, these should tal<;:e the form of reprisals; beyond that , the 
Administration vrould have to IIfeel its way" into stronger, graduated 
pressures . 
Mcnaughton doubted that such strikes would actually help 
the situation in South Vietnam , but thought they should be carried out 
anyvray. 
i\~cl[amara believed they probably vTould help the situation, in 
addition to their broader impacts on the U.S. position in Southeast 
Asia . 235/ 
79 
TOP SECR~ - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Though different i n some respects, all of these policy views 
pointed in · a similar direction. 
In his mVD way, each Principal argued 
that it was unproductive to hold off on further actions against ~·jo rth 
Vietnam lmtil the GifT:; began to operate i n an effective manner . 
Each 
suggested broad~r benefits that could be gained for the United States 
i f firmer measures were t8~en directly against the DRV. 
The impact of these views can be seen in the policy guidance 
emanating from WaShington in mid and late January 1965 0 
For example, 
on the 11th, P~bassador Taylor was apprised of Administration doubts 
that General Khanh had put aside his intentions to stage a coup and 
was given counsel for such an eventuality . 
Essentially, the guidance 
was to avoid actions that 1'Tould further commit the United states to any 
particular form of political solution. 
~he underlying rational e ex-
pressed vias that if a milital'y gover nment did emerge, "vre might well 
have to swallow· our pride and ilOrk \dth it." 236/ 
Apparently, the 
Ad.rninistra,tion's adamant insistence on a11 effective GVF along lines 
specified by the United states had been eroded. 
Hm·rever, on the 14th, 
guidance to Taylor indicated that the Administration had not yet 
determined to move into a phase of action more vigorous than the current 
one. 
In the inLrnediate vlak~ of public disclosures concerning the bombing 
operations in Laos, Secretary Rusk concurred in Taylor's proposal to brief 
the C;Vl~ leaders on these operations 
but caut ioned against encouraging 
their expectations of new· U. S. move~ against the Eorth. 
Rusk considered 
. it "essential that they not be given fC~7 impres~io~ that ~ArWZL ROL~, 
etc~7 repr~sents a major step-up of act i vity agalns~ the DRV or that It 
r epresents an irnportant ne,'r pha.;e of U.S. operational activity ." 237/ 
The im.mediate matter for speculation was the striking of a key hi gh~Tay 
bridge in Laos, but the pr;gram still called for t v-lO missions per week . 
Clear indication that the Afuninistration was contemplating some 
kind of increased military activity came on 25 January. 
Ambassador 
~aylor vIas asked to comment on the "Departmental view" that U. S. depen-
dents should be withdravTn to "clear the decks" in Saigon and enable 
better concentration of D.S . efforts on behalf of South Vietnam. 23~/ 
Previously, the J·CS he.d reversed their init ial position on this issue 
and requested the removaL 
a vie"! .... \\Thich was fOrlmrded to State IIfor con-
sideration at the highest'levels of government" in mid-January . 239/ 
Recalling the Bundy policy assessment of 6 January ( ~AE F), it will be 
noted that cleari ng the decks by removing dependents was recommended only 
i n association with "stronger actions . tl 
Hm.rever, there is no indication 
of any decision at this point to move into Phase ~~o . 
The Rusk cable 
made specific r~ference to a current interest in reprisal actions . 
More-
over, considera.J.;ion of later events and decis;.ons compels the judgment 
that it was only reprisals which the Administration had in mind as 
January drew to a close . 
. 80 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
-n § 
Z S 
m 
en 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECIlliT -
S~n s itive 
IV.C. 
FOOTNOTES 
October 1964 ~ Jenu~ry 1965 
1. 
SlUE 53- 2~64.$ 1 October 1964, pp. 1-3 12assim. 
(TOP SECRE'r). 
2. 
Ibid., p. r(; see aJ.so pp. 1, 2, 9 (TOP SECREI') . 
3· 
SNIE lO - 3 ~·64, 9 Octob'::l' 196!~, p. 2 (TOP SECRl'S'I'). 
4. 
Taylor to D~1?artnC!nt of State, 14 October 196) ~ (TOP SECRET). 
5. 
Taylor messe.ge to President Johnson, 16 Octo .... Cl' 1964 (JPS 303, DrG 
161030~ ), desC2'ibed j n CJCS m:''::mornndu.s to SecD3f, "Courses of 
Action, Southc2..Gt Asia., II 27 October 1964 (JCS M-j02~6!~ ) (TOP 
SECRI~l ) • 
6. 
"Ch:r:Ol.'lOlogic L,l 
Study of Infil :;r?tion from No:rth Vietna.m ll
, 
24 October 1961~ (SECR:2:;;) r 
·7 . 
See P ter Grose, in P(;",7 York T:iJ:l:;S, 2 Octob0r 1964. 
8. 
CJCS r.lemoranU:l1'U to SecD3f, 
"An~..1-ysi5 of Southeast Asia Actions .. 11 
21 O~t ober 1964 (JC811.-893-64 ) (In Viet.m;n 381: 
Sensitive file ) 
(TOP SECRET). 
. 
9· 
JCSM-902-64, 27 October 1961t (TOP SECRET). 
10. Ibid. 
11. 
S0cDcf J-1er:lore.n(lll.:n to CJCS, "Courses of Actio:l, Sout!J. ~f!.st ASic, " 
29 October 196L~ (In Vietnam 381: 
Sensitive file ) (TOP SECRET). 
See also JOint St.ate/D~fense mcssag~ to Ambassador Tn.ylor, 29 
October 1964 (D3fensc 13l~2) (In Vietn::J'!l 381 : 
Novcmb~r fHe ) 
( TOP SECI{Z1'). 
12. 
Nev York T1rne s, 2 Nove.llbcr 1961.~ . 
13· 
NSAM 314) 10 Sept ..... :nbcr 1964 (TOP SECRE'r). 
14. 
CJCS mcss~.ge to CINCPAC, HACV and Amb:J.ssD.dor Taylor, 1 Novc:nb er 
1964 (JCS 1451) (In Victn:un 381: 
Nov(mi~er file) (TOP SECRET). 
15· 
S e~ Tad Szulc, !\(; .. ? York Ti."nes, 2 Nov::::nber 1964 . 
. 
16. 
CJCS to CnTCPAC, ~;;".1 November 1961j. (TOP SECRET). 
81 
TOP SEC~;r - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR~T - Sensitive 
18. 
Descrlbed. in CJCS mcmoranci.u::n to SecD:!f, "Recommended U.S. Courses 
of Action i n Relation t o Viet Cong Attack on Bien Roa Airfield, 
1 Nove:m.ber 1961 ~ (SECRET)" 4 Nove.ruber 1964 ( JC Sl.1-933~64) (TOP SECRE'I'). 
19. 
Saigon 1357, in Taylor mess~ge to SeeDef, 5 November 1964 (Saigon 
251) (In Vir.:tn~m 381: 
November file ) (TOP SECRET). 
2O~' 
T~ylor to SeeD .. f , 3 November 1964 (TOP SECRE'I'). 
21. 
JCSM-933-64, 4 NO'fcmber 1964. (TOP SECREI'). 
22. 
S~e f.1cNe.nl3.r? mcmorandu..'1l to CJCS, "Recommended U ~S. Courses of Action 
in Rclo.tion to Viet Conl7 Att£~ck on Bien Hoa Airficld, 1 No'rerr:ber 1964 
(SECRET)II, 13 Novcmbe:t' 1964 (In Vietnam 381: 
November file (TOP 
SECRET) • 
23· 
Jonathz..n Moo!'l:: memor:m um, 3 Nov(',m.ber 1964 (In State Department 
}'lv..t erio.ls, Vol. II ) (CONFIDENTIAL). 
21~. Ibid. 
25. 
"Proj ;;ct Ou.tline, II 3 Nov~Llbcr 1964, attachment to Corcor.:m memo~.~nd.um 
to Hichael Forrest ,3 Eovember 1964 (In State Dcp~~tmcnt r.1~terie.1s , 
Vol. II) (TOP SECRE':C)·. 
26. 
See his d~sCl'iption of work i n lJiustin me:norc.nduIn. to Chairuw.n, NSC 
'-lorking Gr o1.1:p on Southeast Asia, "Additional Materi<::l for Proj ect 
on C01.u'ses of .Action in Southeast Asia" , 14 November 1961+ (In 
state DeparCr.l0nt Materiels, Book III) (TOP SECRET) 0 
270 
For eX()J;Jple, see No,,, York Times and Neil" York J ournnl American, 
2 NovClmbcr 1964· aDd Chicago Tribu.'1c, · 3 Nov(!:mber 195~ 
280 
P ·tel' Gr ose, l{e\7 York Times, 2, 6, o.nd 8 November 1964. 
290 
Buno.y Qr.:1ft ,ro:t'king p3.per, 
If Conditions for Action and Kcy Actions 
SurrOlL1'1ding Any D~cis:i.on, " 5 November 1961~ (In Stat ~ Department 
Materiel s, Vol II. ) (TOP SECRE.r)0 
30. Sulllv-V}l memor.:'.l1dum to Assiste.nt S_cretary Bu.ndy, "Courses of .Action 
i n Vict.n:vn, It 6 l!ovembcr 1964 (In State Depa:rt!!l.ent l-1at erials, Vol II) 
('J:OP SECR3T) e 
31. CIA-DIA-I HR P3l1el G.r£'.ft p~per, If Section I 
~ 'rhe Situation, fI 6 November 
1964 (In USC Working Group 
l1~vorkine Pc-pers") (TOP SECRET) <> 
32 0 . ;·1cThughton draft outline, "Action for South Victnc.'U, fI 7 November 1964 
(In State D~D3.rt,m~nt Vlatericl.s, Vol. II ) (TOP SECRET). 
33. 
Intelligence 
~el draft p.:'.per, 6 Novemb~i.· J.961~ (TOP SECRET). 
82 
TOP SEC~ET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
34. 
Ibid. 
35. Hustin vlOrking paper, "Comm.~nts on CIA-DLf>.-INR Panel Dr~.ft Section I -
The Situ:t"cion, II enc1osur~ to Joint Staff memorandum, 10 november 1964 
(In State D!:p3.rtmc:lt Materials, Vol. II) (TOP SECRE'T). 
370 
NSC "'orking Group on Vietn$} (sout ·~ast Asia), "Section I; 
I ntelligence 
Assc:l3.'!l::t!l.t : 
The Situation in Vietnam, I~ 21~ November 1964, pp. 6, 7-8 
( Ll1 Stute Department Iviuterinls, Vol. IV) (TOP SECRET). 
38. 
Ibiel. , p. 11-
39 . 
Ipid. , p. 12. 
40. 
Ib~~., ppo 14-15, E.~. 
11-10 
NSC Worki.:rg Group on Southe~st Asia, "Section II: 
U.S . Objectives 
al1(l StakM in Sout Vietn2.l1l c"nd Southeast Asi:l, II 8 Novc::n. er 1961t 
( In Draft Pape:es of NSC Ilm'king Group, 17 NOVCflber 196L~, AF'''{PDRB 
8730..64) (TOP fmCnET). See olso draft (quoted in parts ) in 
enclostU'c to Muotin mcmor.mdum to Cbc,irms.n, NBC "rorking Greup, 
"COID.cll:_nt on Draft for FEzt II of Project OUtline on Courses of' 
Action in SOlltheL~st Asia., II 10 November 1964 (TOP SECRET) and Revised 
Draft,' liS :"111).l"Y _ Courses of Action in southeast Asia, II 21 November 
1964 (TOP 8ECRE'I') (Both in state D~p3Itm.ent :Vlaterials, Vol. II and 
Vol .. IV). 
420 
Ibid. 
43. 
Ibid. 
44. 
NSC 'Horking Group, Section II, 8 November 196t~ (TOP SECRET). 
45. 
Ibid. 
46. Forrestal m,,:::,:nol"Jndul'!l to ."'.ssistant Secretary Bundy, IfCoITh"';1cnts on 
I nput - II U.S. Objectives and stakes in south Vietn:'Jl1 :md Southeast 
Asie.,," 4 Jlfoyemb:::r 196!~ (In State D-~:partment Materinls, Vol o II) 
(TOP SECfu,~). 
47 . 
8'1.' livan to' Buney" vith attached u..ll.cla.ssified po.per, 6 November 1964 
(TOP SECiBl). 
48. 
MUSti..l1 to Cho.irm:'J...'T1, 10 Novem er 1964, pp o 1, 2, 3 (TOP SECRET). 
1}9. 
Ibicl.) pp. 4, 5, 6. 
50 e 
Revised Drai't, "Sl)!nr~~.ry, " 21 November 1964, pp. 3-4 (TOP SECRET). 
TOP SECHE'l1 - Sens it i vo 
510 
52. 
53· 
54. 
55· 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE1 -
s ~ns itive 
D)id., p o 6. 
Ibid., :?p. 5.·6. 
Ibid., pp. 4-5. 
Se_ also NSC ~'] orking GrcJ.p. ItSection II," 8 Novc;:n.bcr 
196 L~ (TOP SEC?ET). 
Mustin to CbaiJ."T1an, 10 Nov'vrnber 1964 (TOP SECRB:r). 
See Revised Dr~ft , "Sur:nnary, II 21 ~rovember 1964, po 7 (TOP SECRE1 ) 0 
ItProject Outline," 3 November 1964 (TOP SEC&~T ). 
IIAltcl'natiY<! Forms of Negot:",'1.tions t1-nd Related Supporting Po1iticn1 
Act::.o!:',s -
,.Ut~rnnt iv~ B. If att::>.cr.nent to Robert J oh.l1son memorc..ndu,!n to 
Assis-Grmt Sc:cr::ta::y B1tn~1y, lICour.scs of Action in Southec.st Asia : 
Political Aspects (l'urt_-..r 'I'houg to)," 6 No\remb~r 1964 (In stat e 
D~p3.rt!Uent iiJ.teri a1s, Vol. II) (SECRE.'l'). 
59. 
HcHaue'1ton I s first drs.ft out,l ine, "Action for South Vict!l.~i.L1, Tl 
5 1:OV'2D.DCr 
1961.~ (In HcNo.ughton II ) (SECRET). 
See also his "Plan of 
Action for South Vietnam," 3 SeptQ;'Ub\:!l' 1964 <".nd "Aims and O".[)tions 
in S ot~the,?,,8t ASia, II 13 October 196J.j. (TO? SECRZT) 0 
60. 
See NSC l'iorkin0 Group, "Section IIItI, 17 November 1964, and. "Section 
VI," 11 Novemner 1964 (TOP SECRET) . 
61. 
MUstb to Che,i rm,::..n, 11+- November 1964 Crop SECRET). 
62c 
trPl~o.j cct Outlin<!,!! 3 November 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
63. 
Bundy draft i-iOrking pc-per, "III - The Broa.d Optionc, " '7 November 1964 
(TOP SZCHET ); Bundy drnft worl~ing Pc.pel', "VIII - Analysis of Option 
C," B nC'vc:ubcr 1964 (TOP SBCRET ) (Both in State D~par'cm~nt r-Iateri e.ls, 
Vol. II). 
64. 
Robert J ohnson me!:1or~dum to Assist;c3,nt SeCl'etary i3lmdy, !ICoI!lll1cnts 
on Drclt l-laterial for Report of iliSe Horking Grcup"," 10 November 196L~ 
(In s t • .'.te D~p3.rtment llateria~s, VoL II) (TOP SECR..4.:T). 
65. 
Sec Hcl\aU&;lton 1 s pencileo. cClmi:lents in rllargin of Bundy drc!.ft, ttAnalysis 
of Oytion C," att3.ch '~ d to Bi.mc1y m~;norand: 11 to fiSC ~";orking Group" 
10 Nov~~bcr 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
66. 
USC Forkin3 Group, I:Section V, I! 8 November 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
84 
TOP SECRET - Sens it i vt) 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
68. Se ... Bundy d.-raft, liThe Brand Ortions, If 7 Nov<..:!:1b,-.r 1964 (TOP SECRET') 
. 
and its discussion of Option.A (included as P:ll't of all other options). 
69. 
JohnsG..l'l to Bundy, 6 November 1964 (SECR.E'l' ) 0 
70. 
Bundy dTC'.ft, "T:Ce Broa,d Options, II 7 November 1964 (TOP SECfuir) 0 
71. 
S~~ Sullivan to Bundy, 6 November 196!~ (TOP SECRET); Johnson to 
Bundy" 6 November 1964 ('l'OF SECRET); CLA.-DL~.-INR Panel draft pLpcr, 
6 :Novc.m.b r~r 1961.,. (TOP SECRET). 
72. 
See IJSC :{orking Group, "Section III, II and IISection V, II 8 November 
1964 (TOP SECRET); also Revised Draft IISUu"11!lo,l'Y, II 21 November 1964, 
pp. la, 12-15 (TOP SECRET). 
73.. 
SeC! NSC Harking Group, 
IIScctlon III, II 17 November 196L~, and "Section 
VI, 11 11 November 1964 (TOP SECRET); also Revis~d J):"caft, "S1.lr.ll!l.ary, fI 
21 Nov .... mbcr 1964, PPe 10, 17 (TOP SEC?J:!,~). 
77· 
See NSC ·Horking Grou.p 
t'Scction III," 17 November 1964, and. "Section 
VII," 13 Nov~.1t:ber 1964 (TOP SECP.El' ); 8.180 Revised. Dr.:U't) 
I!Su..~!::.ry, fI 
21 November 1961;,.1 ppo 10-11, 23-25 (TOP SECRET). 
See Revised Draft, 
ffS~iLllary, II 21 Novem.ber 1961~, pp. 14-15 (TOP 
SECRET) • 
IfA1tcrnative Forms of Negotiations -- Altern.:;.tivc B," 6 November 196i~ 
p. 20 ( SECfu..~ ). 
"Alterne,tivc Forms of Negotiations ... Some Ccmpaisons of the 
Negotiating Situ~l,tions Uncler the ThTe!! Policy A1te!'native~. , If 
6 November 1964 (SECRET). 
fOido; 
8e~ also Johnson to Bundy, "Further Thot ghts, " 6 Novcmbf)r 1964. 
(SECRET) 0 
NSC Working Grou.p, 
"S ~ction VII, n 1,3 November 1964 (TOP SECHET); 
Rcvisecl Draft" "Su."nma:.-y, 11 21 nov .nber J.96~., pp .. 24-25 (TOP SECRET). 
"Altern[:.tiv~ Forms of Negotiation -- Alterne.tive B," 6 November 1961+, 
pp. 1-2 (SECRZr)o 
See ~o, ppo 12-19 p~ssim. (SECFBT). 
NSC Horking Group, "Section III," 17 NOtlCmb2l' 1964 and "Section VI," 
13 November 196!~ (TOP SECRSr); see altO Bundy draft, "'l'he Broad 
Optionc," 7 l'To\"(~mbcr 1961~ (TOP SECREr). 
Ibid • .; Revised Draft, "Sunnna.ry," 21 NO'/e.lnber 1961~, pp. 25-26, 27 (TOP 
SEeRE'i:) • 
. 85 
TOP SECilET 
. M ScnsHive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
84. Ibid.; see also draft , with pemciled cmments, "Analysis of Option 
C, II 10 November 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
. 
85. Revised Draft, II 81.l1JID1.t!..-ry, " 21 November 1964, pp. 8-9, 15, 21-22, 
28-29 (TOP SEC~x )o 
86. Ibid., pp. 13, 15; NSC I,lorking Group, "Section V," 8 Nove!l1.ber 1964 
(TOP SECRET) 0 
87. 
NSC Horking Group, "Section V, II <3 November 1961-1- (TOP SECRET ) 0 
88. Revised Draft, "S'-1.lTJlJlary," 21 NO"v-cmber 1964, p. 15, (TOP SECRE·r ). 
89. Ibid., po 16. 
90. 
NSC Working Grou:p, "Section VI,II 13 November 1964 (TOP SECRET) 0 
91. 
92. 
93. 
94. 
95· 
97 • 
NSC Vorl,ing Group, IISect ion III! (portion completed 11 November 1964) 
(TOP SECRB"T). 
I!Alternative Forms of Negoti~tion -- Alternative B,I! 6 November 1964, 
pp. 4, 4a, 4b (SECP.BT). 
Revi sed Draft, I!Summ:lry, II 21 Nove.'Uber 196)+, pp. lTr-21, pass:l£o 
(TOP 
SECRNr); see also NSC vTorking Group, "Section VI, 13 NOVCl-abcr 1964 
(TOP SECRET). 
. 
Ibid., ppo 28, 29 0 
Ibid., pp. 25-27; NBC I-Jorking Group, "Section VII, II 13 November 1964 
rTOP SECRET). 
Ibid. 
Hal'S 1.3.11 Green mc:mot'2ndum to Assista...'1t Secretary Bundy, 
IINegot iating 
Positions on Victn3l!l, II 16 Novembcl" 1964 (In S-tate Dcpartmcnt 1,1atel"i e.ls, 
Vol e I II ) (TOP SECRET ) . 
BI.U1dy me.mora-l1dllm to the PrinciI'21~s" "Issues Ra,ised by Papers on 
Southeast ASia, \1 24 November 1964 ( In State D:!p.2.rtment r-hterials, Vol. 
IV) (TOP SECRbT). 
99. 
Revised Draft, "Su.rrunary," 21 November 1964, pp. 20, 28 (TOP SECRET) 0 
1000 CJCS memorandtU!l to SecDef, "Opcr:c'.tion Plan 34A. - Additiom,l Actions 
(SECRET) ,," 14 I'rovcmber 196L~ ( C~fl-258-64 ) ( In VietnrJ;). 381 : 
Scnsi ti ve 
fHe) (TOP SECRET). 
1010 C.JSC mcrnorc 1dl.1:11 to SecD:':f) "Courses of Action in Sout.heast As ie., " 
14 November 1964 (JCSH-955-64) (TOP SECRS:r). 
86 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
102. 
CJCS me..llorandum to Sec:G~f, "Courses of Action in Southeast Asia, " 
18 !;o',-e,:nb~l' 1564 (JCSN-967-64) (In Vietnun 381: 
Sensitive file ) 
(TOP SECRET) 0 
1030 
Bundy m~:lorandu:u to SeeDer, Director CIA) and CJCS, "Review of 
Working i)raft on Course of Action in South'!ast Asia, II 17 November 
1964 (In State Departr:lent Hatcrin.ls) Volo III) (SECREI') 0 
104. 
CJCS memorandum to Sec~f, "Courses of .4.ction in South(~ast ASi.?," 
23 Nove:nber 1964 (JC mi-982-6!~ ) (TOP SECRET). 
105. Ibid. 
106. 
Ibid. 
107. 
RostO"tT memOrandUill to Secret,;ory HcNaxne.ra, "Hilite,ry Dispositions and 
Politiccl. Signt~1s, " 16 November 1964 (In Vietnem 381: 
November 
file ) (TOP SECRET). 
108. 
)1)i(10 
109. 
RostenV' mc.'!1.orandum to Secretary Rusk, ':'Som.e O'oservations As We Cc:m/ol 
to the Crunch in Southeast ASia, " 23 November 1964 (In Vietne.m 
381: 
NOv~llber file ) (TO? SECRET). 
1.10. 
Ibid .. 
:lB .• 
1120 
1130 
115. 
116. 
117· 
118. 
119. 
120. 
Ibid. 
Hei·' York Times J 24 and 28 No\rember 
196L~. 
Bun<3y to Princip:lls, 24 November 196!J. (TOP SECR'Eir). 
Bl,mdy memorandlun to the Principcls, "Issues Raised by Pa.pers on 
South-east ASia, II 25 NOYc-1nber 1964 (In state Department Mc.teri2J.s, 
Vol. IV) (TOP SECREI'); h?..nclwrlttcn notes of Principals I:ieeting, 
211- N01rember 1964 (CONl.'''IDEI')"I'IAL ) . 
Ibid. 
--
He.ndwritte.'1 meeting notes, 24 NOVt;rnber 1964 (CONFIDEJI:"TIAL). 
Ball drc.ft · paper in fou.r parts (u.nda:te1) (In state Dep~rtrr_ent 
Mo:terials, Vol. IV) (SECREl') 0 
EOlld,.;rritten meeting notes, 24 November 1964 (CONFIDEl'v'TIfI.L) 0 
Ibid.; see also Bundy to Principn1s, 25 November 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
Ibid~ 
87 
TOP SECREr ..., Sensitj.ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET .. Sensitive 
121. Ibid. 
1220 
H[>.!lc1~·rrHt~ rri.cet:L'1g notes, 24 Nove:aber 1964 (CONFIDENTIAL). 
1230 
See N e,\l York Time s" 25 Nove.;'Ubc)r 1964. 
124. 
Taylor brief:ing, "Tht, Current Situation in South Viet-N,,-'n - I';ovc:Jber, 
1964, TI 27 November 1964 (In state Departm~nt :'!aterials, Vol. IV) 
(TOP SECRET) • 
125. 
rbid. 
126. 
Ibid. 
127. 
Ibid. 
128. 
Ibid. 
1290 ~. 
1300 
Ibiclo 
131. 
Bunc\)' m.::moran~ll"'1 to Prbcip_ s , 
ttHemOl'J;l"u7:1 of Hc)eting on Southeast 
Asia.," 27 Nov~mber 1964 (In Stat_ Del}mmcnt t.~a.teriols, Vol. IV) 
(TOP SECRET ) ; h.:1nCcn.'itten notes of Princip"ls Nceting, 27 November 
1964 ( CONFID~lTIAL ). 
132. Ibid. 
133. 
Ibido 
131~. Bundy to PrinCipa.ls, 27 Novmn1)~r 1964 (TO? SECR..'ST). 
135. He.ncr.;rittcn mc~ting notes, 27 November 1964 (COIIPIDE.i'ITIAL). 
136. 
B'J..nCly to PrincipeJ.s,27 Novcmoc)r 1964 (TOP SECREr). 
137 
Bu ' 
cl 
• 
: - , 
ITS 
• 
f 
" 
nay mC!l1or;J...11. :urn to Sout e::lst Asia J?rl.nC1I8.-LS, 
cenarlO or 
Itn.J7l.cdiate Action Progra1Jl, " 28 November 1964 (In State Department 
Materials, Vol. V) (TOP SECRE'T). 
138 0 
HanaliTHten notes of Principals Meeting, 28 November 1964 (CONFIDE.N1'IJ'tL). 
139. Ibid. 
1l:-0. 
Ibid.; see also I-li11i:1.ln Pe Bundy "MemoTe.ncl'Lil to Southeast Asia 
Princip,-J.s, II 29 Nov~::J.bcr ls6l~ ~na attacrunc:1t, "Dr-8.ft NSNI on 
Southeast As:i.c." (In State D::partrn~nt Ho.terials, Vol. V) (TOP SECREI'). 
141. 
BunCly to Principals, 29 No'r rlber 1964. (TOP SECRZT). 
. 88 
TOP SECRET - Scnsitiye 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE'I' ... Sensit.i'le 
142. 
"Draft NSA:\1," 29 November 1964 (TOP SECRET) 0 
143. Ibid. 
144. Penciled notes on or i ginal IIDraft NSPN, tI 29 November 1964 (TOP 
SECI{ET) • 
145. See NSC vlorking Group, "Section V, tI 8 November 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
146. 
IIDr::lft NSPJ.1," 29 November 196L~ (TOP SECHET). 
147. Bundy to Principals, 28 November 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
148. 
Annex I to T!lY10~ briefing, 27 November 1961~ (TOP SECREI'). 
149. Revined Draft, "Sun~aryJ" pp . 25, 26, revised 25 November 1964 
(TOP SECRET). 
150. 
~Tew :t:ork Times and The vlashington Post, 2 December 1964. 
-
-
151. 
Handi-1:..'itten notes of vlhite House m~eting, 1 December 1961~ . 
( CONFlIEI\TTIAI,) • 
152 . 
Ibid. 
153. Ibid. 
154. Statement to the Govcrnn~nt of the Hepub1ic of Vi~tnam. 
155. Handi,r.citt.en meeting notes , 1 December 1964 (CON'FIDET'-I"rIAL). 
156. 
Text i n Neff Yor k Times, 2 D::ce.llbcr 1964. 
157. 
Toe Ha:::hington Post, 2 Deco-nbcr 1964. 
158. Handwritten eati ng notes, 1 December 1964 (Cm~FIDEl'JTIAL) 0 
159. 
Cmpare "DrD.ft stat~r.1cmt to' GVN, " T:\B B to ".Draft Position Paper on 
Southeast ASia," 30 NovC'.mber 1964 (TOP SECRET), "7ith "Drc.ft Instructions 
from t he Prc3ident to Amb!3.ss:1dor T..::.ylor, f'.f} reviped on 2 Deccmbe:c 1964, 1I 
Enc1oSUl'e B to Joint Sccl'cG2.ria.t memora....'1dum to JCS t 
"Amb~2sa a.o!.' 
Tcy1or's Visit," 3 D~ce:nb~r 1964 . (JCS 2311-37499 ) (TOP SECR1'T). 
160. 
"Dr'aft Instructio:ls from t he Presid~nt. ," 2 December 1991- (TOP SECfu,x). 
161. 
Hanciv..citten m~eting notes, 1 December 1964, (COHFIDEl\iTIAL). 
162. 
Tho Bcltimol"~ Sun, 
! ~ December 1964. 
163-
NSC 'r';orkil g G:roup, '\>lorking Paper, Fart VIII, "Imrncdint c Actions in the 
Period Prior to D~cision , II 7 l;ov~ni'c~r 1961+ (In Ste.te Depcn:'t::lcnt 
J:vie:terials, Vol. II) (TOP SECR:?T ) •. "0PLAH 34A I,u:::sionc" 26 Novc:m.bcr 
196)~ (In Victn::!Ju 381 : 
Sensitive file ) (TOP SSCP,El'). 
89 
TOP SECRE'l' -, Sensiti.ve 
164 . 
166 . 
167 . 
170. 
171. 
172. 
173· 
17 ~'o 
175. 
176. 
177· 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECP~ - Sensitive 
c o~\mS[;lJl.cv to JCS (SACSA) -' 270830SEovember1964 (HACSOG 15084) (TOP 
SECM~ ). 
SACSA to CINCPAC. IIOPLAN 34A-~.'l!3.ritime Open',tions (S), II 2 December 
196L~ (JCS 002524) (TOPSECREr ). 
. 
See CO~.mE1vL4CV to JCS(SACSA), 050245;;December1961~ (Mll.CSOG 15735) 
(TOP SECP3r); SAC8A to CINCPAC and CO~fUffi/iACV} 1I0PL/l.N 3L.-A} II 10 
Dec~:1!ber J.961~ (JCS 002810) (TOP SECRET). 
CJCS memore.nc1.lt:!l. to See Dei' , "Intensification of OPLAN 34A-:v1!\ritime 
Operatlons, n 12 Dec mber 1964 (JC5£;1-104-2-64); D~l?lty SecDef 
mer.'10randUiu to CJ-CS, "Intensification of Orr..p.N 34A
u l'-Ial'itime 
Operations, rr l It December 1964 (:soth in Vietnam 381 : 
Sensiti ve f ile) 
(TOP SECREr). 
JCSH-104-2-6!; .• 
Joint SecreJv.~'..ri2.t menornnd'\.l.'Il to JCS, "meeting of NSC Princ i pals, 
19 DeC::!lnber 1964, on Southcas':'; Asia, II 19 ~ce..'Tlber 196L~ (JCS 2339/166) 
(TOP SEC REI' ) • 
CJCS m~mora..l1c1um to D~put;y SecD:.f,t!OFL.4N 3~-A-Air Operations, · J ... .!1'tlal'Y, 
1965,11 31 D~ccmb~r 1965 (CN 347-64) (,rop SECRE'1
I ). 
Section 2, 
IIMeeting of the Principo.ls, 5 January 1965
11 (A 3-ri ng 
b inde!', XPDm371.~26-65, in USAF, Directora.te of Plans Repository) (TOP 
SECRZT). 
. 
NSC 'Horking Gro'j.p, 
" Immedi~te Actions, " 7 November 1961~ ; also DIA 
me'llorand'.lln to CJCS, ItEva..luation of COmDTh"1ist Rec.ction to B3.rre1 Roll, 11 
31 Decc.'IlbC!r 196t~-, attachment to J CS memorandum to Depu.ty SecD:::f 
( subject us above ), 2 Jenuery 1961~ (CM-353065 ) (In Vietnam 381 : 
December file ) (TOP SEC?BT) . 
JOint Stut0/D~fense mcss~ge to .vi~n;;irne Embassy, IIIntensification of 
RLAF Air Oper.:l.tions, II 8 D~cenbcr 1961\. (St::.te 508; Su11iva..Yl. to Sccstate, 
10 De~cmber 1964 (Vienti&"1e 868) (Both. in IIMeeting of the Principals, 
12 Dc;cembc!' 1964} 11 a 3-ring binder, XPDRB8967664, in USAF Directort.te 
of PIe.ns R~pository ) (TCP SECRE'r) . 
J CS to CINCPAC, "OpcrcJtions in L:105, II 11 Dece."Tlber 1964 (J-CS 0028!t8) 
(TOP SEeM':') • 
. 
Joint Secrct<1ri at memorancbllu to JCS} 
1I1-1ceting of H2C PrinCipals, 12 
December 1964, on Southeast Asia," 12 Decr.: ... 1lber 1964 (J-CS 2339/164) 
(TOP SECRET) . 
S<:ction 1, l~r1eet ing of the Principa S;. 19 ~cerJ.oer 1964> 11 ( A 3-ring 
b incl~J.', X:pD3I.8968-61~ J in US S Directorate of P1~ns Repository) (TOP 
SECRET) • 
JCS mcmorandu;n to SecDef', rtOperations in Laos; It 17 December 1964 
(JCSI-1-1050 .. 6h) (TOP SECHET) . 
90 
TOP SECRST - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
178. Section 1" "Meeting of the Principals, 19 December 1964," (TOP 
SECRE'r) • 
·179. 
Deputy SecDer memorandum to CJCS, 29 December 1964 (In Vietnam 381: 
Lecember file): (TOP SECRET) 
180 • 
DIA to CJCS, 31 December 1964 (TOP SECRF'l'). 
181. 
JCS to CINCPAC, "Barrel Roll," 4 January 1965 (JCS 003441) (TOP 
SECRE'r) • 
182. Section 1, "!-Ieeting of the Principals. 19 December 1964·;11 Section 1, 
" 
-., 
( 
Meeting of the Principals, 5 J a.."'lUary 1965, II 
TOP SECHET) 0 
184. 
186. 
190., 
19L 
192. 
193. 
Cooper memorondum to Hil1iDm Bundy, "Public statement on VC 
InfiltJ:'8.tion (w/ attaclunent)," l~ Dece:nber 1964 (In Vietn3lll 381: 
December file) (COIfl7IDEHTIAL); see elso Section l~ , IIneeting of the 
Princip;:>J.s, 12 December 1964.!! 
Bundy me.'11oranclum to Secretar-f Rusk, et. al. , "Cooper MD.terials on 
Nort.h Vietn::unese Infiltration,1I 9 December 1964 (In Vietne.m 381: 
Dece..TUbe:r. file) (SECRET). 
Rusk to Taylor, 9 Decer:ibeJ' 1964 (state 1230); Taylor to SecState, 
10 December 196~. (So.igon 1775) 1776) (all in Section 4, IIMeeting of 
the Prlncip31s, 12 Deceaber 196411 ) (TOP SECRET). 
JCS 2339/164,. 12 D2ccmber 196L~ (TO? SZCRET). 
Taylor to SecState 
))~ Decemoer 1964 (Saigon 1808) (TOP SECRET); 
Sullhra.n to Hil1iD.~ Bundy, 16 DecEmber 196!~ (Vientic:ne 904) 
(CO:NFIDEi\~I.A.L ) (Both in Section 3, tlliJ.eeting of t he Principals, 19 · 
December 19(411). 
JCS 2339/165, 19 December 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
State mcssag:= to Saigon Dnb.9 :"sy, 19 :ceccmber 1961~1 (state 1312) (In 
VietnGm, December 1964, CF~20) (TOP SECRET). 
RUsk mess8.gcs to P.m ass~.dor Taylor, 24 December 1964 (State 1347 in 
CF-20 ) (Stat.e l3'+9--in "Neeting of the Principe.Is, 5 January 1965
11 ) 
(TOP SECRE'i'). 
At the Principals meeting, 12 Dece.mber 1961~ ) JCS 2339/161~. 
Ibid. 
"New Zealand r;ote," attacbrn..8nt to Bundy memornndl.l.m to Secretary Rusk, 
et.aJ .• , 15 b;-;c ·2.mbe:c~ 196!+ (I-3715V64) (In "P01j.cy-Vietnam, 15-31Dec64," 
RL(b"r;:)38-9, USAF Directoro."e of ?1uns Rel)Osit.o~'Y) (TOP SECRErI'). 
91 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
~. 
194. 
1950 
196. 
197. 
198. 
199. 
200. 
201. 
202. 
204. 
205. 
206. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive 
Joint Staff Di~ectorts memorru1dum to the Chiefs, CINCPAC and 
COI1USMACV, IIEstab1ish."!lent of Intemationul Force in South Vietnam, 
(S),II 10 December 1964 (DJSM-1938-64) (TOP SECRET). 
. 
JCS 2339/166, 19 December 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
Service memoranda to tbe Joint Stai'f, !lEstablj.shment of International 
Fo;rce in South Vietne1n, (S)," 6, 7, 9 end 18 January 1964 (JCS 
2343/505-1,2,3, and 4) (TOP S:SCM'~ )o 
. 
Enclosure to I SA memorandu.'U to Deputy SecDef, "third COtmtry Assistance 
to Vietnam, It 29 December 1964 (In Vietnam 381: 
December file) (SECRE"T). 
See Joseph Fried, New York Daily News, 7 Deca'Uber 1964; see also Wen 
Ygrk Times and. We.sting-Gon Pos:~, 7 Decenber 1964. 
Ta.ylor message to SecState, 9 December 19614- (Saigon 1763) (In 
"Neeting of the Princ ipa.1s , 19 December 1964") (TOP SECRE'r); sec also 
John Naffre, in story filed from Saigon, \-,Tashington Poet, 9 December 
1964. 
Ibid.; Taylor messages to SecState, 9 Dece.nber 1961~ (Saigon 1760, in 
"Meet:i.ne; of the Princi!i3..1s, 19 ~ca"1lb er 1961~1I ) (Saigon ~762-in Vietnsm 
381: 
December file) ( CONFIDilllTIAL) • 
Full text in Nm-r York Times, 12 December 19614-. 
Taylor message to Secretary Rus~>:, 20 December 1964 (Saigon 1877) (In 
CF-20) (SECREl'); see also Peter Grose, New York Times l 22 December 
1964. 
-
Ibide; Taylor messages to SecretarY' Rusk, 21 December 1964 (Saigon 
181r:L) ruld 22 December (Saigon 1890, 1895, 1897, 1900); Rusk 
. 
messages to Ambassador Taylor, 21 December 1964 (St.ate 1318, 1320) 
(In CF-20) (TOP SECRET). 
Rusk message to A"UbassadQr Taylor, 24 December 1964 (state 1347) (In 
CF-20) (TOP SEClli.'""'T); see also Peter Grose, ~ew York Times, 23 and 24 
December 1964. 
Rusk to Taylor (State 1347) (TOP SECRET). 
See Taylor message to SecSto.te, 25 December 196t:. (Saigon 1939) (L"1 
CF~20) ( ~OP SECRET )~ 
See· Peter Grose COlU.ll1.11S filed from Saigon in NmT Yor]\: Times, 23 and 
27 Dec emb~r 1964. 
See Te.ylor messages to SecState, 28 t-ecember 1964 (Saigon 1969" 1976) 
and. 29 December 1964 (Sai gon 1981) (all in CF-20) (SECRET). 
Charles J..iohr, NeiT Yorlc Times,.., 30 .J):;cem er 19611-; Seymour Topping, 
Nev.' York Times" 10 Janual"Y 1965. 
92 
~O? SECRET - Sensitive 
-
~ --",~. ----
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRBT - Sensitive 
210. 
Jock LaV'gguth, in story filed from Saigon, New York Times, 6 January 
1965. 
211. 
Seymour Topping, Net.,.. York Timep, 11 Janu':.l.ry 1965. 
212. 
See Nei·T Yorl~ Times, 18, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, Clnd 27 Je.nuary 1965; 
a.l so the Bal t ir.1.ore Sun, 18 and 25 January 1965. 
213. 
Reported by Peter Grose, New York T~les, 25 December 196~. 
214. 
Rusk to Taylor (state 1347); state-Defense message to Saigon Embassy, 
25 Decanb~r 1964 (state 1355) (In CF-20) (TOP SECRE~). 
215. 
CINCPAC message to JCS 
262251gDecember1964 (In Vietnam 381: 
file) (TOP SECRET ). 
' 
Decem.ber 
216. Taylor message to Secretro'y Rusk, 28 December 1964 (Saigon 1975) (In 
CF-20) (TOP SECREr). 
. 
217. 
CJCS memorandum to SecDef, "Re.cO'..mnendect Reprisal Actions in TIetnliation 
to Break BOQ Incident (rrS), 2e December 1964 (JCSH-I076.64) (TOP SECRET). 
218. 
Rusk messaae to Sa igon Embassy, 29 December 1964 (State 1365) (In CF-20) 
(TOP SECRET). 
219$ 
For example see editorials in p".covidence Journal, ?4 December 1964; Ne~; 
YOl~k Journal hnerican 
28 December '1964; and Life, 8 Janual'y 1965. 
------~~~~~----, 
220.' See ~ 
York Times, 27 December 1964 and 3 January 1965. 
221. 
See The Baltimo!'e Sun, Neil York Times, and :~shington Post, 4 J anuary 
1.965. 
2220 
See NC'.l York Tjmes, 7 and. 12 J enuary 1965. 
223· See The B2.1timore S'-1.'1, Ne"'{ Yor~ Times and v18.11 Street J01J.rn' ,14 J anuary 
1965; in particu.lar, see JI..rth\l~ I:cmnen, UPI teletype ne"TS reles,se from 
Saigon, 14 J8.Iluary 1965. 
224. 
See NCvT York Times, 16 and 20 Ja.YlUary 1965; Tashington Post, 18 
J amlary 1965. 
225. Taylor message to SecState. 31 J)ec~rnber ~.96)+ (Saigon 2010) (In 
IrS . 
"') 
( 
) 
algon CrisIs, January 1965, I I CF-21 
TOP S:SCID';'1.1 • 
226 • 
bundy mcmorandur1 to SCGretary Ru"l~) 1fNotes on the South Vietnamese 
Situation and jI~ternative3." 6 January 1965 (In state Department 
Matcl'ials, Vol. V) ('I:OP SECR.'TI') e 
227· 
Ibid. 
(TOP SECp~r ). 
228. 
Ib icl . 
' (TOP SECRS?) . 
93 
TOP SEC!<E'l' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
229 . 
Ibid. 
(TOP SECRET). 
230. 
Departl-:1ent of State llIe!!10randum of conversation, "South East Asia" 
(Conversation::; beti,,-cen U.S. and Soviet officials, Pa.':"t V of VII), 
30 D~c€mbe:-:-
1961~ (In Vietnam 381 : 
Decell'lJer file) (SECRE'I'). 
231. 
See rYm; York Ti.n:.es, 5, 14 and 23 January 1965; tJashington Post, 
18 January 1965 0 
2320 
See Tad Szulc, New York Times, 
L~ J anua...:"jT 1965 . 
2330 
McNc.ug ton dro.i't su.r11'11ary, "Observations re South Vietnam, II 4 January 
1965 (In tlD1'afts 1965,11 M:cN3.ughton II ) (TOP SECRET) 0 
234. 
Ibid. 
(TOP SECRET) . 
235. r.lcNaughton draft SUlI'!'la.ry i'Tith McNema.ra co:r.ments I>enciled in, 
110bservations re Sout" Vietnarl after Kh2.nh ' s 'Re.·CouI>J tl 27 January 
1965 (In tlDrD.fts 1965, II I.lcNaughton II ) (TOP SECREr). 
Rusk message to Saigon Eilbassy, 11 Je.nuary 1965 (State 1~-36 ) (In 
CF-21) (SECRET). 
Rusk message to Saigon Embassy, 14 J anuary 1965 (State 1471) (In 
CF-21) (TOP SECRBI' )0 
238 0 Rusk messege to Saigon Embassy, 25 J?~uarJ 1965 (Copy tr~~scribed by 
OSD in Vietnam 381: 
Janua~J file ) (TOP SECRET) 0 
239. 
See CJCS melll01'CXI.dum to SeeDef, "Evacuation of U.S . :Dependents fyo:n 
South Vietnam~" 4 J0.l11.'.a.ry 1965 (CH-358-65 ) (SECRET) and Roche 
memoranclu.m to the JOint Sec::cet2.rifl.t (Subject as above)" 19 January 
1965 (SECRET ) (Both in Vietne>Jll 381 : 
January file). 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
