el

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By; NWD Date: 2011

participate in the program in such areas as logistics, sanita-
tion, medical care, construction, and resources and population
control. Military personnel having the necessary skills would
be employed in political, economic and social development pro-
grams until they can be replaced by qualified civilians. 10/

On 24 August, the Roles and Missions Study Group in Saigon had com-
pleted its study and gave its recommendations to the Ambassador. 1i/
fmong their recommendations were several which had implications for the
deployment of U.S. forces. One of these was that "as the increase of
FWMAF strength permits, these forces engage with RVNAF in clearing up
operations in support of RD with the primary objective of improving the
associated GVN forces." They also recommended that ARVN be the principal
force in RVNAF to provide the security essential for RD. To accomplish
this, they recommended that the bulk of ARVN divisional combat battalions
be assigned to sector commanders, that the ARVN division be removed from
RD chain of command, and that the province chief be upgraded. They
further recommended that Ranger units be disbanded because of their fre-
quently intolerable conduct toward the population and that the RF and PF
become provincial and district constabulary under the control of the
ministry of RD. Also recommended was that the national police (special
branch) assume primary responsibility with the identification:and de-
struction of VC infra-structure.

, As far as the U.S. advisory effort was concerned, they recommended
that USAID/Field Operations, USAID/Office of Public Safety, JUSPAO/TFiela
Operations, OSA/Cadre Division and OSA/Tiaison Branch have one responsi-
bility in each province at a minimm. In MACV, they recommended that a
Deputy for RD be established at the division advisory, corps advisory,
and COMUSMACV levels.

General Westmoreland, on 26 August, 2 days after the Roles and
Missions Study was published, sent a message to CINCPAC, information
copies going to the White House and State Department, Secretary of
Defense, the JCS, and CTA. He opened by saying that:

In order to promote a better understanding of the role
which military operations play in the overall effort in South
Vietnam I discern a need at this time to review the military
Situation in South Vietnam as relates to our concepts; past,
present, and future. This is an appropriate time in light of
the fact we are on the threshold of a new phase in the conflict
resulting from our battlefield successes and from the contin-
ving US/FWMAF build-up. 12/

He went on to deseribe the enemy's infiltration and build-up in his effort
to gain control in South Vietnam: After characterizing his efforts from
1 May 1965 to 1 May 1966, as being basically to build up our combat and
logistical forces and to learn how to employ them effectively, he went on

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
