Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In his answer, General Westmoreland was equally optimistic

...additive forces would serve to forestall the danger
of local defeats due to the tactical degeneration or temporary
disorganization of some ARVN units in the event of another
general enemy offensive coupled with a massive invasion across
the DMZ. The need to be prepared to support or reinforce
ARVN units that are surprised by the nature and intensity of
ve/NVA attacks became manifest during the enemy's TET drive
and must be recognized in US troop requirement and deployment
plans for the foreseeable future. By providing a two division
mobile “swing force" which could be positioned and employed as
required, the need to draw down on forces directly engaged in
territorial security tasks probably would be reduced. ‘Thus
the danger of losing popular confidence in and support for
Gvn/usS capabilities, policies and aspirations as a result of
temporary military or psychological setbacks would also be
diminished.

(2) Provision of the immediately required additional
forces also would make it possible to apply continuous pressure
+o some degree in all corps areas and thus reduce the danger
of allowing the enemy the opportunity to solicit support from
the population and to reorganize, refit and recoup so that he
could soon field rejuvenated units, despite heavy losses suffered
during the TET offensive. This is particularly important in
view of the enemy capability to move additional divisions south
through the panhandle or DMZ without any clear intelligence
indicators of such action. (This matter is of particular concern
to me) these forces will also make it possible to retain that
degree of flexibility and rapid responsiveness necessary to
cope with an apparent new enemy tactic of searching for thin
spots in our force structure or deployment in order to launch
his concentrated mass attacks.

(3) In the next six months the presence of the armored
cavalry regiment in II or JII Corps would reduce the degree of
calculated risk inherent in the economy of force posture in
those areas, provide added territorial security and further the
goal of providing added combat flexibility. Addition of another
Marine regiment and its division headquarters in I Corps would
thicken troop density in critical I CTZ, add to combat flexi-
bility and improve command and eontrol capabilities in that critical

area.

(4) Over the next year the increment of force would make
it possible to:

his TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
