Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A rejection, or a refusal even to discuss such a for-
mula, for peace, requires that we face scme sober conclusions.
Tt would mean that Hanoi has not abandoned its effort to
seize South Vietnam by force. It would give reality and
credibility to captured documents which describe a ‘fight
and negotiate’ strategy by Vietcong and the North Vietnamese
forces. It would reflect a view in Hanoi that they can
gamble upon the character of the American people and of
our allies in the Pacific. 22

Final confirmation that the attempt to find a comnon ground on which to
begin negotiations had failed came in an article by the Communist
journalist Wilfred Burchette on October 20. Reporting from Hanoi the
views of Pham Van Dong, Burchette stated that, "There is no possibility
of any talks or even contacts between Hanoi and the U.S, government
unless the bombardment and other acts of war against North Vietnam are
definitively halted." 23/ But the American Administration had already
taken a series of escalatory decisions under pressure from the military
and the Stennis committee.

3. More Targets

The September-long restriction against striking targets
within the ten mile Hanoi perimeter was imposed on the military command
with no explanation of its purpose since apparently every effort was
peing made to maintain the security of the contacts in Paris. Thus, not
surprisingly, CINCPAC complained about the limitation and regularly
sought to have it lifted throughout the month. On September 11, General
MeConnell forwarded a request to the Secretary for a restrike of the
Hanoi thermal power plant. 24/ On September 21, CINCPAC again reiterated
his urgent request that the Hanoi ban be lifted. eof The day before he
had also requested authority to strike the Phuc Yen air field. 26/ In
sending his endorsement of these requests to McNamara, the acting Chairman,
General Johnson, noted that there were fifteen lucrative targets within
the prohibited Hanoi area including critical rail and highway bridges and
the Hanoi power plant, the letter reportedly back to 50% of capability. 27/
McNamara replied tersely and simply, in his own hand, "The Hanoi restric-
tion remains in effect so this strike has not been approved.” 28/ ‘he
requested authorization to hit Phuc Yen air field was not a strike within
the Hanoi ten mile zone but was militarily important because Phuc Yen
was the largest remaining unstruck MIG field and a center of much of
North Vietnam's air defense control. On September 26, it was approved
‘for strike, but before one could be launched the authorization was res-
einded.on September 29, no doubt because of concern about upsetting the

delicate Paris contacts. 29/

To these continuing pressures on the President from the JCS
to remove the Hanoi restrictions were added at the end of September an

SECRET - siti
103 TOP SECRET Sensitive
