Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"These steps would greatly strengthen both the military and
civil lines of command. They would contribute significantly

to the success of RD, But not even these changes would be
decisive without a strong link between them.

"The civil side requires the capacity to influence mili-
tary movement which no organizational chart can provide. The
MACV side requires the political and substantive expertise
which a military organization does not -- and is not expected
to -- possess.

"Mus the fundamental recommendation I would make is:

"6. To appoint, as principal deputy and executive officer
to Ambassador Forter, a general of the highest possible ability
and stature -- of two, three or even four-star rank. To do so
would win the following advantages:

"a. Compelling indication of the seriousness with
which the Administration regards RD.

"b. The rank, and stature to insure optimum RD per-
formance from MACY.

"e, The rank and stature to afford maximum impact
on GVN military leaders and capacity to persuade them properly
to prod RVNAF when necessary.

"a. Demonstrated command administrative capacities
with which to assist Ambassador Porter, while bridging the
inevitable institutional difficulties that might well other-
wise develop from one arm of MACV's taking orders from a
civilian.

"e. A solution to the military control image problem,
by which the advantages of close military support would be
veiled by civilian control.

"f. The capacity and. position to formulate an effec-
tive qualitative plan encompassing both military and civil
realities. Previous plans have focused on numbers of provinces,
volume of RD cadre trained, and so on. They have put an un-
realistic premium on quantitative, "statistical" success.
Meaningful criteria, however, must be qualitative. I would
envision such a qualitative plen intended to cover at least
the next 12 months.

"There would be an additional prospective advantage as
well. If it should later be found that dual lines of authority --
even given this strong link -- are not successful, then we could
more readily fall back to a unitary, military command structure --
with the new RD general taking charge.

98 TOP SECRNT - Sensitive
