Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

40. , oe TOP SECRET - Sensitive

brought to bear on NVN. In summary, they recommended a
"sharp knock" on NVN military assets and war-supporting
facilities rather than the campaign of slowly increasing
pressure which was adopted. Whatever the political merits
of the latter course, we deprived ourselves of the mili-
tary effects of early weight of effort and shock, and gave
+o the enemy time to adjust to our slow quantitative and
qualitative increase of pressure. This is not to say that it
is now too late to derive military benefits from more
effective and extensive use of our air and naval superiority.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend:

(1) Approval of their ROLLING THUNDER 52
program, which is a step toward meeting the requirement
for improved target systems. This program would decrease
the Hanoi and Haiphong sanctuary areas, authorize attacks
against the steel plant, the Hanoi rail yards, the thermal
power plants, selected areas within Haiphong port and other
ports, selected locks and dams controlling water LOCs, SAM
support facilities within the residual Hanoi and Haiphong
sanctuaries, and POL at Haiphong, Ha Gia (Phuc Yen) and
Can Thon (Kep).

(2) Use of naval surface forces to interdict
North Vietnamese coastal waterborne traffic and appropriate
Jand LOCs and to attack other coastal military targets such
as radar and AAA sites.

5. The Joint Chiefs of Staff request that their views
as set forth above be provided to the President.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(Sgd) EARLE G. WHEELER 62/

Such a memo from the Chiefs represents more than a dissent or an alterna-
tive recommendation; it constitutes a statement for the record to
guarantee that in the historical accounts the Chiefs will appear having
discharged their duty. It always comes as a form of political notifica-
tion, not merely a military recommendation.

The available documents do not show what the reaction at
the State Department was (apart from Mr. Katzenbach's apparent endorse-
ment), nor do they indicate the views of the White House staff under
"We We Rostow. McNaughton's files do contain a commentary on the McNamara
recommendations prepared by George Carver of CIA for the Director,
Richard Helms. Carver agreed with the basic McNamara analysis of the
results of the air war but did not think they constituted a conclusive
statement about possible results from an escalation. Carver wrote,

168 " ‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive
