Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

accord with the Principals’ views, the governments of Thailand and Laos
were briefed by the respective U.S. Ambassadors to those countries.
Foreign Minister Thuan Khoman later visited the President in Washington
and presumably oursued the matter further. The Canadians were contacted
in both Ottawa aad Washington, William Bundy held discussions in New
Zealand and Australia on h.5 December. Prime Minister Wilson of the
United Kingdom was thoroughly briefed during a series of meetings in
Washington, 7-9 Decanber. Later, William Bundy told the Principals that
the U.K., Australia and New Zealand received the full picture of immediate
U.S. actions and its stipulations to the GVN and the potential two-phased
concept of graduated pressures on North Vietnam. The Canadian Government
was told slightly less. The Philippines, South Korea and the Republic of
China were briefed on Phase One only. 191/

One of the aims stressed by President Johnson in the meeting of 1 and
3 December, and continually thereafter, was obtaining increased assistance
for the GVil and for our efforts on its behalf from our allies. During the
12 December Principals meeting, for example, William Bundy related the
President's recent wish to obtain assistance even from governments without
strong Southeast Asia commitments, like Denmark, West Germany and India.
This was mentioned in the context of a summary report on current "third-
country assistance of all kinds to South Vietnem.” 192

At the time, however, not only general assistance from many countries
but specifically military assistance from a select few was particularly
sought. During the consultations with allied govermments, both Australia
and New Zealand were pressed to send troop units to assist ARVN. Both
supported the U.S, policy decisions as probably necessary, but neither
was willing at the time to make a commitment. New Zealand officials ex-
pressed grave doubts that Phase II would lead to negotiations, predicting
instead that the DRV would only increase the clandestine troop deployments
to the South. They expressed doubts about the advisability of sending
allied ground forces into South Vietnam. 193/ —

The concept under which the allied troop deployments were believed
desirable was related to that which the NSC Working Group had recommended
as deserving further study. Contemplated was an international force
built around one U.S, division, to be deployed just south of the DMZ in
conjunction with stepped-up US/GVII air operations against North Vietnem.
in essence, therefore, it wes a Phase Two concept, dependent in some
respects on the degree of success achieved during Phase One activities.
The concept was examined in detail by the Joint Staff in early December,
and their staff study was forwarded to the services and the Joint Pacific
Headguarters "fcr comment and recommendetions” on 10 December. The pur-
poses cited for such a force deployment by the Joint Steff were stated as
follows: (1) to deter ground invasion by the DRV; (2) to hold a "blocking
position against DRY attacks down the coastal plain and meke more difficult
DRV efforts to bypass"; ana (3) to be “capable of holding the defensive
positions against attack until reinforcements arrive if required.” 19)/

*

66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
