Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ALTERNATIVE B.. Emphasis on the infiltration routes
south of the 20th Parallel. Under this alternative, the
dominant emphasis would be, not on preventing material
from flowing into North Vietnam (and thus not on "economic
pressure on the regime), but on preventing military men and
materiel from flowing out of the North into the South. We
would terminate bombing in the Red River basin except for
occasional sorties (perhaps 3%) -- those necessary to keep enemy
air defenses and damage-repair crews positioned there and to
keep important fixed targets knocked out. The same total number
of sorties envisioned under ALTERNATIVE A--together with naval
gunfire at targets ashore and afloat and mining of inland
waterways, estuaries and coastal waters -- would be concen-
trated in the neck of North Vietnam, between 17° and 20°,
through which all land infiltration must pass and in which
the "extended battle zone" north of the DMZ lies. ‘The
effort would be intensive and sustained, designed especially
to saturate choke points and to complement similar new
intensive interdiction efforts in adjacent areas in Laos
and near the 17th Parallel inside South Vietnam.

ALTERNATIVE C. Extension of the current program. This

alternative would be essentially a refinement of the cur-
rently approved program and therefore a compromise between
ALTERNATIVE A and ALTERNATIVE b. Under it, while avoiding
attacks within the 10-mile prohibited zone around Hanoi and
strikes at or mining of the ports, we would conduct a heavy
effort against all other land, sea, and air lines of communica-
tion. Important fixed targets would be kept knocked out;
intensive, sustained and systematic armed reconnaissance would
be carried out against the roads and railroads and coastal
shipping throughout the country; and the eight major airfields
would be systematically attacked. The total number of sorties
would be the same as under the other two alternatives. 161/

The positions of the various members of the Defense establishment with
respect to the three alternatives were:

Mr. Vance and I recommend ALTERNATIVE B.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend ALTERNATIVE A.

The Secretary of the Navy recommends ALTERNATIVE B.

The Secretary of the Air Force recommends ALTERNATIVE C
modified to add some targets (especially LOC targets) to the
present list and to eliminate others.

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
