Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

overthrown" as soon as possible if the DRV were to expect to "succeed
in gaining control of South Vietnam." 162/ In February, 1956, Le Duan
is reported to have conferred with southern leaders on tactics, and
concluded that "military pressure" was essential for reunification.

He is alleged to have called for a military campaign in the Highlands,
and a revitalizing of the Communist Party apparatus in the South.
There is some evidence of his having published these views in a book
in late 1956. Hanoi, preoccupied with internal problems, was in no
position to act on such proposals, but it could not ignore the "mood
of skepticism and nonconfidence” -- as a southern communist later
described it -- pervading the South.

Sometime in early 1957 Le Duan returned to Hanoi from South
Vietnam to assume a key role in Lao Dong policy formulation. In any
event, Ho Chi Minh evidently deferred to southern sentiment when on
15 February 1957 he applauded the "appeal of the Supreme Soviet of
the USSR on the banning of atomic weapons and on reduction of armament,"
reaffirmed the DRV's similar devotion to peace, but went on to note that:

"The National Assembly has discussed the question of
national reunification. The struggle waged by our people
for this purpose is long and difficult but will certainly
be victorious. To achieve national reunification, all our
people must unite closely, make further efforts to con-
solidate the North and make it a basis for national libera-
tion. Our deputies have voiced the iron will of our
people in the work of national'reunification. The National
Assembly has many a time warmly welcomed the firm and con-
sistent combativeness of our compatriots in the South. -

" , . . the National Assembly has called on our con-
patriots throughout the country and residing abroad and on
our People's Army to unite closely in their struggle, con-
solidate the North, maintain and extend the struggle waged in
the South, and strengthen our international solidarity.

"Phe National Assembly has appealed to our’ compatriots
in the South to struggle perseveringly and to strengthen their

will for national reunification and independence. 'No force
can hamper the determination of our people for unity and
fraternal love.' ...

"We are duty-bound to unite and struggle in order to carry
into practice the decisions of the National Assembly, imple-
ment the policies and political lines of the Party and Govern-
ment, speed up the tasks set for this year, increase production,
practice savings, consolidate the North, and unite the
people throughout the country on the basis of the program of the
Fatherland Front for the struggle for national reunification." 163/

Ke) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
