5 |

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. Ba 3. THE ADVISORY BUILD-UP, 1961-67

SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS

Thé United States decided, shortly after the Geneva Accords and
during the period of French withdrawal from Indo-China, to give military
assistance and advice to the newly proclaimed Republic of Vietnam. It
might as easily have decided not to undertake this effort to prevent
South Vietnam from falling to communism.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff were pessimistic. The creation of a
Vietnamese Army, they said, might not even lead to internal political
stability, much less assure the capability to protect South Vietnam
from external aggression. The JCS also believed that the limitations
imposed by the Geneva agreements on the number of U.S. military personnel
would make it impractical to attempt to train a new Army ~~ particularly
given the paucity of experienced leaders which was the legacy of French
colonialism. The President's military advisors did not wish to assume
the responsibility for failure without the resources and influence which
would offer a better chance for success.

THE AMERICAN GAMBLE

The available record does not indicate any rebuttal of the JCS's
appraisal of the situation. What it does indicate is that the U.S.
decided to gamble with very limited resources because the potential gains
seemed well worth a limited risk. !'l cannot guarantee that Vietnam wil]
remain free, even with our aid,'' General J. Lawton Collins reported to
the National Security Council, "But | know that without our aid Vietnam
will surely be lost to Communism.!"'

Secretary of State John Foster Dulles was instrumental in deciding
for political reasons to undertake a modest program of military advice
aimed at producing political stability. Once launched, however, the
program of advice and assistance came to be dominated by conventional .
military conceptions. Insuring internal stability is a "lesser included
capability'' of armed force, the reasoning went; the principal purpose of
such a force is to protect the territorial integrity of the nation.

It was such a conventional force that the small USMAAG attempted to
produce from 1955 until about 1960. The Army of the Republic of Vietnam
(ARVN) was made to "mirror image!’ the U.S. Army to the extent permitted
by differences in equipment and locale. The number of U.S. advisors
(approximately doubled by ''The Equipment Recovery Mission! == a thinly
veiled device to increase the number of Americans in Vietnam) remained
stable throughout this period. ARVN developed into a multi-divisional

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
