Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that go beyond the above bare-bones statement of our
"“commitment™); some will insist that pressure, enough
pressure, on the North can pay off or that we will have
yielded a blue chip without exacting a price in exchange
for our concentrating on interdiction; many will argue
that denial of the larger number of troops will prolong
the war, risk losing it and increase the casualties of

the Americans who are there; some will -insist that this
course reveals weakness to which Moscow will react with
relief, contempt and reduced willingness to help, and to
which Hanoi will react by increased demands and truculence;
others will point to the difficulty of carrying the
Koreans, Filipinos, Australians and New Zealanders with us;
and there will be those who point out the possibility that
the changed US tone may cause a “rush for the exists” in
Thailand, in Laos and especially inside South Vietnam,
perhaps threatening cohesion of the government, morale of
the army, and loss of support among the people. Not least
will be the alleced impact on the reputation of the United
States and of its President. Nevertheless, the difficulties
of this strategy are fewer and smaller than the difficulties
of any other approach. 112/

McNamara, showed the draft to the President the same day it
was completed, but there is no record of his reaction. 113/ It is worth
noting, however, that May 19 was the day that U.S. planes struck the
Hanoi power plant just one-mile north of the center of Hanoi. ‘That the
President did not promptly endorse the McNamara recommendations as he
had on occasions in the past is not surprising. This time he faced a
situation where the Chiefs were in ardent opposition to anything other
than 2a significant escalation of the war with a callup of reserves. This
put them in direct opposition to McNamara and his aides and created a
genuine policy dilemma for the President who had to consider the necessity
of keeping the military "on-board" in any new direction for the U.S. effort
in Southeast Asia.

4. JCS, CIA and State Reactions
In the two weeks after McNamara's DPM, the Washington paper-

mill must have broken all previous production records. The JCS in particu-
lar literally bombarded the Secretary with memoranda, many of which had
voluminous annexes. Their direct comments or the DPM did not come until
ten days after it was transmitted to the President. Before then, however,
aware of the Mcllamara proposals, they forwarded a number of studies each
of which was the occasion to advance their own arguments for escalation.

On May 20, the Chiefs sent the Secretary two memos, one
urging expansion of operations against North Vietnam (which they reauested

53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
