Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

“civil war" of southerners against southerners -- no doubt an important
consideration with the United States as a potential antagonist. The
evidence indicates that, at least through 1956, Hanoi did not -expect

to have to resort to force; thereafter, the regroupees occupied increasing
prominence in DRV plans. ;

For Diem's government, refugees from the North were important for
three reasons; firstly, they provided the world the earliest convincing
evidence of the undemocratic and oppressive nature of North Vietnam's
regime. Though no doubt many migrants fled North Vietnam for vague or
spurious reasons, it was plain that Ho's Viet Minh were widely and
genuinely feared, and many refugees took flight in understandable terror.
There were indications that the DRV forcefully obstructed the migration
of other thousands who might also have left the North. In 1955 and 1956,
the refugees were the most convincing support for Diem's argument that
free elections were impossible in the DRV.

Secondly, the refugees engaged the sympathies of the American
people as few developments in Vietnam have before or since, and solidly
underwrote the U.S. decision for unstinting support of Diem. The
poignancy of hundreds of thousands of people fleeing their homes and
fortunes to escape communist tyranny, well journalized, evoked an out-
pouring of U.S. aid, governmental and private. The U.S. Navy was com-
mitted to succor the migrants, lifting over 300,000 persons in "Operation .
EXODUS" (in which Dr. Tom Dooley -- then a naval officer -- won fame).
U.S. government-to-government aid, amounting to $100 per refugee, more
than South Vietnam's annual income per capita, enabled Diem's government
to provide homes and food for hundreds of thousands of the destitute, and
American charities provided millions of dollars more for their relief.
U.S. officials defending American aid programs could point with pride
to the refugee episode to demonstrate the special eligibility of the
Vietnamese for U.S. help, including an early, convincing demonstration
that Diem's government could mount an effective program with U.S. aid.

Thirdly, the predominantly Catholic Tonkinese refugees provided
Diem with a claque: a politically malleable, culturally distinct group,
wholly distrustful of Ho Chi Minh and the DRV, dependent for subsistence
on Diem's government, and attracted to Diem as a co-religionist. Under
Diem's mandarinal regime, they were less important as dependable votes
than as a source of reliable political and military cadres. Most were
kept unassimilated in their own communities, and became prime subjects
for Diem's experiments with strategic population relocation. One heritage
of Geneva is the present dominance of South Vietnam's govermment and army
by northerners. The refugees catalyzed Dieu's domestic political
rigidity, his high-handedness with the U.S., and his unyielding rejection
of the DRV and the Geneva Accords.

The Geneva Settlement was further penalized by the early failure of
the "International Supervisory Commission" established by the Armistice

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
