Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in intelligence estimates, he reported continued deterioration of the
pacification program and continued weakness in the central government,
The former was portrayed as related to increased direction and support
of VC operations from Hanoi end increasing VC strength despite "very
heavy losses inflicted almost daily" by the ARVN. Particular areas of
concern were identified as the area surrounding Saigon and the northern
provinces, which were "now in deep trouble." Taylor related GVN week-
ness to political factionalism, mounting war weariness and hopelessness,
"particularly in the urban areas," and a lack of "team play or mutual
loyalty" among many central and provinciel officials. Calling such
chronic weakness "a critical liability to future plans," he warned that
lack of an effective central government caused U.S. efforts to assist
South Vietnam to have little impact. 12h/

To alter the course of what Taylor called "a losing game in
South Vietnam," he recommended three measures: (1) "establish an edequate
government"; (2) improve the counterinsurgency effort; and (3) “persuade
or force the DRY" to stop aiding and directing the insurgency. With
respect to the first, Taylor allowed that it was "hard to decide what is
the minimum government which is necessary to permit reasonable hope" of -
success. However, he stated:

"eit is hard to visualize our being willing to make
added outlays of resources and to run increasing political
risks without an allied government which, at least, can
speak for and to its people, can maintain law and order in
the principal cities, can provide local protection for the
vital military bases and installations, can raise and sup-
port Armed Forces, and can gear its efforts to those of the
United States. Anything less than this would hardly be a
government at all, and under such circumstances, the
United States Government might do better to carry forward
the war on a purely unilateral basis.

With regard to the counterinsurgency effort, he opined, "We cannot do
much better than what we are doing at present until the government

improves." 125/

Ambassador Taylor saw U.S. militery actions directed at the DRV
as fulfilling a twofold purpose. On the one hand, he believed thet even if
an effective government were established, "we will not succeed in the end
unless we drive the DRV out of its reinforcing role and obtain its cooper-
ation in bringing an end to the Viet Cong insurgency." On the other hand,
he saw actions outside South Vietnam as a means to improve GVN morale and
confidence. Acknowledging that using our aid, advice and encouragement
on behalf of programs to stabilize the govermment would probably be insuf-
ficient for this purpose, he suggested additional measures;

"One way to accomplish this lift of morale would be to
increase the covert operations against North Viet Nam by sea

ns TOP SECRET - Sensitive
