Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

If I had to pick out one quality about that little old man sit-
ting on his hill in the jungle, it was his gentleness.'

"He and John exchanged toasts and shared stewed tiger livers.
John now admits his naivete in being ready to believe that Ho was
not a Communist. But even if he was, John felt certain that Ho
was sincere in wanting to co-operate with the West, especially
with France and the United States. Some of Ho's men impressed John
less. ‘They go charging around with great fervor shouting 'inde-
pendence, ' but seventy-five per cent of them don't know the meaning
of the word,’ he wrote in his diary. John still has two letters
in English Ho sent him in the jungle. One of them, written soon
after the Japanese surrender, when the Vietminh was about to seize
control of the nationalist movement, reads as follows:

Dear Lt. [Jonn/,

I feel weaker since you left. Maybe I'd have to follow your
advice--move to some other place where food is easy to get, to
improve my health....

I'm sending you a bottle of wine, hope you like it.
Be so kind as to give me foreign news you got.

»+ePlease be good enuf to send to your H.@. the following
wires.

i Abea ele [an anti-Vietminh nationalist group/ plans to exer-
cise large terror against French and to push it upon shoulder of
VML [Wietminh League/. VML ordered 2 millions members and all
its population be watchful and stop Daiviet criminal plan when
& if possible. VML declares before the world its aim is national
independence. It fights with political & if necessary military
means. But never resorts to criminal & dishonest act. »

Signed--NATIONAL LIBERATION COMMITTEE

OF VML

2. National Liberation Committee of VML begs U.S. authorities
to inform United Nations the following. We were fighting Japs
on the side of the United Nations. Now Japs surrendered. We
beg United Nations to realize their solemn promise that all
nationalities will be given democracy and independence. If
United Nations forget their solemn promise & don't grant Indo-
china full independence, we will keep fighting until we get it.
Signed--LIBERATION COMMITTER OF VML

Thank you for all the troubles I give you....Best greetings!
Yours sincerely, Hoo [sic7." *

* Robert Shaplen, The Lost Revolution (New York: Harper & Row, 1965), 28-30.

C-99 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
