Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

-TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Rational direction of manpower was not proposed by American
advisors and would have lain beyond the capacity for organiza-
tion of the RVN Government; e211 young professional graduates
were enlisted inte the army, which then controlled most of the
manpower to do the jobs and had to be allowed to make good the
civilian shortcomings engendered by conscription. 12H/

This insatiable requirement for the "best" men to build up the officer corps
was in part a reflection of the requirements of the South Vietnamese social
structure; in any event, it was much closer to the conventional U.S. view of
an officer corps than to the view of Ho Chi Minh and Vo Nguyen Giap, and
reflected the view that well-schooled men are required to manage complex
modern armies.

6. The equipment provided the Vietnamese regular forces was more

suited to countering aggression from the North than to preserving internal
security in the South. While ARVN were not equipped as heavily as those
of the U.S.--they had no tracked vehicles (tanks or personnel carriers),
fewer trucks, and generally lighter weapons--727 trucks, 660 trailers--

to make them mechanized and road-bound. Armor was provided, but was not
organic to the standard division.

e+eU.5- Military aid was programmed in more or less the same
fashion as for countries like Turkey and Korea, where guer-
rillas were not a threat. The Vietnamese armed forces not
only were equipped with tanks, planes, artillery and similar
hardware that was relatively little value against guerrrillas
as the French had discovered so painfully and the Pentagon
apparently had not noticed. They were also trained to depend
on that kind of big bang support in battle, reducing both
their capability and their psychological willingness to get
out and fight the guerrillas the only way that works: with
rifles, close in. 1247

{o That the training of the Vietnamese armed forces was conducted
along U.S. lines has been documented above. Between 1950 and 1959:

(1) 3,296 Vietnamese military personnel had received training
in military facilities in the United States, while 7:7 had
been trained in other Free World military schools. 126;

(2) Training films, manuals and lesson plans were those

used by the U-S. military adapted to Vietnamese culture and
environment. 227,’

(3) The U.S. was particularly proud of its accomplishments in
the training of armed forces in Korea, where a large conyen-
‘tionally organized force had proven itself in the combat
recently experienced there. 12¢/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

30
