Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Viet-Nam is just one example. One-third of the world's people
face a similar challenge. All through Africa end Southern Asia people
struggle to preserve liberty and improve their standards of living, to
maintain their dignity as humans. It is imperative that they succeed.

"But some uninformed Americans believe that we should turn our
packs: on these people, our friends. Our costs and taxes are very real,
while the difficulties of other peoples often seem remote from us.

"But the costs of continuous neglect of these problems would be far
more than we must now bear--indeed more than we could afford. The added
costs would be paid not only in vastly increased outlays of money, but
in larger drafts of our youth into the Military Establishment, and in
terms of increased danger to our own security and prosperity.

"No matter what ereas of Federal spending must be curtailed-=-and
some should--our safety comes first. Since that safety is necessarily
based upon a sound and thriving economy, its protection must equally
engage our earnest attention.

"as a different kind of example of free nation interdependence, there
is Japan, where very different problems exist--but problems equally vital
to the security of the free world. Japan is an essential counterweight
+o Communist strength in Asia. Her industrial power is the heart of any
collective effort to defend the Far East against aggression.

"Her more than 90 million people occupy a country where the arable
land is no more than that of California. More than perhaps any other indus-
trial nation, Japan must export to live. last year she had a trade deficit.
At one time she had a thriving trade with Asia, particularly with her near-
est neighbors. Much of it is gone. Her problems grow more grave.

"For Japan there must be more free world outlets for her products.
She does not want to be compelled to become dependent as a last resort
upon the Communist empire. Should she ever be forced to thet extremity,
the blow to free world security would be incalculable; at the least it
would mean for all other free nations greater sacrifice, greater danger,
and lessened economic strength.

"What happens depends largely on what the free world nations can,
and will, do. :

"Upon us--unon you here--in this audience--rests a heavy responsi-
bility. We must weigh the facts, fit them into plece, and decide on our
course of action. i

"For a country as large, @s industrious, and as progressive as
Japan to exist with the help of grant aid by others, presents no satis-
‘factory solution. Furthermore, for us, the cost would be, over the long

B-50
