Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"trilemma" was addressed and it was decided to embark, albeit cautiously,
on & program of ground troop deployments in excess of the requirements of
base security. To insure control of troops untested in the environment
of Asian insurgency, to provide security for the orderly construction of
an expandable logistics base, and to provide for rapid and easy exit if
the situation suddenly deteriorated, the forces were to be placed in
coastal enclaves with their backs to the sea.

The proponents of the enclave strategy expected it to frustrate
the pRV/VC by denying them victory. This denial of victory strategy
spelled out at the Honolulu Conference, the high water mark of the
enclave strategy, predicted that enemy impotence would lead eventually
to a political solution. The enemy would be denied victory simply
because a modicum of U.S. and 3rd Country force would enable the RVNAF
to be expanded at a controlled rate without undue risk of collapse, loss
of a key area, or a major defeat. The brunt of the war against the
enemy's regular units would still be borne by the RVNAF. The Allied
forces, operating from their secure bases, would be prepared to come to
the aid of the Vietnamese if necessary. The relatively low intensity of
operations to which the Allied forces would be exposed would permit low
risk experimentation with them. The information gained from such experi-
ments would be useful if the strategy failed and more forces had to be
brought in. If the experiments verified that foreign soldiers could not
fight effectively in the Vietnamese environment, a stronger case could
be made for resisting any future attempts to get foreign troops enmeshed
in the war.

Ambassador Taylor wanted to give the Vietnamese maximum oppor-
tunity to save themselves. He was quite sanguine about their prospects
in the spring of 1965 and therefore was predisposed to hold the foreign
troops down to the bare minimmm. He thought things would remain stable
enough to permit leisurely experimentation with four U.S. Marine battal-
ions for two months before thought should be given to bringing in any
more. As Taylor saw the situation at that time, the enclave strategy
would buy enough time for the preparation of an entire logistics base.
Any additional foreign reinforcements needed could be brought in later.
As far as the few U.S. troops already in the country were concerned,
Taylor expected their most serious problem would be boredom.

General Westmoreland expected, and CINCPAC supported him in
this, that the war would be lost if the Allied forces were put into
enclaves. The difference between Westmoreland and Taylor was the
former's insistence on using U.S. and 3rd Country forces to take the
war to the enemy. Taylor was quite content to let RVNAF do that with
the occasional assist from the Allied forces if they got into difficulty.
Westmoreland did not think they could do it, and he was convinced that
no kind of victory could be had unless some pressure were put on the
vc/DRV forces in South Vietnam.

11) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
