Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ye
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

why the best are needed on the spot.

Our U.S. team in Vietnam should have a hard core of experi-
enced Americans who know and really like Asia and the Asians,
dedicated people who are willing to risk their lives for the
ideals of freedom, and who will try to influence and guide the
Vietnamese towards U.S. policy objectives with the warm friend~-
ships and affection which our close alliance deserves. We
should break the rules of personnel assignment, if necessary,
to get such U.S, military and civilians to Vietnam. 35/

Not only should the U.S. depend on advisors who earn the trust of
their counterparts, Lansdale argued, it should depend on them to get the
job done without coercion and threats. Leverage should be the product
of persuasion and trust, not the result of eontrol over funds and
materiel:

..-Many of the Vietnamese in the countryside who were right up
against the Viet Cong terror were full of patriotic spirit.

Those who seemed to be in the hardest circumstances, fighting
barefoot with makeshift weapons, had the highest morale, They
still can lick the Viet Cong with a little help. There's &
lesson here on our giving aid. Maybe we should learn that our
funds cannot buy friends or e patriotic spirit by mere nateri-
alistic giving. Perhaps we showld help those who help themselves,
and not have a lot of strings on that help. 36

If the U.S. could adopt this free-wheeling approach to advice, said
Iansdale, it would do well to do it at the action level, to get down end
share the risks and discomforts of the ARVN rather than to restrict its
advice to paper plans and confrontations in offices:

-- U.S, military men in Vietnam should be freed to work in

the combat areas. Our MAAG has a far greater potential than

is now being utilized. U.S. military men ere hardly in @
position to be listened to when they are snug in rear areas

and give advice to Vietnamese officers who have attended the
same U.S, military schools and who are now in 4 combat in which
few Americans are experienced. MAAG personnel from General
McGarr on down expressed desire to get more into real field
work; let's give them what they want as far as U.S. permission
is concerned and let them earn their way into positions of
greater influence with the Vietnamese military in the field. 31/

BACK TO NORMAL CHANNELS
In sum, General Lansdale urged an extra~bureaucratic, uninhibited

advisory system consciously built on shared U.S.-Vietnamese goals (vali-
dated by shared experiences) and based on mutual trust and admiretion.

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
