Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(1) China's Policy Calls for Assistance to "Wars of National

. Liberation"

From the moment Chinese troops arrived at the Sino-
Vietnamese border, Chinese assistance to the Viet Minh was clearly in
line with Peking's policy of assisting wars of national liberation.
This theme was alluded to frequently by Chinese delegates at Geneva.
The Chinese, however, carefully controlled the dispensation of that aid
in support of the war, and only after the Berlin Conference did they
significantly augment it to assure the fall of Dien Bien Phu. Regardless
of Marxist rationale advanced by China for its policy toward the Viet
Minh, China historically had acted to obtain vassal states on its periph-
ery. China's domestic cohesion having been restored, it turned, consis-
tent with centuries of policy towards Vietnam, to projecting its influence
into Southeast Asia via Vietnam.

(2) China Wary of U.S. Intervention

In providing less assistance than it could have, Peking
may very well have been wary of prompting American intervention and a
wider war. In this respect, U.S. warnings to China during 1953 from an
American Administration which publicly vowed a very hard line toward the
communist bloc could not be ignored by Peking. The Chinese by 1954 had
evinced, moreover, greater concern than previously over the military effec-
tiveness of nuclear weapons. Having been through a costly war in Korea,
and having decided as early as the fall of 1952 to give priority to
"socialist reconstruction" at home, Peking was in no position to risk
provoking the United States. Its willingness to work for a settlement
of the Indochina war may have stemmed, in this light, from the conviction
that: (a) the DRV had made sufficient military gains for China, i.e.,
territorial control in northern Vietnam; and (b) that the DRV should not
be allowed to provoke the West (and the U.S. in particular) into a pre-
cipitous military response that would change the nature of the war and
perhaps of China's commitment as well.

(3) China Wishes to Prevent Laos and Cambodia from Becoming
U.S. Allies

Besides assuring that a communist state would occupy the
northern portion of Vietnam, China also sought to neutralize the two other
Indochinese states. Chou indicated at the Conference that he had no ob-
jection to the introduction of arms and military personnel into Cambodia
or Laos after the cease-fire; 2/ nor did he object to their monarchical
form of government, 3/ to their independent handling of internal politi-
eal problems, 4/ or to their joining the French Union. 5/ Surprisingly,
Chou asked no concessions from the French on these counts, although the
French had half-expected Chou to press for better trade relations, support
for a CPR seat in the United Nations, or French diplomatic recognition
of Communist China. 6/ Instead, Chou made clear that China was concerned
preeminently about the establishment of U.S. bases in Cambodia and Laos
for potential use against the mainland. Concessions to the French may

c-20 "MOP SECRET - Sensitive
