Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Grouping of States

Bollaert did not abolish the "Federation". He diluted and watered
it down and his staff maintain that it is dead. However, at least three
“common services" (a euphonistic name for federal services)will exist:
finance, immigration, and customs... It is probably an economic fact that
if there were no federation in Indo Chine it would probably be necessary
to invent one. Bollaert indicated in his speech that there might be
more "common services" than those he specifically mentioned. Didier
MICHEL maintained vehemently there would not be; that the concept of the
Federation, as proposed by D'Argenlieu, had been completely abandoned.
However, the history of ‘French administration in Indo China is not one
to inspire confidence in such limitations as the French voluntarily place
on the activity of their services.

No where is there any mention of the "Surete", that ubiquitous
French combination of an FBI (for Europeans) and a Gestapo (for Vietnamese).
MICHEL maintained the Surete of the state or states which emerge would
be in the hands of bhe local government. He said that in Laos and Cambodia
there was not a single French member of the Surete which was entirely in
the hands of the indigenous peoples. He considered that during the early
stages of development in Vietnam, there would be two Suretes which would
then be merged as gradually French personnel would be eliminated. "You
will understand, I believe, that the situation in Tonkin is not such that
we can eliminate, at the present time, the French Surete completely with-
out danger to French lives", he said.

There is no good explanation of why Bollaert did not mention the
eventual disappearance of the Surete in his speech. Nor is there any
good reason why it was left to Premier RAMADIER rather than Bollaert to
state in a Paris Press Conference that the government "undertook to elimi-
nate the network of the administrative corps which control or direct the

administrative service".
Special Status

Special status will be prepared by the High Commissioner for the
minorities of the North and South whose rights have, since the war,
assured an overwhelming "sacredness" to the French. It might be mentioned
that the Dutch in Indonesia and, for a time, the British in Burma developed
Similar sentiments at about the same time.

The Mols of the south - the Nung, Tho, Meo, Nan, Lolo, Muong, Black
and White Thai, among others in the north - will become more or less
special wards of the French. Didier MICHEL did not cere to elaborate
what ind of a status the French proposed for these people. This is the
aogroat development of French policy vis-a-vis minorities set as early as
April 9, 1946, as revealed by documents which the Vietnam government

aT abe my Reh a as

