Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IX. REASSESSMENT AS OF APRIL 1 AND THE NSAM 328 DECISIONS
A. The Situation in South Vietnam

A curious phenomenon concerning the period of late March and
early April 1965 was the great divergence among views that were being
expressed about the then prevailing state of affairs in South Vietnam.
Some quite favorable assessments emanated from Saigon. For example,
MACV's Monthly Evaluations for March and April were most reassuring:

March, 1965: Events in March were encouraging...RVNAF
ground operations were highlighted by renewed operational
effort...VC activity was considerably below the norm of the
preceding six months and indications were that the enemy was
engaged in the re-supply and re-positioning of units possibly
in preparation for a new offensive... In summary, March has
given rise to some cautious optimism. The current government
appears to be taking control of the situation and, if the
present state of popular morale can be sustained and strength-
ened, the GVN, with continued U.S. support, should be able to
counter future VC offensives successfully.

April, 1965: Friendly forces retained the initietive
during Avril and a review of events reinforces the feeling
of optimism generated last month...In summary, current trends
are highly encouraging and the GVN may heve actually turned the
tide at long last. However, there are some disquieting factors
which indicate a need to avoid overconfidence. A test of these
trends should be forthcoming in the next few months if the VC
launch their exvected counter-offensive and the period may well
be one of the most important of the war.

Similarly encouraging comments were contszined in Ambassador Taylor’ s
NODIS weeklies to the President -- e.g., in Saigon 2908, March 11, 1965:

The most encoureging phenomenon of the past week has been
the rise in Vietnamese morale occasioned by the air strikes
against North Vietnam on March 2, the announcement of our in-
tention to utilize U.S. jet aircraft within South Vietnam, and
the landing of the Marines at Danang which is still going on.
The press and the public have reacted most favorably to all
three of these events.

And in Saigon 2991, March 17, 1965:
With the growing pressure on North Vietnam, the psycho-
logicel atmosphere continues to be favorable. What-is stil

missing in this new atmosohere is the image of 2 Vietnamese
Government giving direction end purpose to its people.

*

81 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
