Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

disadvantageous place. The Soviets might, but probably
would not, force a confrontation in Southeast Asia --

where even with minesweepers they would be at as great

a military disadvantage as we were when they blocked the
corridor to Berlin in 1961, but where their vital interest,
unlike ours in Berlin (and in Cuba), is not so clearly

at stake. Moscow in this case should be expected to send
volunteers, including pilots, to North Vietnam; to provide
some new and better weapons and equipment; to consider

some action in Korea, Turkey, Iran, the Middle East or,
most likely, Berlin, where the Soviets can control the
degree of crisis better; and to show across-the-board
hostility toward the US (interrupting any on-going conver-
sations on ABMs, non-proliferation, etc). China could be
expected to seize upon the harbor-mining as the opportunity
to reduce Soviet political influence in Hanoi and to dis-
eredit the USSR if the Soviets took no military action to
“Open the ports. Peking might read the harbor-mining as
indicating that the US was going to apply military pres-
sure until North Vietnam capitulated, and that this meant
an eventual invasion. If so, China might decide to inter-
vene in the war with combat troops and air power, to which
we would eventually have to respond by bombing Chinese air-
fields and perhaps other targets as well. Hanoi would
tighten belts, refuse to talk, and persevere -- as it could
without too much difficulty. North Vietnam would of course
be fully dependent for supplies on China's will, and Soviet
influence in Hanoi would therefore be reduced. (Ambassador
Sullivan feels very strongly that it would be a serious
mistake, by our actions against the port, to tip Hanoi
away from Moscow and toward Peking.)

To US ground actions in North Vietnam, we would expect
China to respond by entering the war with both ground and

air forces. The Soviet Union could be expected in these
circumstances to take all actions listed above under the
lesser provocations and to generate a serious confrontation
with the United States at one or more places of her own
choosing.

Ground actions in Laos are similarly unwise. lLeDuan,
Hanoi's third- or fourth-ranking leader, has stated the
truth when he said “the occupation of the Western Highlands
is a tough job but the attack on central and lower Laos is
@ still tougher one. Ifa small force is used, the problem
remains insoluble. The US may face a series of difficulties

158 TOP SECRET’ - Sensitive
