Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

area beyond reach Soviet army. However, US attitude cld take
acct such possibility only if every other possible avenue
closed to preservation area from Kremlin control. Moreover,
while Vietnam out of reach Soviet army it will doubtless be
by no means out of reach Chi Commie hatchet men and armed
forces. 28/

8. .Ho, Asian Neutral?

Ho may indeed have never been other than a crafty Leninist,
seeking a passing accommodation with the French or the U.S. while he
gathered strength. His word and deed after 1949 support such a con-
struction: In January 1950, the DRV declared itself to be the “only
lawful government of the entire Vietnamese people,” 29/ joined the
Sino-Soviet Bloc, and began attacks on the U.S. "imperialists" and
"interventionists." 30/ Early in 1951, the DRV legalized the Lao
Dong Party, expressly communist. 31/

There remains, however, irresolvable doubt concerning Ho's
earlier predilection for neutralism, or even a western affiliation.
It can be said that, whatever Ho might have preferred, he was offered
only narrow options. No reputable Westerner is known to have inter-
viewed Ho face to face from an abortive French attempt in 1917 to ne-
gotiate a Cochinchina settlement through late 1954. 32/ Ho had no direct
means of communication with the U.S. after 1946, and the signals he re-
ceived from the U.S. could hardly have been encouraging. 33/ By 19475
U.S. military equipment had already been used by French and British forces
against the Vietnamese, and the U.S. had arranged credit for French
purchase of $160 million worth of vehicles and miscellaneous. industrial
equipment for use in Indochina. 34/ Secretary of State George C.
Marshall's January, 1947, public statement on Vietnam had been confined
to a hope that "a pacific basis for adjustment of the difficulties
could be found," 35/ and the Marshall Plan for Europe definitely threw
U.S. resources behind France. But assurances from the Russians were not
materially stronger. While the Soviets excoriated colonial powers other
than France, potential imminence of a French Communist government
muffled even their verbal backing of Ho, let alone recognition and

aid. 36/

|

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-h6
