Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

Sa Pa ye =
epee gs Mra ee
BEY % tad r 2 i
ARES SN ire oe ae

12. In @ letter to the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, dated 20
December 1952, the Chlef, MAAG, Indochina stated that the
shortaze of French Air Force personnel has had considerable
adverse effect on operations. He mentioned that, as a con-
servative estimate, the sortie rate could be doubled if the
personnel strength were increased: by one-third. The U.S.
Ambassador to Indochina and the U.S. Consul, Hanoi, have both
reported that French officials in Indochina will press for an
increase in the alr force personnel ceiling for Indochina.

Tt is believed the French should be encouraged through diplo-
matic channels to increase the Indochina air force celling.

13. Active combat participation by the United States in the
Indochina operation is not favored in view of the capability
of France and the Associated States to provide adequate forces
therefor, and present United States: world-wide military commit-
ments.

14. However, in order to provide impetus and support to the
military operations in Indochina, it is recommended that:

a. The French Government be encouraged to take early
action to augment the Vietnamese forces and increase their
air force personnel strength in Indochina.

b. Steps be taken to improve the port and air facilities
in the Tonkin Delta area as early as practicable.

¢. The United States furnish material and financial
support to assist in accomplishment of a and’b above upon

receipt of a definite program from the French., “3

d. The United States give serious consideration’ to
utiliza ae this increased support to impress upon the French
the necessity and desirability for granting the Associated
States more responsibility with respect to expansion of
their economic and political potentials, and to granting -;
more autonomy to Vietnamese military forces).'*

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

ae aie LAWTON COLLINS,
“ Chief of Staff, U.S. Army.
