Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a report that considered the Thakhek-Dong Hoi line (midway between the
17th and 18th parallels) defensible in the event Vietnam were parti-
tioned. 6/ Moreover, Chauvel had told U. Alexis Johnson, then a member
of the American delegation, that French flirtation with the idea of one
or more enclaves for each side in the northern and southern zones of
divided Vietnam had been abandoned. Chauvel indicated his government
had decided it would rather give up Haiphong than accept a Viet Minh
enclave in the south if the choice came to that. t/ The conference
report and the Paris change of heart on the enclave concept had the
effect of convincing some that if partition were adopted, it could pro-
vide for a solid, militarily defensible South Vietnam,

d. Communist Concessions Show More Promise

In another area, the communists had conceded -- with Chou
En-lai's proposal at a restricted Conference session of 16 June -- that
Laos and Cambodia were problems distinct from that in Vietnam. And in a
conversation with Smith, Molotoy added his conviction that Pham Van Dong
already had evidenced his willingness to withdraw Viet Minh "volunteers"
from Laos and Cambodia. 8/ But, here as with partition, communist
initiatives only satisfied in small part the American conception of
acceptable terms, Until regular Viet Minh forces were entirely removed
from Laos and Cambodia, until their puppet Free Khmer and Pathet Lao
elements were disarmed or withdrawn, and until the right of the royal
governments to seek outside support for self-defense was confirmed,
the U.S. saw little progress in Chou's statement.

e. U.S. Remains Pessimistic

The gloom in American circles thickened considerably in
late June. Continued irresolution at the conference table, together
with the strong feeling in Washington that the French delegation, now
responsible to Premier Mendés-France (as of 18 June), would conclude a
settlement as soon as the Conference reconyened, led Dulles to caution
Smith against becoming involved in committee work (as the French pro-
posed) that would appear to link the U.S. to any final decisions. "Our
thinking at present," Dulles cabled Smith on 24 June, "is that our role
at Geneva should soon be restricted to that of observer... ." 9/

3. U.S. Attempts to Unify Western Diplomatic Position

a. French Request Statements of U.S. and U.K. Support

While the U.S. wanted to cut back on its involvement in the
Conference proceedings, the French hoped to obtain, as previously, suffi-
cient U.S. support to bolster their negotiating position in the face of
communist pressure. Thus, on 26 June, Henri Bonnet delivered an aide-
memoire from his government to Dulles and Eden, noting the difficulties
