Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

h. Drafting a Memorandum

There is, of course, no way of knowing how much consideration
and weight were given to each of these papers by the small group of action
officers in the Pentagon who were, in the last analysis, charged with
digesting all of these factors, considerations, and views and actually
drafting the reassessment of U.S, strategy required by the President of
his new Secretary of Defense. The predilections of these drafters, per-
haps were hinted at by the subject matter of the backup papers prepared at
their specific request and summarized above.

By 29 February, this group had produced an initial draft of a memoran-
dum for the President which examined the situation in SVN "in light of U.S.
political objectives and General Westmoreland's request for additional
troops, as stated in General Wheeler's report." hh/

This draft was slightly revised by senior officers in ISA and apparently
was Giscussed within the Defense Establishment on 1 March. 45/

This paper began with an assessment of the current situation in South
Viet Nam and a discussion of the prospects over the next 10 months. Quoting
Generel Wheeler's report, the draft memorandum indicated that the most impor-
tant VC goal in the winter-spring offensive was the takeover of the country-
side. In many parts of the country, it was stated, they may have already
succeeded in achieving this goal.

The 'main event’ thus is still to come, not in a one-night
offensive but in a week-by-week expulsion of GVN presence and
influence from the rural areas, showing up on the pacification
maps as a ‘red tide’ flowing up to the edges of the province
and district towns, and over some of them. 46/

Although ARVN held up well under initial assaults, the ISA memorandum
concluded that they would not soon move out of their defensive posture
around the cities and towns. They would, in the future, challenge the VC
offensively much less than before.

In the new, more dangerous environment to come about in
the countryside, and as currently led, motivated, and influ-
enced at the top, ARVN is even less likely than before to
buckle down to the crucial offensive job of chasing district
companies and (with U.S. help) provincial battalions. In that
environment, informers will clam up, or be killed; the VC will
get more information and cooperation, the GVN less; officials
and police will be much less willing to act on information or

, VC suspects and activities. 47/

The memorandum was even more pessimistic concerning the future direction
and abilities of the South Vietnamese Government, and read more into the TET
offensive than had been noted there by other observers.

33 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
