Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

including a serious weakness and over-extension which had developed
in the basically sound hamlet program. The supply of arms and
cadres fron the north has continued; careful and sophisticated
control of Viet Cong operations has been apparent; and evidence
that such control is centered in Hanoi is clear and unmistakable.

To meet the situation, General Khanh and his government are
acting vigorously and effectively. They have produced a sound
central plan for the prosecution of the war, recognizing to a far
greater degree than before the crucial role of economic and social,
as well as military, action to ensure that areas cleared of the
Viet Cong survive and prosper in freedon.

To carry out this plan, General Khanh requires the full enlistment
of the people of South Vietnam, partly to augment the strength of his
anti-guerrilla forces, but particularly to provide the administrators,
health workers, teachers and others who must follow up in cleared
areas. To meet this need, and to provide a more equitable and
common basis of service, General Khanh has informed us that he
proposes in the near future to put into effect a National Mobilization
Plan that will provide conditions and terms of service in appropriate
Jobs for all able~bodied South Vietnamese between certain ages.

In addition, steps are required to bring up to required levels
the pay and status of the paramilitary forces and to create a highly
trained guerrilla force that can beat the Viet Cong on its own ground.
Finally, limited but significant additional equipment is proposed
for the air forces, the river navy, and the mobile forces.

In short, where the South Vietnamese Government now has the
power to clear any part of its territory, General Khanh's new
program is designed to clear and to hold, step by step and province
by province.

This program will involve substantial increases in cost to the
South Vietnamese econony, which in turn depends heavily on United
States economic aid. Additional, though less substantial, military
assistance funds are also needed, and increased United States
training activity both on the civil and military side. The policy
should continue of withdrawing United States personnel where their
roles can be assumed by South Vietnamese and of sending additional
men if they are needed. It will remain the policy of the United
States to furnish assistance and support to South Vietnam for as
long as it is required to bring Communist aggression and terrorism
under control.

Secretary McNamara and General Taylor reported their overall
conclusion that with continued vigorous leadership from General
Khanh and his government, and the carrying out of these steps, the
situation can be significantly improved in the caning months.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
36
