Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Lodge stressed the more political and intangible aspects of the conflict
and cast doubt on the "hardness" of the statistical data from MACY.

With the Mission's division of opinion exposed and the issues joined,

' McNamara left to tour the country.

His subsequent itinerary took him throughout the country inter-
viewing Americans and Vietnamese both at headquarters, and in the field.
In Saigon, in the last few days of the visit, he was given extensive
briefings by the civilian side of the Mission and, since he stayed with
lodge, had ample opportunity for discussions with the Ambassador.

On September 29, McNamara, Taylor, Harkins, and Lodge called on Diem,
after having previously decided against delivery of a stiff letter from
Kennedy. 11 / After a two-hour monologue by Diem, Mciiamara was finally
able to stress the U.8. concern that political unrest’ was undermining
the war effort. 115/ He stressed the problem that repressions were
creating for President Kennedy because of aroused public opinion. But
he did not ask for the removal of the Nhus, a matter Washington had left
to his and Lodge's discretion. All this seems to have had little impact °
on Diem, however. Diem had asked Taylor for his eppraisal of the war,
and with the approval of McNamara, a long letter from Taylor was delivered
to Diem on October 2. The letter pointedly outlined the major military
problems in the Delta, warned of the danger to the war effort of the
political crisis, and listed many of the specific steps needed to improve
the military effort thet subsequently appeared in the report to the
President. The letter summed up with a terse, tough statement of the
U.S. view:

In closing, Mr. President, may I give you my most important
over-all impression? Up to now, the battle against the Viet
Cong has seemed endless; no one has been willing to set a date
for its successful conclusion. After talking to scores of
officers, Vietnamese and American, I am convinced that the
Viet Cong insurgency in the north and center can be reduced to
little more than sporadic incidents by the end of 1964. The
Delta will take longer but should be completed by the end of
1965. But for these predictions to be valid, certain conditions
must be met. Your Government should be prepared to energize
all agencies, military and civil, to a higher output of activity
than up to now. Ineffective commanders and province officials
must be replaced as soon as identified. Finally, there should
be a restoration of domestic tranquility on the home front if
political tensions are to be allayed and external criticism is
to abate. Conditions are needed for the creation of an atmos-
phere conducive to an effective campaign directed at the objec-
tive, vital to both of us, of defeating the Viet Cong and of
restoring peace to your community. 116/

52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
