Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fl’ é () TOP SECRET

i ‘ hcl

9. In view of the history of military aid in China, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff urge that these aid programs be subject, in
ony event, to the following conditions;

a. That United States military aid not be granted un-
. conditionally; rather, that it be carefully controlled and
that the aid program be integrated with political and
economic programs; and

b. That requests for military equipment be screened
‘first by an officer designated by the Department of Defense
and on duty in the recipient state, These requests should be
subject to his determination as to the feasibility and
satisfactory coordination of specific military operations,

It should be understood that military aid will only be con-
sidered in connection with such coordinated operational plans
as are approved by the representative of the Department of
Defense on duty in the recipient country. Further, in con-
formity with current procedures, the final approval of all
programs for military materiel will be subject to the
concurrence of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,

10, The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that a Southeast Asia
Aid Committee be appointed with State, Defense and ECA representation
which will be responsible for the development and implementation
of the program for the general area of Southeast Asia, Requests
for aid should be screened by the field representatives of the
committee in consultation with the local authorities in the
countries concerned,

11, Present arrangements for military aid to Indonesia through
the military attaches and to the Philippines through the Joint ,
United States Military Aid Group appear to be satisfactory and
should be continued,

12. A small military aid group should be established in
Thailand to operate in conformity with the requirements in paragraph
Q above. Arrangements for military aid anne be made directly
with the Thal Government,

13. In view of the very unsettled conditions in Burma, the
program for military aid to that country should, for the time
being at least, be modest, The arrangements Should be made after
consultation with the British, and could well be handled by the
United States Armed Forces attaches to that country. Arrange-
ments for military aid to Malaya, if and when authorized, should ©
be handled similarly except that request should, in the first
instance, originate with British authorities,

14, The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize the political implica-
tions involved in military aid to Indochina. It must be appreciated,

311 TOP SECRET
