Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

138. a4
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-- By bringing about a series of de facto administrative
changes via persuasion at high levels; collaboration with Diem's
aides who want improved administration; and by a U.S. operating
presence at many working levels, using the U.S. presence (e.g.,
control over the helicopter squadrons ) for forcing the Vietnamese
to get their house in order in one area after another.

We have opted for the third choice, on the basis of both
merit and feasibility.

Our reasons for these: First, it would be dangerous for us
to engineer a coup under present tense circumstances, since it is
by no means certain that we could control its consequences and
potentialities for Communist exploitation. Second, we are con-
vinced that a part of the complaint about Diem's administrative
methods conceals a lack of first-rate executives who can get
things done. In the endless debate between Diem and his sub-
ordinates (Diem complaining of limited executive material; his
subordinates, of Diem's bottleneck methods) both have hold of a
piece of the truth.

The proposed strategy of limited partnership is designed both
to force clear delegation of authority in key areas and to beef up
Vietnamese administration until they can surface and develop the
men to take over.

' This is a difficult course to adopt. We can anticipate some
friction and reluctance until it is proved that Americans can be
helpful partners and that the techniques will not undermine Diem's
political position. Shifts in U.S. attitudes and methods of admin-
istration as well as Vietnamese are required. But we are confi-
dent that it is the right way to proceed at this stage; and, as
noted earlier, there is reason for confidence if the right men
are sent to do the right jobs. 25/

On many points the tone, and sometimes the substance, of the appendices
by the lesser members of the Mission (with the exception of one by Lansdale)
are in sharp contrast to the summary paper.

William Jorden of State begins a discussion of "the present situation”
by reporting:

One after another, Vietnamese officials, military men and
ordinary citizens spoke to me of the situation in their country
as "grave' and ‘deteriorating.’ They are distressed at the
evidence of growing Viet Cong successes. They have lost confi-
dence in President Diem and in his leadership. Men who only one

103
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
