Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In order to assess the similarities and differences between the
U.S. plans and that advanced by the British Advisory Mission, it is neces-
sary to summarize Thompson's argument and proposals. Like Taylor (with
whom he talked and to whom he gave a copy of his initial "appreciation"
at the latter's request), Thompson saw the VC objective to be one of politi-
cal denouement by combined military and political action rather than a mili-
tary takeover of the entire nation. Like McGarr and the other U.S. military
advisors, he recognized the probability and danger of VC attempts to con-
trol the unpopulated areas and to use them both as a base form which to pro-
ject an image of political strength and as secure areas from which (in
the case of War Zone D, northeast of Saigon) to threaten the capital.
But unlike the U.S. military advisors, Thompson viewed the primary threat
to be to the political stability of the populated rural areas. 36/ Con-
sequently, he regarded McGarr's proposed initial operation in Wer Zone D
to be a step in the wrong direction.

The main government target, Thompson argued, should not be simply
the destruction of VC forces. Rather, it should be to offer an attractive
and constructive alternative to communist appeals. This could only be done
by emphasizing national reconstruction and development in the populated
rural areas. To do so would require extensive and stringent security mea-
sures, to be sure, but these measures required primarily police rather
than regular military forces. The police could establish a close rapport
with the populace; the army could not. The army should have the mission
to keep the VC off balance by mobile action in order to prevent insurgent
attacks on the limited areas in which GVN would concentrate its initial
pacification efforts. 37/

This line of argument was more fully developed in Thompson's draft
plan for the pacification of the Delta area, given to President Diem on
11 November. 38/ The objective of the plan was to win loyalties rather
than to kill insurgents. For that reason Thompson selected a populous area
with relatively little VC main force activity. The thrust of his proposal
was that "clear and hold" operations should replace "search and destroy"
sweeps. ARVN might be used to protect the villages while the villages were
organizing to protect themselves and mobile ARVN forces must be available
to reinforce local defense units, but the process should be abandoned of
"sweeping" through an area -- and then leaving it. The peasants must be
given the assurance of physical security so that economic and social im-
provements, the real object of the plan, could procced without interruption.

The means by which the villagers would be protected was the "stra-
tegic hamlet," a lightly guarded village because it was -- by definition --
in a relatively low risk area. More heavily defended centers, called "de-
fended hamlets" and involving more relocation, would be employed in areas
under more VC influence, particularly along the Cambodian border.

To control this effort in the Delta, Thompson recommended that
the ARVN III Corps Headquarters be reinforced with paramilitary and civil
components, relieved of its responsibility for the area around and north
of Saigon, and function under the immediate supervision of the National
Security Council -- presided over by President Diem. The province chiefs,

LL
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
