Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

including the fallback positions in the Group's paper and cited JCS

Memoranda on the critical importance of South Vietnam to the U.S. position

in Asia. His forceful objections were effective and they were downgraded

in the final paper which, while also pointedly rejecting the “domino theory" ~
as over-Simplified, nevertheless, went on to describe the effect of the

fall of South Vietnam in much the same terms. Specifically pointing up

the danger to the other Southeast Asian countries and to Asia in general,

the paper concluded:

"There is a great deal we could still do to reassure these
countries, but the picture of a defense line clearly breached
could have serious effects and could easily, over time, tend to
unravel the whole Pacific and South Asian defense structures."

In spite of these concessions, the JCS refused to associate itself with
the final formulation of interests and objectives, holding that the domino
theory was perfectly appropriate to the South Vietnamese situation.

One of the other important tasks assigned to the Working Group was the
intelligence assessment of the effectiveness of measures against the North
in improving the situation in the South. The initial appraisal of the
intelligence community was that "the basic elements of Communist strength
in South Vietnam remain indigenous," and that “even if severely damaged"
the DRV could continue to support a reduced level of VC activity. While
bombing might reduce somewhat the level of support for the VC and give the
GVN @ respite, there was very little likelihood that it would break the will
of Hanoi. The estimate was that Hanoi was confident of greater staying
power than the U.S. in a contest of attrition. These views were challenged
by the JCS member who stressed that the military demege of air strikes would
appreciably degrade DRV and VC capabilities. Im deference to this view, the
final Working Group estimate gave greater emphasis to the military effective-
ness of strikes, although it was pessimistic about the extent of damage the
DRV leaders would be willing to incur before reconsidering their objectives.
It concluded with the assessment that there was very little likelihood of
either Chinese or Soviet intervention on behalf of the DRV if pressures
were adopted by the U.S.

As the Working Group toiled through November in its effort to develop
options, it focused on three alternative courses of action. Option A was
essentially a continuation of military and naval actions currently underway
or authorized in the September decisions, including prompt reprisals against
the North for attacks on U.S. forces and VC "spectaculars". It also
included a resistance to negotiations until the North had agreed in advance
to our conditions. Option B augmented current policies with systematic,
sustained military pressures against the North and a resistance to negoti-
ations unless we could carry them on while continuing the bombing. Option Cc -
proposed only a modest campaign against the North as compared with option B

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
