==

>

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

within NVN; destroying the "war-making" supplies and facilities of
NV, especially POL; and destroying airfields and SAM sites as
necessary to accomplish the other tasks. The JCS estimated that an
increase from the then 2000 to about 5000 attack sorties per month
would be required to carry out the program.

The elements of greater risk in the JCS proposals were
obvious. The recommendation to mine ports and to strike airfields
and SAM sites had already been rejected as having special Soviet or
Chinese escalatory implications, and even air strikes against LOCs
from China were considered dangerous. U.S. intelligence agencies
believed that if such strikes occurred the Chinese might deliberately
engage U.S. aircraft over NVN from bases in China. CIA thought the
chances were “about even" that this would occur; DIA and the Service
intelligence agencies thought the chances of this would increase but
considered it still unlikely; and State thought the chances "bette
than even." 11/

Apart from this element of greater risk, however, intelli-
gence agencies held out some hope that an intensified bombing program
like that proposed by the JCS (less mining the ports, which they were
not asked to consider) would badly hurt the NVN economy, damage NVN's
ability to support the effort in SVN, and even lead Hanoi to consider
negotiations. An SNIE of 23 July estimated that the extension of air
attacks only to military targets in the Hanoi /Haiphong area was not
likely to "significantly injure the Viet Cong ability to persevere"
or to "persuade the Hanoi government that the price of persisting was
unacceptably high." Sustained interdiction of the LOCs from China,
in addition, would make the delivery of Soviet and Chinese aid more
aifficult and costly and would have a serious impact on the NVN economy,
put it would still not have a "critical impact” on "the Communist deter-
mination to persevere" and would not seriously impair Viet Cong capabili-
ties in SVN, "at least for the short term." However:

If, in addition, POL targets in the Hanoi-Haiphong
area were destroyed by air attacks, the DRV's capability
to provide transportation for the general economy would
be severely reduced. It would also complicate their mili-
tary logistics. if additional PAVN forces were employed
in South Vietnam on a scale sufficient to counter increased
US troop strength -/which the SNIE said was "almost certain"
to happen/ this would substantially increase the amount of
supplies needed-in the South. The Viet Cong also depend
on supplies from the North to maintain their present
level of large-scale operations. The accumulated strains
of a prolonged curtailment of supplies received from North
Vietnam would obviously have an impact on the Communist
effort in the South. They would certainly inhibit and

10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
