Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

role was to be limited to airpower. On February 7, 1965, for example,
McGeorge Bundy sent to the President a memorandum which outlined the
policy of graduated reprisal airstrikes against the DRV. There is no
reference in that memorandum to the use of ground troops in SVN, despite
the fact that it was a major document outlining what was to become U.S.

strategy.

_While it appears as though all the principals in the decision-
making process, including Ambassador Taylor and CINCPAC, chose to view
the Marine deployment as an isolated phenomenon rather than as part of
a sequence, there is evidence to indicate that COMUSMACV saw it as the
first step presaging a U.S. ground force build-up in SHA. A fair pro-
portion of the newspaper writers at the time were equally prescient.

Regardless of what was said or believed at the time the Marines
were landed, it was obvious to them from the outset that they had
neither the capability nor the flexibility to adequately secure the
airbase at Da Nang, and they believed that the restrictions placed on
them were ill-considered.

a

2/ Back in August 1964, when he was less well-acquainted with the
Vietnamese war and the proclivities of the side we were supporting,
Ambassador Taylor was more readily inclined to recommend prudent
actions involving the deployment of U.S. ground forces to Vietnam. ’
He is on record in Embtel 465 of 18 August 1964, as being in favor
of “taking such visible measures as introducing U.S. HAWK units to
Da Neng and Saigon, /and/ lending a Marine Force at Da Nang for

Li

defense of the airfield and beefing up MACV's support base.... :

There is no agonizing over "white-faced" soldiers and their diffi-
culties in Embtel. 465. The cable contains the discussion of two
specific courses of action, labeled appropriately A and B, aimed at
increasing the pressure on North Vietnam through the use of American
air and naval power primarily. Course of Action A presumed that the
government of General Nguyen Khanh would respond to the input of
increased American assistance, get itself organized and make enough
military progress to "free Saigon from the VC threat which preséntly
rings it and assure that sufficient GVN ground forces will be avail-
able to provide. a reasonable measure of defense dgainst any DRV
ground reaction which may develop in the execution of our progrem
and thus avoid the possible requirement for a major U.S. ground
force commitment.” Course of Action B was based upon the inability
of Khanh government to overcome its difficulties or make any sig-
nificant: military progress in the South. Course of Action B pre-
sumed that the U.S. would go ahead with its program to increase
pressure on the DRV notwithstanding; “however, it increases the
likelihood of U.S. involvement in ground action, since Khanh will

y

ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
