Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Meanwhile, the GVil was doing nothing about its Honolulu promises in
the areas of administration, economic reform, and dollar balances.
There were several U.S.Government reactions to these failures and con-
tinuing weaknesses. There was a series of studies and proposals for
leverege, and there was rising pressure for renewed direct negotiations
with GVN.

An exemple of the studies was the U.S, Army's "Program for the -
Pacification and Long-Term Development of South Vietnam," (PROVN).

The PROV study was completed in March 1966 by a Department of the
Army staff team and briefed on May 17 at CINCPAC Headquarters during a
visit by COMUSMACV to Hawaii. His comments at that time were that most
of the recommendations already had been acted on. He emphasized that
particular care should be exercised to avoid conditions which would cause
RVN officials to be branded as U.S. puppets. 37/.

The study results were presented in the MACV conference room on
May 21. In response to a JCS request, COMUSMACV commented in detail on
May 27. He noted that POVii recommended two major initiatives: (1) crea-
tion of an organization to integrate the total U.S. civil-military effort,
and (2) exercise of greatly increased U.S, involvement in GVN activities.

COMUSMACY agreed with the first recommendation but felt it was

- already being accomplished. COMUSMACV agreed that immediate and substan-
tially increased U.S. involvement in GVii activities, in the form of con-
structive influence and manipulations was essential to achievement of
U.S. objectives in Vietnam. He felt there was great danger that the
involvement envisioned would become excessive and boomerang on U.S,
interests; U.S, manipulations could become an American = justi-
fied by U.S compulsion to get the job done.

COMUSMACV saw the advantages in removing ARVN divisions from positions
of command over provinces, and attaching some of their units to provinces,
but this action would require a major shift of Vietnamese attitudes.

_ Assignment of ARVN units to provinces in the past had had limited success
because Of restrictions on employment and command jealousies.

Accordingly MACV recommended that PROVN, reduced primarily to a con-
ceptual dociment, carrying forward the main thrusts and goals of the
study, be presented to the National Security Council for use in developing
concepts, policies, and actions to improve effectiveness of the American
effort in Vietnam. 38/

Subsequently, JCS inquired about Revolutionary Development effective-
ness. They asked why RD objectives could not be more effectively achieved
with the program under military execution. COMUSMACV's reply repeated
the views of the Ambassador's December memorandum to Lansdale and said
the program was primarily civilian. .

a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
