Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

popular support, the continued loyalty of the VNA, and a
deterioration in the strength and cohesiveness of his non-
Communist opposition. The national government will probably
increase the number of rural communities under its control,
particularly in areas now held by the sects...."

It is likely that Diem's stormy first 10 months in office,
June, 1954 to May, 1955, strongly conditioned his behavior in later
years. He must have been impressed almost at once with the political
importance of the army, and the essentiality of personally loyal ranking
officers. He chose openly to oppose the armed sects against the advice
of both his American and French advisers, and his success no doubt
instilled confidence in his own judgments. The same events probably
gave him reason thereafter to value head-on confrontation with a foe
over conciliation or compranise. And in his adamant stand against con-
sultations with the DRV on plebescite, again contrary to initial American
advice, he no doubt learned that on major issues the U.S. stake in his
future was sufficiently high that he could lead, and American policy
would follow. 27/ In any event, he moved with new assurance fron mid-
1955 forward. In many respects his first 300 days were his finest hours,
when he was moving alone, rapidly, and with determination against great
odds. ;

3. Political Concepts: Family Centralism and Personalism

But Diem's early victories were essentially negative, in
eliminating or bypassing obstacles. It remained for him to provide
programs for finding homes and occupations for the refugees, for solving
the politically crucial problems of rural land distribution and taxation,
for installing capable and incorrupt public administrators, for stimu-
lating the economy, for improving the education system -- in short, for
coping with the whole broad range of problems of governing a developing
nation, each rendered especially acute by South Vietnam's war trauma,
internal dissention, and partition from North Vietnam. To cite but a
few: 600,000 refugees were dependent on his government for subsistence;
85,000 people were jobless as a result of the French troop withdrawal;
inter-provincial communications were impaired -- 700 miles of main road
were war-damaged, one third of the railway trackage lay destroyed, 6
concrete bridges on 860 miles of track lay blown. 28/ In devising
programs to meet these challenges, Diem worked from two primal concepts:
family centralism, and "personalism" as a state philosophy.

Diem was raised in a Mandarinal family, born to a tradition
of high position in the social hierarchy and governmental bureaucracy.
It was also a Catholic family, and Diem received a heritage of obdurate
devotion to Christianity under intense persecution -=- within a century
of his birth one hundred relatives had been burned to death by Buddhists
in central Annem. His rearing developed his reverence for the past, a
capacity for hard work, and a deep seated piety. Two French authorities

13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
