Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

was proposed that teams be introduced first into only one or two provinces,
General Peers was being sent to work with COMUSMACV in developing detailed
plans.

The last non-military measure was an experimental plan for distributing
food directly to regular and paramilitary personnel and their families, 148/

Hot on the heels of this message came another on 16 April explaining
in some further detail the proposition to experiment with U.S. civil af-
fairs officers in the pacification program. Major General W. R, Peers'
party was scheduled to arrive in Saigon on 19 April. According to the pro-
posal COMUSMACV was to designate a senior officer to direct the overall U.S,
Army Civil Affairs effort in the one or two test provinces, Within these,
the responsibility for all U.S. activities would be vested in the senior
U.S. Army sector advisor. 49/

This last message was, for Taylor, the straw that broke the cariel’s
back. Immediately upon receiving it the Ambassador dispatched a NODIS to
McGeorge Bundy:

eee eContrary to the firm understanding which I received in Wash-
ington, I was not asked to concur in this massive visitation.
For your information, I do not concur.

Based on the little I know of the proposed civil affairs experi-
ment, I am opposed to beginning any extensive planning exercise
which, because of its controversial and divisive concept, is
going to shake this mission and divert senior members from their
important daily tasks, If GVN gets word of these plans to im-
pose U.S, military government framework on their country (as
this new concept seems to imply), it will have a very serious
impact on our relations here.

‘We are rocking the boat at a time when we have it almost on
an even keel, I recommend that we suspend action on this
project until we have time to talk over its merits and decide
how to proceed with order, 160/

Shortly after dispatching this telegram, the Ambassador sent another
to McGeorge Bundy, this one dealing more generally with the defense mes-
sage Of 15 April which had laid out the new program of added measures .
decided upon by the President,

I am greatly troubled by DoD 152339% April 15. First,

it shows no consideration for the fact that, as a result of
decisions taken in Washington during my visit, this mission is

* 107 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
