Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

take its place in the common effort just as soon as peaceful
cooperation is possible.

And the President then offered his munificent carrot:

For our part I will ask.the Congress to join in a billion-
dollar American investment in this effort as soon as it is
underway.

And he underlined the grandioseness of the vision by characterizing
the effort as being conceived "on a scale to dwarf even our TVA.

There was a third key element to the Johns Hopkins speech which the
President added almost literally at the last minute -- an illustrious
name, a person of unquestioned stature, to lend some eredibility and
prestige to the somewhat improbable peaceful development gambit in the
midst of war. The President found that ingredient in the person of
Eugene Black, former President of the World Bank, a figure of high
prominence in international finance, and a politician enjoying Con-
gressional confidence and open lines to both Democrats and Republicans.
In a whirlwind performance, the President recruited Black just a few
short hours before his scheduled appearance at Johns Hopkins, and was
‘able to- announce that appointment in his speech.

C. Hanoi and Peking "Close the Door"

While the President's speech evoked a good press and much
favorable public reaction throughout the world, 112/ its practical
consequences were meager. It failed to silence the Peace Bloe and it
failed to bring the Communists to the negotiating table.

It is worth noting that the President's initiative of April 7
was in accord with the "pressures-policy" rationale thet hed been worked
out in November, 1964, which held that U.S. readiness to negotiate was
not to be surfaced until after a series of air strikes had been carried
out against importent targets in North Vietnam. Significantly, during
the two weeks prior to the President's address, ROLLING THUNDER VIII
_ (the "Radar Busting Week") and IX (th first week of the "anti-LOc" can-
paign) had inaugurated an almost daily schedule of bombing. ‘Thus the
U.S. was now attempting to achieve, through a deliberate combination of
intensified military pressures and diplomatic enticements, what it had
hoped would result from a mere token demonstration of capability and
resolve. The carrot had been added to the stick, but the stick was still
the more tangible and visible element of U.S. policy. And the President
made sure that this coercive element would remain very much in the fore-
ground, when he stated, in the April 7 speech:

I wish it were possible to convince others with words of
what we now find it necessary to say with guns and planes:
armed hostility is futile - our resources are equal to any

96. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
