Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

its backward economy into a socialist economy with modern industry and
agriculture...." "Communism" (or a derivative term) is not mentioned as
such, but the document is otherwise explicit that the economy is to be
state-centered; e.g.:

"Article 12. The state sector of the economy, which is
a form of ownership by the whole people, plays the leading
role in the national economy, The state ensures priority for
its development."

"Article 17. The state strictly...prohibits the use of
private property to disrupt the economic life of the society
or to undermine the economic plan of the state...."

Chapter ITI is a hyper-democratic guarantee of civil rights, and the
remainder provides for an elected National Assembly and a centralized,
statist public administration. 8/

2. Political Parties

a. lao Dong Party

Unrecognized by the 1960 Constitution except in the Pre-
amble's encomiums, the Lao Dong Party (Dang Lao Dong Vietnam, or Vietnamese
Workers' Party) is the dominant political power within the DRV. It is an
expressly Marxist-Leninist Party which traces its lineage back to the Indo-
chinese Communist Party founded by Ho Chi Minh, and although the ICP was
abolished in 1946, claims to have been prime mover in the major nationalist
"front" movements through 1951, when the DRV "legalized" the Party. For
example, Vo Nguyen Giap explained that:

"The Vietnamese people's war of liberation was victorious
because we had a wide and firm National United Front...organized
and led by the Party of the working class: _the Indochinese
Communist Party, now the Vietnam Workers' [Tao Dong/ Party.

In the light of the principles of Marxism-Leninism...the Party
found a correct solution to the problems...." 9/

Party statutes adopted in 1960 established a National
Congress, and a Central Committee elected by the Congress, as its policy-
making bodies. The Congress is ponderous (600 members, meets every 4 years),
and the Central Committee in fact governs. More precisely, power is exercised
by the Politburo, its steering group. The Central Committee serves as a
forum for the discussion of policy, the dissemination of information, and
the training of future leaders. Though major decisions appear as Central
Committee resolutions, in actuality they originate with the Politburo.
The Secretariat of the Central Committee is the principal executive agency
of the party, directing subordinate Party organizations in foreign affairs
propaganda, organization, inspection (or control), the military establish-
ment, the "reunification" movement, industry and agriculture. The Secre-
tariat also appears to control personnel assignments and promotions in the
Party's middle and upper echelons.

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
