Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

sustained combat operations, thus resulting in fewer U.S. casualties.

Tt was told that without the bombing, NVN could have doubled its forces.
in the South, requiring as many as 800,000 additional U.S, troops at a
eost of $75 billion more just to hold our own. It was told that without
the bombing NVM could have freed 500,000 people who were at work main-
taining and repairing the LOCs in the North for additional support of
the insurgency in the South. It was told that a cessation of the bombing
now would be "a disaster,” resulting in increased U.S. losses and an
indefinite extension of the war.

The subcommittee was also told that the bombing had been
much less effective than it might have been -- and could still be --
if civilian leaders heeded military advice and lifted the overly restric-
tive controls which had been imposed on the campaign. The slow tempo of
the bombing; its concentration for so long well south of the vital Hanoi/
Haiphong areas, leaving the important targets untouched; the existence of
sanctuaries; the failure to close or neutralize the port of Haiphong--
these and other limitations prevented the bombing from achieving greater
results. . The "doctrine of gradualism" and the long delays in approving
targets of real significance, moreover, gave NVN time to build up formid-
able air defenses, contributing to U.S. aircraft and pilot losses, and
enabled NVN to prepare for the anticipated destruction of its facilities
(such as POL) by building wp reserve stocks and dispersing them.

When Secretary McNamara appeared before the subcommittee
on August 25, he took issue with most of these views. He defended the
bombing campaign as one which was carefully tailored to our limited
purposes in Southeast Asia and which was therefore aimed at selected
targets of strictly military significance, primarily the routes of
infiltration. As he restated the objectives which the bombing was intended
to serve:

Our primary objective was to reduce the flow and/or to
increase the cost of the continued infiltration of men and
supplies from North to South Vietnam.

It was also anticipated that these air operations would
raise the morale of the South Vietnamese people who, at the
time the bombing started, were under severe military pressure.

Finally, we hoped to make clear to the North Vietnamese
leadership that so long as they continued their aggression
against the South they would have to pay a price in the North.

The bombing of North Vietnam has always been considered
a, supplement to and not a substitute for an effective counter-
insurgency land and air campaign in South Vietnam.

93 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
