T2t.

123.

jek,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

There is no misunderstanding between U.S. and France if
U.S. policy on a Chinese intervention would be "judged
under the circumstances of the moment." Dillon cites
three courses of action open to the U.S. in such an
event: (1) President will request Congress to act, (2)
President would request authority to use forces, or (3)
U.S. would act only as part of a collective action.

Paris h625 to Dulles, 1 June LOG, gs eae saan ale aa da Stree

NSC Action 5421 incloses summaries of studies prepared
by various departments and agencies with respect to
"possible U.S. action regarding Indochina." Summaries
included here are of studies prepared by Departments of
State, Justice, Defense and CIA, Office of Defense
Mobilization, Bureau of the Budget, Foreign Operations
Administration and Operations Coordinating Board.

Disagreement exists that the U.S. and France have "now
reached accord in principal on the political side" on
conditions for U.S. participation in Indochina. The

U.S. needs a precise statement of France's commitments

to meet the preconditions for intervention. Dulles 421

to Paris, k June ae BSA SASS HGs SOMUR DOOD Sake son DSmodcsse

Saigon suggests that in order to make a French declaera-
tion more palatable, the U.S. announce its intention to
withdraw technical and military assistance as soon as

practicable. In “neutralist Asian eyes, the U.S. is the

principal threat to Eastern Asia....and not decadent

France." A review of terms of reference which limit MAAG to

& logistical function is now essential. Saigon 2656 to
DusLee, une LOG. ws vse -sislecs «10 vids otelsiaalos wa\easevetu wis/aie a 4

The U.S. seeks to avoid formal identification with open
partition or the creation of two states. While U.S.
military authorities take a "gloomy view" of the mili-
tary situation, France has failed to decide to "inter-
nationalize” the war on the conditions laid down in
Paris. The French are not treating the U.S. proposal
seriously but "toying with it just enough to use it as
a talking point at Geneva." TEDUL 169, 7 June 195k...

General Valluy evaluates the Tonkin Delta military
situation: (1) If Tonkin is lost, a military line will
not be re-established, (2) in this connection, there
are no South Vietnamese who could oppose North Viet-
nemese, (3) Ho Chi Minh's objective is Tonkin and the
political capital Hanoi, to be gained either by

seco ee

508

510

930

33.

233

SOL, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
