Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The President was cautious and equivocal in approaching the decision:
Indicative of his reluctance to widen the U.S. commitment and of his desire
to hedge his bets was the decision to make phase II of the new policy
contingent on GV reform and improvement. Ambassador Taylor was sent back
to Saigon in December after the White House meetings with the understanding
that the U.S. Government did not believe:

"that we should incur the risks which are inherent in any
expansion of hostilities without first assuring that there is
& government in Saigon capable of handling the serious problems
involved in such an expansion and of exploiting the favorable
effects which may be anticipated...."

As with the discussions of the preceding six months, the decisions at
the end of 1964 marked another step in the U.S. involvement in Vietnam.
The following is a summary of the November - December, 1964 and January ,
1965 deliberations.

On the eve of the November election, and after the decision not to
retaliate against the North for the VC attack on the Bien Hoa airbase on
November 1, the President appointed an inter-agency working group and asked
it to conduct a thorough re-examination of our Vietnam policy and to present
him with alternatives and recommendations as to our future course of action.
That such a review should have been undertaken so soon after the policy
deliberations and decisions of September is at first glance surprising.

The President, however, was now being elected in his own right with an
overwhelming mandate and all the sense of opportunity and freedom to recon-
sider past policy and current trends that such a victory invariably brings.
In retrospect, there appears to have been, in fact, remarkably little lati-
tude for reopening the basic questions about U.S. involvement in the Vietnam
struggle. NSAM 288 did not seem open to question. In Vietnam, our now sub-
stantial efforts and our public affirmation of resolve to see the war through
to success had failed to reverse either the adverse trend of the war or the
continuing deterioration of South Vietnamese political life. The September
deliberations had produced only a decision against precipitate action and

had done nothing to redress the situation. Significantly, however, they had
revealed the existence of an Administration consensus that military pressures
against the North would be required at some proximate future date for a
variety of reasons. Now, in November, with a new electoral mandate and the
abundant evidence of the inadequacy of current measures, the President was
once again looking for new ideas and proposals--a low-cost option with
prospects for speedy, positive results.

The Working Group's first job had been to examine U.S. interests and

objectives in South Vietnam. This subject stirred some of the most heated -

debate of the entire Working Group project. At the outset, the maximum
statement of U.S, interests and objectives in South Vietnam was accompanied
by two fallback positions--the first a compromise, the second merely rational-
izations for withdrawal. The JCS representative took testy exception to

ak TOP SECRET - Sensitive
i a fa B a CE ae Na naa et
