Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Importation of POL would be a key problem, but would
be surmountable in a comparatively short time, probably a
few weeks, Since quantities involved would not be large,
even if increased somewhat over previous levels. Soviet
POL could be unloaded from tankers at Chan-chiang in South
China, moved thence by rail to the DRV border and from there
to the Hanoi area by truck. It could also move from the USSR
by rail directly across China, or down the coast from Chan-
chiang in shallow-draft shipping. 44/

Restricting the LOCs south of the Hanoi region would create logistical
problems for NVN military forces in Military Region IV south of the 20th
parallel, but would not stop the relatively small amounts of material
forwarded to SVN.

The cumulative effect of the proposed bombing program
would make life difficult for NVN, therefore, but it would not force it
to curtail the war in the South:

The combined impact of destroying in-country stock-
piles, restricting import capabilities, and attacking the
southward LOCs would greatly complicate the DRV war effort.
The cumulative drain on material resources and human energy
would be severe. The postulated bombing and interdiction
campaign would harass, disrupt, and impede the movement
of men and material into South Vietnam and impose great
overall difficulty on the DRV. However, we believe that,
with a determined effort, the DRV could still move sub-
stantially greater amounts than in 1965. h5/

The bombing program would not prevent NVN from further expanding wva/ve
forces in the South at the projected reinforcement rate of h500 men per
month and from further providing them with heavier weapons, but it might
set some limit on their size and their operations:

...an attempt by the Communists to increase their
strength...to intensify hostilities...or...to meet
expanded US/GVN offensive operations...will use up
supplies at a higher rate.../This/ might raise supply
requirements to a level beyond the practical ceiling
imposed on their logistic capabilities by the bombing
campaign....There are, however, too many uncertainties
to permit estimating at just what level the limit on
expansion would be. 46

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
