Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

recognized that aggression by means of armed attack against Vietnam would
threaten our own peace and security. So since that time the United States
has been assisting the government of Vietnam to maintain its independence.
It has had @ military training mission there and extensive economic assis-
tance.

“As you know, in the last two years the war has increased. The Vice
President visited there last spring. The war became more intense every
month; in fact, every week. The attack on the government by the Communist
forces with assistance from the north became of greater and greater concern
to the government of Vietnam and the Government of the United States. |

"We sent -- I sent General Taylor there to make a review of the situa-
tion. The President of Vietnam asked us for additional assistance. We
issued, as you remember, a white paper which detailed the support which
the Viet Minh in the north were giving to this Communist insurgent move-
ment and we have increased our assistance there. And we are supplying
logistic assistance, transportation assistance, training, and we have a
number of Americans who are taking part in that effort.

"We heve discussed this matter -- we discussed it with the leadership
of the Republicans and Democrats when we met in early January and informed
them of what we were doing in Vietnam. We -- Mr. Rusk has discussed it
with the House and Senate Foreign Affairs Committee. Mr. McNamara has
discussed it with the Armed Services Committee. The leadership on both
sides, Republicans and Democrats -- we have explained to them our concern
about what is happening there, and they have been responsive, I think, to
evidence their concern. So that there is a long history of our efforts to
prevent Vietnam from falling under control of the Communists. That is
what we are now attempting to do. And as the war has increased in scope,
our assistance has increased as a result of the request of the government.
So that I think we should -- as it is a matter of great importance, a
matter of great sensitivity -- my view has always been that the headquar-
ters of both of our parties should really attempt to leave these matters
to be discussed by responsible leaders on both sides. In my opinion, we
have hed a very strong bi-partisan consensus up to now, and I am hopeful
that it will continue in regard to the action that we are taking.

"Q. Mr. President, do you feel that you have told the American people
as much as can be told, because of the sensitivity of the subject? Is that
right? :

"He PRESIDENT: I think I have just indicated what our role is. We
have increased our assistance to the government, its logistics, and we
have not sent eoubat troops there, although the training missions that we
have there have been instructed that if they are fired upon they are, of
course, to fire back, to protect themselves, but we have not sent combat
troops, in the generally understood sense of the word. We have increased
our training mission, and we have increased our logistics support, and we
are attempting to prevent a Communist take-over of Vietnam, which is in

C-17
