Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

charged with securing implementation by the two-month old Quat
government of a 21-point military program, a 4i-point non-military
program, a 16-point Rowan USIS program and a 12-point CIA program,
Now this new cable opens up new vistas of further points as if we
can win here somehow on a point score. We are going to stall the
machine of government if we do not declare a moratorium on new
programs for at least six months. Next, it shows a far greater
Willingness to get into the ground war than I had discerned in
Washington during my recent trip...

My greatest concern arises over para 6 reftel [the civil affairs
experiment proposal / which frankly bewilders me. What do the
authors of this cable think the mission has been doing over the
months and years? We have presumably the best qualified people the
Washington agencies (State, AID, DoD, USIA and CIA) can find work-
ing in the provinces seven days a week at precisely the task de-
scribed in paragraph 6, Is it proposed to withdraw these people
and replace them by Army civil affairs types operating on the
pattern of military occupation? If this is the thought, I would
regard such a change in policy which would gain wide publicity, as
disastrous in its likely efforts upon pacification in general and
on US/GVN relations in particular,

Mac, can't we be better protected from our friends? I know
that everyone wants to help, but there is such a thing as killing
with kindness, In particular, we want to stay alive here because
we think wetre Winning -- and will continue to win unless helped
to death, 151/

Shortly after sending this cable, the Ambassador sent still a third
message, this one Suggesting certain steps that might be taken in Wash-
ington to facilitate his implementation of the many and rapidly changing
policies and programs that had been decided upon in Washington since his
visit. The problem was winning not only the acquiescence, but the support
and active cooperation of the South Vietnamese government. He suggested
the kind of instruction that Washington should provide him to present to
the GVN -- the new policy of third country participation in ground combat,
Teylor's proposed instructions are quoted in full here because they pro-
vide, for better or worse, an internally consistent rationale for the
shifting policies of that month:

The USG has completed a thorough review of the situation
in South Vietnam both in its national and international aspects
and has reached certain important conclusions. It feels that
' in recent weeks there has been a somewhat favorable change in
the overall situation as the result of the air attacks on the DRV,

18° TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Se ee vie
