Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

strength had: dropped by 1000 from peak strength, that U.S. military
strength figures in Vietnam be made public, and that the actual strength
as well as the authorized ceilings at any given time be carefully moni-
tored to insure that the desired reductions were indeed achieved. 29/

A few days later the Secretary of Defense approved the 1000-man with~
drawal plan forwarded in JCSM-629-63 as recommended. He agreed, however,
with ISA and advised the JCS against creating special units if their only
purpose was to be a holding unit as a vehicle for withdrawal of individuals.
He also requested that he be provided with a projection of U.S. military
strength in South Vietnam, by month, for the period September through
December 1963. 30/

The following week the Chairman, JCS, responded to the Secretary of
Defense's request and furnished the following projection of end-of-month
U.S. military strengths in South Vietnam:

August <-- 16,201
ge teibers- 16,483
c October -- 16,732
November =~ 16,456
December -- 15,732

It was noted that the planned 1000~man withdrawal would represent a reduc-
tion based on the October peak strength. The first increment of 276
personnel would be withdrawn during November and the remaining increments
in December. 31/ This, as it turned out, was destined to be changed
somewhat before the withdrawal was executed.

THE BUDDHIST CRISIS

While the CPSVN-MAP and withdrawal planning were going on, significant
developments altering the character of the entire situation to which the
planning effort was addressed--in fact threatening to invalidate the very
premises from which the planning sprung--were occurring within South Vietnam.
The Buddhist crisis was rocking the foundations of what precarious political
stability the Diem government enjoyed and there was growing concern about
its effect on the prosecution of the war against the VC and on improve-
ments of RVNAF.

A series of incidents beginning early in May revealed the deep divisions
between militant Buddhist factions, who purported to speak for the bulk of
the South Vietnamese population, and the Goverrment. Iack of popular support
for the Diem regime had now turned to open opposition. As passions flared

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
