Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

effective control of the expanding areas being cleaned
of enemy influence is 2-1/3 divisions with a total of 21
maneuver battalions. One division, with nine infantry
battalions -~ each with 4 rifle companies -- and an ACR
of three squadrons are required. The other division of
nine maneuver battalions, each battalion organized with
four rifle companies is required in Quang Ngai Province.
Four tactical fighter squadrons, each generating 113
sorties per month per identified maneuver battalion, are
required. Two squadrons will be stationed at Phu Cat and
two at Tuy Hoa. One C-130 or equivalent type squadron
can provide adequate airlift and is justified on the basis
of current planning factors: This SQD would be based at
Cam Ranh Bay. A minimum essential logistic base can be
provided by selective augmentation of NSA Danang, and by
provision for lift capability equivalent to eight LST's
in addition to two LST's identified previously for the
containment force in Quang Tri Province. Two non-
divisional Army combat engineer battalions and four Army
construction battalions will be required to support
divisional engineering effort to augment two navy con-
struction battalions that previously have been identified
.with the containment force in Quang Tri Province.

(B) Effectiveness of the US 9th Division's
operations in IV Corps will be degraded unacceptably without
adequate mobility on the waterways. For this reason, addi-
tion of two river assault squadrons with their associated
support is deemed essential. The Mekong Delta Mobile
Riverine Force originally was tailored and justified as
@ four RAS level. This requirement still is valid. The
primary media of transport in the Delta are air and water.
Air mobility is recognized as critical to success of opera-
tions in the area, but the size of offensive operations that
cam be mounted is limited by the inherent physical limita-
tions of airborne vehicles. Accordingly, any sizeable
offensive operation such as those visualized for the US
Oth Division must utilize the 300km of waterways in the
Delta to exploit tactical mobility. Maintenance of LOC's
and population control in the areas secured by the divi-
sion's operations, along with extension of the interdiction
effort, necessitates expansion of the game warden operation.
Fifty PBR's can provide this capability based on experience
factors accrued thus far. AW,

The piaster impact of this request to which much lip-service was

still being paid varied from 4) billion piasters for the 4-2/3 division
optimum force to 41.7 billion piasters for the minimum essential force.

66 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
