142

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

touch with the situation; the GVN was far too fragile a structure at
that point (and about to be challenged again in May by I Corps Com-
mander General Thi and his Buddhist allies) to seriously contemplate
contacts or negotiations with the VC. In Washington, the President

and his key advisors Rusk and McNamara were preoccupied with a host of
additional immediate concerns as well. The President had a newly appointed
Special Assistant, Robert Komer, who had recently returned from a trip
to Vietnam urging greater attention to the non-military, nation-building
aspects of the struggle. In addition, the President was increasingly
aware of the importance of the War, its costs, and its public relations
to the upcoming Congressional elections. McNamara and the JCS were
struggling to reach agreement on force deployment schedules and require-
ments; and Rusk was managing the public U.S, response to a major inter-
national effort to bring about U.S. negotiations with Hanoi. These con-
cerns, as we shall see, served to continue the deferral of any imple-
mentation of strikes against North Vietnamese POL reserves.

On April 19, about the time the option drafting exercise
was ending, Robert Komer addressed a lengthy memo to the President
(plus the Principals and their assistants) reporting on his trip to
Vietnam to review the non-military aspects of the war. Presidential
concern with what was to be called "pacification" had been piqued during
the Honolulu Conference in February. Upon his return to Washington,
President Johnson named Komer to become Special Assistant within the
White House to oversee the Washington coordination of the program. To
emphasize the importance attached to this domain, Komer's appointment
was announced in a National Security Action Memorandum on March 28. 127/
As a "new boy" to the Vietnam problem, Komer betook himself to Saigon
in mid-April to have a first-hand look. His eleven page report repre-
sents more a catalogue of the well-known problems than any very startling
suggestion for their resolution. 128/ Nevertheless, it did provide the
President with a detailed review of the specific difficulties in the RD
effort, an effort that the President repeatedly stressed in his public
remarks in this period. 129/

At Defense, problems of deployment phasing for Vietnam occu-
pied a good portion of McNamara's time during the spring of 1966. On
March 1, the JCS had forwarded a recommendation for meeting planned
deployments that envisaged extending tours of service for selected
specialties and calling up some reserve units. 130/ Whatever McNamara's
own views on calling the reserves, the President was clearly unprepared
to contemplate such seemingly drastic measuves at that juncture. Like
attacks on North Vietnamese POL, areserve callup would have been seen
as a complete rejection of the international efforts to get negotiations
started and as a decisive escalation of the war. Moreover, to consider
such an action at a time when South Vietnam was in the throes of a pro-
tracted political crisis would have run counter to the views of even
some of the strongest supporters of the war. So, on March 10, the Secre-
tary asked the Chiefs to redo their proposal in order to meet the stipulated
deployment, schedule, stating that it was imperative that, "...all necessary

. 109 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
