es

73.

7h.

7).

76.

(T-

78.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"U. S. is doing everything possible....to prepare public,
Congressional, and constitutional basis for united action

in Indochina." However, such action is considered
"impossible" except on a coalition basis with British
Commonwealth participation. Dulles 3482 to Paris,
SrA AD oalscis sa mlten aes 4 sosinaisssisis veenee nen s wie euiens/ ews prs

France feels that the time for formulating coalitions has
passed as the fate of Indochina will be decided in the next
ten days at Dien Bien Phu. Dillon (Paris) 3729 to Dulles,

B AOR P OGM om wa aiare'o arele/ate Wise alka w/gieu'Staw ire sm rs a lera/ave a eiata\wiare/aca

The National Security Council receives recommendations of
the Planning Board on NSC Action 1074-A. The Board recom-
mends that the U. 8. intervene if necessary but continue

to pressure the French’and to support a regional defense
grouping in Southeast Asia with maximum Asian participa-
tion. The NSC also receives an assessment of risks in
intervention and alternative policies. NSC 192d Meeting

Ci Gomes “Gy Lord! TGS, L, stnniealstnwainieisieewcigee-o.Aeaenim ce manne as

Eden feels the seriousness of the French military situa-
tion is exaggerated -- "French cannot lose the war between
now and the coming of the rainy season however badly they
may conduct it." London 4382 to Dulles, 6 April 195)..... este

Dulles emphasizes that unless a new element is interjected
into Indochina situation, such as an ad hoc coalition of
nations prepared to fight, the French will "sell-out" at
Geneva. The U. K., Australia, and New Zealand attitude is
the key to "united action” and it is believed that Red

China would not intervene. Dulles 163 to Canberra,

GS Rete ROSH cay e'aie en siw ooale sie wis'a/ais wa aitors'y s «eine dw niece ewe vee ea oceie

The Maloney mission, which reviewed the Indochina cost

study with the U. S. Country Team in Saigon, concludes

that "it is not possible...to arrive at any reasonable
estimate of cost" to the U. S. of materials for the Indo-
chine war. The "crash requirements" and the French in-
pression (from visiting U. 8S. officials) that all requests
will be granted has kept the MDAP program in a "constant
state of flux.” Maloney Memorandwn to Deputy Defense
Conpiroiader 7 ped. 25th. ee einsivsnee eon nod vee we weie-w 4 67%'6aisleteniehe

Should Comnunist China intervene in Indochina with com-

bat aircraft, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that

talks should be initiated to provide for implementation

of military actions as outlined in NSC 5405. JGS Memo-
randum for Secretary of Defense, 8 April 195hk.....c...ceecee>

Page

359

360

361

366

367

370

378

xii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
