Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

advisors at division, corps and all tactical units down to
battalion -- number about 2000 men compared with about one-
eighth this nurber from all other U.S. agencies combined.

"However, the senior officer in MACV Cealing with pacifi-
cation as his principal function is now a colonel heading the
J33 staff division. Moreover, with 400,000 U.S, troops soon
to be committed, General Westmoreland, his subordinate comman-
ders, and his principal staff officers must spend increasing
time on military operations associated with defeating the
vc/NVA main formations. Therefore, management of the tremen-
dous advisory resources with MACV inevitably suffers regardless
of General Westmoreland's personal effort to give balanced
attention to both.

"Hence there might be merit in COMUSMACV. having a senior
deputy to manage pacification within MACV and pacification
advice to the JCS, as well as throughout the Vietnamese military
chain of command. Key steff sections, such as J33, Polwar Direc-
torate, Senior Advisor for RF/PF, could be controlled by a chief
of staff for pacification responsive to the Deputy. Advisory
teams at corps and division would receive guidance and orders on
pacification from the Deputy. Province and district advisors
would receive all orders, except routine administrative instruc-
tions, through the pacification channel.

"To parallel the MACV organization and provide a single point
of liaison on the civil side, Ambassador Porter should have his
own field operations office formed by merging USAID Field Opera-
tions, JUSPAO Field Services and CAS Covert Action Branch. Con-
trol over the people assigned would be removed, as in Alternative
No. 1, from their parent agency. All civilian field personnel in
the edvisory business would alse receive their guidance and orders
from the Deputy Ambassador.

"For this dual civilian-military system to operate effectively,
the closest coordination would be required between the offices of
the MACV Deputy and the Deputy Ambassador. Since it is difficult
and dangerous to separate military and civilian aspects of paci-
fication at the province level, most policy guidance and instruc-
tions to the provinces hopefully would be issued jointly and be
received by the senior military and civilian advisors who would
then develop their plans together.

"J would still favor a single civil/military team chief in the
province, even though he would have two bosses in Saigon talking
4o him through different.and parallel chains of command. Alterna-
tively, since MACV already has a senior advisor in each province,
it would be possible similarly to assign a single civilian as the

TA. ; ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
