Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

*(a) CONUS depot assets and programmed
production deliveries not committed to higher priority
requirements.
"(b) Operational project stocks.
"(c) Contingency stocks.
"(d) Reserve components not scheduled for callup. >
"(e) Pre-positioned equipment in Europe.
"(f) Diversion of items for recently activated units.

"(g¢) Drawdown from nondeploying active units in CONUS.

"(2) Reopening of CONUS inactive installations, as
required." 43/

hk, The Stimulation of Inter-Agency Reviews: A Proliferation of
Alternatives.

The Chiefs' recommendations, if carried out, promised to spawn signif-
icant political and economic repercussions and they stimulated a plethora
of inter-agency reviews and studies of the situation in Vietnam. The majority
of these in one way or another examined the wisdom of sending more forces
there. The first of these reviews originated in the State Department, in
the office of Undersecretary Nicholas deB. Katzenbach. In a memorandum, he
listed three jobs which he felt had to be done in Vietnam.

"1. Assess the current situation in Viet-Nem and the
various political and military actions which could be taken
to bring this to a successful conclusion;

"2. Review the possibilities for negotiation, including
an assessment of the ultimate U.S. position in relationship to
the DRV and NLF; and

"3, Assess the military and political effects of intens-
ification of the war in South Viet-Nam and in North Viet-Nem." 4)/

He asked that the responsible agencies (Defense, White House, CIA,
State) prepare relevant study papers under the three tasks which he out-
lined. DOD was asked to define and analyze consequences of two likely
alternatives: the first, Course A, added a minimum of 200,000 men and
greatly intensified military actions outside the south especially against
the north. This option included two deployment phases. The first coin-
eciding to the minimum essential force which General Westmoreland and the
JCS had requested, that is 100,000 troops (2-1/3 divisions plus 4 tactical
air squadrons) to be deployed in FY 67.and a second phase of another 100,000

T7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
