Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

break the vicious military circle....

Behind this concept of a strategy to turn the tide and
to assume the offensive lies a general proposition: when an
interacting process is yielding a degenerative situation, the
wisest course of action is to create a positive thrust at as

many points as are accessible.

Thus, the U.S. addressed the critical leverage issue as the expected
product of its own willingness to increase its participation in the
counterinsurgency effort. It did so, moreover, without any conscious
examination of the question beyond stating its expectations. There was
no plan to make the provision of additional assistance contingent upon
GVN actions, only a statement that GVN actions were expected. There
was no willingness, in fact, to consider the conscious exercise of leverage;
the situation was too critical, the available time too short, the issue
too important.

The effect of this avoidance of hard choices -- for good and under-
standable reasons, but avoidance nonetheless -- was to place a very large
burden on the benefits to be realized by an expansion of the advisory
effort. The language of General Taylor's report is reminiscent of Lensdale's
earlier proposals for an unstructured, flexible advisory effort comprising
totally committed, carefully selected individuals who would earn the respect
and cooperation of the Vietnamese. Lansdale had renewed these proposals
at the time the Taylor Report was prepared. Th) But when it was suggested
to the GVN that the U.S. would expect to share in decisions the Vietnamese
reaction led the U.S. almost immediately to modify this expectation. The
original communication on the subject to Ambassador Nolting stated thet
"...we would expect to share in the decision-making process in the political,
economic and military fields as they affected the security situation" as
compared to the earlier arrangement of "acting in an advisory capacity
only." 72/ By early December insistence on this point was quickly dropped
in favor of a view which suggested that close collaboration would produce
automatic unanimity:

What we have in mind is that, in operations directly
related to the security situation, partnership will be so
close that one party will not take decisions or actions
affecting the other without full and frank prior consulte-
GIONS. o. '73/

Unless such exchanges invariably resulted in unanimity one of the partners
would have to give way to the other or inactivity would result. What
line to follow if this occurred seems not to have been examined. This
simply would not happen.

The "close partnership" envisaged by General Taylor ~~ and endorsed

by President Kennedy -- suggested something akin to the "total commitment"
which General Lansdale had earlier urged as one criterion in selecting

28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
