Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This public rationale for the bombing had increasingly
become the most acceptable internal rationale as well, as decision-
makers sought to prevent runaway escalation und to hold down the
pombing in what they thought should be a secondary role in the war.
As a venture in "strategic persuasion" the bombing had not worked.

The most obvious reason was that it was too light, gave too subdued
and uncertain a signal, and exerted too little pain. Hardly any of
the targets most valued by Hanoi -- the "lucrative" targets of the

ICS master list -- had been hit. If the main purpose of ROLLING
THUNDER was to impose strong pressure on Hanoi's will, the "lucrative"
targets in the Henoi/Haiphong area, not those in the barren southern
Panhandle, were the ones to go after, and to hit hard. Aerial bombard-
ment could then perform in its proven strategic role, and even if the
risks of such a course were greater it was precisely because the
potential payoff was greater.

If, however, the emphasis could be shifted toward inter-
diction, it would be easier to confine targets to those of direct
military relevance to the vc/NVA campaign in the South, and it would
be easier to contain the pressures to escalate the bombing rapidly
into the northern heart of NVN's population and industry. A con-
tinuing emphasis on the Panhandle LOCs could be defended more easily,
if the main purpose was to actually handicap NVN's efforts to support
and strengthen vc/NVA forces in the South, and it was less likely to
generate adverse political repercussions.

The interdiction rationale had come to the fore by mid-1965,
poth within the government and before the public. There were still
internal and external pressures to proceed faster and farther, of
course, because interdiction effects had not been impressive either.
Official spokesmen conceded that complete interdiction was impossible:
the flow of men and supplies from the North, however vital to the
enemy effort in the South, was quite small and could hardly be cut
off by bombing alone. They explained that the bombing had "disrupted"
the flow, "slowed" it down, and made it "more difficult" and "costly."
They showed dramatic aerial photos of bridges destroyed, and implied
that the enemy was being forced "off the rails onto the highways and
off the highways onto their feet." They could not, however, point to
any specific evidence that bombing the North had as yet had any impact
on the war in the South. Almost inevitably, therefore, even within
the interdiction rationale, the conclusion was that the bombing had
been too restrained. It was argued that the predictably gradual pace
had allowed NVN to easily adjust to, circumvent, or otherwise over-
‘come the effects of the -disruptions and other difficulties caused
by the bombing, and that only an expanded bombing program could produce

significant material results.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
