Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

our control and could compel us to reconsider this position." Although

our diplomatic track in Laos appeared hopeful, and our now firm escorted
reconnaissance operations provided an image of U.S. resolve to complement
the Polish negotiating scheme, we needed to be able to augment this posture
in the event negotiations stalemated. If Souvanna were to become discour-
aged. or if Khanh were to view our efforts to obtain a Laotian settlement

as a sign af willingness to alter our objectives, we would need additional
demonstrations of our firmness to keep these leaders from being demoralized.
Since additional military actions in Laos and South Vietnam did not hold
much promise, actions or the strong threat of actions against the North might
need to be considered. For these reasons, an immediate Congressional reso-
lution was believed required as "a continuing demonstration of U.S. firmness
and for complete flexibility in the hands of the Executive in the coming
political months.” 126/

A crucial interagency meeting was held at the State Department on
15 June to hold final discussions on the recommendation for a resolution
to be sent to the President. The meeting was scheduled from the White House
and included Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, their principel advisers on
the subject, and McGeorge Bundy. 127/ On the afternoon of the meeting,
a memorandum was distributed by Bundy to the participants, which provided
a rather clear picture of current White House attitudes toward the resolu-
tion -- and by implication, of the President's judgment on the issue of
preparing to take harder measures against North Vietnam.

The memorandum dealt with one subject only -- "actions that would
remain open to us in varying combinations in the event that we do not now
decide on major military operations against North Vietnam and do not now
decide to seek a Congressional resolution." It then listed under the cate-
gories of "military" and "political," those actions which were within an
acceptable range of U.S. capability, as follows:

"Possible military actions

a. Reconnaissance, reconnaissance-strike, and T-28
operations in all parts of Laos.

b. Small-scale reconnaissance strike operations,
after appropriate provocation, in North Vietnam (initially

.
ec. VNAF strike operations in Laotian corridors.

d. limited air and sea deployments toward Southeast
Asia, and still more limited ground troop movements.
(Major ground force deployments seem more questionable,
without a decision "to go north" in some form.

Political actions

a. Internationally -- a continued and increased.
effort to maximize support ‘for our diplomatic track in

39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
