Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

¥. Meanwhile, Back at the War

The re-emphasis of pacification was, of course, a far more dis-
orderly process than any written review can suggest, and unfortunately
must overlook many events and recommendations which were not central
to the re-emphssis of pacification. But it is useful and important to
review briefly what the Mission was reporting to Washington about the
overall effort during 1965, since Saigon's reports should have formed
an important part of the background for decision.

This selection should be read not as the “objective” story of what
was happening in Vietnam -- such an objective study is simply not possible
at this time, even if we had access to enemy thinking -- but as a reflec-
tion of the beliefs of the Americans in Saigon, and as a reflection of
what the Mission wanted Washington to believe.

This selection is entirely direct quotations from MACV's Monthly
Evaluation Report. Each month this report began with a summary of the
month's events, and the following items represent the running evaluation
for 1965: /Emphasis Added/

"January, 1965: Review of military events in January tend to
induce a decidedly more optimistic view than has been seen in
recent-months. Despite adverse influence exerted by national
level political disorders and localized Buddhist/student riot-
ing, the military experienced the most successful single month
of the counterinsurgency effort...Pacification made little
progress this month. Although some gains were made in the

Hop Tac area, effort in the remainder of RVN was hampered by
political activity and religious and student disorders...If

the RVNAF capability can be underwritten by political sta-
bility and durability, a significant turning point in the war
could be forthcoming.

"February, 1965: ...GVN forces continued to make progress in
Til and IV CTZ, maintained a tenuous balance over the VC in

I CTZ, and suffered general regression in II CTZ...The indi-
cators of RVNAF operational effort...all showed a decline.
However, losses on both sides remained high due to the
violence of encounters and VC tenacity...The long term effect
of events in February is impossible to foretell. It is ob-
vious that the complexion of the war has changed. The VC
appear to be making a concerted effort to isolate the northern
portion of RVN by seizing a salient to the sea in the northern
part of II CTZ. Here RVNAF has lost the initiative,. at least
temporarily. However, US/GVN strikes against DRV and increased

use of U.S. jet aircraft in RVN has had a salutary effect on

*

32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
