Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET = Genbitive

V. The Question of Pressures Against the North

With the policy line and the courses of action for dealing with Laos
determined, and with the Iaotian military situation having become somewhat
‘stabilized, the Administration turned to the broader issues of its South-
east Asian policy. ‘These were among the principal concerns of the Honolulu
Conference, 1-2 June 1964.

A. ‘The Honolulu Conference: Defining the U.S. Commitment.

The Honolulu Conference was approached with the realization that
the "gravest decisions are in front of us and other governments about /the/
free world's interest in and commitment to [the/ security of Southeast r
Asia." 9e/ The State Department saw such decisions focusing on three 'cen-
tral questions": (1) Is the security of Southeast Asia vital to the United
States and the Free World? (2) Are additional steps which carry risks of
escalation necessary? (3) Will the additional steps accomplish our goals
of stopping intrusions of Hanoi and Peking into South Vietnam? ‘The Confer-
ence apparently began with the answer to the first question as 4 basic
assumption. Again State:

"Our point of departure is and must be that we cannot
accept /the/ overrunning of Southeast Asia by Hanoi and
Peiping.” 93/

In addition to considering specific proposals for improving condi-
tions in South Vietnam (Administration officials entered the Conference
with another assumption that "we must do everything in our power to stiffen
and strengthen the situation in South Vietnam" 94/ ), the discussions in
Honolulu were intended to help clarify issues with respect to exerting pres-
sures against North Vietnam. ;

B. At Honolulu: Exerting Pressure on NVI

In preparation for the conference, CINCPAC and COMUSMACV had been
asked by JCS Chairman Taylor to develop their views on such questions as:

"(1) What military actions might be teken in ascend-
ing order of gravity to impress Hanoi with our intention
to strike NVN?

(2) What should be the purpose and pattern of the
initial air strikes against NVN?

(3) What is your concept of the actions and reactions
which may arise from the progressive implementation of
CINCPAC 37-64 and 32-642 How may NVN and Communist China
respond to our escalating pressures?

(4) If at some point Hanoi agrees to desist from
further help to VC & PL, how can we verify fulfillment?

How long should we be prepared to maintain our readiness
posture while awaiting verification?

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
28
