=

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SRHCRET - Sensitive

U.S. can make its best contribution to the paramilitary forces
effectiveness is in the area of operations, Our formule, dis-
cussed in 23 May telecon on this subject, is to increase greatly
the U.S. advisory effort at the district level. Therefore,
strongly urge that you support our position that approximately
1000 advisors, in the general proportion of one officer to three
NCO's be authorized as district detachments, with the precise
composition and deployment of said teams left to the determination
of COMUSMACY. 110/

CINCPAC informed the JCS that he agreed with COMUSMACV's arguments and
quoted the telecon referred to above to explain the course of action pre-
ferred by the military commanders in the field:

1. Ovr comment is based on ce/sDC reorganization concept
of 7 May which includes elimination CG Bn Hq in provinces and
establishment 90 man sector Hq in lieu thereof with TAC CP
capability, and sub-sector Hg 16 men at each 239 districts.
This is expected to be accomplished in two to three months.

2. Recommend use of one team composed of mature company
grade officer and other specialist as you suggest (Wpns/Demo,
Commo Med) per district.

3. Proposal para 2 represents end requirement for 239 teams,
totaling 239 officers, 717 enlisted spec aggregate 956 personnel,
by end calendar year 65.

..  MACV current plans call for 1 officer and 1 NCO at 116
districts by June 65. Requisitions have been submitted for 100
of these by end CY 64. ‘Two man detachments now assigned to 13
districts.

5. Assume GVN will agree to use US teams at district which
represent reasonable security risk. At present time approx 40
of 239 districts are not sufficiently secure to enable use of
US advisors. 111/

THE JCS ALTERNATIVE PROGRAMS

The JCS, given the very few days remaining until Secretary McNamara
was to meet in Honolulu with COMUSMACV and Ambassador Lodge, did not
attempt to reconcile the time-phasing and eventual size of the proposed
advisory effort at district level. Rather, it submitted to the Secretary,
just prior to his departure for the conference, two separate memoranda:
One laid out a prospective program for district advisors throughout RVN;
the other outlined a pilot program at the district level. The purpose
of both outline advisory efforts was the same -- "improving the effective-
ness of these paramilitary units in the Vietnamese pacification plan" --
but the rate of advisor buildup differed.

L8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
