Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘American willingness to forego further operations in Southeast Asia
led to a directive to Admiral Lord Mountbatten, Supreme Commander in
that theatre, to liberate Malaya without U.S. assistance. 12/ After
the Yalta Conference (February, 1945), U.S. commanders in the Pacific
were informed that the U.S. planned to turn over to the British respon-
sibility for operations in the Netherlands East Indies and New Guinea.
The President, however, agreed to permit such U.S. military operations
in Indochina as avoided "alignments with the French," and detraction
from the U.S. military campaign against Japan. 13/ The latter stric-
ture precluded, in the U.S. view, the U.S. cooperation with the French
at Mountbatten's headquarters, or the furnishing of ships to carry Free
French forces to Indochina to undertake its liberation. This U.S.
position came under particularly severe French criticism after 11 March
1945, when the Japanese overturned the Vichy regime in Vietnam, and
prompted the Enperor Bao Dai to declare Vietnam unified and independent
of France under Japanese protection. On 16 March 1945, a protest from
General de Gaulle led to the following exchange between the Secretary
of State and the President: 1)/

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington

-March 16, 1945
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
Subject: Indo-China.

Communications have been received from the Provisional
Government of the French Republic asking for:

(1) Assistance for the resistance groups now fighting
the Japanese in Indo-China.

(2) Conclusion of a civil affairs agreement covering
possible future operations in Indo-China.

These memoranda have been referred to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff in order to obtain their views concerning the military
aspects of the problems, and I shall communicate with you
further on the subject upon receipt of the Joint Chiefs’ reply.

Attached herewith is the text of a recent telegram from
Ambassador Caffery describing his conversation with General
de Gaulle on the subject of Indo-China. From this telegram and
de Gaulle's speech of March 14, it appears that this Government
may be made to appear responsible for the weakness of the

A-16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
