Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20! 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and economic development programs and MACV is charged with
military programs. In addition, special task force has
been established by Deputy Ambassador to draft mission-
wide statement of strategy, objectives, and priorities. In
effect, this task force is engaged in integrated planning
which under PROVN concept would be performed by supra-agency
staff. PROVN proposal for designation of a single manager
with supra-staff is a quantum jump to achieve the necessary
degree of military-civil integration. This final step can-
not be implemented by evolutions here in Saigon. It would
heave to be directed and supervised from highest level in
Washington.

"MACV is in complete agreement with PROVN position that
immediate and substantially increased United States direct
involvement in GVN activities in form of constructive in-
fluence and manipulation is essential to achievement of U.S.
objectives in Vietnam. PROVN emphasizes that "leverage
must originate in terms of reference established by govern-
ment agreement," and "leverage, in all its implications,
mimMst be understood by the Vietnamese if it is to become an
effective tool." The direct involvement and leverage en-
visioned by PROVN could range from skillful diplomatic press-
ure to U.S. unilateral execution of critical programs.

MACV considers that there is a great danger that the extent
of involvement envisioned could become too great. A govern-
ment sensitive to its image as champion of national sov-
ereignty profoundly affected by the pressure of militant
minorities, and unsure of its tenure and legitimacy will
resent too great involvement by U.S. Excessive U.S. in-
volvement may defeat objectives of U.S. policy: development
of free, independent non-communist nation. PROVYN properly
recognizes that success can only be attained through support
of Vietnamese people, with support coming from the grass
roots up. Insensitive U.S. actions can easily defeat
efforts to accomplish this. U.S. manipulations could easily
become an American takeover justified by U.S. compulsion

to "get the job done." Such tendencies must be resisted.

It must be realized that there are substantial difficulties
and dangers inherent in implementing this or any similar

program,

"Several important aspects of proven concept require
- comment, further consideration and resolution or emphasis.
Some of the more significant are:

"Regarding U.S. organization, MACV considers that any
major reorganization such as envisioned by PROVN must be
phased and deliberate to avoid confusion and slow-down in
ongoing programs...

78 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
