Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

in battle and are performing vital security functions in
many parts of the country. They look forward with confi-
dence and determination to assuming an increasing share \
of the burden of carrying on the struggle. their ef-
fectiveness full justifies the program of expansion to
which the governments concerned are committed and under-
lines, I believe, the soundness of our own decision,
subject of course to the availability of Congressional ~
appropriations, to render increasing assistance in
building these armies. M. Letourneau described these
programs in the course of his address before the Over-
seas Writers yesterday.

Favorable developments have not been confined to
the fighting fronts and to the national armies. There
are increasing evidences of the growing vitality of the
Associated States in handling their political, financial
and economic affairs. M. Letourneau’s account of the
mennor:iniwhich:: these new member States of the French
Union are envisaging and meeting their responsibilities
was heartening. I do not think it is generally realized
to what extent these new states in fact control their
own effairs, Only a limited number of services related
to the necessities of the war remain bemporersty in
French hands.

We in the United States are aware of the vital
importance of the struggle in Indochina to the cause of
the free world. We have earmarked for Indochina economic
and materiel aid to a considerable amount during the
past two years. We are doing our best to activate
deliveries: as you are aware the 150th ship bearing Ameri-
can arms and munitions to Indochina arrived in Saigon
within the last few weeks. We are now bearing a con-
siderable poption of the total burden of the war in Indo-
china expressed in financial terms, although of course
the entire combat burden is being carried by the French
Union and the Associated States with the latter assuming
@ constantly increasing share.

in Indochina. Thoir aggression has been checked and
recent indications warrant the view that the tide is
now moving in our favor. Once again the policy of
meeting eggression with force is payinz off and we can
I believe bo confident that as we carry out the plans
upon which we have agreed we can anticipate continued
favorable developments, in the maintenance and con-
solidation of the free world bulwark in Indochina.

The Communists have made a most determined: effort
|
