Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The trip books prepared for the members of the Secretary's party also
indicated that one major concern was to reinforce Lodge's demarche a :
30 April concerning facilitating the flow of piastres to the provinces for
counterinsurgency support. It was suggested that possibly the rigid and
conservative director of the budget, Iuu Van Tinh might have to be dis-
missed if Oanh couldn't make him do better. A list of problems that were
created by lack of pidstres in the provinces followed:

1. Health workers trained by AID were not employed for lack of
piastres.

2. Provincial and district officers (both health and agr mena sy
extension worker's ) were severely restricted in travel to villages for
lack of per diem and gasoline.

3- Bills for handling AID counterinsurgency cargo at the gee
Danang were not paid, resulting in refusal and threat of refusal, by
workers and groups, to handle more cargo.

4. Several categories of GVN workers had not been paid salaries
owed to them for months.

J+ Truckers were threatening to refuse to handle = cia aren
insurgency cargo because they had not been paid for past services by
the Government of Vietnam.

6. There were inadequate funds to compensate villages for eee
lodging, water and Services provided by peasants to the ARVN, the CG,
and the SDC.

{. There had been nonpayment or delayed or only partial payment of
promised relocation allowances to relocated authorities. :

In the light of these problems it was considered that two USOM piastre
cash funds might be established: (1) a petty cash fund to support the
Ministry of Education; and (2) a substantial USOM-controlled piastre fund
to break bottlenecks in such matters as transportation of goods, spare
parts, per diem payment of immobilized Vietnamese persomnel, and eee!
purchases on the local market. ATD Administrator Bell in Washington
made commitments to Secretary McNamara that all piastres necessary for
counterinsurgency would be forthcoming even if deficit financing were needed.
But because there were plenty of commodity imports at hand, that posed no
problem. USOM and MACV and the public administration advisors who were
then being recruited should review carefully whether U.S. civil administra-
tion advisors to the provincial chiefs, could facilitate the flow of funds
and commodities, and expedite paper work. Finally, the use of rural affairs
provincial staffs should be increased by one or more per province, perhaps
using Filipinos or Chinese Nationals. 87/ .

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

val
