Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Chapter IT ~- A Rebellion, A Constituent Assembly, and the
Hardships of Negotiating With a "Week" Government

1. Whe Rise of the Struggle Movement, March 1966

General Thi, Commander of I Corps, was a thorn in Ky's side as a
potential rival. Both private and public disagreements showed there was
no love lost between them; and Thi had a considerable base of support in
his connections with the Buddhist leadership. and in his identification
with Annamese sensitivities. These factors also made the other generals
of the Military Directorate (formerly National Leadership Council, etc.)
suspicious of Thi; they felt better able to cope with Ky. 1/

Armed with President Johnson's public support of him, Ky resolved to
exile Thi, and he persuaded his colleagues to go along with the idee in a
meeting on March 10. The day before he told Lodge of his intention, say-~
ing that Thi had been culpably insubordinate; Lodge replied that he should
be sure he could prove the charges, so as to put a good public face on the
move, and pave the way carefully. Later in the day Lodge also advised
him to make sure he had the votes in the Directorate, saying that for him
to lose on the issue and be replaced as Prime Minister would be catastro-
phic. Ky was sure of himself, although he admitted he could not prove
his charges. In a later meeting the same day, Thieu told Lodge Thi “had
conducted himself in a way that was not suitable,” and was confident Thi’
could be dismissed without ill effects. 2/

On March 10, when the Directorate voted to fire him, Thi resigned.
Ky told Lodge that Thi would go to Da Nang the 11th for the change-of-
command ceremony and then leave the country for four months. The same
day, Thi told Colonel Sam Wilson that he did not want to leave the country,
and that he had been encouraged by the Director of National Police to
stay; Wilson suggested that he go gracefully. On the llth, when the time
eame for Thi to fly to Da Nang, he was detained at Tan Son Nhut; Ky had
got wind of, or suspected, his intentions. Ky then urgently requested
lodge to invite Thi to the United States for a physical examination. 3/

The Annamese Buddhists, led by Tri Quang, who had quietly bided their
time for about a year, now entered the action. (Ky later told Lodge that
Tri Quang had assented to Thi's dismissal and had then double-crossed him.)
They began demonstrations in Da Nang and Hue on March 12, joined by the
students, and over the next several days gained control of those cities
as the police stood aside. Again Ky used Lodge's good offices to try to
persuade Thi to leave the country gracefully; but the 16th, Ky and the
Directorate decided to try to use Thi to restore order, and permitted
him to return to Da Nang. For a few days things quieted down slightly,
put the end was not yet in sight. 4/

State offered Lodze suggestions on how to get things calmed down.
First, he might counsel a firm attitude by GVN, seying it would meet with

FA TOP SECRET - Sensitive
