Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The reasons why this kind of impact was believed likely was Ro Ey
perceived lack of realism or effectiveness in U.S, See ae
late autumn. Bundy reflected an apparently widely share Lacan
Administration actions and statements since the oichati oa ee oe
the Vietnamese and other Asians that the U.S. Government di Se

to take stronger action and was "possibly looking for sie ees
Moreover, he saw this impression being created by ns Agee Se Ba
more perfect government than can reasonably be expecte oe ee

sider any additional action «~~ and that we mene even pu

support unless such a government emerges." 227/

To change this impression and reverse the eee

Bundy and others in State suggested eee oe Phe tamed tate.
nizing that these actions incurred certain risks. aaa Sch as ok
actions suggested fell somewhat short of Phase Ewe (a Ale sae i —
used in the correspondence). They included: (1) "an as OLENA DEAN 8 a
reprisal action..."; (2) "possibly beginning low-leve ae: whieh was
the DRV..."3 (3) "an orderly withdrawal of our ae eS sil and (1)
termed "a grave mistake in the absence of stronger ac ake aes
“introduction of limited U.S. ground forces into the nort = de Dey."
South Vietnam. ..concurrently with the first oo coe
They downgraded the potential of further oe ae oe i bebo wine
in Laos, indicating that such actions mould not eas as ie
Saigon morale" and might precipitate a Communist in saya Wess
substantial scale in Laos...." The perceived risks of 1 peeses
actions were; (1) a deepened U.S, commitment at a time w ian ei a
Vietnamese will appeared weak; (2) the likelihood of ae eee
opposition to U.S. policies in nations like India and sani: Ne fi, tis
uncertainty of any meaningful stiffening effort on Phin ee “ eee
inability of "limited actions ageinst the southern DRV" to sharply
infiltration or "to induce Hanoi to call it off. 228/

_if the graduated, "progressively mounting, " aor eel ae
Phase II were implied by these suggestions, it yb eee : ees
perceived as being entered rather gingerly and with little me oe ee
intensify them to whatever extent might be required to See gaa
in Hanoi. Rather, the expectancies in State were quite ae aig
balance we believe that such action would have some aes ae rae ¥
improving the Vietnamese situation, and, above ell, would pu ly Thailand.”
much stronger position to hold the next line of defense, name o a
Moreover, Bundy and others felt that even with the a iran aes meee! nae
negotiating process that they believed was bound to come : ou i sya
be expected to bring about a really secure and independen Sou: rie :
Still, despite whis shortcoming, they reasonel that their Coe tas
“stronger actions" would have the desirable effect in Southeas aie
",.-we would still’ have appeared to Asians to have done a lot more a
it." 229/

Mii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
