Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Inadequacy of forces in the border areas is a sig-
nificant weakness in II Corps. Reinforcement of units in
the western highlands is needed to assist in the conduct
of offensive and containment operations. With the large
enemy forces located in border sanctuaries, II Corps is
faced constantly with the possible requirement to divert
critical resources from priority tasks to counter large
scale intrusion.” 32

The most pressing military objective in III Corps area was to expand
security radially from the Saigon-Cholon area. MACV planned to accomplish
this primarily by standard clearing and security operations featuring an
intensified campaign conducted to root out the VC infrastructure. In
conjunction with this, continuous pressure presumably in the form of
search and destroy operations would be applied to the enemy in War Zones
C and D, the Iron Triangle, and the base area clusters in the Phuoc Long
area. Denial of these areas to the enemy would provide a protective
shield behind which the Revolutionary Development programs could operate.
However, deployment of the U.S. 9th Division to the 4th Corps area would
create & gap in the forces available in III Corps and seriously degrade
the capability to provide this shield. The possible repositioning of the
assets existing within III Corps to either I CTZ in the north or the 9th
Division relocation just to the south just mentioned could also seriously
limit the offensive capabilities in the northern and central portion of
Til Corps. Accordingly, COMUSMACV expressed an urgent requirement for en
additional division for III Corps. This unit would be positioned just
north of the Rung Sat operation zone and would assist in maintaining the
protective shield around Saigon-Cholon. Revolutionary Development opera-
tions would then be able to proceed unhindered and operations against the
VC 5th Division could be reinforced if required. 33

Throughout the force requirement justifications, one is immediately
struck by the implicit ordering of the priorities for assignment of forces
and missions. It is quite clear that the "minimum essential force" which
COMUSMACV requested was intended to be employed against VC/NVA main force
units in a containment role in the border areas and a destruction-disruption
mode in I CTZ as well as the base areas within the country itself. Those
forces over and above the "minimum essential," so labelled the "optimum
force," were those intended to take up the slack in the RD "shield" role.
MACV, probably rightly, calculated that not even minimal gains such as
were forthcoming in the under-manned RD program would be possible unless
the VC/NVA main force operations could be stymied and kept from directly
assaulting the "shields."

- Before the JCS could formally ratify the COMUSMACV-CINCPAC Fy 68
force requirements, two other events transpired which had significant
influence on the development of ground force requirements. On 7 April,
as the situation in 1 CTZ deteriorated COMUSMACV posted a provisional
division named Task Force OREGON to Quang Ngai Province. This develop-
ment caused a reappraisal of the 2-1/2 division minimum essentiel force

72° TOP SECRET - Sensitive
