Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

MACV Dir 10-12
28 May 1967

(2)- In confuaction with Government of Vietnam authorities,
develops joint and combined plans, policies, concepis and programs con-

weiner 178 a4ys Se eae cyte fees “Serdar es oats : moan?
cerning US civil/military support for Revolutionary Development.

(3) Supervises the execuiion of plans and programs for US
civil/railitary support of Revolutionary Development.

(4) Provides advice and assistance to the Government of
Vietnam, including the Ministwy of Revolutionary Development, the Republic
of Vietnam Armed Forces Joint Genera) Siafi and other GVN agencies on US
civil/military support for Revolutionary Development ineluding US advisory
and logistical support, we

(5) Develops requirements for military and civil assets
(US and GVN) to support Revolutionary Development.

(6) Serves 2s the contact point with sponsoring agencies AOS
RD programs. Maintains Naison with sponsoring agencies in represenuns
their interests in civil non-RD programs and activities inthe field, Main-
tains direct operational communications with field elements for these pro-
grams. :

‘3 (7) Is responsible for program coordination with the vari us
Mission civil agencies in the planning and implementation of non-RD ac UVa
ties as they impinge upon or affect RD-related activities. fa

(8) Provides MACY focal point for economic warfare to
include population and resources control, and for civic action by US forces.

: (9) Evaluates all civil/military RD activities inclucing pro-
vision of security for RD by US/FWMA/GVN military forces and reports on
progress, status and problems of RD Support.

(10) Acts on all RD Support policy matters pertaining to sub-
ordinate echelons,

(11) Directs advisory relationships with GVN on RD and RD-
related matters.

3. IMPLEMENTATION,
a. Integration and consolidation of OCO and RD Support activities

will be accomplished at all levels: Headquarters MACV, region/CTZ, proy~
ince-and district, re ap

Tt
