Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for which his division had responsibility. Thus, while civil lines
of authority went directly from corps level (the region) to province,
the military advisory chain added an additionel link at division.
Sector advisors under this arrangement found themselves working under
@ military officer whose advisory responsibilities were actually mili-
tary whereas theirs were only partly (and sometimes only nominally)
military.

OCO attempted to have the ARVN divisions removed fron pacification
responsibilities, but without success. When the Office of Civil Opera-
tions and Revolutionary Development Support (CORDS) was established under
MACV in mid-1967 as the single manager for all pacification advisors, the
issue could not be argued with the same force. For by the time COMUSMACV
assumed responsibility for pacification (through a civilian deputy --
Ambassador Komer), ARVN had also expanded its role in the pacification
effort. The ARVN division, it could be argued, was as much a part of
the pacification effort as were the programs supported by the U.S. eivil
agencies,

But although the argument for removing the Senior Division Advisor
from the U.S. chain of command over provincial advisors lost theoretic
weight with the creation of CORDS, the new civilian deputy to COMUSMACV
secured General Westmoreland's approval to remove the division advisors
from the pacification chain of command and to work to get ARVN to take
parallel action. This step illustrates the extent to which civil influ-
ences were able to operate within this new section of MACV. CORDS was
of such size that it became quasi-independent. One would heave to carry
an issue in dispute all the way to COMUSMACV before it moved outside of
CORDS channels.

The comprehensiveness of this reorganization may be seen in the ;
following MACV Directive, reproduced in its entirety, and especially in
the schematic diagram laying out the new U.S. command structure for a
Corps area:

1D TOP SECRET - Sensitive
