Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

h, “Extremely sensitive targets." This would comprise
targets that are exceptionally sensitive, in terms of
Chinese and/or Soviet reaction, as well as domestic and
international factors. For example, this list would inelude
mining of Haiphong, /*bombing of critical port facilities in
Haiphong,’ - pencilled in/ and bombing of dikes and dams not
directly related to supply route waterways and/or involving
heavy flooding to crops. 92/

Bundy suggested that by looking at the targetting problem in this way
a series of options could be generated that were more sensitive to
considerations of time-phasing. He offered five such options:

Option A would be to move up steadily to hit all the
target categories, including the extremely sensitive targets.

; Option B would be to step up the level a little further
and stay at that higher level through consistent and fairly
frequent re-strikes. Specifically, this would involve hitting
the additional sensitive targets and then keeping all sensitive
targets open to re-strike, although with individual authoriza-
tion.

Option C would be to raise the level slightly in the
near future by hitting the additional sensitive targets,
‘put then to cut back essentially to concentration on supply
routes. Re-strikes north of the 20th parallel would be very
limited under this option once the additional sensitive targets
had been hit, and would be limited to re-strikes necessary
to eliminate targets directly important to infiltration and,
as necessary, to keep Hanoi's air defense system in place.

Option D would be not to hit the additional sensitive
targets, and to define a fairly level program that would
concentrate heavily on the supply routes but would include
a, significant number of re-strikes north of the 20th parallel.
Since these re-strikes would still be substantially less
bunched than in April, the net effect would be to scale down
the bombing slightly from present levels, and to hold it there.

Option E would be to cut back at onze to concentration
on supply routes. Re-strikes north of the 20th parallel
' would be limited to those defined under Option C. 93/

38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
