Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"But the key to all we have done is really our own security. At
times of crisis, before asking Americans to fight and die to resist
aggression in a foreign land, every American President has finally
had to answer this question:

"Is the aggression a threat not only to the immediate victim but
to the United States of America and to the peace and security of the
entire world of waich we in America are a very vital part?

"That is the question which Dwight Eisenhower and John Kennedy
and Iyndon Johnson had to answer in facing the issue in Viet-Nam.

"That is the question that the Senate of the United States answered
by a vote of 82 to 1 when it ratified and approved the SEATO treaty in
1955, and to which the members of the United States Congress responded
in a resolution that it passed in 196) by a vote of 504 to 2:

'...the United States is, therefore, prepared, as the Presi-
dent determines, to take all necessary steps, including the use of
armed force, to assist any member or protocol state of the Southeast
Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance in defense of its
freedom.'

"Those who tell us now that we should abandon our commitment, that
securing South Viet-Nam from armed domination is not worth the price we
are paying, must also answer this question. And the test they must meet
is this: What would be the consequence of letting armed aggression
against South Viet-Nam succeed? What would follow in the time ahead?
What kind of world are they prepared to live in 5 months or 5 years from
tonight?

"THREAT TO SOUTHEAST ASIA

"For those who have borne the responsibility for decision during  ,
these past 10 years, the stakes to us have seemed clear--and have seemed

high.
"President Dwight Eisenhower said in 1959:

. ' 'Strategically South Viet-Nam's capture by the Communists would
bring their power several hundred miles into a hitherto free region.
The remaining countries in Southeast Asia would be menaced by a great
flanking movement. The freedom of 12 million people would be lost immedi-
ately and that of 150 million in adjacent lands would be seriously endan-
gered. The loss of South Viet-Nam would set in motion a crumbling process
that could, as it progressed, have grave consequences for us and for
freedon. ' ’

"And President John F. Kennedy said in 1962;

t...withdrawal in the case of Viet-Nam and in the case of
Thailand might mean a collapse of the entire area.’

D-121
