Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

their political power is less than it was before their
defeat in 1966. National elections are scheduled for
September 1. No one, unfortunately, has shown any
charismatic appeal. Ky and Thieu have promised not to
split over the presidency, but there is obviously a
serious struggle going on between them (Ky has announced
his candidacy, and Thieu, the weaker of the two, has
hinted that he may throw his weight behind a civilian).
So there is hope that there will be an orderly transi-
tion to stable constitutional rule.

Little has been done to remedy the economic and
social ills of the corruption from which VC popular sup-
port stems. Partly because of this inaction -- where
reform action would destroy the working consensus -- the
political situation at the top remains relatively stable.

The port is operating much better. Inflation
appears to be under control. But the flow of rice into
Saigon from the Delta, as good an indicator as any of
the state of affairs, continues to decrease: The flow
is 75 per cent of the 1966, and half of the 1965, rates;
national exports of rice ceased in 1964, and imports
continue to climb.

Hanoi's attitude towards negotiations has never been
soft nor open-minded. Any concession on their part would
involve an enormous loss of face. Whether or not the Polish
and Burchett-Kosygin initiatives had much substance to them,
it is clear that Hanoi's attitude currently is hard and
rigid. They seem uninterested in a political settlement and
‘determined to match US military expansion of the conflict.
This change probably reflects these factors: (1) increased
assurances of help from the Soviets received during Pham
Van Dong's April trip to Moscow; (2) arrangements providing
for the unhindered passage of materiel from the Soviet Union
through China; and (3) a decision to wait for the results
of the US, elections in 1968. Hanoi appears to have concluded
that she cannot secure her objectives at the conference table
and has reaffirmed her strategy of seeking to erode our abil-
ity to remain in the South. The Hanoi leadership has
apparently decided that it has no choice but to submit to
the increased bombing. There continues to be no sign that
the bombing has reduced Hanoi's will to resist or her ability
to ship the necessary supplies south. Hanoi shows no signs
of ending the large war and advising the VC to melt into the

150 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
