Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In this discussion of VNAF pilot training, it was revealed that there were
496 VNAF pilots currently at hand, but that 666 were required by 1 July.
Thirty helicopter pilots were to finish by 1 July, 30 liaison pilots to
finish by 27 June, and 226 cadet pilots were in the United States whose
Status was not known at the time of the meeting. The Secretary emphasized
that it had never been intended that the USAF participate in combat in
Vietnam, and current practices that belied this were exceptions to that
policy. The Administration had been embarrassed because of the Shank af-
fair--letters which had complained that U.S. boys were being killed in
combat while flying inferior aircraft. The Secretary emphasized that the
VNAF should have a better pilot-to-aircraft ratio. It should be 2 to 1
instead of 1.4 to 1 as at present. And, as a first priority project, VNAF
pilots should transition from other aircraft to the A-lis to bring the
total to 150 qualified to fly that aircraft. It was tentatively agreed
to fix that objective for 120 days and accept the consequent degradation of
transport capability. 90/

Following this there was a discussion of offensive guerrilla operations
and cross-border operations, both of which were agreed to be see GuRte:
Creation of an offensive guerrilla force had been one of the Secretary's
March recommendations. General Westmoreland said that Special Forces of
both the U.S. and the GVN were over-~extended, and he added he believed that
they should be expanded. As a result of this conversation MACV was directed
to study the six-month duty tour of the U.S. Special Forces. The Secretary
considered it possibly too short and thought it might have to be extended
to a full year. On the subject of cross-border operations, the concept was
to drop six-man teams in each of authorized areas in North Vietnam and Laos
and pick them up, 30 days later, by helicopter. The objective was two
teams by 15 June; and this potential was to be doubled each month thereafter.
It was decided that operations should begin approximately 15 June 196}. gi/

In his subsequent report on this second SecDef-MACV conference, MACY
reported that the Secretary of Defense had expressed disappointment that
the civil defense decree of the GVN did not constitute a counterpart to
military conscription, Furthermore, MACV recorded that in the course of
the discussion of means of strengthening the VNAF the Secretary of Defense
had reaffirmed basic U.S, policy that fighting in Vietnam should be done
by Vietnamese. The FARMGATR concept was explained as a specific, reluc-
tantly approved exception, a supplementary effort transitory in nature. 92/

The Secretary's military aide, Li. Col. Sidney B. Berry, Jr., recorded
the decisions taken by the Secretary at Saigon. They were these:

1. “Have the first group of six-man reconnaissance teams for
cross-border operations ready to operate by 15 June 1964, then double

the number of teams each month thereafter. The Secretary was anxious
to get hard information on DRV aid to the VC. The Secretary was to

i? = TOP SECRET - Sensitive

{3
