Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

upon ratification by the two governments. But, the ratification process
was delayed for over a month. The U.S. Mission in Saigon was clearly annoyed
that the long-awaited break in the Franco-Vietnamese deadlock did not
lead immediately to ratification. The Mission speculated that the French
were delaying to keep a free hand at Geneva by making no commitments on
Vietnam until the outcome of the conference could be known. The Mission ~
noted that in so doing, the French were only feeding the doubts and suspi-
cions of the Vietnamese about future French intentions toward Indochina. 1/
Washington, for its part, refused to consider the 28 April initialling

of agreements as satisfying its pre-condition on complete Vietnamese in-
dependence. 2/

. GVN Independent After 4 June 1954

Not until 4 June, did the French National Assembly finally
ratify the two treaties. 3/ By the Treaty of Independence, Vietnam was
recognized "as a fully independent and sovereign State invested with all
the competence recognized by international law." Vietnam agreed to re-
place France "in all the rights and obligations resulting from interna-
tional treaties or conventions contracted by France on behalf or on account
of the State of Vietnam or of any other treaties or conventions concluded
by France on behalf of French Indochina insofar as those acts concern
Vietnam." In other words, the GVN assumed. responsibility for all agree-
ments executed prior to ratification of the independence treaty. Under
the accompanying Treaty of Association, Vietnam's status as an equal in
the French Union was acknowledged for the first time, and with it the
right (subsequently re-confirmed) to determine its extent of participa-
tion in the Union. The State of Vietnam was, therefore, a fully indepen-
dent entity by 4 June 1954. France's international obligations in or
for Vietnam as of that date were freely taken over by the GVN. This was
in contrast, it might be added, to the DRV's abrogation of agreements
concluded in Vietnam's behalf by France when Ho's regime took power on
2 September 1945. 4/

d. GVN and DRV Status at Geneva Differ

? The final communique of the Berlin Conference (18 February 1954)
specified that the Indochina phase of the Geneva deliberations would be
attended by the United States, Great Britain, Communist China, the Soviet
Union, France, "and other states concerned." Invitations to participants,
it was further agreed, would be issued only by the Berlin conferees (U.S.,
UK, USSR, and France).

There had been some doubt as to the status of the DRV at
the upcoming Indochina convention, but subsequent talks between Molotov
and Bidault in April clarified the position of the DRV. 5/ Although
the DRV was still considered a rebel group by the West, rather than an
interested State, admission of the Viet Minh to the conference was never
@& serious problem. As one of the principal combatants whose consent to
a cease-fire was considered indispensable, the Viet Minh could hardly be

B-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
