Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

CONFIDENTIAL

Secuzity Information

6. In accordatice with the decisions talzen by

the United Nations, a -poiitical conference is to

convene within a maximum period of ninety days after

the signing of the truce. It is clear that this confer-
ence will consider primarily problems relating directly
to Korea, which it 1s specifically instructed to resolve.
Nevertheless, the success of its mission, though

greatly to be. desired, should not result first of all

in a worsening of the conflict in Indo-China.

Ts As was found by the three Ministers of Foreign
Affairs in Washington, it may be difficult, for proce.
dural reasons, to place the Indo- -Chinese question on the
agenda of the political conference. It should surely
not be wmpossible, however, to see to it that Indo-China
profits, at least indirectly, from a meeting which is
intended to re-establish peace in an area of the Far
East, should such an undertaking meet with success.

8. We shall doubtless soon be in a position to
sense the attitude of Communist China during the political
conference, as the representatives of the United Nations
certainly do not intend to allow the meeting to drag on
indefinitely without results.

If this attitude, as is possible, is entirely
negative, it would obviously be out of the question to
expect the conference to have any beneficial effect
upon the situation in Indo-China.

: /

If, on the contrary, the climate of the confer-
ence becomes more favorable, the opportunity may arise--
without jeopardizing in any way a successful solution
of the Korean problem--to explain to the Communist
representative, unofficially as well as at the conference
table itself perhaps, that his conciliatory attitude
could not limit itself to regions lying north of the
38th parallel, and that he would be assuming an un-
deniable risk if he sought to localize his peaceful in-
tentions in such a manner.

Security information -

102
