Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

day he signed NSAM 288 approving Secretary McNamara'a visit report, the
President sent the first of two closely spaced messages to Ambassador
Lodge that could have set the tone for the planning ahead. (Presumably
the President's views were communicated to the principal officials in
the agencies involved in plenning for Southeast Asia.) Commenting on
Lodge's critique of the McNamara report, he indicated favor for the
Ambassador's expressed preference for "carrot and stick" pressures short
of overt military action, and specifically "reserve/d / judgment on overt
U.S. measures against North Vietnam." 53/ Three days later he cabled
confirmation that actions being studied with North Vietnam as a target
were regarded strictly as contingency planning. 5k /

Principal focus for the planning during April was OSD/ISA, with
assistance from the Far Eastern Bureau and the Vietnam Committee, in
the Department of State, and from the JCS. During the first three weeks
of April, it developed three or four versions of scenarios of political
actions "to set the stage and to develop support ‘both at home and abroad"
for different categories of military action against North Vietnam. Ini-
tially, the categories, and their scenarios, were regarded separately,
although the first "Covert SVN action against the North (with U.S. covert
support) ," was recognized as the stage of political-military activity in
which the United States was currently engaged. The others, (1) covert
U.S. support of overt GVN aerial mining and air strike operations and
(2) overt joint U.S. and GVN aerial reconnaissance, naval displays,
naval bombardments and air attacks, would necessarily have to follow. 55/
In subsequent versions, the planning evolved more explicitly toward a
continuous scenario in three sequential phases.

In each version, however, the "current" scenario included such
political measures as: (1) a speech by General Khanh stating GVN.war
aims; (2) a briefing for "friendly" senators and congressmen on our
aims in Southeast Asia and the problem of DRV directions of the VC;

(3) public explanations of U.S. policy toward South Vietnam; and (4)
diplomatic discussions with the United Kingdom and the North Atlantic
Council. Each of the second scenarios, which came to be characterized

by GVN-USAF/FARMGATE air operations, contained similar actions but placed
emphasis on political initiatives that would surface in Saigon rather

than in Washington, "so as to maintain the credibility of the sovereignty
of the GVN." This stage also included such measures as: (1) another trip
to Saigon by Secretary McNamara for the specific purpose of obtaining
General Khanh's agreement to begin overt GVN actions against the North;
(2) consultations with Thailand and the Philippines; (3) Presidential
consultations with key congressional leaders; and (4) public release of

a new State Department White ‘Paper on North Vietnamese involvement in the
insurgency. Each of the final scenarios, which came to be associated with
our overt responses to DRV/CHICOM escalations, included diplomatic and
political preparations for direct U.S. actions. Significantly, the
scenarios also incorporated initiatives leading to an international con-
ference on Vietnam at Geneva. 56/

The evolution toward a continuous sequential scenario reflects the
influence of the JCS. Their response to the 31 March draft: (1) called

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
IS
