Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

themselves had been prepared by JCS at the request of Deputy Secretary
Vance and they actually incorporated the various separate proposals
“made by the JCS over the past two months.

For instance, Program A included ROLLING THUNDER, naval surface
operations, SHINING BRASS, Leos operations, land artillery firing across
the DMZ and ground force deployments. The deployments recommended under
Program A consisted of merely accelerating Program 4 deployments and
possibly adding three Army maneuver battalions. The remainder of Program
A represented no more than minor expansions in operations, recommendations
for which the JCS had been on record since last fall. Program B featured
expanded ROLLING THUNDER operations to include attacking the North Viet-
namese ports, mining the inland waterways and estuaries south of 20° North,
attacking the MIG airfields previously excepted, expansion of SHINING
BRASS operations into Laos and, significantly, the deployment of the 9th
Marine Amphibious Brigade from Okinawa/Japan to the I Corps Tactical Zone
in March 1967. Program C subsumed all of the recommendations of the two
preceding Programs A and B, but added an expansion of the mining quanti-
tatively, to include all of approaches and inland waterways north of 20°,
authorized battalion-sized expedition forces in the SHINING BRASS area
and recommended deployments of up to four U.S, divisions (3 Army, 1 USMC)
and up to nine tactical fighter squadrons (5 Air Force, 4 USMC).

Major authorization would be required from the President to expand
the air attacks to the ports and MIG airfields as recommended in Program B,
but other than that, only minor policy changes were required to initiate
Programs A and B. In order to deploy the 9th MAB by 1 March 1967, a
decision had to be made concerning acceleration of deployments, some
corresponding end strength increases for Program 4 had to be authorized.
Program C, of course, was the major deployment proposal, one which
the JCS believed wovld require a decision by 1 March 1967 to call up
Reserves, to extend tours and terms of service, to authorize repetitive
tours, to increase service strengths, and effect partial industrial mobil-
ization. None of the recommendations included in all of these programs
possessed more than "moderate military risk" in the eyes of the JCS.
Some, such as expansion of ROLLING THUNDER to the port targets, were rated
as possessing "moderate or higher" political risks. The major deployment
recommendetion requiring Reserve mobilization carried "significant mili-
tary risk in that strategic Reserves would be degraded until the end of
the Calendar Year" and "political’domestic risk in terms of increased
draft and call-up of Reserves,” but again the JCS played down the serious-
ness of such % move.

The documents available do not indicate what usage the President
made of this particular analysis. However, it remains interesting as an
historical event, being the first explicit presentation of new alternative
programs in the development of Program 5.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
pak
