Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from "What Choices Do We Have in Vietnam?" by Edwin 0. Reischauer

Look, September 19, 1967, page 27

The obvious alternative was to allow Ho and his Commmist-dominated
Vietminh to take over the whole of Vietnam. This would have happened early
if the United States had made quite clear in 1945 that it did not approve
of the revival of colonialism in Asia and would give it no support. It
would still have happened if we had not given massive aid to the French
war effort after 1949. It would have happened if we had been willing in
1954 to support the Geneva agreements and had not tried to build up a per-
manent regime under Diem in South Vietnam. It would have happened if we
had. not steadily increased our military commitments to South Vietnam between
1960 and 1963. It would have happened if we had decided against massive
participation in the war in the winter of 1964-'65. ‘Thus, under each of
our last four Presidents, decisions were clearly made, even if not fully
thought out, to reject this one obvious alternative.

What would. have happened if, at any of these moments of decision,
we had chosen the alternative? If we had clearly favored Vietnamese
nationalism over French colonialism in 1945, it seems obvious that Ho,
in short order, would have established effective control over the whole
of Vietnam. He probably would have set up the same sort of dictatorial,
oppressive, Communist rule over all Vietnam that he actually did over the
North. He would probably have encountered much the same sort of problems
he did in the North, and the economic progress of Vietnam would have been
slow, though, of course, not as slow as in a war-torn land.

The society and government of this unified Vietnam would probably
not have been something we would have approved of, but we have not found
much we could approve of in the society and government of a divided Viet-
nam either. Quite possibly, a unified Vietnam under Ho, spared the ravages
of war, would have gone at least as far toward the evolution of a stable
and. reasonably just society as has the divided, war-torn land we know today.
For us, however, the question is what that sort of Vietnam would have meant
in international politics. I believe it would be safe to assume that it
would have been a highly nationalistic Vietnam. By the same token, I be-
lieve it also would have been free of Chinese domination. The Vietnamese
have instinctive fears of their great northern neighbor. While they have
always admired and imitated China, for more than a millennium they have
had a deep national tradition of resistance to its domination. If they
had had. no specific reason to fear or resent us, the chances are that their
fears and resentments would have come to focus on China, whether or not
it, too, were Communist.

)
It seems highly probable that Ho's Communist-dominated regime, if it

had been allowed by us to take over all Vietnam at the end of the war, would
have moved to a position with relation to China not unlike that of Tito's

C-29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
