—

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

19° N latitude would be to take advantage of cessation
and that it will refrain from doing so.

ce. Accept "open skies"over NVN upon cessation.

d. Withdraw from the DMZ within a specified time,
say two weeks, after cessation.

28. Cessation of bombing of NVN for any protracted
period while continuing the war in SVN would be difficult
4o reconcile with any increase in US casualties.

29. If the DRV/NLF act in good faith, formal negoti-
ations toward a cessation of hostilities should begin within
two months after a cessation of bombardment. Preliminary
discussions lasting any longer than two months will require
a resumption of bombardment or the application of other
pressures as appropriate. 54/

As a document, the SEACABIN study was important because
it represented @ first major effort to pull together a positive DOD
position on the question of a bombing halt. The analysis and recom-
mendations were compromises to be sure, but they were formulations that
gave the Administration room for maneuver in approaching the problem of
negotiations. Probably most importantly they established a basis of
cooperation and collaboration between the Joint Staff and ISA on this
issue that would be useful during the crisis of the following March when
a new direction was being sought for the whole U.S. effort in Vietnam.

In mid-December, the Chiefs themselves sent the Secretary
a memo noting that the SEACABIN study was the product of staff work and
did not necessarily reflect the views of the JCS. The Chiefs stressed
again their belief in the effectiveness of the bombing in punishing
North Vietnamese aggression, and recorded their opposition to a halt in
the bombing as a means of starting negotiations. North Vietnamese
performance on the battlefield and diplomatically clearly indicated
their unwillingness to enter negotiations except as a means of handi-

_eapping American power. Such a bombing halt would also endanger the

lives of U.S. troops. Thus, while the study had been a useful exercise,
the Secretary was advised against any endorsement of a cessation of

pombing. 55
2, The JASON Study

While DOD was internally examining bombing suspension
scenarios, IDA's JASON division had called together many of the people
who had participated in the 1966 Summer Study for another look at the
effectiveness of +he bombing and at various alternatives that might get

7 7 as
122 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
