Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"(b) We have failed to realize the necessity of uniting
with the middle-level peasants, and we should have concluded
some form of alliance with the rich peasants, whom we treated
in the same manner as the landlords.

"(c) We attacked the landowning families indiscriminately....

"(d) We made too many deviations and executed too many
honest people. We attacked on too large a front and, seeing
enemies everywhere, resorted to terror, which became far too
widespread.

"(e) Whilst carrying out our Land Reform program we failed
to respect the principles of freedom of faith and worship in
many areas.

"(f) In regions inhabited by minority tribes we have attacked
tribal chiefs too strongly, thus injuring, instead of respecting,
local customs and manners.

"(g) When reorganizing the party, we paid too much impor-
tance to the notion of social class instead of adhering firmly
to political qualifications alone. Instead of recognizing
education to be the first essential, we resorted exclusively
to organizational measures such as disciplinary punishments,
expulsion from the party, executions, dissolution of party
branches and cells. Worse still, torture came to be regarded
as a normal practice during party reorganization." 32/

On 2 November, the DRV announced that its first postwar
elections would be held in 1957, and formed a constitutional reform com-
mittee as one of several measures aimed at greater freedom in the society.

On 8 November, Ho abolished the detested Special People's
Tribunals, and ordered the wholesale release of prisoners fron the regime's
detention centers. There followed then a systematic, government-wide
"Campaign for the Rectification of Errors." Notwithstanding these admissions,
or perhaps because of them, violence broke out in Nghe An, the province of
Ho's birth.

b. Peasant Rebellion of 1956

The year 1956 had been a bad one for communist regimes.
Obedient to the dictates of the 2Oth Congress of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union, most communist governments, including the DRV, had
launched programs of de-Stalinization and liberalization. In China these
took the form of the "Hundred Flowers" movement, and in the DRV, the
"Rectification of Errors Campaign." Poland and East Germany, as well as
Hungary had experienced violence. Nonetheless, it was with some surprise
that the world received Hanoi Radio's announcement of 16 November 1956,

le TOP SECRET - Sensitive
