Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

C7

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(a) Diem's letter would include: reference to the DRV
violations of Geneva Accords as set forth in the October 24
GVN letter to the ICC and other documents; pertinent references
to GVN statements with respect to its intent to observe the
Geneva Accords; reference to its need for flood relief and re~
habilitation; reference to previous United States aid and the
compliance hitherto by both countries with the Geneva Accords};
xeference to the USG statement at the time the Geneva Accords
were signed; the necessity now of exceeding some provisions of
the Accords in view of the DRV violations thereof; the lack of
aggressive intent with respect to the DRV: GVN intent to return
to strict compliance with the Geneva Accords as soon as the DRV
violations ceased; and request for additional United States
assistance in framework foregoing policy. The letter should
also set forth in appropriate general terms steps Diem has taken
and is taking to reform Governmental structure.

(b) The President's reply would be responsive to Diem's
request for additional assistance and acknowledge and Sire eS
Diem's statements on the intent promptly to return to strict
compliance with the Geneva Accords as soon as DRV violations
have ceased,

7. Simultaneous with steps 5 and 6, above, make a private ap-
proach to the Soviet Union that would include: our determination to
prevent the fall of South Viet-Nam to Communism by whatever means is
necessary; our concern over dangers to peace presented by the aggres-
sive DRV policy with respect to South Viet-Nam; our intent to return
to full compliance with the Geneva Accords as soon 4s the DRV does so;
the distinction we draw between Laos and South Viet-Nam; and our ex-
pectation that the Soviet Union will exercise its influence on the
CHICOMS and the DRV.

8. A special diplomatic approach made to the United Kingdom in
its role as co-Chairman of the Geneva Conference requesting that the
United Kingdom seek the support of the Soviet co-Chairman for a ces-
sation of DRV aggression against South Viet-Nam.

9. A special diplomatic approach also to be made to India,
both in its role as Chairman of the ICC and as a power having rela-
tions with Peiping and Hanoi. This approach should be made immedi-
ately prior to public release of the "Jorden report" and the exchange
of letters between Diem and the President.

132

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
