Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B. ‘The Transition Period: 1959-1961

a

BARLY STEPS TOWARD EMPHASIS ON INTERNAL SECURITY

By the time of the Draper Committee (The President's Committee to
Study the United States Military Assistance Program) in 1958-1959, there
was an almost imperapbible but growing U.S. awareness of the require-
ment to promote internal stability. The committee's papers, for instance,
sought to popularize military civie action programs and to link them to
politically acceptable precedents -- such as the U.S. Army's role in the
development of the American West. 14/ ‘he very term “nirror imaging"
was coined in a Draper Committee staff study. 15/ One of the committee's
studies questioned even the easy assumption that internal security was 4
"lesser included capability" of forces structured to promote external
security:

It is seldom that a government considers its military forces
to have only a mission of maintaining internal security. Their
size, organization, equipment, hebitual deployment, and so on,
are nearly always related to real or supposed requirements of
defense against external attack. They are usually considered
capable of performing internal security missions as part of
this larger role. However, the requirements of the two missions
are different, if overlapping; end tailoring 4 military force to
the task of countering external aggression -- i.¢-, countering
another regular military force -- entails some sacrifice of
capabilities to counter internal aggression. The latter requires
widespread deployment, rather than concentration. It requires
small, mobile, lightly equipped units of the ranger or commando
type. It requires different weapons, command systems, communica-
tions, logistics.... 16/

THE McGARR EMPHASIS ON COUNT®WRINSURGENCY

These developments were only harbingers of a dawning awareness, how-
ever, not indicative of a fundamental shift in focus which had already
occurred. The degree to which ARVN and paramilitary forces should be
consciously structured to deal with internal security rather than to pro-
tect against external invasion was the subject of a developing debate
rather than a settled issue. It fell to Ideutenant General Lionel C. McGarr
to head the U.S. MAAG during the confusing period of transition which
accompanied this debate. He did not come to Vietnam unaware of the issues;
a long study prepared for him by his staff at the Army's Command end General
Staff College (his post before coming to Saigon) laid out in some detail
the Viet Cong's strategy as adapted from the Viet Minh's struggle with
the French:

This form of warfare permitted the Viet Minh to retain the

mobility so essential to jungle and mountain operations,
facilitated the gathering of detailed, accurate, and timely

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
