Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Moreover, on issues purportedly relating to sovereignty or "face,"
the Vietnamese were and are quite sensitive, and the U.S. was consistently
afraid to inflame this sensitivity. Both sides avoided many delicate
topics. A prime example is the matter of the lack of a bilateral treaty.
The U.S, operated, and still operates, under a Pentalateral protocol signed
by the French and Bao Dai under the U.S. military assistance program to
France before 1954. It gave U.S. advisers and officials virtual diplo-
matic status, which was reasonable back when there were less than two hundred
of them in all Indochina. But it now applies to all U.S. persommel, and no
one has wanted to stir things up.

The sensitivity problem cropped wp often. For a time early in 196,
the GVN backed off from an agreement to extend U.S. advisors to district
level, and when GVN did approve, they insisted that the advice be strictly
military and that.the advisors be labelled "subsector." In like manner,
the III Marine Expeditionary Force became the IIT Marine Amphibious Force,
because the French had called their Indochina force "expeditionary." But
the GVN, and especially the military, agreed readily to new U.S. troop com-
mitnents,

The Vietnamese would often greet a U.S. representative, in moments of
tension, with false or exaggerated stories of U.S. dealings, such as a
complaint in January, 1964, about U.S. training and CIA contacts with the +
Cao Dai and Hoa Hao. In contrast, on cabinet appointments they often asked
the Anbassador's opinion, and he customarily leaned over backward to avoid
giving specific recommendations. Shared sensitivity, closely related to
the lack of a treaty governing status of U.S. forees, prevented any move
toward joint command and U.S, control of all military operations in Vietnam;
poth Westmoreland and the Vietnamese preferred to operate separately. ‘The
Embassy looked the other way from repressive police measures and political

_arrests unless these led to embarrassing press stories. When the Ambassador

would raise this type of issue with the GVN, it proved always to be touchy.

Vietnamese sensitivity sometimes led to open displays of anti-Americanism.
These happened on three main occasions: (1) when Khanh grumbled about being
a puppet after the go-North leaks in July, 1964; (2) in the open rupture
between Khanh and Taylor in December-Janvary; and (3) in the January riots

. when rioters overran USIS buildings in Saigon and Hue. |

Vietnamese Compliance More in Form Than in Substance

The Vietnamese nevertheless showed a ready willingness throughout the
period to declare new policies, sign decrees, and engage in joint studies
at our request. But as noted above, that did sot mean we got the substance
of what we wanted on such matters. The most important case of this kind
was Khanh's ready agreement in March to "mobilize" South Vietnam. He promptly
made a tokem announcement; and while students and other potential draft-
eligibles waited anxiously to learn what he meant (as did we), he delayed

hale | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
