———

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a rr aterm ih i id rR Sgn ak

4

The Cxaman. The only thing I was suggesting

Senator Monsn. It is in keeping with the division of powers doctrine.

The Cuamoayn. I thought it would be much fairer if we could ar-
Tange to release them simultaneously. For example, the staff report
would present only one side of the picture, as would the Secretary's
Statement. I think it would be too bad if this goes out and nothing
else. That is a matter for the committee to determine, I grant.

Senator Mors, I still would not want to—I would personally not
be a party to placing any restriction on the Secretary.
_ The Cranaran, The point I am trying to make is that much of the
information which we have is confidential and cannot be released.
Whereas a great many of the documents to which the Seeretary refers,
but does not incor porate, are also confidential. I would submit that it
IS a very one-sided picture to release only the statement.

Senator Morse, It is one-sided only if the committee leaves it that

way.

The Cramcan. I grant that. But it is only a matter of time. We
have not had a chance to read the Secretary’s statement. We only
received this statement an hour ago and it is a matter of timing.

Senator Morse. I understand.

, The Cuamatan. Does the Senator object for the committee to have
time to consider the statement ?

Senator Morse. I would only object as to placing any restrictions on
the Sceretary at all. '

The Cramaay. I do not consider it placing restrictions. It is a
matter for us to arrive at an understanding as to When we doit.

Senator Gort. Mr. Chairman.

The Cyairnstan. Yes?

Senator Gore. There is a question here. We are haying an executive
Session. Could we not defer judgment on this until we have had a
chance to read it?

The Cuan, That is what we normally do. That is what I was
Suggesting, until we receive it; the committee makes up its own mind
usually afterward, this afternoon, for example.

Senator Gonz. The point I was attempting to raise, I find a great
deal of appeal in what Senator Morse has said, but I think it must be
interpreted in the light of the fact that we are dealing here with class-
ified materials and having an executive hearing. The release of a
statement in executive hearing, used in an executive hearing, has not,
so far as I can recall, been done except by permission of the committee.

I remember one time when I was chairman of a subcommittee, Sec-
retary Rusk was appearing. and the question of releasing his statement
was submitted to the committee, and the committee voted unanimously
to approve its release. I dave say it might do so—iwe might do so, after
hearing this, but I would like to defer judgment on it.

The Cuatroan, That is all right.

PROCEDURAL RIGHT OF WITNESS

Senator Morsz. Can I take 30 seconds more? I do not want to be a
stickler or make a tempest in a teapot, but I do think, pentlemen, you
are dealing here with a procedural matter that you should not set a
precedent on. I do not think that at any time a committee of the Con-
gress has the right to call into executive session a Cabinet officer or any-

——_ = &
