Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

II. A. 3. PERCEPTIONS OF THE COMMUNIST THREAT TO SOUTHEAST ASIA AND TO
BASIC U.S. INTERESTS

Three major perceptions dominated U.S. thinking and policy-
making on Indochina during the years 1950-1954. The first was the growing
importance of Asia in world politics. The process of devolution from
colonial empires to independent states, it was thought, would create power
vacuums and conditions of instability which would make Asia susceptible to
becoming a battleground in the growing East-West cold war conflict. Second,
there was an undeniable tendency to view the worldwide "communist threat”
in monolithic terms. This was perhaps understandable given the relatively
extensive influence then exerted by the Soviet Union over other communist
nations, and the communist parties in non-communist states. Moreover, the
West, and especially the U.S., was challenged by the expansionist policies
openly proclaimed by leaders of virtually all the communist movements.
Third, the attempt of the patently Communist Ho Chi Minh regime to evict
the French from Indochina was seen as part of the Southeast Asian manifes-
tation of the communist world-wide aggressive intent. The resistance of
France to Ho, therefore, was seen as a crucial stand on the line along
which the West would contain communism.

1. "Domino Principle" Before Korea

These three perceptions help explain the widely held assumption
in official Washington that if Indochina was "lost" to communism, the
remaining nations of Southeast Asia would inexorably succumb to communist
infiltration and be taken over in a chain reaction. This strategic con-
ception of the communist threat to Southeast Asia pre-dated the outbreak
in June 1950 of the Korean War. It probably had its period of gestation
at the time of the Nationalist withdrawal from mainland China. NSC 48/1
was the key document in framing this conception. Drawn up in June 1949,
after Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson had expressed concern at the -
course of events in Asia and had suggested a widening of the previous
country-by-country memorandum approach to a regional plan, NSC 48/1
included the statements that "the extension of commnist authority in
China represents agrievous political defeat for us...If Southeast Asia
is also swept by communism, we shall have suffered a major political
rout the repercussions of which will be felt throughout the rest of the
world, especially in the Middle East and in a then critically exposed
Australia." _1/

It was Russia rather than China that was seen in 1949 as being
the principal source of the communist threat in Asia. Although it was
conceded that in the course of time China (or Japan or India) may attempt
to dominate Asia, --

"now and for the foreseeable future it is the USSR which

threatens to dominate Asia through the complementary instru-
ments of communist conspiracy and diplomatic pressure

A-h5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
