Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in maintaining the vigor and cohesiveness of the resistance.
In this, they have been greatly’ helped by French indecision and
pad faith, and the terrorism of French troops.

"In spite of arms captures and occasional defections, there
is no sign of large scale weakening of Vietnamese resistance
abilities or morale. The large areas under Vietnamese control
lack luxuries and medicines, but are wholly self-sufficient
in the basic necessities and tolerably well administered, accord-
ing to what few reports are available. They continue to form
a source of supplies and of fresh troops that are only limited
in numbers by the arms available.

"Although there are rumors of a Chinese Communist treaty
with Ho Chi Minh, and of a Chinese Communist general and his
staff in Northern Tonkin, there is little evidence, as yet, that
the Chinese are of any considerable help in the resistance,
French sources feel that there is little danger of a Chinese
Communist 5th column in Cochinchina, or of an invitation on the
part of Ho Chi Minh to the troops of the age-old national enemy
to enter Indochina in force, in spite of the communist link.

All French military sources consulted, however, feel that a large
scale Chinese Communist invasion would make most, if not all, of
Tonkin, militarily untenable.

"For many months past, observers feel that the resistance
has not put forth its maximum effort, perhaps because the leaders
are waiting for the outcome of political negotiations going on
between the High Commissariat, the French Government and the
Xuan-Bao Dai elements. If these should break down, the resistance
will be greatly strengthened by the adhesion of many now neutral
or pro-French elements. If the negotiations are successful, the
resistance army is sure to be a dominant factor in any form of
Vietnamese self-government...” 58/

An extensive State Department intelligence report on "Political Alignments
of Vietnamese Nationalists" 59/ of October, 1949, highlighted the impor-
tance of the Viet Minh:

"The Viet Minh. The Vietnam Independence League (Viet Nam
Doe Lap Dong Minh Hoi), or Viet Minh, is the most influential
political organization within the Vietnam Government /DRV/. It
is the only political group whose organization extends down to
the smallest villages. Its members include both individuals and
parties, i.e., the Vietnam Socialist Party, the Vietnam Democratic
Party, etc. As a League, it groups together a wide coalition of
political personalities from moderate nationalists to doctrinaire
communists. It most closely resembles the Chinese Kuomintang

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-65
