Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But "anti-communism" initially proved to be no better guideline
for the formulation of American policy in Indochina than it had been
for the French. Indeed, early U.S. attempts to discern the nature
and extent of communist influence in Vietnam devolved to the seeming
paradox that if Ho Chi Minh were communist, he seemed to have no
visible ties with Moscow. For example, a State Department appraisal
of Ho Chi Minh provided to the U.S. Ambassador in China in July,
1948, was admittedly speculative:

"1. Depts info indicates that Ho Chi Minh is Com-
munist. His long and well-known record in Comintern
during twenties and thirties, continuous support by French
Communist newspaper Humanite since 1945, praise given him
by Radio Moscow (which for past six months has been devoting
increasing attention to Indochina) and fact he has been
called "leading communist' by recent Russian publications
as well as Daily Worker makes any other conclusion appear
to be wishful thinking.

"2. Dept has no evidence of direct link between Ho
and Moscow but assumes it exists, nor is it able evaluate
amount pressure or guidance Moscow exerting. We have
impression Ho must be given or is retaining large degree
latitude. Dept considers that USSR accomplishing its
immediate aims in Indochina by (a) pinning down large
numbers of French troops, (b) causing steady drain upon
French economy thereby tending retard recovery and dissi-
pate ECA assistance to France, and (c) denying to world
generally surpluses which Indochina normally has available
thus perpetuating conditions of disorder and shortages
which favorable to growth communism. Furthermore, Ho seems
quite capable of retaining and even strengthening his grip
on Indochina with no outside assistance other than con-
tinuing procession of French puppet govts." 70/

In the fall of 1948, the Office of Intelligence Research in the
Department of State conducted a survey of communist influence in
Southeast Asia. Evidence of Kremlin-directed conspiracy was
found in virtually all countries except Vietnam:

"Since December 19, 1946, there have been continuous
conflicts between French forces and the nationalist govern-
ment of Vietnam. This government is a coalition in which
avowed communists hold influential positions. Although the
French admit the influence of this government, they have
consistently refused to deal with its leader, Ho Chi Minh,
on ans grounds that he is a communist.

A-ki9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
