Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

mission was to reassure Diem and other Asian leaders, that the U.S. could,
despite Leos, be counted on in Asia. Simply reading the American news-
papers would have told Diem thet at least as of May 5, the Administration
was seriously considering sending American troops to Vietnam, and that
Johnson was expected to discuss this with Diem. A quite reasonable
tactical judgment would have been that nothing would have been more

likely to make Diem ask for U.S, troops than for Johnson to remain

eerily silent on this issue.

Consequently, on the record aveilable, we cam do no more than guess
what would have happened if Diem reacted affirmatively at the time of
Johnson's visit. The most reasonable guess is probably that the Taylor
Mission, or something equivalent, would have been undertaken in the
spring, rather than in the fall, and nothing very much would have been
different in the long run. But that is only a reasonable guess.

For the rest, here are some extracts from a report Johnson wrote
after his return. Essentially, Johnson argued for prompt moves by the
U.S. to show support for non-~communist governments in Southeast Asia.
He had in mind expanded conventional military and economic aid, and
perhaps a new treaty to replace SEATO. But despite the shock of U.S.
willingness to accept a coalition government in Laos, Johnson reported
that U.S. troops were neither desired nor required. And although this
might not always be the case, Johnson recommended that the U.S. "must
remain master of this decision." 3/

The Impact of Laos

There is no mistaking the deep - and long lasting ~ impact
of recent developments in Laos.

Country to country, the degree differs but Laos has created
doubt and concern about intentions of the United States through-
out Southeast Asia. No emount of success at Geneva can, of
itself, erase this. The independent Asians do not wish to have
their own status resolved in like manner in Geneva.

Leaders such as Diem, Chiang, Sarit and Ayub more or less
accept that we are making "the best of a bad pargain" at
Geneva. Their charity extends no farther.

The Impact of the Mission

Beyond question, your judgement about the timing of our

mission was correct, Each leader -- except Nehru -- publicly
congratulated you on the "timing" of this mission. Chieng —
said -- and 211 others privately concurred -~ that the mission

had the effect of "stabilizing" the situation in the Southeast
Asian nations,

7a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
