Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP S%GCRE®

— eee le

increasing share of the finsncial and military burden,

TH: LEChETAn¥Y announced thet the french hsd been informed ,;
thet the United States was prepared to increase its mili-
tary assistance program for Indo-Chine by #150 million,
Ke sdded that the United States, feeling that the French
military training program was badly strained, had offered
to assist them in this respect, but that the French,  .‘
always skittish over whet they might regard as undue
americsn interference, had not talen up this offer.
Certainly it is not up to the Americans to press on the
French assistance along these lines. THE SHCnBTARY said
that it was obvious that ir. Letourneau was much encour-
aged as a result of his visit to washington. He asked
pr. Jessup to read the text of the bepartment's telegram
201), June 18; to Saigon, summarizing the discussions
with ur. Letourneau.

i
}

THE SECHRETAKY said thet he hed warned the French
that success in the military field in indo-China carried
with it certain dansers, including the increased possi-~
bility of a large-scale Chinese Communist military inter-
vention. He said that this in turn points up the ques-
tion, “how cen we prevent this from happening?" he felt
{% would be desirable to issue a warning statement of
some sort, whether public, private, detailed end specific,
or otherwise, but it would be essertisl to have a general
understandin; es to the action vhich we mi,ht taxe if the
warning were to go unheeded. To issue a warning and take:
no effective ection would be calemitous. werhaps the
United States and the United hingdon, preferably in con-
junction with France, Australia, and New Zealand, can
reach a tentative agreement on political policy in this
regard which would form « framework for joint militery
planmnin,. ‘his, in turn, leads to the major question:
Nhat form could retaliation against aszgression take?"
fhe American military authorities are of the strons
opinion thet action only against the approaches to Indo-
China. would be ineffective. In fact, the first problem
which we would likely hseve to face would be the evacu-
ation of French militery end civilians from Tongking.
Action confired to the air and naval arms directed eguinst
the Ghinese Communists in: Indo-Chine would likewise be
ineffective and, in the li,nt of world comuitments, the
Unitea States has no infantry avuileble for operations

within
