Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In the process of combined GVN-U.S. planning, but not yet
approved for execution, were cross-border operations against VC-North
Vietnamese logistical routes in laos. This planning provided for both
air attacks by the VNAF and "ground operations up to battalion size" in
the Iaotian Panhandle. Preparations for such actions had been approved
in principle since March but since then little further interest had been
Shown in them. Toward the end of July, the air force portion was examined
seriously by Administration officials as a means not only to damage the
Communist logistical effort but also "primarily for reasons of morale in
South Vietnam and to divert GVN attention from /a/ proposal to strike
North Vietnam." 17/

In addition to both the open and covert operations already under-
way, a number of other actions intended to bring pressure against North
Vietnam had been recommended to the White House. Receiving considerable
attention among Administration officials during May and June was a pro-
posed request for a Congressional Resolution, reaffirming support by the
legislators for Presidential action to resist Communist advances in
Southeast Asia during an election year /fab A/. In some respects paral-
leling this domestic initiative, the President was urged to present to the
United Nations the detailed case assembled by the Government supporting
the charges of DRV aggression against South Vietnam and Laos. He was
also urged to authorize periodic deployments of additional forces toward
Southeast Asia as a means of demonstrating U.S, resolve to undertake
whatever measures were required to resist aggression in that region.
Moreover, in OPLAN 37-61, there was fully developed a listing of forces to
be deployed as a deterrent to communist escalation in reaction to U.S./GVN
actions against North Vietnam. Finally, it was recommended that the
President make the decision to use "selected and carefully graduated mili-
tary force against North Vietnam" if necessary to improve non-Communist
prospects in South Vietnam and Laos. 18/

The source documents available to this writer are not clear on the
exact decisions made in response to each of these recommendations, or
indeed on the precise form or context in which the recommendations were
presented. It is evident that the proposal to seek a Congressional
Resolution was not favorably received, but as subsequent events indicate
neither was it rejected out-of-hand. It proved very useful in largely the
_ Same language just two months later. Less certain are the decisions made

about the other proposals. Certainly they were not approved for immedi-
ate implementation. However, it is not clear whether they were (1) flatly
disapproved, (2) merely postponed, or (3) approved in principle, subject
to gradual implementation. At the Honolulu Conference, where many of the
proposed actions were discussed with U.S. officials from the theatre, many
practical considerations were aired which showed that delayed implementa-
tion would be a reasonable course of action. 19/ But such factors would
have provided equally valid reasons for either deciding against the pro-
posals or for merely deferring a decision until a later, more appropriate
time. The most significant point, for an understanding of the events and
decisions of the second half of 1964, is that these options remained "on
the shelf" for possible implerfientation should favorable circumstances
arise.

4 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
