Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

hot pursuit actions into Laotian and Cambodian border areas. Phase II
provided for "tit-for-tat" air strikes, airborne/amphibious raids, and
aerial mining operations against targets in North Vietnam. Phase III pro-
vided for increasingly severe air strikes and other actions against North
Vietnam, going beyond the "tit-for-tat" concept. According to the plan,
air strikes would be conducted primarily by GVN forces, assisted by U.S.
aireratt.

As part of OPLAN 37-64, a detailed list of specific targets for
air attack in North Vietnam was drawn up, selected on the basis of three
criteria: (a) reducing North Vietnamese support of communist operations
in Laos and South Vietnam, (b) limiting North Vietnamese capabilities to
take direct action against Laos and South Vietnam, and finally (c) impairing
North Vietnam's capacity to continue as an industrially viable state.
Detailed characteristics were provided for each target, together with damage
effects that could be achieved by various scales of attack against them.
This target list, informally called the "94 Target List," became the basic
reference for much of the subsequent planning for air strikes against North
Vietnam, when target selection was involved. 1/

The Tonkin Gulf incident of 4-5 August, which precipitated the
first U.S. reprisal action against North Vietnam, had enabled the Adminis-
tration to obtain a broad Congressional Resolution of support and had brought
with it & prompt and substantial forward deployment of U.S. military forces
in Southeast Asia, to deter or deal with possible communist reactions to
the U.S. reprisal strike. Encouraged somewhat by the fact that no such
reaction occurred, U.S. officials began to look more hopefully toward force-
ful military alternatives that might help salvage the deteriorating situation
in South Vietnam. A new wave of disorders and governmental eruptions in
Saigon gave added impetus to a succession of JCS proposals for intensified
harassing and other punitive operations against North Vietnam. Their recom-
mendations included retaliatory actions for stepped up VC incidents, should
they occur, and initiation of continuing air strikes by GVN and U.S. forces
against North Vietnamese targets. 2/

A Presidential decision was issued on 10 September.* Besides some
modest additional pressures in the Lao panhandle and covert actions against
North Vietnam, it authorized only preparations for retaliatory actions
against, North Vietnam in the event of any attack on U.S. units or any extra-
ordinary North Vietnamese/VC action against South Vietnam. The forward
deployments that had been carried out in connection with the Tonkin incident
and in accordance with OPIAN 37-64 were kept in place, but the forces
involved were precluded from action in South Vietnam and no decision was
made to utilize them in operations in Laos or North Vietnam.

Throughout September and October, the JCS continued to urge
stronger U.S, action not only in North Vietnam, but also‘in Laos, where
infiltration was clearly on the increase, and in South Vietnam, where
GVN survival was becoming precarious and time seemed to be running out.

* Wational Security Action Memorandum No. 314, 10 September 1964 (TS)

3 “all: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
