Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

1S]
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and other civil projects and to fight if necessary." This last phrase
was explicitly (and correctly) linked to the fact that the area in
which the floods had taken place (the Delta) was precisely the area of
greatest Viet Cong strength. s5y/

A final question of great importance did not have to be resolved
during this review: for although the Taylor Report had stressed the
idea of eventually bombing the north, no immediate decision or commit-
ment on this was recommended.

On the first of these issues (the quid pro quo for U.S. aid) our
record tells us that demands were made on Diem, as we will see when we
come to the actual decision. The newspaper stories strongly suggest
thet the decision to ask for a quid pro quo was made, at the latest,
inmediately following the return of the Taylor Mission. But the record
does not show anything about the reasoning behind this effort to vres-
sure Diem to agree to reforms as a condition for increased U.S. aid,
nor of what the point of it was. It certainly conflicted with the mein
drive of the Taylor Mission Report. The report not only suggested no
such thing, but put a great deal of stress on a cordial, intimate
relationshio with the Diem regime. Pressure for reform (especially
when publicly made, as they essentially were in the leaked stories)
was hardly likely to promote eordiality. Durbrow's experience earlier
in the year had shown that pressure would have the opposite result.

Consequently, the President's handling of this issue had the effect
of undermining from the start what appeared to have been a major premise
of the strategy recommended to the President: that Diem was "in principle”
prepared for what plainly amounted to a "limited partnership," with the
U.S. in running his country and his Army. * 6/

The advantages, from the American view, of the President's decision
to place demands on Diem were presumably that it might (contrary to
realistic expectations) actually push Diem in the right direction; and
that if this did not work, it would somewhat limit the American commit-
ment to Diem. The limit would come by making clear that the U.S. saw
a good deal of the problem as Diem's own responsibility, and not just
@ simple matter of external aggression. fhe balance of this judgment
would turn substantially on whether whoever was making the decision
judged that the "limited partnershin” idea was really much more realistic
than the trying to pressure Dien, and on whether he wanted to limit the
U.S. commitment, rather than make it unambiguous. Further, the cables
from Saigon hed clearly shown that many South Vietnamese were hoping the
Americans vould put pressure on Diem, so that although such tactics

* A cable to Saigon November 4 asked Nolting whether he thought Diem
mignt agree to, among other things, a proposal to establish a National
Emergency Council which, in addition to the senior members of Diem's
army and adininistration would include a "mature and hardheaded
American...to participate in all decisions."

116 ie
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
