Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

IF

a

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group, Vietnam, had been
augmented in 1961 by aviation, communications, and intelligence units,
as well as by Special Forces and other advisers. The Secretary of
Defense plainly intended that plans be devised for terminating the
mission of the augmenting units.

Three days later on 26 July, the JCS formally directed CINCPAC
to develop a Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam (CPSVN) in accordance
with the Secretary's decisions of 23 July. 3/ CINCPAC, in turn, so
instructed COMUSMACV on 14 August, at the same time furnishing addi-
tional guidance and terms of reference elaborating on the original SecDef
decisions at Honolulu and the JCS directive. The stated objective of the
CPSVN was given as: :

Develop a capability within military and para-military
forces of the GVN by the end of CY 65 that will help the GVN
to achieve the strength necessary to exercise permanent and
continued sovereignty over that part of Vietnam which lies
below the demarcation line without the need for continued U.S.
special military assistance.

Development of the plan was to be based on the following assump-
tions: i

a. The insurgency will be under control at the end of three
years (end of CY 65).

b. Extensive U.S. support will continue to be required during
the three year period, both to bring the insurgency under
control and to prepare GVN forces for early take-over of
U.S. activities.

ec. Previous MAP funding ceilings for SVN are not applicable.
Program those items essential to do this job. if

NATIONAL CAMPAIGN PLAN

Planning, in two complementary modes, got underway immediately.
Concurrently with development of the unilateral U.S. CPSVN, USMACV
planners prepared a concept and proposed outline of a GVN National Cam-
paign Plan (1CP) for launching an integrated nation-wide campaign of
offensive military operations to eliminate the insurgency and restore
the country to GVN control. A central purpose was to reorganize and
redispose the VNAF and streamline the chain of command, in order to
improve responsiveness, coordination, and general effectiveness of the
military effort against the VC. Greater authority would be centralized
in the Vietnamese Joint General Staff (JGS); Corps Tactical Zones (CTZs)
would be increased from three to four; and each C7Z would have its own
direct air and naval support.

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
