_ situation. However, I do have some recommendations now for steps

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

a

Since leaving Vietnam, I have spent many hours thinking about the
situation there. I] am far from haying a complete proposal to solve the

which should be taken to start eernedyaits the downhill and dangerous
trend in Vietnam. They are: :

a. ‘Lhe U.S. should recognize that Vietnam is in a critical con- .
dition and should treat it as a combat area of the cold war, as an area
requiring emergency treatment,

b. When there is an emergency, the wise thing to do is to pick

the best people you have, people who are experienced in dealing with

this precise type of emergency, and send them to the spot with orders
to remedy the situation. When yout get the people in position and free _
them to work, you should then back them up in every practical way you
can. The real decisions will ke made in little daily actions in Vietnam,
not in Washington. That's why the best are needed on the spot.

c. Our U.S, team in Vietnam should have a hard core of experi-
enced Americans who know and really like Asia and the Asians, dedicated

_ people who are willing to risk their lives for the ideals of freedom, and

who will try to datitence and guide the Vietnamese towards U,S, policy
objectives with the warm friendships and affection which our close
alliance deserves, We should break the rules of personnel assignment,
if necessary, to get such U.S, military and civilians to Vietnam.

d. Under emergency conditions, our aid to Vietnam should be
treated as contingency business and be given expedited priority handling
until we can afford to take a breathing spell.

e. Ambassador Durbrow should be transferred in the immediate
future. He has keen in the "forest of tigers" which is Vietnam for
nearly four years now and I doubt that he himself realizes how tired he
has become or how close he is to individual trees in this big woods.
Correctly or not, the recognized government of Vietnam does not look
upon him as a friend, believing that he sympathized strongly with the
coup leaders of 11 November.

f, The nevr Ambassador should arrive as many weeks as possible
before the April elections, for which the Communists are now actively

‘preparing with their "political struggle" tactics almost unhindered, The

new Ambassador should be a person with marked leadership talents who
can make the Country Team function harmoniously and spiritually, who
