Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I believe it is quite probable that the same practice
might be repeated by the new province and district
chiefs appointed by the MRC... 29,

McCone, therefore, proposed development of a new, covert method of
checking on the information supplied by these regular reporting authori-
ties on the progress of the war and on pacification and other counter-
insurgency efforts. A plan was developed within CIA by 3 January 196}
which called for the formation of a mission of 10 to 12 experienced
intelligence officers, all drawn from CIA, to proceed to Saigon for a
60 to 90 dey TDY beginning about 12 January. There, under the direction
- of the CAS Station Chief, they would undertake:

1. A survey of Vietnamese/American counter-
insurgency reporting machinery;

2. Develop, assess, and recruit new covert sources
of information, to serve as a check, and finally,

3. Assist the station chief in developing recom-
mendations, for submission to Washington through the
Saigon country team, on means of improving overall
GVN and US reporting machinery.

McCone forwarded these plans to McNamara on 7 January for discus-
sion at a meeting that same day. 30/ Following the meeting of 7 January on
this original proposal, a revised proposal was drawn up and submitted
by McCone to McNamara for concurrence on 9 January. 31/ The revision was
largely responsive to a fear of the Secretary that, as originally pro-
posed, the TDY team would serve as a sort of Inspector General func-
tioning independently of both the Country Team and the CAS Station/
Saigon. Accordingly the new draft expressly specified that a separate
reporting system would not be established, nor a reorganization of the
existing reporting system attempted. It would attempt, however, to
develop through covert techniques a method of spot checking the accuracy
of regular reporting and develop also new covert sources of information
on the progress of the war,

In accepting the proposal in a written reply dated 16 January,

Secretary McNamara expressed insistence on making this a team effort,

first by emphasizing that "I do not believe that the team should have

an inspectoral function for the overall reporting system," and second

by adding to the draft submitted for his signature the clause, "but it
should be a joint program involving all of the affected members of the
country team.” When the definitive messages went out to Saigon they

had the concurrence of State, Defense and CIA, 32/ =

It is understandable enough from an administrative point of view
that a formally coordinated unified effort seemed preferable. ‘There
had been notable discords, and failures of communication, and policy
disagreement within the Mission in the past and these had caused
serious problems. Important sources of disagreement remained, and

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
22
