Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

eat! ye
TOP SECRET - Sensitive aitt at?

When discussing general objectives, Lodge and his team got on
smoothly with GVN. In @ meeting with al the top members of General
Minh's government early in January to discuss the eleven points transmitted
with President Johnson's New Year's greeting, they persudaded Iodge that
they were moving effectively on all points except nunber 8, relating to
amesty. This one evoked little enthusiasm, bunt they seid they had it
under study. 22/ The USOM team that discussed economic policy matters
with GVN economists with the objective of limiting the GVN budget deficit
and drawing down its dollar balances found them willing to talk frankly
and’ to examine alternatives freely. GVN was also willing to set up joint
working committees to analyze the budget, the import program, and agri-
cultural policy. However, the U.S. team found that getting jointly agreed
bench mark date and a clear line of authority for policy actions "may yet
prove difficult.” 23/

Moreover, & snag developed on the previously agreed plan to ex-
tend U.S. advisors to district level. In @ one hour meeting January 10
between Ambassador Lodge and General Minh and other top Vietnamese officers
and officials, General Kim stressed the extreme undesirability of Ameri-
cans going into districts and villages. It would play into the hands
of the VC and make the Vietnamese officials look like lackeys. There
would be a colonial flavor to the whole pacification effort. Minh added
that even in the worst and clumsiest days of the French they never went
into the villages or districts. Others present went on to add that they
thought the USIS should carry owt its work strictly hand-in-hand with the
province chief. When Lodge pointed out that most of the USIS teams were
Vietnamese, Minh said, "Yes, but they are considered the same as Vietnamese
who worked for the Japanese and the same as the Vietnamese who drive for
Americans and break traffic laws." General Minh went on to complain about
the U.8. hand in the training of Cao Dai. and Hoa Hao. This was bad because
they then became American type soldiers, not Vietnamese soldiers. Later
in the discussion, General Minh complained that the ICA had made direct
contacts with the above groups. "We simply cannot govern this country
if this kind of conduct continues," he said. 2h/

In reply to the report of this meeting, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
cabled CINCPAC on January 14:

"SecDef seriously concerned regarding...General Don's
earlier agreement on district level advisors as well as
Minh's assertion that no advisors are desired beyond the
regimental level. The Secretary considers, and JCS agree,
that this would be an unacceptable rearward step. State
is preparing a response...in which SecDef and JCS will have
3, hand." a5)

The State guidance to Lodge on January 17 said:

"...We deem it essential to retain advisors down to
sector and battalion level as we now have them, and con-
sider establishment of subsector advisors as highly de-
sirable improvement from our viewpoint. Such advisors

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
