90.

91.

\O
ie)

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page -

tactical and strategic error." On the political aspects

of the war, Trapnell feels that "a strictly military
solution to the war in Indochina is not possible...It is
doubtful if the ordinary people understand the issues at
stake between the rebel and Associated Svates objectives."
The solution in Indochina requires a strong French assault
on the Viet Minh, training of National armies, a defensive
alliance of Asian nations, and a guarantee of the Associated
States borders. Trapnell recomnends a U.S. training mission
for Indochina, and concludes that victory in Indochina is
international rather than local and essentially political as
well as military. Major General Trapnell Debriefing,

BOMBS TOR ces bea enrea onl, BEN ee i ia eed aaah MOG
Indochina is the only nation that has the highest MDAP

priority and thus has precedence over every’ other

nation for allocation of critical military equipment.

The JCS have completed a plan for military intervention

in Indochina and, as well, planned for resumption of

hostilities in Korea. CINCPAC has directed that other

plans be prepared, i.e., blockade of China coast, evacu-~

ation of French forces from Tonkin, etc. Joint Subsidiary

Plans Memorandum for OCB, 5 May 1954.....cccececccccccccscses 421

General Smith reviews the French proposal which has been

sent to the Cabinet for approval. France proposes a

cease~fire take place when "international" control

machinery, besed on Leniel's 5 March conditions, is in .
place. Regular troops would be regrouped into delimited

areas and all other forces disarmed. France essumes that

the Russians would propose 8s follow-on political settle-

ment (coalition) and immediate elections. SECTO 106,

5 May 19S waaieisensins cas ge sestcosseecasawacecspees secees, 423

The NSC 195th Meeting considers Secretary Dulles pessi-

mistic report on Geneva to the President: (1) there is

no responsible French Government to deal with, (2) the

British reject the "regional grouping," (3) the British

want secret talks on Southeast Asia, (4) the expected

communist proposal is for foreign troop withdrawal and

elections, (5) and the U.K. wants a settlement based on

partition, NSC 195th Meeting, 6 May 1954........ccceeecceees 425

Dulles briefs Congressional leaders on tae Geneva Con-
ference and reviews the weaknesses of Britain's position.
Congress members comments are adverse. Dulles states
three conclusions; (1) U.S. should not intervene mili-
tarily, (2) U.S. must push rapidly for a Southeast Asia
community, (3) and the U.S. should not "write off" the
British and French in spite of their weakness in Asia.

TRDUIN SY. G Mag LOS ans py cio eccee Nig vate brislnwc/ane Sebel pwiewae dy RTO

xV s TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ee
