Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I. C. HO CHI MINH: ASIAN TITO?
SUMMARY

Among the more cogent critiques of U.S. policy toward Vietnam is
the contention that the U.S. failed to recognize in Ho Chi Minh a
potential Asian "Tito." This view holds that Ho has always been more
concerned with Vietnam's independence and sovereign viability than
with following the interests and dictates of Moscow and Peking. With
U.5. support, the argument runs, Ho would have adopted some form of
neutrality in the East-West conflict and maintained the DRV as a
natural and durable bulwark against Chinese expansion southward. Thus ,
were it not for "U.S. communist blinders," Ho would have served the
larger purposes of American policy in Asia. Though the focus of inquiry
in this study is the period immediately following World War II, when it
would have been relatively easy to support an anti-Japanese, anti-
colonial Ho, it is often argued that the U.S. neglected another oppor-
tunity after the Geneva Conference of 195) -- and indeed, that U.S.
acceptance of Ho, and a communist dominated Vietnam, may be the only
path to peace in Southeast Asia today. The historical (1945-1954)
argument has a persuasive ring. In the light of the present costs
and repercussions of U.S, involvement in Vietnam, any prior way out
ean seem attractive. It is possible, however, that a dynamic and uni-
fied communist Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh could have been vigorously
expansionist, thus causing unanticipated difficult problems in some
ways comparable to current ones.

Many authors have advanced one version or another of the "Tito"
hypothesis. Some develop the principal thesis that a different U.S.
policy could have moved Ho to non-alignment and opposition to Peking;
others stress the corollary that Ho was forced into dependence upon
Peking and Moscow by American opposition or indifference. Whether Ho
was a nationalist or a communist is not at issue; all of the authors
quoted seem to accept that Ho was a communist, and that a communist
Vietnam would probably have eventuated under his leadership. Rather,
their arguments center on what they perceive to be Ho's willingness to
subordinate communist goals, forms, and international discipline to
attaining Vietnam's independence and unity. A few openly favor a
communist Vietnam on the grounds that only a national communism led
by Ho would be sufficiently strong to survive adjacent to China. They
stress Ho's attempts in 1945 and 1946 to obtain Western backing, and
point out that antipathy to China is a pillar of Viet nationalism.
Many concede that the Tito analogy is not wholly appropriate. Unlike
Tito, Ho came to power after the war without the aid of another com-
munist state. More basically, there was no analogy to be made until
late 1948, when the experiment with Tito seemed like it would work.

C-1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
