Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

53. Address by Vice President Humphrey at Commencement Exercises at
the United States Military Academy, West Point, New York on

June 8, 1966, “Perspective on Asia’; Department of State Bulletin,
July i 1966, p. 2.

x
"World peace and security will be threatened by propaganda, sub-
version, and agitation, by economic warfare, by assassination of honest
and able leaders, as well as by the naked use of armed force.

"World peace and security will be threatened, above all, by the
very existence, for two-thirds of mankind, of conditions of hunger,
disease, and ignorance.

"We must learn that the simple solutions of times past will not .
meet the present day challenges and new forms of aggression we face.

"Our 'doves' must learn that there are times when power must be
used. They must learn that there is no substitute for force in the
face of a determined enemy who resorts to pene subversion, and aggres-
sion, whether concealed or open.

"Our 'hawks' must learn that military power is not enough. They
must learn, indeed, that it can be wholly. unavailing if not accompanied
by political effort and by the credible promise to ordinary people of
a better life.

"And all of us must learn to adapt our military planning and actions
to the new conditions of subversive warfare, the so-called ‘wars of
national liberation.'"

ek

"America's role in Asia today is a direct product of the century
that preceded World War II and of the war itself. For with the end of
that war, the responsibilities of victory imposed on us a stabilizing
role in Japan and Korea. And with the beginning of the cold war, the
Communist victory in China, and the outbreak of the Korean war, American
power was the only shield availeble to fragile and newly independent
nations in non-Comnunist Asia."

ee

"But what of the states of former French Indochina? There, of
course, is the present focal point of war and revolution in Asia. And
there we are tested as never before. We face a situation of external
aggression and subversion against a postcolonial nation that has never
had the breathing space to develop its politics or its economy.

p-84
