Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

jr
SECRET :
PT Beb Bi GR AM RECEIVED
From: SECSTATE WASHINGTON Date: March 9, 1950.
No: 136
Code: Secret . Recd: March 10, 1950

Sent Saigon 136, Paris 1023, London 1070, repeated Tokyo 212
March 9, 5 PM, Secret

Re Paris tel 62 to Saigon. Dept believes situation clearly points
to possibility of friction between French and Viets re mechanics of ~~
handling US military aid. Althouch vitally interested in satisfactory
solution, Lept feels nothing to cain by US intervention in what is a
matter for joint decision three states and French. Therefore Le;ation
should exercise caution in maintaininz neutral attitude unless lack
agreement endangers program, in which case Dept will act. Your con-
tinuing progress reports required.

Similarly the related problems concerning the relations of the states
with france and with each other are obviously capable of friction, which
US should be careful to avoid.

In meantime, the status of the French prepared request for military
aic has been received in only basic form, and avaits further clarification
from Paris (see Leptel 850 to Paris, repeated Saigon as 109). Request
for economic aid in more understandable terms has been: receivede ‘Embassy
here states PIGNON has copies both economic and military lists Saigon
for information GRIFFIN Mission and Lezation. Exercise care ensure no
embarrassment to French or states results from your use such lists.
BAO DAI's long request to JESSUP now being translated, and not yet available
for study. French request for military aid from UK not yet available Dept.

Against. background foregoing, followine comments on Urtel 157, March 6.

Paracsraph 2 Agencies represented on NAC working sroup have received
all relevant documents on economie discussions. Summary Fao Dai Memo
likewise available, but full translation not completed. Military requests
in present basic form (see above) not made available to all civil azencies
pending clarification.

Paragraph Se Dept has no informtion.

Paragraph 4. Three states’en] French must, we feel, reach own asreement
.on unique lists. Above all, we cannot urge acceptance of one or another
draft unless we are prepsred to accept it, and this is not true of any
presentation hitherto made.

| pa at st
Paragraph 5. Griffin Mission function is clearly understood to be fact
sc Rie ei SECRET ACHESON
