_

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

legitimate indigenous movements and should be withdrawn. The Viet Minh
volte-face came, as in the other cases, soon after. A Laotian delegate
reported on 23 June that the Viet Minh were in apparent accord on the
withdrawal of their "volunteers" and even on Laos' retention of French
treaty bases. The Viet Minh's principal demand was that French military
personnel in Laos be reduced to a minimum. Less clearly, Dong made sug-
gestions about the creation of a government of "national union,” Pathet
Lao participation in 1955 elections for the national assembly, and a
temporary arrangement" governing areas dominated by Pathet Lao military
forces. 31/ But these latter remarks were meant to be suggestive; Dong
had come around to the Western view (now shared by the Soviets and Chinese)
on the important point of removing Viet Minh troops from Laos. lLIater in
the conference, Dong would have to make a similar retreat on Cambodia.

h. USSR and China Agree to a Control Commission

While the Viet Minh from the beginning had pressed for no
outside control or supervision of either military or political agreements
concerning Indochina, all other delegations quickly moved in that direc-
tion. The Soviets took the lead on the communist side. The major issue
was. the composition and voting procedure of .the proposed International Con-
trol Commission. From the Western standpoint, the ICC should not have
had-a communist representative, since no communist could be considered
neutral. The Soviets retorted, as expected, that Western backing of a
Colombo Power (India, Pakistan, Indonesia, Ceylon, or Burma) was subject to
the same objection, namely, that each of these nations always would vote
with the Western bloc. As the matter evolved, a compromise settlement
provided for a three-nation formula including one communist state. Both
aspects of this agreement were based on Molotov's original plan. 32/

As to voting procedure, the communists not surprisingly in-
sisted. on unanimity, at least for "major questions." The West, while accept-
ing that rule, considered pushing for acceptance of majority voting to de-
termine whether a question was minor or major. 33/ The result (Article
42 of the Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities in Vietnam) was to
specify unanimous agreement among the Commission representatives on matters
pertinent to violations, or threats of violations, that might lead to the
resumption of hostilities. However, minority reports could be issued where
the Commission was unable to agree on a recommendation.

i. Sino-Soviet Influence Has Significant Effect

There is little doubt that the conference would not have been
able to move against the initial DRV intransigence without assistance from
the Soviets and Chinese. In the opening phase of discussion, both the
major powers voiced. complete agreement with the DRV in policy and aims,
but through a series of moves both powers also made great efforts to soften
the DRV hard line and to allow enough flexibility for concessions. The
first problem, involving the seating of the Pathet Lao and Khmer, was solved
by Soviet and Chinese agreement to postpone -- indefinitely, as it turned
out -- any discussion of the question. The second stumbling block was the

C-25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
