Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

France, as indicated by the "dovish" votes of the National Assembly
favoring an early settlement of the protracted war. Premier Laniel and
French officials told the U.S. Embassy that they considered the Ho Chi
Minh offer pure propaganda, but said also that Ho's move had produced the
intended impact on public and military circles in France and Indochina.
Laniel mentioned that President Vincent Auriol had become so excited by
Ho's proposal that he told Laniel "to consult representatives of three
Associated States immediately with view to seeking earliest possible
opening of negotiations with representatives of Ho Chi Minh. Laniel had
flatly refused..." But American officials were skeptical. The U.S.
Embassy reported that a Laniel speech of November 24, 1953, "left con-
siderable latitude for negotiations," and that Ho's offers had increased
the pressure for a settlement. 2/

b. Early U.S. Opposition to Negotiations

The consistent U.S. policy was to attempt to steer the French
clear of the negotiating table pending substantial military gains on the
battlefield. In bilateral U.S.-French talks in July, 1953, while the
Korean armistice was being discussed at Panmunjom, Foreign Minister Bidault
told Secretary Dulles that parallel talks should be pursued on Indochina.
Bidault explained that the French public would never understand why
negotiations were fit and honorable for Korea but were not for Indochina.
4A cease-fire in Korea, with nothing similar in prospect for Indochina,
would make his government's position "absolutely impossible."

Secretary Dulles in reply stressed that “negotiations with
no other alternative usually end in capitulation." In the Korean case,
Dulles said, the alternative was the U.S. threat of "other and unpleasant
measures” which the Communists realized we possessed. He urged the French
to adopt the Navarre Plan, not only for military reasons, but because it
would improve the French negotiating position. Dulles made it clear that
the U.S. felt it was inadvisable to have the Indochina war inscribed on
the agenda, of a post-armistice political conference on Korea. 3/ The U.S.
position at this time foreclosed negotiating on Indochina until after a
Chinese decision to eliminate or cut down aid to the Viet Minh. 4/ In
general, the U.S. sought to convince the French that military victory was
the only guarantee of diplomatic success.

Dulles wished the French to continue the war because of his
deep conviction that Indochina was a principal link in the line of the
containment of Communism. In addition, Washington was undoubtedly
influenced by optimistic reports on the progress of the war. General
O'Daniel reported from Saigon that a French victory was likely-if U.5.
material support was forthcoming. On February 6, 1954, it was announced
that forty B-26 bombers and 200 U.S. technicians to service them would
be sent to Indochina. Admiral Radford told a House Foreign Relations Sub-
committee, a month before the siege of Dien Bien Phu began (March, 1954),
that the Navarre Plan was "a broad strategic concept which within a few
months should insure a favorable turn in the course of the war."

B-18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
