Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Phe policy of founding the Indochinese democratic front
between 1936 and 1939, the Viet Minh front between 1941 and
1951, and the Lien Viet front /1946-1951/; the decision of
signing the 6 March 1946...preliminary accord [Ho's accommo-
dation with France/... -- all these are typical examples of
the clever application of the...instruction of Lenin." 61/

In 1951, Ho Chi Minh himself set forth a Leninist account of the ori-
gins of the Viet Minh and its role in the forming of the DRV and the war
against France. In February, 1951, addressing the Congress of the Viet-
namese Communist Party (Lao Dong), Ho explained his political maneuvers
over the previous decades. Reviewing the history of the Russian and Chinese
revolutions, he pointed out that Vietnam, too, had felt the stirrings of

change, and the Vietnamese working class"...began to struggle and needed
& vanguard team, a general staff to lead it. On January 6, 1930, our Party
came into being..." He described how the Party had brought about the forria-

tion of the Viet Minh, and the foundation of the DRV. Then in 1945 the
French colonialists reappeared in South Vietnam and Chinese-sponsored re-
actionary government seemed in prospect in North Vietnam:

"In the face of that grave and pressing situation, our
Party did everything possible to keep itself in existence,
to work and develop to give discreet and more effective
leadership in order to have the time gradually to consoli-
date the forces of the People's power and to strengthen
the National United Front.

"At that time, the Party could not hesitate: Hesitation
meant failure. The Party had to make quick decisions and
to take measures -- painful ones -- to save the situation.
The greatest worry was about the Party's proclamation of
dissolution. But in reality it went underground. And
though underground, the Party continued to lead the admin-
istration and the people...

"Mention should be made of the [agreements with the French
in 19467 because they were considered as ultrarightist and
caused much grumbling. But in the opinion of our comrades
and compatriots in the South, they were correct. Indeed
they were, because our comrades and compatriots cleverly
availed themselves of the opportunity to build up and de-
velop their forces.

"Lenin said that even if a compromise with bandits was
adyantageous to the revolution, he would do it..." 62/

Ho then went on to discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the resistance
against the French, to describe the world situation in terms of a monolithic
bloc of "democratic" nations against which was arrayed the United States

' and other reactionary powers, and to depict, as part of that larger clash,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
