Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Well, now, we don’t object to neutrals or policies of neutrality
or neutralization in that sense. There are a great many countries who are
unalined with whom we have very close and friendly relations. We are not
looking for allies. We are not looking for military bases out in Southeast
Asia. We are not even looking for a military presence in that part of the
world.

"Our troops are there assisting the South Vietnamese because people
in the north have been putting pressures on Southeast Asia. If those pres-
sures did not exist, those troops wouldn't be there. But when one talks
about neutralizing South Vietnam in the present context, this means, really,!
getting the Americans out. That is all that that means.

"Now, North Vietnam is not going to be neutralized. It's going to
remain a member of the communist camp. And from the time that it was estab-_
lished, North Vietnam has broken agreements and has applied pressure on its
neighbors, particularly Laos and South Vietnam. So that if anyone has in
mind that South Vietnam should be neutralized, meaning that Americans should
simply go home and leave it exposed to takeover from the north, then this
isn't going to happen.

"Now, if South Vietnam were independent and secure, it would be per-
fectly free to pursue its own policy. It can be unalined, as far as we
are concerned.”

2, TV Interview with President Johnson, 15 March 1964, Public Papers of
The Presidents, Johnson, 1963-6, o. 370:

"MR. SEVAREID: Mr. Kennedy said, on the subject of Vietnam, I think,
that he did believe in the ‘falling domino’ theory, that if Vietnam were
lost, that other countries in the area would soon be lost.

"THE PRESIDENT: I think it would be a very dangerous thing, and I
share President Kennedy's view, and I think the whole of Southeast Asia
would be involved and that would involve hundreds of millions of people,
and I think it's -- it cannot be ignored, we must do everything that we
ean, we must be responsible, we must stay there and help them, and that
is what we are going to do."

3. "United States Policy in Vietnam," by Robert S. McNamara, Secretar
of Defense, 26 March 1964, Department of State Bulletin, 13 April 1964,
p. 562:

Sas, ec

D-4
