iss:

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

be decisive act and must be sent to achieve a completely
decisive mission, This mission would probably require, over
time, increased numbers of U.S. troops; DRV intervention
would probably increase until a large number of U.S, troops
were required, three or more divisions. 12,

This assessment differed from that in General Taylor's cables only
in not stressing the hope that a U.S, willingness to bomb the north
would deter North Vietnamese escalation of its own commitment.

A special NIE prepared at this time reached essentially the same
conclusions,

This SNIE, incidentally, is the only staff paper found in the
available record which treats communist reactions primarily in terms of
the separate national interests of Hanoi, Moscow, and Peiping, rather
than primarily in terms of an overall communist strategy for which
Hanoi, is acting as an agent, In particular, the Gilpatric Task Force
Report, it will be recalled, began with references to a communist
‘master plan' for taking over Southeast Asia. The Taylor Mission
Report, similarly, began with a section on "Communist Strategy in
Southeast Asia" and opening:

At the present time, the Communists are pursuing a

clear and systematic strategy in Southeast Asia. It is

a strategy of extending Communist power and influence in
ways which bypass U.S. nuclear strength, U.S. conventional
naval, air, and ground forces, and the conventional strength
of indigenous forces in the area, Their strategy is rooted
in the fact that international law and practice does not

yet recognize the mounting of guerrilla war across borders
as aggression justifying counterattack at the source. 13/

The November 5 SNIE presumably indicates the principal courses of
action that were under formal review at the time:

The courses of action here considered were given to the
intelligence community for the purposes of this estimate and
were not intended to represent the full range of possible
courses of action. The given courses of action are:

A. The introduction of a US airlift into and within
South Vietnam, increased logistics support, and an increase
jin MAAG strength to provide US advisers down to battalion
level;

B. The introduction into South Vietnam of a US force
of about 8,000 - 10,000 troops, mostly engineers with some
combat support, in response to an appeal from President
Diem for assistance in flood relief;

"120 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
