Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Cochinchina from a French colony to a part of the Associated State of
Vietnam. A debate on these points is expected early in March. Bao
Dai also wishes the prompt signing and ratification of a treaty cover-
ing the subjects reserved under the Baie d'Along Protocol, but it seems
doubtful if this can be accomplished in the time available before his
return. Disagreement still continues on certain points, the most
important apparently being over separate diplomatic representation for
the new state. The French are believed to have offered consulates in
neighboring countries and Vietnam officers in certain French missions.

Opinions differ considerably as to the chances of the French
Government to obtain the necessary parliamentary action. Undoubtedly
opposition will be violent from both the extreme right and left wings
while the Socialist Party will be seriously split. However, specul-
lation at this time is pointless since the matter will presumably be
settled by the time the conference opens at New Delhi.

A more pertinent question is - assuming Bao Dai returns - what
chances hag he to establish a stable government, split away the non-
Communist followers of Ho Chi Minh, and eventually pacify the country?
It is believed that the most important factor will be the nature of
the French agreement with Bao Dai and the meaning which it gives to
"4ndependence within the French Union." If this independence is a
sham with most real authority remaining in French hands, then Communist
propaganda proclaiming him a puppet and a traitor will be vindicated.

A second factor is the manner in which the relurn is staged
and the agreement is implemented. Because of the delay, inaction, and
disunity on the part of the French in recent months, the Vietnam leaders
and people have become cynical and distrustful. The popular enthusi-
asm which might have been aroused by the return of Bao Dai last June
ean no longer be expected. Furthermore, the French civilian population
in Indochina will be sullenly hostile to any new regime while few of-
ficials can be counted on to offer real cooperation in the difficult
transition perido. The result of the French local elections in March
will also be a factor since if they forecast a return of de Gaulle,
doubt willl be cast on the permanence of the agreement with Bao Dai.

Finally much will depend on Bao Dai's ability to resolve the
rivalry and intrigue between Vietnam leaders and the regional jealousy
and suspicion between the three provinces which are to form the Vietnam
state. The Tonkinese are poor but energetic, intelligent and aggressive,
the Annamese poor but cultured and proud, while the Cochinchinese feel
that the other provinces are interested mainly in sharing the wealth of
their region. Opposition to the French and Chinese is about the only
thing that the leaders of the three provinces see eye to eye on. Cochin-
chinese separatism has been encouraged and supported by French business
interests and less openly by many French officials.

B. Internal Situation in Cambodia and Laos

The people of Cambodia and Laos differ in race, religion, and
temperament from the Vietnamese, and the problem of their relation with
France is less difficult and acute. Cambodia has good reason to fear

the aggression

164
