Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

JOHNSON ADMINISTRATION - 1965

SUMMARY

The level of war was escalated by introduction of increased U.S.
combat troop strength and the initiation of air strikes against targets
in North Vietnam. The Administration justified the escalation on the
basis of increased infiltration of North Vietnamese units into South pail
Vietnam and, in general, justified U.S. involvement using much the same ;
rationale as the Kennedy Administration. The "domino theory," however,
was de-emphasized in light of communist proclamations and predictions
for success. The role of Communist China was given more publicity.
The Administration's public pronouncements stressed the following:

a. The U.S. had been committed ten years before and had pledged
help to the people of South Vietnam. "Three Presidents have supported
that pledge” and it would not be broken. The "integrity of the American
commitment" is at the heart of the problem as a point of national honor.

b. The security of the U.S. was tied closely to the expansion of
communism in Southeast Asia: if the American counterinsurgency efforts
are defeated in Vietnam, they can be defeated anywhere in the world.
Failure to halt aggression through "wars of national liberation” would
see increasing communist pressure on neighboring states and subsequently
greater aggression. "These are big stakes indeed."

ec. The basic issue of the conflict was "letting the nations of the
area develop as they see fit"; if South Vietnam fell to communist control
it would be difficult to prevent the fall of neighboring states. The "domino
theory” was not considered a suitable explanation for the SEA situation.

d. "The confused nature of this conflict cannot mask the fact that
it is the new face of an old enemy. Over this war -- and all Asia -- is
another reality: the deepening shadow of Communist China. The rulers
in Hanoi are urged on by Peiping.” z

e. South Vietnam represented a major test of the communism's new
strategy of "wars of liberation." Veiled aggression under this strategy
had its source in North Vietnam -- previously a privileged sanctuary --
and free nations had to defend themselves. "The simple issue is that
military personnel and arms have been sent across an international
demarcation line contrary to international agieements and laws."

D-21 |
