Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

III. A. 1. U.S. PRE-CONFERENCE MANEUVERS, JANUARY-APRIL 1954

1. U.S. Aims to Keep the Fight on the Battlefield

&. U.S. Opposed to Geneva Conference

Negotiation of a settlement of the Indochina Wer was
never happily accepted by the United States. Consistently, Washington
took the position that France should negotiate only from a posture of
clear military advantage which, assuming success of the Navarre Plan,
would, not come about until some time in 1955. While recognizing strong
pressures in the French National Assembly and among the French public
for peace, the U.S., clearly influenced by the experience at Panmunjom,
hoped. to convince the Laniel government against making a premature com-
mitment to talks with the Viet Minh. The U.S. could not prevent Laniel
from expressing publicly his administration's desire for peace, but sought
to persuade him against actually sitting down at the bargaining table.
As late as December 1953, Laniel agreed that Washington's approach was
the correct one. i Two months later, however, the picture had
changed. At Berlin, the Big Four decision to convene an international
conference on Indochina at Geneva evidenced the irresistible pressure
in French government circles for talks with the Viet Minh.

b. Alternatives to Military Victory Appear Infeasible

Compelled to go along with Anglo-French preference for
negotiating with the communists, the U.S. nevertheless did not shake
its pessimism over the probable results. Our position remained that
nothing short of military victory could settle the Indochina War in
a manner favorable to Free World interests. The rationale behind this
unequivocal perspective on negotiations was first set out fully by the
JCS in March 1954, when the Chiefs examined the alternatives to military
victory and found them all infeasible or unacceptable to the U.S. A
cease-fire prior to a political settlement, the JCS paper stated, prob-
ably would "lead to a political stalemate attended by a concurrent and
irretrievable deterioration of the Franco-Vietnamese military position.”
A coalition government would lead to communist seizure of power from
within, with the U.S, helpless to prevent it. Partition, on the other
hand, would amount to recognition of communist success by force of arms,
cession to the communists of the key Tonkin Delta, and undercutting of
our containment policy in Asia.

c. Elections Would. Be Subverted

The Chiefs also commented at some length on the difficult
question of elections. They took the position that even if elections
in Vietnam could be carried out along democratic lines (which they
doubted), a communist victory would almost certainly result because
of communist territorial control, popular support, and superior tactics:

A-5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
