122

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(4) US reaction to proposal to request govt Nationalist China
to send one division of combat troops for operations in southwest
provinces.

ee ae ee Ue

When Thuan raised question of US combat-trainer units, I asked spe-
cifically whether this was President's considered request, men- j
tioning his oft-repeated views re US combat forces here. Thuan
confirmed that this was considered request from President; confirmed
that Diem's views had changed in light of worsening situation.
Idea was to have 'symbolic' US strength near 17th parallel, which
would serve to prevent attack there and free up GVN forces now
stationed there for combat operations; Thuan said President Diem
also thought similar purpose could be achieved by stationing US
combat units in several provincial seats in highlands, thus freeing
ARVN guard forces there. I told him this represented major request
coming on heels of President Diem's request for bilateral security
treaty with United States. I asked whether this request was in
lieu of the security treaty. Thuan first said that it represented
a first step, which would be quicker than a treaty, and that time
‘was of essence. After some discussion of the pro's and con's of a
possible defense treaty (effect on SEATO, ICC, ratification pro-
cedures, etc.), Thuan said he felt that proposal for stationing
token US forces in SVN would satisfy GVN and wuld serve the purpose
better than a mutual defense treaty. (He had evidently not thought
through this nor discussed it with Diem.)
Me KKH HH
Nolting then indicated he reacted skeptically to Diem’s suggestim of bringing
in Chiang's forces, and comments to Washington that he thought "this was a
trial balloon only." He concluded the cable:
The above questions will undoubtedly be raised with Gen Taylor.
While it is obvious that GVN is losing no opportunity to ask for
additional support as result our greater interest and concern
this area, situation here, both militarily and psychologically,
has moved in my judgment to point where serious and prompt con-
Sideration should be given to these requests. 13/

This cable arrived in Washington the night of October 13. The following
day an unidentified source provided the New York Times with a detailed ex-
planation of what the Taylor Mission was to do. From the way the Times
handled the story it is plain that it came from a source authorized to speak
for the President, and probably from the President himself. The gist of
the story was that Taylor was going to Saigon to look into all sorts of
things, one of which, near the bottom of the list, was the question of U.S.
troops at some time in the indefinite future. Along with a lot of more

87 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
