fad
wf)

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"In order to contribute to the security of the area pending the
further development of national forces for this purpose, the representa-
tives of France indicated that France is prepared to retain forces of
its Expeditionary Corps, in agreement with the government concerned,
within the limits permitted under the Geneva agreements and to an extent
to be determined. The United States will consider the question of
financial assistance for the Expeditionary Corps in these circumstances
in addition to support for the forces of each of the three Associated
States. These questions vitally affect each of the three Associated
States and are being fully discussed with them.

"The channel for French and United States economic aid, budgetary
support, and other assistance to each of the Associated States will be
‘direct to that state. The United States representatives will begin
discussions soon with the respective governments of the Associated
States regarding direct aid. The methods for efficient coordination
of French and United States aid programs to each of the three Associated
States are under consideration and will be developed in discussions with
each of these states.

"After the bilateral talks, the chiefs of diplomatic missions in
Washington of Cambodia, Laos and Viet Nam were invited to a final
meeting to have an exchange of views and information on these matters.
The representatives of all five countries are in complete agreement on
the objectives of peace and freedom to be achieved in Indochina."

17. Aid to the State of Viet-Nem: Message from the President of the
United States to the President of the Council of Ministers of

Viet-Nam, October 23 1O5u Department of State Bulletin

November 15, 1954, pp. 735-730: :

"Dear Mr. President: I have been following with great interest
the course of developments in Viet-Nam, particularly since the conclu-
sion of the conference at Geneva. The implications of the agreement
concerning Viet-Nam have caused grave concern regarding the future of a
country temporarily divided by an artificial military grouping, weakened

by a long and exhausting war and faced with enemies without and by their
subversive collaborators within.

"Your recent requests for aid to assist in the formidable project
of the movement of several hundred thousand loyal Vietnamese citizens
away from areas which are passing under a de facto rule and political
ideology which they abhor, are being fulfilled. I am glad that the
United States is able to assist in this humaniterian effort.

, "We heve been exploring ways and means to permit our aid to Viet-
Nam to be more effective and to make a greater contribution to the
welfare and stability of the Government of Viet-Nam. I am, accordingly,
instructing the American Ambassador to Viet-Nem to examine with you in
your capacity as Chief of Government, how an intelligent program of

B-26
