Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. Westmoreland's Attention Turns to the Sanctuaries

However, in spite of Ambassador Lodge's belief that the atten- .
tion of General Westmoreland had been turned toward pacification, and
that pacification was now to receive first priority, events were occur-
ring which began to divert COMUSMACV's attention:

The NVA/VC had planned to shift into the final annihila-
tion phase as far back as early 1965. ‘The buildup of US forces
in particular in late 1965 and early 1966 inhibited the shift
by the VC into their final phases. As an alternative the enemy
attempted to build up larger forces in certain areas in accor-
dance with Giap's version of "strategic mobility." The areas
wherein the enemy attempted these buildups were Quang Tri
Province in the I CTZ, and the border areas opposite the high-
lands in the II CTZ. In July it appeared that the enemy might
also attempt to create a holding area between the highlands and
the Delta by the use of sufficient forces to prevent the US and
FW forces from reinforcing the main threat in the highlands.

During late June and early July the NVA attempted to move
the 3248 Div across the DMZ without detection and establish 4
base area complete with underground shelters and supply caches.
At the same time the NVA/VC attempted to establish a base for a
two or three division force in the southwestern part of Kontum
Province. In addition, it appeared that in War Zone C an attempt
would be made to train and re-equip the 9th VC Div and reinforce
it with a regiment of the NVA, and to establish a base area east
of Tay Ninh. With the advent of the northeast monsoon season in
October the NVA/VC had planned to launch attacks from the base
area into Quang Tri and Thua Thien. The NVA 2d Div was to make
diversionary attacks alongs the coast between Quang Tri and Quang
Ngai. From the base area in southern Kontum an attack to the
east would be made in coordination with the NVA 3d Div in Binh
Dinh. The objective was to control the Pleiku-Qui Nhon axis, a
classic element of strategy which long has been of interest to
the NVA and VC. The main effort in the III CfZ was an attack
from the base east of Tay Ninh by the 9th VC Div and the 101st
NVA Regt. The aim of this attack was to control Tay Ninh, Bien
Quong, and Hau Nghia, the three provinces northwest of Saigon.
In the Delta the VC continued random attacks on outposts and
isolated units. Toward the end of the year the enemy disposition
of one division in Quang Ngai, one in Binh Dinh and one in Phu
Yen indicated a possible intention to retain control over large
population centers and 10C's and to increase his access to rice,
fish, and salt. The enemy dispositions also made it possible for
him to threaten to isolate the I 0TZ. 20/

By July, the focus of operations had shifted. In I Corps during
early July, Operation HASTINGS, the largest combined operation of the

62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
