Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

pressure on the GVN, 10/ (Through an intermediary the Embassy learned
that General Thi said that the United States wes too conmitted to leave;
this belief may have led Thi and the Buddhists to feel free to use the
theme as a weapon against GV.) ,

On March 29, the Catholic leaders in whom Lodge had placed his
hopes came out against the GVli and demanded a return to civilian rule. 11/

2. Ky's First Attempt to Suppress the Struggle Movement, April 1966

Events now happened in rapid succession. Assured of Lodge's sym-
pathy, on April 3 Ky declared that Da Ilang was in the hands of Communists.
On April 5, despite mild auestioning from State, MACV airlifted two
battalions of Vietnamese Rangers to Da Nang under personal command of Ky,
and they started to seize the city. That same day the Ist ARVN Division
Commander declared for the Struggle Movement, with his officers backing
him, and U.S. advisers were withdrawn from the Division. On April 6,
"non-essential" U.S. civilians withdrew from Hue. On April 8, the GVli
flew two more Ranger battalions to Da Nang, using its own airlift after
MACV refused to provide any. .On April 9, U.S. representatives protested
to Struggle Movement leaders about Howitzers under their control positioned
within range of the Da liang airbase; the leaders agreed to pull them back.
Two hundred U.S. and third country civilians evacuated Da Nang. 12/

Washington played little role in all this. From time to time it
offered mild advice, but Lodge had a free hand. It was his decision to
withhold any further U.S. airlift on April 8, although after he acted
State agreed by urging him to push GV toward a political rather than a
military solution;

Accordingly we believe you should not repeat not urge
immediate Da Nang operations at present, but rather that
entire focus of your efforts at all levels should be to
get political process started.

(It was at this time that Lodge wrote his long cable, discussed in the
next section below, saying that the U.S. does not have enough influence
in Vietnam,and that it should set up a leverage system that bypasses
Saigon and works at the Province level.) lodge accepted the fact of
Buddhist power, and wanted to avoid bloodshed, but as always his syn-
pathies were squarely with the military leadership:

The political erisis which has been gripping Vii is now
almost one month old. The situation has deteriorated steadily
as the Buddhist opposition has increased pressure on the GVN.

Buddhist demands, when stripped of hypocrisy [odds]. «
poil down to a naked grab for power.

15 _-« MOP_ SECRET - Sensitive
