Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

General Maxwell Taylor, like Bundy, sought to place the
alternatives available to the U.S, into some sort of framework and to
package the specific actions and responses to the situation the U.S.
might take so as to create several viable options for consideration
by the group. The memo he drafted on alternatives was more important
finally than the one done by Bundy since Taylor sent a copy of it
directly to the President in his capacity as Special Military Advisor,
as well as giving it to the Clifford Group. With his background as a
military man, past Chairman of the JCS, and former Ambassador to Saigon
Taylor's views carry special weight in any deliberation. His memo was
sent to the White House even before the DPM the Clifford Group was
working on and is therefore included in part here. Taylor wisely
began by reconsidering the objectives of the U.S. involvement in Vietnam,
both past and potential. They were, as he saw it, four:

Alternative Objectives of U.S. Policy in South Viet-Nam

2. The overall policy alternatives open to the U.S.
have always been and continue to be four in number. The
first is the continued pursuit of our present objective
which has been defined in slightly different terms but always
in essentially the same sense by our political leaders. For
the purpose of this paper, I am taking the statement of
President Johnson in his speech at Johns Hopkins University
in April, 1965: "Our objective is the independence of
South Viet-Nam and its freedom from attack. We want nothing
for ourselves, only that the people of South Viet-Nam be
allowed to guide their own country in their own way."

3. We have sometimes confused the situation by sug-
gesting that this is not really our objective, that we
have other things in mind such as the defeat of the "War
of Liberation" technique, the containment of Red China,
and a further application of the Truman Doctrine to the
resistance of aggression. However, it is entirely possible
+o have one or more of these collateral objectives at the
same time since they will be side effects of the attainment
of the basic objective cited above.

h. Of the other three possible objectives, one is
above and:two are below the norm established by the present
one. We can increase our present objecuive to total
military victory, unconditional surrender, and the destruc-
+ion of the Communist Government in North Viet-Nam.
Alternatively, we can lower our objective to a compromise
resulting in something less than an independent Viet-Nam
free from attack or we can drop back further and content
ourselves with punishing the aggressor to the point that
we can withdraw, feeling that the "War of Liberation"
technique has at least been somewhat discredited as a
cheap method of Communist expansion.

, 164 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
