Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

pressing the GVN to make itself more effective and to push forward its
pacification efforts. For the period beyond the first 30 days, the
eoncept provided that

"..fi2rst-phase actions may be continued without chenge,
or additional military measures may be taken including
the withdrawal of dependents and the possible initiation
of strikes a short distance across the border against the
infiltration routes from the DRV. In the letter case
this would become a transitional phase." 142

The kind of actions that the transition would lead to were de-
scribed in a carefully qualified manner:

".eeif the GVN improves its effectiveness to an acceptable
degree and Hanoi does not yield on acceptable terms, or if
the GVN can only be kept going by stronger action, the U.S.
is prepared -- at a time to be determined -- to enter into
@ second phase program...of graduated military pressures
directed systematically against the DRV."

The concept continued with a mixture of suggested actions and rationale
similar to that in Option G. The air strikes would be "progressively
more serious" and "adjusted to the situation." The expected duration
was indicated as "possibly running from two to six months." "Targets

in the DRV. would start with infiltration targets south of the 19th
Parallel and work up to targets north of that point." The approach
would be steady and deliberate, to give the United States the option
"to proceed or not, to escalate or not, and to quicken the pace or not.”
It concluded with the following:

“Concurrently, the U.S, would be alert to any sign of
yielding by Hanoi, and would be prepared to explore
negotiated solutions that attain U.S, objectives in an
acceptable manner., The U.S. would seek to control any
negotiations and would oppose any independent South
Vietnemese efforts to negotiate." 143/

Bundy's draft NSAM also included a summation of the recommended
JCS alternative concept and a brief description of the various military,
political and diplomatic measures to be taken during the first 30 days
following implementation of the concept. Significantly, the latter
included reprisal actions “preferably within 24 hours" for a wide renge
of specified VC provocations. It also contained a specific provision
that DE SOTO Patrols would not be resumed during the initial 30-day
period, but would be considered for the follow-on period.

In the documents available there was no record of the proceed-
ings of the meeting on 30 November. The only evidence available was

» 50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
