Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This deferral decision was strongly supported by Mr. McCone of the CIA

and Ambassador Taylor. Ambassador Taylor, revising his previous position,
believed that the conflict should not be escalated to a level beyond South
Vietnamese capacities to manage it. He opposed overt actions against
North Vietnam as too risky and urged instead that further measures to
strengthen the GVN be taken first. Similarly, Secretary McNamara affirmed
his understanding that "we are not acting more strongly because there is

a clear hope of strengthening the GVN." McNamara went on to urge, however,
that the way be kept open for stronger actions even if the GVN did not
improve or in the event the war were widened by the communists. In notes
taken at this meeting the President asked: "Can we really strengthen the
GVN?"

It is important to differentiate the consensus of the principals at
this September meeting from the views which they had urged on the President
in the preceding spring. In the spring the use of force had been clearly
contingent upon a major reversal -- principally in Laos -- and had been
advanced with the apparent assumption that military actions hopefully would
not be required. Now, however, their views were advanced with a sense that
such actions were inevitable.

The results of the September meeting were recorded in NSAM 314. The
actions that were approved against the DRV for the next three month period
were highly limited and marginal in character. They included resumption
of the off-shore U.S, naval patrols, resumption of covert GVN coastal opera-
tions against the North, limited air and ground operations in the Laotian
corridor, and a preparedness to respond to any further DRV attacks on a
tit-for-tat basis.

From the Septenber meeting forward, there was little basic disagreement
among the principals on the need for military actions against the North.
What prevented action for the time being was a set of tactical considerations,
The President was in the midst of an election eampaign in which he was
presenting himself as the candidate of reason and restraint as opposed to
the quixotic Barry Goldwater. Other concerns were the aforementioned shaki-
ness of the GVN, the uncertainty as to China's response to an escalation,
the desire not to upset the delicate Iaotian equation, the need to design
whatever actions were taken so as to achieve the maximum public and Con-
gressional support, and the implicit belief that overt actions at this time
might bring pressure for premature negotiations--that is, negotiations before
the DRV was hurting. In summary, the period saw the development of the
consensus on military pressures against the North and the decision to defer
them for temporary reasons of tactics.

Vv ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
