Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(92. [ee eee

The anti-troop infiltration system (which would also
function against supply porters) would operate as follows.
There would be a constantly renewed mine field of non-
sterilizing Gravel (and possibly button bomblets), dis-
tributed in patterns covering interconnected valleys and
slopes (suitable for alternate trails) over the entire
barrier region. The actual mined area would encompass
the equivalent of a strip about 100 by 5 kilometers.

There would also be a pattern of acoustic detectors to
listen for mine explosions indicating an attempted pene-
tration. The mine field is intended to deny opening of
alternate routes for troop infiltrators and should be
emplaced first. On the trails and bivouacs currently used,
from which mines may--we tentatively assume--be cleared
without great difficulty, a more dense pattern of sensors
would be designed to locate groups of infiltrators. Air
strikes using Gravel and SADEYES would then be called
against these targets. The sensor patterns would be
monitored 24 hours a day by patrol aircraft. The struck
areas would be reseeded with new mines.

The anti-vehicle system would consist of acoustic
detectors distributed every mile or so along all truck-
able roads in the interdicted area, monitored 24 hours
a day by patrol aircraft, with vectored strike aircraft
using SADEYE to respond to signals that trucks or truck
convoys are moving. The patrol aircraft would distribute
self-sterilizing Gravel over parts of the road net at
dusk. The self-sterilization feature is needed so that
road-watching and mine-planting teams could be used in
this area. Photo-reconnaissance aircraft would cover the
entire area each few days to look for the development
of new truckable roads, to see if the transport of supplies
is being switched to porters, and to identify any other
change in the infiltration system. It may also be desir-
able to use ground teams to plant larger anti-truck mines
along the roads, as an interim measure pending the develop-
ment of effective air-dropped anti-vehicle mines.

The cost of such a system (both parts) has been
estimated to be about $800 million per year, of which by
far the major fraction is spent for Gravel and SADEYES.
The key requirements would be (all numbers are approxi-
mate because of assumptions which had to be made regarding
degradation of system components in field use, and regarding
the magnitude of infiltration): -20 million Gravel mines
per month; possibly 25 million button bomblets per month;

158 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
