Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

III. A. 2. U.S. AND FRENCH ON UNITED ACTION, MAY-MID JUNE 1954.
1. U.S. Attempts to Reach Agreement with France on United Action
a. United Action Stressed as an Option

The formulation of an American approach to negotiations
was paralleled by a search for an appropriate military alternative.
Perceiving the inevitable bogging down of talks at Geneva as the
consequence of communist procrastination, but also mindful of the
bankruptcy of the Navarre Plan, the Administration still hoped. that
"united action" could be achieved once Britain and France realized,
as we had consistently tried to convince them, that negotiating with
the communists was a wasteful exercise. But in keeping open the option
of united action, the Administration, during May and the first half
of June, as in April, carefully conditioned it on a range of French
concessions and promises. Thus, this second go-'round of united
action was not designed to make further negotiations impossible; rather,
it was intended to provide an alternative which the French might utilize
once negotiations were conceded by them to be useless.

b. French Request U.S. Terms for Intervention

The issue of united action arose again in early May when
Premier Laniel, in a talk with Ambassador Dillon, expressed the view
that the Chinese were the real masters of the negotiations at Geneva.
This being the case, Laniel reasoned, the Chinese would probably seek
to drag out the talks over any number of peripheral issues while the
Viet Minh pushed on for a military decision. Readjustment of the
French position in the field, with a major withdrawal on the order of
15 battalions to the Tonkin Delta, was probable very soon, Ianiel said,
unless the U.S. decided to give its active military cooperation. In
the interim, the Premier requested that a U.S. general be dispatched
to Paris to assist in military planning. a

ec. U.S. States Intervention Terms

Ianiel's views failed to make an impression in Washington.
Although the Administration agreed to dispatch a general (Trapnell),
Dulles proposed, and Eisenhower accepted, a series of "indispensable"
conditions to American involvement which would have to be met by Paris; 2/

(1) A formal request for U.S. involvement from France
and the Associated States; similar invitations to other nations;

(2) An immediate, favorable response to those invita-
tions from Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, and. New
Zealand, as well as the assurance that Britain "would:
either participate or be acquiescent";

A-16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
