Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

"So what we face in Viet-lNam is what we have faced on many occa~
sions before--the need to check the extension of Communist power in
order to maintain a reasonable stability in a precarious world...”

we ae) ae

"Under Secretary Smith's statement was only a unilateral declara-’
tion, but in joining SEATO the United States took a solemn treaty
engagement of far-reaching effect. Article IV, paragraph 1, provides
that ‘each Party recognizes that aggression by means of armed attack...
would endanger its own peace and safety, and agrees that it will in
that event act to meet the common danger in accordance with its consti-
tutional processes.’ . :

"Tt is this fundamental SEATO obligation that has from the outset
guided our actions in South Viet-Nem.

"The language of this treaty is worth careful attention. The
obligation it imposes is not only joint but several. The finding that
an armed attack has occurred does not have to be made by a collective
determination before the obligation of each member becomes operative.
Nor does the treaty require a collective decision on actions to be
taken to meet the common danger. If the United States determines that
an armed attack has occurred against any nation to whom the protection
of the treaty applies, then it is obligated to ‘act to meet the common
denger' without regard to the views or actions of any other treaty
member.

2m

"Our multilateral engagement under the SEATO treaty has been
reinforced and amplified by a series of bilateral commitments and
assurances directly to the Government of South Viet-Nam. On October 1,
1954, President Eisenhower wrote to President Diem offering 'to assist
the Government of Viet-Nam in developing and maintaining a strong,
viable state, capable of resisting attempted subversion or aggression
through military means.* In 1957 President Eisenhower and President
Diem issued a joint statement which called attention to ‘the large build-
up of Vietnamese Communist militery forces in North Viet-Nem' and stated:

"Noting that the Republic of Viet-Nam is covered by Article
IV of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, President Eisenhower
and President Ngo Dinh Diem agreed that aggression or subversion threat-
ening the political independence of the Repubiic of Viet-Nam would be
considered as endangering peace and stability.'

"On August 2, 1961, President Kennedy declared that 'the United
States is determined that the Republic of Viet-Nam shall not be lost
+o the Communists for lack of any SuubOrt which the’ United States can

render.'

D-66
