144.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

THE FALL DECISIONS = It

IV.B. CHAPTER VI

I. CONTEXT

Taylor's formal report, as noted, was dated November 3, a day
after the Mission came back to Washington. (A good deal of it had
been written during the stopover at Baguio, in the Philippines,
when Taylor's personal cables to the President had also been written
and sent.) The submission of Teylor's Report was followed by promi-
nent news stories the next morning flatly stating (but without
attribution to a source) that the President “remains strongly opposed
to the dispatch of American combat troops to South Vietnam” and
strongly implying that General Taylor had not recommended such a com-
mitment, 1/ Apparently, only a few people, aside from Taylor,
Rostow and a handful of very senior officials, realized that this was
not exactly accurate--for the summary paper of the Report had not
been very explicit on just what was meant by "a hard commitment to
the ground." Thus only those. who knew about the "Eyes Only" cables
would know just what Taylor was recommending.

Diem himself had given one of his rare on-the-record interviews
to the New York Times correspondent in Saigon while Taylor was on his
way home, and he too gave the impression that the further American aid
he expected would not include ground troops. 2

Consequently, the general outline of the American aid that would
be sent following the Taylor Mission was common knowledge for over a
week before any formal decision was made, The decisions, when they
were announced stirred very little fuss, and (considering the retro-
spective importance) not even much interest. The Taylor Mission had
received much less attention in the press than several other crises
at the UN, in the Congo, on nuclear testing, and most of all in Berlin,
where there had just been a symbolic confrontation of Soviet and
American tanks, The Administration was so concerned about public
reaction to Soviet aggressiveness and apparent American inability to
deal with it that a campaign was begun (as usual in matters of this
sort, reported in the Times without specific attribution) to "counter-
attack against what unnamed ‘high officials’ called a 'rising mood of
national frustration.'" The Administration's message, the Times
reported, was that a ‘mature foreign policy" rather than " elligerence
of defeatism" was what was needed, 3/ What is interesting about such
a message is whet the necessity to send it reveals about the mood of
the times,

in this sort of context, there was no real debate about whether
the U.S. ought to do anything reasonable it could to prevent Vietnam
from going the way of Laos, There is no hint of a suggestion other-
wise in the classified record, and there was no real public debate on

ee MOP SECRET - Sensitive
