~

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Under Secretary Katzenbach regarding reorganization on the
American side of the administration of the Revolutionary
Development (RD) program in Viet-Nam. We therefore recom-
mend that you approve our sending the following State-Defense
message to Ambassador Lodge:

BEGIN TEXT

"Personal For Lodge. You have described the RD program
as‘ the heart of the matter in SVN. We egree. Also, you have
reported and we agree that progress in the RD program so far
has been slight and unsatisfactory. We all agree that progress
must be made in this crucial area if the war is to be won in
the South and if the North is to be persuaded to negotiate.
It is clear to us that some organizational changes are required
on the American side to get RD moving -- to bring harder press-
ure on the GVN to do its job and to get solid and realistic
planning with respect to the whole effort.

"We had considered putting the entire program under COMUSMACV
to achieve these ends; and this may ultimately prove to be the
best solution. But recognizing certain objections to this
approach, we are prepared to try a solution which leaves the
civilian functions under civilian management. As we see it,
the trial organization would involve the following changes:

"1. ‘The several civilian lines of command within U.S.
agencies would be consolidated into one. Thus, line responsi-
bility for all personnel assigned to RD civilian functions would
rest solely with one high-renking civilien. (We presume this
man would be Ambassador Porter. If so, he would have to be
relieved of all other duties, and you would have to have another
deputy assigned to absorb the substantial other responsibili-
ties now met by Ambassador Porter.) The authority of this
civilian would be made clear and full to each constituent agen-
ey of the civilian RD team, including relocation of personnel,
the establishment of priorities irrespective of agency priori-
ties, and the apportionment of the funds allocated for RD by
each agency to Viet-Nam (bounded only by statutory limitations).

"2. Mo strengthen Porter administratively, -it might be
well to assign him 4 competent Principal Deputy and Executive
Officer -- a military officer of two or three-star rank. If
this cfficer is desired, General Westmoreland can supply him
or, if he requests, the officer can be provided from here.
This officer would not be to command U.S, military forces or
operations or to perform MACV's functions of advising and prod-
ding the ARVN, but would be to provide administrative strength
on the civilian side and to serve as a bridge to MACV, ensur-
ing efficient interface between the civilian and military
structures.

107
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a
