Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from "Marxism in Vietnam" by Milton Sacks, in Marxism in
Southeast Asia, Frank N. Trager, ed., 1959.

Pages 163-164

During this same period (1946-1949), the Ho Chi Minh government
carefully sought to maintain friendly relations with the Thai and
Nationalist Chinese governments. In addition, a determined propaganda
effort was made to enlist the sympathy of the other Southeast Asian
states for the Vietnamese struggle. In the developing cold war situ-
ation that polarized international relations, the Viet Minh leadership
publicly refused to take sides and announced a policy of neutrality.
Even when the Soviet Union and the world Communist press affirmed that
Ho Chi Minh was a. Communist or stressed that the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam was part of the "world Democratic Front" fighting against
"American imperialism,” the Viet~Nam government itself maintained a
‘discreet silence. The Vietnamese Communists did not feature the usual
pro-Soviet, anti-American vituperative attacks so common to the world
Communist movement. As late as March 1949, President Ho Chi Minh con-
tinued to denounce the charge of "communist domination" of the govern-
ment he headed as “pure French imperialist propaganda."

This policy of denying links to Communism conflicted with the
Ho Chi Minh government's practice of strengthening the ties between
mass organizations in Viet-Nam and the agencies of international Com-
munism. Supporters of the Viet Minh government claimed that this
practice was the only way the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nem was able
to get some international recognition. The conflict was there none-
theless, and such participation in front organizations raised difficulties:
for example, when representatives of the youth organizations in the
Democratic Republic of Vietnam attended the regional meeting of the
World Federation of Democratic Youth at Calcutta in February 1948. Since
this meeting was used as a means of publicly emphasizing the new Communist
strategy in Southeast Asia that led to Communist insurrections in Malaya
Burma and Indonesia, the Vietnamese representatives were placed in an ‘3
ambiguous position. They could and did point with pride to the "libera-
tion struggle" that they had been waging. Yet, at the same time, they
did not repudiate the ayowedly successful policy of coalition with the
"national bourgeoisie" pursued in Viet-Nam. They simply avoided the
issue posed by the new policy that stressed attacks on the "bourgeois
nationalists," the need for Communist party leadership of liberation
struggles, and the necessity of direct ties with the Soviet world camp.

This deviation from general Southeast Asian Communist policy during
1948-49 may be described as another demonstration of the tactical flexi-
bility of Ho Chi Minh's leadership. The Viet Minh was already leading
to a highly effective armed struggle against the French in Viet-Nam and
enjoyed the support of many Vietnamese nationalists who believed the
non-Communist declarations of the spokesmen for the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam. Moreover, its government had a measure of sympathy and

C-21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
