Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~ . TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I. Joint Personnel Management -- to institute career in-
centive, selection, and removal policies...

Je Joint Command...

K. Policy-level Monitoring System -- to monitor the
exercise of authority of key officials of the GVN...

L. Withholding US Support -- at levels below Saigon,
the authority of US senior advisors to cut off or withdraw US
civil and military support from Vietnamese activities or oper-
ations within their area of responsibility would constitute
powerful leverage...

At the Saigon level, a range of extremely tough options is
available, encompassing selective withdrawal of US support for
Vietnam persuading the GVN that these are in fact available
requires the will to use them and the political ability to follow
through if our hand is called. Options would include halting
further troop deployments, standing down US unit operations,
suspending CIP and MAP assistance, and so forth. 10)/

Ambassador Komer replied on September 19. He recalled his deep interest
in this subject and discussed at length both present and potential tech-
niques. His views seemed considerably mitigated by his several months in
Saigon, for "rapport" and "persuasion with implied pressure” headed the list
of what was presently being done. He concluded by saying, "All of the above
forms of leverage, and yet others, could be useful at the proper time and in
an appropriate way. But they must be applied with discretion, and always in
such manner as to keep the GVN foremost in the picture presented to its own
“people and the world at large... The exercise of leverage in a personal
manner and hidden from the public view is likely to be most effective,
while of the more operational means establishment of combined organization
under a JCRR-type concept, to include joint control of resources, would be
most desirable. In sum, we're gradually applying more leverage in Pacifi-
eation, but wish to do so in ways that least risk creating more trouble
than constructive results.” 105/

18. Postlogue

New plans and new hopes marked the immediate post-election period.
The story of US-GYN relations continues, but this narrative must end. In
conclusion it seems appropriate to quote from the MACCORDS report cover-
ing Bien Hoa province for the period ending December 31, 1967.

Zs Status for the RD Plan:

The GVN in Bien Hoa Province has not met with any measure
of success in furthering the pacification effort during 1967.

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
