Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Diversion of MAP material remained a closet skeleton to be rattled
periodically. In February, MACV performed estimative gymnastics to
suggest that no more than 0.3% of MAP material had been so lost. 69/
CINCPAC quickly suggested thes valid data did not exist and would be hard
to compile. He said that the differences between manifests and the ma-
terial actually received should be otherwise identified, and his thoughts
seemed for the moment to take care of a potentially embarrassing need to
explain a $5 million problem without even bothering GVN. 70/

Throughout the quarter there were periodic flurries of talks about
negotiations with North Vietnam, U Thant was especially active and these
maneuvers caused an uneasiness in US/GVN relations because Saigon was
never completely certain what role it would have in such discussions. T/

12. The Other War

Top levels in Washington realized that not much progress was being
made in Revolutionary Develormment and exhorted Saigon to integrated,
detailed civil/military planning. T2/ COMUSMACV waffled once again on
whether ARVN battalions supporting RD should actually be retained wder
the operational control of the province chief. 73/ US Army units con-
tinued their work in the densely populated Delta provinces. On one
occasion Premier Ky called Colonel Sam Wilson in for his view of progress
there as well as to ask for an evaluation of the ARVN 46th Regiment.
Wilson was able to say plainly that the unit was poor and that its com-
mander was ineffective and, without a doubt, corrupt. Ky explained that
the commander in question was a close friend of the division commander
who was a close friend of the corps commander who was a close friend of
Ky. Thet seemed to explain the matter. T/

The US continued to press national reconciliation upon the Saigon
government. Unger and CAS assets worked with the Constituent Assembly
to get NR into the constitution. The lack of enthusiasm was alleged to
be fear of unilateral US peace action. 75/ The present GVN continued,
as they had so often before, to agree readily in conversations with us
to the principle of national reconciliation; yet any concrete implemen-
tation remained illusive even through another top level meeting pene the
President. 76/

13. Guam Meetings, March 20 and 21, 1967

President Johnson announced that his purpose in calling the Confer-
ence at Guam wes to introduce the newly appointed US team to the leaders
of GVN. The shift of personnel represented the largest shake-up in US
leadership in South Vietnam since August 1965. Ambassador Bunker was
designated as the replacement for Lodge, and Locke took Porter's place.
In a move to resolve the controversy over military versus civil control
of Revolutionary Development, Robert Komer took charge with the rank of
Ambassador under the COMUSMACV organizational structure with ezar powers
and a strong mandate to produce progress.

: Me TOP SECRET - Sensitive
