Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

have been naive to expect much follow-though from Diem. The purpose
would have been to begin the process of separating U.S. support for
Vietnam from support for the Diem regime, and to lay the basis for
stronger such signals in the future unless Diem underwent some miracu-
lous reformation. That, of course, is exactly the tack the U.S.
followed in the fall of 1963, once the Administration had really de-
cided that we could not go on with the Diem regime as it then existed,

All this can be said with hindsight. It is not clear how much
of this line of thinking should be attributed to American officials in
Washington or Saigon at the time. There is no hint in the cables we
have that Durbrow was thinking this way. Rather he seems to have felt
that the concessions he was wringing from Diem represented real progress,
but that we would have to keep up the pressure (presumably with threats
to suspend aid -- as his guidance considered -- even after the "green
light" was given) to keep goading Diem in the right direction. Meanwhile,
the predominant view (pushed most strongly, but hardly exclusively by the
military) was that we should, and could effectively get on with the war
with as much cooperation as we could get from Diem short of interfering
with the war effort: it was all right to try for a quid pro quo on aid,
but not very hard. The Lansdale view went even further, stressing the
need for a demonstration of positive, essentially unqualified support for
Diem if only to discourage a further coup attempt, which Lansdale saw as
the main short-run danger.

In a significant way, Lansdale's view was not very different in
its analysis of tactics from the view that Diem was hopeless. Both
Lansdale, with his strong pro-Diem view, and men like Galbraith with a
strong anti-Diem view, agreed that Diem could not be pressured into re-
forming this regime. ("He won't change, because he can't change," wrote
Galbraith in a cable we will quote in more detail later.)

Where the Lansdale and Galbraith views differed -- a fundamental
difference, of course,-- was in their estimate of the balance of risks of
acoup. lansdale, and obviously his view carried the day, believed that a
coup was much more likely to make things worse than make things better.
This must have been an especially hard view to argue against in 1961, when
Diem did not look as hopeless as he would later, and when a strong argu-
ment could be made that the U.S. just could not afford at that time to
_wisk the collapse of a pro-Western government in Vietnam. It must have
seemed essentially irresistable to take the route of at least postponing,
as seemed quite feasible, a decision on such a tough and risky course as
holding back on support for Diem. The President, after all, could remen-
ber the charges that the Truman Administration had given away China by
holding back on aid to Chiang to try to pressure him toward reform. As a
young Congressman, he had even joined the chorus,

Meanwhile Durbrow was about to come home (he had been in Vietnam
for 4 years); security problems in Vietnam were, at best, not improving;

1
if TOP SECRET - Sensitive
