Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Secretary a memo renewing their earlier proposal for reducing the
restricted zone around Hanoi and Haiphong to 3 and 1.5 n.m. respec-

tively, with field authority granted to make strikes as required out-

side. The memo opened with a reference to the Tet offensive: "Through

his buildup at Khe Sanh and actions throughout South Vietnam during

the past week, the enemy has shown a major capability for waging war

in the South." 8/ In view of the evident ineffectiveness of the bombing
in preventing the offensive, the succeeding sentence in the memo, pro-
viding the justification for the request, can only appear as a non sequitur:
"The air campaign against NVN should be conducted to achieve maximum effect
in reducing this enemy capability." 9/

The arguments against such authorization were formulated by
ISA. Mr. Warnke observed that:

In addition to the lines of communication that would be
opened for attack by shrinking the control areas around Hanoi
and Haiphong only a couple of fixed targets not previously
authorized would be released for strike. These targets do
not appear to have large civilian casualties or other politi-
cal liabilities associated with them. A description of
these targets is attached. (Tab B) The major effects thus
would be (1) to open to armed recce attack the primary and
secondary LOCs between the present "regular" 10 and 4 mile
circles and the proposed 3 and 1-1/2 mile circles, and, if
the Joint Staff interpretation is accepted, (2) to release
for strike the previously authorized targets within the
"special" 5 mile circles. 10/

Other considerations also argued in favor of deferring action on this
proposal for the moment:

I recommend that, if this proposal is accepted, the
new circles be treated as containing areas where no strikes
are to be made without new individual authorization. In
any event, I believe the present restrictions should be
continued pending the return of the 3 American PWs who have
been designated by Hanoi for release. Our information is
that these men will be picked up by 2 American pacifists
who are leaving from Vientiane, Laos, for Hanoi on the
next available flight. The next scheduled ICC flight to
Hanoi is on 9 February. 11/

The issue was probably raised at the White House Iuncheon on February 6,
put the JCS proposal was not approved. Strikes against targets in
Haiphong apparently were authorized, however, since the first such raids
jn over @ month took place on February 10. These, however, were only
the most immediate reactions to the trauma of Tet 1968.. To be sure, as

145 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
