Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

OP SECRET - Sensitive

further reduce the capability to reinforce NATO rapidly, to
provide forces for other contingencies, and to maintain a
sufficient rotation and training base. Mobilization of
reserves, extension of terms of service, and extending over-
seas tours would assist in alleviating shortfalls associated
with satisfying CINCPAC's requirements. Certain critical
problems cannot be fully resolved by mobilization because of
equipment and skill shortages. Of particular note in the
case of the Army, equipment withdrawals from the Reserve
components haye substantially weakened the Army's reserve
structure.

Interestingly enough, the kind of mobilization the JCS were talking
about in JCSM-646-66 was a full-blown affair which added 688,500 reservists
generally in units to the Army, Air Foree, Navy and Marines by December
1966. Other than listing units, availability dates and programmed total
strengths, the memorandum did not delve into specific applications of
these reserve forces or how they would alleviate the manpower/unit/equip-
ment crunch which the JCS described. 49/

D. McNamara Coes to Saigon -- Decision on Four

With all of this information in hand, Secretary McNamara departed
for Saigon. While the records available do not indicate what went on
in Saigon, the results were clearly spelled out in the Secretary of
Defense's Memorandum for the President, submitted upon his return. 50/

Al; Memorandum for the President
ee EE See ee, Peete’

1. Evaluation of the situation. In the report of my last trip to
Vietnam almost a year ago, I stated that the odds were about even thet,
-even with the then-recommended deployments, we would be faced in early 1967
with a military stand-off at a much higher level of conflict and with
"pacification" still stalled, I am a little less pessimistic now in one
respect. We have done somewhat better militarily than I anticipated, We
have by and large blunted the communist military initietive -- any military
victory in South Vietnam the Viet Cong may have had in mind 18 months ago
,has been thwarted by our emergency deployments end actions. And our program
of bombing the North has exacted a price.

81 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
