Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The realities of the Chinese presence alone required Ho Chi Minh to
use circumspection in dealing with rival nationalist groups. Why the
Chinese did not follow through, and simply oust Ho's government in favor
of a VNQDD/Dong Minh Hoi coalition is not known. It appears that venality
played a part -- Chiang Fa Kuei and other warlords were direct benefici-
aries of an official DRV "gold week" in September, 1945, in which the state
appealed to the citizenry for scraps of gold as "a contribution to the
finance of national defense." 4/ Allegedly this campaign produced some
800 pounds of gold and 20 million piastres, and for it the DRV received
from the warloards, besides toleration, weapons the Japanese had in their
possession -- a reported 40,000 arms, including mortars, artillery pieces,
and 18 tanks. 45/

But Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh were constrained to go well beyond
bribery. In setting up the government of 2 September 1945, they had been
carefuly to include non-Viet Minh politicians, and to hold ICP representa-
‘tion to 6 to 16 cabinet seats. On 23 October, the Viet Minh signed a pact
with a dissident faction of the Dong Minh Hoi, purportedly in the interest
of the "common struggle against the aggressive attempts of the colonial
French, in order to defend the liberty and independence of the Democratic
Republic of Vietnam." 46/ But other elements of the Dong Minh Hoi and
the VNQDD persisted in their attack on the Viet Minh, making a particular
point of communist domination.

Ho Chi Minh and the ICP then decided on a drastic move. Following
a three day ICP conclave of 9 to 11 November, 1945, the IcP leadership
issued the following declaration:

"1. Whereas, in consideration of the given historical
situation, both internationally and internally, the present
moment is precisely an exceptional occasion for Viet Nam to
reconquer her unitary independence;

"2. Whereas, in order to complete the Party's task in this
immense movement of the Vietnamese people's emanicipation, a
national union conceived without distinction of class and parties
is an indispenseble factor;

"3, Wishing to prove that the communists, in so far as
they are advance guard militants of the Vietnamese people, are
always ready to make the greatest sacrifices for national
liberation, are always disposed to put the interest of the
‘country above that of classes, and to give up the interests
of the Party to serve those of the Vietnamese people;

"h. In order to destroy all misunderstandings, domestic
and foreign, which can hinder the liberation of our country,
the Central Executive Committee of the Indochina Communist
Party in meeting assembled on November 11, 1945, has decided
to voluntarily dissolve the Indochina Communist Party.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-2
