12$-

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in North Vietnam and accelerate modernization of DRV military
forces.

(6) This would probably mean garrisoning a U.S. division
in SE Asia for an extended period of time in same sense as Army
divisions in Korea. However, circumstances differ from Korea.

For example, nature of VC warfare such that US units cannot
remain long inisolation from conflict realities. Ultimately,

they likely to be forced into varying forms of military engagement
with VC if only for security against attacks ranging from assas-
sination/sabotage to tactical harassment. In short, we should
accept fact that likelihood our troops becoming combat engaged
inereases in proportion to duration of their stay.

2. A summary of the above appears to me to add up in favor
of our not introducing U.S. combat forces until we have exhausted
other means for helping Diem. 15/

IV. TAYLOR IN SATGON

The Taylor Mission arrived in Saigon on the 18th. They had barely ar-
rived when Diem went before his National Assembly to declare that the in-
creasing gravity of the Viet Cong threat now required a formal proclamation
of a State of Emergency. Diem then went off to meet with the Americans, and
after such a spectacular opening shot must have then astonished his visitors
by indicating that he did not want American combat troops after all. What
he wanted, he said, was the treaty, American support for larger GVN forces,
and a list of combat support items that nicely paralleled those Rostow
listed in the note to McNamara quoted earlier. It was Taylor (accord ing to
Nolting's cable 516, 20 SEN who brought up the question of American
combat troops.

Taylor said he understood there had been recent discussions
of introduction of American or SEATO forces into Viet-Nam and
asked why change had occurred in earlier GVN attitude. Diem
succinetly replied because of Laos situation. Noting it will take
time to build up GVN forces he pointed to enemy's reinforcements
through infiltration and increased activities in central Viet-Nan
and expressed belief that enemy is trying to escalate proportionally
to increase in GVN forces so that GVN will not gain advantage.
He asked specifically for tactical aviation, helicopter companies,
coastal patrol forces and logistic support (ground transport).

Diem indicated he thought there would be no particular
adverse psychological effect internally from introducing American
forces since in his view Vietnamese people regard Communist
attack on Viet-Nam as international problem. Rostow inquired
whether internal and external political aspects such move could

90 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
