Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

already under Diem's personal direction, would be responsible on all
emergency matters to the reinforced ITT Corps Headquarters (to be called
the Combined Headquarters), but continue as before with respect to routine
administration. 39/

Thompson presented this Delta plan as a program of wide potential:

---It should lead by stages to a reorganization of
the government machinery for directing and coordinating
all action against the communists and to the production of
an overall strategic operational plan for the country as
a whole defining responsibilities, tasks and priorities.
At the same time it will lead to the establishment of a static
security framework which can be developed eventually into
a National Police force into which can be incorporated 4
Single security intelligence organization for the direction
and coordination of all intelligence activities against the
communists. I agree with Your Excellency that it would be
too disruptive at the present moment to try to achieve these
immediately and that they should be developed gradually.
Using a medical analogy, the remedy should be clinical
rather than surgical. 40/

III. DEVELOPING A CONSENSUS AMONG THE ADVISORS

A. Initial Reaction of U.S. Military Advisors
It is not difficult to imagine the shocked reaction to Thompson's
proposals, especially in U.S. military circles. In fact, one need not
imagine them; General McGarr has recorded a detailed rejoinder to Thompson's
proposals. He was, to begin with, upset about the lack of prior coordina-
tion:

Following Mr. Thompson's medical analogy...we have the
case of a doctor called in for consultation on a clinical
ease, actually performing an amputation without consulting
the resident physician -- and without being required to
assume the overall responsibility for the patient. 41/

General McGarr's unhappiness with Thompson was not simply a case
of injured feelings. He had four related categories of disagreements with
the plan proposed by the British Advisory Mission. First, Thompson's
recommended command arrangements, if adopted, would demolish the prospect
of a unitary chain of command within ARVN, an objective toward which McGarr
had been working for over a year. Additionally, the Thompson proposals
would leave Diem as the ultimate manager of an operation dealing with only
a portion (the Delta) of RVN. The elimination of practices such as this
had been an explicit otjective of the entire U.S. advisory effort for a
long time.

1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
