Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

"Now, as I understand it, when the Korean war started, the purpose
of the United Nations was to prevent any advance by force into South
Korea; they did do that.

"I know of no one that has ever proposed that we go to war to free
North Korea.

"As it is, it is an unsatisfactory situation, exactly as exists in
Germany, and now apparently is going to exist in part of Indochina.

“these are very unsetisfactory situations and, to my mind, will
always give reason for aggravating situations that are difficult, at
best. But there is no thought on the part of any of us to start an
aggressive move for the freeing of that country.”

% +

"T have never felt that, except through these satellite excursions,
that the Communist world wants any war at this time; in other words, I
don't believe they would deliberately challenge us, challenge the free
world, to a war of exhaustion.

"So the problem, no matter whether you happen to be fighting in
one of these areas, remains the same. The loss of great areas through
propaganda and deceit and subversion and coup d'etat, and every means
available to a secret, well-financed conspiracy, they ere all there.
I personally think that if there is one good that can come out of this
whole southeast Asian experience, it is this: to get the free world to
looking facts in the face, and to seeing what we must do, what we should
do, what sacrifices we are ready to make, in order to preserve the
essentials of our system.

"J think that when the freedom of a man in Viet-Nam or in China
is taken eway from him, I think our freedom has lost a little. I just
don't believe that we can continue to exist in the world, geographically
isolated as we are, if we just don't find a concerted, positive plan of
keeping these free nations so tightly bound together that none of them
will give up; and if they are not weakened internally by these other
methods, I just don't believe they will give up. I believe we can hold

them.

"Q. Robert E. Clark, International News Service: Mr. President,
along that line, a number of Congressmen today are branding the Geneva
settlement as appeasement. Do you think there are any elements of
appeasement in the cease-fire agreement?

"THe PRESIDENT. Well, I hesitate, Mr. Clark, to use such words, as
I have told you so often. I find that so many words mean so many different
things to different people. I would say this, as I said in my statement:
this agreement, in certain of its features, is not satisfactory to us.
It is not what we would have liked to have had.

B-22
