Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Secretary of State Dulles publicly drew two lessons from Geneva: (1) that
popular support was essential to combat communist subversion, and (2) collec-
tive defense against aggression could not be devised after the aggression
was in progress. 23/ He went on to assert that a collective security
system in Southeast Asia could in the future check both outright aggression
and subversion. The U.S. moved promptly to convene an international con-
ference at Manila in late summer, 1954, to devise such a security system.

h. Manila Conference, 1954

The outlook at Manila, however, tended to be more retrospec-
tive than futuristic. Vice Admiral A. C. Davis, Deputy Assistant Secretary
of Defense (ISA) and chief DOD representative in the U.S. delegation observed
in his report that:

",..ethe Manila Conference convened. following communist mili-
tary achievements in Indochina and political and psychological
successes at Geneva. Against this background the effort of the
Manila Conference to construct a collective defense arrangement
for Southeast Asia and the Southwest Pacific was directed in
large measure to recovering from the psychological blow thus ad-
ministered to the Free World. Much of what was said at the Con-
ference bore witness to the preeminence of psychological objec-
tives in the thinking of the participating States. In a real
sense, the Treaty that emerged at Manila is a response to the
Geneva Agreements." 24

The task facing the conferees was formidable compared with that Atlantic
planners had faced six years earlier. The Geneva reverse provided a small
basis for common action. NATO had been created in & relatively uncompli-
eated. political situation, in an atmosphere of understanding and common
need, to meet an unambiguous threat. Moreover, the North Atlantic nations
could build collective defense on an infrastructure of shared culture,
political ideals, and interdependent economies. Commitments of the member
nations could be clarified to stipulate standing forces, command structures,
and roles in planning. The nations at Manila, on the other hand, confronted
a complex of dilemmas. Anti-communism was no unifying force. Throughout
the region, potential communist aggressors were likely to adopt causes of
anti-colonialism, anti-traditionalism, racism, religion, or irredentism.
Moreover, the conferees represented disparate cultures in countries scat-
tered across the world. Of the eight nations present, only two were Asian;
several nations whose location made them logical candidates for an Asian
coalition chose not to attend.

The U.S. representatives at the Manila Conference in Septem-
bex, 1954, arrived with instructions to insist on a number of preconditions
for U.S. military action in Southeast Asia. First, with its commitments
in Europe, the U.S. would refuse to act unilaterally in Asia; further,
any such action would have to involve not only Asian nations, but also
major European partners. Moreover, the U.S. would not be prepared to com-
mit ground troops into combat in Asia; other nations would do the ground

A-13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
