Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

MOP SECRET - Sensitive

In the same appraisal, the JCS went on to estimate the time required
to achieve 85% damage against the various target categories, using differ-
ent force combinations in continuous operations. For Category A, they
. estimated, it would take the VNAF alone more than seven months, if they
could sustain combat operations that long; the VNAF plus FARMGATE B-57's
would require over two months. By using, in addition, U.S. land and
carrier-based air units readily available in the Western Pacific, they
claimed that targets in Category A could be eliminated in only twelve days;
those in all categories could be destroyed in 46 days. They added that
sustaining this destruction on LOC targets would require restrikes "con-
ducted for an indeterminate period.”

The JCS were not the only Presidential advisers +o sense the urgency
created by the situation in Iaos. Referring to "recent steps with regard
to bombing operations in laos and recomaissance which step up the pace,"
Secretary Rusk cabled Ambassador Lodge to seek suggestions for ways to
achieve greater solidarity in South Vietnam. He explained that in Wash-
ington, the fragility of the situation in South Vietnam was seen as an
obstacle to further U.S. military involvement in Southeast Asia. As he
stated, "We need to assure the President that everything humanly possible
is being done both in Washington and by the government of Vietnam to pro-
vide a solid base of determination from which far-reaching decisions could.
proceed." 73/ Lodge's reply reflected a new wrinkle in his usual propo-
sals for prompt, but carefully masked. actions. He expressed the attitude *
that some kind of firm action against North Vietnam by U.S. and South Viet-
namese forces was the only way to bring about a2 significant improvement
in the GVN effort. 74/ ‘This view complemented an apparently growing be-
lief among Presidential advisers "that additional efforts within South
Vietnam by the U.S. will not prevent further deterioration there." 75/

This belief, together with the threat presented by the Pathet Lao
offensive, led to a resumption of scenario development. However, in the
-new "crisis management" atmosphere, several new elements affected the proc-
ess. One was the fact that the latest scenario was prepared as & draft
memorandum for the President. Another was the expectation that it would.
be presented to and discussed among the principal officials of the parti-
cipating agencies, serving as an Executive Committee of the National Secu-
rity Council. And finally, the erisis in Laos apparently had focused. ad-
visory interest primarily on one stage -- that dealing with overt operations
against North Vietnam. The scenario no longer contained a section devoted
to “uncommitting steps which should be taken now.” 76/ The rationale
behind this shift of emphasis was explained to Ambassador Lodge, an out-
spoken critic of both the overt approach and the scenario, by Secretary
Rusk: :

"It is our present view here that /substential initial
attacks without acknowledgment/ would simply not be feasi-
ble. Even if Hanoi itself did not publicize them, there
are enough ICC and other observers in North Vietnam who
might pick them up and there is also the major possibility

2k TOP SECRET - Sensitive
