Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

With Course A rejected, the DPM turned to consideration
of the levelling-off proposals of Course B. The analysis of the de-
escalated bombing program of this option proceeded in this manner:

The bombing program that would be a part of this
strategy is, basically, a program of concentration of
effort on the infiltration routes near the south of
North Vietnam. The major infiltration-related targets
in the Red River basin having been destroyed, such inter-
diction is now best served by concentration of all effort
in the southern neck of North Vietnam. All of the sorties
would be flown in the area between 17° and 20°. This shift,
despite possible increases in anti-aircraft capability in the
area, should reduce the pilot and aircraft:loss rates by more
than 50 per cent. The shift will, if anything, be of posi-
tive military value to General Westmoreland while taking
some steam out of the popular effort in the North.

The above shift of bombing strategy, now that almost
all major targets have been struck in the Red River basin,
ean to military advantage be made at any time. It should
not be done for the sole purpose of getting Hanoi to nego-
tiate, although that might be a bonus effect. To maximize
the chances of getting that bonus effect, the optimum scenario
would probably be (1) to inform the Soviets quietly that
within a few days the shift would take place, stating no
time limits but making no promises not to return to the
Red River basin to attack targets which later acquire mili-
tary importance (any deal with Hanoi is likely to be mid-
wifed by Moscow); (2) to make the shift as predicted, without
fanfare; and (3) to explain publicly, when the shift had
become obvious, that the northern targets had been destroyed,
that that had been militarily important, and that there would
be no need to return to the northern areas unless military
necessity dictated it. The shift should not be huckstered.
Moscow would almost certainly pass its information on to
Hanoi, and might urge Hanoi to seize the opportunity to
de-escalate the war by talks or otherwise. Hanoi, not having
been asked a question by us and having no ultimatum-like
time limit, would be in a better posture to answer favorably
than has been the case in the past. The military side of
the shift is sound, however, whether or not the diplomatic
spill-over is successful. 106/

In a section dealing with diplomatic and political con-
siderations, the DPM outlined the political view of the significance
of the struggle as seen by the US and by Hanoi. It then developed
2, conception of larger US interests in Asia around the necessity of
containing China. This larger interest required settling the Vietnam

49 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
