Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

gE. The Menila Conference

President Johnson arrived in Manila on October 23, 1966, to attend
the seven-nation conference of troop contributing countries to the Vietnam
war. While the meeting was hectic and short, it did produce a communique
which contained some major statements about policy, strategy, and inten-
tions. The three most important points in the communique of October 25
were:

a. The pledge that “allied forces...shall be withdrawn, after close
consultation, as the other side withdraws its forces to the North, ceases
infiltration, and the level of violence thus subsides. Those forces will
be withdrawn as soon as possible and not later than six months after the
above conditions have been fulfilled.”

b. The announcement of a new program, which had been thought up in
Washington, for “National Reconciliation." Since the GVN was not in
genuine agreement with the idea, but under great pressure from the
Americans to commit themselves to it, the communique was quite vague on
what difference there was, if any, between the new National Reconcilia-
tion program and the old Chieu Hoi program.*

c. The formalization, in public, of the move towards getting ARVN
more deeply involved with the RD program: "The Vietnamese leaders stated
their intent to train and assign a substantial share of the armed forces
to clear-and-hold actions in order to provide a shield behind which a
new society can be built.” This pubdlic confirmation of the tentative
steps that MACV had been taking was important. Classified documents
could not be used as the basis for a far-reaching reform of the ARVN;
they would never have received wide enough distribution, nor would they
have been fully accepted as doctrine by the doubters within both the
RVNAF and MACY. But here was a piece of paper signed by the President
and by General Thieu which said in simple language that a new direction
and mission was given to the ARVN. After Menila, MACV and the JCS began
in seriousness the formation of the mobile training teams which were de-
signed to retrain every RVNAF unit so that it was more aware of the
jimportance of the population.

*Those Americans who hoped that National Reconciliation would become a
major new appeal to VC at middle and higher levels were to be in for a
disappointment in the year following Manila. The GVN did not agree with
the philosophy behind total forgiveness to the enemy, and continually
hedged its statements and invitations to the VC so that they resembled
surrender with amnesty rather than "national reconciliation.” In fact,
the GVN did not make an internal announcement on the National Reconcilia-
tion program until Tet, 1967, almost four months after the Manila
tonference, end three months after the GVN had "promised" the U.S. that
it would make the announcement. Then, when the Vietnamese finally did
make the announcement, they used the phrase "Doan Ket," which is accurately
translated as "National Solidarity,” rather then "National Reconciliation.”
The difference in meaning is, of course, significant, just as the earlier
nistranslation of "Xay Dung" into "Revolutionary Development" reflected
a divergenct of views.

116 TOP SECRET’ -"Sensitive
