Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

' TOP SECRET -. Sensitive

In response, Secretary Dulles formally told Mendes-France
that both the Eisenhower letter and the stronger U.S. action were "in
furtherance of the understandings reached at Washington." The U.S.
had not "the slightest idea of questioning the good faith of the French
government" but "many French officials have not concealed their belief
that Diem has failed...and...should be replaced." This attitude produced
an "impasse in Saigon" necessitating firmer action. 69/ La Chambre
received this with "little comment" other than to suggest appointment of
Nguyen Van Tam (General Hinh's father, Premier during 1952-1953 and a
strong-even oppressive-administrator) to the Interior Ministry. La Chambre
called this a "way out of the mess...(for) here is°a man who knows how
to fight Communists." 70/ As in the past, the U.S. rejected the proposal.

5. More Action: The Collins Mission

The initial U.S. action program rested on three assumptions:
that Diem could be persuaded to accept U.S. proposals, that Hinh would
obey the government, that the French at all levels would cooperate. None
proved immediately valid. So the U.S. adopted yet another tactic. General
J. Lawton Collins, U.S. Representative to the NATO Military Committee, was
dispatched to Vietnam on November 8 with the personal rank of Ambassador
(Heath returned to the State Department). As President FBisenhower des-
eribed it, Collins' mission was:

to coordinate and direct a program in support of (Diem's)
government to enable it to: (a) promote internal security
and political and economic stability; (b) establish and main-
tain control throughout the territory; and (c) effectively
counteract Viet Minh infiltration and paramilitary activities
south of the demarkation line. 71/

After initial resistance to the Collins mission (seen as @
precursor to complete U.S. take-over of Indochina), General Ely established
a close working relationship with Collins. A seven-point program for
political, military and economic action was quickly designed. On Decem-
ber 13, Ely and Collins signed a Minute of Understanding agreeing that
France would grant full autonomy to the VNA by July 1, 1955 and that the
U.S. would assume training duties in January. They agreed the French
Expeditionary Corps must remain in Vietnam and the level of financial
assistance suggested by Collins ($100 million through December 1955 after
which assistance was not contemplated) was adopted by the Foreign Opera-
tions Administration and subsequently announced to Paris. Aid was contingent
upon consultation with Congress and "subject to Ely and Collins and the two
governments mutually agreeing on what is to be done in Indochina.” 72/

a4 6. .France Objects to Collins-Ely Agreements

Paris was unhappy about the aid figure -- a third of
what France requested. Consequently, withdrawal of French forces was
speeded: of the 150,000 troops scheduled to remain in Vietnam through
1955, all but 35,000 were phased out. Monetary reasons were said to be

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

eee
