Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Asia's independence and security generally, and for the other small
nations everywhere that would face the same kind of subversive threat
from without if the Communists were to succeed in Vietnam...."

ae

31. Address by President Johnson Before the Association of American
’ Editorial Cartoonists at the White House on May 13, 1965, "Viet-
Nam: The Third Face of the War,” Department of State Bulletin
May 31, 1965, Dp. 835.

x * #

"...eCommunist China apparently desires the war to continue what-
ever the cost to their allies. Their target is not merely South Viet-
Nam; it is Asia. Their objective is not the fulfillment of Vietnamese
nationalism; it is to erode and to discredit America's ability to help
prevent Chinese domination over all of Asia.”

eh Mus

32. Address by William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern
Affairs, Before the Faculty Forum of the University of California
at Berkeley on May 27 1965 TA Perspective on U.S. Policy in
Viet-Nem," Department of State Bulletin, June 21, 1965, p. 1001.

Fa oe

"For the underlying fact is that there cannot be a balance of power
in Asia without us. Under the control of a Communist regime still at
the peak of its ideological fervor, a unified mainland China today does
threaten the outnumbered newly independent nations of Asia, not merely
in the sense of influence but in the sense of domination and the denial
of national self-determination and independence--not necessarily drasti-
cally or at once, for the Chinese Communist leaders are patient; not
necessarily, or even in their eyes preferably, by conventional armed
attack, but surely and inexorably, as they see it, through the technique
of spurious national movements deriving their real impetus and support
from external and Communist sources. *

"And in this central Communist effort, the other Communist nations
of Asia, North Viet-Nam and North Korea, are willing partners. They
have their national character, they are not true satellites--indeed,
deep down, they too fear Chinese domination. Yet, so long as the spoils
are fairly divided, they are working together with Communist China toward
a@ goal the opposite of the one we seek, subjugation of the true national
independence of smaller countries, an Asia of spheres of domination."

D-46
