Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘a ! | C) TOP SECRET

Vo however, that French armed forces of approximately 140,000 men

are in the field and that if these were to be withdrawn this
year because of political considerations, the Bao Dai regime
probably could not survive even with United States aid, If the
United States were now to insist upon independence for Vietnam
and a phased French withdrawal from that country, this might
improve the political situation,. The French could be expected

to interpose objections to, and certainly delays in, such a

program, Conditions in Indochina, however, are unstable and the
situation is apparently deteriorating rapidly so that the urgent
need for at least an initiol increment of military and economic
aid is psychologically overriding. The Joint Chiefs of Staff,
therefore, recommend the provision of military aid to Indochina
at the carliest practicable date under a program to implement the
President's action approving the. allocation of 15 million dollars.
for Indochina and that corresponding increments of political and
economic aid be programmed on an interim basis without prejudice
to the pattern of the policy for additional military, political
and economic aid that may be developéd later,

15. In view of the considerations set forth in paragraph 1}
above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend the immediate estab-
lishment of a small United States military aid group in Indochina,
to operate in conformity with the requirements in paragraph 9
above. The Joint Chiefs of Staff would expect the senior member
of this group to sit in consultation with military representatives
of France and Vietnam and possibly of Laos and Cambodia, In

- addition to screening requests for materiel, he would be expected

to insure full coordination of military plans and efforts between
the French and Vietnamese forces and to supervise the allocation
of materiel. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe in the possibiltiy
of success of & prompt coordinated United: States program of mili-
tary, political, and economic aid to Southeast Asia and feel that
such a success might well lead to the gaining of the initiative

in the struggle in that general area,

16.. China is the vital strategic area in Asia, The Joint
Chiefs of Staff are firmly of the opinion that attainment of
United States objectives in Asia can only be achieved by ultimate
success in China, Resolution of the situation facing Southeast
Asia would therefore, be facilitated if prompt and continuing
measures were undertaken to reduce the pressure .from Communist
China, In this connection, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have noted
the evidences of renewed vitality and apparent increased effective-
ness of the Chinese Nationalist forces,

17. The Joint Chiefs of Staff suggest the following measures

with.military implications;

a, An increased number of courtesy or "show the flag"
visits to Southeast Asian states;

q42> TOP SECRET
