Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

who continued to advocate the enclave strategy. The Ambassador was in

Washington on 9 June, and one of the questions put to him by the.Joint
' Chiefs was whether or not the Airmobile Division should go into the
highlands. Taylor convinced them that it should not. 117/ Perhaps
without Sharp's backing for the coastal deployment, the Joint Chiefs
might not have been convinced.

It seems clear, however, that Admiral Sharp was not really an
exponent of the enclave strategy. His insistence that the Airmobile
Division stick to Binh Dinh was prompted by his conviction that the
U.S. forces should operate in close proximity to the objective of the
Viet war -- the people. He was consistent in this approach when he
pushed for deployment of the ROK RCT to Quang Ngai, where it was
originally supposed to go and where there were plenty of people to be
pacified, instead of to sparsely populated Cam Ranh for unremunerative
security duty. He also recommended that the remaining ROK division (-),
which would have been superfluous at Qui Nhon, be sent instead to Nha
Trang or perhaps even into the Mekong Delta. 118/

C. The JCS Yielded the Torch

The JCS put the first major recommendation for ground troop
commitment on the docket, as it were, on 20 March, shortly after Chief
of Staff of the Army Johnson returned from Saigon. 119/ Because the
Viet Cong were stronger and because the leaders of the RVNAF were
overly involved in political matters, there had been, according to the
JCS, for the first time a downward turn in what had been a relatively
stable military situation. Unless the trend could be reversed, the
Chiefs said, the war would be lost and it would be seen-as a U.S. defeat.
That would be intolerable; hence, the Chiefs recommended that U.S. and
Allied forces be introduced with a new mission to stem the tide and
assume the offensive. The Chiefs were manifestly not interested in any
kind of holding action. As they said, "the requirement is not simply
to withstand the Viet Cong, however, but to gain effective operational
‘ superiority and assume the offensive. To turn the tide of the war
requires an Objective of destroying the Viet Cong, not merely to keep
pace with them, or slow down their rate of advance." 120/ The level
of force which they recommended to carry out this aggressive mission
and which they saw as an essential component of the broader program to
put pressure on the DRV/VC and to deter Chinese Communist aggression,
was three divisions,one ROK and two U.S.

In summary, the JCS recommendea that one U.S. Marine division
conduct, on order, offensive operations to kill Viet Cong with or with-
out centralized GVN/US command structure. The Marines should operate
out of their existing TAOR, and expand it as the force grew in size.
The U.S. Army division should go to Pleiku, where it should operate with

. 92 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
