Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

President has issued no order of any kind in this regard to
General Westmoreland recently or at any other time. The pri-
mary mission of these troops is to secure and safeguard im-
portant military installations like the air base at Da Nang.
They have the associated mission of.,.patrolling and securing
actions in and near the areas thus safeguarded.

"If help is requested by the appropriate Vietnamese com-
mander, General Westmoreland also has authority within the
assigned mission to employ these troops in support of Viet-
mamese forces faced with aggressive attack when other effective
reserves are not available and when, in his judgment, the
general military situation urgently requires it."

The documents do not reveal whether or not the ground rules for
engagement of U.S. forces had actually been worked out to everyone's
satisfaction at the time of the White House statement. There is good
indication that they had not. During at least two of the major battles
in late May and early June, Ba Gia and Dong Xoai, the RVNAF were des-
perately in need of assistance. Although U.S. troops were available in
both instances, the Marines at Ba Gia and the 173rd at Dong Xoai, they
were not committed and the result in both cases was defeat for the RVNAF.

The first.major ground combat operation by U.S. forces in the
Vietnam War took place in War Zone D, NW of Saigon, from 27 to 30 June
1965. Participants were the 173rd Airborne Brigade, the Ist Battalion
of the Royal Australian Regiment, two battalions from the ARVN Airborne
Brigade, and the ARVN 48th Regiment. The operation could by no stretch
of definition have been described as a reserve reaction. It was a search
and destroy operation into Viet Cong base areas and its purpose was to
deny to the enemy "freedom of action...in these safe havens." The War
Zone D excursion was a direct result of the sanction given to General
Westmoreland on the 26th of June to “commit U.S. troops to combat, inde-
pendent of or in conjunction with GVN forces in any situation in which
the use of such troops is requested by an appropriate GVN commander and
when, in COMUSMACY's judgment, their use is necessary to strengthen the
relative position of GVN forces.” 99/

At that juncture the 44 Battalion debate was in full swing and
the enclave strategy, as a means to limit the amount and use of U.S.
combat force in Vietnam, was certainly overcome by events. It was not
until the 18th of August that an operation fitting the paradigm des-
cription of the Taylor enclave concept, Operation STARLIGHT, was con-
ducted with dramatic success 15 miles south of the Chu Lai enclave. 100/
It established the viability of enclave operations limited to the
northern coast of South Vietnam, a fact which no one disputed, but such
operations were by that time only one facet of a much more ambitious
strategy sanctioned by the President and in the process of being imple-
mented by Westmoreland.

82 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
