Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
KENNEDY ADt.m:ISTRATION 
SUlt.NARY 
The Administration of President Kennedy justified the grO'.1ing 
U. S, involvement in Vietnnm utilizing much the sane rationale that 
had been employed by t he Administrations of President Truman and 
President Eisenho';ler . 
Initially, the situation in Victne.m received 
l ess emohasis than the crisis in Laos, although the princinles cited 
for U. S: concern for Laos -- the identification of U. S. interests \-lith 
its independence; SEATO obligations - - were couched in terms of col-
lective security for Southeast Asia. 
Thereafter, as insurgency in 
Vietnam itself came to the fore, the Administration ' s public statements 
stressed the follov.'ing: 
a . 
Tbe struggle against the world,dde communist offensive 
bed to confront the da!1ger that through II subversion, infiltration, 
and a host of other tactics . . . aur security may be lost piece by piece, 
country by country, without the firing of a single nissile or the 
crossing of a single border , lI 
b . 
The "domino principle ll
: 
are interdependent for security, and 
tant to the United States . 
the countries of Southeast Asia 
the independence of each is impor-
c , 
ICC reports , as 'Hell as U. S. and South Vietnamese intel-
ligence, demonstrate that Conmllmist j'iorth Vietnam has provided illegally, 
armed and unarmed personnel, arms, munitions, and other supplies from 
North Vietnau to insurgents in South Vietnam for the purpose of supporting 
en organized attempt to overthro.r tbe government there . 
d. 
IINo ..... our great responsibility is to be the chief defender 
of freedom, in this time of maximmn danger . 
Only the U. S, has the 
power and the resources and the determi nation . II 
e . 
~he United States, although not a party to the Geneva 
Accords, decla.red at Geneva in 1954 that it v;ould "vie\! any renewal of 
the aggression in violation of the agreements with grave concern and 
as seriously threatening international peace and security. It 
President 
Kennedy assured President Diem that " in accordance ,lith that declaration, 
and in response to your request, vie are prepared to help the Republic of 
Vietnam to protect its people and to preferve 5ts independence ." 
f . 
The SEATO Pact, by a protocol, extended the protection of 
the treaty to Vietnam; hence the treaty, in President Kennedy ' s words, 
IIstated that the United Stetes recognized ths.t aggression by means of 
arned attack against Vietnam \{ould threaten our O',,'Il peace and security • . . 
the attack on the govel"nment by the conmunist forces, ',rith assistance 
fr~ the north, bccene of greater ~~d gre~ter concern to the Government 
of Vietne!ll atl9- the Government of the United States . 11 
c 
• 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
v. C. 
JUSTIFICATION OF T!iE HAR -- RlBLIC STATEME!·ITS 
1. 
2 . 
3· 
4. 
5· 
6. 
7· 
8. 
9· 
10. 
KENNEDY ADtmliSTRATION 
CONTENTS 
Kennedy stresses the need for a force balance that can deal 
'e£fectivcly with guerrilla scale·activities being utilized 
by Communist aggression (29 February 1960) ....... .. ..... ..... . . . 
Kennedy ~mphasizes the importance of a mobile and versatile 
force structure which can intervene s\'fiftly end effectively 
in support of our global commitments (14 June 1960) . .. . .. . . .. . . . 
Kennedy' comments on the importance of India) Japan, and a 
r egional grouping of the smaller nations to counter the threat 
of an aggressive China (22 September 1960) .... .... ....... .... .. . 
Kennedy corr.mcnts on friction betv;een Russia and China; empha-
sizes the importance of India as an indicator of Asia ' s futUre 
(22 October 1960) . . ... .. .. . .. ... . . .. . .. . . ... . . .. . .. . .. ... . .. ... . 
Kennedy stresses the importance of Laotian security to that of 
Southeast Asia and the U.S.; also our obligation under the 
SEATO agreement (23 ~~ch 1961) . ........ ............. ... .. . .... . 
Kennedy emphasizes threat of limited ,rar and the need to main-
tain powerful and mobile forces to prevent erosion of Free 
World (28 March 1961) . . . .................... . .. . . . .... . .. .. .. .. . 
Kennedy speaks of gl obal exploitation or discontent and yearn-
ing people by Con~ist subversion; Vietnam cited as example 
(20 April 1961) ............ ........... .. .. ... . . . .. . . .. ... . .. ... . 
Kennedy discusses Communist threat to emerging nations of 
Africa, Asia and Latin America \-lith specific mention of Viet-
nam; cites U.S. responsibilities as chief d.efender of freedom 
(28 April 1961) ....................... .. ............. .. ........ . 
Kennedy (in response ·to question) states that the question of 
sending troops to Vietnam is being considered (5 14ay 1961) .... . . 
Johnso::l-Diem communique expressing U. S. a .. nreness of Communist 
subversion in Vietnam and U. S. r esponsibilities and interest 
in assisting the Saigon Govern"nEnt (13 Hay 1961) . . .. . . .. .. ... .. . 
11. 
Kennedy stresses the subversive threat facing the southern 
C-5 
C-5 
c-6 
c-6 
C-7 
,c-8 
C-9 
C-ll 
C-ll 
half of the globe (25 J.lay 1961) .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. C-ll 
C-l 
Declassified per Executive Order [3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 [6. By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
12. 
Kennedy enuoerates bcrder violations to Southeast Asian nations , 
denounces the "'rIar of liberation" justification, and stresses 
the consequences of successful Co~unist efforts in Laos and . 
Vietnam (25 September 1961) . ..... . . . .. ........... . . . .. .... . . .. . . 
C-12 
13· 
14. 
15· 
16. 
17· 
lB. 
19· 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23· 
Ken.nedy conm:ents on evidence that guerrilla acti vi ty in South 
Vi etna~ is originating outside that country (11 October 1961) ... 
Kennedy aCknowledges Hanoi direction of guerrilla effort in 
violation of Geneva Accords ; indicates the U. S. is prepared to 
assist in the defense of Vietnam inde~endencc through increased 
aid (14 December 1961) ......... . .... . ...... . ... . ...... .. .. . .... . 
Kennedy acknO'l·Jledges a step-up in U. S. effort to resist aggres-
sion in Vietnam under the guise of a IIwo.r of l iberation" 
(11 January 1962) .. . .................... . .. . ..... .. ......... . . . . 
Kennedy' s response to a question on the h'lzards of a coalition 
gover~ent in Laos provides insight into his thinking on mili-
tary intervention as the other alternative (15 January 1962) ... . 
Kennedy discusses U.S. involve~ent in Vietnam in general terms ; 
specifics avoided in interest of security (7 February 1962) . .. .. 
Kennedy revie"$ the development of U.S. involvement in Vietnam 
in response to question suggesting a credibility problem 
(14 February 1962) . .. . . .... . .... .. . . ... . .... .. . .. ...... .. ...... . 
Kennedy gives an excellent assessment of the state of the Com-
munist ",orld (23 l·iarch 1962) .......... .. ..... . ' " ... . . . .. . .. .. . . 
Kennedy emphasizes the need to pursue our established goal of 
non-Co:rcmunist Vietne.m (ll April 1962) . .... . .. .... . .. .. ...... : .. . 
Kennedy, c~enting on cease-fire violations in Laos, stresses 
the desirability of a political solution as contrasted to 
military intervention (9 r.~y 1962 ) . . ............. . ... . ........ .. 
Kennedy aP~lounces the movement o~ troops to Thailand as evi-
dence of U.S. concern over the Laotian cease-fire violations 
(15 ].lay 1962) .. . . . . ..• ......... .. .... . .. .. ..... . .... . ........... 
Kennedy responds to questions on troop deployment to Thailand; 
cites SEA'i'O cblige..tions as the legal basis (17 l1ey 1962) . .. . ... • 
• 
24.' Kennedy describes Commu.nist threat of infiltration end sub-
C-13 
c-14 
C-15 
C-15 
C-15 
c-16 
c-1B 
C-19 
C-19 
C-20 
C- 21 
version as he envisioned it (6 June 1962)...... .. .. . ............ C-23 
C-2 
'/1 
• 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
25 . 
Kennedy comments cn I·i3.nsf'ield's concern about the Adminis -
tration ' s Asian policies; suggests he does not think that 
l4ansfield ,muld advocate ".'i thdraHing from Vietnam or Thailand 
(14 June 1962) . . . ...... . ... . . .......... .. . .. . . ................. . c-24 
26. 
An official &tatement calling attention to findings of Inter-
national Control Commission that North Vietnam was violating 
the Geneva Accords (16 July 1962) ... . .. . .. . . .. . . ... :.... . . . ... . . 
c - 24 
27. 
Kennedy cautions that a split in the COInmunj st ,-,arId is over 
28. 
29 · 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33· 
34. 
35· 
36. 
the means not the end of conmunizing the world (14 January 1963) . C-25 
Kennedy argues for foreign aid to help eliminate root causes 
of unrest in developing ,·:orld (14 January 1963) . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . 
C-27 
Kennedy expresses disagreement ,·,ith recommendation of t<iansfield 
committee to reduce aid to Southeast Asia; refuses to vdthdra\-I 
and turn it over to the Co:r.nnunists (6 March 1963) .. .. .. . .... .. .. C-27 
Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs presents importfu~t 
analysis of U.S. interests in Southeast Asia; resources and 
location emphasized as is the importance of Comnunist revolu-
tionary momentUD; validity of SEATO commit~Ent also cited 
(8 April 1963) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. .. c-28 
Kennedy points out the int.errelationship of Southeast Asian 
nations in response to question on domino theory (24 April 
1963) ....... · · . ····· ·. · . ·· ·.···. · · ·· .. · .. · · ·· . ......... . ... . .... C- 30 
Kennedy comments on reasons for sending troops to South Viet-
nam but not to Laos (8 Hay 1963) .. .. .. .. .... .. . ... .............. C-30 
Rusk stresses the strategic importance of South Vietnam and . 
the history of our involvement (13 J·!ay 1963)... . .... . .... .. ..... C- 3l 
Hilsman discusses Communist threat to Asia and the U.S. com-
mitment to combat its spread; explains Viet Cong role in South 
Vietnam and attempts to place it in perspective to worldw·ide 
t hreat (8 July 1963) ...................... ; .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ... c-33 
Kennedy emphasizes the need for U.S. presence in South Vietnam 
to avoid collapse of the government; vows to stay (17 July 
1963) . . ···· ... .. .... . . ; .. . ... . . .. . . . . .. . . .... . . . . ................ C- 37 
Heavner, Deputy Director of Vietnam Horking: Group, discusses 
in detail the evolution of U.S. involve~ent; he looks at South 
Vietnam as a strategic location, a moral commitment, a fulfill-
ment of' SEATO obligations and a test case for "\Olnr of liberation" 
(9 September 1963) . .. . . .... .... . ...... .. . . .. ....... ....... . .. . . . C- 38 
C- 3 
37 . 
38. 
39 · 
40. 
4l. 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
Kennedy admits Diem' s failings but feels it essential that· 
the U.S. remain (2 September 1963) ......... . .. . ..•... .. . . ..... . . 
Kennedy confirms his belief in "domino theory" and emphasizes 
need to remain and help government strengthen and reform 
(9 September 1963) .. .. .. .. . ......... .. .. . . . ...... . . . . . ........ . . 
Kennedy admits to the presence of 25,000 Americans in South 
Vietnam with a primary goal of \.anning the war (12 September 
1963) ... ·· .. · · ···· .. · · · · · · .... · · ·· · · .. .. · ·· ···· · .. · .. ····· .. ·· · . 
Kennedy gives excellent assessment of U.S. role and responsi-
bility to lead the defense of the \-rorld ' s free nations 
(25 September 1963) . . . ........... . ... ·· · · . · . .. . .. ... . ..... . . . .. . 
Kennedy cites U.S. role as leader of Free World (26 September 
1963).······ ·· · · · · · ·· ··· .... · .. ·· · .. ···· .... ··· · ··· · · · ··· .. · · ·· . 
Policy statement reaffirming U.S. intent to fight aggression 
in Vietnam and else .... ·bere where independence and freedom are 
threatenEd (2 October 1963) ... .. . . .. . .... . .. . ..... .. .. . ........ . 
43. 
Kennedy had planned in his Dallas speech to emphasize that 
... rork alone cannot defend the Free Horld from Communist ad-
vances; military and economic assistance must be available to 
C-40 
C-41 
C- 42 
C-42 
c-44 
back U.S. promises (22 November 1963) . .. . .. .......... . .... . .. .. . 
C - l~5 
c-4 
73 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projcci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 20 11 
C. 
Kennedy Adninistration 
1. 
Senator John F . Kennedy, Congressional Record, February 29, 1%0, 
n . 3582: 
. 
• • • 
"But both before and after 1953 events have demonstrated that our 
nuclear retaliatory power is not enough. It cannot deter Communist ag-
gression which is too limited to justify atomic war . It cannot protect 
uncommitted na.tions against a Communist takeover using local or guerrilla 
forces . It c~~ot be used in so-called brush-fire peripheral wers . 
In 
short, it cannot prevent the Communists from gradually nibbling at the 
fringe of the free world ' s territory and strength, until our security hes 
been steadily eroded in piecemeal fashion - each Red advance being too 
small to justify massive retaliAtion, with all its risks . 
• • * 
"In short, we need fOl'ces of an entirely different kind to keep the 
peace against limited aggression , and to fight it , if deterrence fails, 
without raising the conflict to a disastrQus pitch. 
I1And our capability for conventional "Tar is insufficient to avoid the 
hopeless dilemma of choosing beh.,een launching a nuclear attack and watch-
ing aggressors make piecemeal conquests . n 
2 . 
Senator John F . Kenne 
's statement in Con ressionel Record June 14 
1 ... 0, p . 11 31: 
• • • 
" i~e must regain the ability to intervene effectively end swii"'tly in 
any liI!lited war anywhere in the "orld -- augmenting, modernizing end pro-
viding increased mobility and versatility for the conventional forces and 
,,:eapons of the Army and t·larine Corps . 
As long as those forces lack the 
necessary airlift and sealift capacity and versatility of firepo,,'er , ue 
cannot protect our commitments around the globe - resist non-nuclear ag-
gressions - or be certain of having enough time to decide on the use of 
our nuclear power .
11 
• • • 
3 . 
Senator John F . Kenned ' s statement as uoted in the Hashin 
on Daily 
. Ne;,'s, September 22 , 1 
0 : 
• •• 
"The recognition is not really the crux of our foreign policy. 
The 
real question is \.'hat should be done about the harsh facts that China is 
a powerfUl and. aggl'essive nation . 
The dangerous situation now existing 
C-5 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
can be remedied only by a strong and successful India, a strong and success-
ful Japan, and same kind of regiona.l group over Southeast Asia which gives 
these smaller cOQ~tries the feeling that, in spite of their distaste for a 
military alliance, they ' .... ill not be left to be picked off one by one at the 
whim of the Peiping regime . 11 
4. 
Senator John F . Kennedy Interview as Reported in The Hashington Post, 
October 22, 1960: 
'* 
iI' * 
TtCronkite : 
' ... What areas do you see \/here the United States might 
take the offensive in a challenge to communism OVer the next 4 to 8 years? ' 
"Kennedy: 
' . .. the most vulnerable area , I have felt, has been eastern 
Europe . 
I have been critical of the Administration's failure to suggest 
policies which would malte it possible for us to establish, for example, 
closer relations ''lith Poland, particularly after the ' 55- ' 56 period and the 
Hungarian revol ution . 
"le indicated at that time that vIe were not going to 
i ntervene militarily. 
There was a period there when Poland demonstr ated a 
national independence , and even the Polish Government moved some distance 
auay from the Soviet Union . 
" .. . Secondly, the relations between Russia ~~d China. 
They are now 
engaged i n a debate over \lhether Har is the means of conununizing the "Forld, 
or whether they should use subversion and infiltration , economic struggles 
and all the rest . 
No one can say ... ,hat that COill'se of action will be, but 
I think the next President of the United States should watch it carefully. 
If those two years should split) it could have great effects throughout 
the entire world . 
"Th:irdly, I believe that India represents a great area for affi rmat ive 
action by the Free Horld. 
India started fron. about the same pl.ace that 
China did . 
The Chinese Communists have been moving ahead the l ast 10 years . 
I ndia ... has been !:laking some progress ) but if India dOes not succeed \lith 
her 450 million people, if she can't make i'reedom work, then people around 
the world are going to determine, particularly in the underdeveloped Horld, 
that the only "ray they can develop their resources is thxough the Communist 
syst em. " 
-1(. '* 
*" 
5 .. 
Kenned PreSidential Ne\ls Conference as Quoted in the Net_ York Times, 
Narcb '2 
1 1. 
Ne","s Conference of r·!arch '23, 1 
1 : 
* * * 
"My rello\! Americans, Laos is fro: away from .!\merica, but the ... ~orld is 
small. Its 2,000,000 people live in a country three times the s ize of 
AUstria. 
The scct~ity of all Southeast Asia will be endangered if Laos 
loses. its neutral ir.dcpen:ience . 
Its o'm safety runs \dth the safety of 
• 
us all, in real neutrality observed by all. 
c-6 
'i!> 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
"I ,rant to ma.l{e it clear to the American people and to all of the 
world tha.t all we ,,;ant in Laos is peace and not \/ar , a truly neutral 
governmpnt and not a cold war paim, a settlement concluded at the con-
ference table and not on the battlefield. 
"Q. 
'1.1r . President, 
the importance of a free 
the individual American . 
fUrther? 
* * * 
there appears to be some national unawareness of 
Laos to the security of the United States and to 
Could you spell out your vievrs on that a little 
itA. 
'\'lell, quite obviously geographically Laos borders on Thailand, 
which is, to ... · .. hich the United States has treaty obligations under the 
SEP~O agreement of 1954, it borders on South Vietnam - it borders on 
Vietnam - to ".,hich the United States has very close ties , and also .. ,hich 
is a sienatory of the SEATO pact . 
"The aggression against Laos itself vas referred to in the SEATO agree-
ment, so that given this, the nature of the geography, its location the 
coI!D.itnents ,·;hich the United St"ates end Obligations which the United States 
has assumed to .... ;ards Laos as ... :ell as the surrouoding countr ies - as well as 
other signatories of the SEATO pact - it ' s quite obvious that if the Com-
munists were c..ble to tlove in and dominate this country, it v/ould endanger 
the security of ail, and the peace of all of Southeast Asia. 
"And as a member of the United Nations and as a signatory to the SEATO 
pact, and as a country .. ~hich i s concerned with the strength of the cause 
of freedom around the world, that quite obviously affects the security of 
the United states ," 
6. President Kenned ' s Snecial r~ess 2. e to Con 
ess on the Defense Bud et 
March 2 
1961, Public Papers of the Presidents, Kennedy ; 1" 1 , p , 229: 
* * * 
"The strength and deployment of our forces in cOr.lbination ..... rith those 
of our allies should be sufficiently pmlerful and oobile t o prevent the 
steady erosion of the Free World through limited wars; and it is this role 
t.hat should constitute the primary oisslon of our oVerseas forces . 
Non-
nuclear '.fars, and sub-limited or guerrilla warfare , have since 1945 con-
stituted the most active and constant threat to Free Horld security. 
Those 
units of our forces '.Ihich are stationed overseas , or designed to fight 
overseas, can be llloSt usefully oriented to,,'ard deterring or confining those 
conflicts which do not justify Md must not lead to a general nuclear attack. 
In 'the event 0:' a major aggression that could not be repulsed by conventional 
forces, i-,'e z:lust be prepared to" take ,.,hatever action with ' .. ;hatever ..... eapons 
are anpropriete . 
But our objective" nmr i s to increase our ability to con-
fine our response to non-nuclear ;reapons , and to les sen the incentive for 
C-7 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
for any limited aggression by making clear i-That out' response ..... i11 accom-
plish. 
In most areas of the 1,·forld, the main burden of local defense 
against overt att~ck , subversion and guerrilla warfare must rest on local 
populations and forces . 
But given the great likelihood and seriousness 
of this threat, we must be prepared to make a substantial contribution in 
the form of strong, highly mobile forces trained in this type of warfare , 
some of which must be deployed in forward areas, with a substantial air-
lift and sealift capacity and prestocked overseas bases . 
urn this area of local wars, we must inevitably COWlt on the coopera-
tive efforts of other peoples and nations .... 'ho share our concern . 
Indeed , 
their interests are more often directly engaged in such conflicts. 
The 
se1f-relia."lt are also those 1,-[hom it is easiest to help -- and for these 
reasons we must continue and reshape the Military Assistance Program. which 
I have discussed earlier in my special message on foreign aid . 
I1Strengthened capacity to meet limited and guerrilla warfare -- limited 
oilitary adventures a"ld threats to the security of the Free World that are 
not large enough to justify the label of ' limited war . ' 
\'le need a greater 
ability to deal with guerrilla forces, insurrections, and subversion . 
Much 
of our effort to create guerrilla and anti- guerrilla capabilities has in 
the past been aimed at general \far . 
We must be ready now to deal vlith any 
size of force, including small externally supported bands of men ; and vie 
must help train local forces to be equally effective ." 
7· 
President Kenne 
April 20, 1 
1, 
I s Address to Americ(;ln Societ of News a er 
Public Papers of the Presidents , Kennedy, 1 
"* 
.., * 
Editors 
I , p . 306: 
" . .. \·le face a relentless struggle in every corner of the globe that 
goes far beyond the clash of armies or even nuclear armaments . 
The armies 
are there , and in large number . 
The nuclear a.n:!aments are there . 
But' 
they serve primarily as the shield behind which subversion, infiltration, 
and a host of other tactics steadily advance , picking off vulnerable areas 
one by one in situations .... 'hich do not pernit our own armed intervention . 
uPmfer is the hallmark of this offensive -- power and discipline and 
deceit. 
The legitimate discontent of yearning people is exploited . 
The 
legitimate trappings of self-determination are employed. 
But once in 
po~"er, all talk of discontent is repressed, all self.-determination disappears , 
and the promise of a revclution of hope is betrayed, as in Cuba, into a 
reign of terror . ·Those viho on instruction staged automatic 'riots' in the 
streets of free r.ations over the effol·ts of' a small group of young Cubi:l.ns 
to rega.in their freedom should recall the long roll call of refugees who 
cennot no· .... go b:J.ck -- to HlUlgary, to Horth Korea, t o I10rth Viet-Nan, to 
East Gernany, or to Poland, or to any of the other lands :fro:n which a steady 
stream of refugees pours forth, in eloquent testimony to the cruel oppres-
sion nmT holding SHa.y in their homeland. 
c-8 
77 
I 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
"\~e d8.1'e not fail to see the insidious nature of this ne'l-I and deeper 
struggle , 
We dare not fail to grasp the ne,'" concepts, the new t,ools, the 
ne\! sense of urgency we ~dll need to combat it -- whether in Cuba or South 
Viet -Nam , 
And we dare not fail to realize that this struggle is taking 
place every day, rlithout fanfare, in thousands of villages and markets 
day and night -- and in classrooms allover the globe , 
"The message of Cuba, of Laos, of the rising din of Communist voices 
in Asia and Latin Anerica -- these messages are all the same . 
The com-
placent , the self- indulgent, the soft societies are about to be swept away 
with the debris of history. 
Only the strong, only the i ndustrious , only 
the determined, only the courageous, only the visionary who determine the 
real nature of our struggle can possibly survive , 
"No greater task faces this c01J..'1try or this administration , 
No other 
challenge is more deserving of our every effort and energy. 
Too l ong we 
have fixed our eyes on traditional military needs, on armies prepared to 
cross borders , on missiles poised for flight . 
NOH it should be clear that 
tbis is nO longer enough -- that om' security may be lost piece by piece, 
country by country, without the firing of a single missile or the crossing 
of a single border . 
"We intend to profit from this lesson . 
He intend to re-examine and 
r e-orient our forces of all kinds -- our tactics and our institutions here 
in this community . 
\~e i ntend to intensify our efforts for a struggl e in 
many ways nore difficult than war, where disappointment v:ill often accom-
pany us . 
"For I am convinced that we in this country and in the free ..... orl d possess 
the necessary resolU'ce, and the skill, and the added strength that comes 
from a belief in the freedom of man . 
And I am equally convinced that history 
will record the fact that this bitter struggle reached its climax in the l~te 
1950 ' s and the early 1960 ' s . 
Let me then m::;,..l{e clear as the President of the 
United States that I am determined upon our system' s survival and success , 
regardless of the cost and r egardless of the peril! It 
8. President Kenned ' s Address, in Chic 
a to Democratic Part Dinner 
A ril 28 
1 
I 
Public Pa ers of the Presidents Kenned 
1 
1 
* * * 
'~~ e live in a bazardous and dangerous time . 
I do not think it ' s possible 
to overstate it . 
We live L'1 a '.[arld v .. hicb has changed t remendously in our 
lifetime _R history only ,,"'ill secure a full perspective on that change . 
But 
here i s Africa, r1hich was held by \-[estern European povrers for several 
cepturies, nOl" independent -- '''hicb holds Hithin its countries masses of' 
people , m~y of them illitera~e, who live on average incomes of 50 or 60 
or 75 dollars a year, • .-ho want a cbange, v,ho now are the masters of their 
Orin house but , .. ho lack the means of building a viabl~ economy, ,,rho are im-
presse:i by the example of the Soviet Union and the Chinese, "rho -- not 
C-9 
7& 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
kno',;ing the meaning of freedom in their o,m lives -- ,.,ronder ",hether the 
Co~unist syst~~ holds the secret of organizing the resources of the state 
in order to bring them a better life . 
nAnd \~hat is true of Africa is true of Asia, and \-,hat is true of Africa 
and Asia is true in some degree of Latin Americ a . 
The Communists move 
among them, disciplined, organized, subject to an international discipline , 
promising under their ~ystem that all will be well, knowing that if they 
can "Tin just once, then the iron grip of the totalitarian state goes upon 
the population -- those who resist become refugees, or are shot -- and they 
manage to control the population. 
ItTonight , in Viet-Ham, ,.here the President was re- elected recently in 
the last 2 ueeks by a oajority of 75 to 80 percent , yet a small army of 
guerrillas, organized and sustained by the Communist Viet rUnh in the north, 
control most of the countryside in the nighttime - - in the last 12 months 
have assassinated over four thousand civil officers , two thousand state 
employees a'1d t,,·o thousa'1d police, believing if they can 'spill the 'Tine, I 
that then they can i-lin control of the population . 
And ",hen they have won, 
they do not intend to give way. 
"NO'..,r our great responsibility is to be the chief defender of freedom, 
in this tine of maximum danger. 
Only the United States has the pmler and 
the resources and the determination . 
He have committed ow'selves to the 
defense of dozens of countries stretched around the globe "'ho look to us 
for independence, ",ho look to us for the defense of their freedom . 
"Yle are prepared to meet our obligations, but we can only defend the 
freedom of those 'Who are determined to be free theI:lselves . 
He can assist 
them -- we ,...tIl bear more than our share of the burden, but we can only 
help those who are ready to bear their share of the burden themselves . 
liThe RUssians and the Chinese, containing "'ithin their borders nearly 
a billion people , totally nobilized for the advance of the Communist system, 
operating from narrow , interior lines of communication, pressuring on 
Southeast Asia ,dth the masses of the Chinese annies potentially ready to 
move -- of the Russians who hold great pO",.,rer potentially in the Middle East 
and Western Europe -- the United States stands as the chief defender of 
freedom . 
"I said in my Inaugural Address that no group of people in any genera-
tion since democracy was first developed by the ancient Greeks nearly 
twenty-four or -five hundred years ago, bave ever bOrne a responsibility 
as great as ours . 
And I welcome it - - and I vrelcooe it tonight . 
"There is no easy ans\,'er to the dilemmas that we face . 
Our great ally 
is .the fact that people do desire to be free , that people ',;ill sacrifice 
everything in their desire to maintain ~heir independence . 
And as the true 
nature of the Communi st conspiracy becoI:les better knm-m around the globe, 
":hen neoule corne to realize -- as they surely ":ill - '":' that the Comnnmist 
advan~e does not represent a means of liberation but represents a final 
C-10 
'/9 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 633 16. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
enslnveI!".ent , then I believe that they \-till rally to the cause to which we 
have given our support and our commitment . 
"I believe that \-Ie must build our country, ... ell, also . 
Senator Douglas 
described wbat we are attempting to do . 
The burdens are heavy upon us . 
We have to make t'.lis society an exanple to the world , strong enough to 
serve not only as an example but strong enough t o maintain the commitments 
that we have assumed. n , 
9· 
* * * 
President Kennedy ' s Presidential News Conference , t'lay 5, 1951) Public 
Papers of the Presidents , Kennedy, 1961, p . 356: 
* * * 
"Q. 
'There have been reports that you would be prepared to send 
American forces into South Vietnam if that became necessary t o prevent 
Communist domination of tha.t COWltry . 
Could you tell us ,.,hether that is 
correct and also enythL~g else you have regarding plans for that country? 
"A. 
'\vell, we have had. a group working in the Government and ",.e ' ve had. 
a Security Council meeting about the problems ,·,hicb are faced in Vietnam 
by guerrillas and by the barrage lthich the present Government is being sub ~ 
j ected to . 
The problem of troopR ... the matter of "hat we I re going to do to 
assist Vietnam to obtain its independence it . . • n matt er still under con ~ 
' d 
t ' 
I 
II 
-
s ~ era ~on .. • . 
10. 
* .. * 
Joint 
Cornmuni~e Issued at Sai gon by the Vice President of the United 
st ate s and the Pre s id ent 0 f "V-=i"e-,tc:-"N;:am~_I".!"a"-1"3"",,,1,,96=1,,,--,D,,exB.lo:.:·t,,m,,e,,n,,t,-,0,,1' 
State Bulletin, June 19, 1 1, p . 95 
"Tbe United st ates , for its part , i s conscious of the determination, 
energy and sacrifices which the Vietnamese people , under the dedicated 
leadershi p of President Ngo Dinh Diem, have brought to the defense of 
fre edom in their land, 
liThe United States is also conscious of its responsibility e,nd duty, 
i n its own self~ interest as well as in the interest of other free peoples , 
t o assi st a brave country in the defense of its liberties ageinst unprovoked 
subversion and CO!!"!ID.unist terror , It has no other m6tive than the a.el"ense 
of freedom . n 
ll . 
President KennedL~ecial J.!essage to Congress , J/fay 25 , 1961, Publi c 
Papers of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1961: 
liThe great battleground for the defense and expansion of freedom today 
is the \thole southern half of the globe 
Asia , Latin .America, Af"rica and 
C-ll 
go 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
the ltiddle East - - the lands of 
the greatest in buman history . 
and exploitation . 
Nore than an 
the rising peoples . 
Their revolution is 
They seek an end to injustice , tyranny, 
end, they seek a beginning. 
!lAnd theirs is a revolution which we would support regardless of the 
Cold War , and rebardless of which political or economic route they should 
choose to freedom . 
"For the adversaries of freedom did not create the revolution ; nor did 
they create the conditions which compel it . 
But they are seeking to ride 
the crest of its wave -- to capture it for themselves . 
IIYet their aggression is more often concealed than open . 
They have 
fired no missiles; and their troops are seldom seen . 
They send arms , 
agitators , aid, technicians and propaganda to every troubled area . 
But 
,,"'here fighting is required, it is USUally done by others - - by guerrillas 
striking at night, by assassins striking alone -- assassins y/ho have taken 
the lives of four thousand civil officers in the last t,,,elve months in 
Vietnam alone - - by subversive and saboteurs and insurrectionists , who in 
some cases control wbole areas inside of independent nations . 
. 
"With these formidable Yieapons, the adversaries of freedom plan to con-
solidate their territory - - to eA~loit, to control, and finally to destroy 
the hopes of the lfOrld r S neHest nations; and they have ambition to do it 
before the end of this decade . 
It is a contest of' "]il1 and purpose as 
well as force and violence - - a battle for minds and souls as well as l ives 
and territory . 
And in that contest , lie cannot stand aside . 
"\1e stand, as ,,"'e have always stood from our earliest beginnings , for 
the independence and equality of all nations . 
This nation was born of 
r evolution and raised in freedom . 
And lfe do not intend to leave an open 
r oad for despotism . 
ItThere is no single simple policy which meets thi s challenge . 
Experi-
ence has taught us that no one nation bas the power or the wisdom to solve 
all the problems of the v]Orld or manage its revolutionary tides - - that 
extending our commitments does not always increase our security - - that 
any initiative carries v/ith it the risk of a temporary defeat - - that 
nuclear ,,'eapons cannot prevent subversion - - that no free people can be 
kept free without will and energy of their own -- " 
* * .* 
12 . 
President Kenned 
I s Address to the United Nations 
Se tember 25 
Publi~ Pape-s of the Presidents, Kennedy , 1901, p. 
2 
* * * 
" Fina.l~ , as President of the United states, I consider i t my duty to 
report to this Asser.lbly on t"o tlu-cats to the peace ·.~hich are not on your 
crO'l-:ded agenda, but 'Jhich causes us, and most of you, the deepest concern . 
C-12 . 
S/ 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 633 16. By: NWO Date: 20 I I 
"The first threat on which I wi sh to report is widely misunderstood: 
the smoldering coals of 'far in Southeast Asia. 
South Vietnam is alree:.dy 
under attack -- sometimes by a single assassin, sometimes by a band of 
guerrillas, recently by full battalions . 
The peaceful borders of Burma, 
Cambodia and India have been repeatedly violated . 
And the peaceful 
people of Laos are in danger of losing the independence they gained not 
so long ago . 
"NO one can call these 'wars of liberation . ' 
For these are free 
countries living under governments . 
Nor are these aggressions any less 
r eal because men are knifed in their barnes and not shot in the fields of 
battle . 
"The very simple question confronting the ,-rorld community is ·Hhether 
measures can be devised to protect the small and weak from such tactics . 
For if they are successful in Laos and South Vietnam, the gates '''ill be 
opened wide . 
"The United States seeks for itself no base, no territory , no special 
position in this area of any kind . 
He support a truly neutral and inde-
pendent Laos , its people free from outside interference , living at peace 
with themselves and with their neighbors, assured that their territory 
will not be used for attacks on others, and under a government comparable 
(as Hr . Khrushchev and I agreed at Vienna) to Cambodia and Burma. 
"But now the negotiations over Laos are reaching a crucial stage . 
The 
ceasefire is at best precarious . 
The rainy season is coming to an end. 
Laotian territory is being used to infiltrate South Vietnam. 
The world 
cOmL'l.unity must reco~ize -- all those who are involved -- that this potent 
threat to Laotian peace and freedom is individible from all other threats 
to their own .
1t 
13. 
President Kenned IS News Conference October II 
Public Pa ers 
of the Presidents , Kennedy, 1 
1, p . 
0: 
"Troops to Vietnam? 
"Q. 
Hr . President, in reference to your decision to send General Taylor 
to Vietnam , there may be some interpretation of that decision as implying 
confirmation of reports that you intend to send American f orces to Vietnam 
or Thailand or Laos . 
Can you give us your appraisal of the conditions W1der 
which you might find it necessary to send troops? 
"THE FRESIDEN'"J. : He are going to ,.;ait until General Taylor comes back 
and brings an up-tO-date description of the situation, particularl y in Viet-
nam . 
As you MO'''; , in the last t,·,O or three months there has been a large 
increase in the number of the forces that have been involved . 
There has 
been evidence that sane of these forces have come from beyond the frontiers. 
General Taylor ',Iill give me and the .Joint Chiefs of Staff an educated 
C-13 
• 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
military guess as to what the situation is that the government there faces . 
Then we can come to conclusions as to "'hat is the best thing to do . It 
* * * 
14. President Kennedy letter to President Di~u, December 14, 1961, Depart-
ment of State Bulletin , January 1, 1962, p . 13: 
, "Dear Mr . President : 
I have received your recent letter in which you 
described so cogently the dangerous condition caused by North Viet-Nam ' s 
efforts to take over your country. 
The situation in your embattled country 
is , .. ell known to me and to the P.merican people . 
He have ?een deeply 'dis-
turbed by the assault on your country . 
Our indignation has mounted as the 
deliberate savagery of the Communist program of assassination, kidnapping 
and wanton violence became clear . 
"Your letter underlines ",'hat our own information has convincingly shm-m 
that the campaign of force and terror now being waged against your people 
and your Government is supported and directed from the outside by the 
authorities at Hanoi. 
They have thus violated the provisions of the Geneva 
Accords designed to ensure peace in Viet-Ham and to which they bound them-
selves in 1954. 
"At that time, the United states, although not a party to the Accords , 
de.clared that it '",ould view any rene'VTal of the aggression in violation of 
the agreements with grave conc~rn and as seriously threatening intel'national 
peace. and security. I 
We continue to maintain that vie"'. 
"In accordance with that declaration, and in response to your request , 
"'e are prepared to help the Republic of Viet-Nero. to protect its people and 
to preserve its independence . 
He shall promptly increase our assistance 
to your defense effort as ;.;"ell as help relieve the destruction of the 
floods .. :hich you describe. 
I have already given the orders to get t hese 
programs underway . 
"The United States, like the Republic of Viet-Nam, remains devoted to 
the cause of peace and our primary purpose is to help your people maintain 
their independence. If the Communist authorities in North Viet-Nam will 
stop their campaign to destroy the Republic of Viet~Nam, the measures we 
are taking to assist your defense efforts '11 ill no longer be necessary. 
He 
shall seek to persuade the Communists to give up their attempts of force 
and subversion . 
In eny case , "He are confident that. the Vietn&mese people 
"\orill preserve their independence and gain the peace and prosperity for 
which they have sought so hard and so long. 
I1His Excellency Ngo Dinh Diem 
President and Secretary of state for 
National Defense 
The Republic of Viet-rlem 
Saigon, Viet~Il a.m" 
c-14 
"JOHN F. JCElj"NEDY 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
15· 
President Kennedy ' s State of the Union Hcssa~e, January 11, 1962 , 
Public Papers of the Presidents, KCl".nedy, 1962, '0 . 12: 
. 
* * * 
"A satisfactory settlement in Laos would Elso help to achieve and 
safeguard the peace in Viet Nero -- "rhere the foe is increasing his tactics 
of terror - - ,,,here our o'"n efforts have been stepped up -- and ,,,here the 
local goverJ'l.ment has ini Hated neu progrems and reforms to broaden the 
base of resistance . 
The systematic aggression nOlr bleeding that country-
is not a 'war of liberation ' -- for Viet Nero is already free . 
I t is a war 
of attempted subjugation -- and it will be resisted . 
16 . 
President Kenne 
' s News Conference Janu 
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1902, p. 
* * * 
15 1962 Public Paners 
I1Q. 
I n the past it would seem that coalition governments lean towards 
COl!lID.W1ist control. 
Axe we then ta.\(ing a chance in supporting a coalition-
type government in Southeast Asia? 
irA. 
a chance 
\~e are ta.'<ing a chance in all of Southeast Asia and we ' re taking 
in other areas . 
IINobody- can mak;,e any predictions sure for the future really on ~ 
matter in which there are powerful interests at stalte. 
I thin.\';:, however , 
that ... re have to consider \o .. hat our alternatives are and -what the prospects 
for war are in that area if we fail in .our present efforts , and the geo-
graphic problems which \-.'o\lld have to be surmoW1ted in such a military en-
gagement ,~here there is no easy entrance by sea and where the geographic 
location is extremely -- a long way from us and very close to those "rho 
might become involved . 
So that there is no easy sure anSHer for Laos . 
"But it is my judgment that it i s in the best interests of our country 
to ".Iork for a neutral and independent Laos . 
We are attempting to do that 
and I can assure you that I recognize the risks that are involved. 
But I 
also thin!: we should consider the risks if .... :e fail. 
And particularly of 
the nossibility of escalation of a military struggle in a place of danger . 
So w~
! re going to atteopt to work out this matter in a way which permits 
us to try .1I 
17· 
Pre::;iClent KEnned ' s Hews Conference 
1962 Public Pa ers 
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1 
2, '0 . 121: 
"The Subterranean v,lar 
"Q. 
I-tr . President , there seems to be some doubt , e.t least on the local 
level and in the region , .. ,.here this is going on, as to the right of the 
American people and the rest of the .".;orld to kno:·,' the extent of' the battle 
C-15 
81f 
in South Vietnam. 
Ho;,," deeply are we 
the rights of the 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
Could you tell us, sir , what the situation is 
involved in i,hat seems to be a grmfing ,",'ar and 
people to know what our forces are doing? 
there? 
what are 
liTHE PRESIDENT : 
There is a war going on in South Vietnam, and I think 
that last ..... 'eek there were over 500 killings ) ar.d assassinations and bomb-
ings and the casualties are high. 
As I said last "eek, it is a subterran-
ean ,.,a1.', a guerrilla war of increasing ferocity . 
The United States , since 
the end of the Geneva Accord, setting up the South Vietnamese government 
as an independent government, has been assisting Vietnam economically to 
maintain its independence, viability and also sent training groups out 
there, which have been expanded in recent weeks , as the attacks on the 
government and the people of South Vietnam have increased. 
IIHe are out there on training and on transportation , and ile are assist -
i ng in every .. ray we properly can the people of South Vietnam, ,~ho with the 
greatest courage ~~d under danger are attempting to maintain their freedom. 
IINow., this is an area where there is a good deal of danger and it is a 
matter of inforcation . 
vie don 't want to have information which is of 
assistance to the enemy and it ·is a matter .... hich I think will have to be 
worked out vrith the government of Vietnam which bears the primary respon-
sibility. 1I 
18 . 
President Kenne 
' s News Conference Februar 14 
1962 Public Fa rs 
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1 
~2~,~p~
. ~1~3~~
' ==~~CL~~oL~~~~~~~ 
11 l nvol vement in V ietn8I!l 
I1Q . 
t.1r . President, the Republican National Committee publication has 
said that you have been less than candid ,dth the American people as to 
how deeply ,",'e are involved in Vietnam. 
Could you throw any more light on 
that? 
liTHE PRESlDEJ.""rr : 
Yes , as you know, the United sta.tes for more than a 
decade has been assisting the government , the people of Vietnam, to main-
t ain their independence . 
Hay back on Dec . 23 , 1950, we signed a military 
assistance agreement with France and with Indo-China. which at that time 
i ncluded Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia . 
We also signed in December of 1951 
an agreement directly with Vietnam. 
"Now in 1954, the Geneva agreements were signed, and while we did not 
sign t hose agreements , nevertheless Under Secretary Bedel Smith stated that 
he would vie"" any renewal of aggression )..n Vie~nam in violation of the 
aforesaid agreements ,",'ith grave concern, and as seriously threatening 
international peace and security. 
At the time that the SEATO Pact was 
signed in 1954, Sept . 8, Vietnam ... .'as not a signatory, it was a protocol 
state, and, therefore, this pact ' ..... hich was approved by the Senate ,·rith 
only, I think, t..,o against it , illlder Article 4 , stated that the United States 
c-16 
gs 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 633 J 6. By: NWD Dale: 20 II 
recognized that aggression by means of armed attack against Vietnam would 
threaten our own peace and security . 
So since that time the United States 
has been assisting the government of Vietnam to maintain its independence . 
It has had a military training mission there a~d extensive economic astis-
tance . 
"As you know , in the last t< ... ·o years the war has increased . 
The Vice 
President visited there last spring. 
The war became more intense every 
month ; in fact , every week. 
The attack on the government by the Communist 
forces with assistance from the north became of greater and greater concern 
t o the government of Vietnam and tbe Government of the United States . 
''ife sent -- I sent General Taylor there to make a review of the situa-
tion . 
The President of Vietnam asked us :for additional assistance . 
He 
issued, as you re1'!lember, a .... rhite paper .... rhich detailed the support which 
the Viet Minh in the north ,,"'ere giving to this CommW1ist insurgent move-
ment and we have increased our assistance there . 
And we are supplying 
logistic assistance, transportation assistance, training, and we have a 
nun:.ber of Americans .... rho are taking part in that effort. 
"\'Ie have discussed this matter - - we discussed it .... ,oith the leadership 
of the Republicans and Democrats when we met in early January and informed 
them of .... hat we were doing in Vietnam . 
He -- Ur . Rusk has discussed it 
with the House and Senate Foreign Affairs Committee . 
Nr . J.1.cNamara has 
discussed it with the Armed Services Committee . 
The leadership on both 
sides, Republicans and De:mocrats -- ',:e have explained to them our concern 
about \-That is happening there, and they have been responsive , I think, to 
evidence their concern . 
So that there is a long history of our efforts to 
prevent Vietnam from falling under control of the Communists . 
That is 
what we are now attempting to do . 
And as the v",ir has increased in scope, 
our assistance has increased as a result of the request of the government. 
So that I think v!e should - - as it is a matter of great importance , a 
matter of great sensitivity -- my view has alyays been that the headquar-
ters of both of our parties should really attempt to leave these matters 
to be discussed by responsible leaders on both s~des . 
In my opinion, "re 
have hed a very strong bi-partisan consensus up to now, 
~~d I am hopeful 
that it will continue in regard to the action that '·le are taking. 
"Q.. 
as much 
right? 
Mr . President , 
as can be told, 
do you feel that you have told tbe American 
because or the sensitivity of the subject? 
people 
Is that 
"THE PRESIDE..lIJT : 
I think I have just indicated what our role is . 
We 
have increased our assista.'1ce to the government , its logistics , and we 
have not s~nt co~bat troops there , although th~ training missions that we 
have there have been instructed that if they are fired upon they are, of 
course, to fire back, to protect then~elves, but we bave not sent combat 
troops, in the generally understood sense or the word . 
We have increased 
our training nission, and we have increased our logistics support, and we 
are attempting to prevent a Communist take-over of Vietnam, which is in 
C-17 
&(, 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
accordance with a policy which our Government has followed for the last 
__ certainly since 1954 , and even before then as I have indicated. 
He 
are attempting to make all of the information available that vre can , 
consistent i'lith our security needs in the area. 
So I feel that we are 
being as frank as .. :e can be, and I think what I have said to you is a 
description of O1:-r activity there . " 
* * * 
19· 
President Kenned ' s S eech at Universit of California, Harch 23, 1962, 
Public Papers of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1 
2 , p . 265 : 
"The l eaders of the Communist _/orld are not only confronted by acute 
internal problems in each Communist country - -
~he failure of agriculture , 
the rising discontent of the youth and the intellectuals, the demands of 
technical and managerial groups for status and security. 
They are con-
fronted in addition by profound divisions within the Communist world itself 
-_ divisions which have already shattered the image of communism as a uni-
versal system guaranteed to abolish all social and international conflicts , 
the most valuable asset which the Communists had for many years . 
"Wisdom requires the long viell . 
And the long view shovs us that 
revolution of national independence is a fundamental fact of our era. 
revolution cannot be stopped. 
the 
This 
"As new nations emerge from the oblivion of centuries , their first as-
piration is to affirm their national identity . 
Their deepest hope is for 
a world where, l1ithin a frame',rork of international cooperation , every 
country can solve its own problems according t9 its own traditions and 
ideals . 
"It is in the interests of the pursuit of kno\-lledge - - and it is in 
our own national interest -- that this revolution of national indenendence 
succeed. 
For the Communists rest everything on the idea of a monoiithic 
world -- a world ,,,here all knowledge has a single pattern, all societies 
move to'.lard a single model, all problems have a S'ingle solution, and all 
roads lead to a single destination. 
liThe pursuit of knowledge, on the other hand, rests everything on the 
opposite idea - - on the idea of a world based on diversity, self-determina-
tion end freedom. 
And that is the kind of '"orld to which .. re Americans, as 
a nation, are cO!lD:llitted by the principles on \1hich this republic was formed. 
"As men cond\lct the pursuit of knowledge , they create a world which 
freely unites national diversity and internaticnal partnership . 
This p~erg­
ing "'orld is incompetible ,dth the Communist conception of world order . 
"It will irresistibly burst the bonds of COlJununist organization and 
Communist ideOlOgy . 
Pnd diversity and independence , far from being opposed 
to the Amel'ican conception of '·:orld order, represent the very essence of 
our vision of the future . 
c-1B 
<-7 
v 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 I I 
IIThere used to be much talk a feu years ago about the inevitable 
triumph of' communism. 
We hear such talk much less now. 
No one .. rho 
examines the modern "Tarld can doubt that the great currents of history 
are carrying the world a'iay from the monolithic idea toward the pluralist 
i dea -- away froJl". communism and toward nationa'. independence and freedom. 
"No one can doubt th&.t the wave of the future is not the conquest of 
t he world by ft single dogmatic creed, but the liberation of the dive~se 
energies of free nations and free men . 
No one can doubt that cooperation 
in the pursuit of knmrledge must lead to :freedom of the mind and of t he 
soul. 
"The specter of thermonucl~ar \-,ar will hang over mankind; and we must 
beed the advice of' Oliver Hendell Holmes of' ' f'reedom leaning on her spear ' 
until all nations are '-lise enough to disarm saf~ly and effectively. 
* * * 
"We must seize the vision of a free and diverse "'orld - - and shape 
our policies to speed progress tm,ard a f'lexible world order . 
"This is the unifying spirit of our policies in the "/orid . 
The pur-
pose of our aid programs must be to help developing countries to move 
fo~'ard as rapidly as possible on the road to genuine nati onal i ndepen-
dence . 
HOur military policies must assist nations to protect the processes 
of democratic reform and development against disruption and intervention . II 
* * * 
20. 
President Kenne 
' s News Conference 
A ril 11 1 
2 
Public Panel's of 
tbe Presidents Kenne 
1 
2 
. 322 : 
"Q: 
Sir ) what are you going to do about the American soldiers getting 
killed in Viet-Nam'? 
"A: 
. • • He ar e attempting to help Viet -N~ maintain its independence 
and not fall under the domination of the communists .: .But we cannot desist 
in Viet-Nam • . . " 
* * * 
21. President Kennedy ' s Nevs Conference, Nay 9, 1962 , Public Papers of 
the Presidents) Kennedy, 1962, p. 377: 
"THE BROKEN CEASE -FIRE 
"Q: 
that the 
1-1r . President) last February at a ne,-IS conference you told us 
cease-fire was bccOI:ling frayed "in Laos and in the event that it 
C-19 
gg 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
was broken, it could lead to a very serious decision. 
I wonder, 
~rr . 
President, now that the cease-fire has been broken, if efforts should 
fail to re-establish it, '\-.'ould it cause a re-examination on the part 
of the United States towards its policy there? 
"THE PRESIDENT ; 
\~ell , we are concerned about the break. in the 
cease-fire . 
As you know, the State Department, the Acting Secretary of 
Sta~e, and the Assistant Secretary of state, met tOday with Ambassador 
Dobrynin, this afternoon . 
He have already indicated to one of the co-
chairmen, the British gO'rerJ1Ili.ent , our great concern about it. 
O\lr am-
bassador in t-1oscow met 'uith the foreign secretary at' the Soviet Union, 
Mr . Gromyko . 
"vle do believe, and have said from the beginning, that the negotia-
tions should move much more quickly than they h~ve . 
The longer this 
r ather frayed cease-fire continues, the more chance we will have of the 
kind of incidents we have had in the past fe.l days . 
That is .rby we were 
hopeful , after the meetings at Geneva last summer and fall , that the 
negotiations bet'treen the parties involved .,ould take place last fall, 
and we could organize a government, rather than trying to continue to 
hold lines which in some cases are exposed , and which are subject to this 
kind of pressure . 
So that has been our vie,., . 
"So that has been our view, and the longer it goes on, and the longer 
there is not an agreement on a government, the longer some groups stand 
out from these kinds of conversations , then the more hazardous the situa-
tion becomes. 
"NOif, on the particular incident , it is a clear breach of the cease-
fire. 
We have i ndicated and we hope that the Soviet Union, which 1s 
committed to e policy based on the statement at Vienna, in regard to Laos, 
.fe are hopeful that we can bring about a restoration of the cease- fire . 
But ve have got t o use the time to try to move ahead in our political 
negotiations. 
"I agree it i s a very hazardous course, but introducing Americe.n 
forces is the other one -- let's not think there is some great third 
course . 
That also is a hazardous course and we want to attempt to see 
if we can 1'lork out a peaceful solution, ,,.hich has been our object for 
many months . 
I believe that these negotiatio?s should take place qui ckly. 
This 1s not a satisfactory situation today . It 
* * * 
22. 
White House Statement of the President 
l<J:e. 
15 
1 
2 
Public Pa rs 
of the Presidents, Kennedy. 1 
2 , u . 3 
"Following joint consideration by the governments of the United 
States end Thailand of the situation in Southeast Asia , the Royal Thai 
Government has invited, and I have today ordered, additional elements of 
the United States military forces, both ground and air, to proceed to 
C-20 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 633 16. By: NWO Date: 20 I I 
Thailand and to remain there until fUrther orders . 
These forces are to 
help ensure the territorial integrity of this peacefUl country. 
liThe dispatch .of United states forces to Thailand was considered 
desirable because of recent attacks in Laos by Communist forces, and 
the subsequent movement of Communist military units toward the border 
of Thailand. 
IIA threat to Thailand is of grave concern to the United States . 
I 
have , therefore , ordered certain additional American mili tary forces into 
Thailand in order that \-Ie may be in a position to fulfill. speedily our 
obligations under the l-1anila Pact of 1954, a defense agreement which was 
approved ovenlhelmingly by the U. S. Senate, and to Hhich the Secretary of 
state and Foreign l-iinister of Thailand referred in their joint statement 
of Harch 6, 1962. 
He are in consulta.tion lfith sEATO Govermnents on the 
situation . 
III emphasize that this is a defensive act on the part of the United 
states and wholly consistent with the United Nations Charter which 
specifically recognizes that nations have an inherent right to take 
collective mea.sures for self-defense . 
In the spirit of that Charter , 
I have directed that the Secretary General of the United Nations be in-
formed of the actions that we are taking . 
IIThere is no change in our policy toward Laos , \!hich continues to 
be the re- establisbment of an effective cease- fire and prompt negotia-
tions for a goverrunent of national. union . II 
23 · . President Kenne 
' s Ne\-fs Conference 
Me. 17 
Public Pa ers o~ 
the Presidents , Kennedy, 1 
2, p. 402 : 
"No Further Breach in Laos 
1tQ.: 
Hr . President , could you bring us up. to date on the Laotian 
situation since the dispatch of our troops in Thailand? Specifically, do 
you feel that we have increased the cha~ces of our getting caught in a 
communist shooting war in Southeast Asia? 
liTHE PRESIDENT : 
We are continuing to hope that there "Fill be a 
national government or national union , which has been our pol icy, as you 
knO\i , for a year . 
vIe are going into Thailand , at the decision of' the 
Thai government, our own decision to provide for the defense of' Thailand . 
The latest information indicates no further breach of the cease-fir e . 
We also have ind1cations that the three princes will engage in conversation 
shortly. 
I hope they will produce a government . 
That is our object . 
I 
have already indicated the great hazards of a shooting war in Asia. 
I n 
Asia, it is our object to bring about a diplomatic solution ''''hich will make 
the chances of such a war far less likely. 
C-21 
'jo 
Declassified per E.xecuti vc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"Troops in Thailand 
" Q,: 
Mr . President , in light of your answ'er to this question, sir, 
could you give us any idea how long the American troops will be needed 
in Thailand? 
"THE PRESIDENT : ·r cannot at this time . 
"Q: 
Have you any idea under ",hat conditions they might r eturn? 
"THE PRESIDTh"T : 
I cannot at this time . 
They have only been in there 
for a very short while , and we can ' t tell when they will come out . It 
will depend a good deal on what conditions are in Thailand and the neigh-
boring countries . 
"Restoring the Cease-Fire 
"Q: 
Nr . President, could you tell us , please, what you would consider 
the r estoration of an effective cease-fire? "lould this involve the with-
drawal of the Communist forces to their position before the attack on Nam 
Tha, or more or less a quiescence ,",hich would permit the talks to go fon'ard 
on the gover~ent? 
"THE PRESIDENT : 
Obviously, we would prefer as great a "fithdra ..... ·a.l to 
the line that was in effect a ,reek or so ago as "'!e could get . 
I ,'lOuld 
think, hO\o,'ever, that the peace along the line which now may exist, of 
course, is essential . 
"Obj ectives in Laos· 
"Q: 
}'1r . President, w01.!ld you review for us the considerations that 
you had in mnd last weekend ,·rhen you took this rather swift action to move 
more Aoerican troops into Thailand? 
"THE PRESIDENT : 
Yes. 
We are concerned about the breach of the cease-
fire, the sign of deterioration in Laos , which brought Communist forces to 
the border of Thailand up in the Mekong River section, up not too far from 
Nam Tha, and we did not y~o\{ whether this was an indication of a general 
breach of the cease-fire which , of course , ,·;ould immediately imperil Thailand. 
So in our desire to stabilize the situation, we got in touch with the govern-
ment , .,hieh was all:eady in touch ,vith us, arid l10rked out the proposed course 
of action. 
* * * 
ilLegality of Thailand Move 
"Q: 
Mr . President , vhat ,,'as the legal basis for our sending troops 
to Thailand? Has it a bilateral arrangement that we have with the Thai 
government , or .... ,as it possibly secret arrangements? 
C-22 
• 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
liTHE PRESIDEIIT : 
No, the actual legal basis was to put u.s in a 
position to fulfill our obligations under the SEATO Treaty. 
"Q: 
I-tr . President, are the other members of the SEATO Treaty organi -
zation doing the same? 
"THE PRESIDENT : .They have been asked to do so, end there have been 
indi cations of a favorable response from several of t hem. 
This is a de-
cisi on for t hem . 
But we have responded and met our obligations . 
* * * 
liThe Intentions of Pathet Lao 
"Q: 
Mr . President, back on the subject of Southeast ASia, has there 
been any indication that the Pathet Lao intended to march against Thailand 
or against the capital of Laos , and , second, under what conditions "'ould 
t he United States send its troops into Laos? 
"THE PRESIDENT : 
In ensuer to your first question, I don ' t know what 
t heir intentions may be . 
I am hopef'ul their intentions 'Hill be to main-
tain a cease- fire . 
Obviously, as I have said, the breech of the cease- fire 
i n the case of Nam The "ras a blow to the concept of the cease- fire . 
That 
is what initi ated our action in the case of Thailand. 
On the second matter , 
we have to wait and see . 
I think ·it is very important that the princes form 
a government of national union for the preservation of their own country. " 
24 . 
President Kennedy ' s Address at Graduation Exercises of the U. S. 
J.1ilitary Acadet:1Y , Public Papers of the Presidents, Kennedy , 1962, 
p . 453 : 
"Korea has not been the only battle ground since the end of the Second 
World Hal' . 
!,len have fought and died in Mal aya , in Greece , i n t he Phili p -
pines , in Algeria end Cuba, and Cyprus and almost continuously on the I ndo-
Chinese Peninsula. 
r~o nuclear \'ieapons have been fired . 
No massive nuc l ear 
r etaliati on has been considered appropriat~ . 
This is another type of 'lIar , 
Dew i n i ts intensity, ancient in i ts origin -- war by guerrillas , sub-
v ersives, insurgents , assassins , VaT by ambush instead of by combat ; by 
infiltration , instead of aggression , seeking victory by eroding and ex-
hausting the ene..""lY instead of engaging him . . It is a .forn of v .. arfare 
uniquely adapted to what has been strangely called 'wars of liberation , ' 
t o \Uldermine the efforts of ne' .. r and poor countries to ma:i.ntain the freedom 
t hat they have finally achieved. It preys on economic unrest and ethnic 
confli~ts . 
I t requires in those situations where ,·Ie must counter i t , and 
these are the kinds of challenges that "ill be before us in the next decade 
i f freedom is to be saved, a ~.,hole nev kind of strategy, a wholly different 
kind of force , and therefore a ne~-r and wholly different kind of military 
t raining. " 
C-23 
91 
25. 
Declassified per Executive Order [3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 [6. By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
President Ker~edy ' s News Conference, June 14, 1962, Public Papers 
o~ the Presidents; Kennedy, 1962, p . 492: 
IIMansfield' s Criticisms 
" Q: 
Nr . President, Senator Mansfield a few days ago suggested e. 
review of Far Eastern ~olicies because he said they seem to him either 
marking time, or at least on a collision course . 
"Do you think such a review is necessary? 
"THE PRESIDENT : 
~'lell, we have been revie\1ing. 
As you know , we have 
been attempting in the case of Laos to "ork out a policy which would pre-
vent either one of those situations, \·,hether ' ... ·e shell be successful or 
not , only time will tell. 
"I know that we have :put large sums of money, and the situation tbere 
is still hazardous, what is true there of course is true all around tbe 
y~rld . 
This is a period of great tension and change . 
But if the United 
States had not played a part in Southeast Asia for many years, I think the 
whole map of Soutbeast Asia would be different . 
"I am delighted, as you know, I have the highest regard for Senator 
Nensfield, and I think that we should constantly revielf, and I tbink that 
he suggested we should make judgplents betvTeen "Tbat is essential to our 
interest and "!hat is marginal. 
\'le have been attempting ,-lith great dif~i ­
cu.lty to carry out a policy with Laos vihich lTould permit a neutral and 
independent government there , and in Senator l'-lans~ield I s speech he used 
the examples of Burma and Cambodia. 
Those were the examples that were 
also used at the Vienna meeting by Ch9.irman Khrushchev and myself' in which 
we stated the kind of government that we both said ue hoped would emerge 
in Laos . 
That is the commitment that was made by the Soviet Union , and 
by the United States . 
"Now ""e have- moved to a different plateau, and lFe are going to see 
whether that commitment can be maintained . 
But on the other hand, I am 
sure and I knot{ Senator Mans~ield would not think we should ',dthdraw, 
because \·rithdrawal in the case of Vietnam and in the case of Thailand 
might mean a collapse of the entire area. " 
26. 
U. S. Comments on Re art of Control CommiSSion for Viet-Nam 
Deuart-
ment of State Bulletin, July 1 
1 
2, p . 109: 
"Department Statement 
liThe report just issued by the International Control Commission for 
Viet -Hem demonstrates that the CornmtUlist North Vietnamese' are engaged in 
a campaign o~ aggression and subversion aimed at the violent overthrm{ of 
the Government of South Viet -!!am. It indicates clearly that the hostilities 
c-24 
I 
I 
I 
• 
Declassified l>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Dale: 2011 
in Viet-Nam., which in the first 5 months of this year aJ.one resulted in 
the death of more than 9,000 people , are planned, caused, and led by 
the Communist authorities in North Viet-Nam. 
These are the conclusions 
of the Comnission's Legal Committee: 
I ••• there is evidence to show that armed and unarmed 
personnel, arms, 'munitions and other supplies have been sent 
from the Zone in the North to the Zone in the South with the 
object of supporting, organizing and carrying out hostile 
activities, including armed attacks, directed against the 
Armed Forces and Administration of the Zone in the South •. • 
there is evidence to show that the PAVN LPeople ' s Army of 
viet-N~7 hes allm. .. ed the Zone in the lIorth to be used for 
inciting, encouraging and supporting hostile activities in 
the Zone in the South, aimed at the overthrow of the Adminis-
tration in t.he South . I 
liThe Commission accepted these conclusions of the Legal Committee 
that there was sufficient evidence to show ' beyond reasonable doubt ' that 
the authorities in Communist North Viet-Nam comoitted these violations . 
The Commission also cited the Republic of Viet-Nam for its activities in 
importing military equipment and personnel above the limits imposed by 
the 1954 Geneva Accords . 
The report clearly demonstrates , however, that 
these actions ..... 'ere taken by South Viet-Nero. as part of its effort to defend 
i tself against aggression and subversion from the North . 
In December of 
last year President Diem requested increased military assistance from the 
United States . 
He have responded to this request . 
"President Diem and President Kennedy have both stated that they 
look forward to the discontinuance of the present level of military 
assistance \rhen the Communist North Vietnamese halt their campaign to 
destroy the Republic of Viet-Naco The report of the International Control 
Commission takes note of this position. 
The United States welcomes the 
commission ' s report and recolrunends it for world attention . 
We hope that 
the Commission \1ill continue its efforts to restore peace in Viet-Nem. II 
, 
27. 
President Kenned ' s Annual Nessa. e to the Con ress on the State of 
the Union, January 1 ,1 3, Public Papers of the PreSidents, 
Kennedy) 1963) p. 17: 
* * * 
"ThirJ., "Th e'~ comfort can we take from. the increasing strains and 
t ensions within the Co~~unist bloc? Here hope must be tempered with 
caution . 
For the Sovi~t -Chinese disagreement is over means, not ends . 
A dispute over hm-r best to bury the free world is no grounds for Hestern 
r ejoicing. 
"Nevertheless, while a strain is not a fracture , it is clear that 
the forces of diversity are at ~ork inside the Co~unist camp, despite 
all the iron disciplines of regicentati6n end all the iron dogmatisms 
C-25 
'i'I 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
of ideOlOgy. 
Harx is proven ,·rron'5 once again : for it is the closed 
COIllllllL'llst societies , not the free and open societies which carry within 
themselves the seeds of internal disintegration . 
"The disarray of the Conmllmist empire has been heightened by two 
other formidable forces . 
One is the historical force of nationa~ism 
__ and the yearning Of all men to be free . 
The other is the gross in-
efficiency of their economies . 
For a closed society is not open to 
i deas of progress -- and a police state finds that it cannot command the 
grain to grO-vi . 
"New nations asked to choose betvleen hlO competing systems need onlY 
compare conditions in East and West Germany, Eastern and Western Europe, 
North end South Viet -Ham. 
They need only compare the diSillusionment of 
Communist Cuba with the promise of the Alliance for Progress . 
And all 
the world knows that no successful system builds a wall to keep its people 
in and freedom out -- and the wall of shame dividing Berlin is a symbol of 
Communist failure . 
"Finally, "'hat can we do to move from the present pause toward endur-
ing peace? 
Again I would counsel caution . 
I foresee no spectacular re -
versal in Coomunist methods or goals. 
But if all these trends 2lld develop-
ments can persuade the Soviet Union to walk the path of peace , then let 
ber know that all free nations ."Iili journey with her . 
But W1ti l that 
choice is made , and until the world can dev~lop a reliable system of inter -
national security, the tTee peoples have no choice but to keep their arms 
nearby. -
* * 
~-
"In short, let our adversaries choose . 
I f they choose peacefUl com-
petition, they shall have it . 
If they come to realize that their ambitions 
cannot succeed -- if they see their I,\o:ars of liberation I and subversion 
will ultimately fail -- if they recognize that there is more security in 
accepting inspection than L~ permitting new nations 'to master the black 
arts of nuclear war -- and if they are willing to turn their energies , as 
we are , to the great unfinished tasks of our o\.tn peoples -- then , surely, 
the areas of agree:nent can be very wide indeed: a clear W1derstanding 
about Berlin, stability in Southeast Asia, an end to nuclear testing , new 
checks on surprise or accidental attack , and , ultimately, general and 
complete disarn~ent
, 
* * * 
liMy friends : I close on a note of hope . 
He are not lulled by the 
momentary ca.lI:l of the sea or the somewhat clearer skies abOVe . 
We know 
the turbulence that lies belo-,r, and the storms that are beyond the 
horizon this year. 
But nm-, the winds of change appear to be bl m .. ing 
more strongly than ever, in the ,-rorld of cOI!mJ.unism as well as our o\m ... 
* * * 
c-26 
• 
Declassified per E.xecutivc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
28 . 
President Kenned ' s Annual t·1essa e to the Con ress on the state of 
the Union, January 1 ,1 3, Public Papers of the Presidents , 
Kennedy, 1963, p . 16: 
* * * 
"Second, what of .the developing end non- aligned nations? 
They were , 
I believe, shocked by the Soviets sudden and secret attempt to transform 
Cuba. into a nuclear striking base -- and by Conununist China' s arrogant 
invasion of India. 
"They have been reassured by our prompt assistance to I ndia , by our 
support through the United Nations of the Congo ' s unification , by our 
patient search for dis~ament , and by the improvement in our treatment 
of citizens and visitors, ~]hose skin does not bappen to be white . 
And 
as tbe older colonialism recedes , and the neo- colonialism of the Conununist 
powers stands out more starkly than ever, they realize more clearly that 
the issue in the world struggle is not communism versus capitalism, but 
coercion versus a free choice . 
"They realize that tbe longing for independence is the same the world 
over , whether it is the independence of \'lest Berlin or Viet-Nam. 
They 
r ealize that such independence rUJ'lS atht{art all Communist ambitions , but 
is in keeping with our ot·:n -- and that our approach to their needs is 
resilient and resourceful, ,-/bile the Communists r ely on ancient doctrines 
and old dogmas . 
"Nevertheless , it is hard for any nation to focus on an external or 
subversive threat to its independence when its energies are drained in 
daily combat with the forces of poverty and despair . It makes little 
sense for us to assail in speeches and resolutions the hOrrors of com-
munism, to spend $50 billion a year to prevent its military advance __ 
and then to begrudge spending, largely on American products, less than 
one-tenth of that amount to help other nations stre~gthen their indepen-
dence and cure the social chaos in which cOIilmunism has always thrived . II 
29· President Kennedy
1 s News Conference , Narch 6 , 1963, Public Papers 
of the Presidents, Kennedy , 1963, p . 243: 
* * * 
"Q: 
Mr . President , the Mansfield cOmmittee , sent at your suggestion 
to the Far East and Europe, has recommended a thorough security reassess-
ment in the Far East and a clemp dm'o'Il , if not a. r eduction in our aid to 
that part- of the ,.orld . 
Would you have any cOI:llllent on this , sir? 
'ITHE PRESIDKtT. 
I don't see hmT we are going to be able, unless ",'e 
are going to pull out of Southeast Asia. and t urn it over to the Communists, 
how we are going to be able to reduce very much our economic programs and 
military programs in South Viet-ham, in Cambodia, in Thailand . 
C-27 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
ItI think that unless you want to ...... ithdra'"' from the field and decide 
that it is in the national interest to permit that area to collapse, I 
would think that it -.:auld be impossible to substantially change it par-
ticularly , as we are in a very intensive struggle in those areas .' 
"So I think 'ie ought to judge the economic burden it places upon us 
as opposed to having the Communists control all of Soutbeast Asia with 
the inevitable effect that this 'fould have on t he securi ty of India and, 
therefore , ree.lly begin to run perhaps all the ,"ray to\lard the I·fiddle East . 
So I think that while ~le would all like to lighten the burden , I don ' t-
' 
s ee any real prospect of the burden being lightened for the U. S. in South-
east Asia in the next year if we are going to do the job and meet what I 
think are very clear national needs . 11 
30. 
U. Alexis Johnson ' s Address r4ade Before the Economic Club of Detroit, 
I1The United States and Southeast Asia If A ril 8 1963 . De artment of 
State Bulletin, April 29, 1 
3, p . 
3 : 
* 
.j(. * 
I1Hhat is the attraction that Southeo.st Asia has exerted for centuries 
on the great pO'ders flanking it on all sides? \'Illy is it desirable, and 
why is it important? First, it provides a lush climate , fertile soil, rich 
natural resources , a relatively sparse population in most areas , and room 
to expand. 
The countries of Southeast Asia produce rich exportable sur-
pluses such as rice, rubber, teak , corn, tin , spices, oil, and many others . 
It is especially attractive to Communist China, with its burgeoning popu-
lation and its food shortages . 
"t4ilitarily and strategically, Southeast Asia has great assets . It 
stands astride of east- west trade routes . 
I t stands in a critical, stra-
t egic relationship not only to China and India but to Australia, the 
western Pacific, and Japan . 
Bearing in mind the implications of the r ecent 
Chinese attack on India , Southeast Asia takes on an additional significance , 
since its domination by the Communist powers wo~ld out~lank the Asian sub-
continent . 
-
"Although still thinly populated for the most part , the human r esources 
of this area are considerable and growing . 
Taken together , the peoples of 
Southeast Asia represent a~ important segment of' the free world and a tar-
get of prime importance to Communist imperialism . 
"There is a rhytb...In to the tides of history. 
Just as the pressures on 
Southeast Asia have in the past come alternately from China in the north, 
I ndia in the "est, and the maritice pQ1~'ers along the sea, so Southeast 
Asia is again threatened by a resurbence of pressure from the north. 
But 
today the danger froD this quarter is multi plied a hundredfol d by the viru-
lence of the political doctrine -.... hich now rides on the backs of the Chinese 
people. 
c-28 
'1'1 
• 
\ 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
"As my cOlleague Under Secretary Avere~l Harriman said recently, 
'I don It knO'. .. hou you can distinguish between Chinese communism and 
Chinese imperialism . 
Chinese communism and all communism is imperialist . ' 
"Even before Horld "ler II, Communist parties of' varying strengths 
existed in all Svutheast Asian countries, from Burma to the Philippines . 
After the war the signal was given for armed Communist-led uprisings , 
and these occurred in "Burma, Indonesia, t.talaya , Indochina, and the 
Phi~ippL~es. Even Thailand, the one country in Southeast Asia that had 
not knolrn colonial rule, was threatened. 
By 1952 the revolts were 
crushed in all but J.:Ialaya and Indochina . 
It took the British and the 
new J~alay Federation until 1958 to quell Communist guerrilla forces there . 
This struggle, incidentally, provided valuable lessons \lbich are now being 
applied in Viet-Nwn. 
\ole also might note that , except for Japan, Malaya is 
now the most prosperous country in Asia . 
"The efforts of some po~lers following \forld Har II to restore colonial 
rule along the pre-war pattern permitted the Communists more effectively 
to wave the benner of anticolonialism and, for example, through 1I0 Chi l-iinh, 
at that tioe largely to capture the nationalist movenent in Viet-Nam. 
"After the Geneva Agreements of 1954 on Indochina we took the lead in 
the establishment of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, an alliance 
of the Philippines, Thailand, Pakistan , Australia, New Zealand, France, 
Great Britain , and ourselves, \!ith the objective of providing security to 
Southeast Asia through collective military action if the Communists em-
barked on outright military aggreSSion. 
The opening of the eighth meeting 
of ministers of this org~~ization was attended by Secretary Rusk this 
morning in Paris . 
I1Whatever may be the criticisms of SEATO, the fact remains that, since 
its inception, the Communists have not atteopted open military action in 
the area . 
Instead they have turned to tbe more subtle tactics of subver-
sion and insurgency, the prime example being the guerrilla warfare in 
Viet-Nam carried on in the method made classic in China by Mao Tse-tung. 
Whereas the met~od employed by the Communists has changed, the objective 
r emains the same - - destruction of the independence of the Southeast Asian 
cO\LTltries one by one and return to the days ,,,hen they bore their tribute 
to Peiping. 
\~hile the armed struggle is manifest now only in Viet-Ner.t, 
it ceased in Laos through the settlement reeched just last year at Geneva, 
after 14 oonths of negotiation. 
"Implications of' Struggle in Viet-Nam 
III have poLlted out that Southeast Asia i ... not a hor=.ogeneous region 
but rather a geographic expression . 
By this same token of geographic 
interrelation, the security of the area is not stronger than that of its 
cOT.lponent cowltries . 
All of us "rho '.-ere at Geneva in 1954 recognized that 
Communist domination of the Red River Delta of North Viet-Iram llould make 
it much more difficult to defend the rauaining areas . 
This has been true • 
C-29 
9S 
Declassified per Executive Order [3526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 [6. By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
However, for the CO:!I..llunists to M.VG.Ilce any fUrther in the area would 
render the defense problem very much ~re difficult, ir not well-nigh 
impossible . 
This is \thy the valiant strusgle now being waged in South 
Viet-Nam ha.s implications far beyond the borders of that troubled' 
country . 
"Our massive assistance to free Viet -Nam is designed to avoid just 
such a catastrophe . II 
* * * 
31. 
President Kennedy ' s Ne';{s Conference, Anril 24, 1963, Publi c Papers 
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1963, p . 343: 
* * * 
II 'Falling Dominoes ' 
irQ: 
Ur . President, on Laos again, several years ago we heard a great 
deal about the ' falling domino.' theory in Southeast Asia . 
"Do you look upon Laos in terms of that country alone, or i s your 
concern the effect that its loss would have in Thailand, Vietnam, and so 
on? 
"Would you discuss that? 
liTHE PRESIDEHT : 
That is correct , 
The population of Laos i s 2 million 
and it is scattered . It is a very rough country. It is important as a 
sovereign po;rer . 
The people desire to be independent, and it i s also im-
portant because it borders the Mekong River and , quite obviously, if Laos 
fell into Communist hands it ,",ould increase the danger along the northern 
frontiers of Thailand. 
It would put additional pressure on Cambodia and 
WOuld put additional pressure on South Vietnam whicq in itself would put 
additional pressure on Malaya . 
"So I do accept the vie\! that there is an interrelationship in these 
countries and that is one of the reasons why \/e are concerned with main-
t aining the Geneva Accords as a method of maintaining stability in South-
east Asia. It may be one of the reasons }:hy <?thers do not share that 
interest , 
* * * 
32. 
President Ke:ltled 
I s News Conference 
l,fe. 8 1963 Public Panel's of 
the Presidents , Kennedy, 1 
3, p . 375 : 
* * * 
" Q ~ 
Back on the subj ect of Vietnam. 
why we have coomitted ourselves militarily 
C-30 
Could you explain to us , sir , 
in Vietnam but have not committed 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 633 16. By: NWO Date: 20 I I 
ourselves militarily in Laos, depending instead upon this neutralist 
government? 
"A: 
Because the situations are different . 
That ' s why the remedy has 
been different. 
vIe have had a commitment for a good many years to the 
integrity of South Vietnam. 
He are anxious to maintain the neutrali ty of 
Laos . It may not be possible to do so and it may be necessary to seek 
other remedies . 
But vie have adopted what we considered to be , consi deri ng 
the geography, the history, the nature of the threat and the alternate 
solution - - ue Ive adopted for each country what we regarded as the best 
str ategy. 
And ve 'll have to "'ait and see ....,hat happens on them. " 
33· 
* * * 
Secretary Rusk ' s Address Before the Economic Club of Ne',. York , at 
New York A ril 22 
1963 
liThe Stake in Viet -Nero If De artment of 
state Bulletin, May 13, 1 
3, p. 727: 
"Vi et-Ne.m. is a narrO'.,r strip along the South Chine. Sea, nearly as large 
as California, wi th a population of some 30 million people -- about 16 mil-
lion in the North and 14 million i n the South. 
"With Cambodia and Laos , Viet -Nam formed what was formerly kno\om as 
French Indochina. 
During the Second World Har , the Vichy regime yielded 
control of French Indochina to the Japanese . 
In the spri ng of 1945 t he 
J apanese proclaimed the inde~endence of Viet-Nam. 
And in August of t hat 
year they ~ermi tted the COIn!llunist-oriented Viet t-lin..!-) to seize r ule . 
"In the Indian subcontinent and in Burma and the Philippines , Western 
countries recognized at "rar ' s end that national demands for independence 
would have to be met promptly. 
But this vras not the case with Indochina. 
I nstead, we ourselves '''ere somewhat at a loss for a :policy wit h regard to 
that particular put of the world. 
So our people ~ cbarge of war plans 
i n 1944 sent a colonel out there who sent a cable back to the J oint Chiefs 
of Staff saying 'Request policy guidance on American policy tovlard Indo-
china, because we are beginning to get military access to that country and 
we need direction . ' 
"Well , there ensued a vast silence which lasted for months . 
We sent 
staff offi cers back to try to find the ansvler . 
He sent cabl es out t her e , 
and after about 6 months the reply came and it said, 'When asked by the 
Joint Chiefs of staff for a statement of American policy toward Indochina, 
t he President ' - - that was President Roosevelt -- ' r eplied, I don ' t went 
to hear any nore about Indochina. ' 
"Hell, now the result of no significant Allied policy at that point 
was thgt the French did return and take over where they left off at the 
time of the Japanese occupation, and they encoWltered therefore a militant 
resistance movement . 
For 8 years , vritb material help from the United States , 
they sought to pacify the country. 
At the same time they granted increaSing 
C-31 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
autonomy to non-Communist Vietnamese. 
But the Viet N.inh, reforms in Japan 
and on Tai'Han, ..... as pressed fOl"'-:ard -- 123,000 heads of families became 
sme..ll landowners . 
A comprehensive system of agricultural credit was set 
un . 
Thousands of Vietnamese 'Were mO'led into the highlands to raise indus-
t;'ial crops . 
Rubber production rose, and ne".-: plantings of better varieties 
promised still higher production for the fUture . 
Sugar production doubled 
in 1958 . 
South Viet-rram was soon producing enough rice to resume exports 
on a rising scale . 
Various snaIl industries were established. 
Textile 
production rose from near zero to near self-suf'ficiency . 
Electric po',~er 
nearly doubled . 
Per capita national income rose by 20 percent . 
I1Thousands of new schools were built. 
Between 1956 and 1960) enroll-
ment in the elementary schools rose from 400, 000 to 1,500,000 . 
The 
eA~ansion of health facilities included new hospitals and 3,500 village 
health stations . 
Rail transportation was restored . 
Roads were repaired 
and improved, and three ne"" maj or highHa.ys "'ere built . 
"The Conununists "ere not completely eliminated -- especially along the 
land and sea frontiers, where they could be sup~lied -- but most of South 
Viet-Nam became , for a period, safe for travel. 
I1Although North Viet-Nam inherited most of the industry of Viet-Nam, 
and although its population is larger , it fell rapidly behind South Viet-
Nam in food production , the number of children in school, and in standards 
of living. 
\olhile per capita food production rose 20 percent in the South, 
it fell 10 percent in the North. 
"This ...... as competition "hich the Communists apparently could not endure . 
Very likely it was one of the reasons why they decided in 1959 to rene,.; 
their assault on South Viet-Nam. 
And in 1960 the Lao Dong Party -_ that is , 
the Communist Party -- ordered the ' liberation ' of South Vict- Nam. 
"According to Cononunist propaganda, the 'iIar in South Viet-Nam is a 
civil , ... ar , a local uprising . 
The truth is that it is an aggression 
organized, directed, and partly supplied fro~ North Viet-Nam. 
It is con-
ducted by hardened Communist political organizers and guerrilla leaders 
trained in North Viet-Nam, who, upon their arrival in the South, recruit 
local assistance . 
This has been dODe in a variety of ways , including 
terror and assassination . 
Schoolteachers, health workers , malaria eradi-
cation teams , local officials loyal to the Republic -- these i.,rere the 
first targets of the assassins . 
But many. ordinary villagers i,'bo refused 
to cooperate with the Communist guerrillas like~ise have been r uthlessly 
killed . 
"Strategic Importance of South Viet-Nam 
I1This assault on South Viet-Nam >I'as a major Communist enterprise, care-
fully and elaborately prepared, he~vily staffed, and relentlessly pursued . 
. It made head\l'ay . 
In 1961 President Diem a:ppealed for further e.ssistance 
end President Kennedy r esponded promptly and affirmatively. 
C-32 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
liThe strategic iJl:portance of South Viet -NeI!!. is plain. It controls 
the mouth of the j·;ekong River, the main artery of Southeast Asia. 
The 
loss of South Viet-Nam viould put the remaining states of Southeas~ Asia 
in mqrtal dange~ . 
"But there are larger r easons ..... 'hy the defense of South Viet -Nam is 
vital to us and to the whole free ,·,orld. 
We cannot be indifferent to the 
f ate of 14 million people who have fought hard against communism --
i ncluding nearly 1 million who fled their former homes to avoid living 
under CemmuJlist tyrarmy . 
Since we vlent to the aid of Greece and Turkey 
16 years ago, it has been the attitude of the United States to assist 
peoples ",-he resist Communist aggression . 
\'Ie have seen this form of attack 
fail in Burna, Halaya, and the Philippines . 
The South Vietnamese are de-
termined to '.rin their battle , and they deserve our bell' . 
"Criti cs have complained that South Viet -Nem. is not a f~ constitu-
tional democracy end that our aid has been subject tovaste and mismanage -
ment . 
Let us be clear that these criticisms ere not merely alibis for 
inaction . 
For in passing judgement, let us r ecall that we are talking 
about a nation which bas been responsible for its mm affairs for less 
then a decade, about a people \".'ho have had no peace since 1941 and little 
experience in dir~ct participation in political affairs . 
Their four 
national elections , their thousands of elected hemlet councils , and their 
forthcoming village council elections ShOll' steady movement toward a con-
stitutional system resting upon popular consent ." 
* * * 
34. Assistant Secretar for Far Eastern Aff'airs 
Ro er 1'1 . Hilsman Address 
Made at 1 
3 Conference on Cold War Education 2 Tempa 2 Florida 2 June 1 2 
1 '3, "The Chellen e to Freedom in Asia It Denartment of State Bulletin 
July , 1 32 E' 
liAs to t be nature of the danger , the ideology of conununism is a threat 
to the United States tOday mainly because it is joined with the population, 
resources, and military strength of the countries of the Sovi et Union a~d 
communist China , because it is joined with two bases of pOWer . 
"But the fact that ideology has been joined to these two bases of power 
should not be misinterpreted: the threat is not just military; it is also 
political . 
And of the two , the political threat is probably the more per-
vasive . 
This is true because this nation and ~ts allies have made sure that 
their military defenses are adequate and up to date . 
liThe political threat is. also serious bect-use of the COIJl!!J.unists I skill 
in manipulating all the elements of pO\{er -- political , economic , and 
psychological as well as military . 
They use these instrur.tent s \o;itb con-
siderable sophistication, playing first one then another accor ding to the 
C-33 
/0 'L 
• 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
opportunities open to them in any given situation . 
Mao Tse-tung has de-
scribed this alternation of tactics and instruments as 'talk/fight ; 
talk/fight , I and it describes the technique very ,.,eII. 
This sudden 
alternation bet"leen talking and fighting is designed also to induce a 
maximum amount of confUsion, instability, and trouble in the free world. 
One of the latest examples of their use of tbis tactic occurred last 
October in the Chinese. CommW1ist attack along the Indian border, follo,,:ed 
by their withdrawal beginning a month later . 
"The itmnediate goal of the Communists is , of course, to capture the :-
in-bet"een nations , those smaller and "reeker nations "rhich today are 
struggling against odds to remain independent . 
If the Communists can 
cauture such free nations , turning them against the United States and 
making them feel that it is the U.S. which poses the danger or forms an 
obstacle to their goals , then the Communists could win without using 
military pow"er . 
Moreover , the CODUUunists have waged an unremitting attack 
on the foundations of our ~'ay of life, just as they are a threat to free -
dom elseuhere in the world . 
Although they argue over differences in em-
phasis as to hmi the CO!i!!llunist world should carry out its attacks on free 
men, their common goal is plain enough: to further the destruction of the 
values all free men cherish . 
"In Asia the greatest" danger to i ndependent nations comes from Com-
munist China , with its 700 million people forced into the service of an 
aggressive COlllI:l.unist Party. 
\'Ie can 't i gnore that problem, and we don It 
i gnore it . 
Communist China lies in direct contact with , or very close to , 
a \lhole series of free nations ranged in an arc from. Afghanistan, India, 
Pakistan , and Nepal in South Asia; through Burma, Malaya, Thailand, Cam-
bodia, Laos, and Viet-Nam in Southeast Asia; and on up through the Republic 
of China, on its island base of Tai>fan, to Japan and Korea. 
Indonesia , the 
Philippines, Australia, and Ne'l,' Zealand are also alive to the threat posed 
by the Communist Chinese . 
"All these free nations must deal with the facts of Communist China 
and its ambitions . 
No matter \-That response each has made, be it non-
alinement or alliance with friendly nations , they all are aware that the 
aim of the Chinese Communists is to gain predominant control in Asia and 
eventually to secure the establishment of Communist regimes throughout the 
world . 
The reaction of each nation is determined by its own material 
circuostances and , sometimes more importantly, by its ~ln national psychol-
ogy. 
"The United States is determined that communism shall not t ake over 
Asia. 
"For this reason ','e do not recognize Communist China and seek in all 
possible -.,.;ays to limit the ability of COlT.munist China to impl ement its 
threat to obtain hegemony i n" the Far East . 
t-le recognize the Republic of 
China as the legal government of China and support is position in the 
Uni ted Nations . 
\'le are. aware that the eqonooic and social progress on 
C-34 
/03 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 20 II 
Tai."an, carried out by free Chinese, stands in stark contrast to the 
failw'es of the mainland Coc:ounist gover!U:lent . 
Also the existence on 
Taiwan of a 'fell-tl'ained and - equipped force of 600,000 men, dedicated 
to the fight against communism, must have a restraining effect on' any 
expansionist ambitions of the Communist Chinese . 
Furthermore the 
spirit of the people of the Republic of China, and of their leader, 
President Chiang Kai- shek, who have conducted a 40-year struggle agai nst 
Communist imperialism, is an inspiration to free peoples every\,here . 
"We stand ready to help peoples who ,;-ant to help themselves to 
maintain their independence . 
Sometimes this involves outright alliance, 
as with the Republic of China, Japan, South Korea, and, through the 
Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, with the Philippines , Thailand, and 
Pakistan . If any of these nations is attacked the United States is com-
mitted to help defend i t . 
Our contribution to security in the Far East 
also takes other forms, forms designed to meet threats of varying nature . 
"These threats are never simple ones; some are extremely subtle and 
sophisticated . If we are to meet these threats successfUlly, certain 
qualities of mind must be stre~sed and certain dangers avoided . 
Governor 
Bryant, in a recent address , r eferred to the de.nger that the 'timid 
American ' poses for our democracy . 
I think he is quite right . 
I have 
orten had a similar thought, which I would like to emphasize in what I 
have to say today. 
"Wbat has often occurred to 'me is that , if the United States is not 
only going to meet the Communist threat but carry off the difficult task 
of helping to create a ne' .... and stable ,:orld in the process , then Americans 
are going to need very steady nerves . 
"By this phrase ' steady nerves, ' I mean not only not being timid but 
t wo additional qualities : first, the capacity for cold, de~iberate analysis 
in order to know when to act and when to bide one ' s time ; second, the un-
emotional self-discipline end se~f - control ~hat enables one to act effect-
ively as a result of that analysis . 
I mean the kind of self-control that 
enabled President'Kennedy to use United States pOvler with such coolness 
and skill as he did during the Cuban crisis . In negotiations , also, 
extraordinary qualities of' mind and will are demanded, among which the 
element of co~d calm in dealing with complex situations is increasingly 
important . 
President Kennedy was spea.1ting of this in his inaugural 
address "hen he said: 'Let us never negotiate out of fear . 
But let us 
never fear to negotiate . I 
liThe quaJ.it;' 
tasks before us . 
of ' steady nerves ' is needed in both of the fundamental 
For tbere are tuo separate tasks . 
"One i s the meeting of crises ; the other is the slower, but more 
positive, task of nation building, of helping to build a system of stable, 
strong, and independent states which have solved th~ problem of both 
political and economic develoJ;)ment." 
"* 
"* 
*. 
C-35 
toif 
Declassified per Executive Order [3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 [6, By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
" By 1960 the situation had so deteriorated that it seemed possible 
the Viet Cong would be able to establish a territorial base in South 
Viet-Nem, the next step in the Nao fo:rmula. for a successful 'national 
liberation movement .' At this point, President Kennedy' sent General 
Ma.>..vell Taylor to South Viet -Nam to confer with the Vietnamese Govern-
ment and to observe the situation for himself . 
General Taylor r eported 
that the Vietnen.ese people retained the ~.,rill to fight communism and that , 
given more extensive support, had a chance to defeat the Viet Cong o 
"While this support has come predominantly from the United states , • 
a number of other countries have provided significant support , moral and 
material. 
"The first requirE:Dlent of the struggle today is to pull the teeth of 
the Viet Cong terrorist campaign . 
This can best be done not so much by 
killing ~he terrorists but by depriving them of the opportunity to coerce 
the fanmers into providing supplies and recruits . 
This can only be done 
by providing practical protection to the farming population . 
The technique 
which has been adopted to achieve this protection is the construction of 
fortified villages , called strategic hBlDlets. 
This technique vias used 
successfully in Malaya against the Communist movement there . 
The same 
concept had been applied successfully in the late 1790 ' s by the Manchu 
dynasty of China against the White Lotus sect, a fanatical group 'IIrhose 
use of terror resembled closely the methods of the present-day Viet Cong." 
* * * 
"The struggle in Viet-Nam gains the headlines in today ' s ne"iTSpapers . 
But throughout Asia , ne," nations, in varying degrees, are facing the 
challenge of creatirig progressive, yet stable, societies in a world of 
uncertainty. 
American policy aims to provide our experience, our enth\tsi-
asm, and , insofar as our resource~ permit , our material aid to this great 
enterprise of nation building. II 
* * * 
"Thirdly, ,,'hile we are combating Communist imperielism in all its 
forms, lI'e must remember that it is not enough to be against something and 
that in tbe last analysis success depends upon our ability to build, to 
construct, to contribute to man ' s spiritual end material welfare . 
\~e ere 
cooperating with m~~y free peoples in great efforts at nation building, 
while the Communists try to tear dO"lD) in order to impose their hold end 
their system on the world. 
IIFourthly, t,lere is a larger need for tolerance in international life . 
Happily there is a growing understanding among us of the diverse 'Hays by 
which different peoples seek to obtain happiness and security in a troubled 
world . 
In passing I also wish to observe that , remembering our own un-
finished business in fUlfilling the ideals of the Anerican Constitution , 
C-36 
Nt; . 
• 
Declassified per E.xecutive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
we must be tolerant of the shortcor:lings tie may see in other societies . 
While ,.;e are justifia.bly proud of our institutions and our freedoms and 
stand as leaders in the democratic world, our prestige and influence in 
the world suffer whenever we fall short of our own ideals . II 
* * * 
35 . 
President Kennedy ' s News Conference Jul 17 1963 Public Paners 
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1 3, p . 5 9: 
* * * 
"Q: 
Mr . President , there has been a good deal of pUblic concern 
about the political situation in South Viet-Narn, and I t .. auld like to ask 
you whether the difficulties between the Buddhist population there and 
the SOuth Vietnamese Government bas been a.n impediment to the effective-
ness of American aid in the \Jar against the Viet Cong? 
liTHE PRESIDEl;T . 
Yes, I think it has . 
I think it is unfortunate that 
this dispute has arisen at the very time when the military struggle has 
been going better than it has been going in many months . 
I would hope t hat 
some solution could be reached for this dispute, 'ihich certainly began as 
a religiOUS dispute, and because we have invested a tremendous amount of 
effort and it is going quite ... iell. 
"I do realize of course, and "e all have to realize , that Viet-Nam 
has been in , .. ax for 20 years . 
The Japanese crone in , the ','ar with the 
French, the civil \lar which has gone on for 10 years, and this is very 
difficult for any society to stand . It is a country ... rhich has got a good 
many problems and it is divided, and there is guerrilla activity and 
murder and all of the rest . 
Compounding this, ho\.;ever, no" is a religious 
dispute . 
I ,.,ould hope this would be settled, because we want to see a· 
stable goyernment there , carrying on a. struggle to maintain its national 
independence . 
"We believe strongly in that . 
We are not going to withdra"w from that 
effort . 
In my opinion , for us to withdTaw from that effort would mean a 
collapse not only of South Viet-Nam, but Southeast Asia . 
So we are going 
to stay there . 
He hope with the great effort tlhich is being carried by 
the Vietnamese themselves , and they have been in this field a lot longer 
than ' .. 1e have, and ' .... ith a good deal more deaths and casualties, that 
behind this military shield put up by the Vietnamese people they can reach 
an agreement on the civil disturbrulces and also in respect for the rights 
of others . 
That ls our hope . 
Thatls our effort. 
That -- we lre bring5ng 
our influence to bear . 
And the decision is finally theirs , but I think 
that before we render too harsh a judgment on the people, '.1e should realize 
that they are going through a harder time ths.n we have had to go through . fI 
* * * 
C-37 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
36 . 
Deputy Director of Viet-1Tw Horking Group, Theodore J . C. Heavner , 
Address Nede Before Nz.tional Sec & Leg Committee at the National 
Convention of Veterans of Forei n Hars in Seattle Washin 
on 
Au 
st 25 
1 3 
The Viet -Nam Situation 
De artment of State 
Bulletin, Septe~ber 9, 1 3, p . 392: 
* " " 
"In the light of long-term trends in Communist and free Asia l et me 
now review the elements of U.S. strategy and policy. 
Our policy in the 
Fer East C6.!'1 be sununed up in these four points : 
"I. 
To stand firmly behind our cor.mri.tments to the defense of inde -
pendent nations and to turn back any aggressive thrust from 
communism; 
"2 . 
To contribute as "le are able to the prosperity a.'1d development 
of nations 'I'bich request our assistance as the surest ''fay of 
helping to build a systsn of free , viable , and strong nations 
in Asia; 
"3 . 
To recognize the value of initiatives by the Pacific nations 
t hemselves to develop their mm modes of cooperation and com-
munication, and to stand reedy to assist ';ihen called upon to 
do so ; 
"4 .
. To work patiently for the realization of a Pacific community 
of nations so prosperous and progressive that its at~raction 
wi ll prove , in the long run , irresistible to those peoples 
now kept by their rulers from participation in it . II 
* * * 
liThe Guerrilla \'lar in Viet- Nam 
liTo understand why President KenneC!-y said in his state of t he Union 
message that 'The spearpoint of aggression has been blunted i n South Viet -
Nam, ' '\ore need to consider the situation in the fall of 1961 and early 
1962 . 
The Vietnamese were quite plainly losing their fight against the 
Co~unist guerrillas then . 
"The Communist guerrillas, 1,500 str ong, took tiIld held overnight a 
provincial capital in September of 1961, and, to underline the fact , 
they public.ly be}-leaded the Chief of Province there . 
The flow of rice into 
Saigon, normally a rice export center, vas choked off by the guerrillas 
to. the paint where the United States sent P. L. 480 rice to Saigon in eal'ly 
1962 . 
Eneoy attacks in Januery of last year vlere r unning at t he rate of 
more than 120 per ·,feek. 
He even feared that the Communist Viet Cong might 
soon be able to declare ' a liberated area ' some'fhere. in t he highlands. 
c-38 
, 
• 
(07 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
"Faced with this deteriorating situation, President Die!D. in Decem-
ber of 1961 sent a letter to President Kennedy in ,.,hich he outlined the 
nature of the attack on his goverl".ment and asked for increased American 
assistance . 
The United states considered this request very carefully. 
Vice President J~hnson had visited Viet-Nam in May of 1961, and President 
Kennedy hed sent General LMrualell D~ Taylor to Viet-Nam again in the 
fall of that year . 
So we were very clear about the nature of the threat . 
liVre knel-f that the Viet Cong attack was caused, led, and directed by 
A 
the Communist authorities in North Viet-Nam. 
This was a case of Communist 
aggression, although the Communists made great efforts to conceal the 
fact, aggression against a friendly people with whom the United States 
had strong ties . There could be little question e.bout our decision . 
vIe 
promptly agreed to step up our military and economic assistance . 
"When we i ncreased our assistance to Viet-Nam we issued a study of 
the evidence of Communist infiltration into South Viet-Nam and Communist 
direction of the war against the Government of South Viet-Nem. 
This .1e.S 
necessary, not just out of a 'decent respect for the opinions of mankind,' 
but because of the great and continuing Communist effort to portray the 
Viet Cong as an indigenous and legitimate popular movement against a re-
pressive government . 
I think it is worth noting in this connection that 
the international body specifically established in 1954 at the Geneva 
conference to oversee and keep the peace in Viet-Nam -- the International 
Control Comnission, composed of India, Canada, and Poland -- has confirmed 
the fact that Co~unist North Viet-Nero is engaged in en attemnt to overthrow 
'by violence the Government of South Viet-Nero . After sifting the evidence 
for almost a year , t he International Control Commission in June of 1962 
i ssued a special report ' ... hich makes it clear that the Viet Cong are the 
i nstruments of Hanoi 's deliberate attack on South Viet -Nam. 
"If we were losing the war in the fall of 1961 and early 1962, where 
are we today? I think it is fair to say that the tide has no,.". turned and 
that the Governnent of Viet-Nam is with our help slow'ly overcoming the 
Communist guerrillas . 
No more provincial capitals have been taken , the 
Communists have not ' liberated' any part of South Viet-Nam, and Saigon 
is once again exporting rice , In fact we anticipate that Saigon will 
export 300,000 tons of rice this year. 
* * * 
"The 'Why' of' Our Involvement 
III have des~ribed the 
' hOW ' of our involvement . 
of the 'lO{hy.' 
American role in the Vietnamese ~ar 
I would like to close by i ndicating -- the 
something 
"You can think of Viet-Nam as a piece of strategic real estate . It 
is on the corner of mainland ASia, across the east-'.rest trade r outes , and 
in a position that would make it an excellent base for further Communist 
aggression against. the rest of fr,ee Asia. 
C-39 
10& 
Dccl:lssilicd I>cr Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
"You can think of our involvement in South Viet -Nam in terms of a 
moral commitment . 
The Vietnamese, on the frontier of the free world, 
are fighting not just for themselves but for all men who wish to remain 
free . 
I believe the 300- 500 casualties they suffer each week is a 
precious contribution to the security of the whole free world. 
"You can think of the American role in South Viet-Nam in terms of 
our SEATO [Southeast A'sia Treaty Organizatio!!7 commitment. 
You can re -
gard it as a fulfillment of the implied obligation "hich \ole as a nation 
undertook when we said at the Geneva Conference in 1954 that .. Ie would 
regard any reneual of aggression in violation of the Geneva Agreements 
with grave concern and as seriously threatening international peace and 
security. 
'Iyou can think of South Viet -Nam as a test case ; there is good 
reason to believe that this is the vie'" of the Communist bloc . 
In Viet-
Nam we are determining \oThether or not the free world can help a nation 
defend itself against the subversion Md guerrilla warfare "hich make up 
the '",'ar of national liberation' tactics . 
I think it is fair to say that 
we have largely stopped the CommQ~ist thrust all around the world in con-
ventional and nuclear terms . 
lie are nm .... confronted by a ne',1 kind of 
threat, and we have to a degree invented a nel" kind of response to meet 
it. All of the underdeveloped nations of the world are watching the 
event . 
If South Viet -NaI!l falls, their .... fill to resist this kind of ag-
gression wi ll be weakened and the whole fabric of fre e-world strength 
and determination damaged thereby. 
"Perhaps, in more human terms, you may want to think of our support 
to Viet-Na..ll as American help to the nearly 1 million Vietnamese refugees 
".'ho fled North Viet -Nam in 1954 and 1955 to avoid living under a CommWlist 
regime. II 
37. 
'* 
~. '* 
President Kennedy ' s TV Interview; Sept~~ber 2; 1963, Department of 
State Bulletin, September 30, 1903, p . 499: 
* * * 
"Mr . Crorudte : Hasn ' t every. indication from Saigon been that Presi-
dent Diem has no intention of changing his pattern? 
I1President Kennedy: If he does not change it, '01' course , that is his 
decision . 
He has been there 10 years, and , as I say, he has carried this 
burden when he h~s been counted out on a numbe: of occasions . 
"Our best judgment is that he can ' t be successful on this basis . 
He hope that he comes to see that ; but in the final analysis it is the 
people and the Government itself who have to win or lose this struggle . 
All we can do is help, and we are m.sking it very cle'ar . 
But I don 't agree 
c-40 
101 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
with those who say we should withdraw . 
Thet would be a great misteke . 
That would be a great misteke . 
I know people don't like P;nericans to 
be engaged in this kind or an effort . 
Forty- seven Americans have been 
killed in combat with the enemy, but this is a very important strUggle 
even though it is :far a"ay . 
"We took all thi~ -- made this effort to derend Europe . 
Now Europe 
is ouite secure . 
"le also have to participate -- we may not like it --
in the defense of Asia. II 
38. 
* * * 
President Kennedy ' s NBC Interviev, September 9 , 1963, Department of 
State Bulletin, September 30, 1963, p . 499: 
* * 
-t(. 
"Mr . Huntley : 
Mr . President, in respect to our difficulties in South 
Viet -Nam, could it be that our Government tends occasionally to get locked 
into a policy or an attitude ~d then finds it difficult to alter or shift 
that policy? 
"The President : 
Yes, that is true . 
I think in the case of South 
Viet-Nam we have been dealing ,,,rith a Government ,.hich is in control, has 
been in control for 10 years . 
In addition, "Ire have felt for the last 2 
years that the struggle against the COlIUllunists \las going better . 
Since 
June, 
ho~.·ever -- the difficulties with the Buddhists -- we have been con-
cerned about a deterioration, particularly in the Saigon area , which hasn ' t 
been felt greatly in the outlying areas but may spread. 
So \ore are faced 
with the problem of wanting to protect the area against ~he Communists . 
On the other hand, we have to deal ... rith the Government there . 
That pro-
duces a kind of embiv~~ence in our ef'forts ' . ."hich exposes us to some 
criticisI:l. 
'-Ie are using our influence to persuade the Government there 
to take those steps which '''ill win back support . 
That takes some time , 
and we must be patient , vre must persist . 
I1Mr . Huntley: 
Are '.le likely to reduce our aid to South Viet-Nam 
now? 
"The President: 
I don It think vre think that would be helpful at this 
time . 
I f you reduce your aid, it is possible you could have some effect 
upon the governoent structure there . 
On the other hand , you might have a 
situation whi ch could bring about a collapse . 
Strongly. in our mind is 
what happened in the case of China at the end of vlorld War II, vlhere China 
was lost - - a week government became increasingly unable to control events . 
We,don't want that . 
"Nr . Brinkley: 
l·1r. President , have you had any reason to doubt this 
so-called ' domino theory , ' that if South Viet-Hem fa.lls, the rest of 
Southeast Asia .... ·ill go behind it? 
C-41 
110 
Declassified per Executive Order [3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 [6. By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
"The President: 
No , I believe it . 
I believe it . 
I thilLw;' that the 
struggle is close enough . 
China is so large, looms so high just beyond 
the frontiers, that if South Viet-Nem went , it \fould not only give them 
an improved geographic position f'or a guerrilla assault on Halaya but 
would also give the ~pression that the wave of the future in Southeast 
Asia v,as China and the Communists . 
So I believe i t . " 
39· 
* * * 
President Kennedy ' s Ne\vs Conference 
of the Pres idents , Kennedy, 1 
3, p . 
* * * 
Se tember 12 
73, 
1963 
Publi c Pa ers I 
IIQ . 
Mr . President , in vie'H of the prevailing confusion, i s it possi ble 
to state today just what this Governoent ' s policy is toward the current 
government of' South Viet-Nam? 
"THE PRESIDENT . 
I think I have stated ,.,het my vie .... is and we are f or 
those things and those policies which help win the war there . 
That is why 
same 25, 000 Americans have traveled 10,000 miles to participate in that 
struggle . 
What helps to win the war , we support ; what interferes with the 
',,'ar effort , we oppose . 
I have already made it clear that any action by 
either government which may handicap the winning of the "Tar is inconsistent 
with our policy or our objectives . 
This is the test which I think every 
agency and official of the United States Government must apply to all of 
our actions , and \ve shall be applying that test in various ways in the com-
ing months , although I do not think, it desirable to state all of our vieHs 
at this time . 
I 
th~nk they will be made more clear as time goes on . 
"But \'Ie have a very simple policy in that area , I think . 
I n some ways 
I t hink the Vi etnamese people and ourselves agree ; we want the \ .. ar to be 
won , the Communists to be contained, and the &~ericans to go home . 
That is 
our policy. 
I am sure it is the policy of the people of Vi.et-Nam . 
But we 
are not there to see a war lost ] and we will follo\-i the policy whi ch I have 
indicated today of advancing those causes and issues which help "'in the 
.. 
war. 
40. 
* * * 
=
Pr~e::,s~i"d",en"t"-,K:7e=ru",ni'e"d""-'-'S'-;iR"e=:m"a::r"k"s~a:,;t;".:t",h'Ce Y e 1l0'.0IS tone Count Fair 
Billin s 
l·lontana 
Se ternber 25 
1 
3 
Public Pa-oers of the 
dents , Kennedy> 1 
3, p . 72 
* * * 
ounds 
Presi-
" 
Countries 'Khich we had never heard of before , Viet-N8!I1 , Laos , t he 
Congo , and the others, countries ... [hich were distant names' i n our geogra-
-ohies , have now become matters of the greatest concern, \~here t he interests 
~f the United States are vitally involved, and 'olbere -we have , for example , 
in Viet-Nam, over 25 ,000 of your sons and brothers bearing arms . 
C-42 
III 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order [3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 I [ 
"SO this is a difficult and complex • .'arld. 
I am sure a citizen in 
this community 8..rJ.d in this country must .. onder ,",hat we are doing. 
I 
think Hbat -tie are trying to do is comparatively simple, and that is, witb 
our own po't,'er and might -- and the only country which has that po...-er end 
might -- and, I believe, the long-r ange determ~nation and perseverance , 
we are trying to assist the hundred- odd countries which are nOvl inde-
pendent to maintain their independence. 
He do that not only because we 
wish them to be free , but because it serves our O~~ national interest . 
As long as there are all of these countries separate, free, and inde-
pendent, and not part of one great monolithic bloc \'ihich threatens us, 
so long ''ie are free and independent . 
''When it appeared at the end of the fifties that there would be 
over a billion people organized in the Communist movement , Russia and 
China and Eastern Europe working closely together, that represented a 
danger to us which could turn the balance of pO":rer against us . 
As there 
has been a division within the bloc, as there has been a fragmentation 
behind the I ron Curtain, as the long-range interests of geography and 
nationalism playa part even behind the Iron Curtain, as it does on this 
side of the Iron Curtain, we have made progress , not to,"lard an easier 
existence, but, I think, tm.;ard a chance f or a more secure existence . 
"In 1961 the United States and the Soviet Union came face to face 
over Berlin . 
The United States called up more than 150,000 troops . 
At the meeting in Vi enna, of 1961, Nr . Khrushchev informed me that he 
was going to sign a peace treaty i n Berlin by the end of the year , and 
if the United States conti nued to supply its forces in Berlin it would 
be r egarded as a possible act of war . 
In 1962 we came face to f ace with 
the sSJlle great challenge in Cuba, in October . 
So we have lived, even in 
the short space of the last 3 years , on t",o occasions ''ihen we ,"Tere 
threatened ,"lith a direct military confrontation . 
We wish to lessen that 
prospect . 
We know that the struggle between the Communist system and 
ourselves ,,rill go on . 
We know it will go on in economics , in produc -
tivity , in ideology, in Latin America and Africa , in t he Middle East and 
Asi a .
1I 
* * * 
41. 
Presidents, Kennedy , 1963, p . 727: 
h School Memorial Stadi um 
3, Publi~ Papers of the 
"I know that there are many of you who sit here and \Yonder what it· 
i s that causes tl.e United States to go so far b.way, that causes you to 
\Yonder why so many of your sons should be stationed so fer aVTay from our 
mID territory, " .. ho ;'fonder ... hy it is since 1945 that the United States has 
assisted so many countries . 
You must \-ronder "lhen it is all going to end 
and \-Ihen we can come back hom~ . 
Well, it isn ' t going to end, and this 
generation of America~s has to make up its mind for our security and for 
c-43 
/12 
Declassilit'd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
our peace , because v!bat h5.:ppens in Europe or Latin Ame!'ica or Africa or 
Asia directly affects the security of the people ",bo live in this city, 
a."1d particularly those '.1ho are coming after . 
III make no apologies for the effort that we make to assist these 
other countries to maintain their freedom, because I know full well that 
every time a country, regardless of how far away it may be from our own 
borders -- every time ~hat country passes behind the Iron Curtain the 
security of the United States is thereby endangered. 
So all those who 
suggest we withdraw, all those who suggest we should no longer ship our 
surplus food abroad or assist other countries , I could not disagree with 
them more . 
This country is stronger now than i t has ever been . 
Our 
chances for pee.ce are stronger than they have been in years . 
The nuclear 
test ban which was stronely led in the Senate of the United States by 
Mike Mansfield and Lee Metcalf is , ·I believe, a step toward peace and a 
step to"i1ard security, end gives us an additional chance that all of the 
weapons of Nontena. v/ili never be fired . 
That is the object of our policy. 
"So we need your support . 
These are complicated problems which face 
a. citizenry. 
Most of us grew up in a relative period of isolation, and 
neutrality, a!1d unalignment v,hich tfaS our policy from tbe time of George 
Washington to the Second World vJar, and suddenly, in an act almost un-
known in the history of the world , "re were shoved onto the center of the 
stege . 
We are the keystone in the arch o~ freedom. 
I~ the United States 
..... -ere to falter, the whole Horld, in my opinion, ,muld inevitably begin to 
move to'Nard the Coml.Ulist bloc . 
lilt is the United States, this country, your country, "'hieb in 15 
to 18 years has almost singlehandedly protected the freedom of dozens of 
countries ..... 'ho , in turn , by being free, protect our freedom . 
So when you 
ask why are we in Laos , or Vi et -Nam, or the Congo , or why do we support 
the Alliance for Progress in Latin America, we do so because we believe 
that our freedom is tied up with theirs, and if we can develop a. world 
in ..... ·hich all the countries are free, then the threat to the security o~ 
the United states is lessened. 
So we have to stay-at it . vre must not be 
fati gued. 11 
* * * 
42. 
U. S. Polic 
on Viet -Nam: White House Statement 
October 2 
De artment of State Bulletin October 21 1 
3 
u . 
23 : 
111. 
The security of' South Viet-Nem is a major interest o~ the United 
States as other free nations . 
He will adhere to our policy of wor ki ng 
'.'lith the people and Government of South Viet -tl....ro. to deny this country to 
cOmmll..l1iSlll and to suppress the exter nally stimulated and supported insur-
gency of the Vi et Cong as promptly as possible . 
Effective performance in 
this Wldertaking is the central objective of our policy in South Viet-Narn. II 
* * * 
/13 
• 
OecJassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D.lIe: 20 11 
115 . 
It remains the policy of the United States in South Viet -Nam 
as in other parts of the world, to support the efforts of the people of 
that country to defeat aggression and to build a peaceful and free 
society. II 
43· 
* * * 
. 
President Kennedy!s Remarks Pre ared for Delivery at the Trade Mart 
in Dallas, November 22 , 1 3, Public Papers of the Presidents , 
Kennedy, 1963, p . 890: 
* * * 
"I want to discuss with you tOday the status of our strength and our 
security because this question clearly calls for the most responsible 
qualities of leadership and the ~ost enlightened products of scholarship. 
For this Nation ' s strength and security are not easily or cheaply obtained, 
nor are they quickly and simply explained. 
There are many kinds of strength 
and no one kind \'lill suf'fice . 
Overwhelming nuclear strength cannot stou a 
guerrilla war . 
Formal pacts of alliance cannot stop internal subversio~ . 
Displays of material wealth cannot stop the disillusionment of diplomats 
subjected to discrimination . 
"Above all, words alone are not enough . 
The United States is a 
peaceful nation . 
And \-There our strength and determination are clear, our 
words need merely to convey conviction, not belligerence . If we are 
strong, our strength will speak for itself . If '",e are weak, words .... 0'111 
be of no help. 
"I r ealize that this Nation often tends to identify turning-poi nts 
in world affairs with the major addresses which preceded them. 
But it 
was not the Monroe Doctrine that kept all Europe away from this hemisphere 
-- i t was the strength of the British fleet and the width of the Atlantic 
Ocean . It was not General Marshall ! s speech at Harvard which kept commu-
ni sm out of Western Europe -- it \"as the strength and stability made possible 
by our military and economic assistance . 
"In this administration also it has been necessary at times to i ssue 
snecif'ic warnings -- warnings that we could not stand by end watch the 
c~m~unists conquer Laos by force, or intervene in the Congo, or swallow 
West Berlin, or maintain offensive missiles on Cuba . . But while our goals 
were at least t emporarily obtained in these and other instances , our 
successfUl defense of freedom was due not to the words we used, but to 
t he strength we stood ready to use on behalf of the principles we 
st~~d 
r eady to defend. " 
* * * 
"But Ameri can military might should not and need not stand alone 
against the ambitions of" international communism. 
Our security and 
strength, in the last analysis , directly depend on the security and 
c-45 
Declassified per Executi\le Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
strength of others, and that is why our military and economic assistance 
plays such a key role in enabling those who live on the periphery of the 
Communist world to maintain their independence of choice . 
Our assistance 
to these nations ca~ be painful, risky and costly, as is true in Southeast 
Asia today. 
But we dare not weary of the task. 
For our assistance I:l.a.\.;.es 
possible the stationing of 3-5 million allied troops along the Communist 
frontier at one-tenth the cost of maintaining a comparable number of 
American soldiers . 
A successful Communist breakthrough in these areas , 
necessitating direct United States intervention , would cost us several 
times as much as our entire foreign aid program, and might cost us heavily 
in American lives as well. It 
* * * 
c-46 
