Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

- TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Of these three, first appears to us by far the most important,
since our effectiveness in influencing Hanoi leadership will,
in the long run, determine the success or failure of our
efforts in both North and South Vietnem. Second objective,
effect on CVN morale, is also important snd fortunately the
requirements for building morale in the South are roughly the
same as those for impressing Hanoi leaders with the rising
costs of their support of the VC. In this case, what is bad
for Hanoi is generally good for Saigon.

Effect of the physical destruction of material objects and
infliction of casualties will not, in our judgment, have a
decisive bearing upon the ability of DRV to support VC. However,
degree of damage and number of casualties inflicted gauge the
impact of our operations on Hanoi leadership and hence are im-
portant as a measure of their discomfort.

«..We should keep our response actions controllable and
optional to maximum degree possible so that we can act or
withhold action when and as we choose. This need for flexi-
bility argues strongly for vagueness in defining criteria for
Situations justifying retaliation and for retention of freedom
of action to make ad hoc decisions in light of our interests at
the moment. But in any case, complete flexibility will not be
possible...

Assuming that we have achieved control and flexibility, we
will then need to think of the tempo which we wish to communi-
eate to the retaliatory progrem, with primary consideration
given to effect of the progrem on Hanoi leadership. It seems
clear to us that there should be a gradual, orchestrated accele-
ration of tempo measured in terms of frequency, size, number
and/or geographical location of the reprisal-strikes and of
related activities such as BARREL ROLL and 34-A. An upward
trend in any or all of these forms of intensity will convey
Signals which, in combination, should present to the DRV leaders
a vision of inevitable, ultimate destruction if they do not change
their ways. The exact rate of acceleration is a matter of judg-
ment but we consider, roughly speaking, that each successive week
should include some new act on our part to increase pressure on
Hanoi... :

We do not believe that our reprisal program will lead the
GVN to believe that we have taken over their war and that they
can reduce their anti-VC activities. We hope that the opposite
will be the effect and the retaliatory actions in the North will
give impulsion to the defensive efforts in the South. However,
the Dept's fear can certainly not be ruled out and we shall watch
closely the GYli reaction to the program as it unfolds.”

hy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
