Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

JOINT COMMAND CONSIDERED AND REJECTED

The 1965 commitment of U.S. forces also prompted a high level
U.S. debate on the advisability of creating some form of unified
combined command. The question was first raised in Washington in
mid-March when General H. K. Johnson, Army Chief of Staff, returned
from a visit to Vietnam with the recommendation for deployment of
U.S. combat forces. 1)2/ ‘The idea had the same conceptual origins
as the encadrement proposals, namely that if RVNAI could be commanded
by or associated with U.S. troops it might be molded at last into an
effective fighting force. In eddition, such a unified allied command
would have given the senior commander--presumably COMUSMACV~-far
greater freedom to deploy forces and fight the war in the straight-
forward purswvit of unambiguous objectives, rather than restricting
him to coordination with Vietnamese counterparts whose motivations at
all times were a composite of political and personal as well as mili-
tary considerations.

When queried on the matter, General Westmoreland opposed any
formal merging of commands, preferring instead the maintenance of
informal cooperation and coordination together with e limited combined
staff under an American chief with a Vietnamese deputy. This arrange-
ment would better assuage the GYN's sensitivities to questions of sovereignty
and “neo-colonialism." Full integration of command, General Westmoreland
advised, should be deferred until some later time when the influx of U.S.
forces might require it and GVN sensibilities might be more disposed to
its acceptance. 143/ In May, Secretary McNamara authorized the creation
of a formal combined authority in Vietnam. ay] put since both Ky and
Thieu had just publicly condemned any joint command idea in press inter~
views, both Ambassador Taylor and General Westmoreland recommended against
the proposed action. 115/ CINCPAC backed up COMUSMACV's concern about
alienating the South Vietnamese:

Refs A and B [Saigon message 3855, 24 May; and COMUSMACV
message 17292, 210603% May/ again point out the formidable
disadvantages which obstruct early establishment of any formal
combined command authority in South Vietnam. I am fully in
accord with the views of the Ambassador and General Westmoreland
in this regard.

The long-range nature of the actions directed by Ref C
[SCS msg 3159, 1422287 May/ is recognized. At the same time
it is apparent that we should anticipate continued public
speculation as to the purpose and motive of any consolidation
of multi-national forces into a single command if we pursue
even the most limited measures. Although a combined command
might generate an outward illusion of unity, many divisive influ-
ences will remain at work beneath the surface to exacerbate claims
of American neo~colonialism and self-assumed leadership.

61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
