Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"olateau" them below the "Phuc Yen
airfield" flash point on one or the
other of these teneble theories;
(a) Thet we strike as necessary to
-interdict infiltration. (b) That
our level of strikes is generally
responsive to the level of vc /DRV
activities in South Vietnam.

(3) Shunt. Plateau the air strikes per
para (2) and divert the energy into:
(a) a mine-and/or ship-blockede of
DRV ports. (b) Massive deployment of
US (and other?) troops into SVN (and .
Laos?): (1) To man the "enclaves,"
releasing ARVN forces. (2) To take
over Pleiku, Kontum, Darlac provinces.
(3) Tocreate a 16+° sea-Thailand
infiltration wall.

i. Important (1) Progrem should appear to be relentless
Miscellany: (i.e., possibility of employing

"circuit-breakers” should be secret).
(2) Enemy should be kept aware of our
limited objectives.
(3) Allies should be kept on board.
(4) USSR should be kept in passive role.
(5) Information program should préserve
US public support.

McNaughton's memorandum dealt in similar detail with the two other
forms of remedial action that were then being considered: US troop de-
ployments and exit negotiations. Neither of these, however, is a matter
of prime concern within the scope of this paper. It is well to remember,
hovever,, that the April 1 Presidential policy review was not confined to
the air campaign against the DRV. It embraced the whole panoply of military
and non-military actions that might be undertaken in South and North Vietnam,
but the main focus was clearly on actions within South Vietnam, and the
principal concern of Administration policy makers at this time was with the
prospect of major deployments of US and Third Country combat forces to SVN.

Unlike McNaughton's memorandum, the McGeorge Bundy discussion paper
of April 1 which set forth the key issues for consideration and decision
by the President, gave only the most sunerficial treatment to the complex
matter of future air pressures policy. In fact, the Bundy paper merely
listed a series of action recommendations, seemingly providing little room
for debate or for consideration of alternatives. The actions proposed
amounted to little more than a continuation of the ongoing modest ROLLING
THUNDER program, directed, with slowly rising intensity, at the LOC tar-
gets that were then beginning to be hit. One must essume that the

89 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
