Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

25. Address by Leonard Unger, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far’ Eastern
Affairs, Before the Detroit Economic Club, “Present Objectives and

Future Possibilities in Southeast Asia," April 19, 1965, Department

of State Bulletin, May 10, 1965, p. Tle.

* * &

“These Objectives are not just pious generalities, nor is South-
east Asia just a configuration on a map. Distant though it may seem
from Detroit, that area has great strategic significance to the United
States and the free world. Its location across east-west air and sea
lanes flanks the Indian subcontinent on one side and Australia, New
Zealand, and the Philippines on the other, and dominates the gateway
between the Pacific and Indian Oceans.

"Tn Communist hands this area would pose a most serious threat to
the security of the United States and to the family of free-world nations
to which we belong. To defend Southeast Asia, we must meet the challenge
in South Viet-Nam.

"Communist ‘Wars of Liberation'

"Equally important, South Viet-Nam represents a major test of com-
munism's new strategy of 'wars of liberation.'"

cn ie

"After the Communists' open aggression failed in Korea, they had to
look for a more effective strategy of conquest. They chose to concen-
trate on ‘wars of national liberation’ -- the label they use to describe
aggression directed and supplied from outside = nation but cloaked in
nationalist guise so that it could be made to appear an indigenous insur-
rection.

"That strategy was tried on a relatively primitive scale, but was
defeated in Malaya and the Philippines only because of a long and arduous
struggle by the people of those countries, with assistance provided by
the British and the United States. In Africa and Iatin America such
‘wars of liberation’ are already being threatened. But by far the most
highly refined and ambitious attempt at such aggression by the Communists
is taking place today in Viet-Nam...."

gh ee See

"In order to cope with this veiled aggression, free nations must
determine the real source of the aggression and take steps to defend
themselves from this source. In Viet-Nam this has meant.ending privileged
sanctuary heretofore afforded North Viet-Nam--the true source of the Viet
Cong movement. ; :

D-33
