Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

start of bombing in February 1965 is estimated at about
$140 million through October 10, 1966. 87/

As an alternative method of arresting the infiltration the
memo proposed the now familiar barrier, preparatory work on which was
proceeding rapidly. No new arguments for it were offered, and its
unproven qualities were acknowledged. But it seemed to offer at that
point a better possibility of significantly curtailing infiltration
than an escalation of the ineffective air war. Its costs were estimated,
however, at an astounding $1 billion per year.

While these considerations were dominant at the Pentagon,
the air war in the North continued. The only exceptions to the even
pattern of air strikes at the end of 1966 were strikes authorized in
early December within the 30-mile Hanoi sanctuary against the Yen Vien
rail classification yard and the Van Dien vehicle depot. 88/ The former
was attacked on December 4 and again on the 13th and 14th with extensive
damage to buildings but little destruction of rolling stock. The Van
Dien vehicle depot was struck six times between December 2 and 14 with
some two thirds of its 184 buildings being either destroyed or damaged. 89/
Hanoi's reaction was prompt and vociferous. The DRV accused the U.S. of
blatantly attacking civilian structures and of having caused substantial
civilian casualties. On December 13, the Soviet Press Agency TASS picked
up the theme claiming that U.S. planes had attacked residential areas in
Hanoi. This brought a prompt State Department denial, but on December 15
further attacks on the two targets were suspended. Three days later
there were new charges. This time the Communist Chinese claimed the U.S.
had bombed their embassy in Hanoi. On December 17 the Rumanians made a
similar allegation. The net result of all this public stir was another
round of world opinion pressure on Washington. 90/ In this atmosphere;
on December 23, attacks against all targets within 10 n.m. of Hanoi were
prohibited without specific Presidential authorization.

The most important result of these attacks, however, was to
undercut what appeared to be a peace feeler from Hanoi. In late November,
the DRV had put out a feeler through the Poles for conversations in
Warsaw. The effort was given the code name Marigold, but when the attacks

- were launched inadvertently against Hanoi in December, the attempt to

start talks ran into difficulty. A belated U.S. attempt to mollify
North Vietnam's bruised ego failed and formal talks did not materialize.
Some significant exchanges between Hanoi and Washington on their respec-
tive terms apparently did take place, however. gu/

The controversy over civilian casualties from the bombing
continued through the end of the year and into January 1967. Harrison
Salisbury, 2 respected senior editor of the New York Times, went to
Hanoi at Christmas and dispatched a long series of articles that attracted
much world-wide attention. He corroborated DRV allegations of civilian
casualties and damage +o residential areas including attacks on Nem Dinh,

176 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
