Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(4. TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

The idea that, if worse comes to worst, the U.S. could probably save
its position in Vietnam by bombing the north, seems to underlie a good deal
of the optimism that pervades the summary paper. And even Cottrell, in the
dast of his recommendations, states:

If the combined U.S./GVN efforts are insufficient to reverse
the trend, we should then move to the "Rostow Plan" of applying
graduated measures on the DRV with weapons of our own choos-
ing. 33/

Taylor, in his personal recommendations to the President (the cables
from Baguio quoted earlier), spoke of the "extreme vulnerability of North
Vietnam to conventional bombing."

The summary paper, in its contrast between the current war and eee war
the French lost, states:

Finally, the Communists now not only have something to gain
-- the South -- but a base to lose -- the North -- if war should

come. 34/

Bombing was not viewed as the answer to all problems. If things did
not go well, the report saw a possible requirement for a substantial com-
mitment of U.S. ground troops. In a section on South Vietnamese reserves,
there is the comment that

esoit is an evident requirement that the United States review
quick action contingency plans to move into Vietnam, should

the scale of the Vietnam/Viet Cong?/ offensive radically increase
at a time when Vietnamese reserves are inadequate to cope with

it. Such action might be designed to take over the responsibility
for the security of certain relatively quiet areas, if the battle
remained at the guerrilla level, or to fight the Commmists if
open war were attempted. 35/

And the concluding paragraphs of the summary state that:

One of the major issues raised by this report is the need
to develop the reserve strength in the U.S. establishment re-
quired to cover action in Southeast Asia up to the nuclear
threshold in that area, as it is now envisaged. The call up
of additional support forces may be required.

In’ our view, nothing is more calculated to sober the
enemy and to discourage escalation in the face of the limited
initiatives proposed here than the knowledge that the United
States has prepared itself soundly to deal with aggression
in Southeast Asia at any level. 36/

"306
; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
