Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

were visibly cheered. 48/ In South Vietnam, General Nguyen Khanh pro-
claimed that the VNAF reprisal strike after Pleiku marked "the bepptess
day of my life.”

The most interesting reactions, of course, were those of the
Bloc countries. As predicted in CIA's October 1964 estimate, 49/ the
reactions of the three principal Communist powers to the limited US repri-
sal strikes were relatively restrained, with both Moscow and Peking promptly
and publicly pledging unspecified support and assistance to Hanoi. Beneath
the verbiage of condemnation of the U.S. “provocation,” however, there was
@ measure of caution in both pledges. Neither raised the specter of a broad
conflict or portrayed the U.S. actions as a threat to "world" peace.
Peking's propaganda, though full of bellicosity and bluster, and publiciz-
ing huge anti-U.S. rallies organized in China's major cities, carefully
avoided threatening any direct Chinese intervention. Thus it warned that,
if the U.S. spread the flames of war to the DRV, "the Vietnamese people
will, most assuredly, destroy the U.S. aggressors lock, stock, and barrel
on their own soil." 50/ The propaganda line also suggested that only
actual U.S. invasion of North Vietnam would precipitate direct Chinese
intervention in the war.

Moscow's response was even more restrained. "In the face of U.S.
actions" the Soviet statement said, the USSR "will be forced, together with
its allies and friends, to take further measures to safeguard the security
and strengthen the defense capability of the DRV." And it added that "no
one should doubt that the Soviet people will fulfill its international
duty to the fraternal socialist country." ‘Like Peking, however, it derided
U.S. statements that the air strikes were retaliatory, and Soviet media
widely publicized international expressions of indignation and popular
protests in the USSR. While indicating that "DRV defenses’ would be strength-,
ened, some Moscow broadcasts took note of growing interest in the United
States and elsewhere for a negotiated settlement in Vietnam. 51/

Hanoi's voluble, heated propaganda reaction to the air strikes
pictured the incident as a sequel to previous air and naval "provocations"
against the DRV rather than as a move which essentially altered either
America's or North Vietnam's positions in the conflict. DRV propaganda
hailed the "heroic exploit" of the antiaircraft units and claimed that,
in the first raid, 12 planes were downed.

. Officially, Hanoi responded in a more carefully worded fashion.
A Defense Ministry statement on the 7th warned that the United States
must "bear the responsibility" for the "consequences" of its "aggression"
and demanded an end to "provocative and war-seeking acts against the DRV
and the aggressive war in South Vietnam." Implying that the air raids
would not deter future rebel aggression in the South, the DRV Government
declared that "the Vietnamese people will never shrink before any threat
of the United States" and will "further increase their forces and step
up their struggle." The Viet Cong's Liberation Radio on the 8th pro-
tested the air raids and said they had "heightened the determination of
our people throughout the country to fight and win.” 52/ —

30 TOP SECREI - Sensitive
