Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

16. Blueprint For Vietnam, August 1967

State suggested that completion of the election process was a proper
occasion upon which to consider several proposals, including increased
leverage, for advancing the total American effort in South Vietnam. 101/
Bunker also mentioned this when he transmitted the paper, "Blueprint for
Viet-Nam." The "Blueprint" ranged widely over all topics and struck a
consistently optimistic note

Progress in the war has been steady on all fronts. We can
defeat the enemy by patient, continued, and concerted effort.
The way to do this is for the GVN and its allies (a) to re-
inforce and accelerate the progress already made; (b) to
markedly improve the interdiction of infiltration of North
Vietnamese troops and supplies; (c) to upgrade, accelerate,
and coordinate the pacification program in the country-

side; and (d) to maintain political and economic stability
and support the development of the constitutional process,

eoo We Still have a long way to go. Much of the country is
Still in VC hands, the enemy can still shell our bases and
commit acts of terrorism in the securest areas, VC units still
mount large scale attacks, most of the populace has not actively
commited itself to the Government, and a VC intrastructure

still exists throughout the country. Nevertheless, the situa-
tion has steadily improved since the spring of 1965...

Now, that the initiative is ours and the enemy is beginning to
hurt, maximum pressure must be maintained on him by (a) inten-
sifying military activity in the South; (b) developing new
methods of interdicting infiltration; (c) bombing all targets
in the North connected with the enemy's wax effort that do not
result in unacceptable risk of uncontrolled escalation;

(d) accelerating the program of pacification (including better
security more effective attacks on the infrastructure, stepped
up National Reconciliation and Chieu Hoi programs, a greater
involvement of the people in solving their own problems at

the village and hamlet level); (e) encouraging reforms in the
government structure and continued improvement in the armed
forces; (f) attacking the problem of corruption; (g) using
influence to effect a strong, freely elected government with
political stability; and (h) taking actions necessary to the
continued growth and stability of the economy... 102/

In a subsequent message Ambassador Bunker stated more specifically
that the United States should use its influence to get GVN to do the

following: ae \
A. Seek broad based popular support.
