Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In brief, the additional forces are likely neither
to reduce the enemy force nor contribute significantly to
pacification. These goals can only be met by improving
the efficiency of the forces already deployed and, particu-
larly, that of ARVN. But additional U.S. forces decrease
the incentive to MACV and the GVN to make the Vietnamese
shoulder a larger portion of the burden. The RVNAF appear
to have done well by all statistical measures in IV CTZ,
where they have been provided only logistical and combat
support by the U.S., and very badly in the other areas
where the U.S, has taken over the war while denying them
significant support. 8/

Finally, it returned to the "ola" piaster issue which had proven
such a potent instrument of control earlier during the Program 4
deliberations:

Additional forces will also damage the SVN economy,
as we saw when Program 4 was approved. Inflation in
January-March 1967 was 20%. Even apart from the rice
situation, prices were up 7%, or 28% on an annual basis.
The inflation still hits hardest GVN civilian and mili-
tary personnel, on whom we must rely to eventually pacify
the country.

MACV, of course, appears to be doing a good job of
holding down piaster spending. Program 4 forces now
appear to cost P41.0 billion in CY 67, after correcting
for an apparent reporting errors and MACV might be able
to hold to about Phl billion in CY 68 even with increased
forces. Nevertheless, the SVN economy is still far from
sound, and more forces compound the problem. 9/

It closed by carefully listing the following recommendations:

1. That additional forces for SEA not be approved
and the currently approved Program #4 ceiling be firmly
maintained.

2. MACV be directed to submit a plan by Aug 1,
1967 to enhance the effectiveness of the RVNAF forces.
In the long term the RVNAF must assume a greater role for
maintaining the security of SVN. The longer the task is
delayed, the more difficult it becomes. We have made the
Koreans into an effective fighting force, and we must do
the same for the RVNAF. They can do the job far better and
cheaper than we can, and they will remain after we leave.

109 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
