Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Apart from general cautiousness about the next obvious
escalatory step, one of the reasons for the Administration's hesi-
tancy was apparently the fear that the timing might not be right.

As the bombing drew closer to Hanoi and Haiphong, some officials felt
forcing the pace might oblige NVN to confront the issue of negotiations
versus greater Chinese and/or Soviet involvement prematurely, i.e.
before NVN was sufficiently convinced that it could not outlast the

U.S. and win in the South. The theory was that so long as Hanoi was
hopeful there was a greater risk that it would opt for escalation rather
than a compromise settlement. As the October paper from State put it:

We may be able to recognize the optimum time for
exerting further pressure by increasing the level of our
bombing, but an increase in our bombing of the North at
the present time may bring matters to a head too soon. u/

In addition, of course, there was good reason to hold off
any escalation until a substantial bombing pause was undertaken, both
+o test Hanoi's intentions and to disarm critics on the dovish side who
felt that the Administration had not gone far enough to meet Hanoi half-

way.
1. JCS Recommendations

Dissatisfied with the measured pace of the bombing program
from the start, they again began advocating a sharp intensification of
the bombing in early November. Diplomatic and political considerations
were secondary. Their position was that ROLLING THUNDER had succeeded
in making it "substantially" more costly and difficult for NVN to support
the insurgents in Laos and SVN, and had "substantially" degraded NVN's
capability to conduct a conventional invasion of the South, but they
agreed that the campaign had not materially reduced NVN's other military
capabilities, damaged its economy, deterred it from supporting the war
in the South, or brought it closer to the conference table. It was not
because of any difficulty in applying pressure on Hanoi by bombing or in
interdicting support South that the program had not been more successful,
however; it was because numerous "self-imposed restraints" had limited
the potential effectiveness of the program:

...we shall continue to achieve only limited success
in air operations in DRV/Laos if required to operate within
the constraints presently imposed. The establishment and
observance of de facto sanctuaries within the DRV, coupled
with a denial of operations against the most important mili-
tary and war supporting targets, precludes attainment of the
objectives of the air campaign....Thus far, the DRV has been
able and willing to absorb damage and destruction at the slow

rate. Now required is an immediate and sharply accelerated

64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
