Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(born Dang Xuan Khu, party name translating as "Long March"), Secretary
General of the lao Dong Party, who openly espoused the Maoist version

of communism, and who relied upon Chinese advisers. Truong Chinh saw
land reform as a method of organizing the peasantry under the Lao Dong
Party, less important for its economic or social ramifications than for
its political and military significance. Truong had warned in 1947 that:

"If we neglect the organization of the people, we cannot
mobilize the entire people and the army, and cannot enable them
to take part in the resistance in every field. In 1918 Lenin
wrote: 'To wage a real war, we must have a strong and well
organized rear....' These words constitute very precious
counsel for us in this long-term resistance war." 21

As victory of the Resistance neared, Ho Chi Minh's
emphasis on internal reforms, as opposed to martial undertakings,
increased. In December 1953, for instance, he stated that:

"/The/ two central tasks in the next years are to do our
utmost to fight the enemy and to carry out land reform....
In 1954, we must pay particular attention to three great works:

"To combine land reform with strengthening of the
armed forces....

"To combine land reform with the training of cadres
and the raising of their ideology....

"To combine land reform with the development of agri-
cultural production...." 22/

Moreover, Ho apparently countenanced harsh measures to carry out both
"central tasks." He is reported to have stated his basic strategy to
Party cadres in these terms:

"To straighten a curved piece of bamboo, one must bend
it in the opposite direction, holding it in that position
for awhile. Then, when the hand is removed it will slowly
straighten itself." 23/

When the Geneva Conference opened the way to Viet Minh
dominion over North Vietnam, and held out the prospect to Tonkinese
peasants of migrating to South Vietnam, hundreds of thousands were suffi-
ciently apprehensive over religious persecution, or over "land reform"
and other communizing campaigns to the North. There is considerable
evidence that many of these fears were well-founded. On the heels of
the withdrawing French Expeditionary Forces, Truong Chinh's teams of
Chinese advisers toured fron village to village to survey for land
reforms, and these were followed by an infusion of Lao Dong Party cadres
to village level. ak/ People's Courts were activated and the Campaign
became the vehicle not only for land redistribution, but for Communist
Party penetration into rural society, and a wholesale transformation of

10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
