Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

type of interdiction campaign. This program would increase
the hardships imposed on North Vietnem end raise further
the costs of the support of the war in the South. It would,
however, not be able to cut off the flow of essential sup-
plies and, by itself, would not be the determining factor
in shaping Hanoi's outlook toward the war. hel

In addition to mining the harbors, the Chiefs requested
that the comprehensive prohibition of attacks in the Hanoi/Haiphong
areas be removed with the expected increase in civilian casualties to
be accepted as militarily justified and necessary. They suggested as an
alternative a 3 n.m. "restricted" area for the very center of Hanoi and
a similar zone of 1.5 n.m. for Haiphong. They also requested the expansion
of SEADRAGON navel activity north of 21.30° all the way to the Chinese
porder, and authorization of all the remaining targets on the JCS ROLLING
THUNDER list. 43/ In spite of all these requests for expansion of the
war (as well as several others for expanding the ground war in South Viet-
nam and operations in Leos and Cambodia), the Chiefs avoided the kind
of vaunted claims for success from such new steps that had characterized
past recommendations. This time they cautiously noted, "...ethere are no
new programs which can be undertaken under current policy guidelines
which would result in a rapid or significantly more visible increase in
the rate of progress in the near term." )))/

The Chiefs 2h-target proposal was considered at the Tuesday
lunch on December 5, but no action was taken. A memo from Warnke to
McNamara gives a clue as to why, "I have been informed that Secretary
Rusk will not be prepared to consider the individual merits of the 24
unauthorized targets proposed and discussed in the JCS Four Months Plan." 45/
On December 16, McNamara and Rusk did reach agreement on ten new targets
from the 24 target list including seven within the 10-mile Hanoi radius
and two within the 4-mile Haiphong perimeter. 46/ Disapproved were five
Haiphong port targets and the mining proposal.

None of the increased war activity over North Vietnam
which these decisions authorized, however, would be able to prevent the
enemy's massive offensive the following January. The fact that the
President had acceded to the wishes of the military and the political
pressures from Congress On this vital issue at this point when all the
evidence available to McNamara suggested the continuing ineffectiveness
of the bombing must have been an important if not determining factor in
the Secretary's decision in November to retire. For the moment, however,
the escalation continued.

As always, the President moved cautiously in allowing some
military expansion of the air war in the fall of 1967. By the end of
October, 6 of the 7 MIG-capable airfields which Secretary McNamara had

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
i138
