Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

TII. McNAMARA'S DISENCHANTMENT -- JULY-DECEMBER 1966

The attack on North Vietnam's POL system was the last major
escalation of the air war recommended by Secretary McNamara. Its
eventual failure to preduce a significant decrease in infiltration
or cripple North Vietnamese logistical support of the war in the
South, when added to the cumulative failure of the rest of ROLLING
THUNDER, appears to have tipped the balance in his mind against any
further escalation of air attacks on the DRV. As we shall see, a
major factor in this reversal of position was the report and recommenda-
tion submitted at the end of the summer’ by an important study group
of America's top scientists. Another consideration weighing in his
mind mist have been the growing antagonism, both domestic and inter-
national, to the bombing, which was identified as the principle impedi-
ment to the opening of negotiations. But disillusionment with the
bombing alone might not have been enough to produce a recommendation
for change had an alternative method of impeding infiltration not been
proposed at the same time. Thus, in October when McNamara recommended
a stabilization of the air war at prevailing levels, he was also able
+o recommend the imposition of a multi-system anti-infiltration barrier
across the DMZ and the Laos panhandle. The story of this momentous
policy shift is the most important element in the evolution of the air
war in the summer and fall of 1966.

A. Results of the POL Attacks
1. Initial Success

Official Washington reacted with mild jubilation to the
reported success of the POL strikes and took satisfaction in the
relatively mild reaction of the international community to the
escalation. Secretary McNamara described the execution of the raids
as "a superb professional job," and sent a message of personal con-
gratulation to the field commanders involved in the planning and
execution of the attacks shortly after the results were in. 1/

In a press conference the next day, the Secretary justi-
fied the strikes "to counter a mounting reliance by NVN on the use of
trucks and powered junks to facilitate the infiltration of men and
equipment from North Vietnam to South Vietnam." He explained that
truck movement in the first half of 1966 had doubled, and that daily
supply tonnage and troop infiltration on the Ho Chi Minh trail were
up 150 and 120 percent, respectively, over 1965. The enemy had built
new roads and its truck inventory by the end of the year was expected
to be double that of January 1965, an increase which would require 50-70

percent more POL. 2

138 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
