Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

pose &@ constant and serious threat. The enemy will attempt
to tie down large numbers. of our forces to preclude their
support of RD and conduct of offensive operations as well
as draw them into engagements staged in his favor. Our
forces must not meet the enemy where we cannot engage him
decisively. Rather, we should keep him under surveillance
and be prepared to concentrate rapidly to engage him at a
time and on ground of our choosing...." 21

Infiltration also occupied his thoughts, but he was concerned lest
our efforts elsewhere become weakened by an undue emphasis on stemming
the flow.

"...1 concur with your position to resist pressures to

devote a great share of our energies and resources to trying
to stem the flow of men and materiel into SVN from the North.
It is virtually impossible to stop or appreciably impede infil-
tration into SVN with ground forces now available or programmed
for the theater, especially in light of the contiguous sanctu-
aries the enemy now enjoys. Although it would be desirable
to stop or measurably impede infiltration, such action is not
imperative to our winning a military victory. Moreover, main-
taining that long and difficult LOC saps a sizeable measure
of the enemy's effort and resources. It has, assuredly, exacted
its toll on the fighting capabilities of NVA units. Our air
and naval interdiction operations must be continued at the

1 present evel and, if--possibie, cthey amust beexpanded.. At-
though “not in‘ ‘themselves capable ‘of quelling infiltration,
their effects against the enemy and his movement of personnel
and equipment to the South are appreciable." 22/

While Beach's pessimism about stopping the infiltration jibes with
that of COMUSMACY and CINCPAC, his view of how it would affect the
chances of military victory were surely not. If killing vc/NVA was
to be the indicator of military success or "victory," could not an unim-
peded infiltration keep troops: coming faster than they could be killed?
And furthermore, could not free (or freer) flow of supplies degrade your
kill capability/unit cost, e.g., your kill ratio could be adversely
affected by the improved status of his equipment and logistics which the
infiltration afforded. These negative aspects were not discussed, but
surely if Beach clearly believed that the infiltration was not crucial,
he would not have evinced less concern about the sanctuary routes and
the bombing. He closed with two observations:

",..Our country harbors a natural desire to ease the hard-

ships in the Vietnam conflict. The military, however, must press to

30 TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

ft tl ce a
