Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Two appendices to this paper addressed the basis for these recom-
mendations and the context in which additional troop commitments to Vietnam
should be examined.

In explaining the basis for the recommendation to deploy 20,000
troops, the memorandum indicated that the first increment of forces re-
quested by General Westmoreland should be provided as an emergency
measure to meet the prospect of continued abnormal levels of enemy
activity. "This would, by May 1st, furnish him with an additional 20,000
troops, 10,500 of whom would be for combat purposes. Because of the
possibility that the North Vietnamese leaders may decide to launch a
larger scale invasion by main force units, we should put ourselves ina
position to provide the other 1855 000 ground, sea, and air forces in-
volved in General Westmoreland's request." 63/ |

Additional forces, however, should not be dispatched until the
situation in Vietnam developed.

A continuing and intensive review should focus not only on
future enemy activity but also on the demonstrated ability of the
GVN and the ARVN to pull themselves together, to get back into
business, and to demonstrate significant improvements both in
their ability to win popular support and their willingness to
fight aggressively for their own security. Unless these qualities
are evidenced, there can be no real hope for the accomplishment
of our political aims.

Finally, we believe that the striking change in the enemy's
tactics, the willingness to commit at least two additional divisions
to the fighting in the South over the past few weeks, the obvious
and not wholly anticipated strength of the Viet Cong infrastructure,
there can be no prospect of a quick military solution to the
aggression in South Vietnam. Under these circumstances, we should
give intensive study to the development of a new strategic guidance
+o General Westmoreland. This guidance should make clear the
fact that he cannot be expected either to destroy the enemy forces
or to rout them completely from South Vietnam. The kind of
American commitment that would be required to achieve these
military objectives cannot even be estimated. There is no reason
to believe that it could be done by an additional 200,000 American
troops or double or triple that gquantity....

The exact nature of the strategic guidance which should be
adopted cannot now be predicted. It should be the subject of a
detailed inter-agency study over the next several weeks. During
the progress of the study, discussions of the appropriate strategic
guidance and its nature and implications for the extent of our
military commitment in South Vietnam should be undertaken with cee
General Westmoreland and Ambassador Bunker. 6h/

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
