Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

land reform program was half completed some years ago); the VC had been
exploiting the situation very effectively; ;

- oppressive marketing conditions for fisherman (fisheries accounted
for 25 per cent of the rural product of SVN).

General Khanh's initial statement about the land reform problem
was not very encouraging; Mr. Oanh was not even aware of the rice prob-
lem until a conversation with U.S. visitors on March 10th,

A third major requirement for success of the Pacification Plan
was to improve greatly the leadership, pay, training, and numbers of
some of the kinds of personnel needed, notably:

- pay and allowances for Civil Guards and 8.D.C...

- recruitment and training for more civilian technicians...also
increased pay and supporting costs for them; and recruitment and
training of a new kind of rural worker--"hamlet action teams"--
to move into newly cleared hamlets and start improvement programs...

The real problems were managerial: to develop concepts, training
schools, action programs, and aboye all, leadership at the provincial
level and below.

Other requirements for success of the Pacification Plan included:
improvement in the leadership and attitudes of the ARVN particularly
at levels which came into contact with villagers; greatly increased
military civic action programs by the ARVN; much more flexibility and
decentralization of authority in the administration of GVN civilian
agencies; and a far clearer and more consistent pattern of rewarding
excellence and penalizing poor performance in the management of both
military and civilian agencies of the GVN,

Finally, there was one prominent recommendation (it was in fact
the second of twelve): that the U.S. "make it clear that we fully
support the Khanh government and are opposed to any further coups."
This reflected our deep concern over the political instability and
our dismay at having been surprised by the Khanh coup at the end of
January.

An immediate measure to provide this kind of support to Khanh
was the issuance on the following day (17 March) of a White House
release which gave Presidential public blessing to the Khanh regime,
saying in part that, to meet the difficulties and setbacks that had
arisen since last October, "General Khanh and his government are
acting vigorously and effectively.../having/ produced a sound central
plan for the prosecution of the war, recognizing to a far greater

TOP SECRET -~ Sensitive
53
