Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I am very far indeed from suggesting that it would make
sense now to stop the bombing of the North altogether. The
argument for that course seems to me wholly unpersuasive at
the present. To stop the bombing today would be to give the
Communists something for nothing, and in a very short time
all the doves in this country and around the world would be
asking for some further unilateral concessions. (Doves and
hawks are alike in their insatiable appetites; we can't
really keep the hawks happy by small increases in effort --
they come right back for more.)

The real justification for the bombing, from the start,
has been double -- its value for Southern morale at a moment
of great danger, and its relation to Northern infiltration.
The first reason has disappeared but the second remains
entirely legitimate. Tactical bombing of communications and
of troop concentrations -- and of airfields as necessary --
seems to me sensible and practical. It is strategic bombing
that seems both unproductive and unwise. It is true, of
course, that all careful bombing does some damage to the
enemy. But the net effect of this damage upon the military
capability of a primitive country is almost sure to be
slight. (The lights have not stayed off in Haiphong, and
even if they had, electric lights are in no sense essential
to the Communist war effort.) And against this distinctly
marginal impact we have to weigh the fact that strategic
bombing does tend to divide the U.S., to distract us all
from the real struggle in the South, and to accentuate the
unease and distemper which surround the war in Vietnam, both
at home and abroad. It is true that careful polls show
majority support for the bombing, but I believe this support
rests upon an erroneous belief in its effectiveness as a
means to end the war. Moreover, I think those against
extension of the bombing are more passionate on balance than
those who favor it. Finally, there is certainly a point at
which such bombing does increase the risk of conflict with
China or the Soviet Union, and I am sure there is no majority
for that. In particular, I think it clear that the case
against going after Haiphong Harbor is so strong that a
majority would back the Government in rejecting that course.

So I think that with careful explanation there would be
more approval than disapproval of an announced policy restricting
the bombing closely to activities that support the war in the
South. General Westmoreland’s speech to the Congress made
this tie-in, but attacks on power plants really do not fit the
picture very well. We are attacking them, I fear, mainly
because we have "run out" of other targets. Is it a very good
reason? Can anyone demonstrate that such targets have been
very rewarding? Remembering the claims made for attacks on
oil supplies, should we not be very skeptical of new promises? 76/

~27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
