Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Similar assessments of timing in relation to more vigorous
military action against North Vietnam were made in OSD/ISA. The immed-
jiate measures proposed in McNaughton's draft "Plan of Action for South
Vietnam" (3 September) were conceived not only as means to provoke North
Vietnam into responses justifying U.S. punitive actions. They were also
believed to make possible the postponement "probably until November or
December" of a decision regarding the more serious escalation, In
McNaughton's terminology the latter were referred to as "a crescendo of
GVN-U.S. military actions against the DRV," but they included a variety
of possibilities:

"The escalating actions might be naval pressures
or mining of harbors; or they might be made up of air
strikes against North Vietnam moving from southern to
northern targets, from targets associated with infiltration
and by-then-disclosed DRV-VC radio command nets to targets
of military then industrial importance, and from missions
which could be handled by the VNAF alone to those which
could be carried out only by the U.S." 128/

It is clear, however, that what was contemplated was a pattern of gradu-
ally mounting pressures intended to impress the DRV with the increasing
gravity of its situation.

Records of the September conference do not indicate that a
decision was made relative to an explicit January contingency date. In
Several respects they do make clear that the possibility of escalation
at the end of the: year was considered. For example, hope was expressed
that the GVYN would grow stronger over the following two to three months --
by implication, strong enough to permit ima jor deliberate risks of
escalation” or "deliberately provocative" U.S. actions. 129/ Directly
related to this hope was the intention of having the GVN admit publicly
to its conduct of maritime operations against North Vietnamese coastal
installations and communications. The aim was "to justify and legitimize
them on the basis of the facts of VC infiltration by sea." 130/ It was
believed that this step would be useful in establishing a climate of
opinion more receptive to expanded (air) operations against North Vietnam
when they should become necessary. 131/

Reservations. By October 1964, therefore, there was a general
belief among the President's top advisors that it would probably be
necessary eventually to subject North Vietnam to overt military pressure.
Many were convinced, however reluctantly, that it would not be possible
to obtain an effective solution to the problem of DRV sponsorship of the
insurgency in South Vietnam or a permanent solution to the political strife’
in Iaos without such direct pressure on the instigator of these problems.
Significantly, these views were dissimilar in character to the -interest
in graduated pressures shown in the Spring and to the determination "to
use force if necessary" urged on the President at the end of May. For

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
