Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Apparently, the decision was made to do nothing -- at least not
of a retaliatory nature. At a White House meeting to discuss possible
courses of action, on 1 November, "concern was expressed that proposed
U.S. retaliatory punitive actions could trigger North Vietnamese /CHICOM
air and ground retaliatory acts." Questions vere raised about “increased
Security measures and precautionary moves of U.S. air and ground units
to protect U.S, dependents, units and installations against such retali-
ation. 14/ Following the meeting, a White House news release announced
that the President had ordered the destroyed and badly demaged aircraft
replaced. Administration officials stated that "the mortar attack must
be viewed in the light of the Vietnamese war and of the whole Southeast
Asien situation. If the United States is to retaliate against North
Vietnam in the future," they reportedly said, "it must be for broader
reasons than the strike egainst the Bien Hoa base." Moreover, they
drew @ contrast between this incident and the Tonkin Gulf attacks where
ou destroyers were "on United States business." 15

Source documents availeble do not indicate that any further
decisions were made on the Bien Hoa matter. A second meeting to discuss
possible U.S. actions was "tentatively scheduled" for 2 November, but
the available materials contain no evidence that it was held. 16/
President Johnson was scheduled to appear in Houston that afternoon,
for his final pre-election address, and it may be that the second White
House meeting was called off. In any event, unofficial reports from
Saigon, two days leter, stated that most of the B-57s had been withdrawn
from the Bien Hoa base. While acknowledging that "some" had been
removed to Clark Air Base, in the Philippines, official spokesmen in
Saigon refused to conment on whether or not a wholesale withdrawal had
taken place. 17/ One thing is certain; there were no retaliatory
strikes authorized following the attack on the U.S. bomber base.

However, retaliatory measures were proposed. On 1 November,
the JCS suggested orally to Secretary McNamera that air strikes be
authorized on key Commumist targets in both Laos and North Vietnam.
According to the JCS plan, those in Laos would be hit within 24-36 hours
after approval, with forces already in place, and these attacks would
divert attention from the preparation necessary for the stronger actions
to follow. The latter would include a B-52 night attack on Phuc Yen
airfield (outside Hanoi), to be followed by a dawn strike by USAF anda
Navy tactical aircraft against other airfields and POL storage in the
Hanoi-Haiphong area, 18/

Ambassador Taylor inmediately cabled a Saigon Embassy~MACV
recommendstion for "retaliatory bombing attacks on selected DRV targets
‘by combined U.S. /VNAF air forces and for a policy statement that we will
act similarly in like cases in the future." 19/ In a later cable he

made specific reference to "the retaliatory principle confirmed in
NSAM 314," stating that if his initial recommendation was not accepted
at least a lesser alternative should be adopted. This he described as

ade TOP SECRET - Sensitive
