Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Tentative answers are possible, and form a continuum: By 1956,
peace in Vietnam was plainly less dependent upon the Geneva Settlement
than upon power relationships in Southeast Asia -- principally upon the
role the U.S. elected to play in unfolding events. In 1957 and 1958,
a structured rebellion against the government of Ngo Dinh Diem began.
While the North Vietnamese played an ill-defined part, most of those
who took up arms were South Vietnamese, and the causes for which they
fought were by no means contrived in North Vietnam. In 1959 and 1960),
Hanoi's involvement in the developing strife became evident. Not until
1960, however, did the U.S. perceive that Diem was in serious danger
of being overthrown and devise a Counterinsurgency Plan.

It can be established that there was endemic insurgency in South
Vietnam throughout the period 1954-1960. It can also be established --
but less surely -- that the Diem regime alienated itself from one after
another of those elements within Vietnam which might have offered it
political support, and was grievously at fault in its rural programs.
That these conditions engendered animosity toward the GVN seems almost
certain, and they could have underwritten a major resistance movement
even without North Vietnamese help.

It is equally clear that North Vietnamese communists operated some
form of subordinate apparatus in the South in the years 1954-1960.
Nonetheless, the Viet Minh "stay-behinds" were not directed originally
to structure an insurgency, and there is no coherent picture of the
extent or effectiveness of communist activities in the period 1956-1959.
From all indications, this was a period of reorganization and recruiting
by the conmunist party. No direct links have been established between
Hanoi and perpetrators of rural violence. Statements have been found
in captured party histories that the communists plotted and controlled
the entire insurgency, but these are difficult to take at face value.
Bernard Fall ingeniously correlated DRV complaints to the ICC of
incidents in South Vietnam in 1957 with GVN reports of the same incidents,
and found Hanoi suspiciously well informed. He also perceived a pattern
in the terrorism of 1957-1959, deducing that a broad, centrally directed
strategy was being implemented. However, there is little other corrobora-
tive evidence that Hanoi instigated the incidents, much less orchestrated
them.

Three interpretations of the available evidence are possible:

Option A -- That the DRV intervened in the South in reaction
to U.S. escalation, particularly that of President Kennedy in early
1961. Those who advance this argument rest their case principally on
open sources to establish the reprehensible character of the Diem regime, on
examples of forceful resistance to Diem independent of Hanoi, and upon
the formation of the National Liberation Front (NLF) alleged to have
come into being in South Vietnam in early 1960. These also rely heavily
upon DRV official statements of 1960-1961 indicating that the DRV only
then proposed to support the NLF.

2 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
