Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(11) See also General Don's statement to me on Long An,
notably his statement that totally useless and
impractical hamlets were built with forced labor
so that grafters would receive the money allocated
to strategic hamlets... .

(12) I am asking MACV and USOM to find out how the above
and the scandalous conditions described by General
Don escaped inspection. 23/

This report on Long An province reached Washington about the same

time that a Cabinet level meeting at the Department of State was being

held to review the situation in Vietnam and discuss possible further
actions. A briefing on the situation was presented, on behalf of the
Defense Department and the Secretary, by General Krulak. General
Krulak's briefing included the following conclusions:

a. The new GVN shows a desire to respond to U.S.
advice and improve its military effectiveness and

has the capability to do so. Its plans are basically
sound but it is in a state of organizational turmoil
which cannot fail to affect its capabilities ad-
versely for the short term.

b. The VC are making an intensive although loosely
coordinated effort to increase their hold on the
countryside while the new government is shaking down.

¢. The VC have exhibited a powerful military capa-
bility for at least a brief period of intensified
operations and their skill*at least in counter air-
borne operations is improving.

d. There is ground for concern that infiltration
of materiel support has increased in the Delta

area but there is little hard proof. This is a prime
intelligence deficiency since it affects not only

the military tactics but our overall Southeast Asia
strategy. ai

The prevailing view at this time seems to have been more apprehensive
than Gen. Krulak's briefing would suggest. It was immediately decided
that the Secretary should have another look at the situation by return-
ing from the December NATO meeting via Saigon.

The Backup Book for the Secretary of Defense's Saigon trip of 18-20
Decenber contains indications of the major questions that he proposed
to look into during his brief projected visit to Vietnam. The Young
Report on Long An Province as of 6 December had evidently made a strong
impression, and it seems the Secretary was especially anxious to safeguard

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
17
