Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

OSD views. OSD and OSD/ISA views were clearer on some
issues than on others. For example, the source documents indicate
their consistent support for surfacing the GVN maritime operations. ahh /
Similarly, it is clear that OSD continually regarded negotiations as a
necessary process for terminating the insurgency in South Vietnam and
& program of increased pressures against the DRV as a means of improving
the U.S. bargaining position. Like other agencies, it saw negotiations
as something that should not be entered into until the pressures were
hurting North Vietnam, but it emphasized that the pattern of pressures
should make clear our limited aims. 145/ ,

Equally consistent but less explicit were OSD views on GVN/U.S.
readiness to mount overt attacks on North Vietnam. Secretary McNamara
was concerned that too early initiation of air action against North
Vietnam might find the United States unprepared to cope with the con-
Sequences. At the end of August he directed the JCS to study and report
on POL and ordnance stocks available to carry out approved contingency
plans to combat a large-scale communist intervention after the expenditures
required for the pattern of attacks which they proposed against North
Vietnam. He also asked for specific recommendations on next steps to be
taken in the event destruction of the proposed JCS targets did not destroy
the DRV will and capability to continue. Mr. McNaughton's "Plan of Action"
was intended to make unnecessary any decision concerning larger operations
until late in the autumn. Moreover, it was designed explicitly "to create
as little risk as possible of the kind of military action which would be
difficult to Justify to the American public and to preserve where possible
the option to have no U.S. military action at all." In September, OSD/ISA
was On record as favoring the initiation of bombing against North Vietnam --
after suitable provocation by Hanoi. But by mid-October the OSD view
was apparently that overt actions against the North should be held off
at least until the new year. 146/

With respect to the other issues the most consistent aspect of
OSD views was their prudence. Its attitudes toward tit-for-tat reprisals
are not really clear. Soon after Tonkin Gulf OSD notified the JCS that
the events there precluded any further need for their work on retaliation
scenarios in support of NSAM 288. Then, just three weeks later, the
McNaughton "Plan of Action" proposed deliberate provocation of DRV actions
to permit U.S. retaliation -- but as a means to begin a gradual squeeze
on North Vietnam, not merely tit-for-tat reprisals. Mr. McNamara's own
views do not appear except by implication, in that he did not indicate
any Opposition to them when shown William Bundy's draft summation of the
September meeting consensus. 147 / Prudence was again the dominant feature
of OSD views on preparations to cope with possible enemy reactions to the
harsher pressures. For example, "on several occasions" Secretary McNamara
expressed to the JCS his interest in the possibility of countering a
massive Chinese intervention in Southeast Asia without the need to intro-
duce large numbers of U.S. ground forces. The OSD appraisal of the USAF

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
