Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

rejected them altogether, or hinted at their intention of ignoring them,
it clearly put a special interpretation on the agreements. For example,
the GVN made it plain from the beginning that it would not countenance
unsupervised elections. Moreover, it refused to contemplate elections
unless and until it could secure and govern all its territory. This
position was advantageous for the GVN, because it gave the DRV incentive
to avoid actions south of the 17th parallel which might disrupt the
election time-table, or give the GVN an excuse for refusing to hold
elections. Through the concessions of the Communist countries and the
firmess of its Western Allies, the GVN had been given time to consolidate
itself.

hk, U.S. Attitude on Geneva is Mixed
a. Initial U.S. Public View is Cautious

The U.S. viewed the Conference results with mixed emotions.
Publicly, the American position was that the Accords represented the
best that could have been obtained from a bad situation. The President,
at a 21 July news conference, declined to criticize the Accords. He said
they contain "features which we do not like, but a great deal depends on
how they work in practice." He announced the U.S. intention to establish
permanent missions in Laos and Cambodia, and said the U.S. was actively
"pursuing discussions with other free nations with a view to the rapid
organization of a collective defense in Southeast Asia in order to
prevent further direct or indirect Communist aggression in that general
area." 3/ Under Secretary Smith took the same line two days later.
Denying that Geneva was another "Munich," Smith said: "I am... con-
vinced that the results are the best that we could possibly have obtained
in the circumstances," adding that "diplomacy has rarely been able to
gain at the conference table what cannot be gained or held on the battle-
field." 4/ Finally, Secretary Dulles, also on 23 July, made a statement
to the press oriented toward the future. Referring to "the loss in Northern
Vietnam," Dulles expressed the hope that much would be learned from the
experience toward preventing further Communist inroads in Asia. Two
lessons could be culled, the Secretary observed. First, popular support
was essential against Communist subversion; "the people should feel that
they are defending their own national institutions." Second, collective
defense should precede an aggressive enemy move rather than occur as 4
reaction to it. A collective security system in Southeast Asia, he con-
cluded, would check both outright aggression and subversion. 5/

b. Public and Private Reactions Vary

These initial public U.S. reactions to the Conference results
were at considerable variance with what was being said within government
councils. The fact that another piece of territory had been formally
ceeded to the Communists obviously weighed heavily on the Administration.
When papers were drawn up for the National Security Council in August,
the Geneva Conference was evaluated as a major defeat for Western

D-14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
