Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

WITHDRAWING FROM OVERT INFLUENCE

The rejection of a unified military conmand is only one exainple
of the tendency in 1965 to renounce leverage oriented mechanisms at
the very time that the U.S. was committing major land forces to the
war. It was as though the U.S. increased its determination to avoid
arrangements which smacked of direct, open leverage at the same time
that the inadequacy of earlier, indirect measures was made obvious by
the deployment to South Vietnam of U.S. ground combat forces,

This may, in fact, be what happened. Some sporadic earlier attempts
at leverage had not borne the desired fruit. Ambassador Taylor had had
@ disastrous experience in trying to use the U.S. decision to commence
bombing North Vietnam as a lever to get GVN reform in December 1964. ‘The
net outcome was a violent reaction by General Khanh, who very nearly
had Taylor thrown out of the country as personna non greta. In the end,
it was Khanh who went, but the political turmoil that this produced in
the first months of 1965, when the course of the war was taking a dramatic
turn against the GVN, convinced Taylor that such attempts should not be
made again at the national level.*

Concurrently, one of the most direct U.S. tools for influencing
policy implementation at lower levels, the joint sign-off for release
of piaster funds for pacification, was also being abandoned. The decision
was made in December 1964 by the USOM Director, Mr. Killen. Early in
1965, ATID stopped buying piasters for the U.S.-controlled sector funds and,
in June, agreement was reached with the GVN for province chiefs to begin
requisitioning and releasing AID commodities on their own authority. 149/
Thus, the “troike, sign-off" came to an end. While eleborate arrangements
were made for getting reports of U.S. advisor concurrence or non-concurrence,
the practical effect was to remove the advisor's leverage and restrict
his influence. In October, USOM began to have second thoughts on the
wisdom of abandoning control of its resources in the field and proposed
a restoration of the "troika sign-off." The Mission Council endorsed the
plen and had already launched discussions with the GVN when the State
Department objected to the idea, insisting that it would undermine our
efforts to make the Vietnamese more independent and effective. 150/ There
the matter died.

In a somewhat related effort to overcome the delays in the Vietnamese
pacification system, MACV acceded to its advisors' recommendations and ,
on 1 October, created a separate contingency fund of 50,000 piasters for
each subsector (district) advisor tobe used for urgent projects. Sector
advisors were also given access to special funds. The program was highly
successful and toward the end of the year consideration was given to
permanent establishment of such revolving funds. 151/ ‘The plan was

* See Task Force Paper IV.C., Evolution of the War: US/GVN Relations,

1963-67, Part I, pp. 54-59.

64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
