Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

COPY | aot _ OP SECRET

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Washington

. March 15, 1951

‘MEMORANDUM FOR MR. JAMES S. LAY, JR
EXECUTIVE SECRETARY, NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

SUBJECT: First Progress. Report on NSC_64, "The Position of the
. United 8t States with 1 Respect to Indochina”.

NSC 64, "The Position of the United States with Respect to
Indochina", was approved as government policy on March 27, 1950.
It is requested that this first progress report as of March 1,
1951, be circulated to members of the Council for their information,

i - POLICY IMPLEMENTATION .

tee te ee en re

Military Aid

. js °

The Military Aid Program to Indochina enjoys the highest.
priority immediately after the military effort in Korea. The
first deliveries began in June 1950 and by the end of January
1951 military assistance totalling approximately $50 million
hed been delivered to Indochina, ~ Approximately $113 million in
further military aid already has been programmed and is’ at
varying stages in the supply process, An additional $52 million
of military aid is now being programmed out of remaining FY '51
funds and something approaching $170 million for this purpose
has been included in the tentative budget estimates upon which
the President's FY '52 budget was based. This aid program
follows in general the request submitted -to the United States
Government by the French Government in March 1950. During
August 1950 Indochina was visited by a Joint Survey Mission
under the chairmanship of Mr, John Melby of the Department of
State, of which Major General Erskine, USMC was the senior
military member. The mission recommended that the United States
continue its efforts to supply the assistance requested by the
French in March 1950, with certain additions Equipment already
delivered to Indochina, or enroute, includes ‘yarious aircraft,
naval vessels, equipment for twelve infantry battalions (less
small arms), and miscellaneous equipment and ammunition, supplied
both from the United States and the United States Far East Command.
In addition to the military assistance initially requested,
materiel has now been requested for the equipping of national
armies in each of the three States, The cost and availability
of this materiel is now unknown. ,

L241

Lo a ; TOP SEC

oy
i
