Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

J50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Some indication of the concern being generated by these adverse
U.S. political effects of the governmental crisis in South Vietnam is
offered by the fact that State, on May 21, sent the Embassy in Saigon
the results of a Gallup Poll on whether the U.S. should continue its
support for the war. These were the questions and the distribution of
the responses:

1. Suppose South Vietnamese start fighting on big scale
among themselves. Do you think we should continue help them,
or should we withdraw our troops? (A) Continue to help 28
percent; (b) Withdraw 54 percent; (C) No opinion 18 percent.

2. If GVN decides stop fighting (discontinue war), what
should US do -= continue war by itself, or should we withdraw?
(A) Continue 16 percent; (B) Withdraw 72 percent; (C) No
opinion 12 percent. Comparison August 1965 is 19, 63 and 18
percent.

3. Do you think South Vietnamese will be able to estab-
lish stable government or not? (A) Yes 32 percent; (B) No
48 percent; (C) No opinion 20 percent. Comparison January
1965 is 25, 42 and 33 percent. 148/

Lodge, struggling with fast moving political events in Hue and DaNang,
replied to these poll results on May 23 in a harsh and unsympathetic tone,

We are in Viet-Nam because it cannot ward off external
aggression by itself, and is, therefore, in trouble. If it
were not in trouble, we would not have to be here. The time
for us to leave is when the trouble is over -- not when it is
changing its character. It makes no sense for us here to help
them against military violence and to leave them in the lurch
to be defeated by criminal violence operating under political,
economic and social guise.

It is obviously true that the Vietnamese are not today
ready for self-government, and that the French actively tried
to unfit them for self-government. One of the implications
of the phrase ‘internal squabbling’ is this unfitness. But
if we are going to adopt the policy of turning every country
that is unfit for self-govermment over to the communists, there
won't be much of the world left. 149/

Lodge rejected the implications of these opinion polls in the strongest
possible terms, reaffirming his belief in the correctness of the U.S.

course,

The idea that we are here simply because the Vietnamese
want us to be here -- which is another implication of the

ely, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
