Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET . Sensitive

by the ARVN if they did not receive a great increase in external support.
Statistical indices showed a decline in Viet Cong attacks from the
previous year, increased ARVN offensive activity, and improvement in the
weapons loss ratio. Continuing problems were Diem's loyalty-based officer
promotion policy, ARViT desertions and AWOL's, poor intelligence, end low
grade NCO's and company grade officers. Nonetheless, the overall out-
look was sanguine. Particular reason for encouragement was the adoption
in February 1963 of the National Campaign Plan urged by the U.S. The
hopeful prospects were summarized for Secretary McNamara in a briefing
paper for the Honolulu Conference of May 6:

The over-all situation in Vietnam is improving. In the
military sector of the counterinsurgency, we are winning.
Evidences of improvement are clearly visible, as the com-
bined impact of the programs which involve a long lead
time begin to have effect on the Viet Cong. 4

Even as seasoned an observer of insurgency as Sir Robert Ghomeeen, Chief
of the British Advisory Mission, was able to report that, "Now, in March
1963, I can say, and in this I em supported by all members of the mission,
that the Government is beginning to win the shooting war against the

Viet Cong." 5/

One reason for the optimism of these appraisals was the vigor with
which the government, under the direction of Nhu, was pushing the
Strategic Hamlet Program. Nhu had been initially cool to the idea, but
once he established the U.S. willingness to fund the program, he focused
on it as the principal vehicle of the counterinsurgency campaign and as
an excellent means of extending the oligarchy’s control into the country-
side. In April the GVN claimed it had completed 5,000 strategic hamlets
and had another 2,000 under construction. 6/ There was already official
U.S. misgiving, however, about the quality of many of the hamlets and
about overextension of the country's limited human resources in the
program's frantic rate of expansion. Nevertheless, field reports seemed
to support the success of the program which was seen as the key to the
struggle against the Viet Cong.

U.S.-GVil relations in the spring of 1963 were beginning to show signs
of accumulating stress, As the U.S. commitment and involvement deepened,
frictions between American advisors and Vietnamese counterparts at all
levels increased. Diem, under the influence of Nhu, complained about
the quantity and zeal of U.S. advisors. U/ They were creating a colonial
impression among the people, he said, Diem chose to dramatize his com-
plaint by delaying agreement on the commitment of South Vietnamese funds
for joint counterinsurgency projects. 8/ The issue was eventually
resolved, but the sensitivity to the growing U.S. presence remained and
as the long crisis summer wore on, it gradually became a deep-seated
suspicion of U.S. motives.

The report of the Mansfield mission, published in March, further
exacerbated relations between the two countries. Diem and Nhu were

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
