Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

is, (df THE CHARACTER AND POWER OF THE VIET MINH

1. Origins of the Viet Minh

a. Pre-World War II Vietnamese Political Movements

(1) The Political Situation During the 1920's and 1930's

In eighty years of French domination of Vietnam there
had been no increase in per-acre yield of rice, so that the comparative
fertility of Vietnam's fields were, in 1940, the lowest in the world. i/
Viet population increased at double the expansion in rice production from
cultivating new land. Thus, French contentions that their imperium had
uplifted the Vietnamese notwithstanding, there is no evidence that they
improved popular diet, or solved the problem of recurrent famine. In
fact, the rural peasants were in 19h0 socially disadvantaged in compari-
son with their ancestors, in that the pre-colonial mandarinal society with
its subsistence economy had better provided for their basic political,
economic and social needs. Moreover, the neomercantilism of France had,
in fact, given the Bangue d'Indochine a key role in colonial policy. ‘The
Banque was a virtual French monopoly, nearly as baleful an influence over
the Vietnamese as the communists depicted it; at least, with the colonial
administration, it defended the French economic position through blocking
Vietnamese social and political mobility. Vietnamese entered legitimate
domestic businesses under severe handicaps, and were all but foreclosed
from foreign commerce. Few descriptions of pre-World War II Vietnam by
non-French authors fail to portray a colonialism like that depicted by
Karl Marx. For example, the Austrian-American authority, Joseph Buttinger,
characterized the state of Viet society and politics in the late 1930's
as follows:

"Pauperization was the lot of most peasants and of all
tenants, not only in overpopulated Tongking and Annam, but also
in Cochinchina,, which was so much richer than the other four
Indochinese states that it contributed 40 per cent to the general
budget. The economic burdens of French rule, according to a
contemporary English writer, ‘were shouldered principally by the
rural population, and the fiscal demands, together with the in-
creasing birthrate, led to a progressive pavperization of the
countryside, a process illustrated by the fact that rural in-
debtedness in Cochinchina alone increased from 31 million pias-
ters in 1900 to 134 million piasters in 1930.'

"There is, however, no more devastating verdict on the
failure of the French to combat rural poverty than the dry state-
ment of another French authority on living conditions in Vietnan.
‘It is only in periods of intense agricultural labor,' wrote
E. Lerich in a study published in 1942, 'which means during

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
