Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

William Bundy at State drafted comments on the DPM on
May 30 and circulated them at State and Defense. In his rambling
and sometimes contradictory memo, Bundy dealt mainly with the nature
and scope of the U.S, commitment -- as expressed in the DPM and as he
saw it. He avoided any detailed analysis of the two military options
and focused his attention on the strategic reasons for American involve-
ment; the objectives we were after; and the terms under which we could
consider closing down the operation. His memo began with his contention
that:

The gut point can almost be summed wo in a pair of
sentences. If we can get a reasonably solid GVN political
structure and GVN performance at all levels, favorable
trends could become really marked over the next 18 months,
the war will be won for practical purposes at some point, and
the resulting peace will be secured. On the other hand, if
we do not get these results from the GVN and the South Viet-
namese people, no amount of US effort will achieve our basic
objective in South Viet-Nem--a return to the essential
provisions of the Geneva Accords of 1954 and a reasonably
stable peace for many years based on these Accords.

It is this view of the central importance of the South that dominates
the remainder of Bundy's memo. But his own thinking was far from clear
about how the U.S. should react to a South Vietnamese failure for at the
end of it he wrote:

None of the above decides one other question clearly
implicit in the DOD draft. What happens if "the country
ceases to help itself." If this happens in the literal
sense, if South Viet-Nam performs so badly that it simply
is not going to be able to govern itself or to resist the
slightest internal pressure, then we would agree that we
ean do nothing to prevent this. But the real underlying
question is to what extent we tolerate imperfection, even
gross imperfection, by the South Vietnamese while they are
still under the present grinding pressure from Hanoi and the
NLF.

This is a tough question. What do we do if there is a
military coup this summer and the elections are aborted?
There would then be tremendous pressure at home and in
Rurope to the effect that this negated what we were fighting
for, and that we should pull out.

But against such pressure we must reckon that the stakes
in Asia will remain. After all, the military rule, even in

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
