Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

irreversible, but if they remain unchecked, they will almost
certainly in time cause the collapse of Diem's regime. We do
not anticipate that this will occur within the period of this
estimate. However, if Diem is not able to alter present trends
and the situation deteriorates substantially, it is possible
during the period of this estimate that the government will lose
control over much of the countryside and a political crisis will
ensue." (Jbid., p. 1) :

The U.S. view of its policy in Vietnam could not yet be
said to be "crisis management"; but a crisis was portended.

3. Contrasting DOD and State Appreciations

The August SNIE notwithstanding, however, subsequent
analyses appearing in the Department of State and the Department of
Defense disclosed differing views on the relative urgency of the threat
to Diem fron communist machination as opposed to simple rebellion. In
general, Department of Defense papers tended to emphasize the threat
from rural, communist-led insurgents, and to highlight relative military
capabilities; Defense papers usually deprecated the significance or
urgency of non-communist political dissent in South Vietnam. In contrast,
analyses by the Department of State in Washington and Ambassador Durbrow
in Saigon recognized, at least in principle, the importance of both
the military threat posed by the VC, and the problems which stemmed
from Diem's political insolvency. Department of Defense analyses, there-
fore, usually regarded proposals by State or Saigon which aimed at
pressuring Diem into a more enlightened domestic policy as being com-
petitive with measures to improve internal security. The Pentagon and
its field commands tended to regard military assistance to Diem as the
key to the situation. Indeed, the Pentagon tended to oppose U.S.
leverage on Diem because it might jeopardize his confidence in the
U.S. and cooperation from him which was essential to improve his
military posture.

The divergence in view sketched above emerges in several
papers written not long after the 30 August 1960 SNIE. For example,
alarmed by the ominous conclusion of the SNIE's Deputy Secretary of
Defense Douglas asked ASD/ISA for comments and recommendations on how
to remedy the "deteriorating situation in South Vietnam." As input for
the reply, Brigadier General Edward G. Lansdale, 0so/osD, one of Ngo
Dinh Diem's earliest U.S. advisors, wrote a memorandum holding that:

"As noted by the Deputy Secretary of Defense, conditions
in Vietnam are deteriorating. The key element in the situation
is the activity of the Viet Cong. While criticism of Diem's
government in metropolitan areas adds to his problems and
interacts with Viet Cong plans, the Viet Cong remains the primary
threat to security ... " (Memo for Admiral B. J. O'Donnell,

52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
