Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

To Walter Lippman, the New Year meant “there is hope only ina
negotiated compromise" (emphasis added), but to others optimism was
the keynote. Ambassador Lodge, in his New Year's statement, predicted
that “allied forces will make sensational military gains in 1967" and
"the war would end in an eventual fadeout once the allied pacification
effort made enough progress to convince Hanoi that the jig was up." 13/
The New York Daily News informed 15 million New Yorkers that the "U.S.
Expects to Crush Main Red Force in '67." 1h/

As if to balance the cacophony of war dialogue, a final dissonant
note was sounded during those first two weeks of the new year. The famous
"Goldberg Reply" to U Thant's note of 30 December had angered and dismayed
the Secretary General. At a news conference he discussed the U.S. reply
to his message which had basically implored the U.S. to discontinue the
bombing so some kind of talks could open. The U.S. rejection, outlining
its condition of "reciprocal acts" on the part of North Vietnam, he said
was "much regretted," for in his estimation it was based upon an unfortunate
misreading of history and the current situation as well as the result of
misguided assumptions about the "domino theory," which he rejected. The
strong opposition he voiced created important political "ripples" in the
United Nations, Washington, and abroad. A certain mood of frustration
and opposition which had already taken root was nourished and sustained
by the incident. 15/

2. Official Optimism and a Spur to Action: The Komer Memo

Seeds of optimism were not restricted to the public at large, but also
found sustenance in official circles -- primarily in the White House staff.
R. W. Komer, in what he titled a "Vietnam Prognosis for 1967-68," provided
@ markedly optimistic view of the future and a firm conviction that the
military situation was Manageable, if not well in hand. He was convinced
that COMUSMACV's "spoiling strategy" had thrown Hanoi's calculations badly
out of balance, and put us “well past the first turning point where we
stopped losing the war." 16/ In this he agreed with the McNamara 14 Octo-
ber DPM; both believed that we had stopped losing. He saw other major
turning points. He suspected that we had reached a point where we were
killing, defecting or otherwise attriting more ve/NVA strength than the
enemy could build up -- in the vernacular, the "cross-over" point. He
cited the favorable indicators, but he neither sounded completely convinced

-nor conclusive.

A critical psychological turning point may have been crossed, he
believed, because he detected that the bulk of SVN's population increas-
ingly believed that we were winning the war. (He saw this as the chief
significance of the 80% voter turnout on 11 September.) He concluded
his introduction with:

"In sum--slow, painful, and incredibly expensive though
it may be--we're beginning to 'win' the war in Vietnam. This
is a far cry from saying, however, that we're going to win it
--in any meaningful sense,"

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
