Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
rsTilC T2D

Vietnam end has harassed the French ever since. His
followers who are estimated at approximately 75,000
armed men, with probsbly the same number unarmed. his
heedquarters are unknown.

The French counter efforts have included, on the
military side, the dsployment of approximately 130,000
troops, of whom the apvroximately 50,000 are local natives
serving voluntarily, African colonials, and a hard cove
made up of Frencn troops and Foreign Legion units. Ho Chi
Minh's guerrilla tactics have been aimed at denying the
French control of Vietnem. On iarch 8, 191.9 the French
President signed an agreement with Bao Dai as the Head of
otate, granting independence within the French Union to
the Government of Vietnem. Similar agreements were
signed with the sing of Laos end the King of Cambodia.

kecent developments have included Chinese Communist
victories bringin, those troops to the Indochina border;
recognition of ho Chi Minh as the head of the legal
Government of Vietnam by Communist China (18 January)
and by Soviet nussia (30 January).

ll. necognition by the United Stetes of the three
leselly constituted governments of Vietnam, Leos and
Cambodia appeers desirable and in accordance with United
States foreizn policy for several ressons. Among them
ares encouragement to national aspirations under non-
Communist leadership for peo ,les of colonial areas in
Southeast Asie; the establishment of stable non-Comimunist
governments in areas adjacent to Communist China; sup-
port to a friendly country which is also a signatory to
the North Atlantic Treaty; and as a demonstration of
Gispleasure with Communist tactics vhich are obviously
aimed at eventual domination of Asia, working under the
guise of indigenous nationalism.

Subject to your adproval, the Department of State
recommends thet the United Stetes of America extend
recognition to Vietnam, Leos and Cambodia, following
ratification by the French Government. me

(signed) DL8aN ACHESON

Approved

9(signed) co Ae : 3
Harry §. 1!¥ruman . =
February 3, 1950 é

A-16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
