Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ar

AFTERMATH OF THE DIEM COUP
First Halt of 1964

1. The Inheritance From 1963

The top ruling body of the Government of Vietnam at the end of
1963 was a Military Revolutionary Council of twelve generals, under the
chairmanship of the affable and popular but seak General Duong Van "Big"
Minh. ‘The Council governed through an all-civilian cabinet headed by Premier
Tho, having forbade all military officers to engage in politics. A Council
of Notables served as a pseudo-parliament, with a purely advisory role;
it included well-known Vietnamese politicians, but could not claim support
of a broad popular base or the main political forces in Vietnam. While
Premier Tho's previous connection with the Diem government was now a politi-
eal liability, there was a shortage of national. figures who were not tarred
with this brush one way or another. 1/

On the U.S. side, General Harkins, COMUSMACV, who had long been
known to be pro-Diem, was clearly on his way out, although his departure
was to be delayed until the middle of 1964. Ambassador Iodge had replaced
Nolting just before the Diem coup, and was held in that cautious respect
appropriate to the widespread belief among Vietnamese that he had engineered
it.

In the last weeks of 1963, the U.S. government reassessed the
progress of the counterinsurgency effort and the policy options. Plans
for phased withdrawal of 1,000 U.S. advisers by end-1963 went through the
motions by concentrating rotations home in December and letting strength
rebound in the subsequent two months. <A realistic appraisal by Secretary
McNamara showed that the VC were continuing to gain steadily, especially
jn the Delta. 2/ U.S. policy continued to be to provide U.S, resources
and personnel. to the extent necessary.

The tone of USG internal decuments and of its dealings with GYN
was that of a benevolent big brother anxious to see little brother make
good on his own -- but with the benefit of extensive advice. U.S. pres-
sure induced the GVN to break up the pelace guard and to move coup-protection
Ranger units out into the countryside, though it turned out that other units
stayed near Saigon for this purpose. A proposal to put all ammunition stocks
jin Vietnam under U.S. control surfaced in November, only to sink without
a trace. u/ There was gentle pressure to persuade the GVN to allow USOM
economics staffs to share the offices of their counterparts, and to let
them get involved extensively in GYN budgeting. 5/ The USIS and Ambassador

1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
