Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

»LOP SECRET - Sensitive

are largely internal to SVN, but even here success will
require a marked increase in U.S. support and participa-

tion." hs/

There is little doubt that General Johnson was impressed by the gravity
of the situation in SVN as presented to him at the very time the Marines
were landing at Da Nang. The report 46/ which he submitted to the
Secretary of Defense on 14 March contains specifie proposals, including
some for deployment of additional U.S. ground combat forces, which
Johnson felt should be implemented if the U.S. was to realize its ob-
jectives in SVN. Those objectives as seen by Johnson were: (1) to
persuade the DRV to abandon its support and direction of the insurgency,
(2) to defeat the Viet Cong insurgents, and (3) to create a stable GVN.
In accord with the Ambassador, General Johnson called for U.S. action
because "what the situation requires may exceed what the Vietnamese can
be expected to do." To arrest the current deterioration Johnson pre-
sented a list of 21 specific actions to be taken. The upshot of these
21 points was greater U.S. involvement in terms of money, ships, air-
craft, advisors, and assorted hardware, but no ground combat units were
involved. They meant essentially more of the same, and all 21 points
were approved by the President on 1 April 1965. 47/ ‘There was more

to the Johnson recommendations, however. To release RVNAF for offensive
action, he proposed deploying a U.S. division either to defend the Bien
Hoa/Ton Son Nhut airfield complex plus some coastal enclaves or to
defend the highland provinces of Kontum, Pleiku and Darlac. Johnson
obviously preferred the latter alternative because the enemy in the
Montagnard populated highlands would be more easily identified by U.S.
forces. The Secretary of Defense in commenting on the proposed
deployment also preferred the second alternative although he thought
neither afforded an efficient return in terms of RVNAF forces released
per U.S. force input (alternative 1 called for 23,000 U.S. forces to
release 5,000 ARVN; alternative 2 ratio was 15,000 U.S. to 6,000 ARVN).
Secretary McNamara directed the JCS to consider the 2d alternative while
emphasizing that he preferred an ROK division to one of our own. 48/

The culmination of General Johnson's report was his recommendation that
the SEATO treaty be invoked to get allied participation in a four
division force counter-infiltration cordon to be placed across the DMZ
and the Laotian panhandle from the South China Sea to the Mekong River.
In closing his report, General Johnson observed:

"In order for the USG to evaluate his [ComusMACV 's/
requests properly when submitted, a policy determination
mist be made in the very near future that will assure the
question: What should the Vietnamese be expected to do
for themselves and how much more must the U.S. contribute
directly to the security of South Vietnam?"

In reference to this observation Secretary McNamara wrote that the ’

"Policy is: amrthing that will strengthen the position of the GVN
will be sent..." 49/

* 36 TOP SECRET — Sensitive
