Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ready to intervene end some aircraft carriers had already been moved
from Manila to the Indochina coast. On reflection, said Dulles, he had
thought that the U.S. should not act alone in this matter and that an
ad hoc coalition might be formed which might develop later into a
Southeast Asia defense organization. This in itself would deter China
from further interference in Indochina and would strengthen the western
position at Geneva by giving evidence of solidarity. 2h/

Eden was not convinced. He drew a distinction between the
long term issue of collective security in Southeast Asia -- which might
well be guarenteed by treaty after Geneva -- and the more inmediate
question of “united action" in Indochina. He was opposed to any military
action or warning announcement before Geneva. The British were willing
to provide the French with full diplomatac support at Geneva, either as
a guarantor of the final settlement or as a participant in multilateral
talks if a settlement failed to materialize. In the latter case, the
British were prepared to discuss a collective defense formula that would
comprehend any non-Communist portion of ‘Indochina formed as the result
of the Geneva deliberations. But they would not, prior to Geneva, commit
themselves to united action. :

Britain's distinction between'’the appropriateness of a united
approach after, as opposed to before, the Conference was founded on
serious doubts about the true import of united action. As Dulles cor-
rectly judged, behind Britain's push for a settlement was the "fear that
if fighting continues, we will in one way or another become involved,
thereby enhancing risk of Chinese intervention and possibility further
expansion of war." 25/ Eden charged that action prior to the Conference
would not only destroy chances for a peaceful. settlement, but would
eritically raise the risk of a wider war. American planning admitted
the strong possibility of direct Chinese intervention, and his own intel-
ligence staff had concluded that Western involvement would bring on the
Chinese by land and air once the Viet Minh effort became "seriously
endangered." 26/

Thus, while Dulles was angered at the way he felt the British
were writing off Indochina, Eden was highly pessimistic about Dulies'’
militancy in an area of uncertain value for which the United States had
ambiguous, high-risk plans. There was considerable difference, in Eden's
mind, between warnings to Communist China against direct intervention
pefore the fact (which the British went along with in mid-1953) and
united action, which would, despite any allied assurances to Peking, be
interpreted by the Chinese as provocatory. 27/

British suspicions, furthermore, were an extension of the
belief that Indochina need not be entirely lost at Geneva in the absence
of united action. London was apparently puzzled by American talk of the
"loss" of Indochina, for to_10 Downing Street, "French cannot lose the
war between now /April 195h/ and the coming of the rainy season however
badly they may conduct it." 28/ While Dulles kept telling the British
that only united action through the formation of a coalition could ensure

B-25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
