Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

deseribed as necessary in his November 16 cable, Even in Washington it
may be difficult to get furniture and phones moved, except for very high-
ranking peoples; in Saigon a major relocation was more difficult to mount
than a military operation. While this was going on, involving literally
over one thousand people, work in OCO was even more confused and sporadic
than usual.

None of these minor organizational events would be of any importance
if it were not for the fact that they were eating away at the meager time
allotted to the civilians to prove that OCO should remain independent of
MACV. But they did consume time, and this was to prove to be a factor
in evaluating OCO,

The documents do not answer the question of whether or not OCO ever

really head a chance to survive, or whether it was just allowed to start
up by people who had already decided to turn RD over to MACV in a few
months. Eoth possibilities fit the available facts. An educated guess
would be that the decision to give Westmoreland control was tentatively
made by the President in the late fall of 1966, but that he decided he
would gain by allowing the civilians to reorganize first. If OCO proved
to be a major success, he could always continue to defer his decision.
If OCO fell short of the mark, then it still would be an organization in-
being ready to be placed into MACV without further internal changes, and
that in itself would be a major gain. Moreover, if the changes came when
lodge and Porter were gone, there would be less difficulties,

If OCO moved too slowly for Washington's satisfaction, it nonetheless
accomplished many things which had previously been beyond the Mission's
ability: ‘

-- Uniting personnel from AID, CIA, and JUSPAO into a single Plans
& Evaluations Section, OCO produced the first integrated plans for RD
on the U.S. side. These plans were ambitious and far-reaching, and
required MACV inputs. The fact that the civilians were asking MACV
for inputs to their ow planning, rather than the reverse, so startled
MACV thet MACV, in turn, began more intensive discussions or plans. The
planning effort involved several military officers on loan to 0CO, a fact
which further heightened tension between OCO and MACV. When the plans
first formulated were presented to General Westmoreland,. he indicated that
he was not going to be bound by any plans which reduced his flexibility
and ability to respond to military pressure whenever and wherever it
occurred; thet is, he was reluctant to commit many military assets to
permanent RD support activities. But the relentless pressure from COCO,
from Komer in Washington, and even from the public attention focused on
the issue by Article 11 of the Manila communique ("The Vietnamese leaders
stated their intent to train and assign a substantial share of the armed
forces to clear-and-hold actions in order to provide a shield behind which ©
a new society can be built") all were working against General Westmoreland,
and towards the assignment of ARVN units to RD missions.

12h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
