Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. THE ATTEMPT TO DE-ESCAIATE ~- JANUARY-JULY 1967

During the first seven months of 1967 a running battle was fought
within the Johnson Administration between the advocates of a greatly
expanded air campaign against North Vietnam, one that might genuinely
be called "strategic," and the disillusioned doves who urged relaxation,
if not complete suspension, of the bombing in the interests of greater
effectiveness and the possibilities for peace. The “hawks” of course were
primarily the military, but in war-time their power and influence with an
incumbent Administration is disproportionate. McNamara, supported quan-
titatively by John McNaughton in ISA, led the attempt to de-escalate the
bombing. Treading the uncertain middle ground at different times in the
debate were William Bundy at State, Air Force Secretary Harold Brown and,
most importantly, the President himself. Buffetted from right and left
he determinedly tried to pursue the temperate course, escalating gradually
in the late spring but levelling off again in the summer. To do so was
far from easy because such a-course really pleased no one (and, it should
be added, did not offer much prospect for a breakthrough one way or the
other). It was an unhappy, contentious time in which the decibel level
of the debate went up markedly but the difficult decision was not taken --
it was avoided.

Bis The Year Begins with No Change

1. Escalation Provosals

The year 1967 began with the military commands still
grumbling about the Christmas and New Year's truces ordered from Washing-
ton. Both had been grossly violated by multiple VC incidents, and both
had been the occasions of major vc/iVA resupply efforts. The restrictions
placed on U.S. forces were felt by the field commands to be at the expense
of American life. U.S, military authorities would argue long and hard
against a truce for the TET Lunar New Year holiday, but in the end they
would loose.

Early in 1967, CINCPAC reopened his campaign to win
Washington approval for air strikes against a wider list of targets in
North Vietnam. On January 14 CINCPAC sent the JCS a restatement of the
Objectives for ROLLING THUNDER he had developed in 1966, noting his belief
that they remained valid for 1967. af Four days later he forwarded a
long detailed list of proposed new targets fcr attack. What he proposed
was @ comprehensive destruction of North Vietnam's military and industrial
base in Route Package 6 (Hanoi-Haiphong). 2/ This called for the destruc-
tion of 7 power plants (all. except the one in the very center of Hanoi,
and the 2 in Haiphong included in a special Haiphong package); 10 "war
supporting industries" (with the Thai Nguyen iron and steel plant at the
head of the list); 20 transportation support facilities; 44 military
complexes; 26 POL targets; and 28 targets in Haiphong and the other
ports (including docks, shipyards, POL, power plants, ete.). CINCPAC

FE TOP SECRET - Sensitive
