Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

nationalist leader more sympathetic to Bao Dai and France. The first
issue was resolved relatively quickly. General Collins struck an
agreement with General Ely in Vietnam by which, despite serious mis-
givings in Paris, France agreed to turn over the training of the Viet-
namese army to the U.S. and to withdraw French cadres. On February 12,
1955, the U.S. assumed responsibility for training Vietnamese forces,
and the French disassociation began.

But the political controversy over Diem was less easily resolved.
Diem exacerbated matters with increasingly vehement stricture against
“the French and Bao Dai. The United States on its part was insensitive
to the impact within France of Diem's militant anti-communism --
frequently directed at the French Left -- and of the rancor aroused
by U.S. statements portraying America as the only friend of Vietnamese
nationalism. The U.S. did alert, however, to French statements that
Dien was categorically incapable of unifying Vietnamese nationalists.
French advice to the U.S. that Diem should, therefore, be replaced
was seconded by Ambassador Collins from Vietnam. Throughout the winter
and spring, Secretary Dulles and the Department of State in general
seemed disposed to consider favorably suggestions that an alternative
leader for the Vietnamese be placed in power. However, despite an
ostensibly thorough search, no nationalist leader with qualities
competitive with Diem's was identified.

Both the U.S. and France were then caught up in the sweep of
events. The armed sects directly challenged Diem's authority, and he
responded with force. An uneasy truce ended the first clash in March,
and amid the mounting tension in April 1955, the U.S., France, and
Bao Dai all sought actively to bring about a change in the GVN. On
28 April, Diem, against U.S. advice, against French advice, and against
the advice of his cabinet, moved again against the sects. When Binh
Xuyen resisted in Saigon, he committed the Vietnamese army to battle.
Diem's forces won an immediate military victory, and simultaneously
Diem's brother, Nhu, co-opted a committee of nationalist figures
who called for Bao Dai's removal, and transfer of civil and military
power to Dien.

Encouraged by Diem's success, the U.S. declared its unequivocal
support for him as opposed to Bao Dai. The U.S. choice presented acute
difficulties for France. The French Government was convinced that
Nhu's "Revolutionary Comnittee" was under Viet Minh influence, and
was strongly resentful of a renewed GVN campaign against French presence.
In May 1955, France, the U.S., and Britain met in Paris to discuss
European defence, but France promptly made Vietnam the principal agenda
item. France maintained that the U.S., in backing Diem, forced upon
France the necessity for withdrawing altogether from Vietnam. The
French Foreign Minister Faure held that Diem was "not only incapable but
mad . . . France can no longer take risks with him." Secretary Dulles in
reply indicated that the U.S. was aware of Diem's weaknesses, but stressed

.

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
