NN

epee per Executive Order 13526 Section 3.3
Project Number: NND 63316. By; NWD Date: 201 |

SECRET

that the Viet Minh are under complete Com-

munist domination, the Viet Minh control

many villages within areas of nominal French
Union occupation through terror, compulsion,
| and their continued nationalist appeal.

24, The Viet Minh and the Chinese Commu-
nists continue to maintain close relations.
It is estimated that there are less than a
‘thousand Chinese Communist advisers and
technicians with the Viet Minh in Indochina.
The Chinese Communists are providing the
Viet Minh with military supplies at an esti-
mated average level of 400 to 500 tons per
month, and some Viet Minh troops are sent
to Communist China for training. Small
Chinese Communist units reportedly have
entered the mountainous northwest section
of Tonkin on several occasions to assist the
Viet Minh against French-supported native
-~ guerrillas, but no Chinese Communist troops
* have been identified in forward areas. There
was some evidence during the past year that
Viet Minh policy statements may be “cleared,”
if not written, in Peiping. Close Viet Minh
_Telations with Communist China are com-
plemented, superficially at least, by equally
warm relations with the Soviet Union, but we
are unable to determine whether Peiping or
Moscow has ultimate responsibility for Viet
Minh policy.

PROBABLE TRENDS IN FRENCH UNION
CAPABILITIES AND COURSES OF ACTION

25. French plans for dealing with the war in
Indochina now revolve around the develop-
ment of national armies in the Associated
States, particularly in Vietnam. In March
1953, the Franco-Vietnamese High Military
Council approved a new program calling for
an increase in Vietnamese strength during
the current year of 40,000 men, organized in
54 “commando” battalions? A further ex-
pansion of 57,000 men has been proposed for

*The 40,000 are to be recruited and will represent

-a@ net increase in French Union strength.
Planned transfers of native units from the
French Army to the Vietnamese Army will also
strengthen the Vietnamese Army but will not
represent any net increase in French Union
strength.

.

1954 and will probably be undertaken if the
initial reinforcement is successful and if
equipment is made available by the US. With
these additional Vietnamese forces, the
French hope to undertake widespread clear-

_ing operations and subsequently to organize

sufficient mobile groups to begin by early 1955
the destruction of the Viet Minh regular
forces in Tonkin. .

26. Progress has been made in carrying out:
the troop reinforcement program thus far,
and the Vietnamese may have close to 40,000
reinforcements recruited, trained, and ayail-
able for combat by early 1954. However, the
Viet Minh invasion of Laos and the threat of

- Similar operations will probably keep French

mobile reserves deployed outside the Tonkin
delta in isolated strong points. The addition
of 40,000 untested and lightly armed Viet-
namesé will not offset the absence of these
regular French forces, and effective clearing
or offensive operations cannot be undertaken
until French Union forces are régrouped.
Moreover, the French military leadership has
been so dominated by concepts of static de-
fense as to be unable to conduct the planned
operations with the vigor necessary for their
success. How the new military leadership
may alter this we cannot estimate. Finally, ™
unless the French Union forces prove strong
enough to provide security for the Vietnamese
population, it will not be possible to sweep the
guerrillas out of the areas as planned. Not
only will the populace fail generally to pro-
vide the intelligence required to rout the
guerrillas but, as in the past, they will fre-
quently give warning of the presence of the
French Union forces, thus permitting. the
guerrillas to take cover and later to emerge
when the danger is past.

27. The French are fearful that they cannot °
achieve a military decision in Indochina.
Unless the French Union military plans
achieve great, success during the period of
this estimate, the conviction will grow in
France that the Indochina problem can only
be solved through some over-all East-West
settlement in the Far East. The difficulties
of the French financial position impel the
French to seck relief from the mounting costs

SECRET -

90
