Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive re ae

re

On August 29, Colonel Conein and Mr. Spera met with Generals Khiem
and Minh] Minh bluntly said that the generals had to be cautious until
they had clear evidence that the U.S. would not betray them to Nhu. They
were unwilling to discuss their plans, and when asked what would con-
stitute a sign of U.S. support, replied that the U.S. should stop economic
aid to the regime. 49/ In a subsequent separate contact with Rufus
Phillips, General Kim asked for verification that the Minh-Conein meeting
had Lodge's approval. After checking with Lodge, Phillips assured Kim
who then asked for a meeting to discuss planning on the next day. Lodge
then authorized CAS to assist in tactical planning. 50/

Stressing the generals! reported lack of confidence in U.S. support,
Lodge's reply to Washington asked Presidential permission for Harkins to
show CAS messages to the generals to prove our commitment. If that failed,
he reluctantly recommended suspension of economic aid as they requested.
Typical of the Ambassador's all-out support for the coup is the following
summary he gave of the U.S. position:

We are launched on a course from which there is no
respectable turning back: The overthrow of the Diem Govern-
ment, There is no turning back in part because US prestige is
already publicly committed to this end in large measure and
will become more so as facts leak out. In a more fundamental
sense, there is no turning back because there is no possibility,
in my view, that the war can be won under a Diem administra~
tion, still less that Diem or any member of the family can
govern the country in a way to gain the support of the people
who count, i.e., the educated class in and out of government
service, civil and military -- not to mention the American
people. 51/

Harkins, on the other hand, felt that there was still time to make
one last approach to Diem, without endangering the plotters, since their
plans did not appear fully mature yet. Diem should be handed an ultimatum
that the Nhus mist go. This, he felt, would strengthen the hand of the
generals whose opposition, like ours, was to the Nhus, not Diem. If Diem
did not act, there would then be time to back a move by the generals. 52/

These views were all reviewed at the noon meeting of the NSC on
August 29. At the meeting, McNamara backed Harkins! view in favor of a
final approach to Diem, but the issue was not decided. 53/ Rusk took
up the question in a subsequent cable to Lodge, asking Lodge's opinion
about an approach to Diem, possibly by the generals at a time when they
would be ready to act, in which they would insist on the removal of the
Nhus, and threaten withdrawal of U.S. support. 54/ A separate State
cable to Lodge and Harkins authorized the latter to show CAS cables to
the generals to prove our support. Harkins was instructed to insist on
knowing the personnel involved in the coup, and the forces available, and
to ask to review the detailed plans, without, however, directly involving
himself in the coup planning. Lodge was authorized to suspend aid to
Diem, "at a time and under conditions of your choice." 55/

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
