—

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

To the same end of improving our credibility, we should seek ways --
through words and deeds -- to make believable our intention to withdraw our
forces once the North Vietnamese aggression against the South stops. In’ par-
ticular, we should avoid any implication that we will stay in South Vietnam
with bases or to guarantee any particular outcome to a solely South Vietnamese
Shrugghe.

(2) Try to split the VC off from Hanoi, The intelligence estimate
is, that evidence is overwhelming that the North Vietnamese dominate and control
the National Front end the Viet Cong. Nevertheless, I think we should continue
and enlarge efforts to contact the VC/NLF and to probe weys to split members
or sections off the VC/NLF organization.

(3) Press contacts’ with North Vietnam, the Soviet Union and
_ other parties who might contribute toward a settlement. =

(4) Develop a realistic plan providing a role for the VC in
negotiations, post-war life, and government of the nation. An amnesty offer
and proposals for national reconciliation would be steps in the right direction
end should be parts of the plan. It is important that this plan be one which
will appear reasonable, if not at first to Hanoi and the VC, at least to world
opinion.

3. The prognosis. The prognosis is bad that the war can be brought to a
satisfactory conclusion within the next two years. The large-unit operations
probably will not do it; negotiations probably wild not do it. While we should
continue to pursue both of these routes in trying for a solution in the short
"Yun, we should recognize that success from them is a mere possibility, not a

pro arous abi lity.

The solution lies in girding, openly, for a longer war and in taking actions
immediately which will in 12 to 16 months give clear evidence that the continuing

costs and risks to the American peonie are acceptably limited, that 3 the fornuls
for succéss has been found, and that the end of the war is s merely a matter of
time, All of ny recommendations will contrioute to this strategy, but the one
most ult to implement is perhaps the most important one ~- eniivenine the

mh pregreni. The odds are less than even for this task, if only -becauses

led consistently since 1961 to make a dent in the problem. But,

1°57 trend of pacification will, I believe, be the main talisman of

2 success or failure in Vietnam, extraordinary imacination and effort

should §0 into changing the stripes of that problem.

President Thieu and Prime Minister Ky are thinking along similar lines.
They told me that they do not expect the enemy to negotiate or to modify his
program in less than two years. Rather, they expect the enemy to continue to
expand and to increase his activity. They expressed agreement with us that
the key to success is pacification and that so far pacification has failed.
They agree that we need clarification of GVN and US roles and that the bulk

A
a

88 TOP SECRET - Sen

u
Q

+

itive
