Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

prevent Hanoi from maintaining substantial infiltration
if it chose? Moreover, some facets of it contain danger-
ous risks.

C. Thus the Critical Variable is in the South! The
greatest opportunity for decisive gains in the next 12-18
months lies in accelerating the erosion of the VC in
South Vietnam, and in building a viable alternative with
attractive power. Let's assume that the NVA could replace
its losses. I doubt that the VC could. They are now the
"weak sisters" of the enemy team. The evidence is not
conclusive, but certainly points in this direction.
Indeed, the NVA strategy in I Corps seems designed to take
pressure off the VC in the South. 67/

This was the first time that Komer, whose preoccupation was pacification,
had seriously questioned the utility of more bombing. Apparently the
McNamara analysis was reaching even the more determined members of the
White House staff.

A different view of the bombing was presented to the
President, however, by General Westmoreland on April 27. He had returned
from Vietnam to argue in favor of his troop requests and for a consid-
erable expansion of the war, as well as to appear before Congress and in
public to strengthen support for the President's war policy. In his
conversation with.the President on the 27th he stated, "I am frankly dis-
mayed at even the thought of stopping the bombing program." 68/ General
Wheeler in the same conversation, however, went even farther, taking the
initiative to urge the closing of the ports as the next logical step
against the DRV. But in addition he suggested that U.S. troops be
authorized to extend the war into the Laotian and Cambodian sanctuaries
and that we consider the “possible invasion of North Vietnam. We may
wish to take offensive action against the DRV with ground troops." 69/
The President remained skeptical to say the least. When Westmoreland
spoke to Congress the following day he mentioned the bombing only in
passing as a reprisal for VC terror and depradation in the South.

Meanwhile, the Principles continued their deliberations.
They met on May 1 although there is no record of what transpired in
their discussions. The only available paper for the meeting is one that
Bill Bundy wrote for Secretary Katzenbech. Bundy's paper offered a fairly
optimistic view of the overall prospects for the coming six months:

Over-All Estimate. If we go on as we are doing, if
the political process in the South comes off well, and if
+he Chinese do not settle down, I myself would reckon
that by the end of 1967 there is at least a 50-50 chance
that a favorable tide will be running really strongly in
the South, and that Hanoi will be very discouraged.

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
