Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

EGRET

The High Commissioner apnarently believed that h
prompt ratification of his sgreement be the Freneh Cs

following which, Eao Dai would return to Indochina, Se wet ne;

for the susplementary agreements could es

returned to Paris at a particularly difficul

Govermmont was faced with gfroving internal dissension and: oppos

within the Assemblye The Socialist ae Confer

swing to the left and voted a resolution favo ecot tiations with

Ho Chi Minh. Colonialist and ceuesese ike grougs in Indochina and’

France began an active campaign against the me @'Along agreement as -

the first step in throws ings avy the mpare In the circumstances, ths

_ Bovermnent was naturally - Felucts uns «to take up a problem which might
woll result in its overthrow by the Assembly and which eppcared le

urgent than other serious internal and imsernat oe sroblems. After

the Schuminn Cabinet finally fell, the shortlived } Brie Cabinet vas

even less onEee to face a debate on Indochina.

bagir
G momens

Nierle

ae

‘he n the long scheduled inte rpolation on Indochina finally cans

up on the agenda, the Prine Minister asked thaw the debate be post~

noned indefinitely, but indicated the government's approvel of iM.
Bollaert's policy and the Baie d'Along protecol and announced that o
vote in favor of adjournment would be, considered as approving this
policy. A sudstantial majority was obtained after a brief debate on
tho ad journme ont motion vhich indicated general approval of the Baie
d'Alone protocol by all parties except tho Comnunists, but consider-
able differences of opinion as to its interpretation and methods of
applications ‘The Socialists in particular were embarrassed by the

party directive mentioned above.

at

‘ He Bollacrt re pene to Indochina bren
fessing to be completely satisfied with the uh
convinced that Bao Dai would return, and the lementation of tho

thing optimism and pro-
SSO
inp
Baic ad! Along protocol could proceed immediately. This optimistic
i
anSz:

mbly*s action and

facado crumbled quickly. Bao Dai lost no timo in moking it clear

that he was not roturning until a formal agre it had been signed
and ratified by the French Government, not ane covering the princi-
plos of the Bais d'Along protocol; but the reserved ubjects Paae for
futere negotiations sure ana public statements of Xuan and his

the native press showed that they were in no

ministers “and articles 3
eae handling of the matter by the French
i

way satisfie = vee th

i 8

“Governments. The loenl colonialist press proclaimed a. defeat fo
Bolleert and took pains to point out that 3 untbion in Indo-
china was illezsl and unconstitutional and that, in particular, no
change could take place in the political stat ws “Ohe ae nehina withons
formal Assembly action, sinc ehinchine Ranicin and

e Cy nen
Aman, is a French colony and #rench so

MPLS TS

Ma Peas soon let it be known that he would not request a
further i rm of office, which expired September 50.
he reds Vita ok MY bt his © tO retry : is z

7 1 nA
elections

rersgons

~ RECRET

CL wih =a

NY Ba

