Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

which favorable to growth communism. Furthermore, Ho seems
quite capable of retaining and even strengthening his grip

on Indochina with no outside assistance other than continuing
procession of French puppet govts."

In the fall of 1948, the Office of Intelligence Research in the Depart-
ment of State conducted a survey of communist influence in Southeast
Asia. Evidence of Kremlin-directed conspiracy was found in virtually
all countries except Vietnam:

."Since December 19, 1946, there have been continuous
conflicts between French forces and the nationalist govern-
ment of Vietnam. This government is a coalition in which
avowed communists hold influential positions. Although the
French admit the influence of this government, they have
consistently refused to deal with its leader, Ho Chi Minh,
on the grounds that he is a communist.

"To date the Vietnam press and radio have not adopted an
anti-American position. It is rather the French colonial
press that has been strongly anti-American and has freely
accused the U.S. of imperialism in Indochina to the point of
approximating the official Moscow position. Although the
Vietnam radio has been closely watched for a new position
toward the U.S., no change has appeared so far. Nor does there
seem to have been any split within the coalition government of
Vietnam....

"Evaluation. If there is a Moscow-directed conspiracy
in Southeast Asia, Indochina is an anomoly so far. Possible
explanations are:

1. No rigid directives have been issued by Moscow.

2. The Vietnam government considers that it has no
rightest elements that must be purged.

3. The Vietnam Communists are not subservient to
the foreign policies pursued by Moscow.

4. A special dispensation for the Vietnam government
has been arranged in Moscow.

"Of these possibilities, the first and fourth seem most likely."
(Tab 2).
The collapse of the Chinese Nationalist government in 1949 sharp-

ened American apprehensions over communist expansion in the Far East,
and hastened U.S. measures to counter the threat posed by Mao's China.

A-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
