Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By; NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"DEPT still hopeful Bao Dai will succeed in gaining in-
creasing popular support at Ho's expense and our policy remains
essentially the same; to encourage him and to urge FR toward
further concessions.

"The start made by Bao Dai, the qualities exhibited by hin,
and his initial reception seem to have been better than we
might have anticipated, even discounting optimism of FR sources.
Transfer of power apparently well received. FR success in dis-
arming and interning fleeing CHI Nationalists without serious
intervention to the present by CHI COMMIES also encouraging.

"However, more recently, marked opposition has been encoun-
tered which demonstrates at least that Bao Dai's popular support
has not yet widened. Increased Viet Minh MIL activity is dis-
quieting. This CLD be special effort by Ho, timed to coincide
with transfer of power and the arrival of CHI COMMIES armies on
frontier, and to precede Bangkok Conference, or CLD be evidence
of increasing strength reinforced by hopes of CHI COMMIE support,
direct or indirect.

"DEPT has as yet no knowledge of negotiations between Ho and
Mao groups although radio intercept of New China News Agency
release of JAN 17 indicates that Ho has messaged the 'GOVTS of
the world' that ‘the GOVE of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
is the only legal GOVT of the Vietnam people’ and is ‘ready to
establish DIPL relations with any GOVI which WLD be willing to
cooperate with her on the basis of equality and mutual respect
of national sovereignty and territory so as to defend world
peace and democracy. Ho's radio making similar professions....

"Nature and timing of recognition of Bao Dai now under
consideration here and with other GOVTS...." 82/ d
¥
First the Chinese Communists, and then the Soviets recognized the
DRV- On 29 January 1950, the French National Assembly approved legis-
lation granting autonomy to the State of Vietnam. On February 1, 1950,
Secretary of State Acheson made the following public statement:

"The recognition by the Kremlin of Ho Chi Minh's commun-
ist movement in Indochina comes as a surprise. The Soviet
acknowledgment of this movement should remove any illusions
as to the ‘nationalist’ nature of Ho Chi Minh's aims and
reveals Ho in his true colors as the mortal enemy of native
independence in Indochina.

"Although timed in an effort to cloud the transfer of

sovereignty by France to the legal Governments of Laos, Cambodia
and Vietnam, we have every reason to believe that those legal

A-59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
