Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"In Viet-Nam, the situation at first appeared less critical, and
the initial actions of the Kennedy administration were confined to an
increase in our military aid and a small increase of a few hundred men
in our military training personnel, a breach--it may be argued--to this
extent of the limits of the Geneva accords but fully justified in
response to the scale of North Vietnamese violation of the basic non-
interference provisions.

"Although the details somewhat obscured the broad pattern, I think
any fair historian of the future must conclude that as early as the
spring of 1961 President Kennedy had in effect taken a seventh United
States policy decision: that we would continue to be deeply engaged in
Southeast Asia, in South Viet-Nam and under new ground rules, in Laos
as well.

ere:

"No, neither President Kennedy nor any senior policymaker, then or
later, believed the Soviet Union was still united with Communist China
and North Viet-Nam in a single sweeping Communist threat to the world.
But President Kennedy did believe two other things that had, and still
have, a vital bearing on our policy.

"First, he believed that a weakening in our basic resolve to help
in Southeast Asia would tend to encourage separate Soviet pressures in
other areas.

"James Reston has stated, on the basis of contemporary conversations
with the President, that this concern specifically related to Khrushchev's
aggressive designs on Berlin, which were pushed hard all through 1961 and
not laid to rest till after the Cuban missile crisis of 1962. At any
rate, President Kennedy clearly did believe that failure to keep the high
degree of commitment we had in Viet-Nam and Southeast Asia had a bearing
on the validity of our commitments elsewhere. As Theodore Sorensen has
summarized it...: '...this nation's commitment (in South Viet-Nam) in
January, 1961...was not one that President Kennedy felt he could abandon
without undesirable consequences throughout Asia and the world.'

"Secondly, President Kennedy believed that the Communist Chinese
were a major threat to dominate Southeast Asia and specifically that a
United States ‘withdrawal in the case of Viet-Nam and in the case of
Thailand might mean a collapse in the entire area.' Indeed, President
Kennedy in one statement expressly supported the ‘domino theory.'

"My own view, based on participation and subsequent discussion with
others, is that the underlying view of the relation between Viet-Nam
and the threat to Southeast Asia was clear and strongly believed through-
out the top levels of the Kennedy administration. We knew, as we have
always known, that the action against South Viet-Nam reflected deeply held
ambitions by Hanoi, to unify Viet-Nam under Communist control and that

D-115
