Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On September 30, their last day in Vietnam, McNemara and Teylor, together
with Lodge, met with Vice President Tho. Tho said that the U.S., after
Teylor's report in 1961, had responded to the Vietnam situation promptly
‘and efficiently, but that recently we had failed to use our strength and
influence intelligently to prevent the current political deterioration. 117/
But he had no methods to suggest. Later he sharply questioned the success
of the Strategic Hamlet Program, and said that increased Viet Cong strength
had to be attributed to widespread peasant disaffection with the government.
These views, from the man most often mentioned in U.S. circles as an al-
ternative to Diem, coming at the end of the visit as they did, must have
had an important influence on Mclilamara's conclusions. Later that day the
party left Vietnam to return home.

During the briefings for Metiamara, Lodge had raised again his doubts
about the efficacy of aid suspension as a lever against Diem, but had also
expressed his concern that the foreign aid bill would be penalized in
Congress for Diem's repressions. 118/ Lodge reiterated in his cables to
Washington during the visit his belief that an aid suspension could
poomerang and alienate the population as well as the regime. 119/ Aware,
no doubt, that an aid suspension was a potential recommendation of the
mission, Brent went on record against it, too. 120/ Both views were
important because McNamara and Taylor had been specifically charged by
the President with examining ways to make our aid serve our foreign policy
goals, and their briefing papers included a program~by~program considera-
tion of the impact of aid suspension prepared by AID-Washington. 1ai/

After a one-day stop in Honolulu to prepare their report, McNamara
and Taylor arrived back in Washington on October 2 and promptly met with
the President and the NSC. Their report concluded that the "military
campaign has made great progress and continues to progress." 122/ But
it warned that the serious political tensions in Saigon and the increas-
ing unpopularity of Diem and Nhu could abet the then limited restiveness
of some ARVN officers and erode the favorable military trends. They
reported no evidence of a successful coup in the making, and felt that
U.S. pressure would probably only further harden the regime's attitudes.
Nevertheless, "unless such pressures are exerted, they (Diem-I{hu) are
almost certain to continue past patterns of behavior.” 123/

The report's military recommendations were that General Harkins should
review the war effort with Diem with a view toward its successful conclu-
sion in I, IT, and III Corps by the end of 196 and in the Delta by the
end of 1955. This would necessitate: (a) a shift in military emphasis and
strength to the Delta; (b) an increased tempo of military activity
throughout the country; (c) an emphasis on "clear and hold operations";

(d) a consolidation of the Strategic Hamlet Program with the emphasis on
security; and (e) the fleshing out of combat units and better training

and arms for the hamlet militia. It was further proposed that an announce-
ment be made of the planned withdrawal of 1,000 U.S. troops by the end of

33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
