Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Highlands. The role of the US forces was to assist the GVN in expanding
its control over these areas. However, primary emphasis was placed upon
providing "heavy assault strength against VC forces and bases. The —
division of effort between RVNAF and US/Third Country forces clarified
as follows:

The overall concept...visualizes the employment of US,
Third Country and RVNAF forces for the basic mission of
search and destroy, and participation in clearing and secur-
ing operations and civic actions plus the defense of govern-
mental centers and critical areas.

Us/Third Country forces will not ordinarily be employed
throughout securing operations except in areas contiguous to
their bases. The Vietnamese JGS is in general agreement with
this concept and with the concept of weighting the effort
wherein the bulk of operations against the VC forces and bases
outside the secure areas will be undertaken by us/Thira Country
and RVNAF general reserve forces, while the bulk of RVN forces
will be committed to the defense of GVN installations and
securing operations. 29/

interestingly enough, a note of growing disenchantment with the
Vietnamese capabilities appeared in this memorandum, when it was explained
that "complex, detailed US conceived programs may not be picked up and
executed by the Vietnamese [therefore COMUSMACY now deals with them in

terms of simple tasks and short step by step objectives."

D. Overall Strategy Reviewed_as Conflict in SVN Steps Up

Meanwhile in November two other things were taking place which would
have a significant effect on Phase II.

1. MeNamara's DPM on Increasing the Pressure

In early November a Draft Memorandum for the President was in the
works which addressed the problem of how best to conduct the overall effort
in Vietnam. 30/ In this memorandum, Mr. McNamara discussed the relative
merits of varying combinations of a pause in the air war against North

' Vietnam, gradual intensification of the ROLLING THUNDER program, and

earrying out Phase Ii deployments. This memorandum seems to mark one of
the key decision points in the growing involvement of U.S. in Vietnam.

The Phase I deployments appeared to have arrested the deterioration of the
situation in Vietnam, and it now became feasible to consider what kind of
outcome we might be able to get from the present situation. ‘The analysis
in the memorandum was that roughly sticking with the present situation
would lead to a “compromise outcome" which would very likely be unstable,
difficult to sell domestically, and damaging to "U.S. political effective-
ness. on the world scene." Therefore, the course of action to follow was

uit TOP SECRET =~ Sensitive
