Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

II. A. 1. U.S. POLICY AND THE BAO DAT REGIME

1. The Bao Dai Solution
a. The French Predicament

French perceptions of the conflict which broke out in December,
1946, between their forces in Indochina and the Viet Minh forces of the
Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) began to alternate between boundless
optimism and unbridled gloom. In May, 1947, Minister of War Coste-Floret
announced in Paris that: "There is no military problem any longer in
Indochina...the success of French arms is complete." 1/ Within six
months, though ambitious armored, amphibious, and airborne drives had
plunged into the northern mountains and along the Annam coast, Viet Minh
sabotage and raids along lines of communication had mounted steadily, and
Paris had come to realize that France had lost the military initiative.
In the meantime, the French launched political forays similarly ambitious
and equally unproductive. Leon Pignon, political adviser to the French
Commander in Indochina, and later High Commissioner, wrote in January,
1947, that:

"Our objective is clear: to transpose to the field
of Vietnamese domestic politics the quarrel we have with
the Viet Minh, and to involve ourselves as little as
possible in the campaigns and reprisals which ought to
be the work of the native adversaries of that party." 2/

Within a month, an emissary journeyed into the jungle to deliver to Ho
Chi Minh's government demands tantamount to unconditional surrender.
About the same time, French representatives approached Bao Dai, the
former Emperor of Annam, with proposals that he undertake to form a
Vietnamese government as an alternate to Ho Chi Minh's. Being unable
to force a military resolution, and having foreclosed meaningful nego-
tiations with Ho, the French turned to Bao Dai as their sole prospect
for extrication from the growing dilemma in Vietnam.

b. The Ha Long Bay Agreement, 1948

Bao Dai's mandarinal court in Hue, Annam, had been little
more than an instrument of French colonial policy, and -- after the
occupation by Japan -- of Japanese policy. Bao Dai had become Emperor
at the age of l2, in 1925, but did not actually ascend the throne until
1932, after education in France. In August, 1945, when the Viet Minh
arrived in Hue, he abdicated in favor of Ho's Democratic Republic of
Vietnam, and accepted the post of "Supreme Adviser" to the new state.

In 1946, he left Vietnam, and went to Hong Kong. There,he found himself
solicited not only by French representatives, but by the DRV, who sought
him to act on their behalf with the French.

A-5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
