Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

they would be operating in remote and relatively unpopulated areas, the
same justification used to generate State support for large operations

in the border regions. But “remote™ did not necessarily mean “remote,"
as the memorandum explained:

",.-But even these areas, which do exist in the delta,
are less remote and more populated than areas in the highlands
where large US combat forces are currently committed. More-
over, the unpopulated stretches between populated areas are
far smaller in size in the delta than in the highlands, and
therefore there is greater danger that US forces operating
in unpopulated areas could be drawn in the populated areas.
Nor is it entirely certain that US forces will restrict their
missions to search-and-destroy operations against Viet Cong
mainforces. Indeed, it is to be expected that some US units
will eventually participate in pacification, as in Danang for
example, in order to protect the perimeters of US base facil-
ities or encampnents. As the size of the US force increases,
it would be logical for MACV to attempt to expand these
defense perimeters regardless of the proximity of populated
areas. There is also the possibility that US commanders
will be inclined to commit their units to pacification
simply on the grounds that the Vietnamese are not doing the
job efficiently.

"Finally, although it is generally accepted that a mili-
tary stalemate has existed for sometime in the Mekong delta, it
is by no means certain that the GVN's inability to shift the
balance against Viet Cong forces in the area is the result of
lack of manpower resources. The basic problem is the manner
in which ARVN forces are deployed in the delta rather than in
the mimber of ARVN forces committed there. The current ratio
of ARVN to Viet Cong mainforces in Corps IV is already more than
2:1, better than in any other Corps area, and, if plans to
reorient ARVN to pacification are implemented, the ratio of
combat forces should theoretically improve in ARVIN's favor since
more ARVN units would be committed against the Viet Cong for
greater periods of time." 39/

In effect, the presence of large numbers of active U.S, units would
not only risk civilian disruption and casualties, but may tempt U.S.
units to "moonlight" in pacification, possibly alienating, or at least
relieving the ARVN primarily charged with the mission. It was in vogue
in the United States at the time to number as one of the causes of ARVN
combat ineffectiveness and lack of-aggressiveness the rapid assumption
by the United States of the major combat role, leading the Vietnamese to
"let George do it." Katzenbach's staff seemed to sense the same danger
in "too much" U.S, pacification.

17 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
