Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

"As we enter the New Year of 1964, I want to wish you,
your revolutionary government, and your people full success
_ in the long and arduous war which you ave waging so tenaciously
and bravely against the Viet Cong forces directed and supported
by the Commnist regime in Hanoi...0ur aims are, I know, identi-
cal with yours: to enable your government to protect its people
from the acts of terror perpetrated by Communist insurgents
from the North. As the forces of your government become in-
creasingly capable of dealing with this aggression, American
military personnel in South Viet-Nam can be progressively with-
drawn.

“The United States Government shares the view of your
government that ‘neutralization’ of South Viet-Nam is unaccepta-
ble. As long as the Communist regime in North Viet-Nam persists
in its aggressive policy, neutralization of South Viet-Nam would
only be another name for a Communist take-over. Peace will re-
turn to your country just as soon as the suthorities in Hanoi
cease and desist from their terrorist aggression."

In keeping with the attitude of concern but not alarm about the
GVN's conduct of the war, SecState's cable transmitting the President's Jd
message directed Lodge to offer the following eleven points of confidential
advice on behalf of the President:

"1. It is vitally important to act now to reverse the
trend of the war as rapidly as possible.

2. We trust that personnel changes are now virtually
complete and that both military commanders and province chiefs
can now get down to the job at hand.

3. We hope that General Minh can designate a Chief of
. the Joint General Staff and a commander of the IIT Corps who
will have no other responsibilities and can devote themselves
exclusively to these mamnoth tasks.

hk. We assume that, as General Don promised Secretary
McNamara, .the GVN will make available sufficient troops in
the six key provinces in the III Corps to give its forces the
necessary numerical superiority.

5. We have been glad to learn of the stress which General.
| Minh places on small-unit actions, particularly in the Mekong
Delta. We hope that equal stress will be placed on night
actions, both for ambushing Viet Cong and for relieving villages
under abtack, To win the support of the population it needs
: te be emphatically demonstrated that the Viet Cong are being
beaten precisely at their own game.

6. We consider it extremely important that the necessary
civil-military coordinating machinery for clear-and-hold operations

3 TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
