Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

What conditions were proper was the subject of considerable disagreement
and confusion. Tactically, the U.S. desired to respond to North Vietnamese
acts rather than to appear to initiate a wider war. But the strategic
purposes of bombing in NVN were in dispute. The initiation of an air
campaign was deferred early in 1964 as a prod to GVN reform. By 1965

such initiation was argued for as a support for GVN morale. Some adherents
claimed that bombing in NVN could destroy the DRV's will to support the
war in South Vietnam. Others expected it to raise the price of North
Vietnam's effort and to demonstrate U.S. commitment but not to be decisive
in and of itself. The only indisputable facts seem to be that the long
planning and debate over expanding the air war, the claimed benefits
(although disputed), and the relatively low cost and risk of an air
campaign as compared to the commitment of U.S. ground forces combined to
indicate that the bombing of NVN would be the next step taken if nothing
else worked.

Nothing else was, in fact, working. General Khanh's government was
reorganized in November 196) to give it the appearance of civilian leader-
Ship. Khanh finally fell in mid-February 1965 and was replaced by the
Quat regime. Harlier that month the insurgents had attacked the U.S. base
at Pleiku, killing eight Americans. Similar attacks late in 1964 had
brought about recommendations for reprisal attacks. These had been dis-
approved because of timing. On this occasion, however, the President
approved the FLAMING DART retaliatory measures.

Presidential assistant MeGeorge Bundy was in SVN when the Viet Cong
attacked the U.S. facilities in Pleiku. He recommended to the President
that, in addition to retaliatory measures, the U.S. initiate phase II of
the military measures against NVN. The fall of the Khanh regime a week
dater resurrected the worst U.S. fears of GVN political instability. The
decision to bomb north was made, announced on 28 February, and strikes
initiated on 2 March. A week later, after a request from Generals Taylor
and Westmoreland which was debated little if at all, two battalion landing
teams of Marines went ashore at DaNang to assume responsibility for security
of the air base there. U.S. ground combat units were in an active theater
on the mainland of Asia for the first time since the Korean War. This ‘
may not have been the Rubicon of the Johnson administration's Vietnam policy
but it was a departure of immeasurable significance. The question was no
longer one of whether U.S. units should be deployed to SVN; rather, it was
one of how many units should be deployed and for what strategic purposes.

The Army Chief of Staff, General Harold K. Johnson, went to Saigon
in mid-March and recommended that bombing restrictions be lifted and that
auU.s. division be deployed to SVN for active combat. General Taylor
strongly opposed an active combat -- as distinct from base security -- role
for U.S. ground forces. But the President decided on 1 April to expand the
bombing, to add an air wing in SVN, and to send two more Marine battalions
ashore. These decisions were announced internally on 6 April in NSAM 328.

General Taylor continued to voice strong opposition to a ground combat
role for U.S. forces but his voice was drowned out by two developments.

vi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
