Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

on their request, Ho Chi Minh was arrested by the British in Hong Kong.
Attempts at party reorganization in 1932 were met by renewed police re-
pression, and not until 1933 were communists again permitted political
activity of any sort. The party, however, did revive, establishing a
new foothold in more permissive Cochinchina, under Tran Van Giau

(Figure 3). 8/ ‘ran there formed the League Against Imperialism, a
front organization specifically non-violent in its program designed to
attract support from the political center and right. In 1935, following
the Comintern Seventh World Congress, the ICP centered itself on Saigon,
and launched an Indochinese Congress "Democratic Front," paralleling the
communists’ Popular Front movement in metropolitan France. Almost imme-
diately, however, Trotskyite elements, advocating “permanent revolution,"
split with the ICP leadership, and began to press an independent, more
revolutionary line.

The Trotskyites were divided within themselves into the "Struggle"
Group and the "October" Group, differing mainly in the degree to which
they countenanced cooperation with the ICP. In 1937 a Trotskyite candi-
date, Tu Thu Thau, together with an ICP leader, Nguyen Van Tao, was
elected to the Saigon Municipal Council. By 1939 Trotskyite elements
had drawn together into one party, and that year a Trotskyite slate won
80% of votes cast in a Cochinchinese election -- a severe defeat for the
ICP which led Nguyen Van Tao to set up another communist splinter party.

The divisions within the communist movement of Vietnam during the
1930's, as well as the ICP willingness to subordinate its doctrinal ab-
horrence of both the French and the bourgeoisie for short term goals,
are evident in the following report on "The Party's Line in the Period
of the Democratic Front (1936-1939)" submitted by Nguyen Ai Quoc (alias
of Ho Chi Minh) in July, 1939:

"1. For the time being, the Party cannot put forth too
high a demand (national independence, parliament, etc.). To
do so is to enter the Japanese fascists’ scheme. It should
only claim for democratic rights, freedom of organization, free- r
dom of assembly, freedom of press and freedom of speech, general
amnesty for all political detainees, and struggle for the legali-
zation of the Party.

"2, To reach this goal, the Party must strive to organize
a broad Democratic National Front. This Front does not embrace
only Indochinese people but also progressive French residing
in Indochina; not only toiling people but also the national
bourgeoisie.

"3, The Party must assume a wise, flexible attitude with
the bourgeoisie, strive to draw it into the Front, win over
the elements that can be won over and neutralize those which
can be neutralized. We must by all means avoid leaving then
outside the Front, lest they should fall into the hands of the
enemy of the revolution and increase the strength of the re-
actionaries.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-15
