Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By; NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Westmoreland remained apprehensive about the absence of a sizeable
reserve located within quick reaction distance in the Pacific, asking
McNaughton to stress to the Secretary that he badly needed such a "Corps
Contingency Force." He reiterated his desire for a strategy devoted to
building "a balanced, powerful force that we can sustain indefinitely,"
&@ posture that would be of critical importance in communicating our
resolve to the North. 60/

On the bombing, Westmoreland favored reducing restrictions on targets
("more flexibility"), but he could not make a good case for the effects an
expanded RT program would have on his operations. McNaughton cited a CIA
study showing that even with enlarged strikes, the enemy could supply
Several times the amount of material required to support a much increased
level of combat in the South. Pressed, Westmoreland observed that "I'm
not responsible for the bombing program. Admiral Sharp is. So I haven't
spent much time on it. But I asked a couple of my best officers to look
into it and they came up with the recommendations I gave you." 61/

The barrier idea appeared to be evolving as a substitute for some
ROLLING THUNDER activity -- and Westmoreland "shuddered" at this. Some
of his earlier resistance, founded on a belief that MACV resources in SVN
would be drawn down to man the barrier trace, seemed to have softened. In
away, he seemed to sense that the NVA was providing the justification for
more U.S. troops in the area in much more eloquent fashion than he ever
could -- the threats in I CTZ, to Conthien and Khe Sanh, embryonic as
they were, would provide impulse for additional troops well beyond the
artificial program dates established.

Revolutionary Development figured heavily in his plans, but he pre-
dicted that it would be July 1967 before the new orientation of ARVN to
pacification would be in full effect. (He cited as a rough figure 75%
ARVN and 25% of US devoted to RD.)

Westmoreland did not owtline the same picture of urgency as had the
JCS memoranda. (The fact he was really not set on some figures may suggest
that he (and his staff) were looking at "ballpark" figures and had not
really analyzed the new outputs they would produce.) Explaining why at
that time he soft-pedalled the threat developing in the border region
sanctuaries and I CTZ% is difficult. He certainly had been concerned
earlier, even telling Lodge that the new enemy actions possibly made a
re-evaluation of basic strategy necessary. Possibly his formal warnings
(such as his 20 September message to Sharp) were exaggerated, or the
threat had diminished. Events were to prove neither was so. Probably
he missed an excellent opportunity to put his arguments for more troops
before the President, and then felt it best to fight the battle for more
troops "through channels," -- the CINCPAC-JCS funnel.

Nevertheless, his views surely had an important bearing on Mr.
McNamara's estimates in early November. The senior field commander was

98 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
