Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to the Viet Minh even though still occupied by Vietnamese troops, and

the setting up of a date for national elections by a military command
without Vietnamese agreement. He concluded: "...the Government of the
State of Vietnam wishes the Conference to take note of the fact that

it reserves its full freedom of action in order to safeguard the sacred
right of the Vietnamese people to its territorial unity, national inde-
pendence, and freedom.” After other delegation leaders had indicated con-
sent to the military agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities and Final
Declaration, Tran Van Do spoke again. He requested the Conference to incor-
porate in the Declaration the following text:

"The Conference takes note of the Declaration
of the Government of the State of Vietnam undertaking:
to make and support every effort to re-establish a real
and. lasting peace in Vietnam; not to use force to re-
sist the procedures for carrying the cease-fire into
effect, in spite of the objections and reservations
that the State of Vietnam has expressed, especially
in its final statement." 31/

Tran Van Do's final effort was dismissed by Eden (as chairman), who urged
that, the Final Declaration having already been printed, the conferees

take note of Do's statement. Nevertheless, Do's comments then and previ-
ously clearly established his government's opposition to the Geneva Accords.
That the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement was signed by the French and
Viet Minh military commands, the main belligerents, accommodated the fact
that the GVN did not recognize the political existence of the DRV. The
French, correctly anticipating adverse reactions from the GVN, avoided seek-
ing GVN official consent to the armistice. The French also knew that the
GVN would never accede to a partition arrangement, and formal. approval

- of the armistice by the military commands removed the possibility of GVN

obstruction of a cease-fire.
h. GVN Unable to Influence Outcome

The French had good reason for avoiding communication with
the Vietnamese during the last days of the Geneva Conference: scheduled
elections were prominent among the concessions that France had to make
in order to obtain a settlement at all; and the reunification of Vietnam
was deferred by the device of the promised plebiscite. As the Conference
drew to a close, and time was running out for the French, they traded on
the Viet Minh desire for the future "integrity of the Vietnam state” in
order to salvage what they could from their own tottering situation. The
French finally agreed to Vietnam-wide elections within two years. As in
the partition agreements, the GVN was not able to influence that decision
to any appreciable degree. In the larger sense, GVN aspirations were sacri-
ficed to the position of France versus its Communist antagonist. Each’
side was determined not to allow all of Vietnam to fall into the hands of
the other. France agreed to elections, knowing -- as the USSR and China
also knew -- that elections might never be held. 32/

B-14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
