Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

After the internal turmoil of 1956-1957, the DRV's domestic
decks were cleared for more direct action abroad. Internal dissension
died down as the regime effectively suppressed or mollified the .farmers
and the Catholics, the epicenters of discontent. Also, privations
afflicting the society stemming from the war and the regroupment were
somewhat alleviated.

3. Support from Abroad

The DRV, within its own resources, probably could not
have achieved or maintained its independence, and it certainly could not
look for reunification without foreign support. During the period 1950-
1954, the Viet Minh had accepted significant amounts of foreign aid,
especially Chinese aid, 70/ and the Geneva Agreements were in large
measure the product of the diplomacy of the Soviet Union and the Chinese
People's Republic, rather than their Vietnamese allies. 72/ The DRV,
as it emerged from Geneva in 1954, consisted of a society torn by the
war and undergoing the trauma of a 900,000 person exodus, a food deficit,
a modest and war-damaged industrial plant, and a drastic shortage of
technicians and public administrators. Internal and external defense
were almost immediately a principal policy aim -- certainly through the
1956 peasant rebellions, and their consequences. Whatever extraterri-
torial ambitions the DRV may have had, these were necessarily subordinate
to survival as a state. In the view of the Lao Dong leaders, apparently
even the realization of even that minimal goal hinged upon the DRV's
receiving substantial military assistance from abroad. 72/ Additional.
foreign aid dependency stemming from the broad domestic reform programs
which the DRV undertook -- discussed above -- further impelled Ho Chi
Minh and his government to turn to the Chinese and the Russians. The
DRV's dependence upon its communist allies increased markedly over the decade
following Geneva.

a. Foreign Military Assistance

The DRV had sound reason to maintain a large military
establishment in the aftermath of Geneva. The presence of the French
forces in South Vietnam through 1956, and the US-aided GVN military forces
thereafter, taken together with the GVN's claims to DRV territory and
people, GVN diplomatic hostility, and GVN belligerent propaganda, probably
justified a large army for national defense. 73/ Moreover, internal
security placed heavy demands upon DRV forces, at first to deal with the
exigencies of establishing DRV control, pushing the land Reform Campaign,
and coping with the refugee problem. Large forces were also needed in
1956 to suppress uprisings, particularly in the predominantly Catholic
rural areas. Th/ Beyond simply security, however, in orthodox communist
fashion, the DRV regarded the armed forces as a primary instrument for
indoctrination of the masses and for support of other Lao Dong Party
programs; they also served as a reserve labor force to meet agricultural
erises. 75/ And-the foreign policy of the DRV required a military instru-
ment of extensive capabilities in insurgency operations -- subversion,
infiltration, and guerrille warfare.

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
