Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that would be disastrous in shaking the faith and resolve of the non-
Communist nations who rely on the United States for major help against
Communist aggression. In that event, he saw little possibility for
effective U.S. reassurances. 49/

The impact of these criticisms can be seen in the Working
Group's final assessment of U.S. interests in Southeast Asia. In ex-
plaining the need to consider a fall-back position, the statement
stressed the need merely to assess "the drawbacks" associated with
it. Lending to this judgment were admissions that "there is some
chance that South Vietnan might come apart under us whatever course
of action we pursue” and "strong military action necessarily involves
some risks of an enlarged and even conceivably major conflict in Asia."
Then followed the statement:

"These problems force us to weight in our analysis the
drawbacks end possibilities of success of various options,
including the drawbacks of accepting only the fall~back
objectives set forth below. (Underlining added)

Missing was the earlier draft's reference to potential costs and risks
involved in pursuing current objectives. Missing also was any sugges-
tion that the Administration might find some advantage in seeking ean
alternative to these objectives. 50/

The Working Group went on to assess, in terms almost identical
to those in the initial draft, the likely consequence of Communist con-
trol of South Vietnam for different world areas of interest to the
United States. The group saw important distinctions between the likely
impact on U.S. interests in Asia end those in the world at lerge. For
the latter, the most Significant variable was seen es the depree to
which adverse developments in Southeast Asia might produce domestic
public revulsion against all U.S. commitments overseas:

"Within NATO (except for Greece and Turkey to some degree),
the loss of South Vietnam probably would not shake the faith
and resolve to face the threat of Communist aggression or con-
fidence in us for major help. This is so provided we carried
out eny military actions in Southeast Asia without taking
forces from NATO and without generating a wave of "isolation-
ism” in the U.S. In other areas of the world, either the
nature of the Commmist threat or the degree of U.S. commit-
ment or both are so radically different than in Southeast Asia
that it is lifficult to assess the impact. The question would
be whether the U.S. was in fact able to go on with its present
policies." 51/ i

For Asia, other than Southeast Asia, the Working Grouo's assessment went
as follows:

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
