Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The JCS agreed with COMUSMACV citing objections which revolved
around that they believed were two fundamental disadvantages:

"The increased anti-infiltration capability that would
be established would be located in northeastern South Viet-
nam where North Vietnamese infiltration has been minimal.

"The diversion of resources required for execution of
the plan would reduce the emphasis and impetus of essential
on-going programs now approved for the conduct of thr war
in South Vietnam." 39/

Furthermore, they observed that such diversion of resources and efforts
might come at a crucial point...

"The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that military
actions now in progress in Southeast Asia, in support of
the concepts and courses of action approved by them are
demonstrating substantial successes toward national objec-
tives and that if expanded and pressed with continued
vigor, these successes will accelerate. The Joint Chiefs
of Staff, less the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, conclude
that any additional resources that might be provided can be
used to a greater advantage in executing CINCPAC's concept
of operations for Southeast Asia." 4o/

There was no solid consensus among high officers on the barrier
issue. In late February, General Wheeler wrote in reply to JCSM 97-67
that he believed, contrary to COMUSMACV and JCS conclusions, that the
implementation of the PRACTICE NINE Plan might enhance rather than inhibit

“the flexibility available to COMUSMACV. He wrote:

",,-although I support much of the paper (JCSM 97-67,
PRACTICE NINE Requirements Plan), I disagree with the recom-
mendation that the plan not be approved for execution.

"Although I recognize that the eastern portion of the
DMZ does not now represent a major active infiltration corri-
dor, it does possess a substantial potential for the rapid
introduction of sizeable forces from the north; in fact, this
portion of the border area provides the guickest and most
trafficable routes from North Vietnam into South Vietnam.
Thus, an obstacle system impeding enemy capability to exer-
cise such an option seems to me to represent a prudent mili-
tary action.

"Again, while I recognize that the obstacle system
reflected in the COMUSMACY) plan may require an undesirable
diversion of in-country resources, it is not clear to me

0 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
