Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

any opportunity which would permit the unification of our
homeland in freedom, but it is out of the question for us
to consider any proposal from the Viet Minh if proof is not
given that they put the superior interests of the national
community above those of communism.”

Moreover, Diem spoke with some assurance of American backing,
for the U.S, had never pressed for the elections envisaged by the Settle-
ment. At the final session of Geneva, rather than joining with the
Conference delegates in the Final Declaration, the U.S. "observer,"

Under Secretary of State Walter Bedell Smith, had linked U.S. policy
vis-a-vis Vietnam to that for Korea, Taiwan and Germany in these terms: Buf

"In the case of nations now divided against their will,
we shall continue to seek to achieve unity through free elec-
tions supervised by the United Nations to insure that they
are conducted fairly."

Although the U.S. opposed elections in 1954 because Ho Chi
Minh would have then won them handily, 28/ the records of the National
Security Council and the Operations Coordinating Board of the summer of
1954 establishes that this government then nonetheless expected elections
eventually to be held in Vietnam. 29/ But, two major misapprehensions
were evident: (1) the U.S. planned through "political action" to ameli-
orate conditions in Southeast Asia to the point that elections would not
jeopardize its objective of survival for a "free" vietnam; and (2) the
U.S. estimated that France would usefully remain in Vietnam. By the
spring of 1955, although U.S. diplomacy had brought the Southeast Asia
Treaty Organization into being, and although Diem had with U.S. aid
weathered a number of severe political storms, the U.S. was less sanguine
that its "political action" would suffice, and that further French pres-
ence would be helpful. Accordingly, it began to look closely at the
conditions under which elections might be held, and urged that Vietnamese
do the same. One definition of terms acceptable to the U.S. was set
forth in a State Department memorandum of 5 May 1955, approved by Secre~-
tary Dulles: 30/

"The U.S. believes that the conditions for free elections
should be those which Sir Anthony Eden put forward and the
three Western Powers supported at Berlin in connection with
German reunification. The United States believes that the
Free Vietnamese should insist that elections be held under
conditions of genuine freedom; that safeguards be agreed to
assure this freedom before, after, and during elections and
that there be adequate guarantees for, among other things,
freedom of movement, freedom of presentation of candidates,
immunity of candidates, freedom from arbitrary arrest or
victimization, freedom of association or political meetings,
freedom of expression for all, freedom of the press, radio,
and free circulation of newspapers, secrecy of the vote, and
security of polling stations and ballot boxes."

6 TOP SECRET ~ SENSITIVE
