Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vis THE LONG ROAD TO DE-ESCAIATION ~~ AUGUST-DECEMBER 1967

After the decision on ROLLING THUNDER 57, the debate on the air
war against North Vietnam, particularly the public debate, entered a
last long phase of increasing acrimony on both sides. As he had been
throughout the war, President Johnson was once again caught in the
erossfire of his critics of the right and the left. The open-season
on Presidential war policy began in August with the high intensity
Senate Preparedness Subcommittee hearings where Senator Stennis and
his colleagues fired the first shots. In September, the embattled
President tried again for peace, capping his secret efforts with a
new public offer to Hanoi in a speech in San Antonio. The attempt
was unevailing and, under pressure from the military and the hawkish
elements of public and Congressional opinion, the President authorized
a selected intensification of the air war. The doves were not long
in responding. In October they staged a massive demonstration and
march on the Pentagon to oppose the war, there confronting specially
alerted troops in battle gear. A month later, Senator MeCarthy announced
himself as a peace candidate for the Presidency to oppose Lyndon Johnson
within his own party. By Christmas, however, the issue had subsided a
bit. Ambassador Bunker and General Westmoreland had both returned home
and spoken in public to defend the Administration's conduct of the war,
and reports from the field showed a cautious optimism. The stage was
thus set for the dramatic Viet Cong Tet offensive in January of the
new year, an assault that would have a traumatic impact on official
Washington and set in motion a re-evaluation of the whole American policy.

A. Senator Stennis Forces an Escalation
1. The Addendum to ROLLING THUNDER.

Sometime after his return from Vietnam in late July,
Secretary McNamara was informed by Senator Stennis that the Prepared-
ness Subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee intended to
conduct extensive hearings in August into the conduct of the air war
against North Vietnam. In addition to their intention to call the
Secretary, they also indicated that they would hear from all the top
military leaders involved in the ROLLING THUNDER program including
USCINCPAC, Admiral Sharp. The subcommittee had unquestionably set
out to defeat Mr. McNamara. Its members, Senators Stennis, Symington,
Jackson, Cannon, Byrd, Smith, Thurmond, and Miller, were known for
their hard-line views and militery sympathies. They were defenders
of "airpower" and had often aligned themselves with the "professional
military experts" against what they considered “unskilled civilian
amateurs." They viewed the restraints on bombing as irrational, the
shackling of a major instrument which could help win victory. With

90 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
