Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

D. The Single Manager

.By the late summer of 1966, as has been shown in detail in the preceding
sections, the flaws in the structure of the U.S, Mission had been openly
criticized in studi¢s or reports by the U.S. Army Staff (in PROVN), by
the Priorities Task Force and by the Roles and Missions Study Group in
Saigon, by Robert Komer in repeated memoranda, and by various other visitors
and observers. In eddition to the written record, there were undoubtedly
numerous private comments being made both in Saigon and Washington, some
of which were reaching senior officials of the government.

The options before the USG were, in broad outline, fourfold. The Mission
could either remain unchanged, or else it could reorganize along one of
the three general lines which Komer had outlined in his August 7, 1966

* memorandum:

Alternative One -- Put Porter in charge of all advisory and
pacification activities, including the
military;

Alternative Two -- Unify the civilian agencies into a single
civilian chain of command, and strengthen
the military internally -- but leave civilian
and military separate;

Alternative Three -- Assign. responsibility for pacification to
Westmoreland and MACY, and put the civilians
in the field under his command.

The Mission, as usual, argued for leaving the structure the way it was.
Their arguments in this direction were unfortunate, because in Washington
the mood was certainly in favor of some further changes, and by resisting
all suggestions uniformly, the Mission was simply causing friction with
Washington and reducing influence on the ultimate decisions.

The issue was joined more rapidly than anyone in Saigon had expected,
because in mid-September, 1966, the Secretary of Defense weighed in on the
issue in a direct way, producing a Draft Presidential Memorandum which
advocated handing over responsibility for pacification to COMUSMACV.

McNamara'’s draft said: 4

"Now that a Viet Cong victory in South Vietnam seems to
have been thwarted by our emergency actions taken over the
past 18 months, renewed attention should be paid to the
longer-run aspects of achieving an end to the war and build-
ing 2 viable nation in South Vietnam.

"Central to success, both in ending the war and in winning
the peace, is the pacification program. Past progress in

(cy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
