Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As early as January 1955, President Diem was stating publicly that
he was unlikely to proceed with the Geneva elections:

"Southern Viet-Nam, since it protested the Geneva Agrée-
ment when it was made, does not consider itself a party to
that Agreement, nor bound by it.

"In any event, the clauses providing for the 1956 elections
are extremely vague. But at one point they are clear -- in
stipulating that the elections are to be free. Everything will
now depend on how free elections are defined. The President
said he would wait to see whether the conditions of freedom
would exist in North Viet-Nam at the time scheduled for the
elections. He asked what would be the good of an impartial
counting of votes if the voting has been preceded in North
Viet-Nam by a campaign of ruthless propaganda and terrorism
on the part of a police state." * .

As the deaGline for consultations approached (20 July 1955), Diem was
increasingly explicit that he did not consider free elections possible

in North Vietnam, and had no intention of consulting with the DRV con-
cerning them. The U.S. did not -- as-is often alleged -- connive with
Diem to ignore the elections. U.S. State Department records indicate that
Diem's refusal to be bound by the Geneva Accords and his opposition to
pre-election consultations were at his own initiative. However, the U.S.,
which had expected elections to be held, and up until May 1955 had fully
supported them, shifted its position in the face of Diem's opposition,

and of the evidence then accumulated about the oppressive nature of the
regime in North Vietnam. "In essence," a State Department historical
study found, “our position would be that the whole subject of consulta-
tions and elections in Viet-Nem should be left up to the Vietnamese them-
selves and not dictated by external arrangenients which one of the parties
never accepted and still rejects." ¥* Secretary of State Dulles explained
publicly that:

"Neither the United States Government nor the Government
of Viet-Nam is, of course, a party to the Geneva armistice
agreements. We did not sign then, and the Government of Viet-
Nam did not sign them and, indeed, protested against them.
On the other hand, the United States believes, broadly speak-
ing, in the unification of countries which have a historic
unity, where the people are akin. We also believe that, if
there are conditions of really free elections, there is no seriou

risk that the Communists would win. . . ." *** :
% Interview with Max Lerner, transcript in OSD files, dated 2h Jan 55.

Cf., "Vietnam Demands a Time Extension," New York Times, 23 Jan 55.
** U.S. Department of State, "The Shift in the United States Position
Toward Vietnamese Blections Under the Geneva Accords" (RM-765),
1 Sep 65.
%** Press Conference, 23 June 55.

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
