Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the U.S. declaration remains obscure. It can be argued that its intent
was not a long-term U.S. commitment, but an attempt to deter the DRV

from attacking the GVN in the two-year period prior to elections.
According to this argument, the Eisenhower Administration would have
accepted any outcome if assured that the voting were free. A counter-
argument is that Smith was throwing down the gauntlet to the Communists.
An NSC action immediately following the Conference considered the Accords
a "major disaster for U.S. interests" and called for affirmative political
- action to foreclose further loss. In other words, while the specifics of
the Accords were much in line with the U.S. negotiating position, the
overall U.S. evaluation of the Conference’held that territory had been
yielded to the Communists. In this light, the Smith declaration marks
‘the jumping-off point for the concerted U.S. efforts to devise a collec-
tive security system for Vietnam and all of Southeast Asia, which cul-
minated in the Manila Pact of September, 1954 (SEATO), and the aid program
for Ngo Dinh Diem. (Tab 2)

Interpretations of the spirit of the Accords are as disparate as the
interests of the Geneva conferees. Yet, it is difficult to believe that
any of the participants expected the Geneva Accords to provide an inde-
pendent and unified Vietnam. The Communist states -- the Soviet Union,
Communist China, and the DRV -- apparently assumed that the development
of a stable regime in the South was very unlikely, and that the DRV would
eventually gain control of the entire country. They, in any event, had
sound evidence that the GVN was unlikely to last out the two years before
elections. It may well be, then, that the conciliatory posture of the
Communist states at the conference can be explained by their presumption
that the specific terms of agreement were less important than the detente
itself -- that their future successes, however slow in coming, were
inevitable. Western reactions and expectations, on the other hand, were
no doubt quite different. While France was interested in extricating
itself from its military failure, it was no less interested in maintain-
ing its cultural and economic position in Vietnam. Even the United ~
Kingdom gave every indication that it wished to prevent a general Com-
munist takeover. Hence, it would appear that these powers, like the U.S.,
wanted to stop the fighting, but not at the sacrifice of all of Vietnam
to the Communists. Thus, the spirit of the Accords may have been much
less significant than the letter of the Accords. In other words, by
dividing the country at the 17th parallel, with each zone under a
separate "civil administration," by providing for the regroupment of
forces and the movement of people North and South, and by putting off
elections for two years, the Geneva participants jeopardized, if not
precluded, the unification of Vietnam. Whatever the parties intended,
the practical effect of the specific terms of the Agreement was a perils
nently divided nation. (Tab 3)

D-2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
