Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

defined as "any fact or situation that might endanger the peace of the area,"
and provision is made to respond to threatened countries that are non-members
of the pact. In addition, there is no clause implying dependence on the
Security Council of the UN to step in to "restore and maintain international
peace and security," as there is in the NATO Treaty. Yet, the main point
evident is that both the wording of NATO and that of SEATO provide the

basis for a strong defensive strategy or, indeed, would admit of a weak

one. There is enough room for interpretation under the SEATO Treaty for
membersto devise all the defensive protection that NATO offers, and more.

c. Extent of the Treaty Areas

NATO Article 6 is the equivalent of SEATO Article VIII, dealing
with definition of the treaty area. Both are broad, but the SEATO article
is the more flexible of the two. In SEATO the area is limited on the
north at latitude 21 degrees, 30 minutes, thus eliminating Formosa, Hong
Kong, Korea, and Japan. The rest of the area is defined only as "the
general area of South-East Asia" and "the general area of the South-West
Pacific." The area, the treaty notes, can be modified at any time by
unanimous agreement. The phrase that permitted inclusion of "the entire
territories of the Asian parties" was noted by the U.S. delegation as
having the advantage of bringing in West Pakistan "under the protection
of the Treaty even though it is not in Southeast Asia.” 31/

d. UN and Other Pacts

Except for a change in two or three unimportant words, NATO
7 and 8 are summed up and repeated in SEATO VI; these articles declare
that agreements between SEATO members and the UN, or by members with other
countries are not, nor will be, in conflict with SEATO responsibilities.

=

e. Treaty Institutions

NATO 9 and SEATO V establish a council for military and other
planning. In the NATO Treaty this council is authorized to set up "sub-
sidiary bodies," while in the SEATO Treaty such authorization is not given.
This was @ disappointment to several of the delegations at the Manila ~
Conference. The Australians came forward with a request for a strong
organization, but the U.S. delegation was able to persuade them to accept
a modification of their proposal, substituting a concept of "consultation":

"During the sessions of the Working Group it became evident
that some countries would propose wording calling for the establish-
ment of military machinery, possibly along NATO lines. Recalling
the position of [the U.S. State/ Department that military partici-
pation should be consultative along lines of the ANZUS arrangement
rather than permanent and formal as in NATO, the Defense Representa-
tive...proposed that consideration be given to the inclusion of
the following wording after the first sentence of Article IV:

"To this end the Parties to the Treaty will consult with regard

A-19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
