Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Westmoreland also kept up the pressure to get an Army brigade into
Bien Hoa-Vung Tau. The latter action happened to dovetail with the
current Washington strategy options and hence was favorably considered
at Honolulu while, as has already been noted, proposals to deploy
divisions were not. .

Only on one occasion through the spring of 1965 did General
Westmoreland display any inclination to abandon his aggressive high-
lands campaign in favor of the more conservative enclave strategy. On
8 May he cabled to CINCPAC, with Ambassador Taylor's concurrence, his
Concept of Operations by US/Allied Ground Combat Forces in Support of
RVNAF. 14/ The Concept, as spelled out in that message, has already
been discussed at length in an earlier section of this paper. Not dis-
cussed were some proposed deployments of U.S. and Third Country forces
included by Westmoreland. Perhaps in deference to the Ambassador's
known preference, Westmoreland suggested that the U.S. Airmobile Di-
vision be deployed to Qui Nhon and Nha Trang. In light of his previous
recommendations and subsequent ones to be discussed, it is difficult to
conclude that Westmoreland really seriously entertained this recommen-
dation or that it was anything other than an aberration. On the 15th
of the same month, Westmoreland sent a message to the Department of
the Army indicating that, as far as he was concerned, the concept for
employment of the Airmobile Division was still to be determined. Since
he preferred an Airmobile Division, he asked the Department of the Army
to send airmobile experts to Vietnam to assist him in the preparation
of "a concept of operations for a division size force." 115/

In his message #19118 of 7 June, General Westmoreland asked for
U.S. and Third Country reinforcements after he had explained that redress-
ing deteriorating force ratios was beyond the capability of the RVNAF.

He said, "the force ratios continue to change in favor of the VC. I
believe that the DRV will commit whatever force it deems necessary to

tip the balance and that the GVN cannot stand up successfully to this
kind of pressure without reinforcement.” Westmoreland was convinced that
U.S. troops could "successfully take the fight to the VC," and he explained
that the forces he was requesting were “to give us a substantial and hard-
hitting offensive capability on the ground to convince the VC that they
cannot win." /Emphasis added / i ry ae

At the time Westmoreland submitted his recommendations in his
19118, which has erroneously been dubbed “the 44 Battalion request,"
there were, in addition to one Australian battalion, 7 U.S. Marine, and
2 U.S. Army battalions in Vietnam. In his measage, Westmoreland said
this: ,

"In ‘sub-paragraph 'A’ below, deployments and actions are
recommended on which decisions should be made now. In sub-
paragraph 'B' we have identified further actions on which
planning should start and on which separate recommendations
will be forthcoming.

90 TOP SECRET. - Sensitive
