Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

15. (D-Day) Iaunch first strikes (see Attachment C** for
targets). Initially, mine their ports and strike North Vietnam's
transport and related ability (bridges, trains) to move south;
and then against targets which have maximum psychological effect
on the North's willingness to stop insurgency -- POL storage,
selected. airfields, barracks/training areas, bridges, railroad.
yards, port facilities, communications, and industries. Initially,
these strikes would be by South Vietnamese aircraft; they could
then be expanded by adding FARMGATE, or U.S. aircraft, or any
combination of then.

16. (D-Day) Call for conference on Vietnam (and go to UN).
State the limited objective: Not to overthrow the North Vietnam
regime nor to destroy the country, but to stop DRV-directed Viet
Cong terrorism and resistance to pacification efforts in the
South. Essential that it be made clear that attacks on the North
will continue (i.e., no cease-fire) until (a) terrorism, armed
attacks, and armed resistance to pacification efforts in the
South stop, and (b) communications on the networks out of the
North are conducted entirely in uncoded form." 79/

The scenario was circulated among members of the ExCom and discussed
during their meetings of 24 and 25 May. Apparently, modifications were
made in the course of these meetings, as notations in the SecDef files
indicate scenario versions of 24, 25 and 26 May. In addition to the .
assessments that accompanied the scenario proposal, the discussents had —
available to them an estimate of likely consequences of the proposed ac-
tions, prepared by the Board of National Estimates, CIA, with Stete and
DIA assistance, and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Beard. 80/

The national estimate agreed essentially with the proposal'’s assess-
ment of Soviet and Chinese reactions and concluded that Hanoi's would vary
with the intensity of the U.S. /GVN actions. The national intelligence
boards believed that Hanoi "would order the Viet Cong and Pathet Lao to
refrain from dramatic new attacks, and might reduce the level of the in-
surrections for the moment" in response to U.S. force deployments or GYN-
USAF/ FARMGATE attacks. The expected DRY rationale, supported by Peking
and. Moscow, would be to bank on "a new Geneva Conference or UN action...
[to/ bring a cessation of attacks" and to stabilize communist gains in
Vietnam and Ieaos. Communist agitation cf world opinion would be employed
to bring on the conference. If attacks on North Vietnam continued, the
intelligence boards saw Hanoi intensifying its political initiatives, but
also possibly increasing ‘the tempo of the insurrections in South Vietnam
and Iaos." If these tactics failed to produce a settlement "and North
Vietnam began to suffer considerable destruction," the boards estimated:

"We incline to the'view that /DRV leaders/ would lower

their terms for a negotiating outcome; they would do so in
the interests of preserving their regime and in the expectation

2k TOP SECRET - Sensitive
