Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

this subject over the years, but Peiping must also begin to work its
way back toward the idea of mutual coexistence. Otherwise there is
going to be very great trouble ahead.”

* * *
35. Statement by President Johnson at White House News Conference on
July 25, 1965, "We Will Stend in Viet-Nam,™ Department of State
Bulletin, August 16, 1905, p. 262.

Peel eae

"..»-Three times in my lifetime, in two world wars and in Korea,
Americans have gone to far lands to fight for freedom. We have learned
at a terrible and brutal cost that retreat does not bring safety and
weakness does not bring peace.

"Tt is this lesson that has brought us to Viet-Nem. This is a
different kind of war. There are no marching armies or solemn declara-
tions. Some citizens of South Viet-Nam, at times with understandable
grievances, have joined in the attack on their own government.

"But we must not let this mask the central fact that this is really
war. It is guided by North Viet-Nam, and it is spurred by Communist
China. Its goal is to conquer the South, to defeat American power, and
to extend the Asiatic dominion of communism.

"There are great stakes in the balance.

"Most of the non-Communist nations of Asia cannot, by themselves
and’alone, resist growing might and the grasping embition of Asian con-
munism.

"Our power, therefore, is a very vital shield. If we are driven
from the field in Viet-Nam, then no nation can ever again have the same
confidence in American promise or in American protection.

i
"In each land the forces of independence would be considerably
weakened and an Asia so threatened by Communist domination would cer-
tainly imperil the security of the United States itself.

"We did not.choose to be the guardians at the gate, but there is
no one else.

"Nor would surrender in Viet-Nam bring peace, because we learned
from Hitler at Munich that success only feeds the appetite of aggression.
The battle would be renewed in one country and then another country,
bringing with it perhaps even larger and crueler conflict, as we have
learned from the lessons of history.

. .

D-50
