Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

St TOP SECRET - Sensitive

F. What Did It Mean?

Program 4 had important historical antecedents which provide the
basic texture of the decision-making on Program 5. The preceding
sections have outlined the major themes and historical developments
which projected into the succeeding program with telling effect. These
ean be briefly summarized as follows:

(1) A precedent, albeit a seemingly fragile one, of essen-
tially saying "no" to the COMUSMACV force requirements was established.
Actually, DoD and the President were beginning to question the concept
of operation for Vietnam which had led to programs, now becoming increas-
ingly costly and depressingly barren of tangible results. The illusion
of quick victory "on the cheap" had fled, and hard reality intervened.
People in and out of government were beginning +o seek alternatives to
our policies in Vietnam with increased interest, and Program 5 was to
increasingly reflect this basic mood surfacing in late 1966.

(2) The JCS had adopted a strategic concept based upon widely
expanded operations in the North, widened and intensified operations in
the South designed to seek out and destroy enemy forces, and committed
to assisting the GVN in building an "independent, viable, non-communist
society" -- a vestige of the unfortunate wording of NSAM 288. 83/ The
military heads had been denied the troops they said they required to
successfully accomplish the objectives developed under the concept, but
the concept itself had survived. This strategic thought was to provide
the conceptual baseline for Program 5.

(3) Thé basic troop requirement numbers, so important to
Program 5, were introduced during Program 4. In fact, the refined
figure the JCS proposed in JCSM 702-66 for mid-1968, 524,288, became
the eventual "approved" figure for Program 5. This number remained a,
focal point throughout the planning period despite frequent important
changes in the strategic situation.

(4) Certain "oblique alternatives," those which were not
directly substitutable options appeared during this time -- all of them
designed to relieve pressure on U.S. resources, especially manpower.
Among these were the barrier plan (proposed by McNamara), new free

' world military force sharing formulas (KANZUS), efforts to subtly hold
the RVNAF's "fect to the fire," and operations of various kinds in the
“sanctuaries.”

(5) The Reserve mobilization line -- a political sound barrier
as it were, remained unbroken.

The JCS had made a two-pronged case for breaking it: One,
that we could not adequately meet CINCPAC's 1967 requirements and simul-
fancously fulfill our commitments to NATO and other threatened areas
without mobilization (and even then probably dangerously late); and

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
125
