Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of being able to renew the insurrections in South Vietnam and
laos at a later date. There would nevertheless be a significant
danger that they would fight, believing that the U.S. would still
not be willing to undertake a major ground war, or that if it
was, it could ultimately be defeated by the methods which were
Successful against the French." 81/

In its discussion of the problem of compelling Hanoi to halt the vc
insurgency, the national estimate emphasized that this depended on affect-
ing the will of the DRV leaders. It stressed that the measures called
for in the scenario "would not seriously affect communist capabilities to
continue that insurrection," stating that "the primary sources of commu-
nist strength in South Vietnam are indigenous." On the other hend, it
predicted that withdrawal of material assistance from North Vietnem would
badly hurt the Pathet Lao capability. Because of the crucial importance
of Hanoi's will, the estimate argued that the DRV "must understand that
although the U.S. is not Seeking the destruction of the DRV regime, the
U.S. is fully prepared to bring ascending pressures to bear to persuade
Hanoi to reduce the insurrections." But, while comprehending U.S. pur~
poses in the early phase of the scenario actions, they may "tend increas-.
ingly to doubt the limited character of U.S. aims" as the scale of the
attacks increases. The report adds;

"Similarly, the retaliatory measures which Hanoi might
take in Laos and South Vietnam might make it increasingly
difficult for the U.S. to regard its objectives as attainable
by limited means. Thus difficulties of comprehension might
increase on both sides as the scale of action mounted." 82/

C. Rejection of Scenario; "Yse Force if Necessary"
eee or Scenario: "Use Force if Necessary"

At its meeting on 25 May, the ExCom apparently decided not to retain
the scenario approach in the courses of action it would recommend to the
President. At least, it abandoned the time-phasing aspects of the series
of actions contained in the Scenario proposal, and it made explicit its
Purpose not to embark on a series of moves “aimed at the use of force as
an end in itself." 83/ ‘he available evidence is far from conclusive on
the reasons why the scenario approach was cast aside, but it seems clear
that the potential for entering into an escalating conflict in which our
limited objectives might become Obscured weighed heavily in the decision.

In addition to the evidence already cited, a strong indication of the
ExCom's desire to avoid the possibility of escalation is contained in the
draft memorandum prepared for President Johnson, as a result of the 25 May
meeting. In this memorandum, it was recommended that the President decide:

"..ethat the U.S. will use selected and carefully graduated
military force against North Vietnam, under the following con-
ditions: (1) after appropriate diplomatic and political warning
and preparation, (2) and unless such warning and preparation --
in combination with other efforts -- should produce a sufficient
improvement of non-Communist prospects in South Vietnam and in
Laos to make military action against North Vietnam unnecessary." 8h/

25 TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
