Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

dreams three years ago to see what has happened in South Vietnam." The
Admiral also reported that while the Hoa Hao were still presenting diffi-
culties in some areas, the Binh Xuyen and the Cao Dai were "pretty well
eliminated."

But U.S. policy in Vietnam did not again achieve the status of a
national issue until the summer of 1959, when a Scripps-Howard newspaper-
man published a series of articles alleging that the U.S. aid program in
Vietnam was ill-directed, encumbered by waste and delay, and administered
by bumbling, plush-living bureaucrats. Both the Senate Committee on Foreign
Relations and the House Committee on Foreign Affairs thereupon conducted
hearings, and Ambassador Durbrow and General Williams were among the
Administration officials called to testify.’ The picture presented in
their testimony was so roseate that Senator Mansfield, for one, was inclined
to look for an early termination of U.S. aid:

"SENATOR MANSFIELD. It would be correct to say, would it not,
that a principal purpose of U.S. policy in Vietnam has been to
prevent Communist aggression from the north?

"MR. DURBROW. That is one of our basic policies, sir.
"SENATOR MANSFIELD. And in a general way, another principal
purpose has been to foster internal political and economic
stability in South Vietnam, is that correct?

"MR. DURBROW. Correct.

"SENATOR MANSFIELD. Still another would be to maintain friendly
ties with the Vietnamese?

"MR. DURBROW. Yes, sir.

"SENATOR MANSFIELD. You have instructed the various missions
along these lines, have you not?

"MR. DURBROW. I have, sir.

"SENATOR MANSFIELD. Have you ever instructed them to the effect
that one of our purposes was to encourage the development of
conditions of economic self-swpport in Vietnam which would
enable us to reduce and eventually eliminate grants of aid?

"Before you answer that, I want to compliment General
Williams for what he had to say relative to his contacts with

* U.S. Congress, Senate, Mutual Security Act of 1958, Committee on Foreign
Relations, 85th Congress, Second Session (Washington: GPO, 1958), 120-121.
** U.S. Congress, Senate, Situation in Vietnam, Committee on Foreign Rela-

tions, 86th Congress, First Session (Washington: GPO, 1959), 168-171,

198-199; House, Current Situation in the Far East, Committee on Foreign

Affairs, 86th Congress, First Session (Washington: GPO, 1959), 34 fr.,

45 £f.

33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
