Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET ~ Sensitive

there was no alternative to Diem, and Diem must have quickly sensed
this, for he continued to respond primarily to family interest, at best
only listening impatiently to Nolting's carefully put complaints,
secure in the knowledge that ultimately the U.S. would not abandon him
no matter what he did. Both tactics failed because of American commit-
ment, No amount of pressure or suasion was likely to be effective in
getting Diem to adopt ideas or policies which he did not find to his
liking, since we had communicated our unwillingness to consider the
ultimate sanction -- withdrawal of support for his regime. We had
ensnered ourselves in a powerless, no alternatives policy.

The denouement of this policy, the ultimate failure of all our
efforts to coerce, cajole and coax Diem to be something other than the
mandarin that he was, came in the midnight attack on the pagodas on
August 21. And it created a fundamental dilemma for U.S. policy with
respect to Diem. On the one hand, withdrawal of support for his regime
was the only lever likely to force Diem to redress the Buddhist grievances
and to make the political reforms prerequisite for popular support in the
common fight against the Viet Cong. On the other hand, withdrawal of
U.S. support for Diem would be signal U.S. approval for an anti-~Diem
coup, with all its potential for political instability and erosion of
the war effort. We found ourselves in this predicament not entirely
unexpectedly. j

In May 1963, though it had failed to anticipate the Buddhist
upheaval, the U.S. mission nevertheless quickly recognized the gravity
of the threat to Diem and reported it to Washington. 6/ Nolting met
with Diem on May 18 and outlined the steps he felt were necessary to
retrieve the situation. These included a government acknowledgement
of responsibility for the Hue incident, an offer to compensate the
families of the victims, and a reaffirmation of religious equality and non-
discrimination. As an alternative, he suggested an investigatory commis-
sion. Diem'’s noncommittal response led the Ambassador to think that Diem
really believed the Viet Cong had caused the deaths and that the Buddhists
had provoked the incident. Diem felt the U.S. was over-reacting to the
events. wed Thus, at 4a critical time Nolting, in spite of his two years
of careful groundwork, was unable to exercise any real influence over
Diem. Nolting left on a well-deserved holiday and home leave shortly
after this frustrating meeting.

By the end of May, Washington had become concerned at Diem's
failure to act, and at the widening Buddhist protest. The Chargé
d'Affaires, William Truehart, was instructed to press the GViI for
action, 8/ Working with Secretary of State for Defense Thuan, Truehart
tried to move the government toward negotiations with the Buddhists,
After the demonstrations in Hue on June 3, the State Department instructed
Truehart to tell Diem or Thuan that the U.S. also had a stake in an
amicable settlement with the Buddhists. 9/ On the following day, Truehart
met with Thuan and told him that U.S. support of South Vietnam could not
be maintained if there was bloody repressive action in Hue. 10/ This
seemed to get action, Later that day, Truehart was informed that

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
