Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

centers must be maintained. The area under GVN control
must be extended by expanding existing TAOR's, and by
opening and securing major LOC's, particularly Route 1.

The enemy must be contained in his sanctuaries, and denied
use of infiltration and invasion routes. Enemy main forces
and bases must be sought out and destroyed. Surveillance
and reconnaissance in force throughout the CTZ must comple-
ment the tasks discussed above.

"The deployment of a division and an armored cavalry
regiment to Quang Tri Province, south of the DMZ, would
make it possible for Marine Corps units now conducting con-
tainment operations to secure and expand tactical areas of
responsibility (TAOR's).

"The RVNAF and US/FWMAF will intensify operations
against organized enemy forces and base areas in and near
the populated and food producing areas of the coastal
plains thus denying them access to population and food
resources.

"Clearing and securing operations will be pursued
to facilitate the expansion of the secured areas, the
ultimate goal being to connect the Hue-Phu Bai, Danang,
and Chu Lai TAOR's. The following major LOC's will be
opened and secured: Route 9, from Route 1 to Thon San Lam;
and Route 1. and the railroad throughout the entire length
of I CTZ, including the spur to the An Hoa industrial complex.

"One of the most critical areas in the RVN today is
Quang Ngai Province. <A division is required there to main-~
tain continuous pressure on the enemy, to eliminate his forces
and numerous base areas, and to remove his control over large
population and food resources.

"Sustained employment of a division in Quang Ngai would

obviate the necessity to use other forces to meet a critical
requirement. The division would provide security for the
coastal area, facilitate opening and securing Route 1 and the
railroad, and relieve some of the pressure on northern Binh
Dinh Province. Of particular significance is the support
which would be provided to the RVNAF in securing the important
Mo Duc Area with its dense population and three annual rice
crops. Additionally, deployment of the division as discussed
above would allow IIIT MAF to expand its clearing and securing
operations into the heavily populated Tam Ky area north of
the Chu lai TAOR. Long term security must be provided for

70 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
