Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive =

3. On the political track we believe the British will under-
take their role with vigor, and that the Soviets will be more
reserved. The Soviets can hardly hope to influence Hanoi much at
this point, and they certainly have no leverage with Communist
China. In the opening rounds, the Soviets will probably fire
off some fairly sharp statements that the real key to the situa-
tion is for us to get out and to stop our attacks, and the
opposing positions are so far apart that it is hard to see any
useful movement for some time to come. We might well find the
Soviets -- or even the Canadians -- sounding us out on whether
we would stop our attacks in return for some moderation in VC
activity. This is clearly unacceptable, and the very least we
should hold out on is a verified cessation of infiltration (and
radio silence) before we stop our attacks. Our stress on the
cessation of infiltration may conceivably lead to the Indians
coming forward to offer policing forces -- a suggestion they have
made before ~~ and this would be a constructive move we could
pick up. But, as noted above, Hanoi is most unlikely to trade
on this basis for a long time to come.

4, In sum -- the most likely prospect is for a prolonged
period without major risks of escalation but equally without
any give by Hanoi."

In retrospect, Bundy's expectations appear appropriately sober and
realistic in comparison with more euphoric views held by some of his con-
temporaries. Particularly with respect to the Co-Chairmen gambit, his
predictions were strikingly close to the mark, The British did in fact _
"undertake their role with vigor" and, as it turned out, the Soviets were
indeed "more reserved." So much so, that the Co-Chairmen initiative
eventually came to naught.

At this point in time, however, (in the days following February 20th)
the Co-Chairman proposal was in orbit and real hopes were held. out for it.
Trevelyan had approached Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Lapin with the
proposal and the Soviet officials had agreed to take it under advisement,
warning Trevelyan that absolute se¢recy was essential. U.S. Ambassador
to Moscow Foy Kohler, upon learning of the UK/Soviet undertaking, ex-
pressed his concern that the air strikes on the DRV planned for February
20 would put the Soviets on the spot, and tvould cause them to reject the
British proposal. 70/ . :

Washington reassured Kohler by advising him that the scheduled strikes
were being postponed and also informed him thet, wnen rescheduled, the
strikes would be tied to a major DRV aggressive act which had just come
to light. 71/ It appears that, on February 16, an armed ocean-going
North Vietnamese vessel, carrying large quantities of arms and ammunition,
was intercepted and captured as it was infiltrating into Vung Ro Bay in
South Vietnam, to deliver its cargo to the VC. It was thought that, by

a7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
