Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The bombing of North Vietnam has inflicted heavy costs
not so much to North Vietnam's military capability or its
infiltration system as to the North Vietnamese economy as
@ whole. Measurable physical damage now exceeds $370 million
and the regime has had to divert 300,000 to 600,000 people
(many on a part-time basis) from agricultural and other
tasks to counter the bombing and cope with its effects.

The former cost has been more than met by aid from other
Communist countries. The latter cost may not be real,
since the extra manpower needs have largely been met from
what was a considerable amount of slack in NVN's under-
employed agricultural labor force. Manpower resources

are apparently still adequate to operate the agricultural
economy at a tolerable level and to continue simultaneously
to support the war in SVN and maintain forces for the
defense of the North at current or increased levels.

Virtually all of the military and economic targets in
North Vietnam that can be considered even remotely signifi-
cant have been struck, except for a few targets in Hanoi
and Haiphong. Almost all modern industrial output has been
halted and the regime has gone over to decentralized, dis-
persed, and/or protected modes of producing and handling
essential goods, protecting the people, and supporting the
war in the South. NVN has shown that it can find alterna-
tives to conventional bridges and they continue to operate
trains in the face of air strikes.

NVN has transmitted many of the material costs imposed
_ by the bombing back to its allies. Since the bombing began,
NVN's allies have provided almost $600 million in economic
aid and another $1 billion in military aid -- more than
four times what NVN has lost in bombing damage. If economic
eriteria were the only consideration, NVN would show a sub-
stantial net gain from the bombing, primarily in military
equipment.

Because of this aid, and the effectiveness of its counter-
measures, NVN's economy continues to function. NVN's adjust-
ments to the physical damage, disruption, and other difficul-
ties brought on by the bombing have been sufficiently effective
+o maintain living standards, meet transportation require-
ments, and improve its military capabilities. NVN is now a
stronger military power than before the bombing and its
remaining economy is more able to withstand bombing. The
USSR could furnish NVN with much more sophisticated weapon
systems; these could further increase the military strength
of NVN and lead to larger U.S. losses.57/

125 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
