Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

IV.C.1.

U. S. PROGRAMS IN SOUTH VIETNAM, NOVEMBER 1963 ~ APRIL 1965
NSAM 273 - NSAM 288

IT. NSAM-273
1. NSAM-273 -- The Aftermath of Diem

NSAM 273 of 26 November 1963 came just four days after the assassi-
nation of President Kennedy and less than a month after the assassination
of the Ngo brothers and their replacement by the Military Revolutionary
Committee (MRC). NSAM 273 was an interim, don't rock-the-boat document.
Its central significance was that although the two assassinations had
changed many things, U.S. policy proposed to renain substantially the
same. In retrospect, it is ummistakably clear, but it was certainly not
unmistakably clear at that time, that this was a period of crucial and
accelerated change in the situation in South Vietnam. NSAM 273 reflected
the general judgment of the situation in Vietnam that had gained official
acceptance during the previous period, most recently and notably during
the visit of Secretary McNamara and General Taylor to Vietnam in late
Septenber of that year.

This generally sanguine appraisal had been the basis for the recom-
mendation in that report to establish a program to train Vietnamese to
carry out, by the end of 1965, the essential functions then performed.
by U.S. military personne]. -- by which time "it should be possible to
withdraw the bulk of U.S. personnel." As an immediate gesture in this
direction, the report recommended that “the Defense Department should
announce in the very near future, presently prepared plans to withdraw
one thousand U.S. military personnel by the end of 1963." The latter
recommendation was acted upon the same day (2 October 1963) by making
it part of a White House statement of U.S. Policy on Vietnam. This White
House statement included the following pronouncement. ,

Secretary McNamara and General Taylor reported their
judgment that the major part of the 11.§. military task can
be completed by the end of 1965, although there may be a

- continuing requirement for a limited number of U.S. training
personnel. They reported that by the end of this year the
U.S. program for training Vietnamese should have progressed
to the point where one thousand U.S. personnel assigned to
South Vietnam can be withdrawn. 1/

The visit of the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs to Saigon at the end of September was followed by the
report to the President in early October and agreements reached with
the President at the White House early in October following

iid TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
