Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

French citizens during the morning of Sunday, 23 September,
absolutely ensured that countermeasures would be taken by the
Annamites [Vietnamese/. The more emotional of the French
citizens, who, after all, had suffered considerably at the hands
of the Annamites during the past few months, unfortunately took
this opportunity of taking what reprisals they could. Annamites
were arrested for no other reason than that they were Annamites;
their treatment after arrest, though not actively brutal, was
unnecessarily violent." 37/

The following day, the Vietnamese struck back: the economic life of
Saigon was paralyzed by strikes, and that night groups of Vietnamese --
principally a gangster sect called the Binh Xuyen -- began a series of
attacks on municipal utilities. On 25 September, in an assault through
a French residential district, over one hundred Westerners were killed,
and others carried off as hostages; on 26 September, the U.S. commander
-of the 0.8.5. in Cochinchina was killed. Thus, the Indochina War began
in Cochinchina in late September, 1945, and American blood was shed in
its opening hours.

The Committee of the South issued a statement deploring the British
actions:

"Suppression of the press, which was unanimously defending
the independence of Vietnam, prevented us...from controlling
and directing public opinion at a time when the mob was already
exasperated by provocations of the French...The British Army,
to accomplish its mission of disarming the Japanese forces, had
no need to disarm our police force and suppress our government
as it did. Yet we have demonstrated by our actions that our
government is most cordial in its desire to lend every possible
assistance to the British Army in the accomplishment of its
task." 38/

At that juncture, the ICP in Cochinchina was in a particularly vulntra-
ble position. The ICP -- the core of the Viet Minh -- had permitted the
Independence League to pose as the arm of the Allies, and had supported
cooperation with the British and amnesty for the French. The Party had
even undertaken, through the Committee of the South, to repress the Trot-
skyites. It was apparent that advocacy of political moderation, public
order, and negotiations with the French -- by the ICP, by the Viet Minh,
or by the Committee of the South -- was quite futile. Further, the ICP
was apparently assured by French communists that they would received no
assistance from Party brethren abroad. An American correspondent in
Saigon was shown a document dated 25 September 1945, which:

",,.advised the Annamite /Vietnamese/ Commmmists to be sure,
before they acted too rashly, that their struggle 'meets. the

requirements of Soviet policy." It warned that any 'premature
adventures' in Annamite independence might "not be in line with

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-38
