Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

At one point, Fall reports, the President offered General de Gaulle
Filipino advisers to help France establish a "more progressive policy
in Indochina" -- which offer the General received in "pensive silence."

Ultimately, U.S. policy was governed neither by the principles of
the Atlantic Charter, nor by the President's anti-colonialism, but by
the dictates of military strategy, and by British intransigence on the
colonial issue. The United States, concentrating its forces against
Japan, accepted British military primacy in Southeast Asia, and divided
Indochina at 16th parallel between the British and the Chinese for the
purposes of occupation. U.S. commanders serving with the British and
Chinese, while instructed to avoid ostensible alignment with the French,
were permitted to conduct operations in Indochina which did not detract
from the campaign- against Japan. Consistent with F.D.R.'s guidance, the
U.S. did provide modest aid to French-~and Viet Minh--resistance forces
in Vietnam after March, 1945, but refused to provide shipping to move
. Free French troops there. Pressed by both the British and the French
for clarification of U.S. intentions regarding the political status of
Indochina, F.D.R. maintained that "it is a matter for postwar."

The President's trusteeship concept foundered as early as March
1943, when the U.S. discovered that the British, concerned over possi-
ble prejudice to Commonwealth policy, proved to be unwilling to join
in any declaration on trusteeships, and indeed any statement endorsing
national independence which went beyond the Atlantic Charter's vague
"respect the right of all peoples to choose the form of government
under which they will live." So sensitive were the British on this
point that the Dumbarton Oaks Conference of 194), at which the blue-
print for the postwar international system was negotiated, skirted the
colonial issue, and avoided trusteeships altogether. At each key
decisional point at which the President could have influenced the
course of events toward trusteeship -= in relations with the U.K., in
casting the United Nations Charter, in instructions to allied com-
manders -- he declined to do so; hence, despite his lip service to
trusteeship and anti-colonialism, F.D.R. in fact assigned to Indochina
a status correlative to Burma, Malaya, Singapore and Indonesia: free
territory to be reconquered and returned to its former owners. Non-
intervention by the U.S. on behalf of the Vietnamese was tantamount
to acceptance of the French return. On April 3, 1945, with President
Roosevelt's approval, Secretary of State Stettinius issued a statement
that, as a result of the Yalta talks, the U.S. would look to trustee-
ship as a postwar arrangement only for "territories taken from the
enemy,” and for "territories as might voluntarily be placed under trust-
eeship." By context, and by the Secretary of State's subsequent inter-
pretation, Indochina fell into the latter category. ‘Trusteeship status
for Indochina became, then, a matter for French determination.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
