Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

D. The CORDS Reorganization

With Bunker's announcement, the Mission began its second massive
reorganization in five months. This time, the reorganization was
accompanied by one of the periodic turnovers in Mission Council per-
sonnel which have characterized the Mission: for some reason, the
tours of many high-ranking officers seem to end at roughly the same
time, and thus, in 1964, 1965, and again in the spring of 1967,
several key members of the Mission Council all left within a few
weeks of each other. This time, in addition to Ambassador Lodge,
Porter, Habib, and Wehrle all left within a short period of time, and
only a high-level decision -- announced by Bunker at the same time as
the reorganization -- kept Zorthian and Lansdale on for extensions.
Into the Mission came Bunker, Locke, Komer, General Abrams, the new
Deputy COMUSMACV, and Charles Cooper, the new Economie Counselor, and
Archibald Calhoun, the new Political Counselor.

Despite the turnover, the reorganization seemed to proceed with
comparative ease, Perhaps the fact that OCO had already been formed
was critical here, since it meant that instead of MACV dealing with
three agencies simultaneously, the first discussions could be restricted
primarily to MACV and OCO. Moreover, because OCO was already a going
concern, the civilians were better organized than ever before to main-
tain their own position in dealings with the military.

But above all, it was the decision by Westmoreland and Bunker to
let Komer take the lead in the reorganization which was important.
Komer now made major decisions on how the new structure would look
which were usually backed up by Westmoreland, The result looked much
better than many people had dared hope,

The details of the reorganization ere not worth detailed discussion
here. But one point can illustrate the way CORDS could resolve pre-
viously unresolved issues: the question of the role of the ARVN
Division in the chain of command.

As noted in an earlier section, study groups had over the years
adyocated removing the ARVN Divisions from the chain of command on
Pacification/RD. But MACV hed large advisory teams with the Divisions
and these teams controlled both the sector (Province) advisory teams
and Regimental advisory teams below them. The strueture followed normal
military lines, and made good sense to most of the officers in the
higher levels of MACV.

The counter-argument was that Division was a purely military
instrument and could not adequately control the integrated civilian-
military effort that was needed at the Province level. Thus the Roles
and Missions Study Group, for example, had recommended that "Division
be Removed from the RD Chain of Command...that the role of the Province

132
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
