Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Whatever Bao Dai's response -- probably polite and obscure --
he did not act on the U.S. advice. He subsequently told Dr. Phan Quang
Dan, aboard his imperial yacht, that his successive governments had been
of little use, and added that it would be dangerous to expand the Viet-
namese Army because it might defect en masse and go to the Viet Minh.

"I could not inspire the troops with the necessary
enthusiasm and fighting spirit, nor could Prime Minister
Huu... Even if we had an able man, the present political
conditions would make it impossible for him to convince
the people and the troops that they have something worth
while to fight for..." 36/

Dr. Dan agreed that the effectiveness of the National Army was a central
issue; he pointed out that there were but three Viet generals, none of
whom had ever held operational command, and neither they nor the 20
colonels or lieutenant colonels could exercise initiative of any sort.
Dr. Dan held that: "The Vietnamese Army is without responsible Viet-
namese leaders, without ideology, without objective, without enthusiasm,
without fighting spirit, and without popular backing." 37/ But it was
very clear that Bao Dai did not propose to alter the conditions of his
army except by the long, slow process of "nibbling" at French military
prerogative. On other vital issues Bao Dai was no more aggressive.

For all practical purposes, the Emperor, in his own fashion, like Dr. Dan
and Ngo Dinh Diem, assumed the posture of the attentiste -- a spectator
as the French and Americans tested their strength against each other,
and against the Viet Minh.

f. The American Predicament

Among the American leaders who understood the vacuity of the
Bao Dai solution, and recognized the pitfalls in French intransigence on
genuine independence was the then Senator John F. Kennedy. Kennedy
visited Vietnam in 1951 and evidently weighed Gullion's views heavily.
In November, 1951, Kennedy. declared that:

"In Indochina we have allied ourselves to the desperate
effort of the French regime to hang on to the remnants of an
empire. There is no broad general support of the native
Vietnam Government among the people of that area." 38/

In a speech to the U.S. Senate in June, 1953, he pointed out that:

"Genuine independence as we understand it is lacking in
Indochina ... local government is circumscribed in its
functions ... the government of Vietnam, the state which is
of the greatest importance in this area, lacks popular sup-
port, that the degree of military, civil, political, and
economic control maintained by the French goes well beyond
what is necessary to fight a war... It is because we want the war
to be brought to a successful conclusion that we should insist

A-26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
