Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

VC *spectaculars" or at least strong additional evidence of major infil-
tration." Moreover, Option C made provision for the possibility of
making a "Significent sround deployment to the northern part of South

_ Vietnam, either in the form of @ U.S. combat force or a SEATO members
force” as an additional bargaining counter. In any event, "C was
intended to “give the impression of a steady deliberate approach" and
"designed to give the U.S. the option at any time to proceed or not, to
escalate or not, and to guicken the pace or not.

In "C," military pressures were to be accompanied by “communi~
cations with Hanoi and/or Peiping" indicating in essence = willingness
to negotiate in an affirmative sense." From the outset "ve would pears i
accepting the possibility that we might not achieve our full objectives.
Accordingly, the concept for "C" included provision for en initial nego-
tiating position that added “certain bargaining elements to the basic
U.S. objectives. Once negotiations started the military pressures would
cease. As in "B," these would be preceded by 4 vigorous progrem of —
public information efforts and political consultations with Congressional
leaders and foreign allies, surfacing information on DRV infiltration and
explaining our rationale for action, The latter would be thet documented
DRV illegal infiltration of armed and trained insurgents, end over-all
DRV direction and control of Vc insurgency, had now reeched ean intolerable
level end that it was now necessary to hit at the infiltration...and to
bring pressure on Hanoi to cease this infiltration end direction.” 7)/

Ce. Significance of Negotiations. One of the most significant
aspects of the NSC Working Group's analyses was its emphasis on a ‘
negotisted settlement as the final outcome of contemplated U.S. actions.
Regardless of the option selected or the pressure actions employed, inter-
national negotiations in some form were perceived as the Means by which
the situation in Southeast Asia would ultimately be relieved. Even in
the event of a unilateral GyN or a South Vietnemese splinter negotiation
with the NLF, under circumstances of a relatively shallow U.S. comnit-
ment (Option A), negotiation wméer a Geneva format was regarded as a
preferable outcome, 15/ However, it is also clear thet a parallel aim
was to insure that pressures on behalf of such negotiations did not be-
come compelling before the U.S. bargaining position could be improved.

Also significant is the fact that the kind of settlement which
was seen as the purpose of negotiation was one which would end North
Vietnam's participation in the conflicts in Southeast Asia -- and con~
currently, also end the United States! direct participation (as it was
in 1964) in those conflicts. In view of the prevalent Administration
perception of North Vietnam as instigator and 2SBrESsor oes the conflict
within South Vietnam, it is ironic that the Working Group's considere~
tions of @ negotiated Settlement did not include the problems of a poli-
tical settlement in the South. In the available source materials, this
subject was raised only once and even then was not Goals with further.
The one instence was in the context of Robert Johnson's analysis or Lo
Option B. In it he pointed out that if a fully successful "B" negotiation

93 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
