Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

railways, rivers, and canals open for traffic, of ensuring that
rural crops reach the markets and that in turn commodity goods
are distributed throughout the country. The Communists have

no such responsibility. They have no roads and bridges to guard,
and no goods to distribute." 121/

Diem failed to perceive that the "first phase" was crucial, or that the

vC were, from the very outset, constructing while they destroyed, building
a state within South Vietnam with more effective local government than

his own.

Like many another issue in Vietnam, the problem was in part
semantics. "Communists" during this period formally recanted for the GVN
by the thousands; thousands more "communists" were incarcerated by
the GVN for "political reeducation." But Ordinance 47 of 1956 notwith-
standing, “communist” is a term which has not been used since the 1940's
by Vietnamese serving the Marxist-Lenist Party headed by Ho Chi Minh of
the DRV. These referred to themselves as members of the Vietnam Workers
Party (Dang Iao Dong), as members of one Front or another, or as resistance
fighters, or fighters for national liberation. Nor was "Viet Minh” a useful
name, since Viet Minh, a nationalist front, included numerous non-communist,
or at least non-party members. In 1956, the Saigon press began to dis-
tinguish between the Viet Minh and communists by referring to the latter
as "Viet Cong," a fairly precise, and not necessarily disparaging, rendition
of "Viet Nam Cong-San," which means "Vietnamese Communist." 122/ The National
Liberation Front of South Vietnam (NLF) much later condemned the term as
"contemptuous," and pointed out that the GVN had applied it indiscriminately
+o all persons or groups "who are lukewarm toward the pro-U.S. policy even
on details." 123/ ‘There can be no doubt that Diem and his government
applied the term somewhat loosely within South Vietnam, and meant by it
North as well as South Vietnamese communists, whom they presumed acted in

concert. 12) /
2. The Viet Minh Residue

At the close of the Franco-Viet Minh War, some 60,000 men were
serving in organized Viet Minh units in South Viet Nam. For the regroup-
ments to North Vietnam, these units were augmented with large numbers of
untrained young men -- who were later known among the regroupees in North
Vietnam as "soldiers of Geneva." A reported 90,000 soldiers were taken to
North Vietnam in the evacuated units, while the U.S. and the GVN estimated
that 5,000 to 10,000 trained men were left behind as "cadre." If French
estimates are correct that in 1954 the Viet Minh controlled over 60 to 90
percent of South Vietnam's villages outside the Cao Dai and Hoa Hao regions,
those 5000 to 10,000 cadre must have represented only a small fraction of
the remaining Viet Minh apparatus--cadre, local workers, sympathizers--in the
countryside. GVN figures themselves attest to this. In 1955 and 1956 alone,
the GVN claimed 100,000 communist "cadre" rallied or surrendered, and up
to 20,000 "communists and communist sympathizers" were detained for reeduca-
tion. However, from all accounts--including testimony of the communist
prey--the combination of the evacuation and the GVN Anti-Communist Denunei-
ation Campaign was devastating. The Viet Minh wartime apparatus was depleted
and fragmented, as the GVN claimed.

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
