Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(07
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

with 32,000 metric tons needed -- indicating that the strikes would
have to be very damaging in order to cause NVN any major difficulties.
The study also hinted that an adequate subst tute system could be
improvised, with lighterage from ocean tankers and dispersed storage,
but it nonetheless concluded that the strikes would result in "a reduc-
tion of essential transport capabilities for military logistic and
infiltration support opeations," i.e., as a result of a deprivation of
necessary POL. 34/

As already noted, during the 37-day Pause, the JCS con-
tinued to recommend not only the resumption of the bombing but resumption
with a dramatic sharp blow on major targets, including POL, followed by
uninterrupted, increasing "pressure" bombing. They wished, in short,
to turn the limited bombing program into a major strategic assault on NVN.
In mid-January 1966 they sent Secretary McNamara a memo reiterating old
arguments that the current ROLLING THUNDER program would not cause NVN
to stop supporting the war in the South, and that the piecemeal nature
of the attacks left NVN free to replenish and disperse its supplies and
contend with interdictions. The way to achieve U.S. objectives, the JCS
said, was to implement the bombing program they had recommended long ago,
in JCSM 982-64 of 23 November 1964, which called for the rapid destruction
of the entire NVN target system. In order to get the program started, the
JCS recommended extending armed reconnaissance to all areas of NVN except
the sanctuaries, which they would shrink (to a 10-mile radius around
Hanoi and Phuc Yen airfield, a 4-mile radius around Haiphong, and a strip
20 miles along the Chinese border); lifting the sortie ceiling on armed
reconnaissance; and removing "tactical restrictions" on the execution of
specific strikes. The strikes would be heavy enough to deny NVN external
assistance, destroy in-country resources contributing to the war, destroy
in-country resources contributing to the war, destroy all military facili-
ties, and harass, disrupt, and impede movement into SVN. 35

The idea of resuming the bombing with a large and dramatic
bang did not appeal much to decision-makers. Apart from the old problem
of triggering an unwanted Chinese reaction, the Administration was inter-
ested in giving the lie to NVN and Chinese claims that the Pause was a
eynical prelude to escalation. Although it was possible that resuming
merely where the bombing left off (following as it would an extended pause
and a display of great eagerness for peace) might signal too much irreso-
lution and uncertainty, there was good reason to put off any escalatory
acts for a while. As Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy wrote:

For a period of two-three weeks at least, while the
world is digesting and assessing the Pause, we should do as
little as possible to lend fuel to the charge -- which will
doubtless be the main theme of Communist propaganda -- that
the Pause was intended all along merely as a prelude to more

drastic action. 36/

7h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
