Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

with those who say we should withdraw. That would be a great mistake.
That would be ea great misteke. I know people don't like Americans to
be engeged in this kind cf an effort. Forty-seven Americans have been
killed in combat with the enemy, but this is a very important struggle
even though it is far away.

"We took all this -- made this effort to defend Europe. Now Europe
is quite secure. We also have to participate -- we may not like it --
in the defense of Asia."

* * %*

38. President Kennedy's NBC Interview, September 1963, Department of
State Bulletin, September 30, 1963, p. 499:

77 A IE.

"Mr. Huntley: Mr. President, in respect to our difficulties in South
Viet-Nam, could it be that our Government tends occasionally to get locked
into a policy or an attitude and then finds it difficult.to alter or shift
that policy?

"The President: Yes, that is true. I think in the case of South
Viet-Nam we have been dealing with a Government which is in control, has
been in control for 10 years. In addition, we have felt for the last 2
years that the struggle against the Communists was going better. Since
June, however -- the difficulties with the Buddhists -- we have been con-
cerned about a deterioration, particularly in the Saigon area, which hasn't
been felt greatly in the outlying areas but may spread. So we are faced
with the problem of wanting to protect the area against the Communists.
On the other hand, we have to deal with the Government there. That pro-
duces a kind of ambivalence in our efforts which exposes us to some
criticism. We are using our influence to persuade the Government there
to take those steps which will win back support. That takes some time,
and we must be patient, we must persist.

"Mr, Huntley: Are we likely to reduce our aid to South Viet-Nam
now?

"The President: I don't think we think that would be helpful at this
time. If you reduce your aid, it is possible you could have some effect
upon the government structure there. On the other hand, you might have a
situation which could bring about a collapse. Strongly.in our mind is
whet happened in the case of China at the end of World War II, where China
was lost -- a weak government became increasingly unable to control events.
We, don't want that.

"Ny, Brinkley: Mr. President, have you had any reason to doubt this

so-called ‘domino theory,’ that if South Viet-Nem falls, the rest of
Southeast Asia will go behind it?

c-k1
