Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ec. U.S. Aid to Indochina

On February 16, 1950, France requested U.S. military and
economic assistance in prosecuting the Indochina War. 18/ The Secretary
of Defense in a Memorandum for the President on March 6 stated that:

"The choice confronting the United States is to support
the legal governments in Indochina or to face the extension
of Communism over the remainder of the continental area of
Southeast Asia and possibly westward..." 19/

The same month, the State Department dispatched an aid survey
mission under R. Allen Griffin to Indochina (and to Burma, Indonesia, )
Thailand, and Melaya). The Griffin Mission proposed (inter alia) aid for
the Bao Dai government, since the State of Vietnam was considered:

" ... not secure against internal subversion, political infiltra-
tion, or military aggression.

"The objective of each program is to assist as much as possible
in building strength, and in so doing ... to assure the several
peoples that support of their governments and resistance to com-
munist subversion will bring them direct and tangible benefits and
well-founded hope for an increase in living standards. Accordingly,
the programs are of two main types: (1) technical and material aid
to essential services and (2) economic rehabilitation and develop-
ment, focused primarily on the provision of technical assistance
and material aid in developing agricultural and industrial output.
.-. These activities are to be carried on in a way best calculated
to demonstrate that the local national governments are able to
bring benefits to their own people and thereby build political
support, especially among the rural population....

"The aims of economic assistance to Southeast Asia ... are
to reinforce the non-Communist national governments in that
region by quickly strengthening and expanding the economic life
of the area, improve the conditions under which its people live,
and demonstrate concretely the genuine interest of the United
States in the welfare of the people of Southeast Asia.” 20/

In a strategic assessment of Southeast Asia in April, 1950,
the JCS recommended military assistance for Indochina, provided:

" ... that United States military aid not be granted
unconditionally; rather that it be carefully controlled and
that the aid program be integrated with political and
economic programs..." 21/

On May 1, 1950, President Truman approved $10 million for
urgently needed military assistance items for Indochina. 22/ The President's

A-17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
