Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(c) Conduct such combat operations as are necessary for self- Ba
defense and for the security of the area in which they are stationed.

(d) Provide an emergency reserve to back up the Armed Forces of
the GVN in the case of a heightened military crisis.

(e) Act as an advance party of such additional forces as may be
introduced if CINCPAC or SEATO contingency plans are invoked.

It is noteworthy that this force is not proposed to clear the jungles
and forests of Viet Cong guerrillas. That should be the primary task
of the Armed Forces of Vietnam for which they should be specifically
organized, trained, and stiffened with ample U.S. advisors down to
combat battalion levels. However, the U.S. troops may be called upon
to engage in combat to protect themselves, their working parties, and
the area in which they live. As a general reserve, they might be
thrown into action (with U.S. agreement) against large, formed guer-
rilla bands which have abandoned the forests for attacks on major tar-
gets. But in general, our forces should not engage in small-scale
guerrilla operations in the jungle.

As an area for the operations of U.S. troops, SVN is not an excessively
difficult or unpleasant place to operate. While the border areas are
rugged end heavily forested, the terrain is comparable to parts of
Korea where U.S. troops learned to live and work without too much
effort. However, these border areas, for reasons stated above, are
not the places to engage our forces. In the High Plateau and in the
coastal plain where U.S. troops would probably be stationed, these
jungle-forest conditions do not exist to any great extent. The most
unpleasant feature in the coastal areas would be the heat and, in the
Delta, the mud left behind by the flood. The High Plateau offers no
particular obstacle to the stationing of U.S. troops.

The extent to which the Task Force would engage in flood relief activities
in the Delta will depend wpon further study of the problem there. As
reported in Saigon 537, I see considerable advantages in playing up this
aspect of the Task Force mission. I am presently inclined to favor a
dual mission, initially help to the flood area and subsequently use in
any other area of SVN where its resources can be used effectively to

give tangible support in the struggle against the Viet Cong. However,

the possibility of emphasizing the humanitarian mission will wane if

-we wait long in moving in our forces or in linking our stated purpose
with the emergency conditions created by the flood.

The risks of backing into a major Asian war by way of SVN are present

but are not impressive. NVN is extremely vulnerable to conventional
bombing, a weakness which should be exploited diplomatically in

°° ae TOP SECRET - Sensitive
