Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

the Lao Government. No arms were to be introduced into Laos except at
the request of that Government. The signatories agreed to refrain ‘from
all direct or indirect interference in the internal affairs' of Laos.
They promised also not to use Lao territory to intervene in the internal
affairs of other countries--a stipulation that plainly prohibited the
passage of arms and men from North Viet-Nam to South Viet-Nam by way of
Iaos. An International Control Commission of three was to assure com-
pliance with the agreements. .

"What happened? The non-Communist elements complied. The Communists ©
did not. At no time since that agreement was signed have either the
Pathet Lao or the North Viet-lNam authorities complied with it. The North
Vietnamese left several thousand troops there--the backbone of almost every -
Pathet Lao battalion. Use of the corridor through Laos to South Viet-Nam
continued. And the Communists barred the areas under their control both
to the Government of Isos and the International Control Commission.

"Nature of Struggle in Viet-Nam

\

"To revert to Viet-Nam: I continue to hear and see nonsense sbout the
nature of the struggle there. I sometimes wonder if the gullibility of
educated men and the stubborn disregard of plain facts by men who are
supposed to be helping our young to learn--especially to learn how to
think.

"Hanoi has never made a secret of its designs. It publicly pro-
claimed in 1960 a renewal of the assault on South Viet-Nam. Quite ob-
viously its hopes of taking over South Viet-Nam from within had withered
to close to zero--and the remarkable economic and social progress of South
Viet-Nam contrasted, most disagreeably for the North Vietnamese Communists,
with their own miserable economic performance.

"The facts about the external involvement have been documented in
white papers and other publications of the Department of State. The Inter-
national Control Commission has held that there is evidence ‘beyond reason-
able doubt' of North Vietnamese intervention.

"There is no evidence that the Viet Cong has any significant popular
following in South Viet-Nam. It relies heavily on terror. Most of its
reinforcements in recent months heve been North Vietnamese from the North
Vietnamese Army.

"Let us be clear about what is involved today in Southeast Asia. We
are not involvec with empty phrases or conceptions which ride upon the
clouds. We are talking about the vital national interests of the United
States in the peace of the Pacific. We are talking about the appetite
for aggression--an appetite which grows upon feeding and which is pro-
claimed to be insatiable. We are talking about the safety of nations with
whom we are allied--and the integrity of the American commitment to join
in meeting attack.

D-38
