Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

V. Expectations

The first four sections of this paper have presented the development
of the situation in South Vietnam through the early months of 1965 and
discussed the three strategies ( 1) Strategy of Security, 2) Enclave
Strategy, and 3) Search and Destroy Strategy) which were considered dur-
ing the same time span for the employment of United States ground forces.
Each of the strategies had its heyday and its proponents, and each was
associated in the minds of the decision-making principals who were weigh-.
ing it with certain expectations.

A. The Strategy of Security

The short-lived strategy of security saw the deployments as a
necessary evil to meet an immediate need -- the bolstering of base security
in South Vietnam for the air effort against North Vietnam. Few of the
principals read any more into it than that.

The only intelligence estimate dealing with the ramifications of
this strategy came when the intelligence community was tasked to predict
probable communist reactions to the input of an entire Korean division for
base security duty in South Vietnam. The SNIE resulting, dated 19 March
1965, indicated that input of Chinese or North Korean "volunteers" was
very unlikely to occur. Inevitably there would be a great upsurge in
propaganda, and vilification directed against the Koreans and the U.S, for
making such a move. In the main, however, communist reaction depended on
how the signal was interpreted. They would almost certainly estimate that
the input of a ROK division would "not in itself significantly alter the
military situation. They might consider, however, that it portended a
substantial further build-up of foreign forces...e.g., Nationalist Chinese,
Thai, Philippines, md U.S....for ground combat." 173/

The strategy of security was intimately tied to the Rolling
Thunder bombing program. It remained alive only so long as the decision-
making principals were reasonably confident that the bombing was going
- to produce the desired effects on the DRV/VC will to persist. Expecta-
tions for the security strategy were quite modest if the foot-in-the~-door
aspects of it are discounted. No input of "volunteers” from China or other
communist allies of the DRV was expected to occur in response to the pro-
vision of a few foreign troops to look after the bases in the South. It
was merely expected that those bases would be better protected from attack.

B. The Encleve Strategy

‘ At the NSC meetings of 1-2 April, those in attendance could see
that Ho Chi Minh was not quite ready to throw in the towel. The McNaughton

113 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
