Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

«+ « « Permit National Assembly wider legislative

initiative and area of genuine debate and bestow on it authority
to conduct, with appropriate publicity, public investigations

of any department of government with right to question any
official except President himself. This step would have three-
fold purpose: (A) Find some mechanism for dispelling through
public investigation constantly generated rumors about government
and its personalities; (B) Provide people with avenue recourse
against arbitrary actions by same government officials; (C) Assuage
some of intellectual opposition to government.

" , . » Require all government officials to declare publicly
their property and financial holdings and give National Assembly
authority to make public investigation of these declarations in
effort dispel rumors of corruption."

". . . Adopt following measures for immediate enhancement

of peasant support of government: (A) Establish mechanism for
increasing price peasant will receive for paddy crop beginning

to come on market in December, either by direct subsidization

or establishment state purchasing mechanism; (B) Institute modest
payment for all corvee labor; (C) Subsidize agroville families
along same lines as land resettlement families until former on
feet economically; (D) Increase compensation paid to youth corps.
If Diem asks how these measures are to be financed I shall suggest
through increased taxes or increased deficit financing, and shall
note that under certain circumstances reasonable deficit financing
becomes a politically necessary measure for governments. I should
add that using revenues for these fundamental and worthy purposes
would be more effective than spending larger and larger sums on
security forces, which, while they are essential and some additional
funds for existing security forces may be required, are not com-
plete answer to current problems." (Saigon 624 to SecState,
Section 2 of 2, 16 September 1960, pp. 1-2, underlining added)

Finally, in requesting State Department approval for an approach to
Diem along these lines, Durbrow concluded with a recommendation on the
nature of the political objectives the U.S. should set with respect
to the GVN:

"We believe U.S. should at this time support Diem as best
available Vietnamese leader, but should recognize that over-
riding U.S. objective is strongly anti-communist Vietnamese
government which can command loyal and enthusiastic support of
widest possible segments of Vietnamese people, and is able to
carry on effective fight against communist guerrillas. If Diem's
position in country continues deteriorate as result failure adopt
proper political, psychological, economic and security measures, it

57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
