Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ment" which might (the text is not explicit) extend to fighting the
guerrillas, if that should become necessary to save the country, but
also might only cover overt North Vietnamese invasion. 18/

Further, the need for these arrangements was now tied to the "loss"
of Laos. The May 3 draft suggests we “undertake military security ar-
rangements which establish beyond doubt our intention to stand behind
Vietnam's resistance to Communism..." since "it is doubtful whether the
Vietnamese Government can weather the pressures which are certain to be
generated from the loss of Laos without prompt, and dramatic support for
its security from the U.S." 19/

In the May 6 final draft, “establish beyond doubt" was toned down
to “emphasize” and the flat reference to the loss of Laos was changed
to "if Laos were lost." 20/

Similarly, the recommendations on the two new South Vietnamese divi-
sions, and the two 1600-man US combat units to train them was described as
a firm recommendation in the military section of the May 3 draft (which
State left untouched from the Defense version), but were indirectly re-
ferred to as something for study in State's re-drafted political section.
In the final paper, they were still firm recommendations in a military
annex, but not in the main paper, where Defense was only described as
studying this and other uses for US troops short of direct commitment
against the guerrillas. US troop commitments were no longer recommended,
only referred to as something "which might result from_an NSC decision
following discussions between Vice President Johnson /whose mission to
Asia had been announced May 5/ and President Diem." 21/

Yet an interesting aspect of the State redraft is that, although its
main impact was to soften the commitments implied in the Defense draft, a
quick reading might give the contrary impression. We will see this same
effect in the political sections to be discussed below. What seems to
happen is that the very detail of the State treatment creates a strong
impression, even though the actual proposals are less drastic and more
qualified than those proposed by Defense. The contrast is all the sharper
because the Defense draft leaned the other way. For example, the pro-
foundly significant recommendation that the US commit itself to intervene
unilaterally, if necessary, to prevent a Viet Cong victory in South Vietnam,
is tossed into the Defense version most casually, with a reference to the
Manila Treaty that makes it sound as if such a commitment, in fact, already
existed.

In contrast, here is the State language referring to the proposed
bilateral treaty (which in effect is a substitute for the Defense pro-
posed unlimited unilateral commitment):

The Geneva Accords have been totally inadequate in protecting

South Vietnam against Communist infiltration and insurgency.
Moreover, with increased Communist success in Laos dramatic

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
