Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

4
peacltcllhie GC

"OP SECRET - Sensitive oonetide.. fF?

special need for unity in view of possible cross-border problems with Laos;
Khanh accepted the point and agreed to soften the blow on the generals.

He flew immediately to Dalat, and the next day announced to Lodge an amica-
ble settlement of the problem, with lenient treatment of the generals and
new-found complete unity emong the members of the ruling MRC. State and
lodge were gratified, and agreed that the thing to do was to press for
unity in support of getting on with the war. 70/ However, it was soon
common knowledge that the "settlement," amounting to censure of the accused
officers, satisfied no one; and the problem festered on. 71

In May the first sign appeared of varying emphasis at the highest
levels on particular necessary steps for success against the VC. Ina
DPM dated May 25, 1964, McGeorge Bundy restated the theme of the Rostow
memorendum to SecState of February 13:

"It is recommended that you make a Presidential decision
that the U.S. will use selected and carefully graduated mili-
tary force against North Vietnam...on these premises:

(1) That the U.S. cannot tolerate the loss of Southeast
Asia to Communism;

(2) That without a decision to resort to military action
if necessary, the present prospect is not hopeful, in South
Vietnam or in Laos."

Of course, Bundy knew of the GVN's weaknesses and on other occasions asserted
the need to reform GVN; but here he focussed exclusively on using force
against NVN.

In contrast, Chairman Sullivan of the newly-created inter-agency
Vietnam Committee 72 said in a proposed memorandum for the President
(May, 1964, undated):

"The Vietnamese Government is not operating efficiently
enough to reverse the adverse trend in the war with the Viet
Cong. ‘The Khanh Government has good intentions; it has announced
good general plans end broad programs; but these plans are not
being translated into effective action against the Viet Cong ~
on either the militery or the civil side. It has, therefore,
become urgently necessary to find a means to infuse the effi-
ciency into the governmental system that it now lacks."

To remedy the GVN's lack of efficiency, Sullivan proposed that
Americans assume de facto command of GVN's machinery.

“American personnel, who have hitherto served only as
advisors, should be integrated into the Vietnamese chain of
command, both military and civil. They should become direct
operational components of the Vietnamese Governmental struc-
ture. For cosmetic purposes American personnel would not
assume titles which would show command functions, but would

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
