Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

4, The rainy season was a factor precluding any
substantial offensive in the panhandle area until mid-
November.

They added that General Khanh's political base was not as strong as we
wished and that it might not be so until the end of the year. This factor
was also cited by other conferees as being a reason for delay. 106/

C. The Need to Refine Plans and Resolve Issues.

Immediately following the Honolulu Conference, its Chairman,
Secretary Rusk, reported to President Johnson, presumably making some
recommendations. Although a record of this discussion is not available,
Ass't Secretary Bundy's brief to Rusk just prior to his White House meet-
ing may provide a clue to the thrust of the Secretary's remarks. Citing
a "somewhat less pessimistic estimate" of conditions in South Vietnam,
the "somewhat shaky" but hopeful situation in Laos, and the military tim-
ing factors reported above, Bundy counseled taking more time "to refine
our plans and estimates." Criticizing CINCPAC's presentation on military
plenning, he stated that it "served largely to highlight some of the diffi-
cult issues we still have." These he identified as: "(1) the likely ef-
fects of_force requirements for any significant operations against the
[feotian/ Panhandle"; (2) the trade-off between the precautionary advan-
tages of a major build-up of forces prior to wider action and*the possible
disadvantages of distorting the signal of our limited objectives; (3) the
sensitivity of estimates of. communist reactions to different levels and.
tempos of a military build-up; and (4) the need for "more refined target-
ing and a clearer definition of just what should be hit and how thoroughly,
and above all, for what objective." 107/

In particular, Bundy emphasized to Secretary Rusk the need for
immediate efforts in the information and intelligence areas. These were
needed, he said, "both for the sake of refining our plans and for prepar- |
ing materials to use for eventual support of wider action if decided upon" --
particularly to support the diplomatic track in laos. He called for "an
urgent U.S. information effort" to "get at the basic doubts of the value
of Southeast Asia and the importance of our stake there..." However, not-
ing the problem of "handling the high degree of expectations flowing from
the conference itself," Bundy recommended "careful guidance and consideration
of high-level statements and speeches in the next two weeks" to assure that
our posture appeared firm. 108/

Rusk was accompanied at the White House meeting by other high-
ranking Honolulu conferees. Bundy's reactions to Honolulu were forwarded
to Secretary McNamara, Mr. McCone and General Taylor prior to the meeting.109/
Events which followed the late afternoon meeting of 3 June provide an indi-
eation of the discussion that probably occurred. :

3h TOP SECRET --Sensitive
