Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

decisions on fcrces or bombing. On March 11, Policy Planning produced
a lengthy draft memo to Clifford outlining the history of Hanoi's
positions on "talks","negotiations", "settlement", and "no advantage”
provision of the San Antonio formula. Its conclusion was that Hanoi
had indicated “acceptance of the operative portion of the San Antonio
formula,” if we really wished to acknowledge it. 55/ Policy Planning
suggested testing this by asking them to repeat recent private assurances
about not attacking Khe Sanh, the cities, across the DMZ, etc. In an
effort to move the Administration to a more forthcoming interpretation
of the San Antonio formula, this memo proposed discussions with GVN to
define what constituted North Vietnamese acceptance.

The memo which Warnke signed the next day went to both
Clifford and Nitze and began with the statement: "I believe that we
should begin to take steps now which will make possible the opening of
negotiations with Hanoi within the next few months. I believe that
such negotiations are much much in our interest...." 56/ His arguments
were: With respect to the San Antonio formula, he pointed to a number
of Hanoi statements accepting the "prompt and productive" U.S. stipula-
tion for the negotiations, and offered his opinion that Hanoi had also
hinted understanding and acquiescence in the "no advantage" provision.
Warnke argued that further U.S. probing for assurances about "no advantage’
would only reinforce Hanoi's impression that this was really a condition.
If this occurred, he argued, Hanoi “may continue to denounce the San
Antonio formula in public. This will make it difficult for us to halt
the bombing if we decide that it is in our interest to do so." 57/ On
the basis of these conclusions, Warnke recommended discussions with the
GVN to explain our view of the desirability of negotiations. and urged
the completion of an inter-agency study preparing a U.S. position for
the negotiations. He summed up his recommendation as follows:

After holding discussions with the GVN and completing
the interagency study, we should halt the bombing and enter
into negotiations, making "no advantage” and mutual de-
escalation the first and immediate order of business at
the negotiations.

If you approve this course of action, we will work
‘with State on a detailed scenario for you to discuss with
Mr. Rusk and the President. 58

Attached to Warnke's memo were separate supporting tabs outlining
Hanoi's public and private responses to the San Antonio formula and
arguing that Hanoi's conception of an acceptable negotiated settlement,
as revealed in its statements, embodied a good deal of flexibility.

” 187 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
