Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

prevent the GVN from controlling that population; to
reduce the will to resist of the RKF/FWMAF and their
governments and correspondingly to strengthen his own
posture and will.

"B. Strategy: The enemy's favored doctrine
of "strategic mobility" has been the subject of debate in
NVN. Politburo member Nguyen Chi Thanh has held that the
proper application is to initiate mobile warfare with
simultaneous attacks throughout SVN. Defense Minister
Vo Nguyen Giap, whose view has prevailed as soon by our
experience, favors a, "defensive/offensive" version of
strategic mobility consisting of these factors:

(1) Developing strong, multi-division
forces in dispersed regions accessible to supplies and
security.

(2) Enticing AF/FWMA forces into pre-
pared positions where dug-in communist forces may inflict
heavy casualties upon then.

(3) Conducting concurrent, intensified
guerrilla and harassment pressure counter-wide to tie
down our forces, destroy small units, attack morale,
and extend his control.

"h, Evaluation:

"A. Present enemy dispositions, logistics, and
level of combat indicate a continued adherence to the
doctrine of strategic mobility implemented by Giap's
"defense/offensive" major tactics. Our intelligence does
not indicate a change in enemy strategy, tactics, or
weapons now or in the coming year, although this possi-
bility remains under continuous scrutiny. Specifically,
we have no evidence of an intent to fragment his main-
forces and revert exclusively to guerrilla-type operations.

"B. The enemy was hurt during 1966 in many
areas, and his principal concentrations near sanctuaries
at the DMZ, in the Chu Pong region, and in the Tay Ninh/
Binh Long areas have been contained by our preemptive
operations as a result of which he has suffered heavy
losses. He is avoiding major contact by fighting defen-
sively when forced to do so, and attempting to rebuild

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
