Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

against the North, One, with an apparent inside source, even reported
that these would be held in abeyance pending the outcome of strikes in
Leos and the GVii reactions to U.S. suggestions for improvement. 198/

&. Joint Planning. In the days immediately following his
return, Ambassador Taylor's schedule precipitated press reports of fran-
tic activity within the Embassy and other parts of the U.S. Mission in
Saigon. Taylor first briefed his Embassy Council and the Embassy staff
on the policy discussions in Washington and the joint US/GVN courses of
action which it was hoped would be followed in South Vietnam during ;
ensuing weeks. On 7 December, he met with Premier Huong and his senior
ministers and with General Khanh. On these occasions he outlined the
military and diplomatic actions which the U.S. Government intended to
take during Phase One and explained how the Adminis tration releted the
possibilities of Phase Two actions to GVN performence. _The Ambassador
described in general terms the kinds of administrative improvements and
joint planning activities which U.S. officials thought the GVN should
underteke, 199/

Similar sessions were held during the next few days, as the details
for the joint Gv /Us efforts were worked out. On the evening of the 8th,
Ambassador Taylor held a reception for memoers of the High Hetional
Council and General Westmoreland hosted the top ARVIN generals at dinner,
At both Occasions, Taylor briefed the assembled on U.S. attitudes toward
the GVN and, Presumably, on the Administration's calculations of U.S.
risk relative to Gy capability. On the following dey, he held a lengthy
session with Premier Huong, Deputy Premier Vien and General Khanh. On
this occasion, he distributed a paper outlining nine specific aCULONS
which the U.S. Government believed were needed to strengthen the GVIN and
in which the local U.S, mission was committed to meee a Teylor reported
that the "paper was generally well received" and that "specific joint
action responsibilities" hag been agreed on. These were to be confirmed
in writing on the following day. On that same day, he submitted a pro-
posed GYli press release, describing in general terms the nature of ee :
new U.S. assistance to be given and the new sreas of GV and joint Gv /US
plenning, designed to improve the situation in South Vietnam. 200/

On the llth, having obtained Administration approval, an official
GVIi statement was released to the press. It related that "a series of
discussions with the U.$. Mission" had just been completed and that the
U.S. Government had offered additional assistance "to improve one execu-
tion of the Government's programs and to restrain /not ‘offset as
originally worded] the mounting infiltration of men and equipment” from
North Vietnan. Among military measures, it specified that U.S, support
would enable “increased numbers of [South Vietnamese/ military, para-
military and police forces" and would permit "the strengthening of the
air defense of South Vietnam." It also mentioned assistance for a
yeriety of forms of industrial, urban and rural development" and promised

68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
