Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"It is in part, if you like, to persuade them that the fact that
large parts of Asis--including all Southeast Asia and the hill states
of the Himalayas--once, supposedly, paid the emperors tribute is no
reason why they should revert to the status of vassal states in the 20th

century.

"Again, this war is not a holy war against communism as an ideology.
It does not seek unconditional surrender--from North Viet-Nam or anyone

else. It does not seek to deny any segment of South Vietnamese opinion
its part in peacefully establishing a stable regime.

"Tt does, however, preclude retreat before two things--first, the
program of the Viet Cong, strongly controlled by the ae to impose
its will by yealences and second, its claim to be the ‘sole genuine
representative’ of a people, the vast majority of whom have rejected
this clain. ‘

"This, I believe, is the background against which to consider in
positive terms what this war is about. It is, I suggest, another step
in a limited operation of a policing type--an operation designed to check
violence as a means to settle international disputes.

"The violence is no less total because it has been largely organized
as a guerrilla operation...."

ke €t

51. Statement b Secreta Rusk Before the Senate Committee on Forei
Relations on May 9, 1966, "Background of U.S. Policy in Southeast
Asia"; Department of State Bulletin, May 30, 1966, p- 830.

ee FF

"TJ was myself in Government during the Truman administration and
well recall the discussions which were held at the highest levels of
Government in the National Security Council as well as the strategic
problems considered by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

"Tf the committee will search its own and the public records on
this matter during that period and since, they could surely have no
doubt that it was the judgment that the security of Southeast Asia was
. extremely important to the security interests of the United States.
This was because of the more than 200 million people in Southeast Asia,
the geography of that area, the important natural resources of the
countries involved, the relationship of Southeast Asia to the total
world situation, and the effect upon the prospects of a durable peace.

"I emphasize the last point because the overriding security interest
of the United States is in organizing a stable peacé. The sacrifices of
World War II and the almost unimaginable losses of a world war III under-

line this central objective of American policy.

D-78
