Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

stead as a positive signal that the Da Nang deployment was to be of short

duration. If this was indeed the case, it suggests that there were still

high-ranking people in Washington who were hoping to make the deployment
of U.S. troops temporary and limited.

General Westmoreland objected to the proposed change on the grounds
that the Marines were more self-sustaining and the Ambassador agreed with
him. 13/ CINCPAC, in objecting to the proposed change, sent the following
telegram to the JCS:

"The action outlined in Ref A, which would place the
173rd Airborne Brigade, a two-battalion brigade, at Da Nang,
embodies several features which are undesirable. A light and
flexible airborne force would be committed to a fixed task
depriving CINCPAC of his air mobile reserve. It is the only
airborne assault force in the theater. A comprehensive array
of plans and logistic preparations which affect many of our
forces, and the forces of other countries, would be under-
mined. The action would employ units which are less adequately
constituted for the purpose.

"Since the origination of OPLAN 32 in 1959, the Marines
have been scheduled for deployment to Da Nang. Seven CINCPAC
and SEATO contingency plans and a myriad of supporting plans at
lower echelons reflect this same deployment. As a result, there
has been extensive planning, reconnaissance, and logistics
preparation over the years. The CG, 9th MEB is presently in
Da Nang finalizing the details of landing the MEB forces in
such a way as to cause minimum impact on the civilian populace.
The forces are present and ready to land, some now embarked,
with plans for execution complete. The deployment has been
thoroughly explored by Amb Taylor with Prime Minister Quat and
the method in which the Merines would be introduced was mutually
agreed upon as pointed out in Ref B.

"Another practical consideration is the fact that 1300
Marines are already at Da Nang. The Marines have been there in
varying numbers for more than two years and thus have long since
established the logistics and administrative base for future
Marine deployments. They have a long standing and effective
local relationship with the populace and the RVNAF. Then, there
is the matter of adaptability for the task. Da Nang is on the
sea coast. Each Marine BLT has its own amphibian vehicles,
which are adaptable to continuing seaborne supply. Each one has
a trained shore party to insure the the fiow of material across
the beach in an area where port facilities are marginal. They

* embody amphibious bulk fuel systems which serve as a cardinal
stand-by in case of interruption of commercial fuel supply.
Their communications equipment and procedures are compatible
with the hawks, helicopters and other Marine formations now

t

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
