Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

optimistically contended that this voluminous target system could be
attacked with no increase in sorties and with an actual decline in air-
craft lost to hostile fire.

The proposal was evidently received in Washington with some-
thing less than enthusiasm. The Chiefs did not send such a recommendation
to the Secretary and there is no evidence that the matter was given serious
high level attention at that time. On January 25 in a cable on anti-
infiltration (i.e. the much-maligned barrier), CINCPAC again raised the
question. He was careful to note (as he had previously in a private cable
to Wheeler and Westmoreland on Jenvary 3) 3/ that, "...no single measure
ean stop infiltration." 4] But he argued that the extraordinary measures
the enemy had taken to strengthen his air defenses and generate a world
opinion against the bombing were evidence of how much the air strikes were
hurting him.

These arguments were reinforced by the January CIA analysis
which also made something of a case for a heavier bombing campaign. It
considered a number of alternative target systems -- modern industry, shipping,
the Red River levees, and other targets -- and two interdiction campaigns,
one "unlimited" and the other restricted to the southern NVN panhandle and
Taos, and concluded that the unlimited campaign was the most promising. 5/

On the modern industry target list, CIA included 20 facili-
ties, 7 of them electric power plants. Knocking out these facilities, it
said, would eliminate the fruits of several hundred million dollars capital
investment, cut off the source of one-fourth of the GNP and most foreign
exchange earnings, disrupt other sectors of the economy which used their
products, add to the burden of aid required from NVN's allies, and temporarily
displace the urban labor force. The loss would be a serious blow to NVN's
hopes for economic progress and status, negating a decade of intense effort
devoted to the construction of modern industry. This would exert additional
pressure on the regime, but would not by itself, CIA believed, be intense
enough to bring Hanoi to the negotiating table. Outside aid could no doubt
make up the deficit in goods to sustain the economy and the national defense
of the North as well as to continue the war in the South. 6/

Aerial mining, provided it was extended to coastal and

‘ inland waters as well as the harbors, and especially if accompanied by
intensive armed reconnaissance against all LOCs to China, would be very
serious. NVii would almost certainly have to reduce some import programs,
not sufficiently perhaps to degrade the flow of essential military sup-
plies or prevent continued support of the war in SVN, but enough to hurt
the economy. 7,

Bombing the levee system which kept the Red River under control,
if timed correctly, could cause large crop losses and force NVN to import

2 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
