Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"This is not the same kind of aggression which the world has
long been used to. Instead of the sweep of invading armies there
is the steady and the deadly attack in the night by guerrilla bands
that come without warning, that kill people while they sleep.

"In Viet-Nam we pursue that same principle which has infused
American action in the Far East for a quarter of a century. There
are those who ask why this responsibility should be ours. The answer,
I think, is simple. There is no one else who can do the job. Our a
power alone, in the final test, can stand between expanding communism
and independent Asian nations.

"Thus, when India was attacked, it looked to us for help, and
we gave it immediately. We believe that Asia should be directed by
Asians. But that means that each Asian people must have the right
to find its own way, not that one group or one nation should overrun
all the others.

"Now make no mistake about it, the aim in Viet-Nam is not simply
the conquest of the South, tragic as that would be. It is to show
that American commitment is worthless, and they would like very much
to do that, and once they succeed in doing that, the gates are down
and the road is open to expansion and to endless conquest. Moreover,
we are directly committed to the defense of South Viet-Nam beyond any
question.

"Tn 1954 we signed the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty
and that treaty committed us to act to meet aggression Sesinst South
Viet-Nem....

30. Address by William P. Bundy Before Dallas Council on World Affairs
on May 13, 1965, “Reality and Myth Concerning South Vietnam,
Department of State Bulletin, June 7, 1965, p. 093.

Se

"Myths on the South Viet-Nem Story

"This is the simple basic story of what has happened in South Viet-
Nam since 1954. . Let me now turn to certain myths that have arisen
concerning that story.

"First, there is the question of the attitude of the South Viet-
namese Government and ourselves toward the reunification of Viet-Nam
through free elections. The 1954 Geneva accords had provided for free
elections by secret ballot in 1956, and it has been alleged that the
failure to proceed with these elections in some way justified Hanoi's

Fe .

: p-42
