Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date; 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

regardless of their parent agency, and those reports will be
reviewed by Porter's office, which will also control transfers
and. assignments.

5 ft aie

"f, At the more complex region/corps level, we will consider
& similar system, with a senior civilian representative respon-
. Sible for the overall U.S. civilian effort in the corps area.
He will work with the MACV senior advisor, and will in effect
be my agent (and Bill Porter's) at the corps. I have long be-
. lieved in the need. for a sophisticated politically-minded man
in charge of our effort with the politically volatile corps
commanders, and this is a step in thet direction. Porter and
I will be looking carefully for the best men for these four diffi-
cult jobs...

"2, I do not want another deputy Ambassador. I intend to
provide office space for Porter in the new chancery (his present
office will remain at his disposal even after he moves). ‘There
is simply no job for another deputy Ambassador, particularly
since the present political counselor works closely with me,
reporting directly.

"3, There is no doubt that the steps mentioned above are
major ones. Clearly I cannot predict now how long they will
take to achieve, or how much disruption they will cause in their
early stages. For one thing, I feel that a physical relocation
of certain offices now spread out across the city is vital, and
we are now studying the details of how to do this. Forter will
probably need to establish his offices in a building other than
the Chancery, in order to give the office of operations a firm
guiding hand. He will, however, keep an office close to me,
and he will be kept closely informed of policy developments.

ee

"S, I will need your personal support during the period
which lies ahead. J am sure that ali hands here, regardless
of agency affiliation, will support this effort to unify the
U.S, team, The same must be true of the agencies that must con-
tinue to backstop us in Washington. Personnel recruitment will
remain in your hands, and it ultimately determines the caliber
of our efforts. Porter will send you separate messages on the
Question of personnel, so that new guidance and requirements
ean be put into effect as quickly as possible.

"6. We look forward through reorganization to tightening
and simplifying contacts, advice and coordination with GVN
authorities repsonsible for RD. 59/

15
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
