Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

are notified to the contrary.

If in your judgment individual members of the Mission are
not functioning effectively, you should take whatever action
you feel may be required, reporting the circumstances, of
course, to the Department of State.

In case the departure from the Republic of Vietnam of
any individual member of the Mission is indicated in your
Judgment, I shall expect you to make the decision and see
that it is carried into effect. Such instances I am confident
will be rare.

Now one word about your relations to the military. As
you know, the United States Diplomatic Mission includes Service
Attaches, Military Assistance Advisory Groups and other Mili-
tary components attached to the Mission. It does not, however,
include United States military forces operating in the field
where such forces are under the command of a United States
area military commander. ‘The line of authority to these '
forces runs from me, to the Secretary of Defense, to the Joint
Chiefs of Staff in Washington and to the area commander in the
field.

Although this means that the chief of the American Diplo-
matic Mission is not in the line of military command, nevertheless,
as Chief of Mission, you should work closely with the appropriate
area military commander to assure the full exchange of information.
If it is your opinion that activities by the United States mili-
tary forces may adversely affect our over-all relations with the
people or governments of the Republic of Vietnam you should
promptly discuss the matter with the military commander and, if
necessary, request a decision by higher authority. 46/

It is reasonable to surmise that in mid-1961 events did not seem
pressing enough to cast aside a developed--if imperfect--concept of opera-
tional integration in favor of an untried substitute arrangement. In
fact, if one wanted firm leadership one would have had less radical
alternatives to which to turn. To mention two, Secretarial involvement
to a degree tantamount to taking charge of the war (much as Secretary
McNamara did in 1962) or the appointment of en Ambassador to RVN with
such military preeminence that he need not defer to other military judg-
ments (as, General Taylor in 196).

The decision to supervise the American effort in a more or less
conventional way had a direct bearing on the nature of the advisory build-
up then being discussed. It was highly unlikely that General Lansdale's
radical advisory proposals would be kindly received under a system managed
along conventional lines. Even before the Presidential Task Force idea

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
