Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(3) Thailand Planning

In May 1962 when the Pathet Iao threat against
Thailand became acute, a U.S. battle group was dispatched on joint
training exercises within the country. President Kennedy ennounced
that more U.S. troops would be sent, and by 15 May a second contin-
gent landed. On the same day, newspapers reported that the U.S. was
seeking SEATO help, and that W. Averell Harriman, then Assistant
Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, had "outlined the U.S.
position in separate conferences with envoys of Australia, New Zeland,
Pakistan, and the Philippines." 69/ Within two days, all the SEATO
members except France had agreed to send help if necessary. The U.S.
sent 4,000 troops into Thailand. Three other SEATO nations actually
put forces (albeit token forces) into Thailand. The UK sent 10 Hunter
jet- fighters, Australia sent a jet squadron, and New Zealand sent 100
parachute troops and three transport aircraft. The Philippines and
Pakistan publicly noted that they were standing by to help.

(4) The Future

Discussions on the best method under SEATO to “meet
the common danger" in Vietnam have not produced an overall agreement,
and three of the eight SHEATO nations -- the UK, France, and Pakistan --
have not responded to Vietnam's invitation to commit troops there. Of
the five SEATO nations now fighting in Vietnam, the strength figures as
of 17 October 1967 were:

U.S. 169,000

Australia 6, 500

Thailand 2,500

Philippines 2,000

New Zealand 4.00
Total 180,400 70/

One non-member of SEATO, the Republic of Korea, was contributing 48,000
troops to the fighting as of that date, raising the Free World Forces
total to 528,400. France, in view of past policies, could not be expected
to make a contribution; the amount of SEATO "unity" displeyed by French
participation would be offset by other obvious considerations. Pakistani
assistance might be welcomed as a gesture of support for SEATO. But the
major shortfall to date in SEATO has been the British decision that it is
unable to participate militarily in Vietnam.

With all its weaknesses, the majority of the SEATO pact
nations have actually collaborated in regional defense in the Vietnam war.
In fact, given the range of disparity among the members, it is a source
of wonder that support of SEATO nations for Vietnam has been as strong
as it has been. The conflict in Vietnam is a crucible for SEATO; the
future of the alliance will be profoundly affected by the outcome of the
war.

A-31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
