Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

MILITARY PRESSURES AGAINST NVN: NOVEMBER - DECEMBER 1964

In the late fall of 1964, President Johnson made a tentative decision
in favor of limited military pressures against North Vietnam. He acted on
the consensus recommendation of his principal advisors, a consensus achieved
by & process of compromising alternatives into a lowest-common-denominator
proposal a% the sub-cabinet and cabinet level, thereby precluding any real
Presidential choice among viable options. The choices he was given all
included greater pressures against North Vietnam. The Presidential decision
itself was for a limited and tightly controlled two-step build-up of pressures.
The first phase involved an intensification of existing harassment activities
with reprisals; the second, which was approved in principle only, was to be
@ sustained, slowly escalating air campaign against the North. The spectrum
of choice could have run from (a) a judgment that the situation in the South
was irretrievable and, hence, a decision to begin the withdrawal of U.S.
forces; to (b) a judgment that the maintenance of a non-communist South
Vietnam was indispensable to U.S. strategic interests and, therefore, required
a massive U.S, intensification of the war both in the North and in the South.
The extreme withdrawal option was rejected almost without surfacing for
consideration since it was in direct conflict with the independent, non-
communist SVN commitments of NSAM 288. The opposite option of massive involve-
ment, which was essentially the JCS recommendation at an early point in these
deliberations, was shunted aside because both its risks and costs were too
high.

Short of those extremes, however, were two other alternatives that
were briefly considered by the Working Group as fallback positions but
rejected before they were fully explored. While both came into some con-
flict with the commitments to South Vietnam of NSAM 288, they could have
been justified as flowing from another long-standing U.S. conviction,
namely that ultimately the war would have to be won in the South by the
South Vietnamese. These fallback positions were outlined in the following
manner :

"1. To hold the situation together as long as possible so that
we have time to strengthen other areas of Asia,

"2. To take forceful enough measures in the situation so that
we emerge from it, even in the worst case, with our
standing as the principal helper against Communist expan-
sion as little impaired as possible. : :

"3. To make clear...to nations, in Asia particularly, that
failure in South Vietnam, if it comes, was due to special
local factors that do not apply to other nations we are
committed to defend...."
