Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

By the final quarter of 1963, the conclusion
was inescapable that despite the considerable
improvement in the offensive capabilities of the
RVN's counter-insurgency forces, the VC likewise -
had improved their own capabilities. It became
apparent that _a gradual erosion of the govern=
ment's position throughout the country had been
underway since at least August 1963. This erosion
became progressively worse after the November
coup, although late in January 1964, the Minh
government exhibited some signs of assuming the
initiative. This initiative dissolved with the
Khanh coup on 30 January. Organizational
dislocations brought about by coups have weakened
the national direction of most of the counter-
insurgency programs underway throughout the
country. The large number of personnel changes,
both locally and nationally, have played a crucial
role in the indecision and lack of energetic
direction of the government's programs.

Despite General Khanh's expressed determination
to prosecute the war vigorously, available
statistics since his coup reflect a gradual decline
in small-scale ARVN operations. In addition,
Communist forces continue to enjoy the initiative
and to execute disruptive operations at times
and places of their own choosing...

All available evidence points to a steady
improvement in the VC's military posture, both
quantitatively and qualitatively, throughout 1963
and the first two months of 196)..../Emphasis

supplied./ 54/

In advising the Embassy in Saigon of the intended visit of
Secretary McNamara and General Taylor in March, a Joint State/Defense
message outlined the issues that it was hoped would be taken up during
the visit. Five major subject areas were named, each of which was
divided into parts. Objectives were described, in general, as "to
produce best possible evaluation of situation, assist you in measures
to improve it, and help Washington make future policy decisions." 55/

The first subject area was a Review of Situation, in three parts;
Political, €conomic, and military. It was suggested that the political

review should be in executive session limited to the three principals
(McNamara, Lodge and Taylor) and the DCM, Harkins, Brent, de Silva, and

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ha
