Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -~ Sensitive

NSAM 273 was specifically programatic so far as SVN was
concerned only in directing priority of effort to the Delta.

(5) We should concentrate our efforts, and insofar
as possible we should persuade the government
of South Vietnam to concentrate its effort, on
the critical situation in the Mekong Delta. This
concentration should include not only military but
political, economic, social, educational and infor-
mationeal effort. We should seek to turn the tide
not only of battle but of belief, and we should
seek to increase not only the controlled hamlets
but the productivity of this area, especially
where the proceeds can be held for the advantage of
anti-Communist forces. h/

In general, the policies expressed by NSAM 273 were responsive
to the older philosophy of our intervention there, which was that.
the central function of the U.S. effort was to help the South
Vietnamese to help themselves because only if they did the major

_gjob themselves could that job in reality be done at all. We would
assist stabilization of the new regime and head it in that direction.

(3) It is a major interest of the United States govern-
ment that the present provisional government of South
Vietnam should be assisted in consolidating itself in
holding and developing increased public support. 5/

Definition of the central task in South Vietnam as that of
winning the hearts and minds of the people and of gaining for the
GVN the support of the people had been the central consideration
in the late summer and early fall of what to do about Diem and
Nhu. The argument concerning the Diem government centered on the
concept that the struggle in South Vietnam could not be won without
the support of the South Vietnamese people and that under the Diem
regime -- especially because of the growing power and dominance of
Nhu -- the essential popular base was beyond reach. In the 2 October
report to the President as well as in the discussions later at
Honolulu on 20 November this theme was prominent. The U.S. could
not win the struggle, only the Vietnamese could do that. For
instance, in the report to the President of 2 October, there were
these words in the section on "the U.S. military advisory and support
effort,"

We may all be proud of the effectiveness of the U.S,
military advisory and support. With few exceptions,
U.S. military advisors report excellent relations
with their Vietnamese counterparts, whom they charac-
terize as proud and willing soldiers. The stiffening
and exemplary effect of U.S. behavior and attitudes

" TOP SECRET - Sensitive
