Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

5 Us. Aids CRAPO

The role of the United States in the training and equipping
of these forces mirrored the misapprehensions of other aspects of'U.5S.
poliey. ih 1954 Secretary of State Dulles had drawn two principal les-
sons from the First Indochina War: (1) that it was impossible to support
a belligerent in such a war unless he embodied the nationalistic aspira-
tions of the people, and (2) collective action on behalf of that belli-
gerent could not be drawn together amid the war. 96/ The first took
the policy form of U.S. insistence upon a truly national army for South
Vietnam, i.e., an army entirely free of French command. The second
materialized as the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization. On 8 September
1954, the U.S., U.K. and France joined with Australia, New Zealand,
Pakistan, the Philippines, and Thailand and agreed that: 97/

Article IV

"1. Each Party recognizes that aggression by means or
armed attack in the treaty area against any of the parties
or against any State or territory which the Parties by unani-
mous agreement may hereafter designate, would endanger its
own peace and safety, and agrees that it will in that event act
to meet the common danger in accordance with its eonstitutional
processes....

"2, If, in the opinion of any of the Parties, the inviola-
bility or the integrity of the territory or the sovereignty or
political independence of any Party in the treaty area or of
any other State or territory to which the provisions of para-
graph 1 of this Article from time to time apply is threatened
in any way other than armed attack or is affected or threatened
by any fact or situation which might endanger the peace of the
area, the Parties shall consult immediately in order to agree

on the measures which should be taken for the common defense.

"3, It is understood that no action on the territory of
any State designated by unanimous agreement under paragraph 1
of this Article or on any territory so designated shall be
taken except at the invitation or with the consent of the
government concerned...."

By a Protocol to the SEATO Treaty, executed the same day, the Parties:

",..unanimously designate for the purpose of Article IV
of the Treaty the States of Cambodia and Laos and the free
territory under the jurisdiction of the State of Vietnam...."
Shortly after SEATO was formed, the U.S. and France agreed on direct U.5.
aid for the Diem government; a joint communique issued 29 September
reflected the U.S. belief that the French would remain a military power
in South Vietnam: 98/

25 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
