Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

a. General Wheeler and others would advocate a
substantial extension of targets and authority in and
near Hanoi and Haiphong, mining of Haiphong, and naval
gunfire up to a Chinese Buffer Zone;

b. Others would advocate a seasonal step-up
through the spring, but without these added elements. 33/

The two detailed tabs to the memo of special interest to
this study were "B" and "F" dealing with negotiations and bombing respec-
tively. The negotiations paper was written by Bundy and was a lengthy
argument for doing nothing we had not already done. Its central message
was contained in a few paragraphs near the middle of the paper:

As to our conditions for stopping the bombing and
entering into talks, we continue to believe that the San
Antonio formula is "rock bottom." The South Vietnamese
are in fact talking about much stiffer conditions, such
as stopping the infiltration entirely. Any move by us
to modify the San Antonio formula downward would be extremely
disturbing in South Vietnam, and would have no significant
offsetting gains in US public opinion or in key third
countries. On the contrary, we should continue to take the
line that the San Antonio formula laid out conditions under
which there was a reasonable prospect that talks would get
somewhere and be conducted in good faith. Hanoi's major
offensive has injected a new factor, in which we are bound
to conclude that there is no such prospect for the present.

Moreover, we should at the appropriate time --
probably not in a major statement, but rather in response
to a question -- make the point that "normal" infiltration
of men and equipment from the North cannot mean the much
increased levels that have prevailed since October. We
do not need to define exactly what we would mean by
"normal" but we should make clear that we do not mean the
levels since San Antonio was set out.

Apart from this point on our public posture, we should
be prepared -- in the unlikely event that Hanoi makes an
affirmative noise on the "no advantage" assumption -- go
go back at them through some channel anil make this same
point quite explicit.

In short, our public posture and our private actions
should be designed to: 7

a. Maintain San Antonio and our general public
willingness for negotiations.

172 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
