Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"In recent weeks the French have actively supported proposals
for four power cooperation in Southeast Asia to prevent the spread
of communism, and there has been much talk about the strategic
importance of Indochina as a bastion against the southward spread
of Chinese Communists.

"As far as the Annamites are concerned, they were encouraged
to believe that after the defeat of Japan we would assist them
in obtaining independence. As it became apparent that our sym-
pathies were tempered by strategic considerations in Europe, the
popularity of the United States has diminished. Nevertheless,
the prestige of the United States is still high, and even Ho Chi
Minh has been careful to prevent any public anti-American propa-
ganda...

-"No one knows how many communists there are in Indochina,
but the number of real party members is certainly small. The highest
estimate is 20% of the troops fighting with Ho Chi Minh and this
includes sympathizers. However, the number is undoubtedly growing,
and at the same time non-communist military units are being steadily
infiltrated with secret agents. Units under communist command are
generally better armed. Thus the problem for the leader contemplat-
ing changing sides is not an easy one.

"Another point on which definite information is lacking is
the channel of communications with Moscow and the center of re-
gional control...Certainly satisfactory communications exist
since Moscow publications of fairly recent date are frequently
seized by the French...

"One peculiar thing about Vietnam Communism is that there
has been very little anti-American propaganda. It is obvious
that this is not due to ignorance of the current party line. It
apparently represents a hope on the part of Ho Chi Minh that he
may still obtain American support for or at least acceptance of
a Viet Minh government under his leadership. Evidence that this
hope is diminishing is furnished in a regional party directive
dated in November 1948 which stated that active anti-American
propaganda, should be conducted in party circles and by word of
mouth among the people but should not yet appear on the radio,
in the press, or in public speeches...

"Opposed to the French forces are about 75,000 Vietnamese
troops of various political complexions, largely under communist
dominated leadership. There is considerable French-furnished
evidence of communist political commissars and indoctrination
extending down to company strength levels. It is certain that
the disciplined communist element has been the largest factor

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-O}
