Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive.

trend, and French themselves took cognizance of it both in new
Constitution and in their agreements with Vietnam. On other
hand we do not lose sight fact that Ho Chi Minh has direct
Communist connections and it should be obvious that we are

not interested in seeing colonial empire administrations
supplanted by philosophy and political organizations emanat-
ing from and _ controlled by Kremlin. Fact does remain, however,
that a situation does exist in Indochina which can no longer
be considered, if it ever was considered, to be of a local
character. 27/

In May, 1949, Dean Acheson, then Secretary of State, instructed the U.S.
representative in Hanoi to warn Vietnamese nationalists against any ac-
ceptance of a coalition with Ho and the Viet Minh:

",..You may take following line as representing consensus
informed Americans:

"In Light Ho's known background, no other assumptions
possible but that he outright Commie so long as (1) he fails
unequivocally repudiate Moscow connections and Commie doc-
trine and (2) remains personally singled out for praise by
internat'l Commie press and receives its support. Moreover,
US not impressed by nationalist character red flag with
yellow stars. Question whether Ho as much nationalist as
Commie is irrelevant. All Stalinists in colonial areas are
nationalists. With achievement nat'l aims (i.e., indepen-
dence) their objective necessarily becomes subordination
state to Commie purposes and ruthless extermination not
only opposition groups but all elements suspected even
slightest deviation. On basis examples eastern Eur it must
be assumed such wid be goal Ho and men his stamp if included
Baodai Govt. To include them in order achieve reconcilia-
tion opposing polit elements and QTE national unity UNQTE
wild merely postpone settlement issue whether Vietnam to be
independent nation or Commie satellite until circumstances
probably even less favorable nationalists than now. It
must of course be conceded theoretical possibility exists
estab National Communist state on pattern Yugoslavia in any

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-h5 Cot ray an
