Vv. D.

ho,

hi.

he,

h3,

45.

47,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

JUSTIFICATION OF THE WAR -- PUBLIC STATEMENTS
JOHNSON ADMINISTRATION

: 1966

CONTENTS

Pa. ge

President Johnson vows to fulfill “America's solemn pledge to

the countries around the world" whose independence rests, in

large measure, on confidence in America's word and in America's
PFOLECUION scleigeucn esos ap ciceve ped cisbie senips sueee owisicicsesivineee vere Dao

President Johnson states, "If we allow the Communists to win
Vietnam, it will become easier and more appetizing for them to
take over other countries in other parts of the world.......... D-64

Secretary Rusk explains relationship between U.S. presence in

VN and its security in terms of oft-spoken Communist threat of
"wars of liberation" throughout developing world; SBATO com-
mitment and other mutual security pacts being tested......+ee+. D-65

President Johnson states the U.S. is in VN to prevent aggression
as pledged by four Presidents and formally agreed to in the
SEATO SLPS OUEST as we a ietwe (ete! salle alelaimte/ele lye shi gceia eralelera vate aus ele esa/e alee erayaverace D-69

A legal analysis of U.S. involvement in VN concludes "actions

are in conformity with international law and with the Charter

of the United Nations." President's actions are in confor-

mance with Constitutional powers and consistent with both the

SEATO commitment as approved by Senate and the joint resolution

of August 10, 1964 approved by Congress...scsscccecsccccesseess D-70

Ambassador Goldberg suggests that the doctrine of "wars of li-
beration" represents a threat to independent nations throughout
the WITTE Ol ciao e 1s asasslatela\ere‘eco leveud?s oie ll ulate etele eieie (aim algecels-alela bless! §-9' ae ate are! bie D-71

Vice President Humphrey explains U.S. position in VN is in-
tended "to restrain the attempt by Asian Communists to expand
by POSES a at Te (array era ee Sw mea L a are ad le Upvatiadontely ate receeldvel tate eis! -evsiera/tanaviienane D-72

Vice President Humphrey cites U.S. efforts to check aggression,
permit self-determination for SVN and to convince expansionist
Asian Communists that force will not be tolerated in this

nuclear era as requiring our firm stand in VN. .«cescceseseseeees D-73

D-61
