- Oc,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

they did not appear critical to either the viability of the economy,

the defense of the nation, or the prosecution of the war in the South.
The idea that destroying, or threatening to Jestroy, NVN's industry
would pressure Hanoi into calling it quits seems, in retrospect, a
colossal misjudgment. The idea was based, however, on a plausible
assumption about the rationality of NVN's leaders, which the U.S. intel-
ligence community as a whole seemed to share. 69/ This was that the
value of what little industrial plant NVN possessed was disproportionately
great. That plant was purchased by an extremely poor nation at the

price of considerable sacrifice over many years. Even though it did

not amount to much, it no doubt symbolized the regime's hopes and desires
for national status, power, and wealth, and was probably a source of
considerable pride. It did not seem unreasonable to believe that NVN
leaders would not wish to risk the destruction of such assets, especially
when that risk seemed (to us) easily avoidable by cutting down the
insurgency and deferring the takeover of SVN until another day and per-
haps in another manner -- which Ho Chi Minh had apparently decided to

do once before, in 1954. After all, an ample supply of oriental patience
is precisely what an old oriental revolutionary like Ho Chi Minh was
supposed to have.

For 1965, at least, these assumptions about Hanoi's leaders were
not borne out. The regime's public stance remained one of strong defi-
ance, determined to endure the worst and still see the U.S, defeated.
The leadership directed a shift of strategy in the South, from an attempt
at a decisive military victory to a strategy of protracted conflict
designed to wear out the opposition and prepare the ground for an eventual
political settlement, but this decision was undoubtedly forced upon it
by U.S. intervention in the South. There was no sign that bombing the
North, either alone or in combination with other U.S. actions, had brought
about any greater readiness to settle except on their terms.

In the North, the regime battened down and prepared to ride out
the storm. With Soviet and Chinese help, it greatly strengthened its
air defenses, multiplying the number of AAA guns and radars, expanding
the number of jet fighter airfields and the jet fighter force, and intro-
ducing an extensive SAM system. Economic development plans were laid
aside. Imports were increased to offset production losses. Bombed
facilities were in most cases simply abandoned. The large and vulnerable
barracks and storage depots were replaced by dispersed and concealed ones.
Several hundred thousand workers were mobilized to keep the transportation
system operating. Miles of by-pass roads were built around choke-points
+o make the system redundant. Knocked-out bridges were replaced by fords,
ferries, or alternate structures, and methods were adopted to protect
them from attack. Traffic shifted to night time, poor weather, and
camouflage. Shuttling and transhipment practices were instituted. Con-
struction material, equipment, and workers were prepositioned along key

56 ' OP SECRET - Sensitive
