Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

The Seoretary of State ; _ Nay 4, 1950
Ps. Griffin :
Conference on Indo-Uhina — May 2, 1950.

1. ‘Tho Info-China situation cannot be maintained in
4ts present status quo,

Tine ia of the essonce in the Vietnem eltuation. Bao
Tet and his Government cannot maintain a etatue quo. Bao
Ret must either quickly vin additional Stipport and pees
show ing Sains in prosticgn of there will be a falling away
of his “present following. there is general cynicisi in
Vietnan about the French willingness to permit reasonable
coliegovernsent, and that cyniciss spreadae to tae tao Dat
Governuent. Bao Bal at rresent representa | minerit
EXOUp,. but he sti ic potentially Gapable of achicving
Bubstsntial majority suncort Lf ho d2n prove that. he is
taking over suthord ty aha responsibility and 4s exercising
‘them. Ue must ba given face. Unlens tne yresent trend is
materielly and alwest imucdiately aorrested, Bao Dai's
opportuad ty 3 Wili be irretrievably ios t and hts strongth wiil
run to water. To salvage the situation a fundamentsl apres=
ment mist be breurht about with the French, followed quickly
and with certainty wh th antion designed te meke Sac Dai a
puccesa. If Bao Dat onea starts elicping, 4t will be
impossible to restore hin,

2. Froblom of a foundation for asreement.

in orcer to. have a fivm basis of agrecement with the
‘french sorerding U.S. relations vith the State of Vietnan
‘and the Kinedome of Cambo aha and inoa, £6 Aas sisost &
noesscity to escure froa th @ French a vational evaluation
et what they expect of Ingo-China, a forecast of the
gituntioa they reasonably believe oan be brought about
thet would eatisty the aspirations of the pe eople of
Victnan within the Prenek Union.

tno French themselves were forcsd to the sonclusion
that a conclusive military solution of thelr problem was
unattainable end they resorted, therefore, to the effort
to bring about a politics’ esalution. In that effert the.
United etates bocane invelvod in the al aa of the
Covernsen’ or Verne,

The French

322

