Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

{These were our objectives when our bombing program
was initiated in February 1965. They remain our objectives
today. 5/

Weighed against these objectives, the bombing campaign
had been successful:

It was initiated at a time when the South Vietnamese
were in fear of a military defeat. There can be no question
that the bombing raised and sustained the morale of the
South Vietnamese at that time. It should be equally clear
to the North Vietnamese that they have paid and will
continue to pay a high price for their continued aggression.
We have also made the infiltretion of men and supplies from
North Vietnam to South Vietnam increasingly difficult and
costly. 6/

With respect to infiltration, the Secretary said, mili-
tary leaders had never anticipsted that complete interdiction was
possible. He cited the nature of combat in SVN, without “established
pattle lines" and continuous large-scale fighting, which did not
require a steady stream of logistical support and which reduced the
amount needed. Intelligence estimated that vo/ivA forces in SVM ,
required only 15 tons a day brought in from outside, "but even if the
quantity were five times that amount it could be transported by only
a few trucks." By comparison with that amount, the capacity of the
transportation network was very large:

North Vietnam's ability to continue its aggression
against the South thus depends upon imports of war-supporting
material and their transhipment to the South. Unfortunately
for the chances of effective interdiction, this simple
agricultural economy has a highly diversified transportation
system consisting of rails and roads and waterways. The
North Vietnamese use barges and sampans, trucks and foot
power, and even bicycles capable of carrying 500-pound
loads to move goods over this network. The capacity of
this system is very large -- the volume of traffic it is
now required to carry, in relation to its capacity, is very
small....-Under these highly unfavorable circumstances, I
think that our military forces have done a superb job in
making continued infiltration more difficult and expensive. i

The Secretary defended the targeting decisions which had
been made in carrying out the program, and the “target-by-target analysis"
which balanced the military importance of the target against the cost
in U.S. lives and the risks of expanding the war. He argued that the
target selection had not inhibited the use of airpower against targets
of military significance. The target ‘list in current use by the JCS

\ TOP SECRET = Sensitive
-9 aad Caen ae he ee ee,
