Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION —

communist penetration in any one area, point to the importance
of action designed to forestall any aggression by the Chinese
Communists. The most effective possible deterrent would be @
joint warning by the United States and certain other govern-
ments regarding the grave consequences of Chinese aggression
against Southeast Asia, and implying ‘he threat of retaliation
against Communist China itself. Such a warning should be
issued in conjunction with other nations, including at least
the United Kingdom, France, Australia and New Zealand. Parti-
cipation in such a warning involves all the risks and dis-
advantages of a precommitment to take ection in future and
unknown circumstances. However, these disadventages must be
weighed against the alternative of ea costly effort to repel
Chinese invasion after it has actually occurred. A second,

but probably less effective, means of attempting to deter such
én invesion would be to focus world attention on the continuing
threet of Chinese Communist aggression ageinst Southeast Asia
and to make cleer to the Soviet and Chinese Communist Govern-
ments the fact that the United States views the situation in
Southeest Asia with great concern. In fact, statements along
these lines have already been made. Such means might also
incluce a Peace Observation Commission, if desired and request-
ed by the countries concerned, public addresses by U.S. offi-
cials, and "show the fleg" visits by naval-and air units.

17. The Chinese Nationalist forces represent consider-
able reserve upon which to draw in the event of military
action against Communist China. The deficiency in equipment
and training seriously limits the possible employment of these
forces et present, however, continuation of our training and
supply efforts should serve to alleviate these deficiencies,
The manner of employment of these forces is beset not only
with military but also with political difficulties. Hence
the decision as to the best use of these forces cannot be
made at this time. Nevertheless, we should be prepared to
make the best practicable use of this military augmentation
in light of the circumstances existing at the time.

TOP SECRET

(62)
oa
|
ne)

sae

ANNEA TO WN

472
