Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRHT - Sensitive

the efficiency of our interdiction effort; and that (5) we retained
the option to return further north and restrike those targets if mili-
tary considerations so required. 34/

A White House memorandum, prepared by Walt Rostow, on the same
subject, essentially repeated what McNaughton had said. To Rostow the
policy issues and contention were first revolving around choices
involving the North and these, in turn, broke out to either: (a) closing
the top of the funnel - under this strategy he meant that we could mine —
the major harbors and perhaps bomb port facilities and even consider a
blockade; in addition, attacks would be made systematically against the
rail lines between Hanoi and mainland China. He exhibited little confi-
dence that this would have a very important effect upon the North Viet-
namese war effort especially in light of the tremendous costs which he
anticipated, especially the political costs vis-a-vis the Soviet Union
and the Chinese Communists. He concluded for this expanded course of
action that tension between the United States and the Soviet Union and
Communist China would surely increase but that if we were very deter-
mined we could impose additional burdens on Hanoi and its allies, that
we might cut their capacity below requirements, but that the outcome
was uncertain; (b) attacking what was inside the funnel. This was
essentially what the Air Force and Navy had been trying in the Hanoi/
Haiphong area for some weeks. Rostow disagreed with the contention that
the attacks on the Hanoi-Haiphong area had no bearing on the war in the
south, a significant difference from what McNeughton believed. In Rostow's
estimation the North Vietnamese had diverted massive amounts of resources,
energies and attention throughout the civil and military establishment of
North Vietnam. This gross dislocation, in turn, imposed general economic,
political and psychological difficulties on the north during a period
already complicated by a bad harvest and some food shortages. He did
not accept the CIA assessment that the bombings in the North in fact
hardened the will of the people, and in his judgment, up to that point
our bombing had been a painful additional -cost that they had been willing
to bear to pursue their efforts in the south. Although he acknowledged
that there were uncertainties about the eventual political costs of
expanded or continued bombing in the Hanoi-Haiphong area, he played down
what was becoming an increasingly attractive line of argument -- that the
continuation of attacks at about the level that we had been conducting
in Hanoi-Haiphong area would lead to increased Soviet pressure on Berlin
or even some kind of general war with the Soviet Union. In fact, in
Rostow's words, "What the Soviets have been trying to signal is - keep
away from our ships, we may counter escalate to some degree; but we do

not want a nuclear confrontation over Vietnam." 35/

The next alternative (c) that Rostow discussed was the one which
McNaughton had recommended -- that of concentrating our bombing efforts
in Route Packages 1 and 2. The advantages of these he saw would plainly

*

139 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
