-
‘
SS

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Secretary McNamara wrote: "After the 44 US/third-country battalions
have been deployed and after some strong action has been taken in the
program of bombing the North (e.g., after the key railroad bridges
north of Hanoi have been dropped), we could, as part of a diplomatic
initiative, consider introducing a 6-8 week pause in the program of
bombing the North."

The pause which eventually occurred -- for 37 days, from
December 1965 until 31 January 1966 -- was somewhat shorter than the
six-to-eight weeks McNamara suggested, but it was clearly long enough
to allow the North Vietnamese fully to assess the options before them.
They were not very attractive options, at least in the way they were
seen in Washington. McNamara summarized them in a memorandum to the
President on 30 November:

It is my belief that there should be a three- or
four-week pause [note that McNamara himself no longer
held to the six-to-eight week duration] in the program
of bombing the North before we either greatly increase
our troop deployments to Vietnam or intensify our strikes
against the North. The reasons for this belief are,
first, that we must lay a foundation in the mind of the
American public and in world opinion for such an enlarged
phase of the war and, second, we should give North Viet-
nam a face-saving chance to stop the aggression. 28/

In other words, Hanoi should be given the implicit
(although, naturally, not explicitly stated) choice of either giving
up "its side of the war," as Secretary Rusk often put it, or facing
a greater level of punishment from the United States. In an earlier
memorandum, dated 3 November, and given to the President on the 7th,
McNamara had remarked that "a serious effort would be made to avoid
advertising [2 pause/ as an ultimatum to the DRV," 29/ yet Hanoi
could scarcely have seen it as anything else. John McNaughton had per-
fectly encapsulated the Washington establishment's view of a bombing
pause the previous July, when he had noted in pencil in the margin of
a draft memorandum the words "RT /i.e., ROLLING THUNDER/ (incl. Pause),
ratchet." 30/ The image of a ratchet, such as the device which raises
the net on a tennis court, backing off tension between each phase of
increasing it, was precisely what McNaughton and McNamara, William
Bundy and Alexis Johnson at State, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had
in mind when they thought of a pause. The only danger was, as McNamara
put it in his memorandum of 3 November, "being trapped in a status-
quo cease-fire or in negotiations which, though unaccompanied by real
concessions by the VC, made it politically costly for us to terminate

the Pause."

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
21
