Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of a neutral state in Vietnam (or even the creation of two opposed half-
states) met the immediate requirements of the USSR in the best manner
possible under the circumstances -- and it was the short-range solution
that the Soviets, as well as the other delegations, were seeking at Geneva.
The future would take care of itself.

g. Russians See Influence on French View of EDC

Whether or not the cause and effect relationship can be proved
with any accuracy, the fact remains that the French did not ratify the
EDC agreements when these were presented to the French Assembly a month
after Geneva. The reaction in the USSR was described as "jubilant," hail-
ing the French rejection as "an important event in the political history
of Europe." 5/ This event, following closely on the termination of the
Geneva Convention, was seen by the Soviets as, at least in part, influenced
by the communist strategy of letting the French off the hook in Geneva.

2. The Major Communist Powers Perceive Certain Losses

a@&. Communist Consolidation of All of Indochina is Not Achieved

At least for the immediate future, a communist consolidation
of all of Indochina was out of the question. Regardless of how inevitable
the surge of communist control into the area might seem, the move had come
to a halt temporarily at the 17th parallel. In effect, the communists
were not prepared to take the risks in pursuing their very real superiority,
if not on the battlefield, then in the psyche. The communist assertion
at Geneva that the Viet Minh controlled three quarters of the area of
Vietnam was close to the truth. The decision to relinquish this local
control throughout Vietnam must have been viewed as a loss.

b. U.S. Influence in Indochina is Not Prevented

A major political and military objective of China was the
prevention of U.S. bases in Southeast Asia. This aim, paralleling the
Soviet objective of blocking U.S. influence in Europe, was an important
part of overall Chinese strategy at Geneva. But, if the Chinese Govern-
ment considered. the Geneva provisions a first step toward Southeast Asia's

neutralization, this estimate was quickly disabused. The governments of

Iaos and Cambodia issued declarations on 21 July, which left room for

‘the conclusion of alliances and the stationing of foreign forces on their

territory. To ease the communist outcry, both countries vowed not to

ally themselves in any manner “not in conformity with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations," nor to permit foreign bases while
their security was not threatened. 6/ Nevertheless, their delegates in-
dicated even before the Conference that U.S. protection of their countries
against aggression was desirable. The two zones of Vietnam, in contrast,
were categorically enjoined from permitting the establishment of foreign
military bases and from adhering to military alliances (Article 19 of

the armistice agreement). The Chinese, because they were unable to obtain

D-7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
