Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The White House is also reported to have received an analysis
from the Central Intelligence Agency that support this view of
North Vietnam's manpower resources and its will to resist.

'essentially,' said one official, ‘we are fighting Vietnam's
birth rate.'

The Defense Department's paper was yerbally endorsed by Deputy
Secretary of Defense Paul T. Nitze and forwarded by him to Clark
M. Clifford, the new Defense Secretary, for transmittal to the
President on Monday. ;

Mr. Clifford was impressed with the caliber of the analysis,
informants said, but it is not known whether he endorsed the
document personally.

The thrust of the argument in the Pentagon paper is reported
to have gained the sympathetic support of a number of senior State
Department officials, including Under Secretary Nicholas deB.
Katzenbach, William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Fast Asian
and Pacific Affairs, and others close to Vietnam policy.

'I can tell you that all of us in this building are against a
troop increase,’ one State Department official said. However,
Secretary Rusk's position on the matter was unknown.

The defense position paper concludes by proposing a change in
American strategy in South Vietnam. This would entail withdrawing
from exposed positions like Khesanh in the sparsely populated
frontier regions and concentrating on a mobile defense of the
cities and populated areas nearer the sea.

But some military officials contend this is not a realistic
option.

'Rach town will become a Khesanh,' they assert, and civilian
casualties will soar.

Although most civilian officials declined to use the term
tenclave' to describe their proposed strategy, some conceded that
it does amount to a modification of the theory advanced by Lieut.
Gen. James M. Gavin, retired. He has for months urged that the
allies pull back to defensive positions around cities and other
important enclaves along the coast.

The Pentagon document suggests that on the political side the
United States encouraged the Saigon regime to broaden itself by
including non-Communist opposition elements such as the followers of
the militant Buddhist leader Tri Quang. A broader base would help
the regime establish a better relationship with its population and
make its army more effective, the paper asserts.

68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
