Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

His overall prognosis for the war was not optimistic. He believed
that during the course of the next 18 months, the probability of achieving
our goals was quite low. In two or three years, it was possibly higher
depending again on what we did during the intervening period. He entered
a caveat, however, stating that because of our uncertain knowledge of
the motivation and intentions of both the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
and the VC in the South, that we may be closer to achieving our goals
than we thought. Moreover, the Soviet Union and Communist China would
influence the course of events in ways not easily predictable over the
next three years.

He assessed the battle in South Vietnam as "the key" and reviewed
the "big war" of attrition as one in which a flood of contradictory
indicators made it much more difficult to appraise. Enemy losses were
up 70% in the first quarter of 1967, but so were U.S. losses up 90%.
North Vietnamese/VC intentions were also doubtful but they appeared to
be set on an intensive grinding position-warfare campaign in the northern
provinces coordinated with offensive thrusts in the central coastal
provinces and the Western Highlands. All of these then possibly combined
with major actions against cities, provincial capitals in the III Corps
area. The overall object of such a strategy evidently being to inflict
maximum losses on the US/GVN in an effort to break our will. (Here he
noted that INR believed that the VC/NVA had a more positive approach and
were looking for real victories.

Pacification efforts came in for little praise. There was little
real progress reported and the short term prospects were not bright.
However, the long term prospects appeared better if ARVN could be more
effectively involved. However, it appeared that GVN and ARVN were going
to continue moving slowly, corruption was becoming more widespread and
the population was increasingly apathetic. Katzenbach said he could not
determine whether this was due to growing anti-Americanism or war-weariness
or what. He concluded that if we were winning the war, we were not win-
ning it very quickly -- it had become a question of the will to persist
on either side rather than the attainment of an overwhelming military
victory.

With this assessment as background he then analyzed the two courses
of action. In his estimation, Course A, which added a 200,000 U.S. troop
increment and necessitated a call-up of Reserves possessed the following
advantages: It could hasten the end of the war by hurting the enemy
more. Jt could dispel Hanoi's notions about weakening U.S. resolve. It
could provide more U.S, troops to be used for main force sweeps and might
release U.S. units to help provide security for pacification. It might
persuade the Russians to counsel Hanoi to accept some kind of negotiations
rather than risk a much expanded war, possibly in North Vietnam. Katzenbach
listed a score of disadvantages for this course of action:

185 TOP SECRET - Sensitive -
