Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that the Central Committee of the ICP may have actually ordered subordinate
echelons to refrain from violence, communists, first in Cochinchina, and
then in Tonkin, led armed uprisings. The results were disasterous for

the rebels. The Japanese, who probably encouraged the revolts to the extent
they could, stood aside while the French reacted swiftly and savagely to
erush the Vietnamese. 12/ Numerous ICP and other nationalist leaders died
in the fighting, or in the harsh ministrations of French colonial justice
which followed. The outcome of the rebellions of 1940 and 191 was thus

yet another French purge, exile of Vietnamese nationalist movements. While
small scale covert operations continued in Vietnam, party headquarters were
forced to move abroad, mostly to Nationalist China. In 1946, the Vietnamese
government published a tract which acknowledged its debt to China:

"Thus it came to pass that southern China became the by-word
of all Vietnam revolutionists. It was the birthplace of the
Vietnam revolutionary movement, the base from where were directed
all revolutionary activities "beyond the border' -- on Vietnam's
own territory." 13/

Chinese motives for sponsoring the Vietnamese nationalists included a de-
sire to acquire intelligence of Japanese forces on their southern flank,
and to tie down Japanese through sabotage and other operations in Indochina;
there may have been a longer range interest in political influence over
postwar Indochina.

In May, 1941, the head of the ICP, Nguyen Ai Quoc -- the person later
to be called Ho Chi Minh -- convened the Eighth Plenum of the ICP Central
Committee to approve the forming of a new united front organization to
which Vietnamese patriots wishing to resist the Japanese and oppose the
French might rally. The Party meeting was followed by a "congress" of
Vietnamese nationalists who had recently escaped from their homeland, and
others WHO had been in exile for years; there were also representatives
of the "national liberation associations" of workers, peasants, soldiers,
women, and youth -- most of them ICP organized and dominated. ‘The "con-
gress" adopted the recommendations of the ICP ae and established Ff
the Vietnam Independence League, Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi, which
became: known as the Viet Minh. Neuyen . Ai Quoc was named Ge General Secretary
of the new League, and most of its key positions were assigned to ICP menm=-
bers. Nguyen Ai Quoc issued a letter on the occasion, including the follow-
ing appeal:

"Compatriots throughout the country: Rise up quickly! Let
us follow the heroic example of the Chinese people! Rise up quickly
to organize the Association for National Salvation to fight the
French and the Japanese.

"Blders!

"Prominent personalities!

"Some hundreds of years ago, when our country was endangered by
the Mongolian invasion, our elders under the Tran dynasty rose up

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-19
