Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

1961 to describe Communist strategy for the future--aggression directed
and supplied from outside a nation, but disguised in nationalist trap-
pings so that it might pass as an indigenous insurrection.

E

"The Communists have expanded upon their 'wars of liberation' tech-
nique. Africa and Iatin America are already feeling the threat of such

thrusts. But by far the most highly sophisticated and ambitious attempt .

at such aggression by the Communists is taking place today in Viet-Nam.

* + *

"The ‘wars of liberation' strategy is at this time an essential
element of the expansionist policy of Communist China and her Asian
ally, North Viet-Nam. If we allow it to succeed in Viet-Nam, we would
be confirming Peiping's assertion that armed struggle is a more produc-
tive Communist course than Moscow's doctrine of peaceful coexistence.
Wars of national liberation’ would most certainly spread. Red China
has already identified Thailand as the next target for a so-called
"liberation struggle,’ and its Foreign Minister Chen Yi has promised
that it will be launched before the end of this year.

"The major test to date of this new Communist strategy is taking
place today in Viet-Nam. Even the Asian Communists have acknowledged
the larger implications of this confrontation, Not long ago General
Giap, the well-known leader of North Viet-Nem's army, declared that,

; "South Viet-Nam is the model of the national liberation move-

ment of our time....If the special warfare that the U.S. imperialists
are testing in South Viet-Nam is overcome, then it can be defeated
everywhere in the world.'

"In another recent comment, North Viet-Nam's Premier Pham Van Dong
said that: :

"The experience of our compatriots in South Viet-Nam attracts
the attention of the world, especially the peoples of South America.'

"The People's Daily, Peiping's official newspaper, echoed those
statements in an editorial on May Day this year. It said:

'The Vietnamese people's struggle against U.S. imperialism
has become the focal point of the internationel class struggle at this
moment. This is an acid test for all political forces in the world.'

"Our firm posture in Viet-Nam, then, seeks peace and security in
three related dimensions: for South Viet-Nam, for the sake of Southeast

D-45
