Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SEGRET

Ko one Imors how many Communists there are in Indochina, bet the
ror real party mentors is certainly ermiti. Tho hishest estinite

muabe ;
is 20% of the troops fighting with ho Chi Minn and this inoly G28
sympathizerse However, the nunoer is undoubtsdly growing, and at the same
time Hen OUNET EY military units are being stendily infiltrated with
secret agencsa nits under Communist command are generally better armed.
Thus the problem : for the lerder contemplating changing sides is not an
casy once :

Another point on which definite information is lacking is the

e
channci_of communications with finsear and the center of regional con-
trol. [rt is probable that all of the availiable channels are used -
overland from Chine, Burma, and Siam, and by sea from China, Hong

Kong, and Singnpore. It is also very pessible that Hoscow directives
arrive via Wrance.t Certainly satisfactory covmumications exist sincs
Moscow pubdiications of fair l
French,|_ Communist headquarters
to be in n Hong Kong, Bangkok, Singap
Kong scems to be the most likely

ate are frcquently seized by the
outh Asia are variously reported
re, Rangoon, and Caleutta. Hong

One peevliar thing about Vietnam Comaunism is that there has been
very little anti-American pronagandae It is obvious that this is not
duc to ignerance of the eurront varty line. It epoarently represents
o hope en the part of Eo Chi ‘finh that he may still ae American

et

support for or at least acceptance of a Vict ernment undcr his
leadership. Evidence that this hope is ciminis a furnished in a
. regional party Cirectivo dated in November 1946 which steted that
active entisimerican propaganda showuld be conducted in party circles
and by word of mouth among tho people but should_ not yet appear on
the radio, in the press, or in nublie speeches. The main thnemo of
this propaganda was to be that the United Sioa ‘is an aoe a Ree
power which aims to extend its domination aver Indochina “in a nanner
even moro cruel anc ruthless than the French". ifn interesting iten
was thot pros tirscan annanites were to be denounced in anonymous
letters to Freneh officials which indicates that the Communists are
avare of the similarity between their propaganda and the belief of

certain French circles.

The problem of Communism among tho Chinese minority is one which
has been given mich attention by the French authoritic » especially
since the situation became critical in Chinn. Up until now there has
been surprising little dircet cooperation between local Chinese Com-
munists and the View Minh» There are very fow Chinese among the
insurgent troops,and the Chier of Surete states that no Chinese had

ever peon cought taling part in grenade throwing or other terrorist
activities, Howevar, the Chinese olay an importants part in comnmi-
cations and in smussling arms .nd supplics, For some menths now the
Freneh have boon quictiv oie RD joe feporting smail batches of
known Communist Ieadets and the Surote feels shey have the situation
woll in hend. In aA recent conversation with the head of the Surete
8, nevertheless, cupressod sone Véisauios over the tendency of the
loenl Chinsse Les to ¢limd on the band wagon as Communist

victories in Chins rolled up.
GuA/jr SECRET
168
