Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

TVG the. “Se
Tab 1.

FATLURE OF THE GENEVA SETTLEMENT

A. Introduction: The Flawed Peace

The Geneva Conference of 1954 brought only transitory peace to
Indochina. Nonetheless, except for the United States, the major powers
were, at the time of the Conference, satisfied that with their handiwork:
the truce averted a further U.S. military involvement on the Asian main-
land, and dampened a heightening crisis between Fast and West which might
readily have led to conflict outside Southeast Asia. So long as these
conditions obtained, neither France, the U.K., the U.S.S.R. nor Communist
China were seriously disposed to disturb the modus vivendi in Vietnan.

U.S. leaders publicly put the best face possible on the Geneva Settlement --
about all that might possibly have been obtained from a seriously disad-
vantaged negotiating position, and no serious impairment to freedom of
United States action. But the U.S., within its inner councils immediately
after Geneva, viewed the Settlement's provisions for Vietnam as "disaster,"
and determined to prevent, if it could, the further extension of communist
government over the Vietnamese people and territory. 1 U.S. policy adopted
in 195 to this end did not constitute an irrevocable nor "open-ended"
commitment to the government of Ngo Dinh Diem. But it did entail a pro- .
gressively deepening U.S. involvement in the snarl of violence and intrigue
within Vietnam, and therefore a direct role in the ultimate breakdown of
the Geneva Settlement.

The Settlement of Geneva, though it provided respite from years
of political violence, bitterly disappointed Vietnamese of North and South
alike who had looked toward a unified and independent Vietnam. For the
Viet Minh, the Settlement was a series of disappointing compromises to
which they had agreed at the urging of the Soviet Union and China, compro-
mises beyond what hard won military advantage over the French had led them
to expect. 2/ For the State of Vietnam in the South, granted independence
by France while the Geneva, Conference was in progress, the Settlement was
an arrangement to which it had not been party, and to which it could not
subscribe. 3/ The truce of 1954, in fact, embodied three serious defi-
ciencies as a basis for stable peace among the Vietnamese:

-- It relied upon France as its executor.

-- It ignored the opposition of the State of Vietnam.

-- It countenanced the disassociation of the United States.
These weaknesses turned partitioned Vietnam into two hostile states, and
given the absence of a stabilizing international force and the impotence

of the ICC, brought about an environment in which war was likely, if not
inevitable. A nominally temporary “line of demarcation"

1 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
