Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

oe TOP SECRET - Sensitive

actions...be taken to meet these deployment dates without callup of
reserves or extension of terms of service." 131/ The JCS replied on
April 4 that it would be impossible to meet the deployment deadlines
because of shortages of critical skills. They proposed a stretch-out
of the deployments as the only remedy if reserve callups and extension
of duty tours were ruled out. 132/ Not satisfied, the Secretary asked
the Chiefs to explain in detail why they could not meet the require-
ments within the given time schedule. 133/ The Chiefs replied on
April 28 with a listing of the personnel problems that were the source
of their difficulty, but promised to take "extraordinary measures" in
an effort to conform as closely as possible to the desired closure
schedule. 134/ The total troop figure for Vietnam for end CY 66 on
which agreement was then reached was some 276,000 men. This constituted
Program 2-AR.

These modifications and adjustments to the troop deploy-
ment schedules, of course, had implications for the supporting forces
as well. The Chiefs also addressed a series of memos to the Secretary
on required modifications in the deployment plans for tactical aircraft
to support ground forces, and for increases in air munitions requirements. 135
These force expansions generated a requirement for additional airfields. 13
When these matters are added to the problems created for McNamara and his
staff by the French decision that spring to request the withdrawal of all
NATO forces from French soil, it is not hard to understand why escalating
the war was momentarily set aside.

Another possible explanation for delaying the POL strikes
can be added to those already discussed. The spring of 1966 saw one of
the most determined and most public efforts by the international community
to bring the U.S. and North Vietnam to the negotiating table. While at
no time during this peace initiative was there any evidence, public or
private, of give in either sides' uncompromising position and hence real
possibility of talks, the widespread publicity of the effort meant that
the Administration was constrained from any military actions that might
be construed as "worsening the atmosphere" or rebuking the peace efforts.
Air strikes against. DRV POL reserves would obviously have fallen into this

category.

In February, after the resumption of the bombing, Nkrumah
and Nasser unsuccessfully attempted to get negotiations started, the former
touring severel capitals including Moscow to further the effort. DeGaulle
replied to a letter from Ho Chi Minh with an offer to play a role in set-
tling the dispute, but no response was forthcoming. Prime Minister Wilson
met with Premier Kosygin in Moscow from Feb. 22-2) and urged reconvening
the Geneva Conference; the Soviets countered by saying the U.S. and DRV
must arrange a conference since the conflict was theirs. Early in March,
Hanoi reportedly rejected 4 suggestion by Indian President Radharrishnon
for an Asian-African force to replace American troops in South Vietnam.

ee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
