Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

We had embarked on a policy that avoided the
extremes both of withdrawing from Vietnam or of actually
taking part in direct action to change the Government,
The policy was one of trying to discriminate by con-
tinuing to support those Vietnamese who were struggling
against the Communists but maintaining the tension of
our disapproval of Diem's and Nhu's repressive policies. /

It was, in effect, the policy Lodge had proposed.

Meanwhile in Saigon, Lodge had gone ahead with his proposals.
He continued to ayoid any official contact with Diem, but on September 2
he had his second meeting with Whu (the first on August 27 was an incon-
clusive statement of positions on each side 72/) in company with the
Italian Ambassador and the Papal Delegate. Vm, perhaps encouraged by
a collateral intercession of the French Ambassador, announced he intended
to resign from the government for good and retire to Dalat. 73/ A GVN
announcement would state that the progress of the program against the
Viet Cong permitted his departure. Mme. Nhu was to leave Vietnam for
a trip to Yugoslavia, Italy, and possibly the U.S. The Papal Delegate
would arrange for Archbishop Thuc to leaye the country. Some measures
to ease Buddhist tensions would be taken and, as a public relations
gesture, a prime minister would be appointed. These were all proposals
which Lodge had initielly advanced. But as the days passed, nothing
happened and Lodge grew impatient. Contributing to his concern were
the frequent and often contradictory rumors that Nhu was secretly
dealing with Hanoi and/or the VC through the French and the Polish
Ambassadors, both of whose governments favored a neutralist solution
between North and South Vietnam. p/

For the remainder of the week, the Italian Ambassador and the
Papal Delegate urged Nhu to act on his promises to Lodge. On Friday,
September 6, after they had stressed the urgency for action created by
Senator Church's rumored aid-suspension resolution, Nhu went into a
tirade and said he would not consider leaving the country, He did,
however, say he would "formally" resign. 75/ On the following day, the
Papal Delegate, who had condemned Archbishop Thuc's activity to the
Vatican and received the Pope's support, got Thue out of the country. 76/
Mme, Nhu left the country for Europe on September 9, The arrests of
students by the regime, however, continued and stories of torture and
atrocities began to circulate.

In Washington, the NSC met on September 6 and renewed the discussion
of reopening "tough negotiations" with Diem. Tt Lodge, of course,
opposed this while continuing his dialogue with Nhu, But others at the
meeting (presumably ineluding McNamara on the basis of his views at the
August 31 meeting) urged that Lodge be instructed to make another
approach to Diem. Lodge was accordingly instructed to clarify for Diem
the U.S. position and explain the difficult position his policy placed
us in with respect to U.S. and world opinion. 78/

pel TOP SECRET - Sensitive
