Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Though different in some respects, all of these policy views
pointed in a similar direction. In his own way, each Principal argued
that it was unproductive to hold off on further actions against Horth
Vietnam until the GYN began to operate in an effective manner. Bach
suggested broader benefits that could be gained for the United States
if firmer measures were taken directly against the DRV.

The impact of these views can be seen in the policy guidance
emanating from Washington in mid and late January 1965¢ For exemple,
on the lith, Ambassador Taylor was apprised of Administration ra ti
that General Khanh had put aside his intentions to stage a coup an
was given counsel for such an eventuality. Essentially, the guidance
was to avoid actions that would further commit the United States to any
particuler form of political solution. The underlying rationale ae
pressed was that if a military government did emerge, we might ns i.
have to swallow our pride and work with it." 36/ Apparently, the
Administration's adamant insistence on an effective GVIi along ee ”
specified by the United States had been eroded. However, on the 14th,
guidance to Taylor indicated that the Administration had not yet
determined to move into a phase of action more vigorous than the current
one. In the immediate wake of public disclosures Ones oes the din i.
operations in Laos, Secretary Rusk concurred in Taylor's proposal a ae
the GV) leaders on these operations, but cautioned against — ‘
their expectetions of new U.S. moves against the North. ae. Sees ere
‘it"essential that they not be given /the/ impression that /BARREL ee
etc./ represents a major step-up of activity against ene DRY hate
represents an important new phase of U.S. operational activity.” 37/
The immediate matter for speculation was the striking of & key —
bridge in Laos, but the program still called for two missions per week.

Clear indication that the Administration was contemplating some
Kind of increased military activity came on 25 January. Ambassador
Taylor was asked to comment on the "Departmental view" that U.S. depen-
dents should be withdrawn to "clear the decks" in Saigon and enable
better concentration of U.S. efforts on behalf of South Vietnam. 238/
Previously, the JCS hed reversed their initial position on this issue
and requested the removal, a view which was forwarded to State "for con-
sideration at the highest levels of government" in mid-January. 239/
Recalling the Bundy policy assessment of 6 January (TAB F), it will be
noted that clearing the decks by removing dependents was recommended only
in association with "stronger actions." However, there is no indication
of any decision at this point to move into Phase Two, The Rusk cable
made specific reference to a current interest in reprisal actions. More-
over, consideration of later events and decisions compels the judgment
that it was only reprisals which the Administration had in mind as
January drew to a close,

“8D TOP SECRET - Sensitive
