cy

S|

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

assistance wes withheld for almost two years. In January 1959, Diem
agreed to transfer the CG to the Minister of the Interior, and the U.S.
agreed to go ehead with the aid program. The new Public Safety Division
of USOM assumed responsibility for training the CG in June, but the
impasse over the concept of the CG continued until December 1960, when
Diem, at MAAG's urging, transferred the CG to the DOD. 111/

The Self-Defense Corvs (spc), like the CG, was armed with non-U.&,
Weapons surplus to the army's requirements. Established by Diem as a
part of the DOD, the SDC received U.S, assistence from its inception in
the form of a $6 million per year subsidy for salaries. All reports
indicate that the SDC was in even worse shape than the CG. The contro-
versy that engulfed both these organizations for five years produced
two paramilitary units that, far from being adequate to free the army
for "combat," were confusingly organized, inadequately equipped, poorly
trained, and badly led -- even when compared with ARVN. 112

According to the U.S. Army Command and General Steff College "Study
on Army Aspects of thé Military Assistance Program in Vietnam," published
in June 1960, 113/ “The Armed Forces of the Republic of Vietnam are
anxious to take the offensive and ‘march to Hanoi.' The Chief, MAAG,
and his principal assistents who come in direct contact with the Viet-
namese high command must be constantly alert to detect this desire and
any evidence of preparations therefor, as the consequences of such a
premature act, not only to the numerically inferior South Vietnamese
Armed Forces,but also to the entire region and possibly the whole world,
could be most serious." Given the deficiencies remaining in the seven
standerd division regular army that vould do the marching, and the state
of the paramilitary forces, the authors of this study were well advised
to add, parenthetically and perhaps wistfully: "(Eventual reunification
through "peaceful means' is to be hoped for.)"

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

23
