Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In February, Viet Cong guerrillas successfully attacked a GVN outpost
near SSB Sup, in Tay Ninh, and Diem told a French correspondent

that "at the present time Viecuem is a nation at war." George Carver
has recorded that in late 1958 or early 1959, Le Duan journeyed to
South Vietnam for an on-the-spot appraisal of affairs there, and that
his report lead to a DRV decision to step up support of the insurgency.

"Consolidation of the North” proceeded apace during 1958.
Societal discipline advanced to the point that by early 1959 the land
reform campaign -- under a different name -- was re-initiated without
difficulty. 187/ Crops were good, and economic prospects in both the
agricultural and industrial sectors were excellent. 188/ In January,
1959, the DRV contracted with the Soviet Union for a 50% increase in
trade, and in February another large loan was negotiated with the
CPR. 189/ Against this background of domestic success -- progress and
plenty within North Vietnam -- and of international finesse -- coopera-
tion with both the great communist powers without domination by either --
the DRV implemented the next step in its strategy.

4, Taking the Offensive: Spring, 1959 - Fall, 1960.

a. Surfacing the Strategy, 1959

However the DRV privately viewed the war in South
Vietnam during 1959 and 1960, the public statements of its leaders were
aggressive. If the numbers of infiltrators and the amount of supplies cod
dispatched to the South were insignificant or unimpressive to the
beleaguered insurgents, the pose adopted by the Lao Dong principals
must have greatly enheartened insurgents in South Vietnam.

On }. April 1959, President Eisenhower, in an address
at Gettysburg, declared that South Vietnam could not, without U.S. aid,
"meet the dual threat of aggression from without and subversion within
its borders." He stated that U.S. national interests compelled the U.S.
to help South Vietnam sustain its morale, economic .progress, and military
strength. 190/ On 30 April 1959, Pham Van Dong applauded Khrushchev's
rejoinder to President Eisenhower as follows:

"Comrade Khrushchev's strong statement was a powerful blow
to the US imperialists aggressive bloc. The Vietnamese people
are very grateful to the Soviet Union, head of the socialist
camp, for its constant sympathy for and support to their
righteous struggle for national reunification. Comrade
Khrushchev's statement powerfully encourages our people to
enthusiastically build North Viet-Nem and advance gradually
toward socialism and to struggle for national reunification .

"Just as observed by Comrade Khrushchev, the intervention by

US imperialism in South Viet-Nam is the cause of the continued
partition of Viet-Nam . . . The struggle for the reunification

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
