Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"), The Honolulu Declaration emphasizing the defeat of aggression
and the achievement of a social revolution could represent a historic
turning point in American relationships with Asia. The goals agreed
upon by President Johnson and the Chief of State and Prime Minister of
the Republic of Yietnam at Honolulu are taken very seriously:

*

"to defeat aggression,

"to defeat social misery,

"to build a stable democratic government,
"to reach an honorable, just peace.

"5, Most Asian leaders are concerned about the belligerence and
militancy of Communist China's attitudes. None wishes to permit his
country to fall under Communist domination in any form. All are dedi-
cated nationalists. \

"6. Among the leaders with whom I spoke, there was repeatedly
expressed a concern as to whether our American purpose, tenacity and
will were strong enough to persevere in Southeast Asia. I emphasized
not only the firmness of our resolve but also our dedication to the
rights of free discussion and dissent."

_* * *
47. Address by Vice President Humphrey at the National Press Club,
Washington, D.C., March 11, 1966, "nited States Tasks and

Responsibilities in Asia"; Department of State Bulletin, April 4
1966, p. 52 523, —s ————

x * *
"Why are we in South Viet-Nam?

"We are in South Viet-Nam to repel and prevent the success of
aggression against the Government and the people of that country.

"We are there to help assure the South Vietnamese people the basic
right to decide their own futures, freely and without intimidation.

"We are there to help those people achieve a better standard of
living for themselves and their children.

"We are there to help establish the principle that, in this nuclear
age, aggression cannot be an acceptable means either of settling inter-
national disputes or of realizing national objectives. If aggression is
permitted to go unchecked, we cannot in good faith hold out much hope
for the future of small nations or of world peace."

S67 a Se

D-73
