Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

maneuver battalions and a healthy support package. The figure was revised
upward several times later in the year as increased intelligence revealed
the extent of DRV infiltration and Viet Cong build-up.

Force levels for the search and destroy strategy had no empirical
limits. The amount of force required to defeat the enemy depended en-
tirely on his response to the build-up and his willingness to continue the
fight. The 4) battalions seen in mid-summer 1965 as the amount required
to deny victory to the Viet Cong exceeded the amount forecast by the
enclavists to achieve that end for two reasons. First, the enemy had by
the end of June revealed that he was much stronger than had originally
been surmised. Second, the 44 battalions had a dual mission: they were
not only to hold the fort, but were also to lay the groundwork for the
subsequent input of forces to implement the next phase of the strategy.

Ambassador Taylor expected the search and destroy strategy and the
force associated with it to accomplish little more than would have been
accomplished by the enclave strategy at less cost. He was convinced that
only the Vietnamese could save their own country, and too aggressive use
of foreign troops might even work against them in that regard. George
Ball of the State Department wrote that there was no assurance no matter
what the U.S. did that it could defeat the enemy on the battlefield or
drive him to the conference table. The larger force associated with the
search and destroy strategy signified to Ball no more than acceptance by
the U.S. of a higher cost to ultimately be incurred. The 44 battalion
force seemed to William Bundy of State to be an ultimatum presented to
the DRV which would in all probability trigger some sort of dire response.
Westmoreland expected the 44 battalions and the search and destroy strategy
to hold things together long enough to prepare the way for later input
of greater force. With enough force to Seize the initiative from the
Viet Cong sometime in 1966, Westmoreland expected to take the offensive
and, with appropriate additional reinforcements, to have defeated the
enemy by the end of 1967. Exactly what the President and his Secretary
of Defense expected is not clear, but there are manifold indications that
they were prepared for a long war.

The acceptance of the search and destroy strategy and the eclipse .
of the denial of victory idea associated with the enclave strategy left
the U.S. commitment to Vietnam open-ended. The implications in terms of
manpower and money are inescapable. Written all over the search and
destroy strategy was total loss of confidence in the RVNAF and a con-
comitant willingness on the part of the U.S. to take over the war effort.
U.S. involvement in an Asian ground war was a reality.

IV. Caveats

The bulk of this paper is taken up in describing the various propo-
sals put forward by exponents of the strategies. The numerous decision

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
