Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. A. os
Tab 3.

HANOT AND THE INSURGENCY IN SOUTH VIETNAM

A. Character of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam

Between 195 and 1960, Ho Chi Minh had to face in North Vietnan,
as did Ngo Dinh Diem in South Vietnam, the problem of building a nation
out of the ruins of nearly a decade of war. During those years, until
the DRV declared its support for the National Liberation Front or South
Vietnam, Ho seemed preoccupied with the problems of consolidating his
regime and securing the foreign aid he needed to assure economic growth.
Certainly agricultural shortages and popular unrest in North Vietnam in
the immediate aftermath of Geneva were sufficiently serious to have dis-
couraged foreign adventures through 1956. However, by January, .1961,
when Hanoi announced the formation of the NLF, the internal difficulties
of the DRV seen to have been largely resolved. Inquiry into the tining
and extent of the DRV's participation in the insurgency of South Vietnam,
therefore, requires assessment of those conditions within the DRV which
might have affected its capability and willingness to prosecute a war of
ageression.

1. Structure of the Government. He possessed one distinet
advantage over Diem: his govermaent had been in existence, in one form
or another, continuously since 1945. Ho end his lieutenants ruled in
radically differing circumstances as the status of the regime shifted
from that of a state within the French Union in 196, to a belligerent in
a colonial revolution, and back to a sovereign state in 1954, preserving
remarkable continuity. The Geneva Conference of 195). restored its actual
territorial dominion to about what it had been in 1954, in that France
accede. to a cease~fire based upon a territorial division of Vietnam at
the 17th parallel and to Viet Minh "conduct of civil administration" in the
regions to the north, pending "general elections." i/ The withdrawal of
French military forces and civil authority from northern Vietnam was co-
ordinated with the DRY forces and leaders so that the latter systematically
replaced the former; by the end of May 1955, the DRV had acaguired full
control of all its territory, and began to act as a sovereign state. 2/
However, fonnual recognition of DRV statehood dates from January, 1950
(China ana Soviet Union), and best inforation now available to the U.S,
Department of State indicates that thereafter twenty-two other nations estab-
lished relations with it. 3/ Formally, the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam was organized under a Constitution promigated in 19/6 which, in
language echoing Jefferson, guaranteed civic freedoms, and reposed princi-
pal state power in a people's parliament. A second Constitution was adopted
on January 1, 1960, more explicitly drawn from communist thought, resembling
the Chinese Constitution in general, but containing Soviet style clauses
on civil rights and antonony of national minorities.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
4
