Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A "Carrot" at Johns Hopkins. Although devoting much effort to
public explanation and private persuasion, the President could not
quiet his critics. Condemnation of the bombing spread and the
President was being pressed from many directions to make a major
public statement welcoming negotiations. He found an opportunity
to dramatize his peaceful intent in his renowned Johns Hopkins
address of April 7, in which he (1) accepted the spirit of the
17-nation Appeal of March 15 to start negotiations "without posing
any preconditions," {2) offered the vision of a "billion dollar
American investment" in a regional Mekong River basin development
effort in which North Vietnam might also participate, and (3)
appointed the illustrious Eugene Black to head up the effort and to
lend it credibility and prestige. The President's speech evoked
much favorable public reaction throughout the world, but it failed
to silence the Peace Bloc and it failed to move Hanoi. Premier
Pham Van Dong responded to the President's speech by proposing his
famous Four Points as the only correct way to resolve the Vietnam
problem and, two days later, denounced the President's proposal as
simply a "carrot" offered to offset the "stick" of aggression and
to allay public criticism of his Vietnam policy. But this is as
far as the President was willing to go in his concessions to the
Peace Bloc. To the clamor for a bombing pause at this time, the
Administration responded with a resounding "No."

Consensus at Honolulu. By mid-April, commnication between
Washington and Saigon had become badly strained as a result of
Ambassador Taylor's resentment of what he regarded as Washington's
excessive eagerness to introduce US combat forces into South Vietnam,
far beyond anything that had been approved in the April 1-2 review.
To iron out differences, a conference was eonvened by Secretary
McNemara at Honolulu on April 20. Its main concern was to reach
specific agreement on troop deployments, but it also sought to
reaffirm the existing scope and tempo of ROLLING THUNDER. The
conferees agreed that sufficient pressure was provided by repetition
and continuation of the strikes, and that it was important not to
"kill the hostage" by destroying the valuable assets inside the
"Hanoi do-not." Their strategy for victory was "to break the will
of the DRV/VC by denying them victory." Honolulu apparently
succeeded in restoring consensus between Washington and Saigon.

It also marked the relative downgrading of pressures against the
North, in favor of more intensive activity in the South. The
decision, at this point, was to "plateau" the air strikes more

or less at the prevailing level, rather than to pursue the relent-
less dynamic course ardently advocated by Ambassador Taylor and
Admiral Sharp in February and March, or the massive destruction of
the North Vietramese target camplex ecnsistently pressed by the
Joint Chiefs.

Following Honolulu, it was decided to publicize the fact that
"interdiction" was now the major objective of the bombing, and
Secretary McNamara devoted a special Pentagon briefing for the
press corps to that issue.

vii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
