Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

be carrying out a Vietnamese plan and not one imposed by the
U.S,

"hk, To pat the whole nation on a war footing...a new
National Mobilization Plan (to include a National Service Iaw)
should be urgently developed by the Country Team in collebora-
tion with the Khanh Government...

"5, The strength of the Armed Forces (regular plus para-
military) must be increased by at least 50,000 men....

"6, A Civil Administrative Corps is urgently required
to work in the provincial capitals, the district towns, the
villages, and the hamlets...The U.S, should work with the
GVN urgently to devise the necessary recruiting plans, train-
ing facilities, financing methods, and organizational arrange-
ments, and should furnish training personnel at once, under
the auspices of the AID Mission....

"7, The paramilitary forces are now understrength and
lacking in effectiveness. They must be improved and reorgan-
ized.

ad. Additional U.S. personnel should be assigned to
the training of all these paramilitary forces.

e. The National Police reduire special consideration.
Their strength in the provinces should be substantially increased
and consideration should be given to including them as part of
an overall ‘Popular Defense Force'....

"8. An offensive guerrilla force should be created to
operate along the border and in areas where VC control is

He recommended more military equipment for ARVN, which along with

the expansion recommendations shove, added up te a total cost to the U.S.
of some $50-60 million in the first year and $30-40 million thereafter.
Hie reasoned:

"There were and are sound reasons for the limits imposed
by present policy -- the South Vietnamese must win their
own fight; U.S. intervention on a larger scale, and/or GVN
actions against the North, would disturb key allies and other
nations; etc. In any case, it is vital that we continue to
take every reasonable measure to assure success in South
Vietnam. ‘The policy choice is not an ‘either/or' between this
course of action and possible pressures against the North;
the former is essential without regard to our decision with
respect to the latter. The latter can, at best, only reinforce
the former. \

13 NOP SECRET - Sensitive
