"(3)

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

The Party will never abandon the people of the South who
will stay to fight; when the time comes, they will be led.

Those who go north should feel happy in their duties.
Those who remain behind should carry out the glorious
missions entrusted to them by the Party, standing side by
side with the people in every situation of struggle."

The political officers also stressed the dangers to which the stay-
behinds would be subjected. A Viet Cong cadre whose party history
extended back to 1930 stated that: b/

"Those who did regroup did it voluntarily, after realizing
that it was the thing to do. They did it to protect them-
selves from being arrested by the authorities in the South.

They were afraid of being charged with having participated

in the Resistance before. All cadres were afraid of future
persecution by the South Vietnamese authorities; they all wanted
to regroup....They were afraid...."

Still, the Regroupment Diary records that one cadre bet his comrades
"three to ten, the country won't be reunified in two years," and
that many cadres were worried about leaving family and friends be-
hind. c/ Asked, "Were you a volunteer for regroupment?": the
following responses were typical: a/

a/

(A Defector) At the time it was said that we were volunteers.

In reality, they took measures to make sure that everyone left.
At the time of regroupment, we had to go. If I had remained,

I would have been arrested. I believed that I would remain in
the North two years.

(Another Defector) I was a political officer. I went to the
North just like all the other combatants in my unit. I believed,
at the time, that regroupment was only temporary, because from

the study sessions on the Geneva Agreement we drew the conelu-
sion that we could return to the South after the general elections.

(A PA) [Our political officer/ explained that: we were granted
Vietnam north of the 17th parallel now, but in 1956 there would be
a general election and we would regain the South and be reunited
with our families. Because of interest and curiosity and the
opportunity to travel, everyone was happy. They thought they
would be there in the North only two years and then would be able
to return to their homes.

PM-4703, op. cit., 27, 35.

h5 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
