Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

4k, The elections should be conducted so as to produce a
constitutional assembly fairly representing the various regions
and groups within South Vietnam (except those actively partici-
pating with the Viet Cong), including the Army, Montagnards,
Khmer minorities, et. al. =

5. The elections should be conducted so as to gain a maxi-
mum improvement in the image of the GVN.in the United Stetes
and internationally; this calls for a wide turnout, scrupulously
correct conduct of the voting and counting process, as little
political limitation on voter eligibility as possible and
vigorous efforts to avoid voter intimidation from any quarter.
Ideas to be explored are a brief election period ceasefire,
international observation of the elections, students partici-
pating as poll watchers. ete.

6. The emphasis in the campaign should be on the selection
of good men to draft the constitution; political parties are not
expected to play a major role although the campaign may provide
the occasion for laying foundations for future party organization.

7- Unless new developments change our assessment, major
efforts should be devoted not to stimulating the formation of a
large nationalist party but rather to the adoption of the con-
cept that these elections bring together all non-communist groups
who are pledged, among other things, to their country's indepen-
dence and the continuing need to defend it with American help.
Specifically, efforts should not be made to split the SUAS PESS
or isolate the militant Buddhist faction.

8. The election process should be a vehicle for educating
and engaging the population in the democratic process and it should
be used to launch political and psychological initiatives with
youth groups, students, labor, etc.

9. Restore as far as possible the unity of the Directorate
and promote a reconciliation between Generals Ky and Thi. How-
ever, discourage efforts by the Directorate to form a government
party designed purely to perpetuate the Directorate in power to
the exclusion of other significant political groups. 2

At the end of May things seemed to settle down. McNamara sounded
out the Embassy about a trip in early June, but Lodge talked him out of
it on the grounds thet it might tempt the Buddhists to start demonstrat-
ing again. Ky met Buddhist Institute leaders on May 31 and offered
civilian participation in an enlarged Directorate, He reported that the
Buddhists accepted this along with reassurances about elections, and
agreed with Ky's new appointment of General Lem as Commander of I Corps.
Lodge was skeptical:

21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
