Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

those frantic days of late February-early March are included below,
even though moss of them never reached the President.

The CIA, responding to the requirements of the Clifford

Group for an assessment of the current communist position and the
alternatives open to them, sent several memos to the drafting committee
before the Sunday meeting. On February 29, they argued that the ve/NVA
could be expected to continue the harassment of the urban areas for the
next several months in the hope of exacting a sufficient price from the
U.S. and the GVN to force us to settle the war on their terms. But, no
serious negotiation initiative was anticipated until the conclusion of
the military phase:

kh, Political Options. Until the military campaign has
yun its course and the results are fairly clear, it is un-
likely that Hanoi will be seriously disposed to consider
negotiations with the U.S. A negotiating ploy is possible,
however, at almost any point in the present military campaign.
Tt would be intentionally designed to be difficult for the
US to reject. The purpose, however, would not be a serious
intent to settle the war, but rather to cause new anxieties
in Saigon, which might cause a crisis and lead to the collapse
of the Thieu-Ky government.

5. As of now Hanoi probably foresees two alternative
sets of circumstances in which a serious move to negotiate
a settlement might be entertained:

a. Obviously, if the military campaign is pro-
ducing significant successes and the GVN is in serious
disarray at some point Hanoi would probably give the
US the opportunity to end the war. This might take the
form of offering a general cease-fire followed by nego-
tiations on terms which would amount to registering a
complete Communist political success.

b. If, on the other hand, the military campaign
does not go well and the results cre inconclusive, then
Hanoi would probably change its military strategy to con-
tinue the struggle on a reduced level. 22/

To this assessment was added a somewhat more detailed
estimate the following day addressed to several specific questions.
Expanding on their memo of the previous day in response to a question
about whether the North Vietnamese had abandoned the "protracted conflict"

concept, the Agency concluded:

152 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
