Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It is important to consider the factors that may have brought
about the change. (1) It may have resulted as a reaction to the
persuasiveness of General Taylor's arguments. (2) It may have repre-
sented a genuine mellowing of individual viewpoints efter the oppor-
tunity to consider other judgments and weigh 211 the factors. (3) It
may have resulted from the Principals' uneasiness with the negotiating
track included in Option c. (4) It may have reflected concern over
public pressure for harsher measures that could have resulted from too
much public emphasis on the increased infiltration. (5) It may have
represented an attempt to enhance the chances of the President's
approving some kind of stepped up U.S. action outside of South Vietnam.
With regard to the latter, McGeorge Bundy, as the President's Assistant
for National Security Affairs, was in a position to convey President
Johnson's mood to the group. Moreover, notes taken at the White House
meeting tend to confirm that the President's mood was more closely akin
to the measures recomended than to those in Option B or full Option C.
Then again, it may be that all of these factors operated on the Prin-
cipals in some measure.

Also Significant, in the series of diseussions held by the
Principals, was their apparent lack of attention to the policy issues
related to negotiations. Despite the fact that Option C measures were
stipulated for the second phase of U.S, actions, the early negotiating
posture intended to accompany that option was apparently paid little
heed. According to the meeting notes, the only reference to our bar-
gaining capability was Secretary Rusk's concern as to whether Option C
actions would enable Ambassador Taylor to bargain in Saigon. Among the
documents from the Principals meetings, the only reference to Hanoi's
interest in negotiating occurred in Bundy's draft NSAM, where he re-
flected apparent Administration expectations that after more serious
pressures were applied the DRV would move first in the quest for a

settlement. 146/

In retrospect, the Principals appear to have assumed rather low
motivation on the part of the DRV. Hither this or they were overly opti-
mistic regarding the threat value of U.S. military might, or both.

For example, Ambassador Taylor's perception of how a settlement
might be reached -- which apparently produced little unfavorable reaction
among the others -~ indicated the assumption that DRV concessions to
rather major demands could be obtained with relatively weak pressures.

In his suggested scenario (acknowledged as "very close” to the concept
accepted by the Principals), 147/ the U.S. negotiating posture accom-
panying a series of attacks, Limited to infiltration targets "just north
‘of the DMZ," was intended to be as follows:

",.-in absence of public statements by DRV, initiate no

publie statements or publicity by ourselves or GVN. If
DRV does make public statements, confine ourselves and

' 62 TOP SECRET -~ Sensitive
