Ts

OK

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

from Opponents that would make it much more difficult
for the President to contemplate this approach when
an occasion actually arose...."

They went on to point out that accepting the Rostow thesis as a principle
of U.S. declaratory policy would require making it public before applying
it. The need to be assured of "Congressional and other public support

in carrying through the thesis in a given case" would require this.
Therefore, the analysts concluded, "It would be exceedingly unwise to
make the Rostow thesis a declaratory policy unless the U.S. were prepared
to act on it" -- but then only if we were assured of the public commit-
ment and the capability to achieve success. 135/

; _ With regard to the applicability of the thesis to the contemporary
situation in Southeast Asia, the critiquers summarized their views as
follows:

"..«.the situation in Vietnam and Laos is the only
One in which a strong case can be made that the two major
indications for the Rostow approach are made: the ineffective-
ness of alternatives and vital U.S. interests. Even in this
case the degee of U.S. interest, the degree and acceptability
of the risks, and the potential effectiveness of this approach
are subject to question. In particular, the likelihood and
the political costs of failure of the approach, and the

pressures for U.S. escalation if early moves should fail,
* 136/

require serious examination.
DIFFERING AGENCY POLICY VIEWS

In deseribing the evolution of Administration strategy this account
has previously emphasized the points of general agreement among the
President's advisors. Its purpose has been to describe the existence and
sense of a policy consensus that had emerged by mid-October. However,
significant differences of opinion existed among the various advisory
agencies regarding what actions should be taken and how soon they should
be initiated. These differences can be discerned with respect to five
issues: (1) whether and how soon the GVN maritime operations should be

-acknowledged; (2) the desirability of tit-for-tat reprisals; (3) how

best to cope with enemy reactions to increased pressures on the DRV;

(4) the degree of GVN/U.S. readiness required before increasing the
pressures; and (5) the relationship perceived between increased pressures
and negotiatiors.

JOS views. Senior military officials differed among themselves
on the first three issues. CINCPAC apparently perceived difficulties
resulting from official acknowledgements of GVN maritime operations and
suggested that press leaks would achieve the desired effects on SVN morale.

eneral Wheeler saw official acknowledgement as a means to legitimize the

of TOP SECRET - Sensitive
