Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

851G.00/7-740 : Telezram
The Ambassador in France (Cajfery) to the Secretary of State

Pants, July 7, 1946—1 p. m.
[Received July T—12:39 p.m.]

3323. Opening of Franco-Viet Nam confexence at Fontainebleau
yesterday brought to an apparent end pre-conference honeymoon
period during which French and Indochinese officials had rivaled
with each other in displays of Franco-Viet Nam friendship.

After long wait for Adiival Thierry UArgeniieu supposed to pre-
side over conference, unexpected announcement that “Admiral was
indisposed” created uneasiness and rumors to effect Viet Nam delegates
had vetoed presidency of Thierry d’Argenlieu who, in their eyes,
“typified French imperialism”.

Max André, head of Freneh delegation, assuming Presideney at
last moment, delivered innocuous speech of weleome and declered
conference open. Mr. Phan Van Doug, head of Viet Nam delegation,
immediately protested against this unilateral assumption of the chair’
of the direction of the proceedings. Ina fighting speech which con-
trasted sharply with platitudes of Andrés address, he went immedi-
ately to the core of the worst difficulties which the conference will have ,
to face. In sharp words, he protested against “the mutilation of the
Viet ‘Nam Motherland” through the creation of an independent state ,
of Cochin China outside of the Viet Nam. He went ou to accuse the -
French authorities in Indochina of having violated the accords of:
Dalat of March 6, 1946 and of having used these accords to penetrate
peacefully in the north while military operations were being carried
on in the south and in the interior.

This unexpected offensive of the Viet Nam delegation on the first
day has created a sensation. Independent and impartial Combat,
genuinely interested in colonial problems, headlines Viet Nam ac-
eusition across the entire first page and recognizes French mistakes
made in Indochina. Communist iinanite frankly sides with Viet
Nam. Socialists Poyoda‘re gives fair and impartial account ina vein
sympathetic to Viet Nam. MRP. Abe regrets “that French good-
will did not find 2 corresponding echo”. Tn the conservative and’
Nationalist papers there is literally an explosion of wrath against Viet
Nam delegation. Increasingly Leftist but always ultra-Nationalist
Ordre terms Phan Van Dong’s statements “shocking” and already
blames Viet Nam for any future breakdown in negotiations. Al]
these papers play up violations of Dalat agreement by the Viet Nam
and mnderline assassinations, kidnapping and rape of Biropenns as
justification of continued military operations by French expeditionary

RESTRICTED

corps.
On the whole conference had gotten off to bad start. Viet Nam

leaders also express their reeret that conference “of such considerable
Importance” should be held outside of Paris.

Interesting. to note that yesterday afternoon conversation held be-
tween Ho Chi Minh, Vief Nam President, and Algerian deputies of
friends of manifest group headed by Ferhat Abbas (my despatch
5d71 of July 4%) on similarity between problems facing Algeria and

“Not printed; it reported an inferview with the Algerian antonomist leader,
Ferhat-Alibas. <A delegation of eleven Algerian deputies, comprisinz the pre
independence gramp, “deniocratic union in favor of the Algerian Manifest’, wis in
Paris. (2)1R.00/7-246)

Viet Nant. ‘i

Sent Dept as 3523, repeated London as 509.

4 6 Carrreny
wd
