Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The sum total of the briefings did not vary from what McNamara
had heard so many times before: that there was an increasing NVA
presence in control of the war; that it was increasingly becoming a
main force battle; that the sanctuaries were becoming increasingly
important to the enemy both for the logistics and tactical advantages
they offered. It was clear that MACV's view of the war in these terms,
as increasingly a main force battle to be fought by American units,
had considerable influence upon the strategies that they pursued, as
well as their calculations of resources required to carry them out.
By the final day of his visit in Saigon no resolution of the ground
force requirements had really been arrived at. However, on the final
evening, Secretary McNamara and General Westmoreland, accompanied by
General Abrams sat down after dinner and worked out what seemad to be
an equitable provision of forces below the mobilization level. In
this, they took what was commonly accepted as available, approximately
the 3-2/3 divisions outlined by Enthoven, and subtracted those which
the COMUSMACV had stated were possibly available for civilianization
during the next year, some 14,400. Computed, this came to approximately
a 45,000 force increase, since part of the PRACTICE NINE barrier brigade
had already been ineluded in the Program 5 total.

The events of the next week, July 8-13, indicated that COMUSMACV
was not completely prepared to support the 525,C0O level which was agreed
upon, a level, incidentally, which coincided with the old program
optimum request submitted by COMUSMACV in the fall of the previous
year. General Dunn, who was General Westmoreland's force planner,
worked his staff throughout the night prior to the Secretary of Defense's
departure on the 9th. He prepared a rough troop list under the 525,000
limit which he hand carried back to the Joint Staff for refinement. 09,

6. The Compromise--Slightly More of the Same

At the point of Secretary McNamara's return to Washington, planning
on force structures travelled along two parallel tracks for the next week.
As General Dunn conferred with the JCS and the Joint Staff and they tried
to refine the force within the 525,000 level, Secretary McNamara initiated
@ study in Systems Analysis to flesh out the 525,000, or as so often was
the case, to prepare the OSD position with which to compare and evaluate
the JCS recommendation which would come. According to Mr. McNamara's
instructions to Secretary Enthoven, the 525,000 package would include
19 battalions in addition to the 87 already included in Program 4 through
the previous March. The sources of the 19 battalions were to be as
follows: 3 PRACTICE NINE barrier brigade; 3 from the 9th MAB, 6 from
‘the deployment of the 10lst Airborne Division; 3 from the 11th Infantry
Division (the Brigade in Hawaii), and 4 new battalions formed in lieu
of the 24 rifle companies proposed in the ARCOV recommendation. In
addition to these 19 battalions, 9 ARCOV rifle company equivalents,
equivalent to three more battalions in foxhole strength, would be

209 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
