Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Bombing Purposes and Payoffs

Our bombing of North Vietnam was designed to serve
three purposes:

--(1) To retaliate and to lift the morale of the
people in the South who were being attacked by agents
of the North.

--(2) To add to the pressure on Hanoi to end the war.

--(3) To reduce the flow and/or to increase the
cost of infiltrating men and materiel from North to South.

We cannot ignore that a limitation on bombing will
“eause serious psychological problems among the men, offi-
cers and commanders, who will not be able to understand
why we should withhold punishment from the enemy. General
‘Westmoreland said that he is “frankly dismayed at even the
thought of stopping the bombing program." But this reason
for attacking North Vietnam must be scrutinized carefully.
We should not bomb for punitive reasons if it serves no
other purpose -- especially if analysis shows that the
actions may be counterproductive. It costs American
lives; it creates a backfire of revulsion and opposition
by killing civilians; it creates serious risks; it may harden
the enemy.

With respect to added pressure on the North, it is
becoming apparent that Hanoi may already have "written off"
all assets and lives that might be destroyed by US military
actions short of occupation or annihilation. They can and
will hold out at least so long as a prospect of winning the
"war of attrition" in the South exists. And our best judgment
is that a Hanoi prerequisite to negotiations is significant
retrenchment (if not complete stoppage) of US military actions
against them -- at the least, a cessation of bombing. In
this connection, Consal-General. Rice (Hong Kong 7581, 5/1/67)
said that, in his opinion, we cannot by bombing reach the
critical level of pain in North Vietnam and that, "below
that-level, pain only increases the will to fight." Sir
Robert Thompson said to Mr. Vance on April 28 that our
bombing, particularly in the Red River Delta, “is unifying
North Vietnam."

155 TOP: SECRET - Sensitive
