Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. The May 19 DPM

By the 19th of May the opinions of McNamara and his key
aides with respect to the bombing and Westy's troop requests had
erystalized sufficiently that another Draft Presidential Memorandum
was written. It was entitled, "Future Actions in Vietnam," and was
@ comprehensive treatment of all aspects of the war -- military, political,
and diplomatic. It opened with an appraisal of the situation covering both
Worth and South Vietnam, the U.S. domestic scene and international opinion.
The estimate of the situation in North Vietnam hewed very close to the
opinions of the intelligence community already referred to. Here is how
the analysis proceeded:

C. North Vietnam

Hanoi's attitude towards negotiations has never been
soft nor open-minded. Any concession on their part would
involve an enormous loss of face. Whether or not the Polish
and Burchett-Kosygin initiatives had much substance to them,
it is clear that Hanoi'’s attitude currently is hard and rigid.
They seem uninterested in a political settlement and deter-
mined to match US military expansion of the conflict. This
change probably reflects these factors: (1) increased assur-
ances of help from the Soviets received during Pham Van Dong's
April trip to Moscow; (2) arrangements providing for the
unhindered passage of materiel from the Soviet Union through
China; and (3) a decision to wait for the results of the
US elections in 1968. Hanoi appears to have concluded that
she cannot secure her objectives at the conference table
and has reaffirmed her strategy of seeking to erode our
ability to remain in the South. The Hanoi leadership has
apparently decided that it has no choice but to submit to
the increased bombing. There’ continues to be no sign that
the bombing has reduced Hanoi's will to resist or her ability
to ship the necessary supplies south. Hanoi shows no signs
of ending the large war and advising the VC to melt into the
jungles. The North Vietnamese believe they are right; they
consider the Ky regime to be puppets; they believe the world
is with them and that the American public will not have
staying power against them. Thus, although they may have
factions in the regime favoring different approaches, they
believe that, in the long run, they are stronger than we are
for the purpose. They probably do not want to make significant
concessions, and could not do so without serious loss of face. 100/

When added to the continuing difficulties in bringing the

war in the South under control, the unchecked erosion of U.S, public sup-
port for the war, and the smoldering international disquiet about the need

43 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
