a eae

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

attacks. In my testimony, I noted that, while sonar and radar read-

“ings may be subject to pet Ue and argume it because of sea and

atmospheric conditions, we had intelligence reports of a highly classi-
fied and unimpeachable nature which established, without question,
that the attacks took place on both August 2 and August 4.

PART PLAYED BY U.S. NAVAL VESSELS

Also fully explored at the time was the question whether the attacks

on the Maddox and Turner Joy were in any way provoked by or re-
lated to certain South Vietnamese nayal activity which occurred in the
period from July 30 to August 4, As I stated then, and repeat now,
our naval vessels played absolutely no part in, and were not associated
with, this activity, There was then, and there is now, no question but
that the U.S. Government knew, and that I knew personally, the gen-
eral nature of some countermeasures being taken by the South Viet-
namese in response to North Vietnam’s aggression. As I informed
Congress, the boats utilized by the South Vietnamese were financed by
the United States. But I said then, and I repeat today, that the Wuddox
and the Zurnep Joy did not participate in the South Vietnamese
activities, that they had no knowledge of the details of these opera-
tions, and that in no sense of the word could they be considered to
have backstopped the effort.

‘As the chairman noted in the Senate debates, he was informed that
our boats did not convoy or support or back up any South Vietnamese
naval vessels” and that they were “entirely unconnected or unasso-
ciated with any coastal forays the South Vietnamese themselves may
have conducted.” He was so informed and the information was com-
pletely accurate. When the South Vietnamese conducted the first of
their two naval operations against North Vietnamese targets during
this period, the Medion patrol had not even begun and the ship was
at least 130 miles to the southeast. The attack on the Maddow on
August 2 tcok place 63 how's after completion of this South Viet-
namese naval operation. When the South Vietnamese boats conducted
their second foray, the Maddow and the Turner Joy were at least 70
nautical miles to the northeast.

Senator Casn. I wonder if you could go a little more slowly. It is a
little hard to understand.

Secretary McNasrara. Yes.

The attack made against them on August 4 was almost a full day
after this second South Vietnamese operation.

The facts thus show today, as they showed 314 years ago, that at-
tacks occurred against our ships both on August 2 and August 4,
that we had ayailable to us incontrovertible evidence of these attacks
when the decision was made to make our limited and measured re-
sponse, and that these attacks were in no sense provoked or justified
by any participation or association of our ships with South Vietnamese
naval operations. I would like briefly to review these facts with you.

<4

REVIEW OF FACTS OF ATTACK

On the 2d of August 1964, the USS. Maddor was engaged in a
patrol in international waters in the Gulf of Tonkin. At no time dur-
ing the conduct of her patrol did J/addox depart from international
