Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

"Troops in Thailand

"Q: Mr. President, in light of your answer to this question, sir,
could you give us any idea how long the American troops will be needed
in Thailand?

"THE PRESIDENT: -I cannot at this time.
"Q: Have you any idea under what conditions they might return?

"THE PRESIDENT: I cannot at this time. They have only been in there
for a very short while, and we can't tell when they will come out. It
will depend a good deal on what conditions are in Thailand and the neigh-
bereng countries.

treatonttig the Cease-Fire

"Q: Mr. President, could you tell us, please, what you would consider
the restoration of an effective cease-fire? Would this involve the with-
drawal of the Communist forces to their position before the attack on Nam
Tha, or more or less a quiescence which would permit the talks to go forward
on the government?

"THE PRESIDENT: Obviously, we would prefer as great a withdrawal to
the line that was in effect a week or so ago as we could get. I would
think, however, that the peace along the line which now may exist, of
course, is essential.

"Objectives in Laos.

"Q: Mr. President, would you review for us the considerations that
you had in mind last weekend when you took this rather swift action to move
more American troops into Thailand?

"THE PRESIDENT: Yes. We are concerned about the breach of the cease-
fire, the sign of deterioration in Laos, which brought Communist forces to
the border of Thailand up in the Mekong River section, up not too far from
Nam Tha, and we did not know whether this was an indication of a general
breach of the cease-fire which, of course, would immediately imperil Thailand.
So in our desire to stabilize the situation, we got in touch with the govern-
ment, which was already in touch with us, and worked out the proposed course

of action.

"Legality of Thailand Move

"Q: Mr. President, what was the legal basis for our sending troops
to Thailand? Was it a bilateral arrangement that we have with the Thai
government, or was it possibly secret arrangements?

C-22
