Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

direct record of the Secretary's presentation to the President during this
period, but a set of notes 20/ put together in preparation for a Rusk
meeting with the President on January 6 by Assistant Secretary William Bundy,
Special Assistant Michael Forrestal and Deputy Assistant Secretary Leonard
Unger, laid out tne alternatives in some detail. Recognizing that a

"coming apart" of the GVN would most likely take the form of covert nego-
tiations by key governmental groups with the NLF, leading eventually to

the U.S. being invited out, Rusk's principal Vietnam advisers argued that
this was one possible "Vietnamese solution," but hardly a desirable one:

It would still be virtually certain that Laos would then
become untenable and that Cambodia would accommodate in some way.
Most seriously, there is grave question whether the Thai in these
circumstances would retain any confidence at all in our continued
support. In short, the outcome would be regarded in Asia, and
particularly among our friends, as just as humiliating a defeat
as any other form. As events have developed, the American public
would probably not be too sharply critical, but the real question
would be whether Thailand and other nations were weakened and taken
over thereafter.

The alternative of stronger action obviously has grave diffi-
culties. It commits the US more deeply, at a time when the picture
of South Vietnamese will is extremely weak. To the extent that it
included actions against North Vietnam, it would be vigorously
attacked by many nations and disapproved initially even by such
nations as Japan and India, on present indications. Most basically,
its stiffening effect on the Saigon political situation would not
be at all sure to bring about a more effective government, nor
would limited actions against the southern DRV in fact sharply
reduce infiltration or, in present circumstances, be at all likely
to induce Hanoi to call it off.

‘Nonetheless, on balance we believe that such action would have
some faint hope of really improving the Vietnamese situation, and,
above all, would put us in a much stronger position to hold the next
line of defense, namely Thailand. Accepting the present situation--
or any negotiation on the basis of it--would be far weaker from this
latter key standpoint. If we moved into stronger actions, we should
have in mind that negotiations would be likely to emerge from some

_ Quarter in any event, and that under existing circumstances, even
with the additional element of pressure, we could not expect to get
an outcome that would really secure an independent South Vietnam.
Yet even on an outcome that produced a progressive deterioration
in South Vietnam and an eventual Communist takeover, we would still
have appeared to Asians to have done a lot more about it."

Turning then to specific alternatives, Bundy and his colleagues
envisioned five proposals:

13 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
