Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Honolulu...The fact is that for several years this problem of
the ‘other war' has been recognized as vital by the State

' Department, the Pentagon and even by the White House. But
nobody did much about it, except in an offhand way...

"Johnson is a master of timing. He has definitely gained

a political advantage over his Viet policy critics by stressing

’ right now the need of winning over the Reanasite | a/aenee
Robert/ Kennedy complained in a Senate speech just ten days ago
that there were ‘many indications that we have not yet even begun
to develop a program...It is absolutely urgent,’ the Senator said,
"that we now act to institute new programs of education, land
reform, public health, political participation...'."

NEWS ANALYSIS: Richard Critehfield in The Washington Evenin
Star, February 9 (from Saigon):

"President Johnson's historic decision at Honolulu back-
ing an American-sponsored brand of social revolution as an
alternative to communism in South Vietnam was warmly hailed
today by veteran political observers. The Honolulu declara-
tion was viewed as ending postwar era of American foreign
policy aimed at stabilizing the status quo in Asia.

"The key phrase, in the view of many diplomats here, was
the offer of full American 'support to measures of social
revolution, including land reform based upon the principle
of building upward from the hopes and purposes of all the
people of Vietnam.

",..Jdohnson'’s decisions to put political remedies on a par
with military action are also regarded here as a major personal
triumph for Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge and his top aide,
Major General Edward G. Lansdale, the two main advocates of
"social revolution’ in South Vietnam...The Honolulu declara-
tion appears to signify a major shift away from the policy of
primarily military support established by President Kennedy in
1961 and closely identified with General Maxwell Taylor,
Defense Secretary McNamara, and Secretary of State Rusk...The
Lodge-Lansdale formula was 4a striking departure-in that it saw
the eventual solution not so much in Hanoi's capitulation as
in successful pacification in South Vietnam,..The Honolulu
declaration amounts to almost a point by point acceptence
of this formule end both its phraseology and philosophy bear
Lansdale's unmistakable imprint..."

EDITORIAL: The Baltimore Sun, February 10:

"Unless there was more substance to the Honolulu Conference
than meets the eye, it could be summed up as much ado -- not

TRS} TOP SECRET - Sensitive
