Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

or to dampen the mounting tension. Mutual distrust led to incremental
violations by both sides, but on balance, though neither the United
States nor South Vietnam was fully cooperative, and though both acted

as they felt necessary to protect their interests, poth considered
themselves constrained by the Accords. There is no evidence that either
deliberately undertook to breach the peace. In contrast, the DRV pro-
ceeded to mobilize its total societal resources scarcely without pause
from the day the peace was signed, as though to substantiate the declara-
tion of its Deputy Premier, Pham Van Dong, at the closing session of

the Geneva Conference:

"We shall achieve unity. We shall achieve it just as
we have won the war. No force in the world, internal or
external, can make us deviate from our path. + +

Diem's rejection of elections meant that reunification could be
achieved in the foreseeable future only by resort to force. Diem's
policy, and U.S. support of it, led inevitably to a test of strength
with the DRV to determine whether the GVN's cohesiveness, with U.S.
support, could offset North Vietnam's drive to satisfy its unrequited
nationalism and expansionism.

Revolt Against My-Diem (Tab 2)

By the time President Kennedy came to office in 1961, it was
plain that support for the Saigon government among South Vietnam's
peasants -- 90% of the population -- was weak and waning. The Manifesto .
of the National Liberation Front, published in December 1960, trumpeted
the existence of a revolutionary organization which could channel popular
discontent into a political program. Increasingly Diem's government
proved inept in dealing either through its public administration with
the sources of popular discontent, or through its security apparatus
with the Viet Cong. Dien's government and his party were by that time
manifestly out of touch with the people, and into the gap between the
government and the populace the Viet Cong had successfully driven.
When and why this gap developed is crucial to an understanding of who
the Viet Cong were, and to what extent they represented South as
opposed to North Vietnamese interests.

The U.S. Government, in its White Papers on Vietnam of 1961 and
1965*, has blamed the insurgency on aggression by Hanoi, holding that
the Viet Cong were always tools of the DRV. Critics of U.S. policy in
Vietnam usually hold, to the contrary, that the war was started by South
Vietnamese; their counterarguments rest on two propositions: (1) that
the insurgency began as a rebellion against the oppressive and clumsy

* U.S. Department of State, "A Threat to the Peace: North Vietnam's
Effort to Conquer South Vietnam" (Publication 7308, Far Eastern
Series 110, December 1961) and "Aggression from the North: The
Record of North Vietnam's Campaign to Conquer South Vietnam"
(Publication 7839, Far Eastern Series 130, February 1965).

12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
