Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

progress is difficult... If we had this joint Gvn/US
authority, we could get at corruption, provided we also
had advisers with the Ministries who were really "persona
grata." ho/

In the first week of May, Porter put the sector fund idea to Ky, who
rebuffed. him. Lodge tried to keep the idea alive, but without success. kn/

7. Whe Military Advisory Program, March-July 1966

COMUSMACV's concern over declining present for combat strength of
ARVN units resulted in a study which showed that as of February 28, only
62% of their authorized strength were mustered for operations. There
were two principal reasons; (1) Division and regimental commanders had
organized non-TOH units such as strike/recon, recon and security, recruit-
ing teams, and (2) Large numbers of deserters, long-term hospital patients,
and KIA had not been removed from roliis. MACV instructed JGS to disband
non-TON units and give increased attention to improving administrative
procedures. Senior advisers were told to monitor their counterparts and
use their influence to bring present for operations strengths up to at
least 450 men (75%) per battalion.

At the same time, MACV had a study made to determine the need for
reconnaissance units. When field advisers were asked, all replies were
favorable; so JGS was asked to develop the organization for a regimental
reconnaissance company. 42/

Training was another problem. One adviser stated, "It is more
accurate to describe the training program as non-existent instead of
unsatisfactory." Another said, "It appears that the battalion commander
desires the deterioration of the training status of the battalion so that
higher authority will place the unit in a training center to be retrained."
COMUSMACY wrote to the Chief JGS in March on the subject of training, but
training progress did not change appreciably through 1966 from the level
recorded during the first four months. 43/

There was a question of what to do about units which advisers rated
ineffective. The combat effectiveness of the 5th and 25th ARVN Divisions
was the subject of a staff study completed April 19. Five courses of
action were considered: .

(1) Deactivate division headquarters and place subordinate
- units under province chiefs.

(2) Exchange the divisions with two other divisions from
different CTZ's.

(3) Relieve the key leaders at all levels who were marginal
or unsatisfactory.

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
