Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The relationship of the reorganizers to the pacifiers must be
explained. Those who advocated restructuring the Mission for more
effective management were not necessarily the same people advocating
a higher emphasis for pacification. But usually, since the organiza-
tion of the Mission was so obviously deficient, both groups of people
would end up advocating some kind of change -- and even if they dis-
agreed on the nature of the change, the most important fact was that
they were generally pushing a similar mood of dissatisfaction with the
Mission upon the high-ranking officials with whom they might come in
contact. (It should be kept in mind that they were really not groups
at all, in the normal sense of the word, but a shifting collection of
individuals with varying degrees of loyalty to either their parent
agency or their own sense of history; and on each individual issue ae
different set of allies and antagonists might well exist.)

The efforts of those advocating reorganization began to bear
edible fruit in December 1965 and January 1966, when a conference was
held at Warrenton, Va., to which the Mission sent an impressive collec-
tion of Mission Council members: Deputy Ambassador Porter, USAID
Mission Director Mann, JUSPAO Director Zorthian, Political Counsellor
Habib, General Lansdale, CIA Station Chief Jorgenson, and Brigadier
General Collins, representing Westmoreland. From Washington came the
second and third echelons of the bureaucracy: Leonard Unger, Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State; Rutherford Poats, Assistant Adminis-
trator of AID; Major General Peers, SACSA; Alvin Friedman, ISA;

William Colby and Peer Ga Silva, CIA; Chester Cooper, White House;

and Senford Marlowe, USIA. Other participants included: Major General
Hutchins, CINCPAC; Rufus Phillips of Lansdale's group; Charles Zwick
and Henry Rowen of BOB; George Lodge, the Ambassador's son; Desmond
Fitzgerald, CIA; and Leon Goure, of RAND.

The purpose of the meeting was to "bring together senior repre-
sentatives of the U.S. Mission, Saigon, the Vietnam Coordinating
Committee, Washington, and several other individuals to (a) review
the joint GVIN-US pacification/rural construction program and seek to
promote its more effective operation and (b) address the problem of
the increasingly serious shortages and bottlenecks in manpower,
materials, and transport in Vietnam and to designate priorities and
machinery for resources control and allocation." The major unstated
purpose, in addition to those mentioned above, was to discuss the
organization of the U.S. Mission in Vietnam.

Warrenton was to turn out to be a prelude to Honolulu, and as such
its recommendations never were to become an integral part of the
Mission's plans end strategy. But the direction that was developed at
Warrenton is significant, because it represents the clear and unmis-
takable thrust that existed at the time in the "working levels" of both
Saigon and Washington. Given the normal time lag before individual
thoughts can reach the stage of agreed-upon committee-produced papers,

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
