Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

The demands were accompanied by a statement affirming the reunification
of Vietnam as a goal of the NL, the first such statement in over two
years. Dougles Pike's analysis was unable to resolve the reasons for
the inaction of the NLF throughout the crisis:

Had the NLF leadership wished to do so, it could have
used its impressive struggle machine to leuch in the name
of the Buddha a nation-wide struggle movement that con-
ceivably could haye ended with its long-pursved General
Uprising... Knowledgeable Vietnamese attributed its refusal
to act to an unwillingness to involve itself in en alien
strugele movement. ‘the NLF and the communists, ran the
argument, avoid activities over which they do not exercise
total control....The Buddhist leadership made it clear it
did not seek NLM help since it wished at all costs to avoid
the Communist stigma. Another popular explanation for the
RLF's "“sit-tight" policy during the Buddhist troubles was
thet the NLF was going to allow the bourgeois revolutionary
forces to succeed in toppling Diem, efter which it would
capture the Revolution as the Kerensky Government was cap-
tured in the Russian Revolution. Wo such effort, however,
was made by the NLF. A slanderous but widely bandied
explanation among Vietnamese at the time was that the NLF
did not want Diem removed, that he and his brothers and
sister-in-law were far more valuable to the HLF in office
then out. In truth, the NLP posture during this period
remains something of a mystery. 4h/

3. The Honolulu Conference and NSAM 273

Having postponed his planned October 31 yisit to Washington because
of the imminence of the coup, Lodge apparently suggested, in response to
a State query, that it be rescheduled for November 10. Rusk proposed a
further postponement to insure time for Lodge to establish working rela-
tions with the new government end to take advantage of his own planned
trip to Tokyo leter in the month, 4h / Accordingly, a meeting with Rusk,
Bundy, Bell, McNamara, and Taylor in Honolulu was scheduled on Eovenber 20
for the entire country team. Lodge wes invited to proceed on to Washing-
ton after the meeting if he felt he needed to talk with the President.

In preparation for the conference, State dispatched a long series
of specific questions to Lodge on possible methods of brogdening the
political base of support of the new government and increasing the effec-
tiveness of the war effort. 46/ This was additional to the comprehen-
sive review of the situation, including an evaluation of progress on the
McNamare-Taylor recommendations, that the military was expected to provide

65 TOP SSCRET - Sensitive
