Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Danang-Hue which, for the time being, should be merely
contained and isolated. 101/

These recommendations, however, had been overtaken by events. The GVN

had already found a formula for restoring order and appeasing the Buddhists.
In a three day "National Political Congress" in Saigon from April 12-14,
the GVN adopted a program promising to move rapidly toward constitutional
government which placated the main Buddhist demands. 102/ For a few

weeks the demonstrations ceased and South Vietnam returned to relative
political quiet. While not unusual as policy problems go, this political
crisis in South Vietnam intervened temporarily to divert officiel attention
from the broader issues of the war and indirectly contributed to the
deferral of any decision to authorize attacks on the POL in North Vietnam.
Other issues and problems would continue to defer the POL decision, both
directly and indirectly, for another two months.

With some semblance of calm restored momentarily to South
Vietnamese politics, the second-level Washington policy officials could
turn their attention once again to the broader issues of U.S. policy
direction. On April 14, Walt Rostow sent McNaughton a memo entitled
"Headings for Decision and Action: Vietnam, April 14, 1966," (implying
topics for discussion at a meeting later that day?). Ttem one on Rostow's
agenda was & proposed high-level U.S. statement endorsing the recent evolu-
+ion of events in South Vietnam and stipulating that continued U.S. assis-
tance and support would be contingent on South Vietnamese demonstration
of unity, movement toward constitutional government, effective prosecution
of the war, and maintenance of order. His second topic was the bombing of
the North, and subheading "b" re-opened the POL debate with the simple
question, "Is this the time for oil?" 103/ Other issues which he listed
for consideration included: accelerating the campaign against main force
units, economic stabilization, revolutionary construction, Vietnamese
politics (including constitution-making), and negotiations between the
GVN and the vc (if only for political warfare purposes).

On the same day, the JCS forwarded to the Secretary the
previously mentioned "ROLLING THUNDER Study Group Report: Air Operations
Against NVN" with a cover memo noting that its recommendations for a

_ stepped up bombing campaign were "in consonance with the general concept
recommended in JCSM-41-66...." 104/ The voluminous study itself recom-
mended a general expansion of the bombing with provision for three special
attack options, one against the Haiphong POL center; the second for the
aerial mining of the sea approaches to Haiphong, Hon Gai, and Cam Pha; ani
the third for strikes at the major airfields of Hanoi, Haiphong, and Phuc
Yen. 105/ In offering these options, the report stated that, "Military
considerations would require that two of the special attack options, POL
and mining, be conducted now. However, appreciation of the sensitivity of
such attacks is recognized and the precise time of execution must take
into account political factors." 106/ Somewhat optimistically, the report

100 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
