val

Ln

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Other facts were more easily ascertainable. Since the Diem coup,
for instance, only 5 of RVN's 42 provinces had not experienced a change
in Province Chief. Change is, of course, inescapable in the aftermath
of a coup, but by 8 May 15 provinces were under their third chief since
1 November 1964, 7 had their fourth, and 2 provinces were governed by
the fifth officer since the Dien government fell. Instability in edmin-
istration was accompanied by e marked GVN decline in nuibers of population
controlled and a comparable increase in VC population control. These
trends were reflected in the official estimates (themselves suspect of
being overly optimistic) of control in the rural villages:

Comparison, MWumber of Rural Villages Controlled 97/

Sep 63. Apr 64
RVN 1682 1485
vc 709 &66
Contested 139 187

Of the 14 provinces considered critical in terms of location and popula
tion, all were reported by their advisors to be in "critical" condition.
The prospects in 10 of these were judged to be “poor.” Four provinces
were regarded to have "fair" prospects. 98/ It was apparent that the
U.S. could not depend on eventual actions against DRV to save the day in
South Vietnem. By the time such actions were politically feasible there
might be nothing to save. It was time to take some further direct action
within South Vietnam itself -- and to take it quickly. Increasing U.S.
advisors was an obvious and availeble action.

MACV'S GRADUALISTIC APPROACH TO EXPANSTON

As early as December 1963, MACV had studied the desirability of
extending the U.S. advisory effort to district level in 13 certain key
districts, mostly around Saigon. No action was taken et thet time but
the proposal was revived in February and implemented during late March
1964. 99/ ach of the original 13 "key districts" was assigned one
Captain and one noncommissioned officer. Of the original 26 persons
selected for this pilot project, 21 were newly arrived in RVN. 100/

This gradualistic, experimental approach to expanding the advisory
effort typified the method preferred both by the military and civilian
agencies in Vietnam -- although for somewhat different reasons. .MACV
was concerned with the experience and skill levels it could command among
necessarily lower ranks as it expanded deeper into ARVN and the political.
(staffed by ARVN) hierarchy, about increased support requirements, and
about increased casualties, USOM elaimed that its operatives could work
effectively at the "spigot" end of the aid pipeline only where the local -

h3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
