Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The President was one-of the people who used conversation
as others of us use a first draft on paper...a method of trying
out an idea. If it does not go well, you can modify it or drop
it as you will. Nobody thinks anything of it if you do this
with a paper draft; but if you do it with conversation, people
say that you have changed your mind, that ‘you never knew where
you have him,' and so on." 4/

But in response to a memorandum from Secretary of State Hull putting
the question of Indochina to F.D.R-., and reminding the President of
the numerous U.S. commitments to restoration of the French empire,
Roosevelt replied (on January 24, 1944) that:

"I saw Halifax last week and told him quite frankly that
it was perfectly true that I had, for over a year, expressed
the opinion that Indo-China should not go back to France but
that it should be administered by an international trusteeship.
France has had the country -- thirty million inhabitants for
nearly one hundred years, and the people are worse off than
they were at the beginning.

"As a matter of interest, I am wholeheartedly supported in
this view by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and by Marshal Stalin.
I see no reason to play in with the British Foreign Office in
this matter. The only reason they seem to oppose it is that
they fear the effect it would have on their own possessions and
those of the Dutch. They have never,liked the idea of trustee-
ship because it is, in some instances, aimed at future inde-
pendence. This is true in the case of Indo-China.

"Rach case must, of course, stand on its own feet, but the
ease of Indo-China is perfectly clear. France has milked it for
one hundred years. The people of Indo-China are entitled to
something better than that." 5/

(1) Military Strategy Pre-eminent

Throughout the year 194, the President held to his
views, and consistent with them, proscribed U.S. aid to resistance
groups -- including French groups -- in Indochina. But the war in the
Asian theaters moved rapidly, and the center of gravity of the American
effort began to shift northward toward Japan. The question of U.S.
strategy in Southeast Asia then came to the fore. At the Second Quebec
Conference (September, 194), the U.S. refused British offers of naval
assistance against Japan because Admiral King believed "the best occu-
pation for any available British forces would be to re-take Singapore,
and to assist the Dutch in recovering the East Indies," and because he
suspected that the offer "was perhaps not unconnected with a desire
for United States help in clearing the Japanese out of the Malay States
and Netherlands East Indies." 6/ Admiral King's suspicions were not

A-14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
