Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

counterinsurgency effort against Viet Cong, at least in
short term. .. ." Ah]

With respect to Hanoi, it might present an opportunity for a demarche-~
exploiting withdrawal of U.S. forces from South Vietnam by a specified |
date as exchange for North Vietnam's abandoning its aggression against
South Vietnam. But events were already conspiring otherwise, and would
soon frustrate such expectations and intentions as developed. The
internal SVN situation was about to undergo rapid transformation.

By late October, there was increasing skepticism in some quarters
about the military situation in South Vietnam. Indeed, it was beginning
to be suspected that reports of progress by U.S. military sources actu-
ally cloeked a situation that was not only bleak, but deteriorating. A
State Department intelligence evaluation of 22 October showed markedly
pessimistic statistical trends since July 1963, in most areas of enemy-
friendly relative progress measurement, indicating an unfavorable shift in
the military balance. What was disquieting was that the pattern showed
steady decline over a period of more than three months' duration. 45/

Circulation of the INR evaluation occasioned controversy and no little
recrimination. Substantive differences degenerated into a procedural issue.
The outcome was a personal memorandum fron the Secretary of State to the
Secretary of Defense on 8 November, amounting to an apology for the incident.
The Secretary of State stated in regard to INR's RFE-90 of 22 October:

",...dt is not the policy of the State Department to issue
military appraisals without seeking the views of the Defense
Department. I have requested that any memoranda given inter-
departmental circulation which include military appraisals be
coordinated with your Department." 46/

THE NOVEMBER COUP AND OVERTHROW OF DIEM

On 1 November, the political situation fell apart. The long-anticipated
coup occurred. The Diem regime was overthrown, and both Diem and Nhu were
assassinated. A military junta of politically inexperienced generals took
over the government as their successors.

The significance of the great change, for good or ill, was not readily
apparent. Over the next three weeks the feared political chaos, civil war,
and collapse of the war effort following a coup did not seem to be mater-
jalizing. For the United States, the important question was what did the
new circumstances mean militarily for existing policy and plans oriented to
bringing the insurgency under control and to phasing out US force commitments.

On 20 November, at the. President's direction, a special all-agencies
conference on Vietnam was convened in Honolulu for e “full-scale review"
in depth of all aspects of the situation and to reassess U.S. plans and
policies in the political, military, economic and information fields
since the change of government. Attending were some 45 senior U.S.
officials, military and civilian, including: the Secretary of State,
Secretary of Defense, Special Assistant to the President for National

eh _ OP SECRET - Sensitive
