Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in McNamara's attitude toward the force buildup. 56/ ‘The issue would
continue to be debated until the President's decision shortly after
the election in November to approve the McNamara recommended total of
469,300 troops under Program #4.

With respect to the air war he stated that the bombing had
neither significantly reduced infiltration nor diminished Hanoi's will
to continue the fight, and he noted the concurrence of the intelligence
community in these conclusions. Pulling back from his previous positions,
he now recommended that the President level off the bombing at current
levels and seek other means of achieving our objectives. The section of
the memo on bombing follows:

Stabilize the ROLLING THUNDER program against the North.
Attack sorties in North Vietnam have risen from about 4,000
per month at the end of last year to 6,000 per month in the
first quarter of this year and 12,000 per month at present.
Most of our 50 percent increase of deployed attack-capable air-
eraft has been absorbed in the attacks on North Vietnam. In
North Vietnam, almost 84,000 attack sorties have been flown
(about 25 percent against fixed targets), 45 percent during
the past seven months.

Despite these efforts, it now appears that the North
Vietnamese-Laotian road network will remain adequate to meet
the requirements of the Communist forces in South Vietnam --
this is so even if its capacity could be reduced by one-third
and if combat activities were to be doubled. North Vietnam's
serious need for trucks, spare parts and petroleum probably
can, despite air attacks, be met by imports. The petroleum
requirement for trucks involved in the infiltration movement,
for example, has not been enough to present significant sup-
ply problems, and the effects of the attacks on the petroleum
distribution system, while they have not yet been fully
assessed, are not expected to cripple the flow of essential
supplies. Furthermore, it is clear that, to bomb the North
sufficiently to make a radical impact upon Hanoi's political,
economic and social structure, would require an effort which
we could make but which would not be stomached either by our
own people or by world opinion; and it would involve a seri-
ous risk of drawing us into open war with China.

The North Vietnamese are paying a price. They have been
forced to assign some 300,000 personnel to the lines of com-
munication in order to maintain the critical flow of personnel
‘and materiel to the South. Now that the lines of communica-
tion have been manned, however, it is doubtful that either a

163 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
