Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Aside from questions relating to our commitments to Vietnam, there
were also the parallel questions relating to our commitment, if any, to
Diem. As noted in the introduction, discussions about Vietnam always
had this dual aspect, and this part of the problem was treated with in-
ereasing explicitness as time went on (and as the Administration got to know
Diem better), In the CIP, it was treated essentially by implication.
In the Gilpatric/Lansdale draft of April 26, it was also handled that
way: no explicit statement of a change in our relations with Diem was
offered, although by implication it was there.

Where the CIP (by implication) saw our increased aid as contingent
on Diem's performance, the April 26 program left out any suggestion of
a guid pro quo. To the contrary, it simply states that "those portions
of the plan which are agreed to by the G.V.N. will be implemented as
rapidly as possible.”

And where the CIP saw Diem's government as our best hope "at the
present time” this note of limited commitment to Diem is dropped in the
April 26 draft. Instead we have a bland statement that we will “assist
the GVN under President Diem to develop within the country the widest
consensus of public support for a government dedicated to resisting com-

munist domination.” /emphasis addea/ 30/

The May 3 State draft and the May 6 final draft dealt with this issue
much as they had with the questions of military commitments: that is,
these did not so much conspicuously weaken the proposals of the Gilpatric/
Lansdale version, as to qualify and elaborate on them in ways that in
effect (again, we cannot make a statement on intent) left the President
a ready option to reconsider his position. State explicitly asserted that
we were changing our policy on Diem, and spelled out some reasons for
doing so.

Here are some extracts from the May 6 final draft;(the language is
essentially the same in the May 3 draft).

'...we must continue to work through the present
Vietnamese government despite its acknowledged weakness.
No other remotely feasible alternative exists at this
point in time which does not involve an unacceptable

‘degree of risk...Diem is not now fully confident of
United States support. This confidence has been under-
mined partly by our vigorous efforts to get him to mend
his ways, and partly by the equivocal attitude he is
convinced we took at the time of the November 11, 1960,
attempted coup. It is essential that President Diem's
full confidence in and communication with the United
States be restored promptly...Given Diem's personality
and character and the abrasive nature of our recent

: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
