Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On the seme day, Warnke signed = memo to the Director of
CIA requesting a study of seven alternative bombing campaigns for the
future. For unknown reasons, the memo was apparently never sent. 59/
The options for examination in this memo were all taken from the
earlier draft memo with twelve options. Options 1-3 were all reduction
or half options, but the wording of them suggests again that ISA was not
aware of the high level attention being focused on a complete bombing
halt north of 20°.

Neither Clifford's nor Nitze's reaction to Warnke's memo
is available in the files, but two days later the Policy Planning Staff
drafted a memorandum to the President for Clifford's signature which
recommended a leveling off of our effort in the war -- i.e., no new
troops and a reconcentration of the bombing to the panhandle area.
The memo went through several drafts and is probably typical of efforts
going on simultaneously in other .agencies. In its final form it urged
the retargetting of air strikes from the top of the funnel in North
Vietnam to the panhandle with only enough sorties northward to prevent
the DRV from relocating air defenses to the south. 60/ A more detailed
discussion of the bombing alternatives was appended to the memo and
included consideration of four alternative programs. The first two
were (1) a continuation of the current bombing program; and (2) an
inerease in the bombing including the reduction of the restricted zones
and the mining of Haiphong. These two were analyzed jointly as follows:

The bombing of North Vietnam was undertaken to limit and/or
make more difficult the infiltration of men and supplies in the
' South, to show Hanoi that it would have a price for its continued
aggression, and to raise morale in South Vietnam. The last two
purposes obviously have been achieved.

It has become abundantly clear that no level of bombing can
prevent the North Vietnamese from supplying the forces and
materiel necessary to maintain their military operations in
the South at current levels. The recent Tet offensive has
shown that the bombing cannot even prevent a significant increase
in these military operations, at least on an intermittent basis.
Moreover, the air war has not been very successful when measured
by its impact on North Vietnam's economy. In spite of the large
diversion of men and materiels necessiteted by the bombing,
communist foreign aid and domestic reallocation of manpower have
sharply reduced the destruction effect of our air strikes." 61/

The other two alternatives considered were a partial and a complete
cessation of the bombing. Here is how ISA presented them:

188 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
