Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

civil servants from the pre-Diem days. The national flag and the
national anthem remained unchanged. 14/ Moreover, the laws remained
substantially as they had been: the land-holdings, against which was
directed much peasant discontent, were based on pre~Diem law; and old
legal proscriptions against nationalist political activities remained
on the books during Diem's tenure of office. The onus of colonialism
was among the heavy burdens which Ngo Dinh Diem had to shoulder from
the outset.

B. Ngo Dinh Diem: Basis of Power

i. Poltticesl Origins

Why amid the military disasters of spring 1954, Bao Dai,
head of the State of Vietnam, chose Ngo Dinh Diem from among other
Vietnamese nationalists to form a government, has long been debated.
Diem was an Annamese Catholic who in his youth had some experience in
public administration, first as governor of Phan Thiet province, and
then Minister of Interior at Bao Dai's Imperial Court in Hue. 15/ In
1933 Diem discovered, after a year in the latter office, that reforms
he had been promised were being blocked by high French and Annamite
officials. He promptly resigned his office and went into political
retirement -- an act which earned him modest fame for integrity. Through
the years of war and distress in his homeland thereafter, Diem had hewed
to attentisme, and by refusing public office, had avoided the political
discoloration which besmirched more involved Viet nationalists. Bao Dai
had sought him for his premier in 1945, Ho Chi Minh for the DRV govern-
ment in 1946, the French for their "solutions" in 1947 and 1949 -- all
unsuccessfully. Hence, Diem's reputation for incorruptible nationalism,
to the extent that he enjoyed one in 1954, was based on an event 20 years
old and a long period of political aloofness. He did come from a prom-
inent family; a brother, Ngo Dinh Thuc was a leading Catholic clergyman
with countrywide connections, and the family proper retained some con-
siderable influence in Annam. But his personal handicaps were consider-
able: bachelor, ascetic, shy, inexperienced, he seemed ill-fit for the
seething intrigues of Saigon.

One school of conjecture holds that the French pressed him
upon Bao Dai in the belief that under him the newly independent State of
Vietnam would founder; 16/ another that Bao Dai advanced him to power
convinced that his inevitable failure would eliminate him as a political
competitor. 17/ There are those who believe that Diem was foisted upon
the Vietnamese and the French by a cabal of prominent American Catholics
and a CIA agent. 18/ It can be said that Diem was relatively well
acquainted among leading Americans, and that Bao Dai might correctly
have regarded Diem's contacts in the United States as a possible source
of support for Vietnan. 19/ Whatever the reasons for his selection,
however, at the time he took office there were few who regarded Diem
as promising, and fewer still openly willing to back him. Indeed, from
the time he took office on 7 July 1954, until the following May, he stood

10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
