Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Sa1GMW/11-2845; Telegram

The Ambassador in-France (Cajjery) to the Secretary of State

Paris, November 28, 1945.
~ [Received Nov ember 28—4: 05 p. m.]
6857. Speaking of Indochina Chauvel* said that when trouble

= Jean Chauvel, Secretary-General to the French Minister for Foreign Affuirs.
with the Annamites broke out de Gaulle had been urged by the French
Mission in India to make some sort of policy statement announcing
France's intention to adopt a far-reaching progressive policy designed
to give the native population nich greater authority, responsibility
and representation in govt. De Gaulle considered the idea but rejected
it because in the state of disorder prevailing in Indochina he believed
that no such policy could be implemented pending restoration of
French authority and would therefore just be considered hy everyone
as “merely more fine words”. Furthermore de Gaulle and the Foreign
Minister believe that the present situation is still so confused and they
have so little information really reliable on the overall Indochina pic-
ture that such plans and thoughts as they held heretofore may have to
be very thoroughly revised in the light of recent developments.

Despite the fact that the Freneh do not feel that they can as yet:
make any general statements outlining specific future plans for Indo-
china, Chauivel says that they hope “very soon” to put into operation
jn certain areas progranis including lo¢al elections which will be de-
signed to grant much greater authority and eveater voice in affairs
tothe natives, This he said would be a much better indication of the
sincerity of French mentions than any poliey statement,

In this connection he said that Admiral dArgenlieu* is in touch _

Ach. Thierry UArgentien, Governor General of French Tudochina.
with the Ning of Cambodia and the latter lias indicated that he has
no hostility to the French (but on the contrary apparently fears both
Annamile and Sianiese aspirations). ‘The French hope soon to nego-
tinte an agreement with him which will result in the granting of much
greater responsibility and authority. to the Cambodians. He men-
tioned specifically that there would be many more natives integrated
jnto the local administrative services and if was also hoped that local
elections coulkl soon be held. The French he said intend to follow the
same procedure in Laos when the siruation permits and eventually also
in Anan and Tonkin. When order is restored throughout Indo-
china and avreements have been reached with the individual states

CONFIDENTI AL
