Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

aircraft loss. At the present time, the air defense
threat. throughout all of the northeast area of NVN is
formidable. It is not envisioned that uircraft will
conduct classifical low level armed reconnaissance up
and down the newly exposed lines of communication until
the air defense threat is fairly well neutralized.
Attacks of LOC or LOC associated targets and moving
targets in these areas will continue to be conducted
for the time being using dive bombing, or "fixed target"
tactics as is currently employed throughout the heavily
defended northeast. Consequently, the risk to aircraft
and crews will not be increased. In fact these new
operating areas should assist in decreasing the risks.
New targets within the control areas will continue to
be approved in Washington.

7. There tive been repeated and reliable intelligence
reports that indicate civilians not engaged in essential
war supporting activities have been evacuated from the
cities of Hanoi and Haiphong. Photographic intelligence,
particularly of Haiphong, clearly shows that materials of
war are stockpiled in all open storage areas and along
the streets throughout almost one-half of the city.

Rather than an area for urban living, the city has become
an armed camp and a large logistics storage base. Con-
sequently, air strikes in and around these cities endanger
personnel primarily engaged directly or indirectly in
support of the war effort.

8. The special coastal armed reconnaissance area
in the Northeast has limited attacks on NVN craft to those
within 3 NM of the NVN coast or coastal islands. This
constraint has provided another sanctuary to assist NVN
in accommodating to the interdiction effort. To preclude
endangering foreign shipping the requirement is imposed
on strike forces to ensure positive identification prior
+o attack. Identification can be accomplished beyond
an arbitrary 3 NM line as well as within it, and deny
the enemy a privileged area. 38/ z

To complement the expanded strike program lifting these restrictions
envisaged, the Chiefs asked for the expansio1i of the SEA DRAGON naval
activities against coastal water traffic from 20° to the Chinese border,
thereby opening up the possibility of attacks against some of the
traffic moving supplies in and near the ports. Furthermore they desired
permission to use sea-based SAMs, particularly the 100-mile range TALOS,
against MIGs north of 20°. In concluding their discussion of the need
for these new authorizations, the Chiefs were careful to hedge about

ATS... TOP SECRET - Sensitive

,
