Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

idea dropped between the cracks. General Khanh made two requests for U.S.

. recommendations of Vietnamese persons to be members of his cabinet. Ambassa-

dor lodge furnished a list from which a panel could be picked, but refused
+o make specific recommendations for particular positions. 35/

However, there was still no sign of effective GVN action, with
or without U.S, advice. In mid-Vebruary JCS recommended & concentrated
"sounterinsurgency offensive" in Long An province to restore GVN control
and to make that a model for other critical. provinces. 36/ Deputy Ambassa-
dor Nes, in Lodge's absence, objected strongly; for he said such a proposal
was based on the false assumptions that:

"(1) Indigenous Communist insurgency with full external
support could be defeated by an ‘offensive’ of finite dura-
tion.

(2) GVN had adequate political cohesion, leadership,
etc., to launch an offensive.

(3) ‘The U.S. Mission had sufficient influence and con-
trol over GVN to persuade it to do so." 37/

A February 19 report from COMUSMACV tells of continuing delay on pacification
because the Dien Huang (or Dong Hien) had to be revalidated by the new govern-
ment. A new plan was presented to General Khanh on the 17th and was to be
called Chien Thang ("struggle for victory"). 38/ :

On February.21, 1964, Ambassador Lodge, Admiral Felt, and General

‘Harkins saw Khanh with a proposal for creating a corps of civil administra-

tors to take over the villages and hamlets as soon as pacification was com-
plete. Khanh replied that he was just about to put into effect a program
in the seven key provinces around Saigon which would provide the help of
doctors, teachers, and government advisors from Saigon.

The subject of funds for ARVN and para-military pay increases came
wp because counterpart and PL 480 proceeds were U.S. contributions to the
GVN budget. Washington requested additional facts and recommendations on
hoy added U.S. input could best be channeled but advised that an outright
U.S. grant would be highly undesirable. USOM and MAAG were told to analyze
the situation and develop joint U.S. /GVN action to meet the threat of in-
flation. ho/ Saigon replied that their analysis indicated (1) the budget
deficits would probably be smaller than originally expected, and (2) the
economic consequences were extremely difficult to predict. Economic Minis-
ter Oanh shunned any immediate "complex study" of the economic outlook
pecause he was completely tied up with a series of important planning exer-~’

cises for the government, and Oanh felt the potential cost of the pay raise

(700 million piasters in 19644) could be absorbed within the present expendi-
ture levels. ha/ :

The Embassy reported being informed on February 21 by the Minister

of National Economy of a threatened Saigon rice shortage. He reauested that

2 » TOR SECRET - Sensitive
