Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

If this particular chip had to be given up in order to establish what
the group called "the political and psychological framework for initi-
ating negotiations," the gain in leverage might be small.

Public opinion about the bombing was mixed. On the hawk side,
as Secretary McNamara summed it up for the President:

Some critics, who advocated bombing, were silenced;
others are now as vocal or more vocal because the program
has been too limited for their taste. 61/

People who believed that the U.S. was justified in intervening in the
war and who identified Hanoi as the real enemy naturally tended to
approve of the bombing. People who questioned the depth of U.S, involve-
ment in Southeast Asia and who feared that the U.S. was on a collision
course with China seemed to be more appalled by the bombing than by any
other aspect of the war. The peace fringe attacked it as utterly reck-
less and immoral. Abroad, in many countries, the U.S. was portrayed as
a bully and NVN as a victim. Even U.S. allies who had no illusions

about Hanoi's complicity in the South were unhappy with the bombing.

As McNamara viewed it:

' The price paid for improving our image as a guarantor
has been damage to our image as a country which eschews
armed attacks on other nations....The objection to our
‘warlike’ image and the approval of our fulfilling our
commitments competes in the minds of many nations (and
individuals) in the world, producing a schizophrenia.
Within such allied countries as UK and Japan, popular
antagonism to the bombings per se, fear of escalation,
and belief that the bombings are the main obstacle to
negotiation, have created political problems for the
governments in support of US policy. 62/

Bombing NVN, the Secretary added, had also complicated US-Soviet
_ relations, mostly for the worse though conceivably -- barely so -- for
the better:

The bombing program -- because it appears to
reject the policy of 'peaceful coexistence,’ because
the Soviet people have vivid horrible memories of air
pombing, because it challenges the USSR as she competes
with China for leadership of the Communist world, and
because US and Soviet arms are now striking each other
in North Vietnam -- has strained the US-Soviet detente,
making constructive arms control and other cooperative
programs difficult. How serious this effect will be and
whether the detente can be revived depend on how far we

aoe TOP SECRET - Sensitive
