We

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Capitalizing on U.S. intelligence sources now unavailable to the

GVN could lead to effective attacks on Viet Cong nerve centers of command
and communications.

Bis

The SEATO force commitment could be used to get from Diem a

package of actions McGarr feels are needed to step up the GVN effort /mainly
the familiar items of clarifying the chain of command and establishing an
overall plan/.

"6.

Introducing SEATO forces would give us for the first time some

bargaining position with the Russians for a settlement in Vietnam.

iy és c

- If we go into South Vietnam now with SEATO, the costs would be

much less than if we wait and go in later, or lose SVN.

The available record shows three other papers prepared prior to the NSC
meeting, October 11, at which this paper was considered:

1. A special NIE commented on the plan in terms that were a lot

less than encouraging:

In the situation assumed, we believe that the DRV would seek
at first to test the seriousness and effectiveness of the SEATO
effort by subjecting the SEATO forces and their lines of com-
munication to harassment, ambush, and guerrilla attack. The Com-
munists would probably estimate that by using their Viet Cong
apparatus in South Vietnam, and by committing experienced guer-
rilla forces from North Vietnam in guerrilla operations in
territory long familiar to them, and by exploiting the oppor-
tunities offered by the sizable junk traffic in coastal waters,
they could severely harass the SEATO land forces and penetrate ~
the SEATO blockade. The Communists would expect worthwhile
political and psychological rewards from successful harassment
and guerrilla operations against SEATO forces, including
lowered GVN morale and increased tensions among the SHATO members.

While seeking to test the SEATO forces, the DRV would prob-
ably not relax its Viet Cong campaign against the GVN to any
Significant extent. Meanwhile, Communist strength in south Laos
would probably be increased by forces from North Vietnam to
guard against an effort to partition Laos or an attack against
the Pathet Lao forces. The Soviet airlift would probably be
increased with a heavier flow of military supply into south Laos,
and the Communists would probably intensify their efforts to
establish a secure route for motor traffic into the south. The
establishment of a coalition government in Laosunder Souvanna
Phouma probably would not significantly reduce Communist infiltra-
tion of men and equipment from North to South Vietnam through Leos.

81 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
