Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201!

12.
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. Because of the importance of acting rapidly once we have
made up our minds, I will cable my recommendations to Washington
enroute home. 17/

Simultaneously with this cable, Taylor sent a second "eyes only" for
the President, Chairman of the JCS, Director of CIA,McNamara, and Rusk and
Alexis Johnson at State. The cable is a little confusing; for although it
sets out to comment on "U.S. military forces” it concerns only the flood
Task Force, not mentioning the various other types of military forces
(helicopter companies, etc.) which were envisioned. The same slight con-
fusion appears in the “eyes only for the President” cable on this issue
+o be quoted shortly. The impression Taylor's choice of language leaves
is that the support forces (helicopter companies, expanded MAAG, etc.)
he was recommending were essentially already agreed to by the President
before Taylor left Washington, and consequently his detailed justifica-
tion went only to the kind of forces on which a decision was yet to be
made -~ that is, ground forces liable to become involved in direct engage-
ments with tne Viet Cong.

Here is the cable from Saigon, followed by the two "Ryes only for the
President" from the Philippines which sum up his "fundamental conclusions.”

FROM SATGON

- WHITE HOUSE EYES ONLY FOR THE PRESIDENT
STATE EYES ONLY FOR RUSK AND UNDER SECRETARY JOHNSON
DEFENSE EYES ONLY SECRETARY MCNAMARA
JCS EYES ONLY GENERAL LEMNITZER
FROM GENERAL TAYLOR
HX XH KH *
With regard to the critical question of introducing U.S. military
forces into VN:

My view is that we should put in a task force consisting largely of
logistical troops for the purpose of participating in flood relief
and at the same time of providing a U.S. military presence in VN
capable of assuring Diem of our readiness to join him in a military
showdown with the Viet Cong or Viet Minh. To relate the introduc-
tion of these troops to the needs of flood relief seems to me to
offer considerable advantages in VNand abroad. It gives a specific
humanitarian task as the prime reason for the coming of our troops
and avoids any suggestion that we are taking over responsibility for
the security of the country. As the task is a specific one, we can
extricate our troops when it is done if we so desire. Alternatively,
we can phase them into other activities if we wish to remain longer.

The strength of the force I have in mind on the order of 6-8000 troops.
Its initial composition should be worked out here after study of the

in
y TOP SECRET - Sensitive
