Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

III. INDOCHINA

318. In the long run, the security of Indochina against
eommunism will depend upon the development of native govern-
ments able to command tne support of the masses of the people
and national armed forces capable of relieving the French of
the major burden of maintaining internal security. Some

_ progress is being made in the formation and development of
national armies. Howevor, the Vietnamese Government has been
slow to assume its responsibilities and has continued to
suffer from a lack of strong leadership. It has had to con-
tend with: (a) lingering Vistnamese suspicion of any French--
supported regime, combined with the apathetic and "fence
sitting" attitude of the bulk of the people; (b) the diffi-
culty, common to all new and inexperienced governments, of
training the necessary personnel and building an efficient
administration; and (c) the failure of factional and sectional
groups to unite in a concerted national effort,

19. . The U.S. econoaie aid program for Indochina has as
its objectives to increase production and thereby offset the
military drain on the economy of the Associated States; to
increase popular support for the Government by improving the
effectiveness of Government services; to make the Government
and the people aware of America's interest in their independ-
ence and welfare; and to use economic aid as a means of sup-
porting the military effort. Because of their strained
budgetary situation, the Associated States cannot meet the
local currency costs of the projects; about 60 percent of
the progran funds is, therefore, devoted to importing needed
commodities which are sold to generate counterpart.

20. The military situation in Indochina continues to be
one of stalemate. Increased U.S. aid to’ the Franco-Vietnamese
forces has been an essential factor in enabling them to with-
stand recent communist attacks. However, Chinese aid to the
Viet Minh. in the form of logistic support, training, and
technical advisors is increasing at least at a comparable rate.
The prospect is for a continuation of the present stalemate
in the absence of intervention by important forces other than
those presently engaged.

21. While it is unlikely under the present circumstances
that the French will suffer a military defeat in Indochina,
there is a distinct possibility that the French Government
will soon conclude that France cannot continue indefinitely
to carry the burden of her total military commitments. From
the French point of view, the possible means of lessening the

ANNEX TO NSC 124 TOP SECRET

473
