Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By; NWD Date: 2011

Cr,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

however, begin to back away from the implication of his earlier cable
(in which he felt that now was the time for a big push) by quoting
General DePuy as saying that

---AS a general rule, he does not undertake pacification
Operations until RD personnel are ready to put in. Other-
wise, he says, the effort is wasted and ground is covered
which simply returns to the enemy if no organized formations
exist which can be left behind. This statement could influ-
ence the question of how much to increase the number of US
troops in Vietnam. If US troops assigned to pacification
are limited by the availability of RD personnel, and RD per-
sonnel are presently being trained at the rate of about
16,000 to 20,000 a year, then this fact (unless offset by
others such as increased NVN infiltration) must have a limit-
ing effect on the number of US troops which can profitably
be used in Vietnam. 17

Ambassador Lodge then quoted General Westmoreland as believing that
we had "reached a crossover point where the rate of enemy losses equals
the rate of infiltration," raising the question whether a certain number
of US troops should be pared off of one task (the fighting of main force
units) to go to the other (pacification).

He next modified his earlier quotation of General Eisenhower's to
read:

There were advantages in having overwhelmingly superior
military forces which would cut the time and cut the casual-
ties -- if conditions at the specific time and place warranted
it. Clearly, this limit on producing RD personnel is a new
and big "if." 18/

lodge finally rounded out his appeals to authority by quoting an article
by Sir Robert Thompson in the 12 Ausust Spectator which advised that
American military strategy

---Should be rather to commit the minimum forces against the
enemy's purely military forces, sufficient only to keep the
Viet Cong dispersed and off balance. Thus the remainder of
the American troops could then be committed to providing the
punch and protection without which the pacification program
still left almost entirely in Vietnamese hands will not gather
momentum. 19/

Lodge closed by claiming that the new stress on pacification was consis-
tent with Thompson's advice.

61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
