ay

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

These and other facts support earlier predictions and suggest
that the enemy intends to continue a protracted war of attri-
tion. We must not underestimate the enemy nor his determination.

The war can continue to escalate. Infiltration of enemy troops
and supplies from NVN can increase and tliere is no assurance
that this will not occur.

If, contrary to current indications, Hanoi decides not to esca-
late further, some modification of the forces which I have
requested probably could be made. Under such circumstances, I
conceive of a carefully balanced force that is designed to fight
an extended war of attrition and sustainable without national
mobilization.

I recognize the possibility that the enemy may not continue to
follow the pattern of infiltration as projected. Accordingly,
my staff is currently conducting a number of studies with the
objective of placing this command and the RVN in a posture that
will. permit us to retain the initiative regardless of the
course the enemy chooses to pursue. These include:

A. A study which considers possible courses of action by
the enemy on our force posture and counteractions to maintain
our superiority.

BR. An analysis of our requirements to determine a balanced
US force that can be employed and sustained fully and effec-
tively in combat on an indefinite basis without national mobi-
lization.

C. A study to determine the evolutionary steps to be taken
in designing an ultimate GV security structure.

D. A study to determine the optimum RVNAF force structure
which can be attained and supported in consideration of recent
experience and our estimate of the manpower pool.

Ref B [the CINCPAC submission/ establishes and justifies minimal
force requirements, emphasizing the requirement for a well
balanced, sustainable force in SVN for an indefinite period.
Consequently, at this point in time I cannot justify a reduc-
tion in requirements submitted. ta

B. Events in the Summer

1. Emphasis on Pacification

In the meantime, other things were happening which would have a
significant effect on U.S. strategy in Vietnam and force requirements for

.

5D TOP SECRET - Sensitive
