Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

officials because, however familiar the junior officers might be with
local acts or particular details, they generally lacked knowledge
of the overall picture.

There was unquestionable ambivalence in U.S. official attitudes
concerning progress and prospects. Despite the repeatedly expressed
qualifications concerning the potentially grave affect of the political
instability in Vietnam, the programming and policy formulation, as
already noted, was without qualification based on optimistic assumptions.
In an over-view of the Vietnam War (1960-1963) prepared by SACSA and
delivered to the Secretary shortly after his return from South Vietnam,
the mission's assessment of military progress was summarized in these
terms:

The evidences of overall military progress were so
unmistakably clear that the mission, acknowledging

the implications and uncertainties of the power crisis
underway in Vietnam, concluded that the GVN military
effort had achieved a momentum of progress which held
further promise of ultimate victory over the Viet Cong;
further, that victory was possible within reasonable
limits of time and investment of U.S. resources. 16/

The high priority of the Delta problem was recognized, in this same
over-view, with the statement that "the mission was impressed with
the evidence that the decisive conflict of the war was approaching
in the Mekong Delta." The major difficulty there was identified
somewhat euphemistically as due to the fact that "the mission found
evidences that the Government of Vietnam had overextended its hamlet
construction program in these southern provinces." 17

Not long before this, however, Michael Forrestal in the White

, House had sent to Secretary McNamara a copy of a Second Informal
Appreciation of the Status of the Strategic Hamlet Program dated

1 September 1963, and prepared by USOM Regionel Affairs officers.

This Appreciation gave province by province summaries that were

far from encouraging concerning the Delta. In addition to Long An

and Dinh Tuong provinces which were the worst, it was said of Kien

Tuong that

the program continues to be slow...few hamlets
are completed and a fraction of planned militia
trained..,the one bright spot..,remains the Pri
Phap area, which is, however, vulnerable mili-
tarily should the VC decide to concentrate their
efforts against it. The Chief of Province...we

4 feel is totally unqualified. Virhn Binh, although
the hamlet program continued to increase in
numbers...the security situation deteriorated in
July and August. The removal of a recently intro-
duced RVN battalion damaged the effort, and a
change in leadership dislocated projects underway...

aE TOP SECRET - Sensitive
