Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

General Westmoreland and General Vien that, in I, II and IIT
Corps areas, ARVN will devote at least 50% of its effort

directly in support of the RD program. In IV Corps, where .
there are no U.S. forces, it was agreed that ARVN might have
to devote up to 75% of its effort to offensive operations...

"General Vien has issued a directive that/ flatly states
that, while some progress has been made, desired results
are still lacking on RD. It emphasizes that RD efforts
must be on @ par with efforts to destroy the enemy...These
directives of General Vien resulted from his conversations
with General Westmoreland..." 34/ /Smphasis Added/

This was by far the strongest verbal support that MACV had ever given
pacification, and it actually contained the kernel which developed into
the important passage in the Manila communique that committed the RVNAF
to support of RD.

The change in mood in Saigon among the Americans was reflected by
Ambassador Lodge in his Weekly NODIS to the President. On August 31, 1966,
he began his cable with:

"The biggest recent American event affecting Vietnam
was giving pacification the highest priority which it has
ever had -- making it, in effect, the main purpose of all
our activities...

"The above was brought about in several ways -- by word
in General Westmoreland's "Concept of Military Operations
in South Vietnam” of August 24, and by the deeds of the U.S.
ist and 25th Divisions and the III MAF. There has also been
the new MACV proposal to revemp ARVN and turn it into a
force better suited to pacification. Also at a special
meeting of the Mission Council a stimulating paper was pre-
sented by the "Interagency Roles and Mission Study Group”
which would take RF and PF, now a part of the Vietnamese
Armed Forces, make them into a "constabulary" and call it
that. Police Field Force would also be included in the
Constabulary under this concept."

A week earlier, Westmoreland had sent forward to CINCPAC and JCS a
broad strategy statement for the coming year. He saw the time as “appro-
priate in light of the fact that we are on the threshold of a new phase
in the conflict resulting from recent battlefield successes and from the
continuing FWMAF buildup." After reviewing the course of battle since
the introduction of U.S. troops, Westmoreland projected his strategy over
the period until May 1, 1967, as "a general offensive with maximum prac-
tical support to area and population security in further support of RD."
He then added:

. F 89 % TOP SECRET - Sensitive
