Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

distrusted Dan, or feared the GVN. There was, however, one occasion in
the spring of 1960 when opposition to Diem did coalesce. There was
change in the international political winds that year -- a students’
revolt in Korea, an army revolt in Turkey, demonstrations in Japan which
resulted in cancellation of President Eisenhower's planned visit. Diem
remembered 1960 well, as a "treasure chest for the communists." 95/

"The United States press and the world press started saying
that democracy was needed in the under-developed countries.
This came just in time for the communists. Some of the United
States press even incited people to rebellion.

"That year was the worst we have ever had...We had problems
on all fronts. On the one hand we had to fight the communists.
On the other, we had to deal with the foreign press campaign
to incite rebellion vis-a-vis Korea. These were sore anxieties,
for some unbalanced people here thought it was time to act.
Teachers in the private secondary schools began to incite the
students to follow the example of the Korean students. And
then there were our amateur politicians who were outdated and
thought only of taking revenge...."

The last reference was to the Caravelle Group, who issued at the Caravelle
Hotel in late April, 1960, a "manifesto" of grievances against the GVN.
The eighteen signers were all old-time politicians, leaders of the Cao
Dai and Hoa Hao sects, the Dai Viet and the VNQDD parties, and dissenting
Catholic groups. Eleven had been Cabinet ministers; four had been in
other high government positions. -They organized themselves as the Bloc
for liberty and Progress, with a-platform of constitutional revision
toward greater power for the National Assembly against the Presidency.
Dr. Dan could not be induced to join the Caravelle Group, but in the

Diem cleanup after the November, 1960 coup attempt, the GVN arrested most
of the eighteen, and their Bloc disintegrated. The Caravelle Manifesto
is reproduced below: 96/

MANIFESTO OF THE EIGHTEEN

The President of the Republic of Viet-Nam
Saigon

Mr. President:

We the undersigned, representing a group of eminent citi-
zens and personalities, intellectuals of all tendencies, and
men of good will, recognize in the face of the gravity of the
present political situation that we can no longer remain
indifferent to the realities of life in our country.

Therefore, we officially address to you today an appeal with
the aim of exposing to you the whole truth in the hope that the
government will accord it all the attention necessary so as to
urgently modify its policies, so as to remedy the present situ-
ation and lead the people out of danger.

34 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
