Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

economic measures cannot be discussed in this paper, but

a comprehensive economic package should be prepared and
presented to the GVN - to include what the US is prepared

to do in the way of increased financing of commercial imports.

10. Resource Allocation - Non-essential use of resources
should be eliminated. Present government programs to
eliminate new luxury construction. must be tightened and con-
tinued. Bars and night clubs should remain closed. Austerity
should be fostered. 68/

The Appendix recommended that a high-level mission, probably headed
by the Secretary of Defense, should go to Saigon to emphasize to the GVN
that we consider improved GVN performance essential; that any further U.S.
support must be matched by GVN actions; and that the above recommendations
would be used as a checklist for judging Vietnamese performance. In addi-
tion, this Appendix emphasized that we should do what was necessary to
improve the capability of RVNAF. Although no details were given, the state-
ment was made that: "On the basis of current planning estimates, this
would involve additional expenditure of about $475 million over a period
of 18 months."

Tab C of the Memorandum for the President consisted of a brief justif-
ication for increasing the strategic reserve. The basic argument was that
we would then be prepared to provide the additional ground, sea, and air
forces involved in General Westmoreland's request if the military situation
required. In addition, the paper indicated:

If these additional forces are not deployed to Vietnam,
our action in thus reconstituting the strategic reserve would
nevertheless be fully warranted. Our strategic reserve has
been appreciably depleted because of Vietnam demands. At
present, the active division forces in the Continental United
States, Hawaii and Okinawa, and including the Marine units
in the Caribbean and Mediterranean, consist of 4-2/3 Army
divisions and 1-1/3 Marine divisions. This compares with
the 9 Army divisions and 3 Marine divisions in our strategic
reserve on 30 June 1965. A call-up of 245,000, with no
deployments to South Vietnam in excess of the 20-30,000
now recommended, would yield a strategic reserve of 7 Army
divisions and 2 Marine divisions. The unsettled situations
in many parts of the world make this build-up a prudent
action entirely apart from possible Vietnam contingencies. 69/

Relegated to Tab D of the Memorandum for the President was what had
begun as the major task of the Working Group--the necessity for in-depth
study of Vietnam policy and strategic guidance.

General Westmoreland's request, this Appendix pointed out, does not
purport to provide any really Satisfactory answer to the problem in Vietnam.

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
