Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and preliminary conditions for reconvening a Geneva conference. 11)/

The narrow margin by which the cease-fire agreement failed to come
about dramatized the delicate nature of the Administration's diplomatic
position in laos. Having agreed to support the tripartite discussions
prior to the Tonkin Gulf incidents and prior to the political upheaval
in Saigon, it felt constrained to go along with them -- particularly
if they served to forestall movement toward a Geneva-type negotiation.
However, a Ilaotian cease-fire was not compatible with current perceptions
of U.S. interest even if it resulted in communist withdrawal from the
Plaine des Jarres. Ambassador Unger pointed out the contradictory nature
of our position in his reply to the State Department's mid-August analysis
of future U.S. courses of action. Lueey Ambassador Taylor emphasized the
need to maintain the option of operations in the Panhandle in his reply
also, and the September discussions in Washington confirmed that his view
was shared by most of the President's advisors. One could conclude that
the United States was fortunate that Prince Souphanouvang was so intransi-
gent on the issue of I.C.C. supervision. It is also possible that in
insisting on this provision to the leftist prince Souvanna Phouma "knew
his man" -- perhaps reflecting perceptive American advice.

Certainly the course of the tripartite discussions followed a
pattern commensurate with prior U.S. calculation. Jn an assessment of
future courses of action used as the basis for the policy analysis cabled
to affected interested embassies and CINCPAC by the State Department,
Assistant Secretary Bundy characterized U.S. strategy with the statement,
"We would wish to slow down any progress toward a conference...." He then
referred to a specific negotiating position proposed by Ambassador Unger
(a proposal for tripartite administration of the Plaine des Jarres ) as
"a useful delaying gambit." 116/ Significantly, this proposal was
advanced at Paris by Souvanna Phouma on 1 September -- illustrating the fact
that Souvanna was carefully advised by U.S. diplomats both prior to and
during the Paris meetings. 117/ Other features of Souvanna's negotiating
posture which apparently were encouraged as likely to have the effect of
drawing out the discussions were insistence on communist acceptance of
(1) Souvanna's political status as Premier and (2) unhampered operations
by the 1.C.C. 118/ % will be recalled that the latter point was the
issue on which progress toward a cease-fire became stalled.

It is important to note here that the State Department recognized
that Souvanna Phouma might well act on his own and feel compelled to
move toward a conference, even at the price of a cease-fire. In such
an event, our position was to be dependent on conditions in South Vietnam:

"If the timing of the Laos Conference, in relation to
the degree of pressures we had then set in motion against the
DRV, was such that our attending or accepting the conference
would have major morale drawbacks in South Viet-Nam, we might
well have to refuse to attend ourselves and to accept the dis-
advantage of having no direct participation. In the last analysis,
GVN morale would have to be the deciding factor." 119/

eee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
