Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"9. The hamlet should also be organized for its own
defense against small Viet Cong attacks.

"10. After all these things have been accomplished, hold
elections for local office." 21/

COMMENT: Lodge began his second tour as Ambassador where he had left
off the year before. The above paper, which he also transmitted to the
‘President in a NODIS message, again represented no official U.S.
position. After writing it end giving it to everyone in the Mission,
he let the matter drop, and thus the paper did not assume any official
character. Since nothing was changed in the procedures of the Mission,
and since the old criteria for pacification still applied unchanged,
Lodge had, in typical fashion, failed to affect the operating Mission.

Se The Assignment of Lansdale:

"Handpicked group of about ten experienced counter-
subversion/counter terrorism workers under direction of
Edward G. Lansdale will be going to Saigon to provide
Ambassador Lodge with special operating staff in field of
political action both at central level and also in connection
with rural progrems." 22/

COMMENT: From the beginning, there was misunderstanding over Lansdale's
Tole in Lodge's Embassy. The first cable reflects this. The phrase
"counter-subversion/counter-terrorism workers," seems to contradict the
latter part of the sentence, about ' ‘political action." From the start
Lodge wanted him to "get pacification going." Thus, less than a

month later, Lodge told the President: |

"I appointed Edward Lansdale, with his complete approval,
to be chairman of the U.S. Mission Liaison Group to the newly
created Vietnamese governmental body having to do with what we
call "pacification,' what they call ‘rural construction,' and
what means to me socially conscious practical politics, the
by-product of which is effective counter-subversion/ terrorism.
I thought it was important for ell concerned for him to have a
definite allocation where he would have the best chance of
bringing his talents to bear. I trust that the hopes of some
journalists that he is here in an adversarial relationship
with existing US agencies will be nipped in the bud by making
him the spokesman for the whole US Mission in this particular
regard." (underlining added) 23/

Thus, another action which served to strengthen the pacification priority,

although its primary reason probably was to get Lansdale ei on
something other than Saigon politics.

12 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
