Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. Evolution of the Treaty Organization
a. NATO Develops Rapidly

NATO rapidly acquired institutions.* The treaty entered
into force in August, 1949. By September, a Military Committee, a
Standing Group, and the Regional Planning Groups had been created. By
November a Financial and Economic Board and a Military Production and
Supply Board had been set up. By December agreement had been reached
on a strategic concept for the integrated defense of the NATO area.
A year later a centralized command and control structure was formulated,
becoming operational as SHAPE on 2 April 1951, with headquarters in the
old Hotel Astoria, in Paris. Spurred on by the events occurring in
Korea, NATO was further simplified and streamlined in the Ottawa meeting
of September 1951, where a Temporary Council Committee chaired by
W. Averell Harriman was set up. This became a permanent council, in
March, 1952, a month after the accession of Greece and Turkey to the
pact. 39/ In the wake of a major setback when the French Assembly
refused to ratify the European Defense Community (EDC) proposal in
August, 1954, the Paris Agreements were pushed through in October,
providing for the accession of West Germany to NATO, and the establish-
ment of a combined field command.** Early in 1956 the NATO Council
appointed a Committee of Three Ministers (Martino of Italy, Lange of
Norway, and Pearson of Canada) to study Ways that further cooperation
could be achieved within NATO. The report of this Committee was approved
by the Council on 14 December, 1956. Consultation within NATO was to
become "an integral part of the making of national policy." 40/ ‘The
meeting of 16-19 December 1957 of the NATO Council included the heads of
government, with Eisenhower and Macmillan participating. This meeting
symbolized the significance which all the NATO countries attached to the
pact -- and it was this sense of meaningfulness, commonality, and neces-
sity, more than the terms of the North Atlantic Treaty, that accounted
for the rapid organizational growth.

b. SEATO Unstructured by U.S. Preference

The Manila Conference eventusted in a pact termed the
"Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty and Protocol Thereto, Septem-
ber 8, 1954"; the treaty was retified by the U.S. Senate by a vote of
82 to 1, and entered into force on February 19, 1955. 41/ ‘he history
of the development of SEATO thereafter is quite different from NATO's,
since the initial policy of the U.S. was to discourage, rather than to
assist, the evolution of a permanent structure. SEATO military staff

«

% Appendix B, Organizational Charts

** In the same month -- October, 1954 -- the Warsaw Pact came into being.

A-23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
