Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Van Dong and on its behalf reiterate the March message and U.S. determi-
nation to persist in the defense of South Vietnam, to regret that Hanoi
had not responded positively to the various recent initiatives, inelud-
ing the bombing pause, and to state that, nevertheless, the United Stetes
remained ready "to consider the possibility of a solution by reciprocal
actions on each side." If the Vietnamese brought up Pham Van Dong's

four points, Seaborn was authorized to endeavor to establish whether
Hanoi insisted that they be accepted as the condition for negotiations.
On June 3, Seaborn succeeded in gaining an audience with the DRV Foreign
Minister (and concurrent Deputy Premier) Nguygen Duy Trinh, who reluc-
tantly heard him out after stating that the U.S. position was too well
known to require restatement. Trinh's reaction to the message Was totally
negative, and in the exchange preceding its recitation he studiously
avoided going beyond the vague statement that Pham Van Dong's four points
were the "basis for solution of the Vietnam question: "145/

As there was considerable misunderstanding concerning the Mai Van Bo
approach of May 18, and misleading accounts of it were circulating, the
State Department informed seversl U.S. ambassadors (Saigon, Paris, Bonn)
of what it considered the true facts in the case. 146

Facts are that bombing was actually resumed on morning
May 18 Saigon time. Subsequently on morning May 18, Paris
time, but undoubtedly on antecedent instructions, DRV eco-
nomic delegate in Paris, Mai Ven Bo, approached Quai urgently
for appointment. .His message was to explain negative Hanoi
attitude toward Indian proposal (cessation of hostilities on
both sides and Afro-Asian force) but second, and more impor-
tant, to discuss Pham Van Dong's four points originally stated
April 8 and later included in Hanoi statement referring to
appeal of 17 Non-aligned nations... Bo repeated four points
with slight veriations from public statements, apparently
softening language by indicating that four points might be
"best basis" for settlement and apparently insisting less
strongly that their recognition was required 4S condition to
negotiations. During course of conversations, French asked
whether withdrawal US forces visualized as prior condition or
as resulting from negotisbions, and Bo responded that latter
was correct.

French passed us this message on May 20 (deleying two
days) so that we had in fact resumed well before we heard of
it. More important, messege still left ambiguity whether
recognition of four points remained precondition to talks of
any sort. Accordingly, we saw no reason to alter conclusion
based on Hanoi propaganda denunciation of pause, plus fact
thet pace of Hanoi-directed basic actions in South had con-
tinued and even increased -- that Hanoi not ready to respond
to pause and that we must resume.

129 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
