Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

First the group met over dinner witi: Secretary of State
Dean Rusk; Defense Secretary Clark M. Clifford; Ambassador
W. Averell Harriman; Walt W. Rostow, the President's special
assistant for National security affairs; Gen. Harle G. Wheeler,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Richard Helms, Director
of the Central Intelligence Agency; Paul Nitze, Deputy Defense
Secretary; Nicholas Katzenbach, Under Secretary of State; and
William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian
and Pacific Affairs.

The outsiders questioned the government officials carefully
on the war, the pacification program and the condition of the
South Vietnamese government after the Tet offensive. They
included in their deliberations the effect of the war on the
United States.

Three Briefings

After dinner the government officials left and the group
received three briefings.

Philip C. Habib, a deputy to William Bundy and now a
member of the American negotiating team in Paris, delivered
an unusually frank briefing on the conditions in Vietnam after
the Tet offensive. He covered such matters as corruption in
South Vietnam and the growing refugee problem.

Habib, according to reliable sources, told the group that
the Saigon government was generally weaker than had been
realized as a result of the Tet offensive. He related the
situation, some said, with greater frankness than the group
had previously heard.

In addition to Habib, Maj. Gen. William E. DePuy, special
assistant to the Joint Chiefs for counterinsurgency and special
activities, briefed the group on the military situation, and
George Carver, a CIA analyst, gave his agency’s estimates of
conditions in the war zone.

The briefings by DePuy and Carver reflected what many
understood as a dispute over enemy strength between the
Defense Department and the CIA which has been previously
reported. Discrepancies in the figures resulted from the
fact that DePuy's estimates of enemy strength covered only
jdentifiable military units, while Carver's included all known
military, paramilitary and perttime enemy strength available.

192 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

———————
