Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

been a belligerent in the war in which thousands of brave men, while
defending freedom, have died during the past 7 years.

; "The primary responsibility for the settlement in Indochina rested
with those nations which participated in the fighting.

“Our role at Geneva has been at all times to try to be helpful
where desired, and to-aid France and Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam, to
obtain a just and honorable settlement which will take into account the
needs of the interested people.

"Accordingly, the United States has not itself been a party to or
pound by the decisions taken by the conference, but it is our hope that
it will lead to the establishment of peace consistent with the rights
and needs of the countries concerned. The agreement contains features
which we do not like, but a great deal depends on how they work in
practice.

"The United States is issuing at Geneva a statement to the effect
that it is not prepared to join in the conference declaration but, as
loyal members of the United Nations, we also say that in compliance
with the obligations and principles contained in article II of the
United Nations Charter, the United States will not use force to disturb
the settlement. We also say that any renewal of Communist ageression
would be viewed by us as a matter of grave concern.

"As evidence of our resolve to assist Cambodia and Laos to play -
their parts in full independence and sovereignty, in the peaceful com-
munity of free nations, we are requesting the agreement of the governments
of Cambodia and Laos to our appointment of an ambassador or minister to
be resident at their respective capitals. We already have a Chief of
Mission at Saigon, the capital of Viet-Nam, and this embassy will, of
course, be maintained.

"The United States is actively pursuing discussions with other free
nations with a view to the rapid organization of a collective defense
in southeast Asia in order to prevent further direct or indirect Com-
mumist aggression in that general area. /Ends reading/”

+ ©

"Q. Mrs. Mey Craig, Maine Papers: Mr. President, President Rhee
of Korea will be here soon. Do you regard the partition of Korea as
permanent, short of war, and are you including, planning to include,
Korea and Free Ciina in any kind of a southeast Asia pact?

‘oH PRESIDENT. Well, of course, Korea is not in southeast Asia.

“Already we have, you know, a treaty of mutual defense with Korea.
It has been enacted, it has been approved, by the Senate.

B-21 .
