Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in 1965. There were only a handful of "major industrial facilities."
When NVN was first targeted the JCS found only 8 industriel installa-
tions worth listing on a par with airfields, military supply dumps,
barracks complexes, port facilities, bridges, and oil tanks. Even by
the end of 1965, after the JCS had lowered the standards and more than
doubled the number of important targets, the list included only 24
industrial installations, 18 of them power plants which were as impor-
tant for such humble uses as lighting streets and pumping water as for
operating any real factories. 68/

Apart from one explosives plant (which had already been demolished),
NVN's limited industry made little contribution to its military capabil-
ities. NVN forces, in intelligence terminology, placed "little direct
reliance on the domestic economy for material." MNVN in fact produced
only limited quantities of simple military items, such as mortars,
grenades, mines, small arms, and bullets, and those were produced in
small workshops rather than.large arsenals. The great bulk of its
military equipment, and all of the heavier and more sophisticated items,
had to be imported. This was no particular problem, since both the
USSR and China were apparently more than glad to help.

The NVN transportation system was austere and superficially looked
very vulnerable to air attack, but it was inherently flexible and its
capacity greatly exceeded the demands placed upon it. The rail system,
with single-track lines radiating from Hanoi, provided the main link-up
+o China and, via the port of Haiphong, to the rest of the world; it
was more important for relatively long-haul international shipments than
for domestic freight. The latter was carried mostly over crude roads
and simple waterways, on which the most common vehicles were oxcarts
and sampans, not trucks or steamers. The system was quite primitive,
but immensely durable.

Supporting the war in the South was hardly a great strain on NVN's
economy. The NvA/vc forces there did not constitute a large army. They
did not fight as conventional divisions or field armies, with tanks and
airplanes and heavy artillery; they did not need to be supplied by huge
convoys of trucks, trains, or ships. They fought and moved on foot,
supplying themselves locally, in the main, and simply avoiding combat
when supplies were low. What they received from NVN was undoubtedly
critical to their military operations, but it amounted to only a few
tons per day for the entire force -- en amovnt that could be carried by
a handful of trucks or sampans, or several hundred coolies. This small
amount did not have to be carried conspicuously over exposed routes,
and it was extremely difficult to interdict, by bombing or any other

means.

In sum, then, NVN did not seem to be a very rewarding target for
air attack. Its industry was limited, meaningful targets were few, and

55 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
