Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

CIA estimates of communist reaction to systematic U.S./GVN
air attacks on North Vietnam were less certain. While acknowledging
"substantial danger" that the DRV might decide to send its own armed
forces on a large scale to Laos and South Vietnam, :

("Hanoi might assume that United States would
be unwilling to undertake a major ground war, or that
if it was, it could ultimately be defeated by the
methods which were successful against the French.") ;

they thought it more likely that. Hanoi would choose a more conservative
course. They reasoned that "the DRV might calculate that it would be
better to stop vc activity temporarily than risk loss of its military
facilities and industry," but that they would make no meaningful con-
cessions "such as agreeing to effective international inspection of
infiltration routes." 153/ In any event, the CIA did not believe that
Chinese intervention was likely unless the United States should strike
the Chinese mainland or unless U.S./GVN forces should attempt to "occupy
areas of the DRV or communist-held territory in Northern Iaos."154/ It
indicated that both North Vietnam and Communist China wished to avoid
direct conflict with the United States and would probably "avoid actions
that would in their view unduly increase the chances of a major U.S.
response" against them.

Rather than outright military victory in South Vietnam, CIA
estimates indicated belief that the communists expected to gain control
through a "neutralist coalition government dominated by pro-Communist
elements" that would come about "soon." This concern over the threat of
neutralism had been voiced at the September meeting by Mr. McCone and
was quite prevalent among intelligence discussions of the period. Alto-
gether, it created a rather gloomy impression of GVN readiness to support
sustained overt operations against North Vietnam and absorb likely VC
countermeasures. In October the picture became even gloomier as a result
of an intelligence assessment which described continuing deterioration
of the South Vietnamese political situation and predicted even more:

",..we believe that the conditions favor a further
decay of GVN will and effectiveness. The likely pattern
of this decay will be inereasing defeatism, paralysis of
leadership, friction with Americans, exploration of possible
lines of political acconmodation with the other side, and
a general petering out of the war effort." 155

G2 TOP SECREP - Serisitive
