Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

decisions taken in Washington during my visit, this mission
is charged with securing implementation by the two month old
Quat government of a 21 point military program, a 41 point
non-military program, a 16 point Rowan USIS program and a

12 point CIA program. Now this new cable opens up new vistas
of further points as if we can win here somehow on a point
score, We are going to stall the machine of government if
we do not declare @ moratorium on new programs for at least
six months.

"Next, it shows a fax greater willingness to get into the
ground war than I had discerned in Washington during my recent
trip. Although some additional U.S. forces should probably
be introduced after we see how the Marines do in counter-
insurgency operations, my own attitude is reflected in Emb-
Tel 3384, which I hope was called to the attention of the
President.

"My greatest concern arises over para 6 reftel which
frankly bewilders me. What do the authors of this cable
think mission has been doing over the months and years?

We have presumably the best qualified personnel the Washington
agencies (State, AID, DOD, USTA end CTA) can find working in
the provinces seven days a week at precisely the tasks des-
cribed in para 6. It is proposed to withdraw these people

and replace them by Army civil affairs types operating on

the pattern of military occupation? If this is the thought, -
I: would regard such @ change in policy which will gain wide
publicity, as disastrous in its likely effects upon paci-
fication in general and on US/GVN relations in particular.

"Mac, can't we be better protected from our friends?
I know that everyone wants to help, but there's such a thing
as killing with kindness. In particular, we want to stay
alive here because we think we're winning -- and will con-
tinue to win unless helped to death." 21

Another State/Defense message told the Ambassador to discuss with
Quat several possible uses of U.S. combat forces beyond the NSC decisions
of April 2. He replied, "I cannot raise these matters with Quat without
further guidance...I need a clarification of our purpose for the large
scale introduction of foreign troops unless the need is clear and expli-
cit.” 22/

» Yhe plaintive words did not sound convincing to the JCS, for
they told Seclef, almost cavalierly, in JCSM 261/65, "JCS is confident the
Ambassador will be able to accomplish such measures as are required for
an appropriate acceptance of these deployments as approved by the highest
authority."

As directed in the 7 point message, study commenced in Saigon on
the matter of combined command. The message suggested two approaches:

*

71. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
