Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

McNamara frequently conferred on the conduct of the Vietnam war and there
would seem to be little need for such a request or directive to be placed
in writing unless it was to act as some sort of record which could be

easily pulled out and displayed in order to demonstrate that the President
had been sending troops to Vietnam as rapidly as Westmoreland needed them.

This makes sense if it is recalled that at this particular time the
President was just in the process of publicly turning up the pressure on.
North Vietnam by ordering the bombing of the POL supplies. This effort
to step up the pace in the aftermath of the disruption caused by the
Buddhist struggle movement probably also included a desire to increase
the pace of the ground war in an effort to convince the DRV that we could
and would do whatever was necessary to defeat them in the South.

At the same time, there began to be some comment in the news, par-
ticularly by Hanson W. Baldwin of the New York Times that top military
men were beginning to feel that the policy of a gradual build-up was
becoming outmoded and that what was needed was a sharp increase in the
application of force.

Seen in this context, the exercise of naming the last change to ~
Phase IIA(R), "Program 3," and the exchange of memoranda between the
Seeretary of Defense and the President can be interpreted as follows.

The President, impatient at being held back by the internal strife in
South Vietnam in his effort to convince the North of our will to win the
war, was anxious to get on with the war in an attempt to get it over with
quickly. The implication, from a writer reputed to have close ties with
the Joint Chiefs of Steff, that the military felt that the President was
not doing enough, prompted the President to write a memorandum to the
Secretary of Defense asking him specifically to see if the JCS could
think of some way to accelerate the deployments of ground forces. When
the JCS wrote back that the present plan did meet Westmoreland's require-
ments and that additional acceleration was unlikely, the President had
in effect secured the agreement of his senior military men that he was
doing all that was needed and possible.

The ploy of naming the latest change "Program #3" can be seen to
have two effects in this effort. First, it gave the illusion of pro-
gress. Second, it neatly wrapped up the changes since the beginning of
the year, making the very real progress since December readily apparent,
but obscuring the fact that most of the increase in the plan had occurred
by 10 April.

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
