tN

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the count reached 22 torpedoes, a total which caused the Commanding
Officer, once the engagement had ended, to question the validity of
his report and communicate these doubts to his superiors:

"Review of action makes many recorded contacts and
torpedoes fired appear doubtful. Freak weather Ritects ane
Overeager sonarman may have accounted for many reports.

In addition to sonar readings, however, the Task Group had also reported
intercepting communications from North Vietnamese naval craft indicating
that they were involved in an attack on U.S. ("enemy") ships end that
they had "sacrificed" two vessels in the engagement. 27

THE RESPONSE IN WASHINGTON

Sometime prior to the reported termination of the engagement, at
0030 hours, 5 August (Tonkin Gulf time), "alert orders" to prepare for
possible reprisal raids were sent out by naval authorities to Ticonderoga
and to a second aircraft carrier, Constellation, which started heading
South from Hong Kong late on 3 August. Such raids were actually ordered.
and carried out later in the day. "Defense officials disclosed [in public
testimony, 9 January 1968/7 that, when the first word was received of the
Second attack ‘immediate consideration was given to retaliation.'" That
apparently began shortly after 0920 hours (Washington time), when the
task group message that a North Vietnamese naval attack was imminent was
first relayed to Washington. From this time on, amid a sequence oF mes~
sages describing the attack, Secretary McNamara held a series of meetings
with /his/ chief civilian and military advisers’ concerning the engage-
ment and possible U.S. retaliatory actions. As he testified before the
Fulbright Comittee:

"We identified and refined various options for a response to
the attack, to be presented to the President. Among these options
was the air strike against the attacking boats and their associated
bases, which option was eventually selected. As the options were
identified preliminary messages were sent to appropriate operational
commanders alerting them to the several possibilities so that initial
planning steps could be undertaken." 28

At 1230, the President met with the National Security Council.
Having just come from a brief meeting with the JCS, attended also by
Secretary Rusk and McGeorge Bundy, Secretary McNamara briefed the NSC
on the reported details of the attack and the possibilities for reprisal.
shortly theredfter (presumably during a working lunch with the President,
Secretary Rusk and Bundy) and after receiving by telephone the advice of
the JCS, McNamara and the others recommended specific reprisal actions.
It was at this point that the President approved "a response consisting
of an air strike on the PT and SWATOW boat bases and their associated
facilities." 29/

8 ’ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
