Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

against the DRV's importation facilities (i.e., foreign ships in
Haiphong harbor, destruction of harbor dredges, destruction of doc s,
etc.); and the expansion of the reconnaissance effort to provide more
and better information on the overall POL system. Also recommended
was a step-up in attacks on rolling stock of all kinds carrying POL,
and strikes on the Xom Trung Hoa lock and dam. In spite of this recom-
mendation and a follow-up on August 8, ROLLING THUNDER 51 was only
authorized to strike previously approved targets plus some new bridges
and a bypass as outlined in the July 8 execute order. 13)

While CINCPAC and his subordinates were making every effort
+o hamstring the DRV logistical operation through the POL attacks, the
Secretary of Defense was keeping tabs on results through specially com-
missioned reports from DIA. These continued through July and into
August. By July 20, DIA reported that 59.9% of North Vietnam's original
POL capacity had been destroyed. 14/ By the end of July, DIA reported
that 70% of NVN's large bulk (JCS-targeted) POL storage capacity had been
destroyed, together with Th of the capacity of known dispersed sites.
The residual POL storage capacity was down from some 185,000 metric tons
to about 75,000 tons, about 2/3 still in relatively vulnerable large
storage centers -- two of them, those at the airfields, still off limits --
and 1/3 in smaller dispersed sites. 15/ This still provided, however,
a fat cushion over NVN's requirements. What became clearer and clearer
as the summer wore on was that while we had destroyed a major portion
of North. Vietnam's storage capacity, she retained enough dispersed
capacity, supplemented by continuing imports (increasingly in easily
dispersable drums, not bulk), to meet her on-going requirements. The
greater invulnerability of dispersed POL meant an ever mounting U.S.
cost in munitions, fuel, aircraft losses, and men. By August we were
reaching the point at which these costs were prohibitive. It was simply
impractical and infeasible to attempt any further constriction of North
Vietnam's POL storage capacity. ;

As the POL campaign continued, the lucrative POL targets
disappeared and the effort was confined more and more to the small
scattered sites. Finally, on September 4, CINCPAC (probably acting
by direction although no instructions appear in the available documents)
directed a shift in the primary emphasis of ROLLING THUNDER strikes.
Henceforth they were to be aimed at, "...attrition of men, supplies,
equipment and...ePOL...." 16/ Stressing the new set of priorities
CINCPAC instructed, "POL will also receive emphasis on a selective
basis." 17/ By mid-October, even PACAF revorted that the campaign had
reached the point of diminishing returns. 18/

41 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
