Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Now, in this broad picture I have already referred to our stand
in Viet-Nam as having made a major contribution to the confidence factor.
I will not review here the current situation in Viet-Nam, because I think
the interpretive reporting you get is on the whole good.

"I come back to the central point: that what we have done in Viet-
Nem did have a major part in developing the confidence factor, the sense
that progress is possible, the sense that security can be maintained in
the nations of free Asia. To virtually all the non-Communist govern-
ments of the area--and they often say this as. bluntly as President Marcos
did in his opening address at the Manila Conference--that security requires
a continued United States ability to act, not necessarily an American
presence, although that, too, may be required in individual cases, but an
ability to act for a long time. And that we must--and, I think, shall--
provide, and we shall keep on in Viet-Nam, as the President has made com-
pletely clear. Without what we have done in Viet-Nam, without the regener-
ation of the spirit of cooperation among the Western nations, ourselves
included, and the nations of Asia, I doubt very much if the favorable
developments I have described could have taken place on anything like the
scale that has in fact been happening. And I think that is the very
strongly felt judgment of responsible people in government and out,
throughout East Asia.

"If that vast area with its talents and its capacity were to fall
under domination by a hostile power or group of powers, or if it were
to fall into chaos and instability, the result would be vast human misery
and possibly a wider war. However, today, I think, more than at any
time in the 15 years that I have personally been associated with the area,
East Asia offers the hope of becoming a region of stable nations, devel-
oping in their own way, each according to its own strong national and
cultural heritage. And that is our hope and our fundamental national
interest, both in Asia and throughout the rest of the world."

66. Address by Secretary Rusk before a Joint Session of the legislature
of Texas at Austin, Texas, January 26, 1967; “Building a Durable
Peace, © Department of State Bulletin, p. 269.

k *€ &

"Obviously, the first essential in building a durable peace is to
eliminate aggression--by preventing it, if possible, and by repelling it
when it occurs or is threatened....

"The United Nations has helped to make and keep peace in many situ-
ations. We continue to support it and to seek ways of strengthening it.
But because it has been unable to function in some of the most dangerous
situations, the main job of preventing and repelling aggression has been
accomplished by the defensive alliances of the free world--defensive

D-102
