Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET, (ois

Backsreund ays

It 4s believed that a brie? discussion of the backzround.. 3
essential to the understandinr of the present situstion in indo-
chine. The following paragraphs accordingly present a .somevhat
over-simplifie@ version of events since 1945.

On March 9, 1945, the dananese took over direct control of the
aamia stration of Inmctochina, cisarmed French troeps and sTyernee most
French officials anda civilians. Enmicror Bao DAT was retained
power and promised independence. ‘When Japan surrendered, japanese

fficials in Indochina permitted control te be seized by Annamese
nationalists. emperor Bao Dai akdicated on August 26, 1945, and Ho
Chi MIAn, a prominent Comintern leader, prociaimed the Vietnam
z he southern

“Republic on sis ember 2. The British, who moved into t
refzion to disarm Japangse troops, re fused to recognize the new
re pubiae ene promptly turncd over tne administration to the French.

There was some fighting in Saigon and continued guerrilla warfare
throughout cocatachina. .

In the north the Chinese occupation forces recognized Ho's
nt and supported pro-Chinese elements in the dominant Vi

governmen e
Minh party coalitione After prolonged negotiations and considerable
concessions on the part of the French (Shensnai, Yunnan Railroad, et
cetera) the Chinese agrecd to withdraw.” On March 6, 1946, just before
the Chinese withdreval, a representative of the French High Comniss
signed a bricf protocol with ho Chi Minh, recognizing the Vistram as a

free country within tha French Union and the Tndoohinese cdevatsen
with its own army, finances, and government. The status of Cochin=-

ching was to be determined by a plebiscite. Details were fe bo- worke
out at 2 subsequent conference.

After unsuccessful negotiations at Dalat, Ho and a large ecleza-
tion came to France early in June. The so-called Fontainebleau Con-
ference lasted from July 5 to September 11. It broke down over tho
issues of the unity of Cochinchina with the rest of Annam, military
and Vietnam demands for a separate diplomatic service and

relations,
control of custolty, finance and economic matters. dust before leaving

Frances, Ho signed a modus vivendi with Minister of Overseas France
, &
MOUTE? which provided ‘for stoppins euerrilla fighting in southern

Indochina, release of prisoners gnd hostages, and for whe resumption

of negotiations in January 194

then
1. 5 shoulda be reenlled tnac the Fontainoblesnu Conference took place
during ote period oz n tisnt aap eS :
policy 4 4 crucial ane

Were Mr ae ee
do about the rs "
fy of t
isnerens

munis

