Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was not stated -- at least not in documentary form -- were estimates
of how long the process might have to continue or to what extent the
actions might have to be carried.

REASSERTICN OF THE ROSTOW THESIS

soon after the Tonkin Gulf incidents State Department Counselor
Walt Rostow reformulated and circulated his earlier thesis that insurgencies
supported by external powers must be dealt with through measures to
neutralize the sources of that support. First presented to President
Johnson in December 1963, variations on this theme had been proposed by
Rostow at various times throughout 1964, the most recent occasion being

‘in June, right after the Honolulu Conference. 70/ Now in mid-August,

his newly articulated arguments were passed to the White House, Depart-
ment of State, Department of Defense and the JCS.

The "Rostow thesis" was generalized -- not explicitly dealing with
a particular insurgency -- but it was evident that considerations of the
U.S. dilemmas in Southeast Asia affected its formulation. It started with
a proposition:

"By applying limited, graduated military actions reinforced
by political and economic pressures on a nation providing
external support for insurgency, we should be able to cause
that nation to decide to reduce greatly or eliminate altogether
support for the insurgency. The objective of these pressures
is not necessarily to attack his ability to provide support,
although economic and certain military actions would in fact
do just that. Rather, the objective is to affect his calculation
of interests. Therefore, the threat that is implicit in initial
U.S. actions would be more important than the military effect of
the actions themselves." 71/

In Rostow's view, the target government's "calculation of interests"
could be affected by a number of factors, none of which would preclude,
however, the need for effective counterinsurgency programs within the
country already under attack. The factors included: (1) loss, and fear
of further loss, of military and economic facilities; (2) fear of involve-
ment in a much larger conflict; (3) fear of increased dependence upon,

‘and loss of independent action to, a major communist country; and (4) fear

of internal political upheaval and loss of power. The coercive impacts
of. the pressures were to be their principal objectives. Significant (in
view of currently espoused rationale for increased pressures on North
Vietnam) was the explicit caution that improved morale in the country
troubled by insurgency and "improved U.S. bargaining leverage in any
international conference on the conflict" were to be considered merely
as "bonus effects."

The coercive pressure was to result from “damaging military actions"

coupled with concurrent political, economic and psychological pressures.
The former could include selective or full naval blockade and “surgical”

eal ; TOP SECRET = Sensitive
