et

ti

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
DRAFT i
9 Feb 66

SUMMARY FOR RECORD

.

# meeting was held in the Conference Room of the Secretary of Defense
from 1:45 to 3:00 p.m., February 9, 1966 following the return of the
Secretary of Defense from Honolulu. At the conference table were the
Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense, the Service Secretaries,

and the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff minus the Chairman. Also
present were Mr. Anthony, Mr. Ignatius, Mr. McNaughton, Mr. Morris,
Dr. Enthoven, Mr. Glass, and the undersigned. This memorandum will
summarize the major points of the meeting.

1, The Honolulu Conference. Mr. McNamara opened with a general
report on the events in Honolulu. The meetings in general were highly
successful, The primary purpose of the Honolulu conference was as indi-
cated in the press, namely to permit the leaders of the United States and
South Vietnam to get to know each other better and to discuss non -military
programs, The top South Vietnamese handled themselves superbly and
made a fine impression. They have a non-military program which, if it
can be put into effect, should greatly strengthen the government and the
country. Most of the discussions concentrated on the non-military pro-
grams, The Vice President is going to Saigon to assist on this. McGeorge
Bundy is also going there to help the American Embassy organize so as to
further the non-military efforts.

Mr. McNarnara brought back with hira a great deal of material
prepared by General Westmoreland and Admiral Sharp. He will have this
material reproduced and copies sent to the Service Secretaries and the
Chiefs of Staff. No significant military decisions were taken with the
exception of one which he will now discuss.

2. The Case 1 Decision. Mx, McNamara reminded the group of
the three cases which have been under discussion involving various
assurmptions, Briefly, Case 1 assumes that the Reserves will be called
up, tours will be extended, and units will be re-deployed from other
overscas areas. Case 2 is the same as Case 1 but does not involve
calling up the Reserves, Case 3 involves no Reserve call-up and no
overseas. re-deployment. One of the big differences between these cases

is in the number of support units available, with the resulting effcct on

the number of combat units that can be deployed, For example, under

Case 1, some 102 maneuver battalions would be deployed by the end of
the year as opposed to 80 such battalions under Case 3, This is in
comparison to approximately 50 deployed at present.

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
