Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Whether or not Hanoi responded to these initi-
atives would depend on its view of the military out-
look in the South, and on whether it believed that a
move toward negotiation would bring success nearer. 142/

Bombing north of 20° without closing the ports would not
bring on new or different Chinese or Soviet. responses except for the
attacks on airfields. These might lead to greater Chinese involvement,
especially if NVN transferred air defense operations to bases in China.
If the ports were closed, however, there would be a direct challenge
to the USSR. While it was unlikely that the USSR (or China, for that
matter) would undertake new military actions, it would make every effort
to continue supplying NVN and would attempt to put maximum political
pressures on the U.S, China's leverage with Hanoi would grow, and
China would urge Hanoi to continue the war more vigorously than ever. 143/

The formal JCS response to the SecDef's questions on
pombing north versus south of the 20th parallel, quite apart from troop
levels, was submitted on 2 June. It was predictably cool toward
restricting the bombing to southern NVN, a good deal warmer toward
continuing the bombing in northern NVN, and warmest by far toward
proceeding from there to close the ports. 1h}

The JCS opposed any cutback on bombing north of the 20th
parallel on grounds that it would decrease the effectiveness of inter-
diction and make things easier for NVN. It would reduce the distance
over which the flow of men and supplies was subject to attack. It would
provide NVN free and rapid access down to Thanh Hoa, decreasing transport
time, rolling stock requirements, pipeline assets, and man-hours for
moving supplies South. It would release resources currently required
north of 20°. It would enable NVN to accelerate the import of weapons
and munitions, strengthen the Panhandle defenses, and increase U.S. attri-
tion. The U.S. action would be interpreted as yielding to pressure and
weakening resolve; NVN would be sure to claimvictory and press for greater
concessions as a price for any settlement. 145/

The JCS also argued that terminating strikes against non-
Loc targets in the north and switching to expanded armed reconnaissance
there would have the disadvantage of not maintaining the level of damage
achieved with respect to fixed installations and industry, but would have
the advantages of adding to NVN's difficultics -- from interruptions of
the LOCs, having to resort to inferior means of transport, shifting its
management and labor resources, and the like. However, leaving the ports
open would permit NVN to absorb the damage and adjust to the campaign.
With the ports open, NVN could continue to handle imports even if the
LOC strikes were successful. With the ports closed, on the other hand,
sustained attack on the roads and railroads would become militarily

64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
