Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from Vietnam: The Logic of Withdrawal, 1967, by Howard Zinn

Pages 101-102

The perspective of history suggests that a united Vietnam under Ho
Chi Minh is preferable to the elitist dictatorship of the South, just as
Maoist China with all its faults is preferable to the rule of Chiang, and
Castro's Cuba to Batista's. We do not have pure choices in the present,
although we should never surrender those values which can shape the future.
Right now, for Vietnam, a Communist government is probably the best avenue
available to that whole packet of human values which make up the common
morality of mankind today; the preservation of human life, self-determination,
economic security, the end of race and class oppression, and that freedom
‘of speech and press which an educated population begins to demand.

In the debate on Vietnam, there has been little or no discussion on
exactly what would be the evil consequences of a united Communist Vietnam.
It has become an article of faith that what is good or bad in international
relations is a matter of counting up the countries that are on the Commun-
ist side, and the number that are on our side. There is the black eye,
and, there is the feather in the cap. And the difference is worth a moun-
tain of corpses.

We need to get accustomed to the idea that there will be more Commun-
ist countries in the world, and that this is not necessarily bad. The
physical security of the United States is not diminished by that fact in
itself; Communist nations in their international affairs behave very much
like other nations (this is why they are so often disappointing to their
sympathizers); some are friendly, some are hostile. Each is a unique re-
sultant of Marxist theory and local conditions. The more there are, the
greater diversity there will be among them. It is several years now singe
scholars in the field of Communist studies began taking note of "polycen-
trism," but American officials still often act as if there were one Commun-
ist center in the world,

One thing we should have learned by now is that Communist nations are
as prone to the emotion of nationalism as other nations; they crave inde-
pendence and resist domination by any other nation, whether capitalist or
Communist. What this means is that a small but effective Communist nation

which is neighbor to a large one can guard its independence far better
' than a non-Communist, semifeudal dictatorship. A Communist Vietnam under
Ho Chi Minh can be expected to retain its independence as surely as Tito
has maintained his.

The idea of "containment" has always been ambiguous: Is it our aim
to contain China, or to contain Communism? And if it is both, then what
do we do if the two aims turn out to be in conflict with one another?

c-18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
