Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201

"The Prime Minister of Singapore said:

'T feel the fate of Asia--South and Southeast Asia--will be
decided in the next few years by what happens out in Viet-Nam.'

"I cannot tell you tonight as your President--with certainty--that
a Communist conquest of South Viet-Nam would be followed by a Communist
conquest of Southeast Asia. But I do know there are North Vietnamese
troops in Laos. I do know that there are North Vietnamese-trained
guerrillas tonight in northeast Thailand. I do know that there are
Communist-supported guerrilla forces operating in Burma. And a Com-
munist coup was barely averted in Indonesia, the fifth largest nation
in the world.

"So your American President cannot tell you--with certainty--that
a Southeast Asia dominated by Communist power would bring a third world
war much closer to terrible reality. One could hope that this would
not be so. ;

"But all that we have learned in this tragic century strongly
suggests to me that it would be so. As President of the United States,
I am not prepared to gamble on the chance that it is not so. I am not
prepared to risk the security--indeed, the survival--of this American
Nation on mere hope and wishful thinking. I am convinced that by seeing
this struggle through now we are greatly reducing the chances of a much
larger war--perhaps a nuclear war. I would rather stand in Viet-Nam
in our time, and by meeting this danger now and facing up to it, thereby
reduce the danger for our children and for our grandchildren."

x + *

75. Secretary Rusk's News Conference of October a 1967; Department
of State Press Release No. 227, October le, 1967.
x * x .

"Our commitment is clear and our national interest is real. The
SEATO Treaty, approved with only one dissenting vote by our Senate,
declares that ‘Each party recognizes that aggression by means of armed
attack in the treaty area...would endanger its own peace and safety,
and agrees that it will in that event act to meet the common danger....'
The Treaty says ‘each party' will act. The fidelity of the United States
is not subject to the veto of some other signatory -- and five signatories
have engaged their forces alongside Korean anc South Vietnamese troops.
Indeed, the proportion of non-U.S. forces in South Viet-Nam is greater
than non-U.S. forces in Korea.

"In August 1964 the Congress by joint resolution declared, with only

two dissenting votes, that 'The United States regards as vital to its
national interest and to world peace the maintenance of international

D-123
