>
ny fT,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

os
mediate interest in maintaining in power a friendly French government, to
-gssist in the furtherance of our aims in Burope.” ‘This immediate and vital
interest has in consequence taken precedence over active aps looking toward
the realization of our objectives in Indochina, t

We are prepared, however, to support the French in every way possible in
the establishment of a truly nationalist government in Indochina which, by
giving satisfaction to the aspirations of the peoples of Indochina, will serve
as a rallying point for the nationalists and will weaken the Communist elements.
By such support and by active participation in a peaceful and constructive
solution in Indochina we stand to regain influence and prestige.

Some solution must be found which will strike a balance between the aspira-
tions of the peoples of Indochina and the interests of the French. Solution by
French military reconquest of Indochina is not desirable. Neither would the
complete withdrawal of the French from Indochina effect a solution, The first
alternative would delay indefinitely the attainment of our objectives, as we
would share inevitably in the hatred engendered by an attempted military re-
conquest and the denial of aspirations for self-government. The second solu-
tion would be equally unfortunate as in all likelihood Indochina would then be
taken over by the militant Communist group. At best, there might follow a
transition period, marked by chaos and terroristic activities, creating a political
vacuum into which the Chinese inevitably would be drawn or would push.
The absence of stabilization in China will continue to have an important in-
fluence upon the objective of a permanent and peaceable solution in Indochina.

We have not been particularly successful in our information and education
program in orienting the Vietnamese toward the western democracies and the
US. The program has been hampered by the failure of the French to under-
stand that such informational activities as we conduct in Indochina are not
inimical to their own long-term interests and by administrative and financial
considerations which have prevented the development to the maximum extent
of contacts with the Vietnamese. An increased effort should be made to explain
democratic institutions, especially American institutions and American policy,
to the Indochinese by direct personal contact, by the distribution of informa-
tion about the US, and the encouraging of educational exchange.

149

= er ee

4
