Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of mutual de-escalation, but it was more likely to be taken as a
sign of U.S. weakness and encourage Hanoi to take a still stronger
stand. 151

Expanded armed reconnaissance in northern NVN, especially
if coupled with denying or inhibiting importation through Haiphong,

«.-would have a substantial effect on NVN economy
and logistic net and would...force enough additional
diversion of resources to reduce NVN infiltration and
support. 152/

However, closure of Haiphong -- which might not shut off all access from
the sea -- would carry unacceptable risks of wider war, an allout attack
on the railroads and roads from China was preferable, and would still
complicate NVN's logistic problems. Still more preferable, on balance,
was maintaining the present level of operations:

Because closure of Haiphong is probably not acceptable,
what would otherwise be a reasonable price in terms of air-
eraft loss for greatly reducing the inflow along the northern
yoads and railroads becomes an unreasonable loss in the
presence of a possible increase of sea import....This option
is not, without Haiphong port denial, an optimum use of air-
power. It is a war of attrition, forced by the risk of a
wider war or other actions by the Soviets if we do try to
close Haiphong. In that sense, it is analogous to the
ground war in the South....153/

On June 9, Secretary of the Air Force Brown sent McNamara a supplemental
memo in which he tried to make a case for interdiction bombing based on
a statistical demonstration that it was the most important factor in
explaining the difference between uninterdicted infiltration capability
and actual infiltration. 15h/

- Thus, the responses to the SecDef's questions on bombing
north versus south of the 20th parallel divided about evenly, with the
JCS and the Air Force strongly opposed to a cutback to 20° and backing
the more escalatory route, and the Navy and CIA concluding that inter-
diction either north or south was a difficult if not impossible goal but
thet a cutback would cost little.

6. The June 12th DPM

The Defense Department having fully explored the various air
war options, attention within the Administration again focused on preparing
a memorandum to the President, this time on strategy against North Vietnam
alone. But other events and problems were intervening to consume the

.66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
