Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Secretary Dulles raised the question of early military talks
that might strengthen the French position at the Geneva Conference at a
meeting in Geneva on May 2 with the Foreign Ministers of Australia and
New Zealand, partners of the United States in the ANZUS organization.
The three agreed at this meeting that there should be five-power military
talks in Washington among the ANZUS powers, the United Kingdom, and
France, with the possible participation of Thailand. 51/

ce. The Washington Viewpoint

In Washington in the meantime, the President on April 26,
the opening date of the Geneva Conference, told a group of Republican
leaders that it would be a "tragic error" for the United States to intervene
unilaterally as a partner of France in the Indochina struggle. 52/ Two
days later, in a discussion with Under Secretary W. Bedell Smith, Presi-
dential Assistant Robert Cutler, and Admiral Radford (who had just been
to London and had talked with the British Chiefs of Staff and Prime
Minister Churchill), 53/ the President expressed disappointment over the
British attitude of refraining from active participation in discussions
on a Southeast Asian collective security arrangement before the end of the
Geneva Conference. President Eisenhower, in this discussion, reiterated
his firm decision that there would be no United States military intervention
in Indochina by executive action. He urged his aides to provide help to
the French in repairing three airfields in Indochina but to avoid any undue
risk of involving the United States in combat operations.

The feasibility of American intervention at Dien Bien Phu
was finally removed with the fall of that fortress on May 7. President
Eisenhower sent messages to the President of France, René Coty, and to
the Chief of State of Vietnam, Bao Dai, praising the defenders of Dien
Bien Phu and stressing the determination of the free world to remain
"faithful to the causes for which they fought." 55/

5. Reappraisal of Domino Theory After Dien Bien Phu

The fall of Dien Bien Phu, and the failure to organize an inter-
vention through "united action" prior to the opening of the Geneva Con-
ference in late April, 1954, led to a reappraisal of the "domino theory
which had been at the center of U.S. policy in Southeast Asia since the
late 1940's. The loss of Tonkin, or Vietnam, or perhaps even all of
Indochina, was no longer considered to lead inexorably to the loss to
Communism of all of Southeast Asia.

WY

Accordingly, Secretary Dulles in a press conference on May 11
(four days after the French surrender at Dien Bien Phu) observed that
"Southeast Asia could be secured even without perhaps Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia." He went on to note that although he would not want to under-
estimate the importance of these countries he would not want either to
give the impression that "if events that we could not control, and which
we do not anticipate, should lead to their being lost that we would

B-30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
