Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

CONFERENCE DOCUMENTS AND SUPPUSMENTARY PAPERS

6. The Fronch/Netherlends represen

fatives will be siven tins, ~
information of ot intentions in respect of eny oper ations ths,
zB oe
directly 2

fact # Froneh/Net? terlones territocies or armed forces ih
Hor las
A 7

16. We have considered an offer by the French of Brene eorrs
of two infentry divisions to carve in the Pacific war and heve agrcsd
on tis isllowing roply:—

ir

i

Whether tae corns will serve under ( witish commande and
tho ae which it yall operate wil be eotermined Inter,

S a Hin Be seceptanes of tle corps will involve on sexeome? ni wit it tho
¢ concomed on basic motters including Ooms:
nlncoments, tnd logistical b

ee i be-made ol equipment proviced under tha
‘A and Matropoliten Reszmoment Programs.

Ad. The tone of movement wi a ee in eecordence with the priority
ftire operetions in which it is to be used. Pressing shipping and
ated recuirements fer operetio isin ‘the Pacific make certain that. bio
corps  chunst bo moved isc Franco ic? at loast goverel months:
Vehother used in the mein effort-or in. the South Chins Sea Brea, ih
Will not be possible te commit i$ to operations prior to tho spring of

1926." ‘

Portuguese Participation tn tie Wor

17. We sat vo examined 2 report by an wingio-American Milite:
Mission «which discussed with the Portuguese railitery: 9 tems
Portiigiiess proposels for participation in such operions es may
eventually be conducted to expel the dapanese from Portugese
"mor, Vo hove informed the State Department and the 2 oreign
Office of our view WS; wiieh ere set ous in Appendix ““D.”
Informatio: 2 for the Russians Concerning the Japanese Wor

18. Wo hsve Ciscussed polic oy to be folloyod by tne British and
the United States Chiels of Staff in passing to the Russians informe-
tion end intelligence concerning the Japanese war sad have sgreed
as followsi-—
¢. The | United St tetes an a British Chiofs of Staff will pass te the

‘rational informa tion ntailigence resording: t the

arorespectively 30 ie a5 either may “yish
ort bergciuing,

tee

pieriay a
zt Ea: mrpolizopes
‘Ne 3 pass to the Rus
or ty +3) Bars tra # fhe ole=r

nied tnt ne ae end oe
: 4

1=s6 rat
<2" Sa ethese ae

saruy’s 2 egrmees wwithe

