Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Johnson walks in with Press Secretary George Christian.
McNamara, Rusk, Rostow, Christian, and the President--
they are the Tuesday lunch regulars. The principal cast
for Target Tuesday.

Sometimes others join. Chairman of the Military Joint
Chiefs, General Earle Wheeler, for example. He's been coming
more often recently, ever since the Senate Subcommittee on
Preparedness Committee griped about no military man being
present many times when final bombing decisions were made.
Central Intelligence Director Richard Helms seldom comes.
Vice President Humphrey almost never.

Decision making at the top is an intimate affair.
Mr. Johnson prefers it that way. He knows men talk more
freely in a small group. :

After a bit of chatter over drinks in the sitting room,
the President signals the move to the dining room. It is
semi-oval, with a huge chandelier, a mural around the wall-
brightly colored scenes of Cornwallis surrendering his sword
at Yorktown. The President sits at the head, of course. Sits
in a high back stiletto swivel chair. Rusk is at his right,
McNamara on his left, Rostow is at the other end. Christian and
the extras, if any, in between. ILunch begins, so does the
serious conversation. There is an occasional pause, punctu-
ated by the whirl of Mr. Johnson's battery-powered pepper
grinder. He likes pepper and he likes the gadget.

Around the table the President's attention goes, sampling
recommendations, arguments, thoughts. It is now the time for
a bombing pause. How about just a bombing reduction? Laos,
Haiphong, Hanoi, everything around population centers, confined
bombing to that tiny part of North Vietnam bordering the
Demilitarized Zone. McNamara long has favored this. He
thinks it worth a try. Rusk has been going for some indica-
tion--the slightest hint will do--that a bombing pause or
reduction will lead to meaningful negotiations. Rostow,
least known of the Tuesday lunch regulars, also is a hard-
liner. He more than Rusk is a pour-it-on man. Christian
doesn't say much. He is there to give an opinion when asked
about press and public reaction. The military representative,
when there is one, usually speaks more than Christian, but
less than McNemara, Rusk, and Rostow.

Mellamarva is the man with the target list. He gives his
recommendations. If bomb we must, these are the targets he
suggests. His recommendations are based on, but by no means
completely agree with those of the military Joint Chiefs.
