Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the French, who, while the conference went on, continued to violate
its spirit by further fostering the idea of the separate south and
central federation in Indochina....

When he and Sainteny finally flew up to Paris for the start of the
talks, Sainteny described him as "pale, eyes brilliant, and tight-
throated," and he quoted Ho as saying, when the plane was settling down,
"Above all, don't leave me, whatever you do." As the conference dawdled
in the shadow of defeat, by now the result of the activities of the
Vietminh extremists in Hanoi as well as of the French maneuvers in
Cochin China, Ho grew more and more restless. Sainteny agreed he ought
to return to Hanoi as soon as possible. “What would I be able to do if
I went home empty-handed?" Ho asked. "Don't let me leave this way,"
he begged Sainteny and Marius Moutet, the Socialist Minister of Overseas
Territories. “Arm me against those who would seek to displace me. You
will not regret it." It was a significant plea, as significant as what
Ho said on another evening to Sainteny and Moutet, "If we have to fight,
we will fight. You will kill ten of our men and we will kill one of
yours, and in the end it will be you who will tire of it."

At midnight on September 14, 1946, the frail figure of Ho Chi Minh,
in its military tunic, walked out of the Hotel Royal-Monceau in Paris
(the Fontainebleau sessions had ended) and strolled to Moutet's house
nearby. There Ho and Moutet signed a modus vivendi, which, while it
underlined Vietnamese (and some French) concessions for safeguarding
French rights in Indochina, only postponed agreement on basic political
questions; it at least placed upon the French the responsibility for
restoring order in Cochin China. This was nothing more than had been
agreed to in the spring and been vitiated since, but Ho publicly called
the modus vivendi “better than nothing." He murmured to a security
officer who accompanied him back to the hotel early in the morning, how-
ever, "I have just signed my death warrant."

Despite the failure of his mission, Ho, in his true cosmopolitan
fashion, had enjoyed his stay in Paris, a city he had always loved.
Years before, standing on a bridge across the Seine, he had remarked
to a Communist comrade, "What a wonderful city, what a wonderful scene!”
When his friend had replied that Moscow was also beautiful, Ho had
said, "Moscow is heroic, Paris is the joy of living." During the 1946
conference, Ho had revisited some of his former haunts and, mixing
socially with several foreign correspondents, had talked freely about
himself and his politics. "Everyone has the right to his own doctrine,"
he had said. "I studied and chose Marx. Jesus said two thousand years
ago that one should love one's enemies. That dogma has not been realized.
When will Marxism be realized? I cannot answer....To achieve a Communist
society, big industrial and agricultural production is necessary....I do
not know when that will be realized in Vietnam, where production is low.
We are not yet in a position to meet the conditions."

0-15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
