Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

major force increases are now more marginal, while the
effect on the South Vietnamese must be rated a very much
more important factor and one which goes to the heart of
the conflict itself and of our ability to achieve a lasting
peace. 30/

On the basic objectives, Bundy disagreed with the Chiefs and
expressed general agreement with what the McNaughton draft had stated.
He believed that the minimum statement which we could make reference
our objective in Vietnam was certainly "to see that the people of
South Vietnam are permitted to determine their own future." But he
felt it much too pat to say that "this commitment ceases if the country
ceases to help itself," or even to observe that there are not further
elements in our commitment. He believed additional commitments related
not only to getting North Vietnamese forces off the backs of the South
Vietnamese but to making sure that the political board, as he called it,
in South Vietnam was not tilted to the adventage of the NLF. 31/

In his summary, he addressed this question of our commitment again,
and then expanded upon what he called the hard core question, that is,
what to do if "the country /Vietnam/ ceases to help itself." Using the
teeter-totter analogy, he commented that our commitment must be to see
that the people of South Vietnam were permitted to determine their own
future and to see that the "political board" was level and not tilted
in favor of elements that believed in force. He also believed that we
should at least hold open the possibility that a future South Vietnamese
government would need continuing military and security. assistance and
should be entitled to get it. He agreed with the Joint Chiefs analysis
of the DOD draft and their contention that it displayed a negative turn
to our strategy and to our commitment in Vietnam:

In terms of our course of action, the major implication--
as compared with the DOD draft--is that we will not take our
forces out until the political board is level. The implica-
tion of the DOD draft is that we could afford to go home the
moment the North Vietnamese regulars went home. This is not
what we said at Manila, and the argument here is that we should
not in any way modify the Manila position. Nor should we be
any more hospitable than the South Vietnamese to coalitions
with the NLF, and we should stoutly resist the imposition of
such coalitions. 32/

On the second question, of what would happen if the Vietnamese could
not help themselves or refused to help themselves Bundy argued for more
time to take a closer look at the Vietnamese situation, especially the
elections, before getting into a negative frame of mind about our Viet-
namese military/political/economic commitment. In arguing this position
he broadened the perspective embraced by the question and addressed the
entire range Of U.S. interests in Asia:

182 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
