Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(g) It is understood that the French are planning to
send reinforcements urgently from France and North Africa
to replace the losses incurred in the evacuation of Caobang,.
These reinforcements may include the 10,000 non-commissioned
and enlisted personnel planned for normal replacement in-
Indochina. In addition, there is a report that General
Carpentier has requested 15 battalions for immediate rein-

forcement.

tions in pare ¢ fa ae eee that is not already in process in
fashington, other than callings in the U.N. to put out the big fire.
Mr. lacy opposes referring the Indochina problem to the U.N. He
read his memorandum of conversation “a hed) with Counselor of

the French Bnbassy on Saturday, October 14. He and Mr, Hoey briefly
noted the State Depsrtnent!s proposed reply to Saigon's cable.

4. Estimate of the Situation. Today's State-Defense informal

meeting develaped the following opinions on the overall situation,
based on current information:

Political:

(2) There is no evidence of a French intention to with
draw from Indochina, There is considerable evidence of a
French intention to withdraw from Tonxin or a part thereof.

(b) There is strong evidence of a French intention: to
Lh
yble

throw the Indochina problem into the U.i. (see attached memo~

4

andum of conversation on 14 October.)

{c) There is no now evidence ‘of a French Satention to
make a deal with the Chinese Communists, It should be noted
that French reports from Saigon, particnlarly from High
Corimissioner Pignon, have bezun to emphasize the presence of
large nunbers of "Chinese troops" on the Vietnamese side of
the frontier.

Military:

(a) .It is expected that the French will evacuate the
posts of Iaokay and Longson, and the entire border area to
the small post of Monkay on the coast. pias this post can
be sunplied by sea it is possible that the French may try
to hold it.

(b) According to the most recent estimate of G2, the
French can hold the Delta-aren becsuse of their eee fire
power and air cover.

