Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

provide support for the new forces, prepare bases and installations for
possible future deployments, and be prepared to support those additional
forces." 85/ From the thrust of this JCSM it is apparent that the en-

_ Clave strategy was no stopping place as far as the Chiefs were concerned.
They continued to push hard for the earliest possible input of three
full divisions of troops. They were still well ahead of the pack in
that regard..

None of the Honolulu recommendations had been approved at the
time the 30 April JCSM was forwarded, although the 173rd was approved for
Bien Hoa-Vung Tau and three Marine battalions for Chu Lai on the same
day. 86/ Included in the logistics package listed by the JCS as
"approved" were some 4,700 troops later identified by Mr. McNaughton as
belonging to the three division program and definitely not approved. 87/
Secretary McNamara replied to the JCSM on the 15th of May, after the
landing of the 173rd on the 5th and the Marines at Chu Lai on the 7th.
The Secretary said that he considered as approved only so much of the
remainder of the Honolulu recommendations as applied to the Australian
Battalion, the ROK Regimental Combat Team and some MACV augmentations.
He went on to approve: (1) movement of the I MEF from California to
WESTPAC to reconstitute CINCPAC's floating reserve, and (2) preparation
for the deployment of an Army brigade to Qui Nhon-Nha Trang with final
decision on 21 May and closure on 27 June. This latter move, when ap-
proved, together with individual add-ons was to bring total permanent
in-country strength to 69,143 (the 173rd having been deployed on a
temporary basis). Secretary McNamara deferred decision on all JCS pro-
posals dealing with the three division plan, 88/ thereby giving the
enclave strategy temporary respite.

€.— Difficulties in Experimentation

As of the landings of the Marines at Chu Lai and the Airborne
at Bien Hoa-Vung Tau, the U.S. forces in Vietnam with some nine maneuver
battalions had yet to conduct a major offensive operation, with or
without the RVNAF. The experimentation with U.S. forces in an offensive
role, a large factor in the decision to accept the enclave concept, was
delayed because some knotty problems involving command and control re-
“mained to be ironed out with the Vietnamese.

In the early days when the Marines arrived to secure bases and
installations, the control measure devised for their employment was the
Tactical Area of Responsibility (TAOR). Under the overall suzerainty of
the Vietnamese Corps Commander, the Marines were given a well-defined
geographical area in which the U.S. exercised command authority over
military forces and for which the U.S. accepted defensive responsibility.
The original Marine TAOR consisted literally of their half of the Da Nang
airfield and a portion of a couple of hills on which the Marines were
entrenched and which they covered by the fields of fire of their small
arms. Assured by this conservative assignation was minimum contact be-
tween U.5. troops and the Vietnamese population. In fact, there were
only some 1,930 people living within the original Marine TAOR. 89/

AE TOP SECRET - Sensitive
