Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

¥ TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in the face of these cautiously optimistic and hopefully pessimistic
reports, was to continue its established program of material support
coupled with attempts to influence Diem to make desired changes.

Vit. THE PATH TO THE END
A. Diem's Position Hardens

The obvious U.S. alternatives, by mid-1963, remained the same
as they were in late 1961: (1) to induce changes within the Strategic
Hamlet Rrogram (among others) by convincing Diem to make such changes;
(2) to allow Diem to run things his own way and hope for the best; and
(3) to find an alternative to President Diem. The U.S. continued to
pursue the first course; Diem insisted increasingly on the second.
Finally, due to pressures from areas other than the Strategic Hamlet
Program, the U.S. pursued the third alternative. The Strategic Hamlet
Program, in the event, died with its sponsors.

Far from becoming thore reasonable, in U.S. eyes, President
Diem by mid-1963 had become more intractable. He insisted, for example,
that the U.S, cease to have an operational voice in the Strategic Hamlet
Program. The multiplication of U.S. advisors at many levels, he claimed,
was the source of friction and dissension. The remedy was to remove the
advisors. 105/ The essence of Diem's position was that Taylor's
"limited partnership" would not work.

Other U.S. missions visited Vietnam to assess the conduct of
the war. The result was much the same as reported by Krulek and
Mendenhall. This was essentially the findings of the McNemara-Taylor
mission in September: the military campaign is progressing, political
disaffection is growing; U.S. leverage is questionable. 106

B, The Program Dies With the Ngos

The rest may be summarized: the U.S. attempted to insist on
a progrem with more emphasis on broad appeal rather than control; Diem,
finding himself increasingly embroiled in the Buddhist controversy,
increased repressive measures; a coup toppled the Diem regime on i
November; the deposed President and his brother Nhu, "architect of the
Strategic Hamlet Program," were killed. ‘The Strategic Hamlet Progrem-~
or at least the program under thet name which they had made the unifying
theme of their counterinsurgent effort--died with them. ‘The inhabitants
who had wanted to leave the hemlets did so in the absence of an effective
government. The VC took advantage of the confusion to attack and overrun
others. Some offerred little or no resistance. The ruling junta -
attempted to resuscitate the program as "New Life Hamlets" early in 196},
put the failures of the past provided a poor psychological basis upon
which to base hopes for the future.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

35
