Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

From the standpoint of ground force strategy, what McNaughton was
really, it appears, saying was that-we should make a decision to
basically set our objectives within a time frame geared to South Viet-
namese Army and South Vietnamese government progress, and that-in doing
sO Our Own troops in approximately the current strengths could be devoted
to providing the shield while the government of South Vietnam provided
the shelter and performed the vital pacification function. As he noted,
associated in the decision was the very conscious determination not to
use large numbers of U.S. troops in the delta and not to use large
nunibers of them in what he called "grass roots pacification work," the
two justifications most frequently used to support requests for addi-
tional troops. The appraisal, as well as the alternative military
courses of action and their analyses contained in this document pro-
vided the catalyst for the subsequent and final decisions on Program 5.

2. JCSM 286-67, Persistent Pressure Up the Ladder--"Shouldering
Out" the Parts

On 20 May the Joint Chiefs of Staff submitted JCSM 286-67, entitled
"Operations Against North Vietnam," a paper primarily concerned with the
air campaign. It stated that the JCS were seriously concerned at the
prospective introduction by the USSR into NVI of new weapons including
improved antiaircraft and surface to air missiles, guided missile patrol
boats, surface to surface missiles and a variety of artillery and direct
fire weapons. They felt that such weapons would further improve the
NVN air and coastal defense systems and provide offensive capabilities
which would pose additional threats to our forces and installations in
SEA. Since the Hanoi-Haiphong areas constituted the principal North
Vietnam logistical base through which these arms passed the JCS recom-
mended that this complex be neutralized. This was feasible by direct
attack on the areas but such direct attack would entail increased danger
of high civilian casualties. Preferable to direct attack the Chiefs
recommended that the area be interdicted by cutting the land and sea
lines of communications leading into it. However, for such an inter-
diction campaign to be effective, all the elements of the import system
of North Vietnam had to be attacked concurrently on @ sustained basis,
or, in the Chiefs’ estimation, the weight of the attack would be insuffi-
cient to reduce imports to a Jevel which would seriously impair the
overall North Vietnamese war supporting capability. Accordingly, they
recommended first an attack of Haiphong, conducted first by surgically
"shouldering out" foreign shipping and then mining the harbor and
approaches. This concept of "shouldering out" which was to reappear
many times in subsequent JCS communications was to be executed by a
series of air attacks commencing on the periphery of the port area and
gradually moving to the center of the complex. ‘These attacks were designed
to reduce the functional efficiency of the port and could be expected to
force the foreign shipping out of the nearby estuaries for off-loading
by lighterage. Once the foreign vessels cleared port, according to the
JCS calculation the remaining elements of the port could be taken under
attack and the harbor mined. While the Haiphong port was being attacked

165 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
