Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Peace requires that the existing agreements in the area be honored.

"Peace requires that we and all our friends stand firm against the
present aggressions of the government of North Vietnam.

"The government of North Vietnam is today flouting the will of the
world for peace. The world is challenged to make its will against war known
and to make it known clearly and to make it felt and to make it felt de-

cisively.

"So, to our friends of the Atlantic alliance, let me say this this morn- ,
ing. The challenge that we face in Southeast Asia today is the same challenge
that we have faced with courage and that we have met with strength in Greece
and Turkey, in Berlin and Korea, in Lebanon and in Cuba, and to any who
may be tempted to support or to widen the present aggression I say this:

There is no threat to any peaceful power from the United States of America.
But there can be no peace by aggression and no immunity from reply. That
is what is meant by the actions that we took yesterday.

% & %
10. "President's Message to Congress August 1964," Department of State
Bulletin, 24 August 1961, p. 261:
x * *

"These latest actions of the North Vietnamese regime have given a new
and grave turn to the already serious situation in Southeast Asia. Our
commitments in that area are well known to the Congress. . They were first
made in 1954 by President Eisenhower. They were further defined in the
Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty approved by the Senate in Febru-

ary 1955. .
"This treaty with its accompanying protocol obligates the United States

and. other members to act in accordance with their constitutional processes
to meet communist aggression against any of the parties or protocol states.

"Our policy in Southeast Asia has been consistent and unchanged since
1954. I summarized it on June 2 in four simple propositions:

"1. America keeps her word. Here as elsewhere, we must and shall
honor our commitments.

"2, The issue is the future of Southeast Asia as a whole. A threat
to.any nation in that region is a threat to all, and a threat to us.

"3. Our purpose is peace. We have no militery, political, or territorial .
ambitions in the area. F

D-14
