Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in a new long range strategy which emphasized pacification, to Lodge's
pleasure. MACV also produced a new position on revamping ARVN, and
briefed the Mission Council on it in August, 1966. The Honolulu em-
phasis was beginning to produce tangible results on the U.S, side.

D. The Single Manager

Despite the movement described in the above three sections, Wash-
ington wanted more, and was not satisfied with the rate of progress.
Komer, therefore, in August of 1966 had produced a long paper which
offered three possible changes in the management structure of the
Mission. They were: (1) put all pacification responsibility and assets,
including MACV Advisors, under Porter; (2) reorganize the civilian struc-
ture to create a single office of operations, and strengthen MACV in-
ternally, but leave the civilians and the military split; (3) give
Westmoreland full pacification responsibility. The Mission rejected all
these ideas, offering in their stead the proposal that Washington leave
Saigon alone for a while, but the pressure for results and better manage-
ment was too great, and the inadequacies of the Mission too obvious, to
leave it alone. Secretary McNamara weighed in at this point with a draft
Presidential memorandum proposing that Westmoreland be givenresponsibility
for pacification. Komer and JCS concurred in it, but State, USIA, AID,
and CIA nonconcurred. McNamara, Katzenbach, and Komer then went to Saigon
to take a look at the situation. When they returned, Katzenbach, new to
the State Department and previously uninvolved in the problem, recommended
that Porter be told to reorganize the civilians along the lines previously
discussed (similar to Komer's Alternative Number 2). The President agreed,
discussing it with Lodge and Westmoreland at Honolulu. But he added a
vital warning: he would give the civilians only about 90 to 120 days to
make the new structure work, and then would reconsider the proposal to
transfer responsibility for pacification to MACV.

E. The Manila Conference

The decision had not yet been transmitted to Saigon, but it had been
made. At Manila, with six other heads of state in attendance, the dis-
cussion turned to other matters. At Manila, in the final Declaration,
the GVN announced that they would commit half the armed forces to secur-
ing operations in support of pacification/RD. This had previously been
discussed, but it was the public commitment that really mattered, and now
it was on the record. °

A. O€O on Trial: Introduction

The Office of Civil Operations was formed, creating confusion and
resentment among the agencies, but also marking an immediate and major

vi . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
