Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

they commit the GVN to a continual expansionary effort
on all sides of Saigon simultaneously, an effort which
is beyond its capabilities. Above all, they ignore the
political structure of the area around Saigon.

The U.S. Mission has two broad courses of action avail-
able in regard to Hop Tac. First, the Mission Council
may feel that the area encompassed by Hop Tac remains

the first pacification priority of the U.S. and the GVN.
If this is the considered judgment of the Mission Council,
then we must seek ways of re-emphasizing, re-invigorating
and reorienting Hop Tac in order to achieve a dramatic
and sustained success in pacification.

There is an alternative open to the Mission Council.
Perhaps it would be politically unwise to attempt to
commit the GVN to re-enphasis of Hop Tac at this time.
There are several facts which support this view:

"A. The GVN has never considered Hop Tac its own plan
and its own number one priority. The staff planning
for the plan was done almost entirely by the United
States, and then translated into Vietnamese. It is,
in the eyes of many Vietnamese, ‘the plan of the
Americans. '

"B. It is perhaps the most difficult area in the country
in which to attempt pacification. Since it surrounds
Saigon (but does not include it), every political
tremor in the capital is felt in the neighboring
area...the High Command has created chains of command
in the area which are clearly designed primarily to
prevent coups, and only secondarily to pacify the
countryside. Another example: in the last 11 months,
oh out of 31 district chiefs and five out of seven
province chiefs have been changed.

"CG. Prime Minister Ky will never feel that Hop Tac is his
plen. If he is seeking a major public triumph, and
intends to devote his attention to achieving that
triumph, it is wmlikely that he will choose Hop Tac,
which as mentioned above, is publicly considered an
American plan. Moreover, to the extent that any Viet-
namese is publicly connected with Hop Tac, it is
Nguyen Khanh. For this reason, more than any other,
the dangers of re-emphasizing Hop Tac outweigh the
possible gains..."

5 '-'fOP SECRET - Sensitive
