Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

relationships, success or failure in this regard will
depend very heavily on Ambassador Nolting's ability to
get on the same wavelength with Diem...

The chief threat to the viability of President Diem's
administration is, without a doubt, the fact of communist
insurgency and the government's inability to protect its
own people. ‘Thus military measures must have the highest
priority. There is, nevertheless, strong discontent with
the government among not only the elite but among peas-
ants, labor, and business. Criticism focuses on the
dynastic aspects of the Diem rule, on its clandestine
political apparatus, and on the methods through which the
President exercises his leadership. This is aggravated
by Communist attempts to discredit the President and
weaken his government's authority. All this is made the
easier because of a communications void existing between
the government and the people. For many months United
States efforts have been directed toward persuading Diem
to adopt political, social, and economic changes designed
to correct this serious defect. Many of these changes
are included in the Counterinsurgency Plan. Our success
has been only partial. There are those who consider that
Diem will not succeed in the battle to win men's minds in
Vietnam,

Thus in giving priority emphasis to the need for in-
ternal security, we must not relax in our efforts to per-
suade Diem of the need for political social and economic
progress. If his efforts are inadequate in this field
our overall objective could be seriously endangered and
we might once more find ourselves in the position of shor-
ing a leader who had lost the support of his people. 32/

Although the paper expresses the hope that through "very astute deal-
ings" ("a combination of positive inducements plus points at which discreet
pressure can be exercised”) Diem could be successfully worked with, the net
effect of the State draft is hardly enthusiastic. The paper tells the
President that his Task Force "believes" that the policy will work. But it
is a large order: for the aim had been referred to as nothing less than
"a major alteration in the present government structure or in its objectives."

In effect, the silence on Diem in the Gilpatric/Lansdale draft was re-
placed by a detailed statement which, in the course of reaffirming the need
to take prompt steps to show confidence in Diem, nevertheless leaves the
strong impression that we really did not have much confidence in him at all,
Support for Diem became tactical: based explicitly on the hope that he
might reform, and implicitly on the fact that trying to overthrow him would

48 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
