Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Security Affairs, Chairman, JCS, Director of CIA, CINCPAC, Ambassador to
to Vietnam, and COMUSMACY. Ambassador Lodge assessed the prospects for
Vietnam as hopeful. In his estimation the new government was not without
promise. Vietnamese militery leadership appeared to be united and deter-
mined to step up the war effort. The Ambassador advocated continuing to
pursue the goal of setting dates for phasing out U.S. activities and
turning them over to the Vietnamese, and he volunteered that the announced
withdrawal of 1000 troops by the end of 1963 was already having 4 salutary
affect. COMUSMACV agreed with the Ambassador that the conduct of the war
against the VC was coming along satisfactorily. Admitting that the VC-
incidents rate shot up 300 to 400 percent after the coup, he noted that
since 6 Noveriber, however, it had dropped down to "normal" and remained

so to the present. Military operational statistics now generally showed

a more or less favorable balance. In short, the briefings and assessments
received at the conference constituted "an encouraging outlook for the
principle objective of joint U.S.-Vietnamese policy in South Vietnam--the
successful prosecution of the war against the Viet Cong comunists." More-
over, “excellent working relations between U.S. officials and the members
of the new Vietnamese government" had been established. All plans for the
U.S. phasing out were to go ahead as scheduled.

In this light the U.S. military plans and programs for Vietnam were
addressed. The revision of the Model M Plan of the CPSVN, ordered by
the Secretary of Defense during his last visit to Vietnam in October was
progressing apace and the finished Accelerated Plan was expected to be
forwarded shortly. It would cost $6.4 million more than the Model Plan,
however. Indications were that the FY 64 MAP would also cost more because
of the acceleration--to a total now of $187.5 million. The Secretary of
Defense made it clear that he felt that the proposed CINCPAC MAP could be
cut back and directed that the program be reviewed to refine it and cut
costs to stay as close as possible to the OSD ceiling of $175.5 million.
He was equally emphatic, however, that while he would not tolerate fat or
inefficiency in the program he was prepared to provide whatever funds
might be required under MAP to support the GVN. Im fact, he observed
that the GVN was already running into "tremendous financial deficits,"
and opined that neither AID nor MAP had budgeted enough to provide for
the emergencies which were likely to arise during 196. it

ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT KENNEDY

On 22 Novenber 1963, President Kennedy was assassinated. The con-
sequences were to set an institutional freeze on the direction and momentwn
of U.S. Vietnam policy. Universally operative was a desire to avoid change
of any kind during the critical interregnum period of the new Johnson
Administration. Both the President and the governmental establishment
eonsciously strove for continuity, with respect to Vietnam no less than
tin other areas. In Vietnam this continuity meant that the phase-out
concept, the CPSVN withdrawal plan, and the MAP programs probably survived
beyond the point they might have otherwise.

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
