Py

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In the proposed "pilot program," for instance, the concept envisaged
the phased establishment of teams in 49 districts of seven key provinces
during a six-month period. This would require approximately 300 addi-
tional advisors. 112/ The broader program called for an additional 1,000
advisory personnel, phased over a period of 1-15 years, to cover all 239
districts by the end of CY 1965. 113/ The more comprehensive program
estimated that 63 districts (compared to 49 districts in the "pilot
program") would be manned by the end of CY 1964. Both were represented
as suitable bases for the Secretary's impending discussions in Honolulu.
Both were hurriedly drawn up alternative schemes for expanding the
advisory effort to district level. Both, moreover, incorporated the
arguments of COMUSMACV: concentration on operations rather than training
and a time-phased buildup with due attention to existing security con-
ditions and interpreter availability. The point was also made that the
total number of additional personnel would necessarily include a support
slice of approximately 35%. 11)1/

One other Question of expansion was addressed before the Secretary
of Defense's conference in Honolulu in June. The JCS studied the possi-
pility, also in late May, of extending the advisory effort to regular
ARVN units at the company level. The JCS agreed with the COMUSMACV and
CINCPAC reasoning that such an extension would be undesirable because it
would lead to greatly increased U.S. casualties, would be unsupportabiLe
in terms of necessary language training (one year to 18 months necessary
to provide 500 "bilingual" advisors), and would meet resistance from
ARVN commanders faced with strange new relationships and potential loss
of face. 115/

MACV'S PREFERRED APPROACH ACCEPTED

The prevailing military advice, then, when the Secretary met on
1 June with the principal U.S. managers of the Vietnamese effort, was
that it was desirable to expand the advisory effort to district level
on a careful basis in order to promote better effectiveness in the
paramilitary forces engaged in pacification activities, but that U.S.
advisors should not be extended to company level in the regular forces.
The available record does not make clear the exact positions and argu-
ments put forward at Honolulu. What is clear is that it was decided,
following basically the revised estimates proposed by COMUSMACV, to
expand the advisory effort to district level at some rate (to be worked
out later in detail) and to increase the size of battalion-level advisory
groups by two noncommissioned officers in infantry battalions and cavalry
troops and by one commissioned and two noncommissioned officers in
artillery battalions. 116/ The acknowledged effect of the latter
decision was to make company-level advisory teams availeble on an ad hoc
basis without assigning them on 4 permanent basis. 117/ It is uncles
how this scheme solved the previous reservations relative to language
training, higher casualties, and Vietnamese sensibilities. A likely

hg TOP SECRET - Sensitive
