Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

CONETD PTT. ff

the impossibili ity of chtnining dollar excnirge. very few Viebnanes

are suificie net wealthy unde - any circwastences to send their cr

half way around the world te college. The dup toneute sion of th
&

bright aeweeuent with France is being workectt out in Paris. I+ seems
probable that this implementation will piacs Indochinese arplicants in
direct competition with those in France, In that ease there is not
likely to be any political discrimination against Vietnamese or ae

Indochinese applicants. They will, however, constitute bat a small
fraction of those applying in french territory and will rarcly poss
acconplishments porn pane them to meet the competition of scones.
from.Franee itself, It will be recalied that the Fulbright progran
is designed for graduate students,

ay

Hanoi is under more intense siege than oe and hans experienced
more destruction. A very modest USIS program, limited vrimsrily to
magazines and some film distribution, is about to be launched by tho
Consulat e theres The possibility cf expanding this program will be
subject to periodic review. fresont plans are for the Consul and

1

Vice Consul to derste some of their time to USIS activities, assisted
namese emplcyed at. USIS expensee The pos ssibild

by onc or tivo Vio
aut room at Fhnom Penh, the capital of Camb

Despite the accelereted tompo of events in China, Indonesia,
Malaya, and Burra, the situation in the Prench~held areas of Indo-

ching ce teen relatively static for some time past. This report
writton in tho light of this static situation. Cyrrent
ae nogotiations with ex-Emperor Bao Dai of annam may lead to
his carly return to Victnam with a trend tovard more peaceful con-
ditions in Indochina which would permit expanded USIS activities.

The single factor of improved sreaa tt facilities would be an
immense “advantage. if, however, conditions become more unscttled,
USIS will soon be eareres Ly affected.

HeC/jr

177
