Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

49 ,
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

fixed target strikes were authorized. The operational latitude for
armed reconnaissance missions was also widened. They were authorized
to strike small pre-briefed fixed military targets not on the JCS
list (e.g., minor troop staging areas, warehouses, or depots) in the
course of executing their LOC attacks, and to restrike previously
authorized JCS targets in order to make and keep them inoperable.

An armed reconnaissance sortie ceiling continued in effect. It was
lifted to 600 per week by October, but then held there until the end
of the year. 20/

By the end of 1965 total ROLLING THUNDER attack sorties had
levelled off to about 750 per week and total sorties to a little over
1500 per week. All told, some 55,000 sorties had been flown during
the year, nearly half of them on attack (strike and flak suppression)
missions, and three-fourths of them as armed reconnaissance rather
than JCS-directed fixed target strikes. Altogether, ROLLING THUNDER
represented only 30 percent of the U.S. air effort in Southeast Asia
during the year, in keeping with the rough priorities set by decision-
makers at the outset. 21/

Although bombing NVN had done much to generate, as Secretary
McNamara put it, "a new school of criticism among liberals and ‘peace’
groups,” whose activities were reflected in a wave of teach-ins and
other demonstrations during 1965, 22/ the bombing also drew abundant
eriticism from more hawkish elements because of its limited nature.
As a result, the Secretary and other officials were frequently obliged
to defend the bombing restrictions before Congress and the press.

Most of the hawkish criticism of the bombing stemmed from
basic disagreement with an air campaign centered upon a tactical inter-
diction rationale rather than a punitive rationale more in keeping with
strategic uses of air power, a campaign in which the apparent target
was the infiltration system rather than the economy as a whole, and in
which, as one CIA report put it,

..ealmost 80 percent of North Vietnam's limited modern
industrial economy, 75 percent of the nation's population,
and the most lucrative military supply and LOC targets
have been effectively insulated from air attack. 23/

This kind of criticism of the bombing concentrated on the most conspic-
uous aspect of the program, the strikes against fixed targets, and it
faulted the program for failing to focus on the kinds of targets which
strategic bombing had made familiar in World War II -- power plants, oil
depots, harbor facilities, and factories.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
17
