Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

withdrawn, and that the MRC would meet the next day to choose a new Chief
of State and would then dissolve itself. 23/

Taylor had made it clear to Minh, Khiem, Lam and Khanh that the
U.S. favored retaining Khanh as head of the GVN. Both Tri Quang and Tam
Chau, fearing s Dai Viet takeover, supported Khanh. Aligned egainst Khanh
were elements of the military angered by Khanh's “down with military dic-
tatorship" statement made froma truck top and the Dai Viet (including
Khiem, Hoan and Minh) angered by his appeasement of the Buddhists. 2h/

On August 26 and 27, the MRC met, while violence erupted in the
streets of Saigon. The evening of the 27th they announced that a trium-
vireate consisting of Generals Khanh, Minh, and Khiem would rule as an
interim government while they tried to form a new one. Khanh withdrew to
Dalat, and Vice-Premier Oanh became acting Prime Minister. Violence con-
tinued, @nd coup rumors became especially active. 25/

On August 29, a State Department official briefed the press,
interpreting events. He said Buddhists and students interpreted the August
16 charter as a return to Diemism and repression; in meeting their demands
the MRC had worried some Catholics, but balanced things out by creating
the triumvirate with all views represented. He said the charter had not
been the USG's idea, but that we had been consulted and had urged delay.
The demonstrations did not contain appreciable anti-Americanism, he said,
nor did they arise from differences between the "go North" feelings of
the military and refugee Catholics, on the one hand, and neutralist senti-
ments of students and Buddhists, on the other. However, the cable report-
ing the press conference to the Embassy showed concern on both these latter
points. 26/ ‘

, GVN Acquires a Civilian Mleavor, and the USG Reviews Priorities

On August 29th, Vietnamese paratroopers armed with bayonets restored
order in Saigon. Khanh rested in Dalat; Taylor called on him on the 31st
to try to persuade him to return to Saigon quickly to prove he was in charge.
Westmoreland went to see Khanh the next day to urge him to keep ARVIN on
the offensive and to press on with Hop Tac and other pacification; in ex-~
change for reassurances, Westmoreland revised a previous position 27/ anda
promised that U.S, advisors through MACV would alert Khanh to unusual. troop
movements. Westmoreland also obtained reassurances from General Khiemn.
Rusk suggested a letter from President Johnson urging Khanh to return to
Saigon, and then cabled the text of such a letter. A Dai Viet coup attempt
was blocked by the junior menbers of the MRC, who had now become powerful.
Several Generals went to Dalat to persuade Khanh to return as Prime Minister,
which he promised to do in a few days. Khanh did return to Saigon on Septem-
ber }. 28/ Minh was to be chairman of the triumvirate, and would appoint
a, new High National. Council to represent all elements in the population.
The Council was to prepare @ new constitution and return the government to
civilian leadership within a month or so. Khanh was taking the line that
he wanted to get the Army out of politics. When Taylor cautioned Khanh,
just before the latter's return to Saigon, that an all-civilian government

, . Nia TOP SECRET - Sensitive
