Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

IMMEDIATE RELEASE JUNE 27, 1950
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT

In Korea the Government forces, which were armed
- to prevent border raids and to preserve internal
security, were attacked by invading forces from
North Korea. The Security Council of the United
Nations called upon the invading troops to cease
hostilities and to withdraw to the 38th parallel.
This they have not done, but on the contrary have
pressed the attack. Tne Security Council called
upon all members of the United Nations to render
every assistance to the United Nations in the execu-
tion of this resolution. In these circumstances I
have ordered United States air and sea forces to
give the Korean Government troops cover and support.

The attack upon Korea makes it plain beyond all
doubt that Communism has passed beyond the use of
subversion to conauer independent nations and will
now use armed invasion and war. It has defied the
orders of the Security Council of the United Nations
issued to preserve international peace and security.
In these circumstancss the occupation of Formosa by
Communist forces would be a direct threat to the
security of the Pacific area and to United States
forces performing their lawful and necessary func-
tions in that area.

Accordinsgly,I have ordered the Seventh Fleet
to prevent any attack on Formosa. As a corollary
of this action I am calling upon the Chinese Govern-
ment on Formosa to cease all air and sea operations
against the mainland. The Seventh Fleet will see
that this is done. The determination of the future
status of Formosa must await the restoration of
security in the iacific, a peace settlement with
Japan, Or consideration by the United Nations.

I have also directed that United States Forces
in the Philippines be strengthened and that military
assistance to the Philippine Government be accelerated.

I have similarly directed acceleration in the
furnishing of military-assistance to the forces of

336
