Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

First, the air campaign against NVN (ROLLING THUNDER) did not appear to be
shaking the DRV's determination. Second, ARVN experienced a series of
disastrous defeats in the spring of 1965 which convinced a mumber of
observers that a political-military collapse within GVN was imminent.

As the debate in Washington on next steps revealed, something closely
akin to the broad objectives stated over a year earlier in NSAM 288 repre-
sented a consensus among U.S. policymakers as a statement of proper U.S.
aims. The domestic political situation had changed materially since early
1964. President Johnson was now armed with both a popular mandate and
broad Congressional authorization (the extent of which would be challenged
later, but not in 1965). Palliative measures had not been adequate to the
task although they had continued and multiplied throughout the period. As
General Taylor wryly remarked to MeGeorge Bundy in a back channel message
guoted in the following paper, the U.S. Mission in Saigon was charged with
implementing a 2l-point military program, a 41-point non-military program,
a 16-point USIS program, and a 12-point CIA program "...as if we can win
“here somehow on a point score."

As fears rose in Washington it must have seemed that everything had
been tried except one course -- active U.S. participation in the ground
battle in SVN. Palliative measures had failed. ROLLING THUNDER offered
little hope for a quick decision in view of the rapid deterioration of
ARVN. The psychological barrier against the presence of U.S. combat units
had been breached, If the revalidated U.S. objectives were to be achieved
it was necessary for the U.S. to make quickly some radical departures. It
was politically feasible to commit U.S. ground forces and it seemed desirable
to do so.

Secretary McNamara met in Honolulu on 20 April with the principal U.S.
leaders from Saigon and agreed to recommend an enclave strategy requiring
a quantum increase above the four Marine battalions. An account of the
rapidity with which this strategy was overtaken by an offensively oriented
concept is described in another volume in this series.* The present volume
describes the situational changes, the arguments, and the frustrations as the
U.S. attempted for over a year to move toward the realization of ambitious
objectives by the indirect use of very limited resources and in the shadow
of a Presidential election campaign.

* IV.C.5. Phase I in the Build-Up of U.S. Forces: The Debate, March-July
1965.

“wii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
