Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Recommendations to teke reprisal action came from several quar-
ters. Citing whet it called "a further indication" of Viet Cong respon-
sibility, and cautioning against adding the Brink affair to the Bien Hoa
instance of unreciprocated enemy provocation, CTNCPAC urged a reprisal
attack. He argved that the "bombing of Brink BOQ was an act aimed
directly at U.S. armed forces in RYN" and that feilure to respond would
only encourage further attacks. 215/ Ambassador Taylor: forwarded what
he termed "a unanimous recommendation" by himself and members_of the U.S,
Mission Council "that a reprisal bombing attack be executed /as soon as
possible/” ona specified target "accompanied by statement relating this
action to Brink bombing." He stated that "no one in this part of the
world has [the ‘slightest doubt of VC guilt" and pointed out that the NLF
was publicly taking credit for the incident. 216/ Citing Taylor's
request and concurring in his recommendation, even to the specific target
selection, the JCS added their voices to those arguing for reprisals. In
their proposed execute message to CINCPAC, they proposed a one-day
mission by 40 strike aircraft against the Vit Thu lu Army barracks.
Further, they recommended that the VIAF should participate if their

state of readiness and time permitted. 217/

In spite of these strong recommendations, the decision was made
not to retaliate for the Brink bombing incident. On 29 December, the
following message was dispatched to the U.S. embassies in Southeast Asia
and to CINCPAC:

"Highest levels today reached negative decision on proposal
-..for reprisal action for BOQ bombing. We will be sending
fuller statement of reasoning and considerations affecting future
actions after.Secretary's return from Texas tonight." 218/

Available materials do not include any further explanation.
3- Policy Views in January

As the new year began, the Administration was beset with frus-
tration over an apparent leck of impact from Phase One operations, over
its failure to take reprisals after an attack on U.S. personnel, and
over the still troublesome crisis within the CVN. In this mood, U.S
policy was subjected to various kinds of criticism and comment. Some
came from within the Administration, various reactions came from outside
it.

@. Public Debate. At the height of the GVN crisis, a number
of newspapers and periodicals joined with the already committed (in
opposition) and influential New York Times and St. Louis Post Dispatch
in questioning U.S. objectives in Southeast Asia and/or advocating U.S.
withdrawal from the entanglements of South Vietnam. 219/ In the midst
of this kind of public questioning, a major debate arose among members
of Congress and enmeshed, on occasion, leading officials in the Adminis-~
tration. Leading off in opposition (26 December) was Senator’ Church,

ee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
