Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

efforts to mobilize the tribal peoples against it, and in opening
access to South Vietnam via the Laotian panhandle.

It is not clear whether the DRV found it necessary
to pressure or subvert the Cambodian government in order to bring it
into line with its general strategy, but align the Cambodians did.
As in Iaos, the Viet Minh had fronted for Khmer Resistance at the
Geneva Conference of 1954, and there is evidence that in the years
following it supported subversive organizations in Cambodia.

In 1958, a crisis between South Vietnam and Cambodia erupted over
boundary disputes and border violations. Cambodia formally laid claim
to all of Cochinchina in a declaration to the United Nations, while
South Vietnam laid claim to off-shore islands and other nominally
Cambodian territory.

Beginning in 1958, Cambodia declared for "neutralism,"
and thereafter its relations with the DRV were marked with increasing
cordiality and cooperativeness. Evidence collected since -1963 indicates
that the Viet Cong built bases adjacent to the Cambodian border, used
sanctuary areas across it, operated trans-frontier supply routes, and
had sources of supply within Cambodia. . Insofar as the minimal evident
objectives of DRV policy were concerned -- use of Cambodian territory
to further the campaign to reunify Vietnam -- Cambodia proved to be
incapable of interfering even when, apparently, it wished to police
its territory. 201/

c. Explication of the Strategy, 1960

During 1958 and 1959 work had progressed on a revision
of the DRV Constitution. On 1 January 1960, with much fanfare, the
new basic law was promulgated. The Preamble recounted the modern |
history of Vietnam, in part as follows:

"Vietnam is a single entity from Lang-Son to Camau.

"The Vietnamese people, throughout the thousands of years
of history, have been an industrious working people who have
struggled unremittingly and heroically to build their country
and defend the independence of their Fatherland ..- . With the
Dien Bien Phu victory, the Vietnamese people defeated the
French imperialists and the U.S. interventionists .

"This major success of the Vietnamese people was also a
common success of the liberation movement of the oppressed
peoples, of the world front of peace, and of the socialist camp.

"Since the restoration of peace in completely liberated

North Viet-Nam, our people have carried through the National
People's Democratic Revolution. But the South is still under

64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
