Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a en ee (ra ie apa pal == ; i =

ie

study when you requested it. General Wheeler was not aware of it. The
author did not query General Wheeler or me about the actions we took
today, or the actions of the Joint Chiefs, the National Security Council,
or those the President took. Ee

_ Ido not think you want evaluative reports sent over here that are
Incomplete. Any report we have, you have access to, but only after it
has been properly reviewed as to its reliability. J ge: .

Your staff study is quite a different matter. I consider it a very seri-
ous handicap to me in appearing before you today to address these
issues that have been reviewed and addressed and considered in your
staff study, evidence of which is examined in your staff study, which
evidence has never even been brought to my attention, but if you are
willing to go ahead with the hearing on that basis, Tam.

The Cramaray. All of the staff was based upon material that came
from your office, all of it. We gave you a complete list of every docu-
ment and everything we had received, and it is available to you as it
was to us.

ADDENDUM TO STATE STUDY

Secretary McNaasana. Senator Lausche has just stated it had an
addendum to it that included information that was not available to me.

The Cramsuayn. That was not used in the preparation of the staff
study and it was purely an addendum of things that had happened out-
side of the documents which came from the Pentagon.

Senator Lavscir. Let me sas’, Mr. Chairman, that the addendum
recited a number of contacts made by a staffman with persons un-
known. Now it was offered as an addendum supposedly having an in-
significant importance, but it is there. Three or four men Who were
supposed to have been in the Tonkin Bay are alleged to have said that
there were no missiles fired. Who are the men? How did they contact
them? :

Senator Coorrr. What weight was given to it? ; ;
Senator Mansrierp. Mr. Chairman, I apologize for the interruption
but Ihave to be up here on the floor.

The Ciramsan. I would hope the Secretary would be allowed to
proceed.

Mr. Secretary?

ESSENTIAL FPAGTS ARE THE SAME TODAY

Secretary McNasrara. Mr. Chairman, on August 6, 1964, I appeared
before this committee and testified concerning the attacks in the Ton-
kin Gulf on the destroyers U.S.S. Vaddow and U.S.S. Turner Joy,
and our response to those attacks. :

Over 3% years have passed since that time. However, even with the
advantage of hindshight, I find that the essential facts of the two

! attacks appear today as they did then, when they were fully explored
with this committee and other Members of Congress. 7 ;

Tho relovant events, and their significance, were the subject of inten-

; sive debate in the IIouse and Senate. Both my testimony and that of
other officials of the Government reported the evidence that established
conclusively the occurrence of these attacks on U.S. naval vessels op-

“erating in international waters. This evidence was available to us at
the time of the decision to make a carefully tailored response to the
