Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

leave the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. The refugee problem
was one of the most far reaching issues at the time...."

This condemnation of the DRV was fairly well substantiated by U.S. intel-
digence. A U.S. Intelligence Advisory Committee report of 1955 quotes
“usually reliable French intelligence reports" that after October 1954
three DRV regular infantry divisions, with local forces, were positioned
to block refugee movement. These, with "voluminous reports from Catholic
and other sources" indicated that the DRV, with armed forces, by barring
refugees from local transport, and through economic penalties, was pur-
suing a deliberate policy to prevent departures. Article 14(d) of the
Geneva Agreement obliged the DRV to assist the movement of would-be
refugees, but GVN officials reported receiving only 15,000 refugees
bearing official Viet Minh exit permits, including 8,300 who obtained
their papers under direct ICC supervision. U.S. and French naval offi-
cers have attested that thousands of northerners literally escaped to
their waiting ships. 51/

Again, no entirely dependable record exists. The ICC was
impeded in its observations and reporting by "narrow and complicated
administrative procedures in the areas in the control of the PAVN...." 52/

Of 119 investigations conducted by ICC mobile teams during the period,

34 dealt with violations of Article 14(d) alleged by first parties.

Beyond these, however, DRV authorities submitted to the ICC 320,000 peti-
tions from friends and relations of regroupees alleging that the French

had forced evacuation, and "thousands" of petitions were received from

French sources claiming that the DRV was obstructing those who wished to

move South. 53/ After a survey of 25,000 refugees in the South,:-the ICC
teams reported that “there was no foundation for the allegation that
thousands were victims of a systematic propaganda and many of them wished

to go back to the PAVN zone and none of the persons contacted by the

teams complained of forced evacuation or expressed a desire to return..:." 54/
Investigations in the North, however, did disclose that observance of a
Article 14(d) by the DRV was not uniformly satisfactory. The ICC majority
report notes that: 55/

"(ii) yveligious, social and local influences were used by
both sides either to persuade persons to change their
zone of residence or to dissuade them from exercising
the freedom of choice regarding the zone in which they
wanted to live. F

"(iii) the demand for permits and facilities under Article 1(d)
was the largest in the areas under the control of the
PAVN and it was generally met except in the areas of Nghe
An and Ha Tinh...."

The named areas were predominantly Catholic, and in the vil-

lage of Iuu My, in the province of Nghe An, the ICC team did report on a
clash between the civil populace and troops of the DRV in which at least

13 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
