Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

u
law

at
wo Mer.

Toe,
jos
fim ats

should seek to impress upon the French the necessity and desir-
ability of granting the Associated States ever-increasing re-
sponsibilities with respect to expansion of their economic,
political and military potentialities.

4. The U.S. Ambassador to Indochina has reported that the
French and Vietnamege are in general agreement on the necessity
of expanding the Vietnamese Army by some 57 light battalions
involving approximately 40,000 troops. The details on financing
and the degree of autonomy and military responsibility to be
allowed the Vietnamese Army have yet to be decided. It is en-
visazed that these additional battalions will provide the
Franco-Vietnamese forces with sufficient strength to undertake
effective offensive action in Vietminh-held territory. It is the
‘opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that this augmentation of
the Vietnamese Army is one of the most important and feasible
actions that can be talen to improve the situation in Indochina
and that United States support of the program should be under-
taken as necessary upon receipt of definite planning data from
the French.

5. The addition of another squadron of transport aircraft
would materially aid offensive operations by providing increased
troop-carrier and supply support capabilities.

6, The report of the ad hoc committee, formed in accordance
with your memorandum for the Joint Secretaries dated 19 January
1953 and which eoneide red the foregoing projects has a final
conclusion:

"Te final determination of the feasibility of imple-
mentation of the augmentation of Vietnamese forces cannot
be accomplished ent? receipt of a concrete proposal from
the French Government.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the French should be
encouraged to expedite the submission of such proposals in orler
that the United States may take steps to provide such aid as may
be deemed appropriate. In this connection the Joint Chiefs of
Staff indicated in a memorandum for you, dated 11 February

1953, that plans now under consideration to expand the Republic
of Korea Army may introduce some competing requirements, pri-
marily in non-critical items. However, certain ammunition
requirements could be both critical and competing.

7. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the augmentation
mentioned above should be energetically prosecuted and finan-
clally supported in order that the Franco-Vietnamese forces will
be able to undertake offensive operations during the 1953-54
dry season,

