Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

Vestiges of optimism still persisted in one degree or another in
some quarters. The earlier sense of confidence that had been established
was deep-rooted and not easily shaken. A retrospective evaluation of
the Vietnam situation ostensibly covering the period 1960 through 1963,
prepared by SACSA (General Krulak) is indicative. Although intended as
a broad overview (and so called), and though actually cut off as of some-
time in October 1963, it was forwarded in late October or November directly
to the Secretary of Defense. The SACSA report presented nothing less
than a glowing account of steady progress across the board in the mili-
tary situation. Significantly, it contained no hint that the rate of
progress possibly might have temporarily slowed somewhat in the second
half of 1963, despite the fact that it expressly treated events as late
as October. 55/ Yet by this time, other evaluations giving a quite
different picture were already asserting themselves. Near the close of
1963 the Director, DIA, reported to the Secretary of Defense that year-
end review and reassessment of the enemy situation revealed VC capabilities
had not been impaired over the past year. On the contrary, the VC had in
many regards improved in combat effectiveness and now enjoyed a generally
improved force posture for insurgency. 56/

Hopeful bias alone does not explain the endurance of past firmly
rooted optimism--such as the SACSA overview. The difference between
those who stressed the positive and those who saw decline was, in part,
the product of viewing the situation in greater or shorter time frames.
Those who applied a macroscopic perspective, believed--and not without
certain logic--that current unfavorable reports were, at worse, a temporary
lapse in the larger curve of progress over the years. Those who took spot
checks tended to be more impressed by the immediate situation, and at
this time, the immediate situation was critical. The feelings of this
latter group were buttressed when on 30 January another coup, this time
lJargely bloodless, ousted the ruling Minh government. It was a factional
power struggle in which one military group replaced another, this time
with General Khanh emerging as Premier. The latest development held
forth little promise of giving the country the political stability so
desperately needed in the midst of a war for survival. The event would
prove only symptomatic as part of a sequence of similar government up-
heavals that were to follow.

dn the U.S., the coincidence of domestic tragedy and patent instability
in Vietnam evoked a chorus urging a Iaos~like resolution of the Vietnam
conflict. In late August, 1963, President de Gaulle had issued a policy
statement on Vietnam which was subsequently officially interpreted as a
proposal for "independence and neutrality" for Vietnam--meaning eventual
U.S. withdrawal. In the aftermath of the assassinations, speculation turned
increasingly to this solution. For example, Senator Mansfield wrote to
President Johnson to propose a division of Vietnam between the GVN and the
Viet Cong, coupled with a U.S. withdrawal. In early January, 1964, Secre-
tary McNemara furnished the President the following counters to Senator
Mansfield's arguments:

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
