Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The effects in Asia generally would depend heavily on
the circumstances in which South Vietnam was lost and on
whether the loss did in fact greatly weaken or lead to the
early loss of other areas in Southeast Asia. WNationeal
China..., South Korea, and the Philippines would need
maximum reassurance. While Japan's faith in our military
posture and determination might not be shaken, the growing
feeling that Commmist China must somehow be lived with
might well be accentuated. India and Ivan appear to be the
Asian problem cases outside the Far East. A U.S. defeat
could lead to serious repercussions in these countries.
There is a great deal we could still do to reassure these
countries, but the picture of a defense line clearly breached
could have serious effects and could easily, over time, tend
to unravel the whole Pacific and South Asian defense struc-~
tures.” 52/

The consequences for Southeast Asia of Communist control in
South Vietnam were seen as highly differentiated and by no means auto-~
matic. The "gomino theory" was viewed as "over-simplified. The
Working Group felt that i+ might apply "if, but only if, Communist
Chine...entered Southeast Asia in force and/or the United States ves
forced out of South Vietnam, in circumstances of military defeat.
Nevertheless the Broup judged that “almost immediately, Laos would
become extremely hard to hold and Cambodia would be "bending sharply
to the Commmist side." ‘These developments were seen as placing great
pressure on Thailand and encouraging Indonesia to increase its pressure
on Malaysia. Thailend, it was noted, had “an historic tendency re make
‘peace’ with the side that seems to be winning," and Malaysia's "already
serious Malay-Chinese problem" was cited. The Working Group concluded:

"We could do more in Thailand and with the British in
Malaysia to reinforce the defense of these countries, the
initial shock wave would be great..."

This assessment wes quite close to that made in the 8 November draft in
which Bundy hed gone on to point out that even if we succeeded in over-~
coming the shock wave in Thailand and Malaysia, “the struggle would be

uphill for a long time to come." But in neither case was much credence
placed in the domino theory. 53/

It should be noted that Admiral Mustin and the JCS did not agree
with this assessment. The Admiral commented that the JCS believed the
so-called domino theory "to be the most realistic estimate for Cambodia
end Thailand, probably Burma, possibly Malaysia." In the context of
late 1964, these nations were expected to collapse "plainly and simply
as the corollary to our withdrawal." 54/ Accordingly, a specific no-
tation of the differing viewpoint of the JCS was placed in the Working
Group's finel report. 55/

17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
