Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

McNamara returned to the Pentagon to inform the Chiefs that, while
these operations had not been vetoed, they were not yet authorized. 85/

The President had authorized the extension of armed
reconnaissance into the northeast quadrant and strikes on 4 of the 5
bridges recommended by McNamara but deferred any decision on the crucial

- portion, the strikes against the 5th bridge, the cement plant, the radar,

and above all the 7 POL targets. The JCS execution message for ROLLING
THUNDER 50, which was sent out on 1 April, directed implementation of what
had been approved. In addition, it ordered CINCPAC to "plan for and be
prepared to execute when directed attacks during April" against the 5th
bridge, the cement plant, the radar, and the 7 POL sites. 86/ A pen-
cilled notation by Secretary McNamara with reference to these targets also
mentions April: "Defer...until specifically authorized but develop specific
plans to carry out in April." 87/

C. April and May -- Delay and Deliberation

1. Reasons to Wait

Although the President's reasons for postponing the POL
decision are not known, and although the initial postponement seemed
short, a matter of weeks, it is evident from the indirect evidence avail-
able that the proposal to strike the POL targets ran into stiffening
opposition within the Administration, presumably at State but perhaps in
other quarters as well. Before the question was settled it had assumed
the proportions of a strategic issue, fraught with military danger and
political risk, requiring thorough examination and careful appraisal,
difficult to come to grips with and hotly contended. The question remained
on the agenda of senior officials for close to three months, repeatedly
brought up for discussion and repeatedly set aside inconclusively. Before
it was resolved a crisis atmosphere was generated, requiring the continuing
personal attention of all the principals.

There can be little doubt that the POL proposal instigated
a major policy dispute. The explanation seems to be two-fold. One,
those who saw the bombing program, whatever its merits, as seriously
risking war with China or the USSR, decided to seize the occasion as
perhaps the last occasion to establish a firebreak against expanding the
pombing to the "flash points." Two, those who saw the bombing program
as incurring severe political penalties saw this as the last position

_ up to which those penalties were acceptable and beyond which they were

not. Both points no doubt merged into a single position. Both turned
the POL question into an argument over breaching the Hanoi/Haiphong
sanctuaries in any major way.

90 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
