Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On the U.S, side, where his suggestions had the force of orders,
General Westmoreland took one step to integrate the U.S. combat and
advisory functions. The Commanding General, III Merine Amphibious
Force, the senior U.S. officer in the area, was designated on 7 August
as the Senior Advisor to the ARVN I CT% Commander. The former U.S.
Senior Advisor became the Deputy Senior Advisor under CG, ITI MAT,
although no further integration of the advisory structure into the
U.S. chain of command was attempted. This pattern was soon extended
to the other two Corps areas where major U.S. units were operating.

The latter changes were made at the insistence of the ARVN Corps
Commanders who felt that they would suffer a loss of prestige if they
were "advised" by anyone other than the senior U.S. officer in the

zone. ‘Thus, on 21 October, the commander of Ha, Field Force, Vietnam
(FFORCEV), with operatione.. control of all U.S. units in II Corps,

was also named II Corps Senior Advisor. On 1 December, CG, 1st Infantry
Division was named III Corps Senior Advisor, following the pattern
already established. Wo such arrangement was made, however, in IV Corps
since the U.S. had no major units deployed there. 18/ later, when
U.S. force deployments had led to the establishment of another FFORCEV
headquarters, each ARVN Corps Commander was advised by a U.S. Lieutenant
General with equivalent U.S, responsibilities and a U.S. general officer
was appointed Senior Advisor in the Delta area, which had no U.S. combat
maneuver units.

LEVERAGE: THE HIDDEN ISSUE

It is relevant to ask why COMUSMACV (backed up without exception
by the Ambassador and CINCPAC) uniformly opposed integrative measures
designed to provide that which was and is almost an article of faith
in the military profession--unity of command. U.S. troops in both
World Wars and in Korea had fought under at least nominal command unity.
There had been reservations for national integrity, to be sure, but the
principle of unified command was both established and generally accepted.
Why then did the U.S. military commander in Vietnam recommend against
its adoption?

The answer to this question is not to be found by @n examination of
military factors. The issue, rather, was a political one, as CINCPAC's
message quoted above makes clear. The U.S, military leaders feared the
exacerbations of US-SVN differences which they thought would accompany
an overt Americanization of the war. They wished to increase U.S, influ-
ence in the conduct of the war but only as a result of persuasion and
example. They tended to eschew the use of leverage. A unified command
arrangement would have provided--assuming that a U.S, officer would have
been the overall commander~-an open and obyious means by which to
exercise leverage. The U.S. leaders in Saigon rejected its adoption
for this reason.

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
