Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

beyond this level with Hanoi and Peiping, if there is a Communist counter-
action. We and the GYN should also be prepared for a spurt of VC terror-
ism, especially in urban areas, that would dwarf anything yet experienced.
These are the risks of any action. They should be carefully reviewed --
but we believe them to be acceptable.

"9. We are convinced that the political values of reprisal require
a continuous operation. Episodic responses geared on a one-for-one basis
to "spectacular" outrages would lack the persuasive force of sustained
pressure. More important still, they would leave it open to the Communists
to avoid reprisals entirely by giving up only a small element of their
own progrem. The Gulf of Tonkin affair produced a sharp upturn in morale
in South Vietnam. When it remained an isolated episode, however, there
was a severe relapse. It is the great merit of the proposed scheme that
to stop it the Communists would have to stop enough of their activity in
the South to permit the nrobable success of a determined pacification
effort.

"III. Expected Effect of Sustained Reprisal Policy ©

"1. We emphasize that our primary target in advocating a reprisal
policy is the improvement of the situation in South Vietnem. Action
against the North is usually urged as a means of affecting the will of
Hanoi to direct and support the VC. We consider this an important but
longer-range purpose. The immediate and critical targets are in the
South -- in the minds of the South Vietnamese and in the minds of the
Viet Cong cadres.

"2. Predictions of the effect of any given course of action upon
the states of mind of people are difficult. It seems very clear that
if the United States and the Government of Vietnam join in a policy of
reprisal, there will be a sharp immediate increase in optimism in the
South, among nearly all articulate groups. The Mission believes and our
own conversations confirm -- that in all sectors of Vietnamese opinion
there is a strong belief that the United States could do much more if it
would, and that they are suspicious of our failure to use more of our ~
obviously enormous power. At least in the short run, the reaction to
reprisal policy would be very favorable.

"32. (his favorabl reaction should offer opportunity for increased
American influence in pressing for a more effective. government -- at
least in the short run. Joint reprisals would imply military planning
in which the American role would necessarily be controlling, and this
new relation should add to our bargaining power in other military efforts
-- and conceivably on a wider vlane as well if a more stable government
is formed. We have the whip hand in reprisals as we do not in other

fields.
"h, The Vietnamese increase in hope could well increase the readi-

ness Of Vietnamese factions themselves to join together in forming a
more effective government.

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
