Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

recourse, and that to maintain leadership of the nationalist movement
in South Vietnam they had to make the Viet Minh the most unbending foe
of compromise with the French.

The situation in all of Vietnam at the end of the war was confused--
neither the French, nor the Viet Minh, nor any other group exercised
clear authority. While the Viet Minh was far and away the single most
powerful Vietnamese organization, and while it claimed dominion over all
Vietnam, its authority was challenged in the North by the Chinese and in
the South by the British. The French position was patently more tenuous
than that of the Viet Minh until 9 October 1945. On that date, France
and the UK concluded an agreement whereby the British formally recognized
French civil administration in Indochina and ceded its occupation rights
to France south of the 16th parallel. This ceding of authority in the
South did not, as a practical matter, ensure French rule. With only
35,000 French soldiers in South Vietnam, the Viet Minh and other parties
were well able to contest the French.

Viet Minh authority in Annam and Tonkin was less ambiguous, but by
no means unchallenged. In the North, the salient political fact of life
for the Viet Minh was the presence of the Chinese Nationalist Army of
Occupation numbering 50,000 men. Through this presence, the Chinese were
able to force the Viet Minh to accommodate Chinese~Viet Nationalists
within the DRV and to defer to Chinese policy in other respects. The
resultant situation in North Vietnam in the autumn of 1945 is depicted
in the map on page B-41.

The Viet Minh had to go further still in accommodating the wishes
of the Chinese. In setting up the DRV government of 2 September 1945,
pro-Chinese, non-Viet Minh politicians were included, and the ICP took
only 6 of 16 cabinet posts. On 11 November 1945, the Viet Minh leader-
ship went even further, and formally dissolved the ICP in the interest
of avoiding "misunderstandings." Even this, however, was not sufficient.
Compelled by opposition demands, Ho agreed to schedule national elections,
for January of 1946. The results of these elections were arranged before-
hand with the major opposition parties, and the Assembly thus "elected"
met on 2 March 1946. This Assembly approved a new DRV government, with
the ICP holding only 2 of 12 cabinet posts. :

By then, France was ready to pose a stronger challenge. French
reinforcements had arrived in Indochina, so that Paris could contemplate
operations in North Vietnam as well as in Cochinchina. In early 19h6,
the Chinese turned over their occupation rights in the North to France.
Faced with increased French military power and Chinese withdrawal, and
denied succor from abroad, Ho decided that he had no recourse save to
negotiate with the French. On 6 March 1946, Ho signed an Accord with
the French providing for French re-entry into Vietnam for five years in
return for recognizing the DRV as a free state within the French union.

B=5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
