| jo5

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

abandoned, however, after the four-month trial period due to the strong
opposition of the GVN Minister for RD, General Thang, who contended that
such funds were undermining the legitimate efforts of his organization

to meet urgent province needs; it would encourage Vietnamese dependence

on the U.S. 152/

But USOM did use successfully a form of direct, selective leverage
in the late summer of 1965. The Province Chief of Binh Tuy Province,
It Colonel Chi, was accused of misusing some $250,000 in AID funds.
When USOM pressure on the GVN for his removal produced no results, aid to
the province was suspended on 23 September, @nd USOM field personnel were
withdrawn. In spite of Chi's friendship with the Defense Minister and
Deputy Premier, General Co, Premier Ky removed him six weeks later.
Aid to the province then resumed, but Ambassador Lodge made it clear to
the Mission Council that he disapproved of the action and did not want
it repeated (particularly the press coverage). 153/

As already indicated, both Ambassadors Taylor (after his near-
disastrous experience in December 1964) and Lodge preferred not to force
the GVN or attempt to use high-level pressure to reach solutions we
felt necessary. The fragility of the political arrangements in Saigon
at any point in time seemed to dictate against any U.S, action that
might precipitate coups or disruption from elements even less disposed to
be cooperative than the current group, whoever they might be. In this
view, the successive Ambassadors were strongly supported by the State
Department. Thus, while we resented the Ky coup in June, we did nothing
to exacerhate our delicate relations with Ky. In July, during Secretary
McNemare's visit, the GVN requested a devaluation of the pilaster and a
hefty increase in aid. 154/ Rather than use the request as an oppor-
tunity to press the GVN for action on matters of U.S. concern, Ambassador
Taylor preferred to restrict our counter-demands in the interest of quick
agreement:

We would avoid giving the impression of asking for new
agreements or imposing conditions for our increase AID....
We do not want to raise conditions in terms likely to be
rejected or to require prolonged debate. 155/

Consequently, agreement was reached between the two governments on
28 July, providing only for "joint discussions to precede policy
decisions...for control of inflation," and scarcely mentioning GVN
obligations. 156/

McNAMARA'S MINORITY POSITION ON LEVERAGE
The only consistent supporter of increasing and exercising U.S.
leverage with the GVN during 1965 was Secretary McNamara. As previously

noted, he was one of the principal proponents of the joint command idea
and @ supporter of the encadrement proposals. In April, the Defense

65 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
