Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In addition, the Joint Chiefs of Staff indicated that an updated
assessment of U.S, military posture worldwide pertaining to additional
problems for U.S, military capabilities, to include specific recommenda-
tions for required improvement, would be reported in the near future.

This request was overtaken, as we shall see, by subsequent require-
ments submitted by COMUSMACY.

2. The Troop Request

Although the new Secretary of Defense, Clark Clifford, was formally
sworn into office by the President on 1 March, his work had begun many days
before.

In order to ascertain the situation in SVN and to determine subsequent
‘MACV force requirements, General Harle Wheeler, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, had been sent by the President to Saigon on 23 February. His report
was presented to the President on 27 February 1968. 11/ On the basis of this
report, and the recommendations it contained, the President ordered the initi-
ation of a complete and searching reassessment of the entire U.S. strategy
and commitment in South Vietnam. The Secretary of Defense-designate, Mr.
Clifford, was directed to conduct this review, aided by other members of the
Cabinet.

In his report, General Wheeler summarized the situation in Vietnam
as follows:

- The enemy failed to achieve his initial objective but
is continuing his effort. Although many of his units were
badly hurt, the judgment is that he has the will and the
capability to continue.

- Enemy losses have been heavy; he has failed to achieve
his prime objectives of mass uprisings and capture of a large
number of the capital cities and towns. Morale in enemy units
which were badly manled or where the men were oversold the idea
of a decisive victory at TET probably has suffered severely,
However, with replacements, his indoctrination system would
seem capable of maintaining morale at a generally adequate level.
His determination appears to be unshaken.

- The enemy is operating with relative freedom in the
countryside, probably recruiting heavily and no doubt infil-
trating NVA units and personnel. His recovery is likely to be
rapid; his supplies are adequate; and he is trying to maintain
the momentum of his winter-spring offensive.

- The structure of the GVN held up but its effectiveness
has suffered.

12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
