Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnamese insurgency. The catalogue of operations submitted from
Saigon was intended to "canvince the DRV leadership that they should
cease to support insurgent activities in the RVN and Laos." Although,
in its forwarding letter, CINCPAC expressed doubt that all but a few

of the 2062 separate operations detailed by MACV-CAS could have that
kind of effect. In his view, only air attacks and a few other "punitive
or attritional" operations had any probability of success in achieving
the stated objectives. 11/

Rationale accompanying the interdepartmentel committee's program
recommendations, apparently accepted by higher authority, reflected
poth the coercive objectives and the reservations associated with the
earlier documents. Through its recommended program of “progressively
escalating pressure," the committee aimed "to inflict increasing punish-
ment upon North Vietnam and to create pressures, which may convince the
North Vietnamese leadership, in its own self-interest, to desist from
its aggressive policies." However, it expressed the caution that UE
is far from clear whether even the successful conduct of the operations...
would induce Hanoi's leaders to cease and desist." Still, after enumer-
ating a number of specific risks involved, it expressed the opinion that
they were "outweighed by the potential benefits of the actions [it]
recommended." In selecting these actions, the committee stated the
assumption that the DRV's current strategy was to support the Viet Cong
“at little cost’ to itself and at little risk to its industrial complex,
while counting for victory upon U.S. and South Vietnamese war weari-
ness..." It calculated:

"The importance attached by Hanoi's leaders to the
development of North Vietnam's economy suggests that pro-
gressive damage of its industrial projects, attrition of
its resources and dislocation of its economy might induce
a decision to call off its physical support of the Viet
Cong. This reaction might be intensified by the traditional
Vietnamese fear of Chinese domination, where expanded opera-
tions by our side could arouse concern in Hanoi over the
likelihood of direct Chinese Commmist intervention in
North Vietnamese affairs." 12/ :

Interagency commentary on the proposed operations provides additional
insight into the rationale and expectancies associated with the initial
i-month program. After reviewing 13 of these operations, the Board of
National Estimates concluded that "even if all were successful," they
would not achieve the aim of convincing the DRV to alter its policies.
The Board thought it possible that North Vietriamese leaders might view
these operations "as representing a significant increase in the vigor
of U.S. policy, potentially dangerous to them," but with a likely re-
action no more significant than a DRV effort to try to arouse greater
international pressure for a Geneva-type conference on Vietnam. In
addition, it cautioned that at least three operations proposed for the
initial period were too large and complex to be plausibly denied by the

TOP SECRET - Sensitive.
