ay

~ ground,.I have come to the following personal convictions:

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET o*, _

- MEMORANDUM FOR SECRETARY OF DEFENSE . a

DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

From: BrigGen Lansdale, OSO/OSD .

“Subj: © Vietnam

| As desired by you, I visited Vietnam 2-14 January 1961. After
twelve days of intensive looking and listening over some old familiar

THA

”
Pe,

2. 1961 promises to be a fateful year for Vietnam.

at ef tw ff

b. The Communist Viet Cong hope to win back Vietnam south
of the 17th Parallel this year, if at a]! possible, andare much turther
along towards accomplishing this objective than 1 had realized from _
reading the reports received in Washington.

;

/AQ

. ©. The free Vietnamese. and their government, probably wil!
be able to do no mere than postpone eventual defeat - - unless they
find a Vietnamese way of mobilizing their total resources and then
utilizing them with Spirit,

d. The U. S, team in Vietnam will be unabie to help the Viet-
namese with real effectiveness, unless the U.S. system of their
operation is changed sufficiently to free these Americans to do the
job that needs doing, and unless they do it with sensitive understanding
and wisdom,

e. If Free Vietnam is won by the Communists, the remainder
of Scutheast Asia will be easy pickings for our enemy, because -the
toughest local force on our side will be gone. A Communist victory
also would be a major blow to U, S. prestige and influence, not only

’ in Asia but throughout the world, since the world believes that Vietnam
has remained free only through U.S, help. Such a victory would tell
leaders of other governments that it doesn't pay to be a friend of the

U.S., and would be an even more marked lesson than Laos.

f, Vietnam can be kept free, but it will require a changed

U.S, attitude, plenty of hard work and patience, and a new spirit by _
the Vietnamese. The Viet Cong have been pushing too hard militarily a.
to get their roots down firmly and can be defeated by an inspired and :

‘determined effort. ze Be, RAE Ve vectas RE :
