Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. U.S. Neutrality in the Franco-Viet Minh War, 1946-199
a. Failures of Negotiated Settlement

The return of the French to Tonkin in March, 1946, created
an explosive situation. North Vietnam, a traditionally rice-deficit
area, had experienced an extraordinarily bad harvest in 1945. Severe
famine was scarcely helped by the concentration of armies in the Red
River Delta -- Vietnamese irregular forces, the most numerous belonging
to the Viet Minh; some 150,000 Chinese; and then the French Expedition-
ary Corps. The people were not only hungry, but politically restive;
the popular appetite for national independence had been thoroughly
whetted by the Viet Minh and the formation of the DRV. While feeling
against all foreign occupiers ran high, the French remained the primary
target of enmity. But the March 6 Accord deferred a reckoning, serving
to mollify extremists in Tonkin, and to dampen guerrilla operations in
South Vietnam. The accord in any event underwrote peaceful cooperation
between France and the DRV in North Vietnam for eight months.

Yet the March 6 accord constituted an admission of defeat
for Ho Chi Minh, because his policy had been directed toward inter-
nationalizing the Indochina problem. Ho made repeated overtures to
the United States, to the United Nations, and to China, the USSR, and
the U.K. 36/ His letters presented eloquent appeals for U.S. or U.N.
intervention in Vietnam on the grounds of the principles embodied in
the Atlantic Charter, the U.N. Charter, and on humanitarian grounds.
The last such to be forwarded to the U.S. prior to the Accord of
6 March 1946, is summarized in the following telegram from an American
diplomat in Hanoi, received in Washington 27 February 196;

"Ho Chi Minh handed me 2 letters addressed to President
of USA, China, Russia, and Britain identical copies of which
‘ were stated to have been forwarded to other governments named.
In 2 letters to Ho Chi Minh request [sic] USA as one of United
Nations to support idea of Annamese independence according to
Philippines ety example, to examine the case of the Annamese,

A-28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
