Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

future VC provocations similar to the attack on Bien Hoa. Coupled with
these military measures was to be a continuous declaratory policy com-
municating our willingness to negotiate on the basis of the Geneva accords.
It was recommended that successive actions woud be undertaken only after
waiting to discern Hanoi's reactions to previous actions, with the commit-
ment to later stages, such as initiation of air strikes against infiltration
targets across the 17th parallel, kept unspecific and dependent upon enemy
reactions.

The recommended program also included a Phase II, a continuous
program of progressively more serious air strikes possibly running from
two to six months. The attacks would at first be limited to infiltration
targets south of the 19th parallel, but would gradually work northward,
and could eventually encompass all major military-related targets, aerial
mining of ports, and a naval blockade, with the weight and tempo of the
action being adjusted to the situation as it developed. The approach would
be steady and deliberate, "progressively mounting in scope and intensity,"
with the U.S. retaining the option to proceed or not, escalate or not, or
quicken the pace or not, at any time. It was agreed, however, that this
second phase would not be considered for implementation until after the GVN
had demonstrated considerable stability and effectiveness.

As part of this "progressive squeeze," the working group recom-
mended that the U.S. be willing to pause to explore negotiated solutions,
should North Vietnam show any Signs of yielding, while maintaining a credible
threat of still further pressures. In the view of the working group, the
prospect of greater pressures to come was at least as important as any damage
actually inflicted, since the real target was the will of the North Viet-
namese government to continue the aggression in the South rather than its
capability to do so. Even if it retained the capability, North Vietnam
might’ elect to discontinue the aggression if it anticipated future costs
and risks greater than it had bargained for. uf

The JCS dissented from the working group's program on the grounds
that it did not clearly provide for the kinds and forms of military pressures
that might achieve U.S. objectives. They recommended instead a more accel-
erated program of intensive air strikes from the outset, along lines similar
to the actions they had urged in response to the Bien Hoa incident. Their
program was in consonance with the consistent JCS view that the way to exert
significant military pressure on North Vietnam was to bring to bear the
maximum practicable conventional military power in a short time.

The working group's proposals for a graduated approach were ham-
mered out in a series of policy conferences with Ambassador Taylor, who
had returned to Washington for this purpose at the end of November, and
were then presented to the President, who approved them conditionally on
1 December, without, however, setting a timetable or specifying precise
implementing actions. Allies had to be brought in line, and certain other

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
