Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ability to win in Vietnam and so indicate by our willingness
to rely on our military superiority if need be.

We must not be driven to premature discussions with the
DRV in our eagerness to find a solution to the Southeast
Asian problem. We should continue our military pressures,
meking (our) general objectives publicly known, while awaiting
some sign that the DRV is ready to negotiate towards achieve-
ment of those objectives...

«Finally, any political program which is designed to
formulate terms and procedures for reaching agreement on
cessation of a graduated military pressures program, will be
successful in proportion to the effectiveness of the military
pressures program itself. 58/

D. JCS Eight-Week Program

As these discussions continued, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, re-
sponding to a McNamara request of 8 February, sent to the Secretary of
Defense their recommendations 59/ for an initial program of military
actions against the DRV, extending over a period of eight weeks. In
accordance with McNamara's instructions, the program was to be confined
generally to targets along Route 7 and south of the 19th parallel, was
to employ both RVN and US forces, and was to be primarily a plan for air
strikes. Since it was so constrained, the JCS program does not fully
reflect the preferences of the Joint Chiefs. But it does reveal some-
thing of their thinking. The context in which the program-would be
undertaken is described as follows:

It is visualized that the initial overt air strikes of this
program will have been undertaken as a retaliation in response
to a provocative ect by Viet Cong or DRV forces against US or
RVN versonnel or installations. Successive overt operations to
provide sustained pressures and progressive destruction will be
continued on the plausible justification of further provocations,
which on the basis of recent past experience seem quite likely to
exist. As this program continues the realistic need for precise
event-association in this reprisal context will progressively
diminish. A wide range of activities are within the scope of
what may be stated to be provocations justifying reprisal.

The program called for two to four US-VNAF strikes per week, ini-
tially against targets along Route 7 south of the 19th parallel and near
the Laos border. Specifically, the program was conceived as follows:

The air attacks are scheduled for the first eight weeks at
the rate of four fixed targets a week...These initial targets
are located South of the 19th parallel with the exception of

yy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
