Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. Reunification

The goal of independence, because of American "imperialist"
support of the Diem government, thus became closely allied with, if
not inseparable from, that of reunification. But the DRV-Lao Dong leaders,
though widely acknowledged by all Vietnamese as heroes in the struggle for
independence, did not win similar acceptance as political spokesmen for
Cochinchina or Annam. Indeed, in all the modern history of Vietnam there
has been little real unity. Vietnam's record is, rather, one of violence
and political division. The conquest of Vietnam's current territory by
the Dai-Viet people of the Red River Delta (modern Tonkin) from the Chams
(of modern Annam) and Khmers (of modern Cochinchina) took place throughout
this millenium; the Mekong Delta did not come under Viet suzerainty until
ca 1780. In the meantime, civil war had fractioned the Dai-Viet: for 150
years (ca. 1640-1790) two high walls divided North from South Vietnam at
approximately the 17th parallel. A unified Vietnam came into being in
1802 under the Emperor Gia Long, but scarcely half a century elapsed before
the French conquests began. Under the French, Cochinchina, Annam, and
Tonkin were politically separate. 6)/

Present-day South Vietnam--by Viet Minh terms, Zone V (Annam)
and VI (Cochinchina or Nam Bo)--has always been of secondary importance
to the DRV. Ho Chi Minh's government can claim to have ruled Saigon, for
example, for only twenty days in September, 1945, and neither the DRV
government nor the Lao Dong Party ever commanded the strength in South
Vietnam that they did in Tonkin.. During the War of Resistance, 1945-195,
Zone V was less a theater of operations than a source of supplies and
recruits for the Viet Minh in Tonkin, and in both Zone V and Nam Bo the
Viet Minh practiced economy of force: only some 20% of organized Viet
Minh military units were in either at end 1953, even though the areas
supported nearly half of all Vietnam's population. Douglas Pike's study
of the Viet Cong led him to conclude that:

“The Cochin-Chinese regarded the resistance as Northern-
oriented: the center of fighting was in the North, the Vietminh
was strongest in the North, most of its leaders were Northerners,
and the French were most vulnerable in the Red River delta. The
South had less tradition of revolution, and inevitably a variety
of North-South policy conflicts arose. The communication channel
between Hanoi and Saigon was undependable, and liaison within the
South was difficult. The Northern leadership exhibited little
knowledge about southerners and even less patience with Southern
lethargy...." 65/

Even Ho Chi Minh was fairly explicit in assigning to South Vietnam a lesser
role in the revolution. For example, in his December, 1953, address to the
National Assembly on Land Reform, he was careful to point out that Zones V
and VI were not yet ripe for "progress toward socialism":

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
