Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Conferences

7. Declares general elections should be held in July 1956, with
mutual consultations to this end beginning on 20 July 1955.

8. Emphasizes the provision for free movement of civilians.
9. Cautions against reprisals.

10. Takes note of French agreement to withdraw troops from Cambodia,
Laos, and Vietnam "at the request of the government concerned.”

11. Takes note of French recognition of sovereignty of Cambodia,
Laos and Vietnam.

12. Agrees as a group to respect sovereignty of Cambodia, Laos,
Vietnam.

13. Agrees as a group to consult on questions presented by ICC.

2, Theoretical and Practical Interpretations Differ

a. The Election Provision Causes Controversy

The most serious controversy over the Accords has centered
on the election provisions (Article 7) of the Final Declaration. The
Declaration obviously envisaged elections to decide on a united Vietnam
to be held by July, 1956. Since "the military demarcation line is pro-
visional and should not in any way be interpreted as constituting a
political or territorial boundary,” the Geneva partition was a temporary,
expedient measure. The Conference intended then to permit the Vietnamese
people "to enjoy the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by democratic insti-
tutions,” and to devise a political settlement for their country "in the
near future." That settlement, the conferees declared, ought to come
about (1) "on the basis of respect for the principles of independence,
unity and territorial integrity” and (2) through "free general elections
py secret ballot...in July 1956, under the supervision of an international
commission composed of representatives of the Member States of the Inter-
national Supervisory Commission...Consultation will be held on this sub-
ject between the competent representative authorities of the two zones
from 20 July 1955 onwards."

b. Practical Views Very
The difficulty with the election provisions of the Final
Declaration, as with the Accords as a whole, relates not to their spirit,

put to their practicality. It remains a matter of conjecture whether the
members of the Convention genuinely thought that a political solution to

p-2h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
