Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

To erystallize more clearly in his readers' minds what
the options implied in intensity compared with oe current effort he
employed &@ numerical analogy:

To put a rough numerical index on these options, one
might start by saying that our general level in the past
year has been Force 4, with occasional temporary increases
to Force 5 (POL and the December Hanoi strikes). On such
@ rough numerical scale, our April program has put us at
Force 6 at present. Option A would raise this to 8 or 9
and keep it there, Option F would raise it to 7 and keep it
there, Option C would raise it to 7 and then drop it to 3,
Option D would lower it to 5 and keep it there, and Option E
would lower it to 3 and keep it there. 9h/

Bundy's analysis of the merits of the five options began
with the estimate that the likelihood of Chinese intervention in the war
was slight except in the case of option A, a probability he considered
a major argument against it. He did not expect any of the courses of
produce a direct Soviet intervention, but warned against the possibility
of Soviet pressures elsewhere if option A were selected. He underscored
a report from Ambassador Thompson that the Soviets had been greatly con-
eerned by the April bombing program and were currently closeted in delib-
erations on general policy direction. Bombing of any major new targets
in the immediate future would have an adverse effect on the Soviet leader-
ship and was discouraged by Bundy. Option A was singled out for further
condemnation based on the views of some China experts who argued that an
intensive bombing program might be just what Mao needed to restore internal
order in China and resolidify his control.

With respect to the effect of the bombing on North Vietnam,
Bundy cited the evidence that strikes against the sensitive military
targets were having only temporary and marginal positive benefits, and
they were extremely costly in planes and pilots lost. By restricting the
ponbing to South of the 20th parallel as McNaughton had suggested, the
military payoff might just be greater and the psychological strengthening
of North Vietnamese will and morale less. The main factor in Hanoi
attitudes, however, was the war in the South and neither a bombing halt
nor an intensive escalation would have a decisive impact on it one way
or the other. In Bundy's estimation Hanoi had dug in for at least
another six months, and possibly until after the US elections in 1968.
In the face of this the U.S. should try to project an image of steady,
even commitment without radical shifts. This approach seemed to Bundy
best suited to maximizing U.S, public support as well, since none of the
courses would really satisfy either the convinced "doves" or the unflinching
"hawks." The bombing had long since ceased to have much effect on South

39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
