Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Included in the MACV assessment was the opinion that military effort
could not succeed in the absence of effective political leadership. A
special CIA report, forwarded to Secretary McNamara at about the same time
made the opposite point: military victories were needed to nourish the
popular attitudes conducive to political stability. Assistant Secretary of
State Roger Hilsman -- who would shortly leave office after his views were
rejected -- stressed the need for physical security in the rural areas and
the adoption of counterguerrila tactics as the preconditions to success,
These interesting reversals of nominal functional preferences indicate that
there was at least a sufficiently broad awareness within U.S. Officialdom
to permit a useful debate on U.S. actions which might deal more successfully
with this seamless web of political-military issues. Certainly the intel-
ligence picture was dark enough to prompt such a debate: the SNIE on short-
term prospects in Southeast Asia warned that "...South Vietnam has, at best,
an even chance of withstanding the insurgency menace during the next few
weeks or months."

The debate did begin, but in hobbles. The generally agreed necessity
to work through GVN and the felt imperative to strengthen GVN left the U.S.
in a position of weakness. It was at least as dependent on GVN leaders as
were the latter on U.S. support. Moreover, mid-1964 was not an auspicious
time for new departures in policy by a President who wished to portray
"moderate" alternatives to his opponent's "radical" proposals. Nor was
any time prior to or immediately following the elections very appealing for
the same reason. Thus, while the debate in high official circles was very,
very different from the public debate it still reflected the existence of
the public debate.

LIMITED MEASURES FOR LIMITLESS ATMS

The first official internal pronouncement to reflect this difficult
policymaking milieu was NSAM 288, in March 1964. Approved verbatim from
the report of the most recent McNemara-Taylor visit to Vietnam, it was
virtually silent on one issue (U.S. troops) and minimal in the scale of
its recommendations at the same time that it stated U.S. objectives in
the most sweeping terms used up to that time. The U.S. objective was
stated to be an "independent, non-communist South Vietnam, free to accept
assistance as required to maintain its security" even though not necessarily
& member of the Western alliance. The importance of this objective was
underscored in a classic statement of the domino theory:

Unless we can achieve this objective in South Vietnem, almost
all of Southeast Asia will probably fall under Communist dominance
(all of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia), accommodate to Communism so
as to remove effective U.S. and anti-Communist influence (Burma),
or fall under the domination of forces not now explicitly Communist
but likely then to become so (Indonesia taking over Malaysia).
Thailand might hold for a period with our help, but would be under
grave pressure. Even the Philippines would become shaky, and the
threat to India to the west, Australia and New Zealand to the south,
and Taiwan, Korea, and Japan to the north and east would be
greatly increased.

rine TOP SECRET - Sensitive
