Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
r-
IV.B Evolution of the War (26 Vols.) 
f 
Counterinsurgency: The Kennedy Commitments, 1961-
1963 (5 Vols.) 
2. Strategic Hamlet Program, 1961-63 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR'::;'.£' - Sensitive 
I V. B. 2 . 
Strategic Hamle.!. Pr~gr~ 
_1~9_6_1 __ 
1.36] 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensi tive 
Sec ~ef Cant :N:v. X-_____________ _ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV.B.2. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEC~ST - Sensitive 
STRliTEGIC Hfl .. ELET PROGRAI-1 
A specific strategy by 1!lhich the U. S. and GVJ:l would attempt to end 
the insu~ gency in South Vietnarn had never been agreed upon at the time 
that the U.S, decided, l ate in 1961, to :i..ncrease materially its assist-
ance to GVW and to expand its advisory effort into one which vlOuld 
implement a "limited partnership." 
By early 1962, hOl·.rever, there "I-ras 
apparent consensus among the principal participants that the Strategic 
Hamlet Program, as it c arD.e to be called , represented the unifying concept 
for a strategy desi gned to pacif;y- rural Vietnam (the Viet Cong I s chosen 
battleground) and to develop support among the peasants for the central 
government. 
The Strategic Hamlet Program VT8.S much broader than the construction 
of strategic hamlets p er see 
It envisioned sequential phases which, 
beginn ing vri th clearing the insurgents from an area and protecting the 
rural populace, progressed through the establish.ment of GVW infrastructure 
and thence to the provision of services vThicn Hould lead the peasants to 
identify with their government . 
The strategic hamlet program "I,raS , in 
short , an attempt to translate the nevTly articulated theory of counter-
insu~gency into operational reality. 
The objectj.ve was polit:i.cal though 
the means to its realization "I'Jere a mixture of military, social, psycho·· 
logical, economic and political measu~es . 
'I'he effect of these sequential steps to pacification 'tTas to make it 
very difficult to make interTtlediate assessments of progress . 
One could 
not really be sure hO'N one was doing until one ·\'Tas done . 
Physical 
security by itself (the so-called 'Iclear and hold" initial step ) was a 
necessary condition for pacification, not a sufficient one. 
The establish-
ment of governmental functions was not, by itself, necessarily conducive 
to a successful effort; the quality of those functions and their respon-
siveness to locally felt needs "lvas critical. 
This inherent difficulty in 
assessi.ng progress did not simply mean that it VIas difficult to identify 
problems and to make improvements as one went along -- which it v!as. 
It 
also meant that it was quite possible to conclude that the program as a 
whole "lms progressing well (or badly) according to evidence relating only 
to a single phase or a part of a phase. 
A related problem arose from the uniaueness of this program in 
American experience -- pacification-by pr;xy. 
The theory of sequential 
i 
TOP SF.CRBT - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensi t i ve 
phases could be variously interpreted. 
This is not the problem of the 
three blind men describing the elephant; it is the probl em of men vIi th 
different perspectives each moul ding his olm conception of a proper 
body to the same ske leton. If the final product vTere to have some sem-
blance of coherence and mutual satisfaction it \\Tas necessary that the 
shapers came to agreement on substa.nce and operational procedure, not 
just that they agree on the proper skeleton upon which to work . 
The problem "lith the apparent consensus 
hich emerged early in 1962 
was that t he principal participants did view it with different perspec-
tives and expectations. 
On the U.S. side, military advisors had a set 
of preferences which affected their approach to the Strategic Ha...11l1et 
Program. 
They wanted to make RVNAF more mobile , more aggressive, and 
bett ~r orga.nized to take the offensive against the Viet Cong o They vrere , 
consequently, extremely l eery of proposals which might l ead it to be tied 
dOlm in strategic defenses ("holding" after liclearing" had been completed) 
or diverted too much to military civic action undertakings . 
The American political leadership , insofar as a generalizat ion may 
be attempted, may be said to have been most concerned with the later 
phases of the program .. . - those in which GVH services vTere provided, 
local governments established, and the economy bolstered. 
Military 
clearing operations were , to them, a distasteful, expensive, but neces-
sary precondition to the really critical and important phases of the 
effort. 
Both of these U.S. groups had perspect i ves different from those of 
the Diem administration. 
In the U.S . view the i nsurgents were onl y one 
of Diem I s enemies ; he himself vTaS the other. 
I n this view the p rocess of 
pacification coul d proceed successfully only if Diem reformed his OvlD 
government . 
It was precisely to achieve these goals simul taneously that 
the U. S. agreed to enter a !!limited partnership!! with GVF in the cOUllter-
insurgent effort. 
The strategic Hrunlet Program became the operat ional 
symbol of this effort . 
President Diem -., unsurpris i ngly -- had a very different viev! . 
His 
need, as he saw it, was to get the U. S. committed to South Vietnam (and 
to his administration) 'without surrendering his i ndependence . 
He knew 
that his nation vTOuld f all without U. S. support; he feared that his 
government ,wuld fall i f he either appeared to toady to U. S. vrishes or 
allowed any single group too much potential power -- p articularly coer-
cive povTer. 
The Strategic Hamlet Program offered a vehi cle by vrhich E~ 
could direct the counterinsurgent effort as he thought it should be 
directed and 1'Tithout giving up either his prerogatives to the U. S or his 
mantle to his restle s s generals . 
The progra~, i n the form of a plan for pacification of the Delta, 
)Vas formally proposed to Diem in November 1961 by R. G. K. Thompson, 
head of the ne.vly arrived British Adv isory Mi ssion. 
U. S. military 
ii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
advisors favored at that time an ARV":{ penetration of the VC redoubt in 
Hal' Zone D prior to any opere,tions aimed specifically at pacification. 
But UoS. political desires to start 
some lo cal operation which could 
achieve concrete gains combined vrith Die..rn ' s preference for a pacifica-
tion effort in an area of strategic importance led to the initial effort 
i n Harch 1962, 1T0pers,tion SmmISE, II in Binh Duong Province north of 
Saigon. 
This was a heavily VC-infiltrated area rather than one of 
minimal penetration, as Thompson had urged. 
But planning .. - as distinct 
from operations -- continued on the Delta plan and strategic hamlets were 
constructed in a variegated, uncoordinated pattern throughout the spring 
I 
and early summer. 
The U. S. had little or no i nfluence over these activi-
ties; the primary impetus vms traceable directly to the President's 
brother and political counsellor, Lgo Dinh ?lhu. 
'In August 1962, GVN produced its long aI>Jaited national pacification 
pleD with four priority areas and specified priori ties vri thin each area. 
At the same time, however, it indicated that over 2,500 strategic hamlets 
had already been completed and that vlork was already undenvay on more 
than 2 ,500 more. 
Although it viaS not until October 1962, that GVS 
explicitly annou.nced the strategic Haml et Program to be the unifying 
concept of its pacification and counterinsurgent effort it 'tTaS clear 
earlier that the program had assumed this central position. 
Three important implications of this early progress (or , more pre-
cisely, reported progress ) are also clee,r in retros:pect. 
These impli-
cations seem not to have impressed themselves acutely upon U. S. observers 
at the time . 
First, the program viaS truly one of GVH initiative rather 
than one embodying priorities and time phasing recommend ed by the U. S. 
Diem was running -.;dth his ovm ball in programmatic terms, no matter viho 
articulated the theory of the approach. 
The geographic dispersion of 
hamlets already reported to be completed indicated that there was, in 
f act , a conscious effort to implement this phase almost simultaneously 
throughout the entire nation r ather than to build slowly as Di em ' s 
foreign advisors (both U. S. and British) recommended. 
Finally, the physical aspects of Die..:m ' s program 'I>Jere s imilar if not 
identi cal to earlier population resettlement and control efforts prac-
ticed by the French and by Diem. 
The l ong history of these efforts was 
marked by consistency in results as well as i n techniques: 
all fail ed 
dismally because they ran i nto resentment i f not active resistance on 
the part of the peasants at whose control and safety, t hen loyalty, they 
were aimed. 
U.S . desires to begin an effective process of paci fication 
had fastened onto security as a necessary precondition and slighted the 
histori c record of rural resistance to resettlement . 
President Di em and 
his brother, for their part , had decided to emphasize control of the 
rural population as the precondition to vTinning loyalty. 
The record is 
i nconclusive 'I'lith respect to their v:eighing the record of the past but 
it appears that they, too, paid it scant attention . 
Thus the early 
operational efforts indicated a danger of peasant resist ance , on one hand, 
iii 
TOP SECR!.IT - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECHET - Sensitive 
and of divergent approaches between, in the i nitia,l steps, the U.S . 
(focused on security measures) and Diem (concerned more vlith control 
measures). 
Since the physical actions to achieve security and those 
to impose control are in many respects the same, there was generated 
yet another area in vlhich assessments of progress 'Ivould be inconclus ive 
and difficult to maJ~e. 
U.S. attention, once an apparent consensus had been forged con-
centrated on program management efforts in t iro categories: to convince 
GVN to proceed at a more measured, coherent pace vlith a qualitative 
improvement in the physical construction of strategic hamlets; and to 
schedule materi al assistance (fortifica.tion materials, etc.) and train-
ing for local defense forces to match the rate of desired hamlet con-
struction . 
U.S. assessments, at the same time, concentrated on the physical 
aspects of the program and on VC activity in areas 'I-There strategic 
hamlets had been constructed. 
Assessments tended to be favorable from 
a security (or control) viewpoint and uneven with respect to political 
development. 
The general conclusion was almost abmys one of cautious 
optimism when security (control) vms emphasized, one of hopeful pessi-
mism vThen political follow-up vIas stressed. 
The impression in Hashing·, 
ton vms typically slanted tOl-lard the more optimistic appraisals i f for 
no other reason than that hamlet construction and security arrangements 
'\ITere the first chronological steps in the long process to pacification. 
Ha.s it not, after all, "progress" to have moved from doing nothing to 
doing something even though the something was being done imperfectly? 
These U.S. assessments changed only marginally throughout the life 
of the program. 
By the time , in 1963, that the hopeful pessimist voices 
were clearer, it 'Has also much clearer t hat the Ngo brothers had made 
the Strategic Hamlet Program i nto one closely identified with their 
regime and with Diem ' s r ather esoterically phrased "personalist revolu-
t ion.
11 
Fears grew that Diem vTas attempting to impose loyalty from the 
top through control rather than to build it from the bottom by deeds. 
These fears 'I<Tere not limited to the Strategic Hamlet Program, hm<Tever ; 
they extended to urban as well as rural phases of South Vietnamese life 
and liere subsumed, as the Buddhist question moved to the fore , by the 
general issue of the viability of Diem' s regime . 
President Diem gre'I'T increasingl y umiilling to meet U. S. demands for 
r eform. 
He believed that to do so lvould cause his government to ' fail. 
U. S. observers held that. failure to do so would cause the nation, not 
just the government to fall. 
In the event the government fell and the 
nation ' s counterinsurgent program took a definite turn for the worse , 
but the nation did not fall. 
The Strategic Hamlet Program did. 
Closely 
i dentified Iii th the Ngo brothers , it vms alnl0st bound to suffer their 
fortunes; when they died it died, too. 
The nevr government of generals , 
presumably realizing the extent of peasant displeasure with resettlement 
and control measures, did nothing to save it. 
iv 
TOP SECRET 
Sensi tive 
. 
( 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A number of contributory reasons can be cited for the fail ure of the 
Strategic Hamlet Program. 
Over-expansion of construction and poor 
quality of defenses forms one category. 
This r eason concentrates only 
on the initial phase of the prograil1, however . 
~'lhile valid, it does little 
to explain why the entire program collapsed rather than only some hamlets 
v!ithin it. Rural antagonisms l'lhich identified the program with its 
sponsors in the central government are more suggestive of the basis for 
,-
t he complete collapse as Diem and Nhu departed the scene. 
The reasons 
why they departed are traceable in part to the di fferent expectations 
which combined in the apparent consensus at the program ' s beginning: to 
Diem's insistence on material assistance and independence, to U. S. willing-
ness to provide assistance only if its advice was heeded, and to the 
f ailure to resolve this question either by persuasion or l everage • . 
Having said this , it does not automatically follo't1 that the program 
would have succeeded even if Diem had met U.S. demands for change. 
To 
point to the causes of failure is one thing; to assume that changes of 
style v10uld have led to success is c;uite another . It may well be that 
the program was doomed from the out;et because of peasant resistance to 
measures yrhich changed the pattern of rural life .~ .. whether aimed at 
security or control. It might have been possible, on the other hand, for 
a well-executed program eventually to have achieved some measure of success. 
The early demise of the program does not permit a conclusive evaluation. 
·The weight of evidence suggests that the Strategic Hamlet Program was 
fatally fla'tred in its conception by the unintended consequence of alienat-
i ng many of those whose loyalty it aimed to 'tri n. 
This inconclusive finding, i n turn, suggests that the sequential 
phases embodied i n the doctrine of counterinsurgency may slight some 
very important problem areas. 
The evidence i s not sufficient f or an 
i ndictment ; still less i s one able to validate the counterinsurgent doc -
trine with reference to a program that failed. 
The only verdict that 
may be given at this time with respect to the~lidity of the doctrine is 
that used by Scots courts --
!I case not proved;" 
v 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
() 
I 
:xJ 
o 
Z o 
r o 
G> 
-< 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV.B.2. 
DATE 
1953-1959 
1959 
Late 1960 
Early 1961 
May 1961 
July 1961 
15 September 1961 
18 October 1961 
27 October 1961 
3 li[ovember 1961 
13 Fovember 1961 
15 November 1961 
22 November 1961 
15 December 1961 
2 February 1962 
3 February 1962 
TOP 
SECR~~"i' - Sensitive 
C}mO=~OLOGY 
OCC uPI{E~WE 
French and GVE early attempts at popul ation r esettle·· 
ment int o defended communities to create secure zones. 
Hural Community Development Centers (Agroville ) Pro-
gram initiated by GVf.L 
USMN~G Counterinsurgency Plan Vietnam completed. 
Agroville Program modified by construction of "Agro-
Harnlets II to meet peasant obj ections. 
Vice President Johnson I s visit to RVN . 
Staley Gro'up report on i ncreased economic aid and 
i ncrease in RV=~AF strength. 
USVlALiG Geographically Phased I,rational Level Operation 
Pla.n for Counterinsurgency. 
Genera.l Taylor arrives i n RVI~ ; President Diem declares 
nati onal emergency. 
R. G.K. Thompson submits to President Diem hi s 
Appreciation of Vietnam, .November 1961-April 1962. 
General Taylor submits his report and r ecommendations 
to President Kennedy. 
RoG. K. Thompson submits his draft plan for pacification 
of the Delta to Presi dent Di em. 
NSC drafts FSJ:":f 111. 
Cable to .JiJnbassador Nol ting, 
i nstructing hi.lll to meet ,,7ith Diem, l ays out pr oposed 
U. S. assistance and expected GVN effort . 
NSA.vl 111. 
First Secretary of Defense Conference , Honolul u. 
Roger Hilsman I S A strategic Concept for South Vietnam. 
Di em creates Inter-Mini sterial Committee on Strategic 
Hamlets. 
vi 
TOP SECRE'l' - Sensi ti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
DATE 
19 Harch 1962 
22 Narch 1962 
8 August 1962 
28 October 1962 
8 May 1962 
24 August 1963 
10 September 1963 
2 October 1963 
1 November 1963 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
OCCU.HREl'fCE 
Diem approves Thompson's "Delta Plan ll for execution. 
"Opera,tion SliHRISE tl corolUences in Binh Duong Province. 
GV~ National Strategic Hamlet Construction Plan. 
GYii devotes entire is sue of The Times of Vietnam to 
"The Year of the Strategic Hamlet . Ir 
Buddhist controversy erupts I'Then GVh troops fire on 
demonstrators i n HUe. 
State to Lodge, Message 24.], says that U, S. can no 
l onger tolerate Fhu ' s continuation in po''.'"er. 
General Krulak and Mr . Mendenhall give contradictory 
r eports on progress of war to I\"SC . 
Secretary McNamara reports to President Kennedy folloVl-
i ng his visit to RVH vlith General Tayl or. 
Coup d' etat by group of generals agai nst President Diem. 
vii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1. 
II. 
III. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
TIlli STRATEGIC ~lliET PROGRAM 
1961 - 1963 
TABLE OF CONTENTS AND OUTLINE 
INTRODUCTION ........................ .... ... ...... .. .... . 
1 
A. 
Scope and Terminology • eo •••••• ~ ••••• " " •••• 0 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
1 
B. 
.Arlt·ecedent·s ••• o. e ••••••••••••• II 0 ... eo. e •••••• 0....... 
1 
C. 
The Situation in Late 1961 .•••••.••..•. ••• •••• ••••• · 
3 
Tllli FORMUlATION OF TIlE STRATEGIC HAMLE~ PROGRAM ..••• •••• 
4 
A. 
U. S. -GVN Consultations •.•• " ••• 0 ............... 0 (I ...... 
4 
B. 
"Limited Partnership"... ............ ....... . ....... . 
7 
C. 
U.S.-Proposed National Plans •••••••••••••••••.•. ••·• 
7 
D. 
Initial Vietnamese Reactions... . .... .... .. .... ...... 
8 
E. 
Thompson ' s Counterproposals......................... 
10 
DEVELOPING A CONSENSUS AMONG THE ADVISORS ••.••.•..•..••• 
12 
A. 
Initial Reaction of UoS. Military Advisors.... ...... 
12 
B. 
Reactions in Washington .••.•..••..••• ~ •• ••• •• • . . • • •. 
13 
C. 
The Advisors Reach Agreement... ..................... 
14 
IV. . 
THE ADVISORS "SELL" DIEM (OR VICE-VERSA)................ 
15 
A. 
Wb.~re to Begin? •••••• • •• • •• •• 0 •••• e..... ........... 
15 
B. 
Concurrent GVJIif Acti vi ty. • • • • • • • • • • . • • • • • • • • • • • • . • . . . 
16 
C. 
Early Signs of GVN Expectations.............. . ...... 
17 
V. 
DIFFERING PERSPECTIVES AND EXPECTATIONS ••.•.•••••••••.•• 
18 
A. 
U.S. Military Advisors.............. ................ 
18 
B. 
U.S. Political Leadership........................... 
18 
a 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
VI. 
VII. 
VIII. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
President Diem ••••••••• 
e ••• ••••••
• ••• " • •••••••• 
The Central Issue .••••••• •• 
..0 ••• 0 ••••• •••••
• ••••• 
The Problem of Assessment . 
••••••• co.c ••••• •••• .. •• 
TEE NATION_AL PLAN EMERGES .••••.••.•••••••••• •••••••••••• 
A. 
Awareness of the Unifying Potential. •••••••••• •••••• 
B. 
tfOperat·ion Sunrise tf • • .. • • • • 
" •••••• " .0 • ••• e " CI •••••• 
C. 
Other Early Progra.rn.s ......... " .. c ...... " • " ••••••••• " " 
D. 
At Last -- A National Plal"l •••• 
• ••• " •••••••• 0 ••••• 
E. 
Effect on U. S. Perceptions ••••••.••••••••• •••••••••• 
F. 
Differences Begin to Emerge •••••••••••••• ••••••••••• 
TIrE P AT1-1 TO TEE EN])....... ..". .. . ....... " .... 0 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• •••• 
A. 
Diem t s Position Hardens •• .... .... .... . " .. " . " ... " ..... 
B. 
The Program Dies With the =Tgos . 
AN INCONCLUSIVE SUMMARy .•••••.••••••••••••• ••••••••••••• 
b 
Pa.ge 
19 
19 
20 
20 
20 
22 
22 
24 
24 
30 
35 
35 
35 
36 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
( 
IV. B.2 . 
I. 
Il\lTRODUCTION 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
THE STRATEGIC HAMLET PROGRAM, 1961-1963: 
AN APPRAISAL 
A. 
§cope and Terminology 
The Strategic Hamlet Program in the Republic of Vietnam (RVN) - -
articulated and carried forward from late 1961 until late 1963 -- has cre-
ated some confusion because of terminology . 
One source of confusion stems 
from the similarity betvTeen the physical aspects of the program and earlier 
fortified communities of one kind or another. 
Another source of confusion 
rises because of the loose usage of I1hamlet
l1 as compared to I1village
l1 and 
because of the practice of referring to these communities as I1 defended, 11 
I1secure ,11 and fortified
l1 as well as I1 strategic. 11 
But the greatest source 
of confusion lies in the distinction between a strategic hamJ_et }!er se 
and the strategic hamlet program. 
The hamlet is the smallest organized community in rural South Viet-
nam . 
Several hamlets (typically 3-5) comprise a village . 
During the stra-
tegic hamlet program both hamlets and villages were fortified . 
The distinc-
tion is unimportant for the present analysis , except as it bears on the 
defensibility of the com~lmity protected. 
The several adjectives coupled 
with hamlet or village were occasionally used to differentiate communities 
accord:i..ng to the extent of their defenses or the initial presumed loyalty 
of their inhabitants . 
More often no such distinction was made; the terms 
were used interchangeably . 
Where a distinction exists, the follo\<Ting ac-
count explains it . 
The phrase Strategic Hamlet Program when used to represent the pro-
gram is much broader than the phrase applied to the haml ets themselves . 
The program, as explained below, envisioned a process of pacification of 
which the construction of strategic hamlets was but part of one phase , al-
beit a very important part . 
This paper examines the program, not just 
t he hamlets . 
B. 
Antecedents 
Population relocation into defended villages was by no means a 
recent development in Southeast Asia. 
Parts of South Vietnam had experi-
ence with the physical aspects of fortified communities going back many 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
years . 
As the intellectual godfather of the Strategic H~mlet Program has 
put it, the concept's use as one of the measures to defeat communist insur-
gency " ... has only meant that the lessons of the past had to be relearn"; ." 2:.,/ 
The aruninistration of President Diem had relearned thFse lessons 
much earlier than late 1961. 
There I'Tas, in fact, no need to r.elearn them 
because they had never been forgotten . 
The French had made resettlement 
and the development of "secure zones" an important element in their effort 
near the end of the war with the Viet Minh. 
The government of newly-created 
South Vietnam, headed since 195~· by President Diem, had continued resettle-
ment schemes to accofimodate displaced persons, to control suspected rural 
populations, and to safeguard loyal peasants in the threatened areas . 
None of these efforts i nvolving resettlement had succeeded . 
Each had in-
spired antagonism among the peasants who were moved from their ancestral 
lands and away from family burial plots. 
Diem' s actions in late 1961 'were thus inescapably tied to earlier 
actions by proximity in time, place, and the personal experiences of many 
peasants . 
Chief among the earlier programs was that of the so-called 
Agrovilles or "Rural Community Develo"pment Centers," launched in 1959 · 
The Agrovilles, groupments of 300-500- families, were designed to afford the 
peasantry the social benefits of city life (schools and services), to in-
crease their physical security, and to control certain key locations by 
denying them to the communists.?J 
They were designed to improve simultane-
ously the security and well-being of their inhabitants and the government's 
control over the rual population and rural areas . 
The Agroville program was generally unsuccessful . 
The pea,sants 
had many complaints about it ranging from clumsy, dishonest administration 
to the physical hardship of being too far from their fields and the psy-
chological wrench of being separated from ancestral homes and burial plots . ;J 
By 1960, President Diem had slowed the program in response to peasant com-
plaints and the Viet Cong ' s ability to exploit this dissatisfaction . !!J 
The transition from Agrovilles to strategic ha.mlets in 1961 was 
marked by the so-called "Agro-hamlet" "lvhich attempted to meet some of the 
peasants ' objections : 
The smaller 100 family Agro-hamlet was located more 
closely to lands tilled by the occupants . 
Construction vms 
carried out at a slower pace filled to the peasant ' s plant-
ing and harvesting schedule ... By the end of 1961, the Agro-
hamlet had become the prototype of a vast civil defense 
scheme known as strategic hamlets, ~ Chien Luoc . 21 
It was inevitable, given this lineage , that the strategic hamlet program 
be regarded by the peasants as old wine in ne\'I"ly-labelled bottles . 
The 
successes and failures of the past were bound to condition its acceptance- -
and by l ate 1961 the Diem government "l8,S ha,ving more failures than successes . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
2 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C. 
The Situation i n Late 1961 
By late 1961, if not earlier , it had become clear in both Siagon 
and Washington that the yellow star of the Viet Cong \Vas in the ascendancy. 
Following the 1960 North Vietnamese announcement of the twin goals of oust-
ing President Diem and reunifying Vietnam under communist rule, the Viet 
Cong began sharply to i ncrease its guerrilla, subversive, and political 
warfare . §/ 
Viet Cong regular forces, nOl'T estimated to have grown to 
25,000, had been organized into larger formations and employed with increas-
ing fre~uency. The terrorist-guerrilla organization had grown to an esti-
mated 17,000 by November 1961. 11 
During the first half of 1961, terror-
i sts and guerrillas had assassinated over 500 local officials and civilians, 
kidnapped more than 1,000, and killed almost 1,500 RVNAJI'" personnel. §/ 
The VC continued to hold the ini tia ti ve in the 'countrys ide , controlling 
major portions of the populace and drawing an increasingly tight cinch 
around Saigon . 21 
The operative ~uestion was not whether the Diem govern-
ment as it was then moving could defeat the insurgents, but whether it could 
save itself . 
Much of this deterioration of the situation in RVN vTas attributable, 
in U. S. eyes, to the manner in which President Diem had organized his govern-
ment . 
The struggle -- vlhether viewed as one to gain loyalty or simply to 
assert control -- was focused in and around the villages and hamlets in the 
countryside. It was precis e ~·" in those areas that the bilineal GVN organi-
zation (ARVN and civilian province chiefs) most lacked the capability for 
concerted and cohesive action. 
The Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) 
was developing a potentially effective institutional framework under U.S. 
tutelage, but that effectiveness against the VC, Diem realized, could po-
tentially be transferred into effectiveness against himself. 
The abortive 
coup of late 1960 had made Diem even more reluctant than he had earlier 
been to permit power (especially coercive power) to be gathered into one 
set of hands other than his own. 
Still, the establishraent of an effective 
military chain of command which could operate where necessary in the country-
side remained the prime objective of U. S. military advisors . ~ 
A unitary chain of command had recently been ordered into effect 
within ARVN, but this had not solved the operational problems, for mili-
tary operations were inescapably conducted in areas under the control of 
an independent political organizati on with its own military forces and in-
fluence on operations of all kinds -- military, paramilitary, and civic 
action . 
The province chiefs, personally selected by President Diem and 
presumably loyal to him,controlled politically the territory in dispute 
with the VC and within which ARVN must operate . 
They also controlled terri-
torial forces comprising the Civil Guard (CG) and Self Defense Corps (SDC) . 
For President Diem' s purposes this bilineal organization offered 
an opportunity to counterbalance the pOvler (and coup potential) of the 
generals by the power of the province chiefs . It was a device for survival. 
But the natural by-product of this duality, in terms of the effectiveness 
of actions against the VC, was poor coordination and imperfect cooperation 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
3 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
in intelligence collection and production, in planning, and in operational 
execution in the countryside, where the ba ttles ~rere fought - - both the 
"battle for men's minds" and the more easily understood battles for con-
trol of the hamlets, villages, districts, and provinces . 
( 
The U.S. and GVN were agreed that in order to defeat the insurgency 
it was necessary that the rura.l populace identif'y with at lea.st the local 
representatives of the central government. 
They were agreed, too, that 
some measure of physical security must be provided the rural population 
if this end were to be achieved. 
Both agreed that the GVN must be the 
principal agent to carry out the actions which 1vould bring the insurgency 
to an end. 
The high level U. S. -GVN discussions held during President Kennedy ' s 
first year in office focused on wha.t the U. S. could provide GVN to assist 
the latter 's counterinsurgency efforts and on Ivhat GVN should do organi-
zationally to make its efforts more effective . 
A subsidiary and related 
discussion revolved around the U.S. advisory organization to parallel the 
GVN reorganization. 
The problem of how additional resources jn some im-
proved organizational framework were to be applied operationally was frag-
mented into many sub-issues ranging from securing the border to building 
social infrastructure. 
The story of the Strategic Hamlet Program, as it came to be called, 
is one in which an operatj.onal concept specif'ying a sequence of concrete 
steps was introduced by an articulate advocate, nominally accepted by all 
of the principal actors, and advanced to a position of apparent centrality 
in which it became the operational blueprint for ending the insurgency . 
But it is also the story of an apparent consensus built on differing, some-
times competin& expectations and of an effort which was, in retrospect , 
doomed by the failure to resolve in one context the problem it was designed 
to alleviate in another -- the .pr09lem of GVN stability.· 
II. 
THE FORMULATION OF THE STRATEGIC HAMLET PROGRAM 
A. 
U. S. - GVN Consultations 
Beginning in May 1961, the U.S . and GVN conducted a series of high 
l evel conferences to fashion r esponses to the insurgent challenge . 
The 
first. of these was the visit to Saigon by the Vice President , Lyndon B. 
Johnson. 
The Vice President ' s consultations were designed to reinforce 
the U. S. commitment to RVN and to improve the image of President Diem' s 
government . 
In a comm1.mique issued jointly in Saigon, it was agreed that the 
RVNAF was to be increased to 150, 000 men, that the U.S . would support the 
entire Civil Guard I'd th military assi stance funds, that Vietnamese and 
U. S. military specialists would be used to support village-level health 
and public works activities, a,nd that the two governments vTould "discuss 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
4· 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
new economic and social measures to be undertaken in rural areas to 
accompany the anti-guerrilla effort ... . "!Y 
These discussions implied 
that more GVN effort should be devoted to rural pacification and civic action 
and acknowledged that more regular military forces were needed, but they 
did little to clarify the relationships of these parts to the whole or to 
an overall scheme by which the process i.,rQuld develop. 
The Staley group, a joint economic and financial committee co-
cbaired by Dr . A. Eugene Staley, Stanford Research Institute, and Vu Q,uoc 
Tuc, GVN, followed much the same pattern . 
Meeting in Saigon in June 1961, 
the corrrmittee agreed that RVNAF strength should be increased to 200,000 
during CY 1962 and that U. S. funding should be provided to various emergency 
economic and social programs . § 
But the group did noghing to tie together 
the strands of what it recognized as the central problem: 
to achieve a 
simultaneous "breakthrough" on both the military-internal security front 
and the economic- social front. 13/ 
Its recormnendations "\-Tere restricted 
(in part , no doubt, because of its limited charter) to specific program 
increases and to a restatement of the dimensions of the problem . 
The devastation caused by the September monsoonal floods (320,000 
r efugees, 1,000 kilometers of road destroyed, 10 million acres of rice and 
other crops lost), combined with the losses attributable to increased insur-
gent 8.ctivity, led President Diem to declare a state of national emergency 
on 19 October 1961 . 
This declaration coincided with the visit to Southeast 
Asia (15 October - 3 November) of General Maxwell D. Taylor, heading a 
mission asked by President Kennedy to appraise the situation in South Viet-
nam. 
The President stated the scope of Taylor ' s mission in the broadest 
terms : 
While the military part of the problem is of great 
importance in South Viet-Nam, its political, social, and 
economic el ements are equally significant, and I shall ex-
pect your appraisal and your recormnendations to take full 
account of them. ~ 
I n his report to the President, General Taylor sketched out the 
nature and aims of the Viet Cong threat and assessed the strengths and 
weaknesses of the Diem government . 
He proposed a U.S . strategy for "turn-
i ng the tide and for assuming the offensive in Vietnam ." 15/ 
The report 
warrants summarizing in some detail, not because it outlined the main 
thrust of the pacification effort (it did not ), but because itr'epresents 
t he best document to portray the range of U. S. concerns at the time the 
U. S. was making a major comrnitment to South Vietnam and because it lays 
out the major el ements of the U. S. strategy of response . 
The Viet Cong, Taylor judged, vTere militarily powerful and becom-
i ng more powerful . 
But they were not yet ready to move to the third , 
climactic phase of I~ao ' s classic format for guerrill a warfare : 
The military stra.tegy being pursued is , evidently, to 
pi n down the ARVN on defensive missions ; to create a per-
vasive sense of insecurity and frustration by hit-and-run 
raids on self-defense corps and militia units , ambushing 
5 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the reserve forces if possible as they come up to defend; 
a,nd to dramatize the inability of the GVN to govern or to 
build, by the assassination of officials and the sabotage 
of public works . ~ 
The purpose of this military strategy, Taylor asserted, was apparently not 
to capture the nation by force. 
Rather, in concert with non-military means , 
it was to produce a political crisis which would topple the goverrnnent 
and bring to power a group willing to contemplate the unification of Viet-
nam on Hanoi I s terms. };]) 
It was in the U. S. interest, Taylor reasoned, to act vigorously --
with advice as i'Tell as aid -- in order to buy the necessary time for Vietnam 
to mobilize and to organize its real assets so that the Vietnamese them-
selves might "turn the tide" and assume the offensive . 18/ 
But U. S. aid 
and U. S. advice on where to use it were not enough . 
TheDiem Government 
i tself had to be reformed in order to permit it to mobilize the nation . 
Diem had, in Tayl or ' s assessment, allowed two vicious circles to develop 
which vitiated goverrnnent effectiveness . 
In the first of these circles 
poor military intelligence led to a defensive stance designed primarily to 
guard against attacks , which in turn meant that most of the military forces 
came under the control of the province chiefs whose responsibility it was 
to protect the populace and installations . 
This control by province chiefs 
meant that reserves could not , because of tangled lines of command and 
control, be moved and controlled quickly enough to be effective . 
The effect 
of high losses in unsuccessful defensive battles served further to dry up 
the basic sources of i.ntelligence . W 
The second vicious circle stemmed from Diem's instinctive attempts 
to centralize power in his own hands while fragmenting it beneath him . 
His excessive mistrLlst of mB,ny intellectuals and younger Vietnamese , i.n-
dividuals badly needed to give his administration vitality, served only 
to alienate them and led them to stand aside from constructive participation 
thereby further increasing Diem' s mistrust . ~ This administrative style 
"fed back, too, into the military equation and through it, created another 
potentially explosive political-military problem: 
The inability to mobilize intelligence effectively for 
operational purposes directly flows from this fact LDiem' s 
administrative practici7 as do the generally poor relations 
between the Province Chiefs and the military conwanders, 
the former being Diem I s r eliable agents , the latter a pmver 
base he fears. 
The consequent frustration of Diem I s mili-
tary commanders -- a frustration well-knoi'm to Diem and 
heightened by the November 1960 coup -- l eads him to ac-
tions which further complicate his problem; e . g ., his un-
willingness to del egate military operations clearly to his 
generals. 21/ 
General Taylor ' s recommended actions for the U. S. were designed 
to demonstrate U.S . commitment in order to strengthen Diem' s stand and , 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
6 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
simultaneously, to broaden U. S. participation in the hope of bringing 
about necessary reforms in Diem's regime. 
The President ' s emissary rejected 
the alternatives of a military takeover which would make the generals 
dominant in all fields . 
He rejected, too, the alternative of r eplacing 
Diem with a weaker figure l'lho l'lould be vlilling to delegate authority to 
both military and civil leaders . 22/ 
The first course l'lould emphasize 
the solution to only one set of problems while slighting others; the 
second would permit action, but not coordinated action . 
B 
"L;Ynl·ted Fa t 
" 
. ·.wu 
r nership 
In order to move in a coordinated way on the intermingled military, 
political, economic , and social problems facing South Vietnam, General 
Taylor reconunended that the U. S. initiate a "limited partnership" ,'lhich 
would stop short of direct U. S, action but would also, through persuasion 
at many levels judiciously mixed vlith U,S. leverage , " ... force the Viet-
namese to get their .house in order in one area after another. " ?J.! 
In-
creased material assistance from the U. S. would be accompanied l'li th increased 
U. S. participation at all l evels of government in which the American advisors 
must " ... as friends and partners -- not as arms-length advisors -- show 
them how the job might be done -- not tell them or do it for them ." If 
strongly motivated, tactful Americans were assigned primarily outside 
Saigon, thus avoiding the establishment of large headquarters not actually 
engaged in operational tasks, Taylor thought that this increased U. S. 
participation would not be "counter-productive" ; e .g ., lend substance to 
claims of U. S. imperialism and dominance of the Diem Government . ~ 
Thus, Taylor consciously opted for a U. S. course of action in which 
the major thrust of effort would be to i nduce Diem to do the things that 
the U. S. thought should be done : 
to dravl the disaffected into the national 
effort and to organize and equip so that effective action would be possible . 
General Taylor did not argue explicitly that success would follovl automatic-
ally if Diem' s practices could be r eformed and his operational capabilities 
upgraded, but he implied this outcome . 
The question of an overall strategy 
. to defeat the insurgency came very close to being regarded as a problem 
in the organization and management of resources . 
Since GVN had no national 
plan,efforts were concentrated on inducing them to produce one . 
There was 
much less concern about the substance of the non-existent GVN plan. It 
was almost as though there had to be something to endorse or to criticize 
before substantive issues could be treated as relevant . 
C. 
U.S.-Proposed National Plans 
This priority of business is r eflected in the U. S. ple,ns which 
were proposed to GVN for adoption by the latter. 
In l ate 1960 the U.S . 
Country Team in Saigon produced an agreed "Counterinsurgency Plan for 
Viet- Nam" (CIP). 
The plan was an attempt to specify roles and relation-
ships within GVN in the counterinsurgency effort, to persuade Diem to 
abandon his bilineal chain of conunand in favor of a single command line 
with integrated effort at all levels within the government, and to create 
the governmental machinery for coordinated national planning . ~ It 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
7 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
was recognized that these recommendations were not palatable to President 
Diem, but reorganization along the lines specified was regarded as essential 
to successful accomplisl1ment of the counterinsurgent effort. ~ 
. 
The CIP 1-laS an indictment of GVN failure to organize effectively 
and to produce coordinated nationa.l plans . ?:JJ 
It advanced no operational 
concepts for adoption by GVN. 
This obvious omission ,·TaS corrected in the 
"Geographically Phased National J.Jevel Operation Plan for Counterinsurgency" 
which MAAG Vietnam published on 15 September 1961. ?:§} 
Not only did this 
plan specify the areas of primary interest for pacification operations --
as its title indicates - - it also set forth a conceptual outline of the 
three sequential phases of actions 1-Thich must be undertaken . 
In the first, 
"preparatory phase, " the intelligence effort "ras to be concentrated in the 
priority target areas , surveys were to be made to pinpoint needed economic 
and political reforms , plans were to be drawn up, and military and politi-
cal cadres were to be trained for the specific objective area . ?!1I 
The 
second, or "military phase, " would be devoted to clearing the objective area 
with regular forces, then handing local security responsibility over to the 
Civil Guard (CG) and to establishing GVN presence. 30/ In the final , 
"security phase, " the Self Defense Corps (SDC) "lYOuldassmne the civil 
action-local security mission, the populace was to be "reoriented," politi-
cal control was to pass to civilian hands, and economic and social pro-
grams 'were to be initiated to consolidate government control. Military 
units would be withdrawn as security was achieved and the target area 
would be "secured" by the loyalty of its inhabitants -- a l oyalty attribu-
table to GVN!s successful responses to the felt needs of the inhabitants . ~ 
First priority in this plan (1962 operations) was to go to six 
provinces around Saigon and to the Kontum area. 
Second priority (1963 ) 
would be given to expansion southvrard into the Delta and southward in the 
Central Highlands from Kontum. 
Third priority (1964) would continue the 
spread of GVN control in the highlands and shift the emphasis in the south 
to the provinces north and east of Saigon . 
Before any of these priority 
actions were undertaken, however , it was proposed to conduct an ARVN sweep 
in War Zone D, in the jungles northeast of Saigon, to r educe the danger 
to the capital and to increase ARVN ! s self- confidence . 2 
(See Map 1.) 
The geographically phased plan compl emented the earlier CIP. 
Together , these two U. S. efforts constituted an outline blueprint for 
action . It is, of course, arguable that this was the best conceivable 
blueprint , but it was at least a comprehensive basi s for r efi nement --
for arguments for different priorities or a changed "series of events" 
in the process of pacification . 
D. 
Initial Vietnamese Reacti ons 
This is not h01-7 matters proceeded, in the event . 
Ambassador 
Durbrow, General McGarr, and others urged acceptance of the CIP upon 
President Diem, but with only partial success . ~ Diem stoutly resisted 
the adoption of a singl e , i ntegrated chain of operati onal cormnand , show'ed 
no enthusiasm for detail ed prior plamling, continued his practice of cen-
t ralized decision-making (sometimes tantamount to decision piegonholing), 
8 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
i. 
j 
I 
1 
j.' 
t I 
j 
I 
I 
[ 1 
t 
1 
I t 
J 
:1·,·· 
.. 
I 
! 
[. 
I t I r 
I 
i 
\ 
1 
It 
• . 
. -( 
' .. 
:. 
• r .. 
. . 
\. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
U.s. MAAG Geographically Phase'd Plan 
, .. 
-l" 
0\ 
'II -IAI LAN D ",\ 
" 
··· L ..-:.--' -
.- -
MAP 1 
9 
... 
. ' 
.. 
, , 
. 
' 
\ : 'l;~ 
". 
, , 
. j. 
t 
I 
t 
< 
! r. 
\'" 
-, 
, 
" 
- .. ----- -------- -----,. 
-,--------------------~------- ---...:---'------~ ~---
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEeRE~ - Sensitive 
and continued to playoff the provin:::8 chiefs against the generals . 
Some 
aspectp of the eIP were accepted, bu~ the basic organizational issues 
remained unresolved and the strategic approach QDresolved by default . 
The unsuccessful U.S . atter::."Jts to secure organizational reforms 
wi thin the Diem goverr1.1nent had asslJr::~d psychological pr:Lrnacy by the time 
of General Taylor ' s October 1961 mis3ion to Saigon . 
The Ameri.can posi-
tion ,'ras essentially that no operaticnal plan could succeed unless GVN 
were reorganized to permit-effective i.mplementation . It was reorganiza-
tion that Taylor emphasized, as deta~led above . 
But General Taylor did 
bring up the need for some coordinated operational plan i n his talks with 
President Diem . 
Diem's r esponse is :::escribed in a cable to Washington 
by Ambassador Nolting : 
Taylor several times stre3sed importance of overall 
plan -- military, politica.l, ecc::1omic, psychological, etc . 
for dealing with guerrillas. 
D~em tended avoid clear re-
sponse this suggestion but fine.=-ly indicated that he has 
a new strategic plan of his ovl::1 . 
Since it was not very clear 
in spite efforts to dra"T him 01:.~ Ivhat this plan is, Ta.ylor 
asked him to let us have a copy in vTri ting . W 
E. 
Thompson ' s CounterRroposals 
President Diem may have be e~'"l vlhistling in the dark about a new 
plan of his own . It is likely, howe-,cer, that he I'Tas already conversant 
with the ideas of a new high level 6.:::visor "Tho had been in Saigon for 
several weeks and whose .approach to prosecuting the war he would soon en-
dorse officially as his own . 
The ad-,-isor vTas RGK Thompson, a Bri tish civil 
servant who had come from the position of Permanent Secretary of Defense 
i n Malaya . 
Thompson ' s British Adviscry Mission VTas in Saigon in response 
to Diem ' s re~uest for experienced tt~rd country nationals to assist him 
in his counter insurgent operations . 
There had been some i nitial U.S. ob-
j ection to British "advice without r esponsibility," but fears had been 
temporarily alla.yed when it was agreed that Thompson ' s charter would be 
limited to civic action matters . 
Thompson provided Diem his initial "appreciation" (or , i n U. S. 
terminology, "estimate of the situation") in October 1961. 22.1 
His assess-
ment was well received by the Presic.ent , I'rho asked him to fol lov7 it up with 
a specific plan . 
Thompson ' s response , an outline plan for the pacifica-
tion of the Delta area, was given to the ~resident on 13 November . 
Thus , 
Thompson was in the process of articulating one potentiall y comprehensive 
strategic approach at the same time that the U. S. was deeply involved in 
fashioning a major new phase in U. S.-Gv}T rel ations in which major new U. S. 
aid would be tied to Diem' s acceptance of specified reforms and , inferentially, 
t o his willingness to pursue some agreed, coordinated strategy . 
Thompson ' s 
plan was, in short, a potential rival to the American-advanced plans repre -
sented by the CIP and the geographically phased IVlAAG plan of September 1961. 
TOP SECRET - Sensiti ve 
10 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In order to assess the similarities and differences between t:re 
U. S. plans and that advanced by the British Advisory Mission, it is neces-
sary to summarize Thompson ls argument and proposals. 
Like Taylor (with 
whom he talked and to whom he gave a copy of his initial "apprecj.ation" 
at the latter ls request), Thompson saw the VC objective to be one of politi-
cal denouement by combined military and political action rather than a mili-
t ary takeover of the entire nation . 
Like McGarr and the other U.S. military 
advisors, he recognized the probability and danger of VC attempts to con-
trol the unpopulated areas and to use them both as a base form which to pro-
j ect an image of political strength and as secure areas from vlhich (in 
the case of War Zone D, northeast of Saigon) to threaten the capital. 
But unlike the U:S : militar~ ~dvisors, Thompson viewed the primarj threat 
t o be to the polltJ..cal stablllty of the populated rural areas . 36 
Con-
sequently, he regarded McGarr I s proposed ini tial operation in Wa,r Zone D 
to be a step in the wrong direction . 
The main government target, Thompson argued , should not be simply 
the destruction of VC forces . 
Rather, it should be to offer an attractive 
and constructive alternative to communist appeals . 
This could only be done 
by empha,sizj.ng national reconstruction and development in the populated 
rural areas . 
To do so would r equire extensive and stringent secu.rity mea-
sures, to be sure, but these measures required primarily police rather 
than regular milj.tary forces . 
The police could establish a close rapport 
with the populace; the army could not . 
The army should have the mission 
to keep the VC off balance by mobile action in order to prevent insurgent 
attacks on the limited areas in which GVN would concentrate its i nitial 
pacification efforts . J1I 
This line of argwnent vIas more fully developed i n Thompson I s draft 
plan for the pacification of the Del ta area, given to President Diem on 
11 November.]§I 
The objective of the plan was to win l oyalti es r ather 
than to kill i nsurgents . 
For that reason Thompson selected a populous area 
with r elatively l ittle VC main force activity. 
The thrust of his proposal 
was that "clear and hold" operations should r eplace "search and destroy" 
sweeps . 
ARVN might be used to protect the villages while the villages were 
organizing to protect themselves and mobile ARVN forces must be available 
to reinforce local defense units, but the process should be abandoned of 
"sweeping" through an area - - and then l eaving it. 
The peasants must be 
given the assurance of physical security so that economic and social im-
provements , the r eal object of the plan, could procced without interruption. 
The means by which the villagers would be protected was the II stra-
tegic hamlet," a lightly guarded village because it was -- by definjtion --
in a relatively low risk area . 
More heavily defended centers , ca,lled "de_ 
fended hamlets" and involving more relocation, Ivould be employed i n areas 
under more VC influence, particularly along the Cambodian border . 
To control this effort i n the Delta , Thompson r ecommended that 
the ARVN III Corps Headquarters be r einforced with paramilitary and civil 
components, relieved of its r esponsibility for the area around and north 
of Saigon, and function under the immediate supervision of t he National 
Security Council - - presided over by President Diem. 
The province chiefs , 
11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
already under Diem ' s personal direction, would be responsible on all 
emergency matters to the r einforced III Corps Headquarters (to be called 
the Combined Headquarters), but continue as before with respect to r outine 
administration . J2/ 
Thompson presented this Delta plan as a program of wide potential : 
... It should lead by stages to a reorganization of 
the government machinery for directing and coordinating 
all action against the communists and to the production of 
an overall strategic operational plan for the country as 
a whole dehning responsibilities, tasks and priorities . 
At the same time it will lead to the establishment of a static 
security framework which can be developed eventually into 
a National Police force into which can be incorporated a 
single security intelligence organization for the direction 
and coordination of all intelligence activities against the 
communists . 
I agree with Your Excellency that it would be 
too disruptive at the present moment to try to achieve these 
immediately and that they should be developed gradually. 
Using a medical analogy, the remedy should be clinical 
r ather than surgical . ~ 
III. 
DEVELOPING A CONSENSUS AMONG THE ADVISORS 
A. 
Initial Reaction of U. S. Military Advisors 
It is not difficult to imagine the shocked r eaction t o Thompson ' s 
proposals , especially in U. S. military circles . 
In fact , one need not 
imagine them; General McGarr has recorded a detailed rejoinder to Thompson ' s 
proposals . 
He was , to begin with, upset about the lack of prior coordina-
tion: 
Following Mr . Thompson ' s medical analogy .. . we have the 
case of a doctor called in for consultation on a clinical 
case , actually performing an amputation without consul ting 
the r esident physician -- and without being required to 
assume the overall responsibility for the patient . ~ 
General McGarr ' s unhappiness with Thompson was not simply a case 
of injured feelings . 
He had four r elated categories of disagreements with 
the plan proposed by the British Advisory Mission . 
First , Thompson ' s 
r eco~mended command arrangements , if adopted, would demol ish the prospect 
of a unitary chain of command within ARVN, an obj ecti ve tOY-lard which McGarr 
had been working for over a year . Additionally, the Thompson proposal s 
would l eave Diem as the ultimate manager of an operation dealing with only 
a portion (the Delta) of RVN. 
The el imination of practices such as this 
had been an explicit otj ective of the entire U. S. advisory effort for a 
l ong time . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
12 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Second, the proposed priority in the Delta clashed with MCGarr ' s 
priorities which placed War Zone D first, the area around Saigon second, 
and the Delta third . 
There was a lack of unanimity among the U. S. advisors 
about the relative importance of the War Zone D operation but the military, 
in particular, were looking for an important operation to help the (hope-
fully) revitalized ARVN demonstrate its offensive spirit and mobile capabili-
ties. 
This desire gave rise to the third and fourth objections -- or fears. 
The II static security frame"Tork" in the villages to which Thompson 
referred struck General McGarr as an unwarranted dOlmgrading of the need 
for a sizeable conventional military force to play an important role in 
pacification. 
Thompson's stated desire to emphasize police forces in lieu 
of regular military forces was regarded by the U.S. military advisory chief 
as unrealistic -- a transferral of Malayan experience to a locale in which 
the existing tools of policy were very different . 
Related to this obj ection "Tas a final set of disagreements. 
Thompson had wanted to go slowly and to let a ne"T GVN organization grow 
from the effort . 
The U. S . military advisory chief also wanted to go slow'ly 
but not that SlO"Tly. Not only would the Viet Cong not wait, it was simply 
unsound policy not to use the tools at hand. It would not do to reduce the 
ARVN and increase police forces while the VC continued thier successes . 
It was necessary, in sum, to act in a limited area but to act ~uickly. 
Thompson ' s recommendations did not look to ~uick action, emphasized the wrong 
area, were designed to emphasize the wrong operational agency, and proposed 
unacceptable coro~and lines . ~ 
It is important to note that in'spite of these explicit disagree-
ments there "Tere broad areas of apparent agreement between Thompson and 
his U.S. counterparts . (Apparent, because the "areas of agreement" concealed ' 
differences, too .) 
The U.S . MAAG was amenabl e to the development of strate-
gic hamlets, General McGarr claimed . ~ Indeed, MAAG ' s long, diffuse doc-
trinal "handbook" for advisors in the field did devote three pages - - without 
any particular emphasis -- to the "secure village concept ." 44/ 
MAAG did 
not stress the centrality of strategic haro~ets per se, but neither did 
Thompson . 
Strategic hamlets were to Thompson a ,.:ray station enroute to 
his real objective -- winning the loyalty of the rural peasants . 
This 
was apparently compatible with the se~uential steps to pacitication out-
lined in MAAG ' s own Geographically Phased Counterinsurgency Plan . If the 
competing approaches of the U. S. and British advisors had not been made 
compatible,there was , at l east , some agreed ground from which to launch 
the effort to make them compatible. 
B. 
Reactions in Washington 
That such ground existed was fortunate, for Thompson' s evolutionary 
plan was not only finding a warm reception at the Presidential Palace, 
it was also winning an attentive ear in Washington. 
As already mentioned, 
Thompson talked with General Taylor during the latter's October 1961 mission 
to Saigon and provided Taylor a copy of the initial British "appreciation ." 
13 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Copies of the Thompson memorandmfi on the Delta were also forwarded to 
Taylor at the latter's request. ~ Then in January 1962 , Thompson, again 
r esponding to Taylor's request, sent the l atter a long letter outlining 
his views. 
In l ess than a month, General Taylor could present to Presi-
dent Kennedy a plan entitled "A Strategic Concept for South Vietnam" by 
Roger Hilsman which was an unabashed restatement of most of Thompson ' s 
major points and to\vard which President Kennedy had, not incidentally, 
already expressed a favorable disposition. ~ 
Hilsman ' s "strategic concept" avowedly flowed from three basic 
principles : 
that the problem in Vietnam presented by the VC was political 
rather than military in its essence; that an effective counterinsurgency 
plan must provide the people and villages with protection and physical 
security; and that counter guerrilla forces must adopt the same tactics 
as those used by the guerrilla himself. ~ 
To translate these principles into operational reality, Hilsman 
called for "strategic villages" and "defended villages" a la Thompson, 
with first priority to the most populous areas; i.e., the Delta and in the 
vicinity of Hue. 48/ 
ARVN would, much as in Thompson' s proposal, secure 
the initial effort, when necessary, and be employed to keep the VC off 
balance in those areas already under Viet Cong control. 
The plan envisaged 
a three-phase process by which GVN control would progressively be expanded 
from the least heavily VC-penetrated provinces with large populations 
(phase I), into the more heavily penetrated population centers (phase II), 
and finally into the areas along the I,aotian and Cambodian borders (phase 
III).!t1/ 
Hilsman eschewed use of the "oil spot" analogy but the process 
and rationale he put forth were the same . 
His plan moved "strategic vil-
lages" to a place of prominence greater than that in Thompson's Delta plan 
and far in excess of the offhanded acceptance which had thus far been 
afforded them by U. S. military advisors . 
Strategic hamJ.ets were not the 
heart of the Hilsman plan -- civic action was that - - but they were the symbcl, 
the easily recogni zable, easily grasped initial step by which GVN could be-
gin, following Hilsman ' s second principle, to "provide the people and the 
villages with protection and physical security ." zY 
C. 
The Advisors Reach Agreement 
Thompson's basic ideas were gaining wide dissemination at the 
highest level within the U. S. government in early 1962 . 
What of his r el a -
t ions with the U. S. MAAG in Saigon? 
These had been significantly improved 
as the resll1t of a meeting between Thompson, Ambassador Nolting, and 
British Ambassador Hohler . 
Thompson agreed to revise his paper so as to 
remove the objection to his proposed command arrangements. 
Ambassador 
Nolting r eported that Thompson 'i'laS nOlV' working "closely and amicably" with 
MAAG. ~ This took care of one of MCGarr ' s objections . 
Thompson had 
apparently decided, too, to allow the issue to drop for the time being 
of police primacy in pacification vis -a-vis ARVN. It was not, after all, 
a change that could be made quickly; President Diem was convinced that 
some start was needed to save his administration . 
Tha,t had been his rea-
son, after all, in reluctantly inviting increased American participation 
in the war. 
TOP SECRET - S...;.dsiti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Secretary McNama.ra played an important role in disposing of still 
another issue in dispute -- that of ,·;here to begin . 
In mid-December 1961, 
after President Kennedy had decided to adopt essentially all of General 
Taylor ' s November recom~endations except the introduction of major U.S . 
forces into Vietnam, Secretary McNamara met in Honolulu with the U. S. 
principals in Vietnam to discuss futuxe plans. 
A central question was that 
of what could be done in the short term future. The Secretary of Defense 
made it clear that RVN had "number one priority." 5JJ... 
McNamara urged 
concentration on one province : 
"I 'll guarantee it7the money and equipmeny 
provided you have a plan based on one province . 
Take one place, sweep it 
and hold it in a plan ." 2J./ 
Or , put another W8.y, let us demonstrate that 
i n some place, in some way, we can achieve demonstrable gains . 
General McGarr , immediately upon his return to Saigon, wrote to 
Secretary Thuan and passed on this proposal : 
I would like to suggest that you may wish to set aside 
one specific area, say a province, and use it as a "test 
area, " in establishing this type "pacification infrastruc-
ture . " 
My thinking is th8.t all the various elements of this 
anti-VC groundwork be designated i mmediately by your govern-
ment and trained as a team or teams for the actual reoccupa-
tion and holding of the designated commlmist infiltrated 
area when it has been cleared by RVN.A.F military action . 2!3J 
Such teams would embrace, McGarr suggested, police, intelligence , financial , 
psychological, agricultural, medical, civic action, and civil political 
functions . 55/ 
IV. 
THE ADVISORS "SELL" DIEM (OR VICE-VERSA). 
A. 
Where to Begin? 
GVN did indeed have a province in mind . It was not a Delta province , 
however . 
Nor 1-laS it a province relatively secure from VC infiltration . 
~uite to the contrary, Binh Duong Province , extending north and northwest 
of Saigon, had been heavily infiltrated. Its main communications axis 
(National Highw'ay 13, extending north\-Tard from Saigon into Cambodia ) sliced 
di r ectly between War Zone D and War Zone C. 
The province was crossed 
by important routes of communications , liaison, and supply between two 
i nsurgen redoubts . 
Hardly the logical place to begin, one might say, 
but "logic" was being driven by events and desires more than by abstract 
r easoning . 
One desire was the widely held wish to do something concrete 
and productive as a symbol of U. S. determination and GVN vitality. 
Another 
desire was GVN ' s ,vish to commit the Americans to support of Diem' s govern-
ment on terms which would be in fact acceptable to that government and 
would -- equally important -- aEpear to be U. S. support for GVN-initiated 
actions . 
I f one were Vietnamese one might reason that Binh Duong was an 
15 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
area of unquestionable strategic importance -- and one in which GVN had 
already initiated some pacification efforts . If the Americans wish to 
concentrate in one province and i f they are willing to underwrite the effort 
with r esources , why not begin in an important strategic area where work. 
is already underway? 
GVN had initiated , in August 1961, a "Rural Reconstruction Cam-
paign" in the Eastern Region of South Vietnam to secure the provinces of 
Tay Ninh, Binh Duong, and Phuoc TUy. 2fJ 
Most of the effort prj_or to 
December 1961 had been concentrated in the Cu Chi District of Binh Duong . 
Xom Hue Hamlet of Tan An Hoi was , during December , in the process of being 
fortifi ed as a strategic hamlet . 211 
General McGarr was under the impres-
sion that "conSiderable progress" had already been made in these three 
provinces in the establishment of the GVN village level activities so 
necessary to winning popular support . 2§/ 
In mid-January General McGarr met (just prior to his departure 
for Honolulu ) with President Diem and Secretary Thuan to dis cuss pacifica-
tion plans . 
As McGarr told Secretary McNamara , Diem stressed that the 
If.tAAG-endorsed military operation in War Zone D might merely close the 
string on an empty bag . 
Such a failure would be detrimental to ARVN morale . 
Besides, the President observed echoing Thompson, "sweeps" solved nothing; 
the problem was to bold an area and to separate the VC from the rest of the 
populace . 
Diem preferred a concentrated effort in Binh Duong, a heavily 
infiltrated province , close to Saigon, of great strategic importance , and 
in ''i'hich only 10 of 46 villages were under GVN control -- but in which the 
groundwork for a sound governnlent infrastructure had already been laid . )~ 
The discussions at the Secretary of Defense ' s Conference in 
Honolulu turned on whether or not the War Zone D operation offered more 
hope f or a concrete gain than a "single province" pacification scheme . 
McNamara concluded that it did not. 
General McGarr dissented mildly from 
the sel ection of Binh Duong . 
He would have favored Phuoc Tuy (where U.S. 
troops were scheduled to land if a decision wer e ever made to commit them). 
But Bi nh Duong was GVN ' s plan and the "limited partners" finally agreed 
to back Diem ' s preferred attempt . §2/ 
Thus, the U. S. cmae to a roundabout 
decision t o support as a "test" of vlhat would l ater be called the "strategic 
hamJ_et program" an operation about whose details they kne'\v little , in an 
area that all recognized to be difficult, because it allegedly r epresented 
a long-sought example of GVN i nitiative in planning and civil-military 
preparation . 
Much of the public i mage of the strategic hamlet program was 
to be established by this operation, as it turned out . Its name was 
"Operation Sunri se .,t 
But it was not -- U.S. desires to the contrary --
the only strategic hamlet effort to be carri ed fOY'\'i'ard during this peri od . 
It was only one of several -- and several grew very quickly into many . 
B. 
Concurrent GVN Activity 
It has al ready been suggested that President Diem responded wi th 
some enthusiasm to the early proposals from Thompson ' s Briti sh Advisory 
Mission. 
In mid-February 1962 , President Diem approved orally Thompson' s 
16 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"Delta Pacification Plan" and said he would like to see it executed with-
out delay. ~ Earlier, on 3 February, he had created by presidential 
decree the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Strategic Hamlets (IMCSH), 
comprising the heads of various ministries (Defense, Interior, Education, 
Civic Action, Rural Affairs, etc .). 62/ 
The IMCSH was, as its membership 
indicates, a coordinating body designed to give national direction and 
guidance to the program . 
Its importance is not in its work -- for it 
apparently did very little -- but as an indicator of Diem's early 1962 
thinking of strategic hamlets as a national program and of the central 
role which his brother, Ngo Dim1 Nhu, would play in this program . 
1~u was the real driving force behind GVN' s uneven but discernible 
movement toward adoption of the strategic hamlet theme as a unifying con-
cept in its pacification efforts. 
In the early period under discussion 
he masked his central role, however. 
He was not announced as the Chairman 
of the IMCSH (nobody was), but the committee was responsible to him. 63/ 
He did not, hO'trever, lead it actively. 
As two American observers remarked 
at the time, "Nhu seems to have consulted the committee seldom and to have 
shared his policy-making power with it even less frequently ." 64/ 
C. 
Early Signs of GVN Expectations 
But although brother Nhu was behind the scenes in late 1961 and 
early 1962, an occasional fleeting glimpse of his thinking and the direction 
in which he was hea,ding has still managed to show through. 
A CIA report 
from Saigon summarized Nhu ' s instructions to a dozen province chiefs from 
the Delta in a meeting held on 14 December 1961. 
Primary emphasis was to 
be placed on the strategic hamlet program, Nhu said, and this program was 
to be coupled with a "social revolution" against "Viet-Nam ' s three enemies : 
divisive forces, low standard of living, and communism ." 65/ 
The CIA 
Task Force - Vietnam observed , in forwarding this report, that Nhu ' s "social 
revolution and strategic hamlets appear to be fuzzy concepts with little 
valv.e in the fight against the Communists ." f!J 
No doubt these concepts seemed fuzzy at the end of 1961. 
But 
within another twelve months, as events would prove, they would be widely 
recognized as the twin spearheads of GVN's counterinsurgent effort, fuzzy 
or not . 
The strategic hamlet program would have broad support within the 
U.S. 
gover~~ent and financial resources to underpin that support. 
The 
"social revolution" to which Nhu referred in December 1961 would be surfaced 
as Diem ' s "personalism" drive. 
The important thing for the present analysis 
is that all of the expectations of the several participant groups -- both 
U.S. and GVN -- were identif.iable by very early 1962 at the latest, and that 
the concept of the strategic hamlet prograrn in the broad sense had been 
fully adumbrated. 
The skeleton -- the rationale -- was complete; the body - -
operational programs -- had not yet taken form. 
Each group could, however, 
work tOvlard construction of a slightly different body (and for differing 
reasons ) and claim ,vi th some plausibility to be 'Ivorking from the same 
skeleton . 
17 
TOP SECRET - Se1 iti ve 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
V. 
DIFFERING PERSPECTIVES AND EXPECTATIONS 
Three somewhat different views may be categorized which are of interest 
to the present inq,uiry: 
those of the U. S. military advisors, of the U. S. 
political leadership, and of the Diem government ' s leaders . 
Such generali-
zations are admittedly risky and easily overdrawn; there were, of course, 
differences betvleen the perceptions and expectations of, say, the U. S. 
military advisors . 
For example , those farthest from Saigon tended to be 
less patient -- 'Ivi th Diem and in expecting results -- than were those closer 
to the area of operations . 
Still, discernible differences of outlook and 
expectations may be said to represent the prevailing views in each of these 
three groups . 
A. 
U. S. Military Advisors 
The U.S. military advisors mistrusted arguments which stressed 
the Vietnamese struggle as essentially political rather than military. 
They were q,uite willing to concede that the struggle was multi-di.mensional 
but they feared instinctively any line of reasoning which might appear to 
argue that military considerations were relatively unimportant in Vietnam . 
So, too, they were wary of schemes which might lead ARVN to perpetuate its 
defensive tactical stance . 
Both dangers were present in the strategic 
hamlet program . 
The same military advisors were more forceful than others 
in stressing the need for the Diem regime to rationalize its com~and arrange -
ments and to plan comprehensively and in detail from the highest to lm·rest 
levels . 
Their operational interest concentrated on making ARVN not just 
more mobile but more aggressive . 
Their creed , devel oped through years of 
experience and training (or vicarious experience ) was to "cl ose with and 
destroy the enemy." 
One could expect them, then, to be more than willing 
to turn over the job of static defense to the CDC and CG at the earliest 
opportunity, to keep a weather eye out for opportunities to engage major 
VC formati ons in decisive battle, and to chafe under the painfully slow 
evolutionary process which was implicit even in their own 1961 geographically 
phased plan . 
B. 
U.S. Political Leadership 
The D. S. political l eadership, and to varying degrees the l eaders 
i n the Saigon Embassy and in USOM, were more attuned to the political 
problems -- both with r espect to GVN-U.S. r elations and t o the problem 
of winning broad support among the Vietnamese for the Diem administration . 
This made members of this group i nherently more sympathetic t o proposals 
such as the Thompson pl an for the Delta than they were , for i nstance , to 
i ncreasing ARVN ' s size and capabilities . 
They found compelling the logic 
of analyses such as Hilsman' s which cut to the political root rather than 
treating only the military symptoms . 
One suspects -- though documentation 
would never be found to support it -- that they were attracted by an argu-
ment which did suggest some hope for "demilitarizing" the war, de- emphasizi ng 
U. S. operational participation, and increasing GVN ' s ability to sol ve its 
ovlD. internal problems using primarily its own human resources . 
18 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
--~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C. 
President Diem 
Ngo Dinh Diem's perspective and expectations were the most 
different of all . 
U.S. groups differed in dregre; Diem's eA~ectations were 
different in kind. 
He vmnted, first of 8.11, to obtain uneCluivocal U. S. 
support, not just to his nation but to his administration . It was essential~ 
in his eyes , that this support not cc:npromise his authority or Vietnamese 
sovereignty. 
He did not want to give credence to communist claims that 
he was a puppet of the U.S., on one tand, or concentrate the coercive in-
struments of power in the hand of poc.;ential antagonists, on the other. 
A r evealing assessment of Diem ' s frame of mind is provided by 
Ambassador Nolting . 
Diem invited increased U.S. aid and U. S. participa-
tion because he feared that, especia2.1y vith an impending settlement in 
Laos, South Vietnam would come under increasing communist pressures. 
If Diem ' s government could not win o-rer these pressures -- and Diem feared 
it could not -- it had only the choi~e of going down fighting or of being 
overthrovTn by a coup . 
Thus, in reCluesting additional U. S. help, Diem had 
"adopted an expedient which runs ag2.inst his O"Tn convictions, and he is 
apparently willing to accept the att2ndant diminution of his own stature 
. as an independent and self-reliant nc.tional leader ." §J} 
But when Ambassador Nolting presented to Diem the U. S. Cluid pro 
CluO for its "limited partnership," this apparent acceptance of decreased 
stature and independence suddenly see~ed less apparent . §§j 
Then, as 
Nolting reported, President Diem feared the reaction even among his own 
cabinet aides . 69/ 
Secretary Thuan, in whom Diem did confide, said that 
the President was brooding over the fa.ct that the U. S. was asking great 
concessions of GVN in the realm of i ts sovereignty in exchange for little 
additional help . 121 
Diem argued that U. S. influence over his govern-
ment , once it was known, would play directly into the communists ' hands. 
The first priority task, he added, ,·;c.s to give the people security, not 
to make the government more popular. 
To try it the other way around was 
to place the cart before the horse. 71/ 
. 
Diem sa"l himself caught in a dilemma in which he was doomed if he 
did not get outside assistance and doomed if he got it only at the price 
of surrendering his independence . 
To him the trick was to get the U.S. 
committed without surrendering his independence. 
One possible solution 
lay in getting U.S. material aid for a program that would be almost wholly 
GVN-implemented . 
The strategic ham~et program offered a convenient vehi-
cle for this purpose and one which ,·;as also appealing for other reasons . 
It put achieving security before "liL1.ing loyalty -- in an operational con-
text in vlhich it "las difficult to di:::ferentiate between security for the 
r ural populace and control of that populace, since many of the actions 
to achieve one were almost identical to the acts to realize the other . 
D. 
The Central Issue 
The U.S., for its part, was asking Diem to forego independence by 
accepting the wisdom of the American r ecommendations for reform . 
The 
19 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
central question was 1-Thether he would -- or could -- do so . 
Among those 
who responded to this question in the negative, J. Kenneth Galbraith wasmost 
trenchant: 
In my completely considered vie1-T . . • Diem 1-Till not 
reform either administratively or politically in any 
effective way. 
That is because he cannot. It is 
politically naive to expect it. 
He senses that he 
cannot let power go because he would be thrown out. 72/ 
The U.S. decided that Diem could make meaningful reforms and that he 
would do so -- or at least it decided that it was likely enough that he 
would do so and that support for his administration constituted the best 
availabl e policy alternative. 
E. 
The Problem of Assessment 
The differences in perspectives and expectations outlined above 
are important in their own right. 
They 100m even l arger, hmfever, when 
one considers the difficulty of assessing progress in the program about 
to be undertaken. 
These groups \fere about to embark upon a long, arduous 
joint voyage. 
Their only chart had never been to sea. 
This was the 
newly-articulated and imperfectly understood doctrine of counterinsurgency 
which stressed the interaction and interdependence of political, military, 
social, and psychological factors . It posited the necessity for certain 
actions to follow' immediately and successfully behind others in order 
for the process of pacification to succeed . 
Above all -- and this point 
cannot be overstressed -- while this doctrine recognized the need for both 
the carrot and the stick (for coercive control and appealing programs ) 
it made gaining broad popular acceptal1ce the single ultimate criterion 
of success. 
Neither kill ratios nor construction rates nor the frequency 
of incidents was conclUSive, yet these were all indicators applicable to 
phases within the larger process. 
The gains of doing well in one phase, 
however, could be ¥Tiped out by inactivity or mistakes in a subsequent 
phase . It was, in short, very difficult to know how well one was doing 
until one was done. 
VI . 
THE NATIONAL PLA..l'if EMERGES 
A. 
A1-Tareness of the Unifying Potential 
Before examining the quality of execution of the operational pro -
grams for which some detailed r ecord is available it will be useful to 
outline the process by Ifhich the strategic hamlet program became -- by late 
1962 -- a comprehensive national program embodying the major effort of GVN 
in paCification . 
1t0peration Sunrise" in Bin,h Duong Province was launched on 22 
March 1962 i n what was initially called the ItBen Cat Project. It 
73/ The 
Delta project, however, l anguished in a "planning stage" until May, when 
it first became known that Diem was considering incorporating it into the 
'Strategic Hamlet Program. 
74/ 
By August the IMCSH proposed a priority 
plal1 for the construction of strategic hamlets on a nation-vide basis. 
20 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Later the same month, the U.S. Inter-Agency Committee for Province 
Rehabilitation concurred in this plan (with minor reservations ) as a 
basis for planning and utilization of U.S. assistance . 
75/ 
By October, 
the Diem government had made the Strategic Hamlet Program the explicit 
focus and unifying concept of its' pacification effort . 
The government-
controlled Times of Viet Nam devoted an entire issue to !l1962 : 
The Year 
of Strategic Hamlets .!I 
76/ 
Ngo Dinh Nhu was unveiled as the !larchitect 
and prj.rne mover!l of the program which was the Vietnamese answer to 
communist strategy. 
As Nhu proclaimed : 
!lStrategic hamlets seek to 
assure the security of the people in order that the success of the polit -
ical, social, and military revolution might be assured by the enthusiastic 
movement of solidarity and self-sufficiency." 77/ 
President Diem had 
earlier put the same thought to an American visitor in clearer words: 
The importance of the strategic hamlets goes beyond the 
concept of hamlet self defense . 
They are a means to institute 
basic democracy in Vietnam. 
Through the Strategic Hamlet 
Program, the government intends to give back to the hamlet 
the right of self-government with its own charter and system 
of community law. 
This "l-Till realize the ideas of the consti -
tution on a local scale which the people can understand. 78/ 
By this time, too, influential American circles regarded the 
Strategic Hamlet Program as the shorthand designation for a process which 
represented a sensible and sound GVN effort . 
Roger Hilsman had said so 
in February to President Kennedy, and found the latter highly receptive. 
He continued to say so . 
79/ 
As he advised Assistant Secretary of State 
Averell Harriman in late 1962, "The government of Vietnam has finallB 
developed, and is now acting upon, an effective strategic concept.!I ..52/ 
Even so lukewarm an enthusiast as the CJCS, General Lyman L. Lemnitzer 
could report that " 
the Strategic Hamlet Program promises solid 
benefits, and may well be the vital key to success of the pacification 
program. !I 
81/ 
The public record also shows early support from high U.S. officials 
for the Strategic Hamlet Program and recognition of its central role in 
GVN!s pacification campaign. 
Speaking in late April 1962, Under Secretary 
of State George W. Ball, commented favorably in the progressive develop -
ment of strategic hamlets throughout RVN as a method of combating 
insurgency and as a means of bringing the entire nation "under control 
of the government." 
82/ Secretary McNamara told members of the press, 
upon his return to Washington from a Pacific meeting in July 1962, that 
the Strategic Hamlet Program was the !lbackbone of President Diem! s 
. 
program for countering subversion directed against his state .1f 
83/ 
I t is reasonable to conclude from the evidence that official U.S. 
awareness kept abreast of Diem! s progressive adoption of the Strategic 
Hamlet Program as the Ifunifying conceptlf in his counterinsurgent effort . 
The same officials were constantly bombarded by a series of r eports 
from a variety of sources describing the progress of the hamlet program 
and assessing its efficacy. 
21 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
. ; 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B. 
1I0peration Sunrise ll 
The first operational effort in which the U.S. had a hand, 
1I0peration Sunrise,1I got under way in Binh Duong Province on 22 March 1962 
when work commenced on Ben Tuong, the first of five hamlets to be con-
structed for relocated peasants in the Ben Cat District in and around the 
Lai Khe rubber plantation. 
(See Map 2. ) 
Phase I of the operation - - the 
military clearing phase - - was condu.cted by forces of the 5th ARVN Divi-
sion reinforced by ranger companies, a reconnaissance company, t'iw rein-
forced CG companies, and a psychological "Tarfare company. 
The Viet Cong 
simply melted into the jungles. 
With the Viet Cong out of the way -- at least for the time be;Lng 
the :::elocation and construction of the new hamlet commenced . 
The new 
program got off to a bad start. 
The government was able to persuade only 
seventy families to volunteer for resettlement. 
The 135 other families in 
the half dozen settl ements "rere herded forcibly from their homes . 
84/ 
Li 'ttle of the $300,000 in local currency provided by USOM had reached the 
peasants; the money was being withheld until the resettled families indi-
cated they Imuld not bolt the new hamlet. 
Some of them came ,vi th most of 
their meager belongings. 
Others had little but the clothes on their backs. 
Their old dwellings -- and many of their possessions -- were burned behind 
them. 
85/ Only 120 males of an age to bear arms were found among the more 
than 200 families --
indic atin~ very clearly that a ~ar~e. num~er had epne 
over to the VC, whether by cholce or as a result of lntlIDldatlon. 
86/ 
. C. 
Other Early Programs 
Progress in Binh Duong continued at a steady pace, beset by diffi-
culties. 
By midsummer 2900 persons had been regrouped into three strategic 
hamlets. 
87/ 
Elsewhere, the pace quickened. 
Although the Delta Plan, as 
a coordinated effort, had not been implemented by the summer of 1962, 
Secretary McNamara found in Mayan aggressive effort under way without U.S. 
help near Ca Mao: 
Here the commander of the 31st Infantry Regiment had gone 
into an area 95% controlled by the VC, declared martial I m,r, and 
r esettled 11, 000 people ( some under duress) i n 9 strategic hamlets, 
while fighting the VC wherever he found them. 
Since inception 
of the program, none of his villages have been attacked, and the 
freedom from VC taxation (extortion ) i s proving most appealing to 
the people. It i s the commander fs hope (doubtless optimistic) 
that he will be able to turn the whole area over to the civil guard 
and self defense corps ivi thin 6 months. 
88/ 
These resettlement efforts in areas which had been under VC domination 
were not the extent of the early hamlet ttprogram,tt however . 
Manyexist-
i ng hamlets and villages were ttfortified tt in one degree or a..YJ.other early 
in 1962 follmung no discernible pattern. 
This appears to have been the 
natural product of the varied response to Nhu ' s i njunction to emphasize 
strategic hamlets. 
In April, the GV"N Ministry of the Interior informed 
the U.S. that 1300 such hamlets were already completed. 
89/ 
ttOperation 
Sunrise tt had by this time been broadened to embrace efforts in several 
provinces 0 
90/ 
Several other Strategic Hamlet Programs i,rere begun : 
ttOperation Hai Yen 1111 (Sea SwallOlv) in Phu Yen Province with a goal of 
281 hamlets, 157 of which were reported . as completed "¥ri thin two months: 
22 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
~ ' ,' 
~ ' . . " . 
.. " ." 
4 : ' . 
• ... 1 
' 
.~ . ~ . 
< '. 
-
~. 
f 
. , 
• i 
~ ". 
' .. . ~. ~ 
• f J , 
• t.' :'!.. • . 
, ' 
" 
" 
..... 
" 
-.. 
'j" 
" 
•• 
r -". 
" ~ 
~ .. 
.... 
"" , 
-':' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
,," ".-.,. 
I 
~' .. 
..... :.":;, .. ' 
" 
' 
. ' '.' j'" 
" 
" 
, , 
.~ 
~ .. '. ; 
. I 
I , 
. ." 
~. 
'''. 
. '.: , ~ . 
" 
':: 
; .' 
v -
, .' 
, : 
.' .. t _~' . ' . 
,. 
,.', 
.. ' 
.. 
' ': . 
,..~ , 
. 
· f .i~_ ';:~ _>,~i"~ ~. 
.'! 
t.: .... '..1; •••• 
~. 
.:. ;, ,, ',' 
' . , 
;: _ 
; :- .' 1..~ ;~ 
' . 
';", '!;.,\. 
, .
' 
... 
.:..! 
.' ...... 
• 
' .. 
I 
.. ',I 
, . 
. . 
, 
-.. , 
,'t. 
1\ OTHUUG ~ 
-!
' 
. ' 
PHUoe 
vnm IllNHO 
'v 
, . ' 
i .,' " 
" ' 
!. " 
.", 
- II 
:SImI DUONG PROVINCE 
. -. 
~ 
., 
pP 
D,\ U o/'NG 2 0 
EAU ~lJiG 
, , 
BEN ~l; S 
., 
, 
Q , 
0. BE?l TUCr;O 
/ 
, c::> c? 
~oo ... CII.,., <lD 
, . 
" " 
~,' . . . 
i.' 
' OJ 
, ~ ' . . 
:-,. 
I':, 
'. : 
.. : .... 
"r_ ,. 
_.':" 
! 
: ' 
:',._, 
~ 
'.! ' .. '. 
.. 
_. 
',. 
, ' 
, 
. 
"'-'i"'.=':' 
',;. 
. :-:", 
. .; 
, . ... :. 
.
,' 
•
• ' 
j '. 
- •• 1· ..... 
. ~ . 
' " 
.. .
. " 
' III 
',' 
~ '; . 
. -.' .: . 
~ . : 
.'. '\ 
~. ~: ; :::. ~ 
.'
.., ,,' I 
:'; .. , . 
. 0.':' 
.: " 
: . '\ .' 
.,' 
:i ... ';1: 
,:'0.: 
'" 
, 01; 
, , 
'. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"Operation Dang Tien "(Let 1s go) ' in Binh Dinh Province with a goal of 328 
strategic hamlets in its first year; and "Operation Phuong Hoang" (Royal 
Phoenix) in Quang Nai Province with a goal of 125 strategic hamlets by 
the end of 1962. 
D. 
At Last -- A National Plan 
The GVN drew all of the partialistic programs together in its 
August 1962 national priority plan) mentioned earlier . 
The nation was 
divided into four priority zones (Map 3). First priority was assigned 
to the eleven provinces around Saigon . 
This included essentially the 
area of the Thompson Delta plan plus the original area of "Operation 
Sunrise fl plus Gia Dinh Province (Map 4). 
Priorities within each zone 
were further specified . 
Within the zone of first national prior ity) for 
example ) the provinces of Vinh Long) Long AD, and Phuoc Try were assigned 
the highest priority; Binh Duong -- Hhere operations were already in 
progress -- was given priority three (Map 5) . 
By the end of the summer 
of 1962 GVN claimed that 3,225 of the plarmed 11, 316 hamlets had already 
been completed and that over 33 percent of the nation 1s total population 
was already living in completed hamlets ( See Table 1) . 
October 1962, when Diem made the StrategiC Hamlet Program the 
avoi-Ted focus of his counterinsurgent campaign ) marks the second watershed 
i n the development and implementation of the program. 
The first such 
watershed had been the consensus ) on the potential value of such a pro-
gram, which had been developed at the end of 1961 and early 1962. 
There 
would be no others until the program died with Diem. 
E. 
Effect on U.S . Perceptions 
The effect of the GVN 1s concentraion on strategic hamlets was to 
make U.S. assessments focus on several sub -aspects of the pr oblem . 
Atten -
tion tended to be directed toward how I-Tell hamlets were being fortified and 
whether or not the implementation phase was ,·Tell managed; i . e ., whether 
peasants were paid for their labor, reiInbursed for their losses , and given 
adequate opportunity to attend their crops . 
Conversel y, attention was 
directed away from the difficult -to -assess question of whether the follow'-
up actions to hamlet security were taking place - - the actions which would 
convert the peasantry from apathy (if not opposition) to i dentification 
with their central government . 
This focusing on details I-Thich diverted attention from the ultimate 
objective took the form of reports , primarily statistical) which set forth 
the construction rate for strategic hamlets ) the incident rate of VC 
activities) and the geographical areas in which GVN control was and was not 
i n the ascendancy . 
These flspecifics" "ere coupl ed to generalized assess -
ments which almost invariably pointed to shortcomings iB GVN1s execution 
of the program. 
The shortcomings) however) were treated as probl ems in 
efficient management and operational organization; t he inel uctability of 
i ncreased control (or security ) leading somehow to popular identification 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.' . 
':', 
. . ( 
:' 
.. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
GVN PRIORITIES FOR STRATEGIC HAMLE:TS BY ZONES 
I. 
TI 1/\1 LAND 
0". 
I 
I 
,. 
. .. 
u .j ., 
" . 
,. 
! 
~. 
CON SO~ () 
o 
" 
0 
----------- ----
,0 
~, .. ' 
~( 
MAP 3 
?5 
". 
., 
1 Yo 
:,:..' 
....... 
SQUTH VI ET-NAM 
,aWHIA I BOfJUD ARY 
f'ROV, 'NC[ BOU NDARY 
________ L-_________________________ ~ 
. . 
' ..... 
4., . 
:t. 
! 
I r 
t 
," 
\. 
l~ 
. -
:~ 
L . 
' .~ ."". 
• 
\.' ""I 
,. 
:;, . 
" 
. , 
',' 
'. 1 
I , ! 
.' 
t · 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
.' 
.... 
• 
• 
.. 
lot 
.,' 
'" 
.·f 
.... . 
..... : 
" 
'" 
" 
-I. " 
. ' , , 
! . 
," 
. V .. 
'TI--IA I LA I") D. 
J 
t ·· : . 
c· A M 
. ' .. 
DELTA PLAN PRIORITIES 
... ~.
" 
" 
CON SON./1 '. 
. cV 
o 
17th PIIRALLEL 
.' 
r- [fi' AREA INCL.UDED IN THE 
c:: 
DEL. TA P~N 
. !fNI AREA IN~L.UDED IN THE NEW 
. 
. tff:< GVN PL.AN AS PRIORITY NO, 1 
. ~ 
'f IN PROGRESS' 
,""'-" r'-"'-;' PRIORITY . 1 
I "~ 
-[ :=-=:--... - " PRIORITY Z 
. 
t -' _' . 
. '. '--'-.; :"; '," }:>R!,!I-S01,!R!,JI!,:TYCY.23 _____ -.;-:-::-:-__ -1 
.'_._.;-_. ~~:~ 
SOUTH VlET-NAM 
NATIONAl BOU IIO hRY 
PROYIfIC! BOUHDARY 
___ ~ 
______________ ~ 
____ ~MAP~
. ~~~)~~ ________ ~ 
__ ~----~--~~~--~ 
---
26 
(. 
J 
.'. ,,"'. 
t 
: . 
1 
1 
! 
j 
1 i 
1 
I ' 
IV 
I I I " 
I r 
I 
,. 
;. . , 
, c 
..... 
.... .. 
' .. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
, " 
. . 
GVN PRIORITIES FOR STRATEGIC HArv1LETS WITHIN THE 
FIRST PRIORITY ZONE 
.~. 
'; 
p------~. :~~~~--~~----------~~.------~~----~--------~------------------~~--_, 
l 
u 
, 
,·C 
.'r , 
',.' 
V 
~, 
"' 
PHU QUO'G , 
,·',L /-\ C) S 
> ' 
\ 1 
, 
\.: 
,,' 
A MB .()DIA 
. ~ . 
-.' 
, . 
CON SON './I • 
, 
°V 
, " 
0 
' 
'MAP S 
_ 17th PA RALLEL 
; 
," 
' . . , 
-, 
" 
, 
_1 ._ 
• 
,', 
PRIoR I TY 1/4 
~------~------~----~----~~ 
SOUTH :VIET·Ni'.?-.;i :' 
H A TI 0 N ALB 0 U N D'H Y, 
PROVIH,E BOUNDARY 
\
27 
. ' ,' , 
I, 
'/" 
L~· ,- -=·.~ ~- ~~-
: '_ .. 
2~_:~~ .~_~ __ ._.·: ... -:.~'--.-
, , 
,'" 
i 'i:-
~ 
-
~. 
f 
} 
r 
~, 
! , 
!-\ .... 
l 
r 
I 
I . 
l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREE 
Sensitive 
TABLE 1 
GVN HEPOn'l' ON STATUS OF STRA~('EGIC lL"l,jLSTS 
, . 
Strategic 
Sh'etcgic 
Stn.tcgic 
Hamlets 
Hemlcts 
Hamlets Uncler 
Popub.tion in 
Are 0. 
Planned 
Completecl 
ConstI'uction 
Cocnpleted HCJnlets 
--
SOUTIlERN: 
Saigon 
433 
105 
115 
261, 470 
East ern F'rov'i nces 
1,595 
291 
501 
423,060 
vrestcl'n Provi nces 
4,728 
1,236 
702 
1,874,790 
SUB-TCYl'AL 
6,756 
1,632 
1,318 
2,559,320 
CENTR.4JJ: 
Ccnt:cal Lmrl anc1s 
3,630 
1, 1~90 
, 682 
1,654,470 
High Plateau 
930 
103 
217 
108, 244 
. SUB-TOTP.L 
4,560 
1,593 
899 
1,762,714 
-'--
GRAND TOTAL 11,316 
3,225 
2,217 
4,322,034 
- Percentage of planned hc'..mlets cempleted •••••• • • , ••••••• • 28.49% 
- Percent aGe of t otal popule.tion i n completed hE:..llllets •••• • 33.39% 
* Adapted f ro:n :£he 'l'incs of Victn3..'U, 28 Octobe}.' 1962, p. 17. 
TOP SECRET - Sens i tive 
28 . 
/I. ••
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
TABLE 1 
GVN HE PORT ON STATUS OF S'l1J.iA'l"EGIC H.AHLE':rS 
As of 30 September 1962 * 
Strategic 
Str ;..tegic 
Strdegic 
Hamlets 
Hamlets 
EarnJ.ets Under 
Are£.\ 
Planned 
Completed 
Construction 
SOUTHERN : 
Saigon 
433 
105 
115 
Eastern Provinces 
1,595 
291 
501 
vlestern Provinces 
4,128 
1,236 
102 
SUB-TOTAL 
6,156 
1,632 
1,318 
CENTRlI.L: 
Central Lo\f1ands 
3,630 
1,490 
682 
High Plateau 
. 930 
103 
211 
SUB-TOTAL 
4,560 
1,593 
899 
GRAND TOTAL 
11,316 
3,225 
2,211 
Popule.tion in 
Completed H<:'mlets 
26J.,1~10 
423,060 
1,814,190 
2,559,320 
1,654,410 
108,241+ 
- Percentage of planned hamJ.cts comp eted ••••••••• ••• •• •• .28.4% 
- Percentage of total popula.tion in completed b~unlets ••••• 33.39% 
oX- Adapted from f,l1.e 'rimes of Vietno..'1l, 28 octobe:c 1962, p. 11. 
TOP SECRET. - Sensitive 
28 
, '0 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
by a process akin to the economic assumption of "flotation to stability 
through development" Ivent unchallenged as a basic assumption. 
Cri tics 
pointed to needed improvements ; the question of Fhether or not these 
could be accomplished, or iVhy, almost never Has raised. 
"Operation Sunrise", for example, I,ras criticized in some detail 
by the US MAAG. 
Much better planning and coor<Unation "\-Tas needed in order 
to relocate effectively: Aerial surveys iVere necessary t o pinpoint the 
number of families to be relocated; unanticipated expenditures needed to 
be provided for; preparation of sites shm.dd begin before the peasant s 
were moved; and GVN resource commitments should be carefully checked by 
U. S. advisors at all levels. 
92/ 
There Ivas no discussion of the vulnera-
bility of the strategic he.mletsto VC infiltration ( as against VC attacks ) 
or of the subsequent steps to vrinning support. 
That vas not, one may 
assume, the military's prime concern. 
Political observers who examined this follow-on aspect were 
cautiously optimistic: 
The strategic hamlet program i s the heart of our effort 
and deserves top priority. While it has not -- and probably 
will not -- bring democracy to rural Vietnam, it provides t ruly 
local administration for the first time. 
Coupled with measures 
to i ncrease rice production and farmer i ncome, these local 
administrations can work a revolution in rural Vietnam. 
93/ 
The same tone was reflected in Michael Forrestal's report to President 
Kennedy i n February 1963 following his visit to Vietnam va th Roger Hilsman. 9l~/ 
The visitors found Ambassador Nolting and his deputy, William C. Trueheart, 
optimistic about the r esults vrhich the program might achieve once the 
materials for it, then just beginning to come in, r eached full volume. 
95/ 
The Department of Defense was devoting considerable effort to 
insuring that these materials did r each Vietnam in, the quantities needed 
and i n t imely fashion. 
Secretary McNamara had been stuck with this prob-
lem during his May 1962 visit to "Operation Sunrise" . 
He saw especi8~ly a 
need to program SDC, CG, and Youth Corps training so that it ,{Quld match 
the role of hamlet building and to insure the provision of proper commu-
nications for "rarning purposes 0 
96/ A substantial amount of the MAAG-DoD 
effort subsequently iVent into programming. 
The Agency for International 
Development had agreed to fund the "Strategic Hamlet Kits" ( building 
materials , barbed wire and sta..."k.es, light vreapons, arnmuni tion, and commu-
nication equipment), but in August 1962 it demurred, stating that support-
ing assistance fu.Ylds in the MAP vrere i nadequate for the purpose 0 
97/ 
Secretary McNamara agreed to undertake the financing for 1500 kits""T13 
million) but asked if the additional 3500 kits requested iVere r eally 
necessary and, if so, on I'That deltvery schedule . 
The target l evels and 
delivery dates unclenrent more or less. continuouS revision from then until 
the question becarne irrelevant in late 1963. 
98/ 
A separate but relatecl 
effort went into expediting the proclJ.r ern.ent , delivery, and installation of 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
29 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
radios in the strategic hamlets so that each would have the capability 
to sound the alann and request the employment of mobile reserves when 
attacked. 
F. 
Differences Begin to Emerge 
All of these IIprogram management II activities vTere based on the 
unstated assumpt.ion that the strategic hamlet program vmuld lead to effec-
t i ve pacification if only Diem vlould mal<;,e it work. 
As it turned out, 
there was some disagreement behreen what the U. S. considered needed to be 
done and what President Diem knew very well he was doing. 
He was using 
the Strategic Hamlet Program to carry fonTard his IIpersonalist philosophy. II 99/ 
As brother Nhu visibly took the reins controlling the program and began to 
solidify control over the Youth Corps it became increasingly clear that 
Diem was emphasizing government. control of the peasantry at the expense (at 
least in U.S. eyes ) of pacification. 
100/ 
As awareness in Washington increased that strategic hamlets could 
serve several purposes, there developed also a divergent interpretation of 
vThether or not the GVN was '\al1l1ing the ,yar. II 
When General Krulak, SAC SA, 
and Joseph Mendenhall, an ex-counselor in Saigon then at State, visited 
RVN i n September 1963, President Kennedy wryly asked upon receiving their 
conflicting reports, lIyou hID did vi sit the same country, didn ' t yoU?1I 
101/ 
The ansl·rer is that they had, but the general stressed that the ~ilitary war 
was going well while the diplomat asserted that the political war was being 
l ost. 
The argumept vTaS not, it· should be stressed, one between the generals 
and the diplomats; experienced diplomats disagreed fundamentally with 
Mendenhall. 
The disagreement vTaS between those iyho poi nted to signs of 
progress and those who heJdup examples of poor planning, corruption, and 
alienation of the peasants vThose loyalty was the obj ect of the exercise 0 
Criticisms -- frequently accompanied by counterbalancing assertions that 
"limited progress ll was being achieved __ mentioned corvee labor, GVN fail-
ures to reimburse the farmers for losses due to resettlement, the dishonesty 
of some officials, and Diem's stress on exhortations rather than on the 
provision of deSirable social services . 
102/ 
Those who emphasized that the prograrn '\-Tas shmving real progress --
usually ,vi th a caveat or two that there was considerable room for improve-
ment -- stressed statistical evidence to portray the exponential increase 
i n strategic hamlet construction ( Table 2), the decli.ning trend in Viet 
Cong-initiated incidents (T:able 3), ther:Lse in VC defections (Table l~ ), and 
t he slovT but steady increase in GVN control of rural areas (Table 5). 
The J CS observation va th respect to the establisbrnent of strategic 
hamlets, for instance, was that since fewer than hTO tenths of one percent 
(0.210) of them had been overrun by the VC, liThe Vietnamese peopl e must 
surely be finding in them a measure of the tranquility ,'Thich they seek. 
103/ 
RGK Thompson later claimed that the very absence of attacks 'ioTaS 
an indicator that the VC had succeeded in infiltrating the hamlets o 
104/ 
The point is not Thompson ' s prescience but the diffi culty of reasoned-~ 
assessment to which this analysiS has already pointed . The U.S. course, 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
30 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
" 
',' ",' 
" ;, ' 
" .... . ' 
• .'. ~ . 
I 
I 
• • \.. . 
• 
. t ' .t;':' 
", .. ~ 
", .. 
', . 
\J. o 
c5 z 
; 
.... : . 
. -' 
STRATEGIC HAMLET GROWTH SOUTH VIETNAM 
,.' 
" 
9000-~-r~--+--r~~-~-+--~~-4--_~~-4~+
I --~~_~--+--r~'--+--+~ 
, 
I, 
8500 STRATEG IC HAMLETS 
. 
. 
ESTI M ATE D TO IlE C OMPLE T E D 
g' 
BY' JUI_V . 
8000 -6--+~+-~--~~--~-~~-~j~~--I--'-fl--~I--+--+--+--r--1--~--~~~~~-4 
b 
0· ... 
.\ 0 
N 
D 
.. 1962 
\ 
, \ 
", 
',), . 
J 
F 
M 
A 
.. .. 
1963 
M 
J 
31 
--
J 
A 
5 
0 
N 
D 
J 
F 
M 
A 
M 
A 
1964 
TABLE 2 
~ 
" 
.. 
" 
. 
" . 
' .' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
...... ··i . '. ,. 
I 
. 
., 
. 
' , . 
'. :-~ __ .I VI ET CONG I NITI ATED I NCI DENTS BROKE.N DOWN INTO CATEGORI ES 
(AHACKS, TERRORI SM, SABOTAGE, PROPAGANDA), 
I 
• 
, -
. :-. 
_.-: .",":: 
:,1 
tl OO 
.:.' tooo 
" 
~ .... 
.'. . 
• 
. ' . . ' . . 
' .. 900 
'.1 '. 
. ;;: 
700 
.. . ,. 
, 
', . 
. i' 
.. ,'. 
. I
' 
TEn ROR I S M 
. / 
.1 . 1 
. '. 
, . 
.. , 
I 
I 
I 
I
' 
I 
l' 
ATTf., CKS 
0= 
TE:RR ORISM 
II GII'" SABOTAGE: 
s 
PROPAGANDA 
----;-- , .--
TAJ3LE 3 
.-,', '~ 
.. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
, , 
'" 
.
.. 
- - .. 
" 
. 
VIET CONGDEFECTI,ONS, 
' " 
" 
'. 
' 350 
ca --+--+---l--+--+--~-+-'---+--f-,--t---t--t---r-fiT---t 
C' 
I .. 
'/ 
h J--+,---I--+ 
. ~'50 .J.--,-+--:'-+--+---l--+--1--J-:.-l--+-~-+-t--j---t---
, 
, . 
~ 
..' 
, 
" 
, 
\ 
, 
o 
. .. 
J 'F 
M 
A 
M 
J 
J ', A 
5 
0
' N 
,,'------..,...-..-~ J962 ------..-.;.-
, , 
: . : 
TABLE 4 
• 
j 
F 
M 
A/ 
1963--./ 
. t .... \. ' 
-" 
:. .; ... 
SIT UATION 
AS OF 
I JULY 1962 
SITUAT ION 
' AS OF 
I OCT 1962 
S ITUATION 
AS OF 
I DEC: 1962 
"', :,. 
SIT UATI ON 
AS OF 
I APRIL 63 
,', 
CHANGES 
JUL 62 TO 
A PR IL 63 
, ., 
v 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
~OMPAR I SON OF CONTROL; GOVERNMENT OF VI ETNAM AND VI ET CONG 
JULY, OCTOBER AND DECEMBER 1962, 
AND APRIL 1963 
,GOVERNMENT OF 
GOVERNMENT OF 
NEITHER GOVERI':MENT 
V IETNAM EFFECTI VE 
V IETNAM IN 
OF VIETNAM NOR 
CONTROL 
ASCENDANCY 
VIET CONG CON TROL 
NUMBER OF 
VILLAGES 
859 
710 
34 '. 
RURAL 
POPULATION 
5, 800, 000 
3, 622, 000 
137, 000 
% OF RURA L ' 
47 "10 
29% 
1 % 
POPULATION 
'NUMBER or-
1"8 
VILLAGES 
929 
61 3 
RUR AL 
6, 07 1,000 
3, 246 ,000 
71 7. 000 
POPULATION 
-
%01" RURAL 
49 % 
, 
6 % 
POPULATION 
27 "/0 
NUMBER OF 
120 
VILLAGES 
95 1 
6GG 
-
RURAL 
. 
POPULATION 
6,300, 000 
3,33 \, 000 
643,000 
%01" RURAL , 
51 % 
27% 
5 % 
POPULATION 
NUMBER OF 
139 
VI L LAGES 
935 
73 1 
, 
RURAL 
. 
609.000 ' 
POPULATION 
6,724.000 
3, 356, 000 
"!o OF RURAL 
I 
54 % 
27%. 
5 % 
POPULATION 
' NUMBER OF 
+ 21 
+ 105 
+ 76 
V1L,LAGES 
RURAL 
+ 924, 000 
-266, 000 
+ 472, 000 
POPULATION 
. 
% 0 1" RURA L 
.+ 7 % 
- 2 % 
POPULATION 
NO;;;:'; IN ORDER 1'0 PRESENT A BET TER-PICTURE OF CONTPOL OF 
OF RUR AL V IETNAM, 1,600,000 POPULATION OF AUT ONOMOUS ' 
J CITIES OF SAIGON, DANANG, HUE, AN:) DALAl' U"DER GVN 
CONTROL 
AS NOT USED IN T HIS STUDY , ( POPULATIONS ARE 
ESTIMATESl. ' • 
,'.'- '. 
"';: 
. '. ! ' 
. : 
• \ 
',J 
, . 
+1,% 
VIET CONG 
IN 
ASCENDANCY 
422 
1,702,000 
--
14 % 
329 
1, 275,000 
10 % 
340 
I, 143,000 -
9 % 
348 
. 
9G2,OOO 
7 % 
':"'74 
'-He, 000 
- 7% 
, " .. 
VIET CONG 
EFFE CTI VE 
CONTROL 
454 
1,1 57 , 000 --
9 % -
437 
= 
1,008 , 000 
8 % 
445 
926, 000 
8 % 
390 
, 
' 857,000 
" : 
'7 % 
-64 
- 300,000 
- 2 % 
-- .... ~. '. 
'J 
. 
'. ' 
I.) 
v 
, , 
,.-
. . 
: 
: • • :_':~ "
, 
,0
. 
',? 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
in the face of these cautiously optimistic and hopefully pessimistic 
reJ2ort~? was to continue its established program of material support 
coupled with attempts to influence Diem to make desired changes. 
VII. 
THE PATH TO THE EnD 
A. 
Diem's Position Hardens 
The obvious U, S, alternatives, by mid-1963, remained the Salile 
as they were in l ate 1901: 
(1) to induce changes within the strategic 
Hamlet PiTogram ( among others ) by convincing Diem to make such changes; 
(2) to allow Diem to run things his own ,-my and hope for the best; and 
(3) to find an alternative to President Diem. 
The U.S. continued to 
pursue the first course; Diem insisted increasingly on the second. 
Finally, due to pressures from areas other than the Strategic Hamlet 
Program, the U.S. pursued the third alternative . 
The Strategic H~mlet 
Program, in the event, died with its sponsors. 
Far from becoming rnore reasonable, in U.S. eyes, President 
Diem by mid-1963 had become more i ntractable . 
He insisted, for example, 
that the U. S, cease to have an operational voice in the Strategic Hamlet 
Program. 
7he multiplication of U. S. advisors at many l evels, he claimed, 
was the source of friction and dissension. 
The remedy was to remove the 
advisors . 
105/ The essence of Diem's position was that Taylor ' s 
"limited partnership" would not vwrk . 
Other U,S . missions visited Vietnam to assess the conduct of 
the war. 
The result was much the same as reported by Krulak and 
Mendenhall. This was essentially the findings of the r1cIl:amara-Taylor 
mission i n September ; the military campaign is progressing, political 
disaffection is growing ; U, S. leverage is questionable. 
106/ 
B. 
The Program Dies With the Ngos 
The r est may be summarized: 
the U.S. attempted to i nsist on 
a program with more emphasis on broad appeal r ather than control; Diem, 
finding himself increasingly embroiled i n the Buddhist controversy, 
increased repressive measures; a coup toppl ed the Diem regime on 1 
November ; the deposed President and his brother I'Jhu, "architect of the 
Strategic Hamlet Program," were killed. 
The Strategic Hamlet Program--
or at l east the program under that name '\.,rhich they had made the unifying 
t heme of their counterinsurgent effort--died with them. 
The inhabitants 
who had wanted to leave the hamlets did so in the absence of an effective 
government . 
The VC took advantage of the confusion to attack and overrun 
others. 
Some offerred little or no r esistance . 
The ruling-junta 
attempted to resuscitate the program as "Eevl Life Haml ets" early in 1964 , 
but the failures of the past provid.ed a poor psychological basis upon 
which to base hopes for the future. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
35 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECm-:;T - Sensitive 
VIII. 
AJ:: INCm:CLUSIVE Sm10,lARY 
'Jlhe dominant U. S. vie"r has been that the Strategic Hamlet Program 
failed because of over-expansion and the establishment of hamlets in 
basically insecure areas. 
107/ That there "Tas overexpansion and the 
establishment of many poorly defended hamlets is not questioned. 
This 
contributed, beyond doubt, to the failure of the progrrun. 
But this view 
finesses the problem of the process for \~hich t he strate(Sic hamlets were 
but the tangible symbol. 
The present analysis has sought to emphasize 
both the essentially political nature of the objective of the Strategic 
'Hamlet Program and the political nature of the context in which the 
process evolved -- of expectations, bargaining, and attempts to exert 
i nfluence on other participants in policy formulation 811d implementation. 
In this context it is the U.S. inability to exert leverage on President 
Diem (or Diem ' s i nability to reform) that emerges as the principal cause 
of failure. 
Yet, both of these attempts to pinpoiDt the reasons >",hy the 
strategic hamlet program did not succeed fai l to get at another v"hole 
issue: 
the validity of that body of writings which one may call the 
t heory and doctrine of counterinsurgency. 
Reither the military nor 
the political aspects of this doctrine can be upheld (or proved false ) 
by an exmfrination of the strategic Hamlet Progrruu. 
Quite aside from 
whether or not Diem was able to broaden the program' s appeal to the 
peasantry, what would have occurred had he made a determined and 
sustained effort to do so? 
Would this have l ed in some more-or-l ess 
direct way to stability or to even greater dissatisfaction? He simply 
do not know. 
The quest ion is as unansvlerable as whether the appetite 
grOlvs with the eating or is satisfied by i t . 
The contention here is 
that claims of mismanagement are not sufficient to conclude that better 
management would necessarily have produced the desired resul.ts. 
In the military sphere the unanswerable questions are different. 
It i s said that the military phase of the strategic Hamlet Program 
progressed reasonably well i n many areas; the failure was in the political 
end of the process . 
But did the military actions succeed? Might failures 
to develop adequate i ntelligence ana. to ,,;eed out VC infrastructure in 
these hamlets not as easily be attributable to' the fact that the 
inhabitants knew they were not really safe from VC i ntimi dation and 
reprisals? Does the analogy to an "oil spot" have operational meaning 
when small bands can carry out hit and rQD raids or when many small 
bands can concentrate in one location and achieve surprise? Hhere i s 
t he key to this vicious circle -- or i s there a l,-ey? 
In concl usion, vlhile the abortive strategic Haml et Program of 
1961-1963 may teach one something, the available record does not pernlit 
one to conclude either that the prograM fell because of the failure of 
a given phase or that other phases "rere, i n fact, adequate to the 
chal lenge. 
One may say that the program was doomed by poor execution 
and by t he inability of the Ugo family to reform coupled with the i n-
ability of the U.S. to i nduce them to reform. 
The evidence does not 
warrant one to proceed further . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
" 
o 
o 
-i 
2: 
o 
-i 
m 
en 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -Sensitive 
IV. B. 2 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9· 
10 . 
11. 
12 . 
13. 
FOOTNOTES 
Sir Robert Thompson, Defeating Comrmmist Tnsurger..cy (New York: 
Praeger, 1966), p. 123. 
Seven Years of the Ngo Din}} Diem Admini.stra:tion, 1254 .. 12.§]: 
( Saigon : 26 October 1961) , pp. 35'(-3t30. 
See J.J. L2,slo1'f, "Rural Resettlement in South Vietnam: Th2 
Argovi 11e Program", Pac:ific Affairs, Vol. XXXV, Nr 4 (Winter 
1962-63 ), pp. 327-340. 
Despatch, Saigon to State Nr 278, 7 Ma.rch 1960, Inte,llJ..gcnce 
Report, Hr 2137261, :p o 14· ( S/NF) 
William A. Nighsvlonger, Rural Pacificatiol". i n Victncull ( NeVi York : 
Praeger , 1966), p. 4.6 . 
' 
SlUE 10-L~-61 , 7 November 1961, Probe.ol e Conrrn'.mi st Re8.ctio!.1s i n 
,South Vietnam., p . 3 (TS) 
Briefing Paper, n. d., The Nort h Vietmunese Role in t~e Or i gi n , 
Directio:r:., and S'l'oportOfthe We.r in South Vietna~i1 , p. i v ( S); 
State Department Bureau of Intelligence ,211d Research, RFE .-3, 
1 Nove~ber 1961, ComTIYl.Hlist Threat Mounts in South VietIl8111, 
1'. Lj. (8) 
. 
~., p. 5 
l\TJE 50-61, 28 March 1961 , Outlook i n Ma in l~md Southeg,st ASi8., 
p. 7 (s) 
MAAG, Vietnam, 1 September 1961, First 'I'l-relve M2nth R2po2;'t of 
. ~ef lfJAAG, Vietnam, p . 10 (S) 
U:S. Senat e CO'ffir.dttee on Foreign Rel ations , 89th Congress , 
2nd SeSSion , Background Tnfonnat-j on Rel 8.ti ng to Sot;.theast Asia 
and Vi etnillll ( 2nd ReYised Ed . ), Hashingto~'l , GPO, 1966, FP-:tSb-7. 
Letter of Transmittal to President Diem 8:(,d Presidel".t Kennedy, 
n.d. (JlJ.ne 1961), Joint .Actio·~ Program Proposea by the Vi et rram-
Unitee. States S'pecial 
F2:E~::"cial Groups (S) 
See I bid ., I ntroQuction, p . 1, passim. 
TOP SECRET- Sel:.siti ve 
37 
14. 
15· 
16 . 
17 . 
18 . 
19 · 
20 . 
21. 
22 . 
23. 
24 . 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive 
J..Jette:c, President Kennedy t o Gen.eral Haxvlell D. Tayl or, 13 October 
1961 ( C) 
Reuort on General Taylor ! s 11; ssion to SOljth Vietnam, 3 November 
1961, bou.,'1d in loo'se l eaf "rith letter Of t ransmit tel , evaluations 
cnd conclusions, and Appendices A-I. (TS ) 
Cited hereaft er as 
,?~~rlo:c Reuort . 
All referer.ces are to the section on eval uations 
and concl usions . 
Ibid. , p . 2 
I bid. , p . 3 
I bid. , p . 8 
~. , pp. 6-7. 
~ ., p. 9 
Ibid. , p . 7 
I bid. , p . 14 
I bid. , See al so pp . 11-16. 
----.--
~ ., pp. 11-12 
25 . 
The pl an, cited hereafter as CIP-1960 , is contained as a.n i ncl osure 
to De spatch 1:Tr. 276, SeigoLl t o State , 
l.~ J~(lU21j' 1961, Com."!ter 
I nS1.1..rge~lcy Plan for SOl'.th Vietnam. (S) 
26. 
Despatch Nr . 276, Saigon to State, 9,E' cit., p.3 
27. 
See for exampl e , I bi d., Annex B. 
28. 
HAAG Vietn2.ill, 15 S2ytember 1961 , GeorgrEmhically Phase d. National 
Level Operation P12.ll for Cwnteril1surgenc;/ ( C) (Secret) } cited 
hereafter 2.S Georgraphie:all y Plnsed COlmterinsurgen,cy Plan . 
29 .. 
Ibi d . , pp. Al-A3 . 
30 . 
I bi d . , pp . A3-AL1. 
31. 
Ibid. . } l)P · A4-A7 . 
32. 
I bid . } p . C2 . 
38 
TOP SECRET .. SE~mI'I'IVE 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET .. Sensitive 
33 . 
See , for eX3l!ll")le, Te1egrarn, Saigon to State Nr. 1~.66 , 16 March 
1.961 (S), snd Aiee Memoire , McGarr -Co Die.:ll, 3 July 1961, RevieH 
of Mili tB.ry Si tuat~on and Recormnenc1.atiol1s for COlltinued Improveme~l t ( S). 
34 . 
Telegram, S2.igon t o State , Nr . 508, 18 October 1961 ( S). 
35 . 
Study, RGK Thompson to Presi d.ent Diem, 27 October 1961, Appre~i at ion 
of Vietnam , November 1961 -April 1962 (S), Inc1. to letter Lt. Gen. 
Lionel C. McGarr to Secretary of Defense , 20 November 1951, SecDef 
Control j\l"r . 2654 (s). 
36 . 
I bi d . 
37. 
I bic1. 
38. 
Copie s of Thompson ' s covering l etter EJ:,1d memorandum to Diem are 
.:.enclosed Vii th msS, Saigon to State ~ Er. 205 , 20 November 1951, 
'l'honrDson l'viission Hecommendations to President Diem ( S) . The 
mei:!lJr andtWl. is cited hereafter a s Thoru11sonMemora:.1'lQum. 
-..---
~-
39 . 
Ibid . 
40. 
~b i d . , l etter of transmittaL 
(Emj?hasis added) •. 
41. 
Lett er, McGarr to Admiral H.D. Felt ( CHTCPAC ), 27 November 1961 
(S), Inc1. to l ett er , McGarr to Secret ary' of Defense , 27 November 
1961 , op. ~if . 
42 . 
I bid. 
43 . 
Ibid. 
44 . 
U. S. Militay.f Advisory Group, C:m.1AAG Gui dance Paper to Field 
Advisors i n COULter I nsurgency, Fourth Revision, 10 February 1962, 
T8.Ctics and Techniq'.;.es of Counterinsurgent Operations ( S) 
h 5. 
De spatch Hr . 205 , Sai gon to State , 20 li;ov~mber 1961, op. cit. 
LI·6. 
D2partr.Jent of Ste.te, Bureau of Intelligence and Re.search, 
2 Feoruary 1962, A Strategj.c Concept for South Vietnam ( S) ; 
on the Presi dent I s i nterest and Thompson 1 s effect on Hi l sma;'--l , 
see Roger Rilsmau, To Eove a H2,tion : T:ne Politics of Foreign 
. 'Polic;! i n t he Administration of Jo:b...n F . Kennedy (li"ei-f Yor!~ : 
Doubl eds.y, 1967 ), 1>:9 . 427 - 39 . 
---~ 
39 
TOP SECEET - Ser:si tj.ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A StratefSic CC?,ncept for 5l::mth Vietnam, oJ2. cit. , pp . 9-14. 
The third principle is Hi 1 sm821 I s own contribution, c1raving 
heavily on his personal experiences ivi th the OSS o.uring 
World 'YTcor II. 
~ ., pp . 15-19. 
49. 
Ibid" 
pp . 15-24 . 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 
54. 
55· 
56. 
57. 
59 · 
Departmel1t of State, Task Force Vietn81u, 
ll.~ December 1961, 
Stah ,\s Report of Developp1ents Since De.c:ember 8, p. 3 (8') 
HQCINCPAC, 16 December 1961, Transcript, First 8ecret ar:r.-2! 
De!ense Conference, pp. 1-2 (S) 
Personal notes of Assistant SEcretary of Defense Arthur Sylvester, 
16 December 1961, SecDef Conference, Honolulu. 
Memorandum, McGarr to Mr. Thuan, 18 December 1961, ~l . Government_ 
P!"-ramilitary Infrastructure (Organization ) Required as Integ!ated_ 
Pr:Tt of ~Hli tary Phase ot Peci!_ic;9.tiog :E;ffort_ rsT· 
Ibid. 
The GVN plan and actions are not well docwnented but are r eferred 
to i n U. S. MAAG Vietnam Repor!., 31 July 1962 , ~1S L~rne~ 
!ir. 1,2,. 
John C. Donnell e.nd Gerald C. Hickey 
The Vietnamese IIStrategic 
tf 
,
--------...---. --
Hamlets: 
A PreliminarY' Report (mum I-iemoTe.ndum Ri.1 3200~ARPA, 
30 August 1962), p. 24 (C). 
Letter McGarr to Felt, 18 December 1961, op. 
c~.!. 
HQCINCPAC, 15 J antlaYT 1962, Record o::f~S~e __ c...:o;,;...n~retary of Defense ' 
Conference, pp . 5A-l - 5A-3 rs;-
60. 
~., PI>. 6-1 - 6-5. 
61. 
62. 
Departmei.1t of State, R:;search Project 630 
R'3cent American Policy 
and Diplome.c;r. Concernin/L.Vidnp.Jll., 1960-1963~99-'(TS)---' 
Telegralrl, Sa igon to State , Nr . 1031, 10 Februe,rJ 1962 ( 8). 
Donne 11 and Hickey, op. cit., pp. 3 .. 4. 
40 
TOP SECP..ET·· Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
_. 
TOP SECRET .- Sensitive 
64 . 
Ibid.,:p. 4. 
65 . 
Departmer.t of State, Ts.sk Force Vietmuu, 28 December 1961, Status 
Report of Developments Since Decenioer 21, p. 2 (S). 
66 . 
~. , p . 3. 
67. 
Telegram, Seigon to State Nr . 495, 16 October 1961 ( S). 
68 . 
The U.S. proposals are recorded in N2.tional Security Action 
Mcmora'1dulll No. 111, 22 November 1961, First Phase of Vietnam 
ProgrelU ( TS). 
69. 
Telegrcm, Saigon to State Nr. 687, 22 November 1961 ( S). 
70 . 
Ibid. 
71. 
TelE;'gr81u, Saigon to State Nr . 708, 25 November 1961 (s). 
72 . 
Telegram, CAS New Delhi to Director No 9941, from Ambassador 
Gal brai th for t he President, 21 November 1961 (rrs). 
73 . 
See Homer C. Bigart, ItVietnameseOpen a Drive on Reds , It New 
York Times 29 March 1962: 
74. 
Telegram Saigon to State Nr . 1367, 22 May 1962 (s). 
75. 
Telegram, Saigon to State Nr . 133·, 8 August 1962 (C); Airgrmns , 
Saigon to State, Nrs . A-85 and A-llO, 9 August end 27 August 1962 (C). 
76. 
"The Times of Vietnam,"Vol IV, Nr 43, 28 October 1962 . 
77. 
Ibid., p. 6. 
78. 
Rufus Phillips, A Report on Counter-Insurgency in Vietn8~ , 
31 August 1962,p, 5 (C) . 
----
79 . 
See for eX81llple, Department of St8.te , Bureau of Intelligence and 
Research Research Memorandum RFE.·2'1, 18 June 1962, Progr~ss Report 
on South Vietn~ ( ShfF). 
80 . 
DepartmeYlt of State , Bureau of Intel ligence and Research, Research 
Memorandun RFE-E:2, 5 Dec2lTIDer 1962 , Saigon I S S!rategic Ccmc.ept for 
Counter-Tnsurgency 2. Prog:;ress Report (S/ NF) . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
41 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
81. 
~ 
to S92:l.!hesst Asia by the Secret a,ry of Defense, 8-11 May 1962, 
p. 5 (TS) , I nclos'-lre to lvlemo ~ CJCS to SecDef, 14 May 1962, Visit 
to Southeast Asia. 
82. 
Vte"tnam : li'ree-I'lorld Cha lleDg~ in So,~theast Asia ( Department of State 
Publication 7388) , pp. 16 ·-17 .. 
83. 
Remarks to press, 24 J'J.ly 1962, in OSD Historical Files . 
84 
H 
C B· 
t 
"U'S 
. 
T 
t 
f' St 
J . 
11 
liT 
'
. 
omer. 
19ar· , 
Helps "VietD2lll 1n es· 0.,. 
TSLegy ~ 
Yorl<:. Times , 27 ll,farch 1962 . 
85 . 
Ibid. 
86 . 
"No 'tlin,11 Th,e Ne:w Republic, 9 April1962 . 
87. 
US lflAAG, 31 July 1962, Lessons Learned r-Tr . 19, p. 2. (C). 
8S. 
Visit to Southeast Asia bl the Secretary ?f Defense., 8
n ll May 1962, 
op . cit., p . 2 
89 
Bureau of Intelligence and Research, RFE-27, 18 J une 1962, op. cit . 
90. 
VlAAG Lessons IJec.rned nr . 19, op. cit. 
91. 
COMUSMACV Message DA IN 262596, 8 September 1962, Province 
~e.hab ilitation Prog~ ( S). 
92 . 
HAAG, Lessons Len.rned Nr . 19, 91:.' cit. 
93. 
Theodore J. C. Heavner, Deputy Director Worldng Group V~etnam j 
Report on Visit to Vietnam" October l S··Kovember 26, 1902 , p . 2 ( S) 
94 • 
MichaeLV. Forrestal, MemoranCl: .. lm for the President , A Report on 
South ViehH3Jll. 
. 
95 . 
Hilsman, To Move a r\"e.tioI':, op. cit., p. 453 • 
. 96. 
Visit to Southeast Asia, by the Secretexy of Defense , 8 ··11 Iviay 1962, 
op. ei t . 
97 . 
Memo, ASD lISA to SeeDef , 9 August 1962, Fu.r:.ding of Strateg.i e Hamlet 
Kits) Vietnam. 
98. 
See, for exampl e, JCSIvl 734 -62, 22 September 1962, Funding of 
,§trategic Hamlet r:i ts, Vietnam. 
42 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
" . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
, 
99. 
CIA M~.rJ.o for SecDef, 28 September 1962 ( S). 
100. 
Department of State , Burea·oJ. of Intelligence 8nd Research, 
RFE~.42, 
27 l-iay 1963, Implications of GVN Difficulties i n Viet~~ ( S). 
101 
t-T' 1 
fjl FiT" 
• t 
502 
• 
II smen, .LO 1'10Ve a _~aTlon, op . ~.
, p. 
_. 
102 . 
See, :for example, USOH Rure,l Affe,irs Office, 1 September 1963, 
Second Informal Appreciation of the Status of the Strategic 
HpJrrlet Progrs.m, IEcl. to Memora..ndmn, i·iichael V. Forrestal to 
SecretaI"J McNamer-a, 20 September 1963, Vietnam, SecDef Control 
Nr . 497. 
103. 
104 . 
105 . 
106. 
107 . 
J'oint Chiefs of Steff, 11 Mey 1963, Tre:c.ds in the Counterinsurgency 
Effort in South Vietne.m, p. 60 (sjrIT). 
i 
Thompson, Defeati ng Communist Insurgency, oJ2.. cit., p. 136. 
Dep8Ttment of State, RFE-42, 27 Hay 1963, op. cit. 
Memorandum for the President, 2 October 1963 
Report of the 
MdJamara.-Taylor I:lission to South Vietnam (TS). 
See, for example , Depa.rtment of State , J;3ureau of Intelligence and 
Resee..rch, RFE-102, 20 December 1963, Trends in the War Effort i n 
South Vietnam ( S); See also Hilliam A. NighsVTtJuger, ~ural Pacifi cation 
i n Vietnam. 
. 43 
TOP SECRET -
S ?~sitive 
