a

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It mst have seemed reasonable to expect that an increased but diffuse
U.S. presence would not only enhance information on VC actions and
probable plans but also improve U.S. knowledge of APYN plans and per-
formance.

Finally -- and most difficult to pinpoint in terms of what policy-
maker or policymaking group emphasized which aspects -~ the U.S, expected
to gain additional influence from an increased advisory effort. General.
Taylor viewed this as the natural product of individuals with parallel
interests working hand-in-glove in the field (as distinct from large
headquarters). This would enable them to escape the petty differences
which grow up in the absence of operational responsibility and permit
the U.S. advisors to "lead by example" even though they would not be
technically empowered to lead.

Other expectations of increased U.S, influence could take a variety
of forms. Improved information, for instance, in a hierarchically ordered
U.S. advisory system, would permit the U.S. to push more effectively any
line of endeavor which it wished GVN to adopt. This potential for improved
"salesmanship" was not unrelated to an increased potential for coercive
influence. What the U.S. would give in material support it might also
withhold selectively. Influence need not be dependent wpon example alone.

None of these expectations were, however, articulated fully or spelled
out in terms which would provide operational guidelines for the new U.S.
advisors who were being deployed to SVN. The expectations of benefits were
implicit and generalized. The potential existed for a comprehensive, co-
ordinated U.S. approach to advising but the potential was not the reality.

IMPLEMENTING THE FIRST BUILD-UP

The decision just examined to increase the U.S. advisory effort was
preceded by a series of marginal increases in the U.S. military strength
in Vietnam. (Actual "in-country" strengths are available for only a few
months during the early build-up period so it will frequently be necessary
to use authorization figures and to realize that newly authorized spaces
were generally not filled until some time had passed after their establish-
ment.) Presidential decisions in April and May 1961, taken in the light
of a central concern with Laos rather than Vietnam, increased the authorized
size of MAAG Vietnam from 685 to 785. ‘The 100-man increase was divided
almost equally between technical advisors and advisors for ARVN's tactical
training centers. 78/ In October 1961 the authorized strength was
increased again, to 972, of which 948 spaces were for U.S. Army personnel;
603 of these 948 spaces were actually filled by the end of November. 79/

ele TOP SECRET = Sensitive
