.
oe
hy

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

bomber squadrons have been transferred from the United States
into advance bases in the Pacific. Fifthly, an antisubmarine
task force group has been moved into the South China Sea. 37/

It is significant, relative to the broader purpose of the deploy-
ments, that few of these additional units were removed from the Western
Pacific when the immediate crisis subsided. In late September the fourth
attack aircraft carrier was authorized to resume its normal station in
the Eastern Pacific as soon as the regularly assigned carrier completed
Saas The other forces remained in the vicinity of their August deploy-
ment. 3

Other actions taken by the Administration in the wake of Tonkin
Gulf were intended to communicate to various audiences the depth and
sincerity of the U.S. commitment. On the evening of 4 August, in con-
junction with his testing of Congressional opinion regarding reprisal
action, President Johnson disclosed his intention to request a resolution
in support of U.S. Southeast Asian policy. This he did through a formal
message to both houses on 5 August. Concurrently, identical draft
resolutions, the language of which had been prepared by executive agencies,
were introduced in the Senate by J. William Fulbright (D., Ark.) and in
the House by Thomas E. Morgan (D., Pa.) and co-sponsored by bi-partisan
leadership. 39/ Discussed in committee on 6 August, in response to
testimony by leading Administration officials, the resolution was passed
the following day -- by votes of 88 to 2 in the Senate and 416 to O in
the House [ites c/.

Despite the nearly unanimous votes of support for the Resolution,
Congressional. opinions varied as to the policy implications and the
meaning of such support. The central belief seemed to be that the
occasion necessitated demonstrating the nation's unity and collective
will in support of the President's action and affirming U.S. determination
to oppose further aggression. However, beyond that theme, there was a
considerable variety of opinion. For example, in the House, expressions
of support varied from Congressman Laird's argument, that while the
retaliation in the Gulf was appropriate such ections still left a policy
to be developed with respect to the land war in Southeast Asia, to the
more reticent viewpoint of Congressman Alger. The latter characterized
his support as being primarily for purposes of showing unity and expressed
concern over the danger of being dragged into war by "other nations
seeking our help." Several spokesmen stressed that the Resolution did
not constitute a declaration of war, did not abdicate Congressional
responsibilit;, for determining national policy commitments, and did not
give ee, President carte blanche to involve the nation in 4a major Asian
war. 40

Similar expressions were voiced in the senior chamber. For example,
Senator Neison sought assurances that the Resolution would not be exploited
to commit the United States further in the direction of a large land war

13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

