Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

livin Bess

THE ADVISORY BUILD-UP. 1961-67

INTRODUCTION

From shortly after the founding of the Republic of Vietnam (RVN)
in 1954 until the first year of the Kennedy Administration the U.S,
supported RVN with a Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) which
was reasonably stable in size. Beginning in 1961 the mmber of U.S.
military advisors to RVN increased sharply. ‘This increase continued
unevenly throughout 1967 and into 1968.

This U.S, military advisory buildup did not mark the first U.S.
attempt to conduct “advisory warfare" in the post-World War II era.
The first such attempt was in Greece. Nor did it mark the initial U.S.
program aimed at creating a modern militery force from meager beginnings
in a foreign nation. The first attempt of this kind was made in the
Republic of Korea. What it did mark was the first sustained U.S. effort
to advise foreign national forces engaged in combatting what the communists
have termed a "war of national liberation,” a struggle which took the form
of a civil war with external assistance to both antagonists and in which
winning the adherence of the population was at least as central an issue
as was the tide of military battle. This has been the first sustained
U.S. advisory effort to be concerned in = major way with "pacification
by proxy."

The present study examines the major decisions to undertake and to
expand this large military advisory effort. It attempts to describe the
context in which successive decisions were made to send advisors to South
Vietnam, to record the expectations of the policymakers or, when appro-
priate, to note the absence of explicit expectations, and to trace the
expansion of the U.S, military presence in the advisory role through the
various levels of the South Vietnamese military and administrative machinery.
Finally, this study attempts to assess the impact of the U.S. advisory
buildup in terms of the extent to which U.S. expectations have been realized
or frustrated.

The main study is divided into two varts. Part One describes briefly
the U.S. advisory effort in RVN from 1954 through 1960. It sets the stage,
as it were, for the more comprehensive examination of the advisory buildup
from 1961 through 1967 in Part Two. (The latter year marks roughly the
final period for which information is aveileble at this writing, not any
necessary end to the general process described.) ‘The summary and analysis
which accompanies this study constitutes in effect Part Three of the study.
It assesses the U.S, advisory effort in terms of expectations and develop-
ments and examines persistent issues throughout the period under discussion.
Finally, the growth of the U.S. military advisory effort and related data

Al TOP SECRET - Sensitive
