Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Although NSAM 328 only approved 2 Marine BLT's for deployment to
Vietnam, there was also included an 18-20,000 man increase in U.S. forces
in order to "fill out existing units and supply needed logistic personnel.”
48/ Just what the President's intent was in approving that number of
personnel became the subject of some debate. The Secretary of Defense on
21 April told the President that 11,000 of the approved increase was to
augment various existing forces while a further 7,000 were logistic troops
to support "previously approved forces." 4g/ According to a memorandum
from McNaughton to Vance dated 5 May, the JCS misconstrued the add-ons to
mean logistic build-up for coastal enclaves and the possible later intro-
duction of two to three divisions. 50/ It isn't entirely clear from the
documents exactly what the President did have in mind for the support
troop add-ons. What is clear, however, and was made explicit in a memo-
randum from the Secretary of Defense to the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of
Staff, on 5 April was that the JCS were continuing to plan for the earliest
possible introduction of two to three divisions into RVN. 51/ The An-
bassador indicated to the State Department in a cable on 12 April that he
too thought the 18-20,000 man increase was for something more than those
forces already approved. Taylor said;

"T have been following with interest the logistic studies
which are going on at PACOM and MACV in anticipation of the
possible introduction of several divisions into SVN. Several
comments occur to me which are passed on for what they are
worth. There appears to be no question about the need for
the 18,000-20,000 logistic build-up (the Category A force)
eecmmented by General Westmoreland. The introduction of
this force has been approved and should be implemented as
rapidly as the elements can be moved and MACV can accept
them. I am surprised to learn from MACV that May 1 is the
earliest date for the arrival of the engineer element which
paces. the rate of arrival of the other components. If pos-
sible, this date should be advanced.

"The Category A package will provide support for about
50,000 U.S. personnel in-country, i.e., the present strength
plus the additional Marines now landing in the Da Nang-Hue
area and will permit some preliminary work in anticipation of
the arrival of additional U.S. forces. To make any signifi-
cant progress toward the establishment of a logistic base to
support additional forces, it will be necessary to bring in
rapidly about 5,000 more engineers (above those in Category A).
MACV estimates they could arrive about August 1 (if the Cate-
gory A engineers arrive on May 1). I would concur in the
desirability of this reinforcement, feeling that these engi-
neers can be very useful in SVN yiethen or not we ever intro-
duce additional divisions.

Taylor went on in the same cable (as though he were summing up the Peales
of the meetings which led to the NSAM):,

61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
