asl

a!

fwd | ka thei

| aye | Pree D

See

cay

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

19. In discussions on all levels my party and I strongly Greed the
French to utilize their present school and training center plant facility
to capacity for the training of indigenous personnel and establish ad-
ditional facilities where necessary in order to expedite the development

of the indigenous armies. The French accepted this concept with the

reservation that inasmuch as no additional qualified students may be

‘available, following utilization of the present large training plant

facility to capacity, the need for further expansion may be eliminated.
Furthermore, ay pereneiy believe that U. S. schools should be utilized,
not only to train Vietnamese instructors, but also to acquaint the Viet-
namese with U.. S. training methods. | |

‘20. Employment of Associated States Military Potential: Manpower

resources available in the Associated States are capable of supporting

considerable expansion beyond currently programmed increases in the

Armies of the Associated States. Bao Dai stated that Vietnamese forces

‘alone are capable of expansion to 500,000 men. Other Vietnamese

officials reiterated that their army could and should be expanded to at

least double current plans. This is a commendable attitude but pay,

‘equipment and training are the limiting factors.

21. Although a considerable increase in Vietnane’se support of the

war has been made during the past year (Vietnam has reportedly increased

its dotasse budget by 300% since President Tam took office), Vietnam’
remains capable of inapensed financial support of the war effort, as does
Cambodia. This dose not hold true for Laos, with its primitive economy
and present complete dependence on France for budgetary support. It is

the opinion of ‘Ambassador Heath and his staff that the Associated States

uy

2
eee i
Pr i
beret

=
re

&
BLT}

| fetes

~ 2
I
