Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(6) Resulting pressures to cease bombing -
in Laos.

(7) Vulnerability of barrier system.

b. Possible Offset: Present bombardment
forces could be reallocated to SVN and. Laos missions.

ec. Critical Times to Offset Risks. US should
enter cessation resolved to limit the time for DRV response
generally as follows:

--Discussions should begin within 30-60
days of cessation.

--Discussions should be productive within
four months of cessation; i.e., actions are being taken or
are agreed to be taken to reduce the threats posed by the
NVN to’ the achievement of US/GVN military objectives in SVN. 51/

The international reaction to a bombing halt was expected
to be entirely positive, hence not a problem for analysis. The study
postulated that the DRV would seek to prolong the bombing halt but try
to maintain a level of military activity below the provocative that
would maintain its strengths in the war while trying to erode the U.S.
position through protracted negotiations. In approaching a bombing halt,
the U.S. could escalate before it, de-escalate before it, or maintain the
current intensity of combat. The latter course was recommended as the
best method of demonstrating continued U.S. resolution in anticipation
of a dramatic act of restraint. With respect to the negotiations them-
selves, the SHACABIN Group cautioned against the U.S. being trapped in
the kind of protracted negotiations we experienced in Korea while the
enemy took military advantage of the bombing suspension. To guard against
this, unilateral verification was essential through continued aerial
surveillance. To round out their recommendations, the SEACABIN Group
looked at the reasons and methods of resuming bombing if required.

H. THE RESUMPTION OF BOMBARDMENT .
18. Resumption - When. The conditions under which

the bomba:'dment of NVN should be resumel cannot be deter-
mined in advanee with assurance. However, the US/RVN should

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

lig
