Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

importan 5 part or the native dict. and lores quantities are enugit in
tho con Oe wators, the rivers end particvlarly in the Tonle Sap Inke
in Cambodia. Large quantities of dried fisn were formerly expcrtcd.
Whilo Indochina. has great areas of forest and many valuable woods,

v
their exploitation is difficult ane cimser nas never been an important
export. The cutting of construction tinbvor and firewood is, however,
an important local industry. :

3, Minerals

=

fhe provinces of Tenkin and Leos are rich in minerals, the
lather largely uncxploited. Nigh quality anthracite cool deposits
are teens north of hriphong, and before the war production reached
over 2,000,000 tons a year mostly by open cut mining. Production in
1948 was only $49,000 tons cue to lack of mncninery and labor and
guorrilla activities. Coking coal is found only in insignificant
quantities. :

There are valuable tin doposits in North Tonkin and Contral
Inos. Production reached 1800 tons in 1938. Considerable crude tin
was clso brought cown from Yunnan, China, for smelting at Haiphong,
Production is “at present at a standstill due to the guerrilla warfare.
A fow tons were flowm out of Yurman in 1948, but plans for developing
‘this have been postponed beenuse of the present high price of Chinese
tin. Tonkinese tin ores contain tungsten, and production in 1958
reached 555 tons of concentrate.

%

Thore are valuable gine ores in Yonkin.e Production reached
25,000 tons in 1926, but cropped to about 5,000 before the war as
‘world prices dsclined. These mings are also closcds Gold deposi
wero worked at various points before the war but were of minor in-
portance.

There are important deposits of phosphate rock in northyvest
Tonkin nonr the Chinese frontior, the developmont of which was begun
by the Japanese during the war. Exploitation of these rich mines will
require not only the pacifiestion of ke area but large investments of

capital.

Many other mincrals, includin
mony, and graphite, are ‘none to dis
been partially prospected.

iron ore, bauxite, lead, anti-
bs rviar Marly has only

oo) sneer”.
Industry is of 1
concorncd with the proces
The most important manul n
Haiphong. This pro } ; S oe and about.
100,999 in 1948. Other minor industries produce aleochol, textiles,
1 *

[s)

sughyY, and Clgaroutes.

cs

C. Forcign
