Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

capable of following the 325th. The recent heavy actions in
Phuoe Long and Quang Ngai, and VC initiatives in Pleiku,
Kontum, Phu Bon and Thua Thien are demonstrations of VC
strength and their apparent determination to employ their
forces aggressively. Recent events as well as captured VC
prisoners and documents suggest that a summer campaign is
now underway to destroy government forces and, concurrently,
to first isolate and then attack district and province towns.

"So far, the VC have not employed their full capabilities
in this campaign. Only two of the nine Viet Cong regiments ‘
have been heavily engaged (one in Phuoc Long and one in Quang
Ngai), and probably only a similar proportion of their separate
battalions has been committed. In most engagements, VC Main
Force units have displayed improved training and discipline,
heavier firepower from the new family of weapons with which
most Main Force units have been equipped, and a willingness to
take heavy losses in order to achieve objectives.

"In pressing their campaign, the Viet Cong are capable of
mounting regimental-size operations in all four ARVN Corps
areas, and at least battalion-sized attacks in virtually all
provinces. Known dispositions indicate major actions are
likely in the near future in the Binh Duong-Phuoc Thanh-Phuoc
Long area north of Saigon, in the Quang Ngai-Quang Tin area in
Central Vietnam, and in Kontum, Pleiku, Phu Bon and Binh Dinh
Provinces. Major attacks could occur also in other areas; the
Viet Cong have shown that they are capable of concentrating in
regimental strength with little or no warning. Whether or not
the 304th Div is in, or moving toward SVN, the DRV has a
‘doorstep ' capability to reinforce the VC with sizable forces.

"ARVN forces on the other hand are already experiencing
difficulty in coping with this increased VC capability. De-
sertion rates are inordinately high. Battle losses have been
higher than expected; in fact, four ARVN battalions have been
rendered ineffective by VC action in the I and II Corps zones.
Therefore, effective fighting strength of many infantry and
ranger battalions is unacceptably low. As a result, ARVN
troops are beginning to show signs of reluctance to assume
the offensive and in some cases their steadfastness under
fire is coming into doubt. In order to bring existing bat-
talions up to acceptable battlefield strength, it will be
necessary to declare at least a temporary moratorium on the
activation of new battalions. Thus, the GVN/VC force ratios :
upon which we based our estimate of the situation in March
have taken an adverse trend. You will recall that I recon-
mended the deployment of a U.S. division in II Corps to cover

48 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
