Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the void between the GVN and its people which stems from the
failure of the GVN to communicate understandably with the
poulation [sic] and, in reverse, the lack of an effective
mechanism whereby the people can in their terms communicate
with the GVN. Taking advantage of this lack of effective com-
munication and the GVN's inability to protect the people the
Viet Cong has had considerable success in sowing disaffection
and disrupting effective administration of the government among
the population. This is especially true in the Capital, 1st
and 5th Military Regions. Viet Cong successes in these regions
are due to the large number among the population who, whether
out of terror or sympathy, give support to the Viet Cong.

Aided by this situation, the Viet Cong is striving to establish
a@ political apparatus parallel to the GVN. Below province level
in the 5th Military Region, no effective GVN control exists in
many areas. The Viet Cong are increasing the void by taxation,
terroristic acts, attacks on Self Defense posts, assassination
of village and provincial officials, and simultaneously a
systematic development of the Viet Cong political apparatus

to fill the void. In view of the above conditions the. principal
task facing the GVN is restoration of individual security... .-

Military force, in the form of increased communist
insurgency, is clearly the major immediate threat to the
stability of Viet-Nam today. South Viet-Nam is unique in that
it is the only country in the world which is forced to defend
itself against a communist internal subversion action, while
at the same time being subject to the militarily supportable
threat of a conventional external attack from communist North
Viet-Nam. The RVNAF force basis is inadequate to meet both
these threats.

"The problem is twofold, although at present the counter-
insurgency phase is the more dangerous and immediate. In this
counterinsurgency fight RVNAF is on the defensive. Approxi-
mately 75% of ARVN is committed to pacification missions, about
half of these being committed to static guard and security roles.
The military chain of command has usually been violated at the
expense of unity of effort and command. No adequate operations
control or overall planning system presently exists, although
significant progress has been made in the development of mili-
tary plans. The President has exercised arbitrary control of
Operations, by-passing command channels of the JGS and often
Corps and Division staff. Resources have been fragmented to
provincial control. The above practices appear to have been
designed to divide responsibility in order to guard against
the possibility of a military coup through placing too much
power in the hands of a single subordinate. The guerrilla

88 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
