Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

apparatus into efforts designed to complement tactical
advice with improvement in the quality, efficiency, and
reliability of the RVNAF structure as a whole. 3h/

Shortly afterward the Chinh-Hunnicutt affair erupted. As it unfolded
it revealed the near impossibility of eliciting satisfactory performence
by means of the existing advisory system. CG 25th Division published an
order of the day accusing the Senior Advisor of trying to have the CG
removed, of attempting to dismiss other division officers, of bypassing
the chain of command, and of destroying the "spirit of cooperation between
Americans and Vietnamese."

The MACY command history describes General Chinh as extremely weak,
afraid to command. ‘The Senior Advisor was a dynamic, competent officer
assigned to improve effectiveness. He pursued his objective in a firm
manner.

COMUSMACV felt the incident received distorted press coverage in the
US where it was portrayed as a challenge to the entire position of the US
advisory effort. He noted that the Vietnamese were sensitive to real or
imagined infringements on their sovereignty. Great care had to be exer-
cised to avoid even the appearance of violating their pride; an officer
who yielded too readily to US advice was regarded as a puppet. He felt
the most effective way to work with the Vietnamese was to discuss matters
with them and then allow them to resolve their problems. CG 25th Division
did have redeeming qualities. He was considered honest; and for his stand ~
at the coup trials in the early 1960's, when he had accepted punishment
while many others were -rumning; he had acquired a sizeable following among
ARVN officers. He was, in addition, a boyhood friend of CG III Corps,
who was seid to recognize the CG's fault but felt that his hands were tied.

Deputy COMUSMACV who enjoyed good rapport with CG 25th ARVN Division,
visited General Chinh. In a two-hour meeting, the Vietnamese spoke freely
and openly. He displayed genuine and extreme concern and admitted his
error in issuing the Order of the Day. He had already apologized to
CG III Corps. Deputy COMUSMACV received the impression that the advisor
might have been a little too aggressive with the Vietnamese general, who
was hypersensitive. Deputy COMUSMACV suggested that a memorandum be
published to the division which would mention that the Order of the Day
had leaked to the press which had taken it out of context and that there
was no intention to disperage the advisory effort. The memorandum was
published on December 21. It said the past must be forgotten and that
cadre of all ranks should display warm, courteous, and friendly attitudes
toward their American counterparts. General Chinh appeared to turn over
anew leaf. Colonel Hunnicutt was reassigned to en apparent terminal
assignment in the United States. 35/

COMUSMACV addressed a letter to all advisors in December, 1966, to
again emphasize the importance of rapport. He said, the key to success
or failure was the relationship achieved and maintained by the advisor

*

: 4o TOP SECRET - Sensitive
