Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ts

IV.€.2. POLICY DEBATE IN NOVEMBER

In their Southeast Asia policy discussions of August-October 1964,
Administration officials had accepted the view that overt military
pressures against North Vietnam probably would be required. Barring
some critical developments, however, it was generally conceded that
these should not begin until after the new year. Preparations for
applying such pressures were made in earnest during Novembez’.

1. Immediate Antecedents

In Administration policy discussions, the two developments most
often cited as perhaps warranting implementation of overt military pres-
sures before 1965 were: (1) increased levels of infiltration of guerrilles
into South Vietnam and (2) serious deterioration of the GYN. Evidence of
poth was reported to Washington during October. :

National intelligence estimates gave the GVN little hope of sur-
viving the apathy and discouragement with which it was plagued. They
reported, "Government ministries in Saigon are close to a standstill,
with only the most routine operations going on.” U.S./GVN planning was
not being followed by GVN action. A coup by disgruntled South Vietnamese
military figures was believed imminent (one had been attempted unsuccess-
fully on 13 September). Moreover, the civilien government which General
Khanh -had promised for the end of October was seen as unlikely to bring
about any real improvement. 1/ :

A threat of GYN capitulation to the NLP, in the form of accept~
ing a coalition government, was also seen 35S & veal possibility. Citing
"numerous signs that Viet Cong agents have played a role in helping sus-
tain the level of civil disorder...in the cities," intelligence reports
estimated that it wes the Communist intention to seek victory through a
"neutralist coalition" rather than by force of arms. Pernaps straining
a bit, an estimate stated, "Tne principal GYN leaders have not to our
knowledge been in recent contact with the Communists, but there has been
at least one instance of informal contact between a lesser sovermmental
official and members of the NIF." 2/ Another estimate portrayed the
DRV and Chinese as regarding South Vietnam as a "developing political
vacuum," soon to be filled "with a neutralist coalition government
dominated by pro-Comnunist elements." 3/

a Reports of increasing infiltration began erriving in mid-October.
Ambassador Taylor cabled on the lth thet he had received indications of
a "definite step-up in infiltration from North Vietnam, particularly in
the northern provinces...." He went on to report:

ak TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive
