Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a "Provisional Republican Government of Vietnam" was proclaimed in Iuichow,
China, with Viet Minh officials occupying only a minority of positions in
the government. 18/ But in Vietnam, the Viet Minh formed the only effec-
tive and extensive resistance movement.

(b) Collaborator Parties

Both the French and the Japanese sponsored Vietnamese
political parties. On the whole, the Japanese enjoyed significantly greater
success in manipulating the Vietnamese, and they thereby emasculated Decoux's
colonial administration. Through direct support of the theocratic movements,
such as the Cao Dai and the Hoa Hao, and a variety of nationalist political
parties, they maintained the potential for popular dissidence in balance
with available French force. As a result, large portions of Vietnamese
territory, especially in Cochinchina, were vacated by the French to Viet-
namese rule. Japanese sources reported during World War II that the more
important of the collaborating Viet nationalists were in two groups: The
Great Vietnam Nationalist Association (Dai Viet Quoc Dan Hoi) -- an out-
growth of rightist elements within the VNQDD; and the Vietnam Restoration
League (Viet Nam Phuc Quoc Dong Minh Hoi) -- based on the nationalist groups
which had been in exile in Japan. According to Japanese reports, in Annam
and Tonkin, these included:

Great Vietnam Party (Dai Viet)

(1) The Great Annam People's Party (Dai Viet Quoc Dan Dang), which
at its height -- about 1940 -- had about 25,000 members; but
as a result of the pressure of the French authorities in Indo-
china, it is now somewhat reduced. Its members are chiefly from
the lower clases, students or boy scots, and its influence extends
from the provinces of Ha Dong, Hai Duong, Bac Ninh and Central
Annam to the Laos District.

(2) The Great Annam Democratic Party, which was disbanded in 1941
as a result of official pressure but reformed in 1942 and consists
chiefly of intellectuals and men of letters; its members number
about 2,000. This was probably the section of the Vietnam
Nationalist Party known as the Dai Viet Dan Chinh and directed
by Nguyen Tuong Tam.

(3) Three other groups whose total membership is two or three thousand.
One of these smaller groups was probably the Youth Patriots (Than
Nhien Ai Quoc), led by Vo Xuan Cam, which has been described as
a terrorist party that maintained a flow of violent anti-Prench
propaganda. Another was the Servants of the Country (Phung Xa,
Quoe Gioi), directed by Pham Dinh Cuong. hes

Restoration League (Phuc Quoc)

(1) The Annam National Party, consisting of a volunteer corps, @
civilian section, and a military section. The volunteer corps,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

