Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Thus, the outlook in mid-1965 was for some further escalation
of the bombing. with a certain amount of tension between pressures
to speed it up and counter-pressures to keep it in check. With the
debate increasingly forced into the interdiction context, the prospect
was for gradual rather than sudden escalation, and strong resistance
to going all the way if necessary to break Hanoi's will could be pre-
dicted. There was still a gap between those who thought of the bombing
as a primarily political instrument and those who sought genuine mili-
tary objectives, and this would continue to confuse the debate about
how fast and far to go, but the main lines of the debate were set.

$till unresolved in mid-1965 was the problem of the diplo-
matic track. Could the U.S. continue to escalate the bombing, main-
taining a credible threat of further action, while at the same time
seeking to negotiate? Could the U.S. orchestrate communications with
Hanoi with an intensifying bombing campaign? As of mid-1965 this was
an open question.

B. The July Escalation Debate

The full U.S. entry into the Vietnam War in the spring of
1965 -- with the launching of air strikes against NVN, the release of
U.S. jet aircraft for close support of ARVN troops in SVN, and the
deployment to SVN of major U.S. ground forces for combat -- did not
bring an immediate turnabout in the security situation in SVN. The
vc/NVA may have been surprised and stunned at first by the U.S. actions,
but by the summer of 1965 they had again seized the initiative they
held in late 1964 and early 1965 and were again mounting large-scale
attacks, hurting ARVN forces badly. In mid-July Assistant Secretary
McNaughton described the situation in ominous terms:

The situation is worse than a year ago (when it
was worse than a year before that)... .A hard VC push is
on...-The US air strikes against the North and US combat-
troop deployments have erased any South Vietnamese fears
that the US will forsake them; but the government is able
to provide security to fewer and fewer people in less and
less territory, fewer roads and railroads are usable, the
economy is deteriorating, and the government in Saigon
continues’ to turn over. Pacification even in the Hop Tac
area is making no progress. The government-to-VC ratio
overall is now only 3-to-1, and in combat battalions only
1-to-1; government desertions are at a high rate, and the
Vietnamese force build-up. is stalled; the VC reportedly
are trying to double their combat strength. There are no
signs that the VC have been throttled by US/GVN inter-
diction efforts; indeed, there is evidence of further
PAVN build-up in the I arfd II Corps areas. The pRv/vC

5 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
