Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Lending further support to these military and civilian
recommendations was a study completed on May 4 by the Air Staff which
suggested that civilian casualties and collateral damage could be mini-
mized in POL strikes if only the most experienced pilots, with thorough
briefing were used; if the raids were executed only under favorable
visual flight conditions with maximum use of sophisticated navigational
aids; and if weapons and tactics were selected for their pinpoint accuracy
rather than area coverage. 158/ On May 22, COMUSMACV sent CINCPAC yet
another recommendation for retaliatory air strikes against North Vietnamese
. industrial and military targets. He called for plans that would permit the
U.S. to respond to any VC terror attacks by an air strike against a
similar target in the North. In particular, the Hanoi and Haiphong oil
storage sites were recommended as reprisal targets for VC attacks against
U.S. or South Vietnamese POL. 159/

Intervening again in mid-May, however, was yet another
round of the continuing South Vietnamese political crisis. It is not
clear whether or not a decision on the strikes against Hanoi/Haiphong
POL was deferred by the President for this reason, but it is plausible to
think that it was a factor. In brief, the Buddhists in Hue and Dalang,
with the active support and later leadership of General Thi, the I Corps
commander, defied the central government. Thi refused to return to Saigon
when ordered and only when Ky flew to DaNang and intervened with troops
and police to recapture control of the two cities was GVN authority
restored to the area. The crisis temporarily put the constitutional
processes Off the track and diverted high level American attention from
other issues. 160/ ‘The effect of this dispute on public support for the
U.S. involvement in the war has already been discussed. Concern with
bringing an end to this internal strife in South Vietnam and with pushing
a reluctant GVN steadily along the road to constitutional and democratic
government preoccupied the highest levels of the U.S. Government throughout
May. These concerns momentarily contributed to forcing the military
aspects of the war into the background for harried U.S. leaders whose time
is always insufficient to the range of problems to be dealt with.

D. The Decision to Strike

The POL decision was rapidly coming to a head. On May 31, a
slight relaxation of the restrictions against attacking POL was made when
six minor storage areas in relatively unpopulated areas were approved
for attack. 161/ Apparently sometime in late May, possibly at the time
of the approval of the six minor targets, the President decided that
attacks on the entire North Vietnamese POL network could not be delayed

"much longer. In any case, sometime near the end of the month he informed
British Prime Minister Wilson of his intentions. When Wilson protested,
McNamara arranged a special briefing by an American officer for Wilson

and Foreign Minister Michael Stewart on June 2. The following day, Wilson

120 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
