Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘capitals in the highlands. Permissionto withdraw from

Special Forces camps (e.g., Dak To), and other exposed
positions remote from the coastal plain should be included.
Under this guidance, six U.S. battalions could be with-

drawn from border defense operations in the highlands for

use as a mobile reserve or for Operations on the coastal plain.

- In ITT Corps, no redeployment from present positions, with U.S.
forces concentrated in the immediate environs of Saigon were envisaged.

The guidance to MACV should be to concentrate on offensive
operations in and around the densely populated portions of
Tit CTY. MACV should maintain a mobile strike force for
defense of remote province capitals, buthe should otherwise
forego long range or regional search-and-destroy operations.
Withdrawals from Special Forces camps should be authorized.

Fourth Corps - the Mekong Delta region - is the only region of SVN in
which the burden of the war was still borne, chiefly by RVNAF. U.S.
strategy should avoid Americanizing the conflict there. Instead, our
efforts should be aimed at catalyzing increased RVNAF efforts there.

Guidance provided to MACV should be geared to galvanizing
RVNAF by a strategy of:

1. Defending province capitals, major towns, principal
comminication centers, and commercially important routes.

2. Extending GVN control into the countryside, consis-
tent with RVNAF capability to defend RD teams and other
public administration there.

3. Stimulating RVNAF operations by providing U.S. forces
on an occasional basis for combined operations against
particularly promising targets, or in conjunction with key
defensive operations. U.S. forces in the Delta for this
effort should draw on the existing Dong Tam and Saigon bases.

h, Providing limited assistance to RVNAF with sophisti-
cated engineer equipment and reconnaissance apparatus where
such would improve their ability to perform the missions
sketched above.

5. Bringing serious pressure to bear on RVN leaders in
Saigon and within IV CTZ to mount active, sustained, offensive
operations consistent with the foregoing missions. Considera-
tion should be given to:

Providing additional RVNAF battalions to IV CTZ on
a temporary basis from TIT CTZ--conceptually, battalions or
regiments from the 5th or 18th ARVN Divisions would be deployed
to IV CTZ, minus dependents, for periods of one month or more

of active operations. 55
40 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
