Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"I would strongly oppose the mining of Haiphong at
any time in the next nine months, unless the Soviets cate-
gorically use it to send in combat weapons. (It may well be
that we should warn them quietly but firmly that we are watching
their traffic into Haiphong very closely, and particularly
from this standpoint.) Mining of Haiphong, at any time, is
bound to risk a confrontation with the Soviets and to throw
Hanoi into greater dependence on Communist China. These in
themselves would be very dangerous and adverse to the whole
nation of getting Hanoi to change its attitude. Moreover,

I think they would somehow manage to get the stuff in through
China no matter what we did to Haiphong." 60/

His concluding overall assessment of the situation was that Hanoi was
waiting us out believing that the 1968 elections would cause us to change
our position or even lose heart completely. He believed that our "herky-
jerky" and impatient actions had greatly strengthened this belief in
Hanoi. He felt that our major thrust must be now to persuade them that
we were prepared to stick it out if necessary. 61/ He continued by
turning to the political factors which he felt were really important:

"B. ‘The Real Key Factors in the Situation. I believe
we are making steady progress in the South, and that there
are things we can do -- notably effort with ARVN -- to
improve the present slow pace of pacification. Over-all
progress in the South remains the key factor that could
bring Hanoi to the right attitude and actions.

The really important element in the South over the
next few months is political. There could be a tremendous
gain if the elections are honest and widely participated in,
and if the result is a balanced civilian/military government
that commands real support in the South. Such a gain would
do more than any marginal action, except for the essential
job of countering the Communist thrust in I Corps.

At the same time, if the election process is
thwarted by a military coup or if it is turned into a mili-
tary steam-roller, the results could be sharply negative.
We might even be forced to re-assess our basic policy. This
is simply a measure of the vital importance of the political
front for this year.

“In addition, we must consider at all times the
effect of the Chinese internal situation. We cannot
affect whether convulsion resumes, but we should certainly
avoid actions that might tend to reduce the possibility of
convulsion. (This is argued strenuously by Edward Rice in
Hong Kong 7581, received today.)

‘ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
