Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Perhaps our suggestion may be bearing fruit. We devoutly hope
SO.

"Naturally, the United Stetes will adhere to the position it
first took in 1955, that we will not in these talks be a party to any
arrangements which would prejudice rights of our ally, the Republic
of China.

"We know by hard experiences that the Chinese Communist leaders
are indeed militant and aggressive. But we cannot believe that they
would now persist in a course of military aggression which would
threaten world peace, with all that would be involved. We believe
that diplomacy can and should find a way out. There are measures that
can be taken to assure that these offshore islands will not be a thorn
in the side of peace. We believe that arrangements are urgently re-
quired to stop gun fire and to pave the way to a peaceful solution.

"Tf the bileteral talks between Ambassadors do not fully succeed,
there is still the hope that the United Nations could exert a peaceful
influence on the situation.

"In 1955 the hostilities of the Chinese Commmists in the Formosa
area were brought before the United Nations Security Council. But the
Chinese Communists rejected its jurisdiction. They said that they were
entitled to Formosa and the offshore islands and that if they used
ermed forces to get them, that was purely a 'civil war,' and that the
United Nations had no right to concern itself.

"They claimed also that the attack by the Communist North Koreans
on South Korea was ‘civil war,' and that the United Nations, and the
United States, were ‘aggressors’ because they helped South Korea. They
said the same about their attack on Viet Nam.

"T feel sure that these pretexts will never deceive or control
world opinion. The fact is that Communist Chinese hostilities in the
Formosa Straits area do endanger world peace. Ido not believe that
any rulers, however agsressive they may be, will flout efforts to find
a peaceful and honorable solution, whether it be by direct negotiations
or through the United Nations. :

"My friends, we are confronted with a serious situation. But it
is typical of the security problems of the world today. Powerful and
aggressive forces are constantly probing, now here, now there, to see
whether the free'world is weakening. In the face of this, there are
no easy choices available. It is misleading for anyone to imply that
there are.

"However, the present situation, though serious, is -by no means
desperate or hopeless.

"There is not going to be eny appeasement.

B-}1
