—_

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

6

~ The Crraman. I was not asserting any right to control it. It was
merely a sugcestion if there was some comity
i Senator Hicxentoorer. If it is a question of comity, we can arrive
at it.
The Crraman. He can keep it within his control.
Go ahead, Mr. Secretary. !

NEWSPAPER REVORTS OF CLASSIFIED INFORMATION

Senator Lavscne. Mr. Chairman, haying listened to what Senator
Hickenlooper has jast said, Teel obliged to make a statement that this
body, vested with secret information of the most intimate character,
dealing with the security of the United States, has been brought
scandalously into disrepute by the frequency with which reports are
carried in the newspapers of what is supposed to be done under closed
executive meetings, and I do not feel content that we can wink at
these leaks that are coming out of this committee. I am not satisfied
with the statement that.there is nothing we can do about it. Somebody
is leaking things, whether it is a member, Members of the Senate, or
whether it is members of the staff. I do not know who it is, but it is a
terrible mistake that this body, related most intimately to matters
that deal with the security of the United States, finds itself with
newspapers reporting what takes place under confidential discussions.

It cannot be denied that these reports are being carried outside
-of the meeting. How do they get out? I think we ought to make an
Investigation. We ought to find out whether it is from the staff or
Where itemerges.

The whole world ean laugh at us at what happened. It seems you
do not need spies, all you have to do is look at the papers and fully
you will find revealed what takes place confidentially in this room.

The Cwarraran. I wonder if we could get on with the testimony,

Senator Atkrex. I would like to observe that sometimes the leaks
appear 2 or 5 days after they come out in the newspapers, which can
hardly be in the category of a leak.

: The Crarrsran. Let us eet on.

Senator Lavscirr. The chairman wants to get on with this matter,
and I can understand why he would want to get on, but T will say
to you with what you are trying to get on is not as significant as what

am trying to search out. Something is wrong with this committee.

Senator Monsn. Mr. Chairman.
The Cramsan. I wonder if we could proceed.
Senator Crark. Let us go ahead.

PLACING RESTRICTIONS ON ADMINISTRATION SPOKESMEN

_Senator Morse. We are not going to leave this record in this condi-
tion so far as the Senator from Oregon is concerned. I do not think we
ought to take up the Secretary's time with quarrels of the committee,
but, Frank, you were not here and you are not aware of what Senator
Hickenlooper was talking about. We are not talking about what you
are talking about. That was not raised. I had risen to the defense of
what I think is a very important doctrine that always ought to prevail
at our hearings when we have a Cabinet officer or anyone else from
the administration here; namely, we should make no attempt to place

a enn er
ee me ee tet ee ne SS
