Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C. The Situation in Late 1961

By late 1961, if not earlier, it had become clear in both Siagon
and Washington that the yellow star of the Viet Cong was in the ascendancy.
Following the 1960 North Vietnamese announcement of the twin goals of oust-
ing President Diem and reunifying Vietnam under communist rule, the Viet
Cong began sharply to increase its guerrilla, subversive, and political
warfare. 6/ Viet Cong regular forces, now estimated to have grown to
25,000, had been organized into larger formations and employed with increas-~
ing frequency. The terrorist-guerrilla organization had grown to an esti-
mated 17,000 by November 1961. af During the first half of 1961, terror-
ists and guerrillas had assassinated over 500 local officials and civilians,
kidnapped more than 1,000, and killed almost 1,500 RVNAF personnel. 8/

The VC continued to hold the initiative in the countryside, controlling
major portions of the populace and drawing an increasingly tight cinch
around Saigon. 9/ ‘The operative question was not whether the Diem govern-
ment as it was then moving could defeat the insurgents, but whether it could
save itself.

Much of this deterioration of the situation in RVN was attributable,
in U.S. eyes, to the manner in which President Diem had organized his govern-
ment. The struggle -- whether viewed as one to gain loyalty or simply to
assert control -- was focused in and around the villages and hamlets in the
countryside. It was precise? in those areas that the bilineal GVN organi-
gation (ARVN and civilian province chiefs) most lacked the capability for
concerted and cohesive action. The Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN)
was developing a potentially effective institutional framework under U.S.
tutelage, but that effectiveness against the VC, Diem realized, could po-
tentially be transferred into effectiveness against himself. The abortive
coup of late 1960 had made Diem even more reluctant than he had earlier
been to permit power (especially coercive power) to be gathered into one
set of hands other than his own. Still, the establishment of an effective
military chain of command which could operate where necessary in the country-
side remained the prime objective of U.S. military advisors. 10/

A unitary chain of command had recently been ordered into effect
within ARVN, but this had not solved the operational problems, for mili-
tary operations were inescapably conducted in areas under the control of
an independent political organization with its own military forces and in-
fluence on operations of all. Kinds -- military, paramilitary, and civic
action. The province chiefs, personally selected by President Diem and
presumably loyal to him, controlled politically the territory in dispute
with the VC and within which ARVN must operate. They also controlled terri-
torial forces comprising the Civil Guard (CG) and Self Defense Corps (SDC).

For President Diem's purposes this bilineal organization offered
an opportunity to counterbalance the power (and coup potential) of the
generals by the power of the province chiefs. It was a device for survival.
But the natural by-product of this duality, in terms of the effectiveness
of actions against the VC, was poor coordination and imperfect cooperation

TOP SECRET - Sensi tive
