(ns
AS

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

bomb infiltration routes in the Iaotian Panhandle. 55/ This "don't
rock the boat" policy was given added encouragement when, on 1 August,
Great Britain initiated a promising effort toward a new diplomatic
solution. Acting on Souvanna Phouma's request, the British government
urged the I.C.c. members to arrange a meeting among the three Laotian
political factions. 56/

Concern over not provoking a communist military escalation that
would upset the relatively stabilized situation in Laos figured promi-
nently in a tentative analysis of U.S. strategy for Southeast Asia made
and circulated for comment by the State Department in mid-August. It

had a significant impact on the Administration's assessment of its options
in the post-Tonkin period. Among other effects, this concern caused it
to withhold for several weeks its approval of continuing proposals for
air and ground initiatives in the Panhandle as means to improve the
situation in South Vietnam. 57/

CONCERN OVER PRESSURES FOR NEGOTIATIONS

One of the Tonkin Gulf impacts which was perceived within the
Administration served to exacerbate its policy dilemmas regarding Laos.
Administration officials were apprehensive that the international crisis
precipitated by incidents in the Gulf might intensify the kind of Geneva
conference pressures generated previously. 58/ Administration concern
was apparently well founded. On 5 August UN Secretary General U Thant
stated that the 14-Nation assembly should be reconvened to deal with the
Tonkin Gulf debate then being urged on the UN Security Council. (He
had earlier urged reconvening the 1954 Conference to negotiate a Vietnam
settlement.) Two days later, during the debate, the French delegation
urged the calling of a conference for the pacification of all of Indo-
China. Reports appeared on 10 August that the Chinese People's Daily
published an editorial arguing that a Geneva settlement was the only
effective way to solve the problem of South Vietnam. On the 19th, in
a note rejecting potential UN Security Council findings regarding
responsibility for the Tonkin Gulf incidents, North Vietnam declared
its insistence on a Geneva conference. 59/

Such was the Administration's concern in the immediate aftermath
of the crisis, that it contemplated a diplomatic initiative relating to
laos that was designed to counteract the expected pressure. Reflecting
a point of view reportedly also becaning attractive to Souvanna Phouma,
the State Department sought reactions to a policy direction that would
no longer insist.on Pathet Lao withdrawal from the Plaine des Jarres as
a preconditiox to an international conference. The gains recently
achieved through "Operation Triangle" were so significant, it reasoned,
that they more than offset communist control of the Plaine. And it was
clear that any negotiations by which a communist withdrawal might be
arranged would include reciprocal demands for the government to relinquish
its recently won gains. 60/ Moreover, passage of the Congressional
Resolution and the strong DRV naval attacks had accomplished the exact
kind of actions believed to be necessary earlier to demonstrate U.S.

.

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
