Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

has had an impact which is not confined to the war
effort, but which extends deeply into the whole
Vietnamese way of doing things.

The U.S. advisory effort, however, cannot assure
ultimate success. This is a Vietnamese war and

the country end the war must in the end be run
solely by the Vietnamese. It will impair their
independence and development of their initiative if
we leave our advisors in place beyond the time they
are really needed... 6/ /emphasis supplied/

Policy concerning aid to the Vietnamese may be considered to
range between two polar extremes. One extreme would be our doing
almost everything difficult for the Vietnamese, and the other would
consist of limiting our own actions to provision of no more than
material aid and advice while leaving everything important to be
done by the Vietnamese themselves. Choice of a policy at any point
on this continuum reflects a judgment concerning the basic nature of =
the problem; i.e. to what extent political and to what extent military;
to what extent reasonable by political means and to what extent
resolvable by military means even by outsiders. Rut in this
case the choice of policy also reflected confidence that success
was being achieved by the kind and level of effort that had
already been devoted to this venture. The policy of NSAM 273 was
predicated on such confidence, It constituted by its reference to the
2 October statement an explicit anticipation, with tentative time
phases expressly stated, of the assumption by the Vietmamese of direct
responsibility for, doing all the important things themselves sometime
in 1965, the U.S. thereafter providing only material aid and non-
participating advice at the end of that period. That optimism was
explicit in the report to the President of 2 October wherein the
conclusion of the section on “The US Military Advisory and Support
Effort consisted of this paragraph:

Acknowledging the progress achieved to date, there
still remains the question of when the final victory
can be obtained, If, by victory, we mean the reduc-
tion of the insurgency to something little more than
sporadic banditry in outlying districts, it is the
view of the vast majority of military commanders
consulted that success may be achieved in the I, ITI,
and III Corps area by the end of CY 1964. Victory in
IV Corps will take longer - at least well into 1965.
These estimates assume that the political situation

does not significantly impede the effort. W/ /emphasis supplied/
vad), First Reeppraisals of the Situation in South Vietnam

The caveat given expression in the last sentence of the con-
clusions cited above offered an escape clause, but it was clearly

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
