Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Counter-infiltration operations also received a boost from the
recommendation in General Johnson's report to the effect that BARREL
ROLL be re-oriented to increase its military effectiveness against
Lao Panhandle infiltration routes into South Vietnam. Acting upon
thet recommendation and upon a Presidentisl directive to make a maxi-
mum effort to shut off infiltration into SVN, a new program, nicknamed
STEEL TIGER, was developed, for the conduct of greatly intensified air
operations against routes and targets in Laos associated with infiltre-

tion. 102/

At about the same time, a Pacific Command study group developed -
amore comprehensive concept of air operations "to attrit, harass, and
interdict the DRV south of 20 degrees." In a lengthy cable to the Joint
Chiefs excerpted below, Admiral Sharp described the concept as follows:

103/ ;

The program calls for an integrated strike, armed recce
and recce program designed to cut, in depth, the NVN logistic
network south of 20 degrees, and to continually attrit and
harass. by-pass and repair reconstitution efforts.

This progrem provides for primary bridge/ferry cuts and
highway blockage/take out cuts on major long-haul road and
rail routes. It additionally cuts the full road network in-
cluding all feeder and by-pass routes which develop into 4
main entry/funnels to Laos and SVN. All targets selected are
extremely difficult or impossible to by-pass. The program
also provides for concurrent disruption of the sea-carry to
SVN with strikes against suspect coastal staging points
supporting end-running shipping into the area, as well as SVN.

LOC network cutting in this depth will degrade tonnage
arrivals at the main "funnels" and will develop a broad series
of new targets such as backed-up convoys, off-loaded materiel

- dumps, and personnel staging areas at one or both sides of
cuts. Coupling these strikes with seeding and re-seeding
missions to hamper repairs, wide ranging armed recce missions
against "developed" targets, and coastal harass and attrit
missions against coastal staging facilities, may force major
DRV-log flow to sea-carry and into surveillance and attack by
our SViNV coastal sanitization forces...

In summary: recommend concerted attacks against LOC
targets recommended herein be initiated concurrently with
interdiction targets progremmed for ROLLING THUNDER 9-13.
Preferentially, recommend a compressed "LOC cut program"

_Similar to my vroposal for a "Radar Busting Day." This
should be followed by completion of attacks on other than

76 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
