Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TASK FORCE - Sensitive

of the forces. The South Vietnamese insisted, for the outset, that they .
could not raise the piasters required.

The basic question of whether the South Vietnamese were bearing a
reasonable share of the burden devolved into a number of technical
issues, such as the effect of the program on inflation in South Vietnam,
and the piaster/dollar exchange rate. The Gilpatric/Lensdale draft of
the Task Force Report proposed that Diem be flatly assured that the U.S.
would make up any deficit in the Vietnamese budget. But State objected
from the start to giving any such assurance, Instead a joint commission
of U.S. and South Vietnamese economic experts was proposed to work out
a joint program dealing with these economic issues. This was one of the
proposals Vice President Johnson carried with him on his mission, Diem
accepted the proposal, And the U.S. team, headed by Eugene Staley
(president of the Stanford Research Institute) was dispatched to South
Vietnam in mid-June,

By the time the Staley Mission left, though, Diem had written the
letter just quoted’asking for U.S. support for a large further increase
in his forces, Staley's group, with its Vietnamese counterpart, found
themselves serving as the vehicle for the discussions on force levels.
The report they issued is mostly about military issues, on which the
economists steted they simply reflected instructions passed on by their
respective governments, Here are sane excerpts on the military issues
(in addition, the report of course contained a discussion, rather vague
as it turned out, of the economic issues which were nominally its pur-
pose, and it also contained a good deal of very fine, vigorous language
on the need for "crash programs" of economic and social development).

Viet Nam is today under attack in a bitter, total struggle
which involves its survival as a free nation. Its enemy, the
Viet Cong, is ruthless, resourceful, and elusive. This enemy
is supplied, reinforced, and centrally directed by the inter-
national Communist apparatus operating through Hanoi. To
defeat it requires the mobilization of the entire economic,
military psychological, and social resources of the country
and vigorous support from the United States,

The intensified program which we recommend our two coun-
tries adopt as a basis for mutual actions over the next
several years is designed not just to hold the line but to
achieve a real breakthrough, Our joint efforts must surpass
the critical threshold of the enemy's resistance, thereby put-
ing an end to his destructive attacks, and at the same time
we must make a decisive impact on the economic, social, and
ideological front.

The turn of events in Laos has created further serious
problems with regard to the maintenance of the GVN as a free

62

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
