Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

A shift /shoulld oceur7 in the American relation to the
Vietnamese effort from advice to limited partnership. The
present character and scale of the war in South Vietnam
decree only that the Vietnamese can defeat the Viet-Cong;
but at all levels Americans must, as friends and partners--
not as arms-length advisors-~show them how the job might be
done--not tell them or do it for them. 66/

General Taylor was most explicit that the purpose of the proposed
troop deployments and the new "Jimited partnership” was to buy time for
the Vietnamese so that they could marshall their considerable resources
and assume the offensive against the VC. As mentioned above, this would
require internal reform in GVN. ‘The limited partnership would contri-
bute to both of these interacting objectives:

The present war cannot be won by direct US action; it must
be won by the Vietnamese. But there is a general conviction
among us that the Viennamese performance in every domain can
be substantially improved if Americans are prepared to work
side by side with the Vietnamese on the key problems. More-
over, there is evidence that Diem is, in principle, prepared
for this step, and that most--not all--elements in his establish-
ment are eagerly awaiting it. 67/

THE KENNEDY DECISIONS: NSAM 111

It is useful to approach the effect of General Taylor's mission on
the advisory effort from the Simple recollection of what President Kennedy
decided not to do. He decided not to deploy U.S. combat forces to South
Vietnam. This meant -- given the U.S. assessment of the importance of
RVN and the felt necessity to do something -- that the expansion of U.S,
assistance was a foregone.conclusion. This was the general course of
action that would be followed as the ineluctable result of having decided
not to do something else which was more dramatic, involved more risk,
and was more contentious.

Given the decision not to send troop units, then, the general thrusts
of U.S. actions were determined -- but the specifics were not. Just how
did Taylor's "limited partnership," for instance, propose to influence
GVN's attitudes and organization, to develop initiative matched by compe-
tence, and to insure that the Vietnamese would assume successfully the
responsibility for winning the struggle which it was said only they could
win? How was this expanded U.S. effort to be organized? From whence
would come the new junior partners of the firm? What would be their
preparation, their instructions, their duties?

The first of these two groups of questions is more easily answered
than the second; the answer to neither of them is retrospectively very

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
