Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

¢ TOP 3ECRET ~2-
5. The President approved an 18-20,000 man increase in ¥
U. S. military support forces to fill out existing units and eeretys needed
logistic personnel, re |
6. The President approved the deployment of two additional
Marine Battalions and one Marine Air Squadron and associated headquarters ~
and support elements, ‘

7 The, President approved a change of mission for all Marino
Battalions deployed to Vietnam to permit their more active use under
conditions to be established and approved by the Secretary of Defense in
consultation with the Secretary of State.

8. The President approved the urgent exploration, with the
Korean, Australian, and New Zealand Governments, of the possibility
of rapid deployment of significant combat elements from their armed
forces in parallel with the additional Marine deployment <z eps oved in paren
graph 6,

9. Subject to continuing review, the President approved the
following general framework of continuing action against North Vietnam
and Laos:

‘We should continue roughly the present slowly ascending ae
tempo of ROLLING THUNDER operations, being prepared to add strikes
in response to a higher rate of VC operations, or conceivably to slow
the pace in the unlikely event VC slacked off sharply for what appeared to
be more than a temporary operational] lull. ,

The target systems should continue to avoid the effective GCI
range of MIGs. We should continue to vary the types of targets, stepping» .
up attacks on lines of communication in the near future, and possibly ~~
moving in a few weeks to attacks on the rail lines north and northeast
of Hanoi,

Leaflet operations should be expanded to obtain maximum
practicable psychological effect on the North Vietnamese population,

Blockade or aerial mining of North Vietnamese ports need further
study and should be considered for future operations. It would have major
political complications, especially in relation to the Soviets and other
third countries, but also offers many advantages e

TOP SEGRET
“wieo

yt A, eee FS ee _- a
ee a ere eee eee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee eee ee
