(&

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

C. Kennedy Administration

1. Senator John F. Kemedy, Congressional Record, February 29, 1960,

p. 3502:

* + +

"But both before and after 1953 events have demonstrated that our
nuclear retaliatory power is not enough. It cannot deter Communist ag-
gression which is too limited to justify atomic war. It cannot protect
uncommitted nations against a Communist tekeover using local or guerrilla
forces. It cannot be used in so-called brush-fire peripheral wars. In
short, it cannot prevent the Communists from gradually nibbling at the
fringe of the free world's territory and strength, until our security has
been steadily eroded in piecemeal fashion - each Red advance being too
small to justify massive retaliation, with all its.risks.

ee

"In short, we need forces of an entirely different kind to keep the
peace against limited aggression, and to fight it, if deterrence fails,
without raising the conflict to a disastrqus pitch.

"And our capability for conventional war is insufficient to avoid the
hopeless dilemma of choosing between launching a nuclear attack end watch-
ing aggressors make piecemeal conquests."

>, Senator John F. Kennedy's statement in Congressional Record, June 14
196 O, p. 11631: ; 3

+ 38 Oo

"We must regain the ability to intervene effectively and swiftly in
any limited war anywhere in the world -- augmenting, modernizing and pro-
viding increased mobility and versatility for the conventional forces and
weapons of the Army and Marine Corps. As long as those forces lack the
necessary airlift and sealift capacity and versatility of firepower, we
cannot protect our commitments sround the globe ~- resist non-nuclear ag-
gressions - or be certain of having enough time to decide on the use of
our nuclear power."

k
3. Senator John F. Kennedy's statement as quoted in the Washington Daily
«News, September 22, oe: ="

ee ie

"The recognition is not really the crux of our foreign policy. The
real question is whet should be done about the harsh facts that China is
a powerful and. aggressive nation. The dangerous situation now existing

c-5

4
