Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

U.S. priority in the aftermath was accorded to programs designed to
"give democratic elements best chance” through economic assistance and
political support for South Vietnam. Elections, as Dulles indicated
during the Conference, and as the OCB concurred in August ,9/ were
agreeable to the U.S.; but they were two years away, and the primary
task in the interim was seen as "to maintain a friendly non-Communist
South Vietnam..."10/ The corollary objective (stated by the NSC in
August, 1954, and approved by the President) "to prevent a Communist
victory through all-Vietnam elections,"11/ then did not connote U.S.
determination to subvert the Accords; rather, it appears to have meant
that U.S. influence would aim at assuring that the communists would not
gain an electoral victory through force, deceit, or other undemocratic
methods.

(6) The Accords expressly provided for the transfer of
individuals desiring to move from one zone to another.

(7) The Accords did seem, at the time, to have basically
fulfilled the precondition of providing “effective machinery for inter-
national supervision of the agreement." Although the machinery would
be the ICC's rather than the UN's, Under Sécretary Smith noted that the
ICC would have a veto power on important questions, would be composed
of one genuine neutral (India) and one pro-Western government (Canada) ,
and would be permitted full freedom of movement into demilitarized zones
and frontier and coastal areas. Smith, on 19 July, gave this assessment:

"Taking everything into consideration, I strongly
feel this is satisfactory and much better than we were
able to obtain in Korea. French feel, and Eden and I
agree, that with such composition built-in veto will
work to our advantage. This setup is best French or
anybody else could get, and I feel it is within spirit
of point 7."12/

d. Smith States U.S. Position on Accords

The final statement by Under Secretary Smith, setting forth
the U.S. position on the Accords, provides the only public measure of
the U.S. commitment to them. At Smith's urging, Dulles agreed that the
U.S. delegation could take note of the Final Declaration as well as of
the military agreement. But, Smith was specifically instructed not to
take note of paragraph 13 of the Final Declaration. That paragraph aimed
at ensuring respect for the armistice accords in Laos, Cambodia and
Vietnam by declaring the conferees’ agreement "to consult one another on
any question which may be referred to them by the International Super-
visory Commission..." Dulles felt that provision implied:

"...a multilateral engagement with communists which
would be inconsistent with our basic approach and which

D-16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
