Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The new concept which appeared to be emerging, of recommitment
of ARVN infantry divisions to pacification primarily in and around:
pacification areas did not, on the surface, appear to be anything but
a long-term process, very sensitive to ARVN acceptance of the role.
It failed the twin tests of being a panacea -- it would not be fast, it
would not be cheap. There was little doubt that most ARVN division and
corps commanders continued to regard pacification operations as dull,
less prestigious, and generally not. in keeping with the basic mission,
past tradition and organization of ARVN. This should not have been
startling to the American observer -- after all, U.S. units and com-
manders found pacification no more palatable, and they had nowhere near
the same political or economic stakes in its consequences as their Viet-
namese contemporaries.

The conclusions of the paper were not heartening. State believed
that even assuming that all the attitudinal problems of ARVN could be
overcome, many of its basic weaknesses would undermine its effectiveness
in pacification -- just as it had in conventional combat. These included:

"a) poor leadership, preoccupation with political man-
euvering at the senior officer level, the lack of experienced
junior officers whose recruitment and promotion is based more
on considerations having to do with economic and family status
than with motivation or ability and whose assignments fre-
quently reflect the use of influence to obtain headquarters
or other safe and prestigious posts, and the lack also of
competent and experienced NCOs;

"b) poor morale (reflected not only in a continuous
rise in desertions dating from at least 1962 but also in a
very high battlefield missing-in-action rate) resulting from
low pay rates; inadequate dependent housing, concern over
the welfare of families, infrequent rotation of units in
isolated outposts, and inadequate medical care;

"c) poor relations with the population who, on the one
hand, Have had little reason for confidence in the ability
of the military to afford them any lasting protection and,
on the other, have all too frequently been victimized by them;

"a) low operational capabilities including poor coordina-
tion, tactical rigidity, overdependence on air and artillery
support drising in part from inadequate firepower, overdepen-
dence on vehicular convoy, unwillingness to remain in the field
at night or over adequately long periods, and lack of aggres-
siveness." 38/

Deployment of U.S, forces to the highly populated Mekong Delta would,

in the writer's eyes, carry potentially adverse political repercussions.
MACV was criticized for underestimating the impact on the grounds that

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
