Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As the year 195). wore on, the near paralysis of the
government and the increasing challenges to Diem's leadership from
non-communist elements seemed increasingly to confirm the judgment
U.S. estimates ascribed to the communists: that no forceful measures --
open violations of the Geneva Agreement, risking U.S. intervention --
would be necessary to achieve the eventual extension of DRV authority
throughout Vietnam. These developments reinfoced the U.S. expecta-
tion that the communists would stand back from open intervention, at
least until the scheduled date of elections in July 1956.

Yet, as early as November, 1954, a National Estimate
projected the likelihood that if -- contrary to expectations -- the
communists should be denied a victory by political means on or before
July 1956, they would turn to violent means, using their remaining
apparatus in the south for terrorism and guerrilla action and
reinforcing it by infiltration. According to NIE 63-7-54, 23 November
1954 (p. 9):

"We believe that the Viet Minh will continue to gain in
political strength and prestige and, with Chinese aid, to
increase its military striking power in North Vietnam. The
Viet Minh probably now feels that it can achieve control over
all Vietnam without initiating large-scale warfare. Accordingly,
we believe that the Communists will exert every effort to
accomplish their objectives through means short of war... ."

"If, on the other hand, South Vietnam should appear to be
gaining in strength or if elections were postponed over Communist
objections, the Communists probably would step up their sub-
versive and guerrilla activities in the South and if necessary
would infiltrate additional armed forces in an effort to gain
control over the area... ."

As of late 1954, the Estimate stated the "present key to
political power in South Vietnam" was still held by the French.
"Under present circumstances, only the French can provide to the
legitimate governing authority in Vietnam the power it now lacks,
and force the coalescence of the various factions, groups, and
individuals." (Ibid., p. 5) As for Diem himself: "Diem, the
leading lay Catholic in Vietnam, is honest, austere, and widely
respected for his integrity and nationalistic zeal. . . . However,
Diem is rigid, unwilling to compromise, and inexperienced in the
rough and tumble of politics. He is acutely suspicious of his col-
leagues on the political scene and is inclined to seek advice among
a small group of relatives and close friends who, for the most part,
are incapable of proffering sound counsel .. . None of the groups
opposing Diem has any broad-based popular support. It is the weakness
of Diem rather than any genuine political strength of their own that
enables them to prolong the political crisis in Saigon. ou
(Ibid., p. 4)

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
