Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECREI - Sensitive

no one else who can. Whatever US view has been in past, today
US must support Diem whole-heartedly. US must not permit Diem
to become another Karensky.

eeeBao Dai...had irretrievably lost capacity to be anything but
titular head of government....Cao Dai and Hoa Hao could be used
but not Binh Xuyen....With support (of France and US) Diem could
sit on top of revolution. Diem is only force of moderation.

FEC is certain stabilizing influence. US was giving fimds to
support Vietnamese army and could not see anyone else to give
funds to but Diem for that purpose.

eoin US view present revolution is not yet dominated or influenced
by Communists to any appreciable degree... Support of Diem did
not indicate US non-recognition of his wealmesses. US..-had
been and remained ready to support any other man who might be
presented by orderly process of law. (Dulles) remarked that just
before outbreak of fighting US was prepared to consider alter-_
natives but he was not sure now that it would have been practi-
cal....lf there is a better man US is ready to consider him but
*eonO one has been suggested. Although Collins had reached
agreement with Ely in early April to change Diem he now believes
we must support him. 137/

‘be The French Position

French Minister La Forest had opened the meeting by pointing
to consultations (scheduled for July) between North and South Vietnam about
elections. He said France felt South Vietnam could win the contest if a
"nationalist, stable and broadly based government” were in control and that
France wanted South Vietnam to win.

There is no ambiguity in French policy between North and South
Vietnam. Presence of France in North could not be erased by
stroke of pen. It is French duty to protect her cultural and
economic presence there. Sainteny mission is designed for only
that purpose. France had given up thought of mixed companies
as result (US) objections and had now surrendered coal mines.c.

IaForest presented the French analysis of events over the past
four months. While the US could not argue his facts, the US could not accept
LaForest's interpretation of them. Differences between the two nations were
more fundamental than at any time in the past.

eooFrance had loyally supported government of Diem from begin-
ning. Any allegation to contrary is untrue...France reached
agreement with US last December to persuade "or compel" Diem to

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

34
