Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

[28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

d. Within South Vietnam we must recognize that the
period of political transition now in train -- even if it
evolves in the most favorable fashion possible -- will pro-
duce some diminution in the effectiveness of central authority
and some disruption in current programs. At best, we will be
in for a situation like that of late 1963. It is essential
that the Communists be prevented from making major military
gains during this time of transition or scoring military
successes which would generate an aura of invincibility or
seriously damage the morale of our South Vietnamese allies.
Therefore, it is essential that during this period, Communist
forces be constantly harried, kept off balance, and not per-
mitted to press their advantage. The bulk of this task will
have to be borne by U.S. and allied forces during the immedi-
ate future and these forces must be aggressively and offensively
employed.

Option B-O, as developed by Unger, assumed a "policy
decision that we will undertake to find a way to bring to an end by
negotiation the military contest in South Viet-Nam." (This paper, dated
" Ti /66,." was prepared after the April 9 meeting but was filed with the
other papers of that date.) It was the optimistic version of this option
because Unger assumed the possibility of reaching a settlement "on terms
which preserve South Vietnam intact and in a condition which offers at
least a 60-40 chance of its successfully resisting Communist attempts
at political takeover."

In pursuit of this option the United States would persuade
the GVN to negotiate with the NLF, offering amnesty and a coalition
government, though not one giving the NLF control of the military, the
police, or the treasury. The United States would withdraw troops "in
return for the withdrawal of North Vietnamese military forces and political
cadre." Perhaps, agreements between South Vietnam and North Vietnam would
provide for economic intercourse and mutual recognition.

It would not be easy to persuade the GVN, Unger conceded.
Doing so might require not only words but withholding of funds or with-
drawal of some American forces. And once the GVN appreciated that the
United States was inearnest, there would be danger of its collapse. Even
if these problems were surmounted, there would remain the difficulty of
pressing the negotiations to conclusion. "There is no assurance," Unger
wrote, "that a negotiated settlement can pass successfully between the
upper millstone of excessively dangerous concessions to the vC/NLF and
the nether millstone of terms insufficiently attractive to make the
vc/NLF consider it worthwhile to negotiate."

95 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
