Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘Specifically, we believe that General Khanh, with all his
faults, is by long odds the outstanding military man currently
in sight -- and the most impressive personality generally. We |
do not share the conclusion of Ambassador Taylor that he must
somehow be removed from the military and political scene.

There are strong reasons for the Ambassador's total lack
of confidence in Khanh, At least twice Khanh has acted in ways
that directly spoiled Ambassador Taylor's high hopes for Decem-
ber. When he abolished the High National Council he undercut
the prospect of the stable government needed for Phase II action
against the North. In January he overthrew Huong just when the
latter, in the Embassy's view, was about to succeed in putting
the bonzes in their place...

«..our principal reasons for opposing any sharp break with .
Khanh is that we see no one else in sight with anything like his
ability to combine military authority with some sense of politics.

Bundy also differed from the Embassy on the necessity of "facing
down" the Buddhist leaders, believing instead that they should be
"incorporated" into GV affairs rather than being "confronted." He
stressed the significance of these differences, but then generously en-
dorsed the Mission's overall relationship to and handling of the GVN.

Having registered these two immediate and important differ-
ences of emphasis, we should add that in our judgment the mission
has acted at about the right level of general involvement in the
problem of Vietnamese government-making. American advice is sought
by all elements, and all try to bend it to their own ends, The
mission attempts to keep before all elements the importance of
stable government, and it quietly presses the value of those who
are known to be good, solid, able ministerial timber...

eeelt is important that the mission maintain a constant and
active concern with the politics of government-making. This it
is doing.

Bundy then went on to pay obeisance to the need for a stronger
pacification program and for greater recognition that the Vietnamese need
"a sense of positive hope":

If we suppose that new hopes are raised -- at least tem-
porarily -+ by a reprisal program, and we support further
that a government somewhat better than the bare minimum is
established, the most urgent order of business will then be
the improvement and broadening of the pacification program,
especially in its non-military elements...

»»-Vietnamese talk is full of the need for ‘revolution.’
Vietnamese practice is empty of action to match the talk --

33 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
