Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET =- Sensitive

In view of the ARVN's low efficiency in major combat operations and
the increasing difficulties that SVN forces have had in recruiting and
retaining the planned forces in an overtaxed economy, I believe that we
should not increase the SVN forces (ARVN, Regional and Popular Forces)
above the present strength of 158 battalions with 610,000 men. It is
likely that GVN control ean be extended most rapidly by using SVN forces
mainly for revolutionary development, and using additional recruitable
personnel for non-military and para-military revolutionary development
duty. The ARVN must be retrained and assigned to RD duty, and General
Westmoreland plans to do so. ‘The performance of the ARVN and other SVN
forces as an instrument for winning popular support for the GVN has been
decidedly unsatisfactory. Apparently ARVN personnel have not appreciated
the decisive importance of revolutionary development and popular support $
the importance of these items will be heavily emphasized in the retraining
programs.

The Problem of Inflation. To unite the population behind the Govern-
ment - indeed, to avoid disintegration of SVN society - a sound economy
is essential. tunaway inflation can undo what our military operations
accomplish. For this reason, I have directed that a “piaster budget" be
established for U.S. military funded activities. The intent of this
program is to hold military and contracter piaster spending to the mini-
mum level which can be accomplished without serious impact on military-
operations. 2

Ambassador Lodge has asked that U.S. military spending be held to
Ph2 billion in CY 67. The Ambassador's proposed program of tightly
constrained U.S. and GVN civilian and military spending will not bring
complete stability to SVN; there will still be, at best, a P10 billion
inflationary gap. It should, however, hold price rises in CY 67 to 10%
to 25% as opposed to 75% to 90% in the current year. Unless we rigidly
control inflation, the ARVN desertion rate will further increase and
effectiveness will decline thus partially canceling the effects of
increased U.S. deployments. Further, government employees will leave
their jobs and civil strife will occur, possibly collapsing the GVN and,
in any event, seriously hindering both the military and the pacification
efforts. :

of our efforts to hold U.S. military expenditures to

The success of
- = = se at =e <1 :
PLO billion depends, among other trincs. on U.S. force leyels, Ths im-
ay Sac *y oes ey =] ae ied ae
pact cf three differing deployment 13 ON plasver sp

prices is shown in the table below. The actual level
associated with each deployment program is, of course,
policies are pursued in saving piasters. The planning factors used in

the table are based on little actual experience and may be either too high

ox too low to serve as a reliable basis for projection. They do, however ,

reflect first quarter FY 67 experience, MACV planning factors, and expected
anti-inflationary programs.

118 TOP SECRET - Sensitive —
