Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive .

the group believed Option B would risk an impairment of the "U.S. stand-
ing in the NATO and European fremework." The option was believed likely
to produce a major conflict and these effects were seen as quite probable
if it "produced anything less than an early and completely satisfactory
outcome." 91/ Problems were also perceived at home. It was pointed

out that any U.S.-initiated military pressures against North Vietnam
Should be consistent with the provisions of the Joint Congressional
Resolution passed following the Tonkin Gulf incidents, but that Option B
would be difficult to justify under the authorities cited in this resolu-
tion.

"Characterizing the use of force in the context of this
alternative as a legitimate exercise of the right of indi-
vidual or collective self-defense in response to an "armed
attack" from the North would be a major public relations
effort."

Moreover, given the pace and likely intensity of escalation in this option,
it was suggested thet "the constitutional prerogatives of the Congress,
for example, to declare war [would become pertinent.” 92/

AS seen by the Working Group the most disturbing aspect of
Option B was its almost irreversible commitment to a major military
effort, the ultimate neture of which was difficult to predict. That
Hanoi would yield to U.S, demands at an early stage of "B" was considered
unlikely. The chances were considered "significantly greater" that the
DRV would retaliate, either by air attacks on the South or a ground offen-
sive either in Leos or into South Vietnam. It was considered most likely.
however, that Hanoi would continue to hold firm, thus requiring the United
States to "up the ante militarily.” With further increases in our mili-
tary pressure, the group argued, “the odds would necessarily start to
increase that Hanoi...would either start to yield by some real actions
to cut down, or would move itself to a more drastic military response."
The Working Group then cautioned:

"We could find ourselves drawn into a situation where
such military actions as an amphibious landing in the DRV
~~ proposed es one of our further actions -- moved us very
far toward continuing occupation of DRV soil. Alternatively,
the volume of international noise...could reach the point
where, in the interest of our world-wide objectives, we would
have to consider accepting a negotiation on terms that would
relatively but not necessarily be wholly favorable to the
attainment of our full objectives.” 93/

Option C was particularly attractive to the Working Group because
it was believed to be more controllable and, therefore, less deeply com-
mitting than "B." Moreover, in the event of a GVN collapse (recognized
as a danger wider all of the options), the group argued, "our having taken
stronger measures would still leave us a good deal better off than under

“29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
