Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"The countries of the area are now thinking in constructive
terms, which include the indispensable concept of collective security.
Progress in this matter has been considerable, and I am convinced that
further progress will continue to be made.”

* * *
12. President Eisenhower's News Conference, May 12, 1954, Public
Papers of the Presidents, 195 » 473:
x % x

"Q. George Herman, CBS Radio: Mr. President, since we seem to be
going into the past, a few weeks ago you told us of your theory of
dominoes about Indochina, the neck of the bottle --

"THE PRESIDENT. Yes.

"Q. Mr. Herman: Since the fall of Dien Bien Phu, there has been a
certain amount of talk of doing without Indochina. Would you tell us
your administration's position; is it still indispensable to the defense
of southeast Asia?

"THE PRESIDENT. Again I forget whether it was before this body I
talked about the cork and the bottle. Well, it is very important, and
the great idea of setting up an organism is so as to defeat the domino
result. When, each standing alone, one falls, it has the effect on the
next, and finally the whole row is down. You are trying, through a
unifying influence, to build that row of dominoes so they can stand the
fall of one, if necessary.

"Now, so far as I am concerned, I don't think the free world ought
to write off Indochina. I think we ought to all look at this thing with
some optimism and some determination. I repeat that long faces and
defeatism don't win battles."

* (3

13. Address by the Secretary of State, June 11, 1954, (Excerpt) The
Threat of Direct Chinese Communist Intervention in Indochina,
Department of State Bulletin, June 28, 1954, p. 971:

"At the moment, Indochina is the area where international communism
most vigorously seeks expansion under the leadership of Ho Chi Minh.
Last year President Eisenhower, in his great ‘Chance for Peace’ address,
said that ‘aggression in Korea and Southeast Asia are threats to the
whole free community to be met by united action.’ But the French were
then opposed to what they called ‘internationalizing' the,war. They
preferred to treat it as a civil war of rebellion. However, on July 3,
1953, the French. Government mede a public declaration of independence
for the three Associated States, and in September it adopted the so-called

*

B-18
