Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a treaty. This request, coming after the American offer in May to con-

sider such steps and in the context of a worsening situation in Vietnam,
could hardly be ignored. The Taylor Mission and the Presidential review
and decisions of November followed. :

The present paper is organized around these natural climaxes in
the policy process, The balance of Part I describes the situation inherited
by the new Administration. Part II covers the period through the May peak.
Part III covers the fall crisis.

Ii, THE CONTEXT

In January, 1961, there were five issues that were going to affect
American policy toward Vietnam. They turned on:

1. The VC Insurgency Itself

An illustration of the growth of the insurgency, but also of the
limits of U.S. concern can be seen in the 1960 CINCPAC Command History.
For several years prior to 1960, CINCPAC histories do not mention the VC
insurgency at all. In 1960, the development of a counterinsurgency plan for
Vietnam (and simultaneously one for Laos) received a fair amount of atten-
tion, But when, in April, MAAG in Saigon asked for additional transports
and helicopters. for the counterinsurgency effort, CINCPAC turned down the
requests for transports, and OSD overruled the recommendation CINCPAC for-
warded for 6 helicopters. By December, OSD was willing to approve sending
11 helicopters (of 16 newly requested) on an “emergency” basis. But the
emergency was partly a matter of reassuring Diem after the November coup,
and the degree of emergency is suggested by the rate of delivery: 4 in
December, and the balance over the next three months.

The record, in general, indicates a level of concern such as that
illustrated by the helicopter decisions: growing gradually through 1960,
but still pretty much of a back-burner issue so far as the attention and
sense of urgency it commanded among policy-level officials. As we will see,

-the new Kennedy Administration gave it more attention, as the Eisenhower
Administration undoubtedly would have had it remained in office. But it is
important (though hard, now that Vietnam has loomed so large) to keep in
mind how secondary an issue the VC threat to Vietnam seemed to be in early

1961.
2. Problems With the Diem Government

Yet, although the VC gains were not seen -~ even in the dispatches
from Saigon -- as serious enough to threaten the immediate collapse of the
Diem government, those gains did have the effect of raising difficult ques-
tions about our relations with Diem that we had never had to face before,
For by late 1960, it was a quite widely held view that the Diem government

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
