Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

his old acquaintance Diem was the only man for the job in Saigon. He
said the issue "is not Diem as an individual but rather the program

for which he stands." That program "represents genuine nationalism,...
is prepared to deal effectively with corruption and...demonstrates a
concern in advancing the welfare of the Vietnamese people." The Senator

felt it "improbable" that any other leadership "dedicated to these

principles" could be found and recommended the Government "consider an
immediate suspension of all aid to Vietnam and the French Union Forces
there, except that of a humanitarian nature, preliminary to a complete
reappraisal of our present policies in Free Vietnam" if Diem fell. 63/

The Mansfield Report elated Diem (who proceeded to react
with even more intransigent self-righteousness to suggestions of change),
subdued the French and annoyed Paris. For those Frenchmen who favored
conciliation with the Viet Minh, Mansfield's analysis proved the validity
of their policy. Obviously, they said, if Diem falls the U.S. will heed
Mansfield and withdraw from Vietnam. Equally obviously, they said, Diem
will fall. Ergo, France should start "betting on Viet Minh to win war." 6)4/
To French officials willing to back Diem the Report and Washington's
endorsement of it was a violation of the Franco-American agreement to sup-
port another government if Diem fell. When Mendes-France reminded Dulles
of this and spoke of the need to lay plans for "another structure of govern-
ment" which both France and the US could support, Dulles was noncommittal. 65/

hk. NSC Action Program of October and Hisenhower Letter to Diem

President Eisenhower's letter to Diem of 24 October (written
August and shown to the French at that time; held up until the political
situation in South Vietnam settled somewhat; finally approved for trans-
mission at the October 22 NSC meeting) was called a direct violation of
the principle of cooperative action agreed upon in September by Minister
La Chambre. 66/ French Ambassador Bonnet told Secretary Dulles that "it
was felt (the letter) had given Diem full rein without requiring of him
as a preliminary condition that he should first succeed in forming a strong
and stable government, even though this preliminary condition had been a
part of the basis of the Washington agreements." Bonnet added that the
letter might be a violation of the armistice and the Viet Minh might take
advantage of it. 67/ Then, when Ambassador Dillon suggested to the
Quai d'Orsay that French support for Diem had not been all that it might
have been, La Chambre was inflamed. Not only was this a false allegation,
it was a direct slur on General Ely, the government in Paris and the glory
of France. M. La Chambre said he was personally convinced Diem was
leading South Vietnam to disaster but would still support him:

We prefer to lose in Vietnam with the US rather than
to win without them...we would rather support Diem knowing
he is going to lose and thus keep Franco-US solidarity than
to pick someone who could retain Vietnam for the free world
if this meant breaking Franco-US solidarity. 68/

17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
