Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Speaking personally, I told him that I thought there was
one flaw in the French approach to the problem worth men-=
tioning. JI had in mind an apparent assumption by the French
that there was an equality of responsibility as between the
French and the Vietnamese. I said that this did not seem to
me to be the case; that the responsibility of France as a
world power to achieve a solution of the problem was far
greater than that of the Vietnamese; and that the situation
was not one which could be localized as a purely French-
Vietnamese one but might affect adversely conditions through-
out Southeast Asia.

" /The emissary/ quickly substituted the word ‘authority!
for ‘responsibility’ and said that the French were now faced
with the problem of reasserting their authority and that we must
share the responsibility for their delay in doing so because
we had not acceded to French requests in the autumn of 1945
for material assistance." 61/

Farly in February, the U.S. Ambassador in Paris was instructed to
reassure Premier Ramadier of the "very friendliest feelings" of the U.S.
toward France and its interest in supporting France's recovering eco-
nomic, political and military strength:

"In spite any misunderstanding which might have arisen in
minds French in regard to our position concerning Indochina
they must appreciate that we have fully recognized France's
sovereign position in that area and we do not wish to have it
appear that we are in any way endeavoring undermine that posi-
tion, and French should know it is our desire to be helpful and
we stand ready assist any appropriate way we can to find solution
for Indochinese problem. At same time we cannot shut out eyes
to fact that there are two sides this problem and that our reports
indicate both a lack French understanding of other side (more in
Saigon than in Paris) and continued existence dangerously out- ¥
moded colonial outlook and methods in area. Furthermore, there
is no escape from fact that trend of times is to effect that colonial
empires in XIX Century sense are rapidly becoming thing of past.
Action Brit in India and Burma and Dutch in Indonesia are out-
standing examples this trend, and French themselves took cognizance
of it both in new Constitution and in their agreements with Viet-
nam. On other hand we do not lose sight fact that Ho Chi Minh has
direct Communist connections and it should be obvious that we are
not interested in seeing colonial empire administrations supplanted
by philosophy and political organizations emanating from and con-
trolled by Kremlin...."

"Frankly we have no solution of problem to suggest. It is
basically matter for two parties to work out themselves and from
your reports and those from Indochina we are led to feel that
both parties have endeavored to keep door open to some sort of

A-hs5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
