Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In view of these deficiencies, the CJCS continued,

»--l intend to ask the Joint Staff, in drafting its
proposals for future strikes, to insure that the critical
elements of target selection and weight of effort are
evaluated as carefully as possible against specific and
realistic military objectives. At the same time, I believe
the commander of the operating force should have a degree
of flexibility with respect to the weaponeering of the
strikes and their timing. My concern here is that the
operational commander be given adequate latitude to take
advantage of his first-hand knowledge of the target and
its defenses as well as of the changing conditions of
weather and light,

2. I am also asking the Director, DIA, to propose a
standardized and streamlined system of after-action re-
porting so that prompt and responsive analysis of strike
results can be made available to those who require it. 83/

Immediately after the first ROLLING THUNDER strike on March 2,
Devuty Secretary of Defense Cyrus R. Vance convened a meeting attended
by Air Force Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert and other USAF officials to
consider using the high-flying B-52's for pattern bombing in either
North or South Vietnam to avoid Communist ground fire. The Air Staff
and SAC recommended reserving B-52's for use against major targets in
the North. ' The idea of B-52 pattern bombing was not again seriously
considered until April. On the same date (March 2) Secretary Mcllamare
asked that the Joint Staff prepare as soon as possible an analysis of
Us aircraft losses to hostile action in Southeast Asia. B4./ An expe-
dited review and analysis of this subject was promptly undertaken,
covering the experience in YANKEE TEAM (Reconnaissance), BARREL ROLL
(Armed Reconnaissance/Interdiction), BLUE TREE (Photo Reconnaissance),
PIERCE ARROW (Tonkin Gulf Reprisal), FLAMING DART and ROLLING THUNDER
operations. The results were reported to the Secretary of Defense on
March 10, 85/ and, aside from presenting some early and not too reveal-
“ing statistical findings, the report urged that consideration be given
to several measures that, the Chairman felt, might help minimize loss
rates:

(1) Authorize use of NAPALM.

(2) Provide “optimm" strike ordnance not yet aveilable
in the theater.

(3) Allow the operational commander flexibility in strike

timing and selection of alternate targets so as to minimize
weather degradations and operational interferences at target.

65 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
