Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that only conviction of certain failure justifies interven-
tion. We believe that your standard for intervention should
be that stated above.

Therefore, if you should conclude that there is not
clearly a high prospect of suecess, you should communicate
this doubt to generals in a way calculated to persuade them
to desist at least until chances are better. In such a com-
munication you should use the weight of US best advice and
explicitly reject any implication that we oppose the effort
of the generals because of preference for present regime.

We recognize need to bear in mind generals' interpretation
of US role in 1960 coup attempt and your agent should main-
tain clear distinction between strong and honest advice

given as a friend and any opposition to their objectives. 65/

Lodge was also urgently requested to obtain more detailed information
about the composition of the forces the coup leaders expected to have
et their disposal so that we could better assess their prospects.

With regard to Lodge's absence, the instructions placed Truehart in
charge unless a coup occurred, in which case Harkins would be Chief of
Mission. The desirability of having Lodge on the scene in the event of
a coup, however, was stressed and he was encouraged to delay his depar-
ture if he thought the coup wes imminent. The following four-point
stending instructions for U.S. posture in the event of a coup were also
given:

&- US authorities will reject appeals for direct inter-
vention from either side, and US-controlled aircraft and other
resources will not be committed between the battle lines or
in support of either side, without authorization fron Washing-
ton.

b. In event of indecisive contest, US authorities may in
their discretion agree to perform any acts agreeable to both
sides, such as removal of key personalities or relay of infor-
mation, In such actions, however, US authorities will stren-
uously avoid appearance of pressure on either side. It is not
in the interest of USG to be or appear to be either instrument
of existing government or instrument of coup.

e. In the event of imminent or actual failure of coup, US
authorities may afford asylum in their discretion to those to
whom there is any express or implied obligation of this sort.
We believe, however, that in such a case it would be in our
interest and probably in interest of those seeking asylum that
they seek protection of other Embassies in addition to our own.
This point should be made strongly if need arises.

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
