Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Then Dulles agreed -- but added a fourth point:

If the US should decide that there is no repeat no
good alternative to Diem we will have to consider how
much more investment we will be prepared to make in Indo-
china. Our policy would have to be reappraised. Congres-
Sional committees...would have to be consulted. Mansfield
believes in Diem....Even slight chance of success in Vietnam
was worth considerable investment. US had also to think of
what happened in adjacent countries -- in Cambodia, Laos,
Thailand and Malaya. US situation was different from that
of French. French had an investment in lives and property
in Vietnam while ours involved effect that fate of Vietnam
would have on rest of Southeast Asia. 92/

b. But Dulles Reports, No Other Suitable Leader Can Be Seen

After the Tripartite meetings, Dulles reported his assess-
ment of their outcome to Saigon. He said he had agreed with Mendes-France
on four points concerning Diem but*had not agreed to a deadline for Diem's
replacement. Rather, "Collins and Ely would report late January on over-
all situation."

Dulles called the “investment in Vietnam justified even
if only to buy time to build up strength elsewhere in area" and concluded:

_ We are going to have to maintain flexible policy and proceed
carefully by stages in Vietnam....Under present circumstances
and unless situation (in Vietnam) clearly appears hopeless and
rapidly disintegrating, we have no choice but continue our aid
Vietnam and support of Diem. There no other suitable leader
known to us. -93/ :

France believed Dulles had in fact committed the United
States to consider a change with which Bao Dai would be associated by
mid-January. Washington denied it and Paris protests were unable to
budge the State Department. The U.S. and France did agree that the Tri-
partite talks had given Collins and Ely a mandate to study alternatives,
however. 9h/

ec. The U.S. Looks at Alternatives

Having told Paris the U.S. was not committed to either
a deadline or an alternative involving Bao Dai, the U.S. proceeded to
study alternatives. Secretary of Defense Wiison asked the Joint Staff to
assess the impact on military commitments to Southeast Asia of the loss
of South Vietnam, of continued but reduced assistance to that nation and
of a range of actions in between. 95/ ‘The JCS responded by calling
Wilson's alternate options incomplete, that consideration of increased
aid, and institution of a unilateral program of direct guidance to the
GVN through an "advisory system" should be among U.S. considerations.
If these programs were insufficient to insure the retention of South

2h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
