Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

He had: on November 18, the Embassy got word that General Quang would
head a newly-created Ministry of Planning and Develorment; the Ministry
would deal primarily with postwar planning. The command changed and
Quang moved up on November 23. Possibly Ky's idea of how to deal’ with
Quang came from an end-October suggestion from the Embassy for a joint
postwar study teem, to which Ky had agreed and was to announce jointly
with the White House. (Creating the Ministry scrambled the plans for
the study team and announcement, so the Embassy had to go to work on a
new plan.) 18/

A couple of weeks later, following allegations of corruption in news
stories, State cabled the Bnbassy that the President wanted accelerated
efforts both to cope with diversions and to deflate distorted allegations.
State was also considering sending a "blue ribbon panel" from Washington
to assess the problem of AT) misuse. Responding to the stories and to
the Washington concern, Ky said he planned a national campaign against
corruption. State told the Embassy on November 25 of suggestions in
Washington for a joint US/GVN inspectorate general to follow up AID
diversions, and asked for a reaction. After a delay due to active truce
discussions with the VC, Saigon replied on December 2:

There is already an interchange.of information on the
working level between Ky's investigative staff and our re~
sponsible people in USAID. We doubt GVN would respond posi-
tively to idea of joint US/GVN inspectorate to work on AID
diversions. This would touch very sensitive areas. While
we want to expose and cut diversions to maximum extent
possible, we doubt that this rather public way is best
suited to achieve GYN cooperation. 19/

On December 3, Lodge and Ky had an "amiable discussion” on corruption, and
Ky agreed to study and consider all these suggestions. 20/

5. Political Matters at Year's Ind, 1966

Washington and the Saigon Mission watched closely as the Constituent
Assembly did its work. Concern arose at word that GVN was providing a
complete draft constitution either formally or through sympathetic Deputies,
particularly because it provided that ultimate political power ro be
vested in the Armed Forces Council. 21/

Washington, consistent in its championing of National Reconciliation,
urged the Mission to make the USG's views known both to GVN and to key CA
members before the metter became a major issue. 22/ Lodge spoke with Ky
who said he was at that very moment about to lesve to talk with Thieu on
the matter. lLodse further encouraged Ky to state his views on the con-

' stitution to the Chairman of the Drafting Committee and reminded Ky that
the American constitutional expert, Professor Flenz, was available to go
to Ky at any time to give advice in complete confidence. 23/

39 _ BOP SECRET - Sensitive
