Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The bombing which had always attracted considerable JCS attention was

in Wheeler's estimation about to reach the point of target saturation --
when all worthwhile fixed targets except the ports had been struck. Once
this saturation level was reached the decision-makers would be impelled

to address the requirement to deny to the North Vietnamese use of the
ports. He summarized the JCS position saying that the JCS firmly believed
that the President must review the contingencies which they faced, the
troops required to meet them and additional punitive action against DRV.
Westmoreland parenthetically added that he was "frankly dismayed at even
the thought of stopping the bombing program."

There followed @ short exchange devoted to Cambodia and Laos in
which Westmoreland described his impression of the role of Cambodia in the
DRV's grand design, one which incorporated the use of Cambodia as a supply
base, first for rice and later for ammunition. The American commander in
Vietnam also believed we should confront the DRV with South Vietnamese
forces in Laos. He reviewed his operational plan for Laos, entitled HIGH
PORT, which envisioned an elite South Vietnamese division conducting ground
operations in Laos against DRV bases and routes under cover of US artillery
and air support. He saw the eventual development of Laos as a major battle-
field, a development which would take some of the military pressure off the
south. He also thought it would be wise to think in the same terms as
HIGH PORT for Cambodia; he revealed that he also possessed contingency plans
to move into Cambodia in the Chu Pong area, again using South Vietnamese
forces but this time accompanied by US advisors.

The President closed the meeting by asking: "What if we do not add
the 2-1/3 divisions?" General Wheeler replied first, observing that the
momentum would die; in some areas the enemy would recapture the initiative,
an important but hardly disastrous development, meaning that we wouldn't
lose the war but it would be a longer one. He added that...

"Of the 2-1/3 divisions, I would add one division on the
IMZ to relieve the Marines to work with ARVN on pacification;
and I would put one division east of Saigon to relieve the 9th
Division to deploy to the Delta to increase the effectiveness
of the three good ARVN divisions now there; the brigade I would
send to Quang Ngai to make there the progress in the next year
that we have made in Binh Dinh in the past year." 56/

The President reacted by saying:

"We should make certain we are getting value received
from the South Vietnamese troops. Check the dischargees to
determine whether we could make use of them by forming addi-
tional units, by mating them with US troops, as is done in
Korea, or in other ways." 57/

ah TOP SECRET - Sensitive
