Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

offer to mediate under present conditions we do want the French
GOVT to know that we are ready and willing to do anything which
it might consider helpful in the circumstances. We have been
gratified to learn of Moutet's mission and have confidence in

his moderation and broad viewpoint. We believe however that the
situation is highly inflammatory and if present unsettled con-
ditions continue, there is a possibility that other powers might
attempt to bring the matter up before the Security Council. If
this happens, as in the case of Indonesia, the question will arise
whether the matter is one of purely French internal concern or a
situation likely to disturb the peace. Other powers might like-
wise attempt some form of intervention as has been suggested in
the Chinese press. We would be opposed to such steps, but from
every point of view it seems important that the question be
settled as soon as possible. Mr. Acheson added that he wondered
whether the French would attempt to reconquer the country through
military force which was a step that the British had found unwise
to attempt in Burma." 58/

On 8 January, 1947, the Department of State instructed the American
Ambassador in Paris that the U.S. would approve sale of arms and arma-
ments to France “except in cases which appear to relate to Indochina." 59/
On the same date, 8 January 1947, the French conveyed to the Department —
of State a message that:

"...the French Government appreciated the understanding
attitude that Mr. Acheson had shown in discussing the problen
of Indochina; that it had taken note of Mr. Acheson's offer of
"good offices’ and appreciated the spirit in which the offer
was made; and that the French Government did not feel that it
could avail itself of our offer but must continue to handle
the situation_single~handedly along the lines stated by Moutet.
[The emissary/ went on to say that the principal objective of
the French military was to restore order and reopen communica-
tions. He said that after this was done the French Government
would be prepared to discuss matters with the Vietnamese. He
said that the French Government had every intention of living
up to the agreement of last March 6 and the modus vivendi of
September 15, once order was restored. [Be was/ asked...whether
he thought the French military could restore order within any
foreseeable future time. He seemed to think, without much
evidence of conviction, that they could." 60

=¥

There then ensued an interesting exchange between the U.S. official and
the French representative in which the Frenchman sketched a claim of
American culpability for the war:

enn TOP SECRET - Sensitive
