Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On the other hand, we must look with care to our position
under a program of slowly ascending tempo of air strikes.
With the passage of each day and each week, we can expect in-
creasing pressure to stop the bombing. This will come from
various elements of the American public, from the press, the
United Nations and world opinion. Therefore time will run
against us in this operation and I think the North Vietnamese
are counting on this.

Therefore I think what we are doing is starting on a track
which involves ground force operations which, in all probability,
will have limited effectiveness against guerrillas, although
admittedly will restrain some VC advances. However, we can
expect requirements for an ever-increasing commitment of U.S.
personnel without materially improving the chances of victory.
I support and agree with this decision but I must point out
that in my judgment, forcing submission of the VC can only be
brought. about by a decision in Hanoi. Since the contemplated
actions against the North are modest in scale, they will not
impose unacceptable damage on it, nor will they threaten the
DRV's vital interests. Hence, they will not present them with
a situation with which they cannot live, though such actions
will cause the DRV pain and inconvenience.

I believe our proposed track offers great danger of simply
encouraging Chinese Communist and Soviet support of the DRV and
VC cause, if for no other reason than the risk for both will be
minimum. I envision that the reaction of the NVN and Chinese
Communists will be to deliberately, carefully, and probably
gradually, build un the Viet Cong capabilities by covert infil-
tration on North Vietnamese and, possibly, Chinese cadres and
thus bring an ever-increasing pressure on our forces. In effect,
we will find ourselves mired down in combat in the jungle in a
military effort that we cannot win, and from which we will have
extreme difficulty in extracting ourselves.

Therefore it is my judgment that if we are to change the
mission of the ground forces, we must also change the ground
rules of the strikes against North Vietnam. We must hit them
harder, more frequently, and inflict greater damage. Instead
of avoiding the MIG's, we must go in and take them out. A
bridge here and there will not do the job. We must strike their
airfields, their patroleum resources, power stetions and their
military ccmpounds. This, in my opinion. must be done promptly
and with minimum restraint.

If we are unwilling to take this kind of a decision now,

we must not take the actions concerning the mission of our
ground forces for the reasons I have mentioned above.

92 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
