Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"French draw sharp distinction between (1) US
intervention in present circumstances with Viet Minh
bolstered by Chinese Communist materiel, technicians
and. possibly scattered troops and (2) US reaction
against full-scale air attack mounted from Communist
Chinese bases."

Dillon said that, for the French, the U.S. preconditions applied in the
first case but not the second, wherein only Congressional authoriza-
tion was understood to stand in the way of direct U.S. action. Ely,
the Ambassador reported, had all along believed he had Radford's
personal assurance of an American reaction to Chinese air attack in
the Delta. Now, the French wanted to know if they could count on
instant U.S. interdiction of a CCAF strike. The Ambassador closed.

by reminding the Department of the incalculable harm to NATO, to the
whole U.S. position in Western Europe, and to the U.S. position against
communist worldwide strategy if a Chinese attack were not met. 22/

j- U.S. Repeats Initial Reply

Despite Dillon's protestations, the Department stuck by
its initial position of May 15, namely, that Chinese air attack was
unlikely and that the U.S. would meet that problem when it arose. 23/
Clearly, the U.S. was unwilling to make any advance commitments which
the French could seize upon for political advantage without having to
give a quid pro quo in their Indochina policy. Eisenhower affirmed
this view and went beyond it: the conditions for united action, he
said, applied equally to Chinese direct and indirect involvement in
Indochina. The U.S. would make no unilateral commitment against any
contingency, including overt, unprovoked Chinese aggression, without
firm broad allied support. 2h/

k. Other Obstacles to U.S.-French Accord

There were other obstacles to U.S.-French agreement, as
brought into the open with a memorandum to the President from Foreign
Minister Bidault on June l. 25/ One was American insistence on
French Assembly approval of a government request for U.S. intervention.
The French cabinet considered that to present a program of Allied
involvement to the Assembly except under the circumstance of "a complete
failure of the Geneva Conference" attributable to the communists "would
be literally to wish to overthrow the [french] Government.” A second
area, of continuing disagreement concerned the maintenance of French
forces in the field and the nature of a U.S. commitment. The French
held that the U.S. could bypass Congress by committing perhaps one
division of Marines without a declaration of war. 26/ Although
assured, that the Marines, being part of the Navy, would be included
in a U.S. air-naval commitment, the French wanted much more.

A-22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
