\é2-

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

things, of trying to use Vietnam as a "pawn of capitalist imperialism."
26/ Nolting went to Diem to complain about the damage that such stories
would do to U.S.-Vietnamese relations. But Diem disclaimed responsibility,
and suggested they were an understandable reaction of the South Vietnamese
to what they had learned about the U.S. proposals from U.S. press reports.
Nolting's final comment in his report on this meeting was a suggestion
that the U.S. concentrate on "efficiency in GVN rather than on more nebu~
lous and particularly offensive to Diem concept of political reform. 27/
The impression given by the cable is that Nolting felt on the defensive,
which was probably the case since the package Washington had proposed
must have been disappointing to him as well as to Diem.

It did not take long for Washington to back away from any hard demands
on Diem. A sentence from the original guidance telegram stated "we would
expect to share in the decision-making process in the political, economic
and military fields as they affected the security situation”...as opposed
to the previous arrangement of "acting in an advisory capacity only. :
28/ Alexis Johnson and Rostow drafted a cable on December 7 that clarified
this and a number of other points to which Diem had strongly objected, in
this case to explain that,

wt

e-ewhat we have in mind is that, in operations directly related to
the security situation, partnership will be so close that one :
party will not take decisions or actions affecting the other without
full and frank prior consultations... 29/

This was quite a comedown from the idea that American involvement in the
Vietnamese government should be so intimate that the government could be
reformed "from the bottom up" despite Diem. Once the U.S. backed away from
any tough interpretation of its proposals, agreement was fairly easily
reached with Diem, and one of the usual fine sounding statements of agreed
principles and measures was drawn up.

On one seemingly modest request from Diem, Washington was curiously
firm. Diem repeatedly, both while the Taylor Mission was in Saigon, and
after its return, asked for Lansdale to be sent. (Our record shows four
such requests, one directly by Diem to Taylor; a second from Thuan; and
in a memorandum to McNamara William Bundy referred to two further requests
relayed through McGarr, ) Cottrell, the senior State representative on
the Taylor Mission, strongly endorsed sending Lansdale, and the main paper
of the Taylor Report seemed to endorse the idea, William Bundy was in
favor of sending Lansdale, and Lansdale wanted to go. But nothing happened.
sare never got to Vietnam until Cabot Lodge brought him out late in
1965.

The first contingents of helicopters arrived in Saigon December 11

(having been put to sea several weeks earlier). On the following day a
New York Times dispatch from Saigon began:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

147.
