Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

South Vietnam should be accompanied by air strikes against the North suf-
ficiently heavy and damaging to really hurt the North. If the U.S. were to
combine combat operations in the South with air strikes of any kind in the
North, the attacks on the North should be heavy and do great damage,
Without expressly saying so, his point seems to have been that the air war
against the North should not be an attempt to persuade, but an effort to
compel, He said that he had already reported that:

The strikes to date have not caused a change in the
North Vietnamese policy of directing Viet Cong insurgency,
infiltrating cadres and supplying materials, If anything,
the strikes to date have hardened their attitude,

Although the memo as a whole conveys Mr. McCone's serious doubt that the
ground operations in the South would in any event serve their purpose, he
clearly advocated bombing more heavily if we decided to engage in ground
operations. Unless they were supported by really strong actions against
North Vietnam, he felt such ground operations would be doomed to failure:

I believe our proposed track offers great danger of simply en-
couraging Chinese Communists and Soviet support of the DRV and VC
cause if for no other reason than the risk for both will be mini-
mum. I envision that the reaction of the NVN and the Chinese Com-
munists Will be to deliberately, carefully, and probably gradually,
build up the Viet Cong capabilities by covert infiltration of
North Vietnamese and, possibly, Chinese cadres and thus bring an
ever increasing pressure on our forces. In effect, we will find
ourselves mired down in combat in the jungle in a military effort
we cannot win, and from which we will have extreme difficulty in
extracting ourselves,

McCone argued that if we were going to change the mission of the U.S. ground
forces we also needed to change the ground rules of the strikes against
North Vietnam, and he concluded:

If we are unwilling to teke this kind of a decision now,
we must not take the actions concerning the mission of our
ground forces for the reasons I have mentioned above. 145/

McCone's views notwithstanding, U.S. policy was promptly and sharply
reoriented in the direction of greater military involvement with a pro-
portionate de-emphasis of the direct counterinsurgency efforts, It is not
fully clear to this writer exactly how and why this rapid re-orientation
occurred, On 7 April the President made his famous Johns Hopkins speech
in which he publicly committed the United States more than ever before to
the defense of South Vietnam, but also committed himself to engage in

11). TOP SECRET . Sensitive
