Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Current repatriation schedules envisage the completion of the evac-
uation of the Japanese from nothern Indo-China by April 15. The
Combined Chiefs of Staff consider that it is most desirable to have
the French commander in Indo-China conform to present schedules.

Accordingly. Admiral Mountbatten has been directed to make the
neceseary arrangements with the Prench military commander in Indo-
China regarding the transfer of his share of the above-mentioned re-
sponsibility at the earliest possible date.

The Supreme Commander for the Alted Povers and the avpro-
priate Chinese authorities have been informed of the Combined Chiefs
of Staif action on this matter.

Tt is understood that a memorandum has been addressed dit ectly
to fhe French Military Atlaché to the United Stafes informing him
of the above and requesting that appropriate instructions be issued to
_ the French military commander in Indo-China.

Wastixerox, April 10, 1946.

§51G6.00/4-1546 : Telogram P o
The Vice Consul at Hanoi (O'Sullican) to the Secretury of State™

“This teleerim was summarized ina Department circular telegram of April 19,
46, noon, to Bangkok, Uatavin, Chungking. Manila, and Paris.

CONFIDENTIAL Hawor. April 18, 1946—S a.
PRIORITY : : [Received April 15—S a. m

9, Despite many questions which ave stil in fluid state, conditions
‘in Hanoi ave surprisinely quiet. French Annamifeand Chinese troops
are in city in varying foree but with comparatively little friction.

Freneh troops under General Valluy. commosed of elements of
Second Armoured and Ninth Colonia) Tnfautry Divisions, are making
strennous sffarts to avoid antagonizing Chinese.

Fifty-third Army with seattered services are only Chinese troops
which remain in vicinity of Hanoi. Date of their withdrawal
unkpown here.

Repatriation of Japanese soldiers and civilians north of 16th paral-
Tel Fias heen tak'ne place durine past 2 weeks. Apnroximately 30 of
35,000 have been shipped. Remainder are scheduled to leave in near
future. ; :

French eppear to be exercising no civilian functions here. Vietnam
is de fecto covernnient of Hanol, rannine police and administrative
services. There are indications that no effective central authority
exists ontside of city areas alfhonel natives ore said to be bitterly auti-
French. Passage of recent French convoy from Tnaiphone to TManoi,
for exnmple, was resisted by barricades (but apparently not by rifle
fire) in villages nlony ronte.

Negotiations naw openine between French apd Vietnam at Dalat
(Dalat is WN station in Cochin China) to implement prelininary
agreement to Maveh Gh Most important immediate question appears
to he status of Cochin China.

Food situation generally better than last vear. Reports indicate
there should be no famine in northern FIC in near future,

O'SULrtvan

|
