Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

TV. A. 25 AID FOR FRANCE IN INDOCHINA, 1950-1954

SUMMARY

The United States decision to provide military assistance to France
and the Associated States of Indochina was reached informally in February.
March 1950, funded by the President on May 1, 1950, and was announced on
May 8 of that year. The decision was taken in spite of the U.S. desire to
avoid direct involvement in a colonial war, and in spite of a sensing that
France's political-military situation in Indochina was bad and was deterio-
rating. Moreover, predictions that U.S. aid would achieve a marked dif-
ference in the course of the Indochina War were heavily qualified.

The situation in which the decision was made was completely dominated
by the take-over of and consolidation of power in China by the communists.
Nationalist Chinese forces had been withdrawn from mainland China and Com-
munist Chinese troops had arrived on the border of Indochina in late 1949.
This period was the high water mark of U.S. fears of direct Chinese Com-
munist intervention in Indochina. NIE 5 of 29 December 1950 stated:
"Direct intervention by Chinese Communist troops may occur at any time...
it is almost certain to occur in strength whenever there is danger either
that the Viet Minh will fail to maintain its military objective of driving
the French out of Indochina, or that the Bao Dai Government is succeeding
in undermining the support of the Viet Minh."

The rationale of the decision was provided by the U.S. view that the
soviet-controlled expansion of communism both in Asia and in Europe required,
in the interests of U.S. national security, a counter in Indochina. The
domino thesis was quite prominent. On 6 March 1950, the Secretary of Defense
wrote the President as follows: "The choice confronting the United States
is to support the legal government in Indochina or to face the extension
of communism over the remainder of the continental area of Southeast Asia
and possibly westward..." Despite this statement, it was a generally
accepted proposition that “regardless of current U.S. commitments for cer-
tain military assistance to China, the U.S. will not commit any of its
armed forces to the defense of Indochina against overt, foreign aggression,
under present circumstances."

The decision to begin military assistance to France and the Associated
States of Indochina was not made under the illusion of great expectations.
In April 1950, the Joint Chiefs would go no further than to say that prompt
delivery of the aid would do no more than create the "possibility of success.'
In July 1950, General Erskire, after completing his Presidential mission
to Indochina, reported that “the amount of aid and the scope of the assis-
tance thus far requested by the French were inadequate to the needs of the
situation." All U.S. expectations seemed to have been underpinned by the

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
