Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Communist Chinese promptly responded with recognition, followed by

the Soviets. In France, there was a sharp debate in the National Assembly
between Leftist advocates of an immediate truce with the Viet Minh, and
Government supporters of ratification for the Elysee Agreement. On

2 February 1950, the French Government prevailed, and the Elysee Agreement
was formally ratified. Under the circumstances, the United States deter-
mined that this action met its minimum requirements for tangible French
progress towards Vietnamese autonomy. On 3 February, President Truman
approved recognition of the States of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. _7/
Within three months the United States decided to extend economic and
military aid to the new States. On 8 May 1950, the Secretary of State
announced that:

"The United States Government, convinced that neither
national independence nor democratic evolution exist in any
area dominated by Soviet imperialism, considers the situation
to be such as to warrant its according economic aid and mili-
tary equipment to the Associated States of Indochina and to
France in order to assist them in restoring stability and
permitting these states to pursue their peaceful and democratic
development." _8/

The U.S. involvement in the Vietnam war originated with its
decision to provide assistance to France and the Associated States, and
to form MAAG Indochina. Therefore, it is of particular importance to
understand the reasons for the decision, the form of its execution, and
its effects.

2. The Containment of Communism

U.S. chagrin and increasing concern over the post-World War II
expansion of the Soviet Union in Europe, together with fear of further
gains by communism, set the tone of U.S. policy toward Asian communist
nations in the 1948-1950 period. As the Secretary of State's statement
above indicates, these were the days of the "monolithic Communist bloc,"
dominated by the Soviet Union. A National Security Council policy paper
of 1949 stated that:

"The USSR is now an Asiatic power of the first magnitude
with expanding influence and interest extending throughout
continental Asia and into the Pacific. Since the defeat of
Japan...the Soviet Union has been able to consolidate its
strategic position until the base of Soviet power in Asia
comprises not only the Soviet Far East, but also China north
of the Great Wall, Northern Korea, Sakehalin, and the Kuriles." 9/

The question of how best to oppose the expansion of communism
in Asia was reised to crisis proportions by the "loss" of China. An
extensive and acrimonious national debate on foreign policy was stirred,
conducted in the midst of growing public apprehension over communist
penetration, espionage, and subversion in Europe and within the United
States itself. In Congress, a particularly active and vocal group

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
