Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Q. Have the figures on VC control of territory and popu-
lation changed appreciably? A. The statistic that counts is
people, and in the month of March the statistics that are here
do not have percentiles.

"Q. Can you give us figures on the number of people
brought under government control in January and in March -- or
to the closest month? A. It's not significant. I'd say it was
a slow gain basically in the Hop Tac area. Any place else, you've
had a trade-off.

"Q. Would it be a fair assumption to say that, outside of
Hop Tac the government held its om? A. In the overall, held
its own. -

"Q. There was no significant progress, then. The government
held its own? A. That's correct.

"Q. It was a stalemate, then? A. No, I wouldn't call it a
stalemate. I don't consider the fact that you pacified, or
asserted control over 20 additional hamlets which might house
as many as six or seven thousand people a stalemate.

"Q. At the same time we lost... A. No, you misunderstand
me...the losses and the gains were counter balanced outside the
Hop Tac area. In the Hop Tac area, there were gains."

CIA and MACV Situation Reports contained the following observations on
pacification; :

CIA Monthly Report, 21 January 1965:

"Pacification on a nationwide basis, has generally been stalled for
the past month. Although there are pacification plans in effect in all
provinces (except Con Son Island), there has been little significant
progress; in some areas there has been an appreciable deterioration of.
governmental control. Even though South Vietnamese officials report con-
tinuing progress in the high priority Hop Tac effort around Saigon, it
remains to be seen whether these are more than paper achievements. To
date there has been no major effort by the Viet Cong to strike at areas
which are now claimed as "secure," and therefore the validity of govern-
ment claims remains untested. The Viet -Cong have increased their numbers
and the tempo of their operations in areas adjacent to Hop Tac and what
is apparently an attempt to draw off government forces committed to this
major pacification effort."

CIA Monthly Report, 17 February. 1965:

"Nationwide, the pacification effort has barely moved ahead since
1 January; there has been a serious deterioration in some areas, mainly

52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
