wo

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

carried out by Vietnamese by the end of 1965. It should be
possible to withdraw the bulk of U.S. personnel by that time.

ce. In accordance with the program to train progressively Viet-
namese to take over military functions, the Defense Department
should announce in the near future presently prepared plans to
withdraw 1000 U.S. military personnel by the end of 1963. This
action should be explained in low key as an initial step ina
long-term program to replace U.S. personnel with trained Viet-
namese without impairment of the war effort.

Germane to the above recomendations, however, it was stated elsewhere
in the report, "No further reductions should be made until the requirements
of the 196) campaign become firm." 40/

Following the NSC meeting of 2 October, the White House issued a
formal public announcement of the major policy aspects of the McNamara~
Taylor Mission Report. The White House statement is reproduced below.

U.S. POLICY ON VIET-NAM:
WHITE HOUSE STATEMENT, OCTOBER 2, 1963 41/

Secretary [of Defense Robert s./ McNamara and General [Maxwell py
Taylor reported to the President this morning and to the National
Security Council this afternoon. Their report included a number of
classified findings and recommendations which will be the subject
of further review and action. Their basic presentation was endorsed
by all members of the Security Council and the following statement
of United States policy was approved by the President on the basis
of recommendations received from them and from Ambassador /Henry
Cabot/ Lodge.

1. The security of South Viet-Nam is a major interest of the
United States as other free nations. We will adhere to our policy
of working with the people and Government of South Viet-Nam to deny
this country to communism and to suppress the externally stimulated
and supported insurgency of the Viet Cong as promptly as possible.
Effective performance in this undertaking is the central objective
of our policy in South Viet-Nam.

@. The military program in South Viet~Nam has made progress and
is sound in principle, though improvements are being energetically
sought.

3. Major U.S. assistance in support of this military effort is
needed only until the insurgency has been suppressed or until the
national security forces of the Government of South Viet-Nam are
capable of suppressing it.

Secretary McNamara and General Taylor reported their judgment
that the major part of the U.S. military task can be completed by the
end of 1965, although there may be a continuing requirement for a
limited number of U.S. training personnel. They reported that by
the end of this year, the U.S. program for training Vietnamese should

22 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
