Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

all whites in another "night of the long knives" similar to
that of 1946.)

Now the French had been insistent thtthe National Army was a
hollow shell, that its officers would refuse to fight...that
morale was so bad the troops would desert rather than follow
“bloody Diem." 111/

Lansdale implies Collins fell for this "propaganda" but he, Lansdale,
did not.

=

On the cease-fire, Lansdale reports:

The French told Diem that if he tried to take over Sureté
headquarters which was now included in the French zone, French
troops would open fire on the Vietnamese Army. The US advised
Diem to be patient, that the French were really being helpful
by negotiating with the Binh Xuyen. The cease-fire limit was
extended... .Sizeable sums were being offered (by French) +o
Army officers and to sect leaders who were remaining loyal to
Diem and to entice them into being at least neutral. Those
who refused were subjected to character assassination
attacks... 112/

be. Ely and Collins’ Decision: Diem Must Go

On April 7, Collins and Ely discussed Diem. Ely said Diem
could be maintained only by overcoming enormous difficulties. After a full
day of "soul-searching," Ely had been forced to conclude Diem had to go
to preserve Vietnam for the free world. He would accept anyone but Diem
as premier. 113/ Collins had been nearing a similar conclusion. On
March 31 he told the State Department it was necessary to consider alter-
natives to Diem. 114/ A week later Collins cabled Dulles to insist Diem
be removed. He recommended Tran Van Do (Diem's foreign minister who also
resigned from the cabinet in March) or Dr. Quat as replacements. 115

ce. Dulles! Indecision

Dulles replied as he had in December: he could not see how
Diem's replacement would solve the sect problem for any successor worthy of
US assistance would still have to contend with them. A change in premiers
would damage US prestige throughout the Far East: the US would be charged
with paying lip service to the cause of Asian nationalism, then abandoning
a nationalist leader when pressured by "colonial interests." Plus pro-
Diem Congressional sentiment was a problem. Tne Mutual Security bill was
under debate and Mansfield had made it clear that Congress would be reluc-
tant to appropriate funds to a Vietnam without Diem. Despite these diffi-
. culties, Dulles eventually agreed to consider a change if Collins would
personally come to Washington for consultation. 116/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

29
