Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

operations. Making a distinction between border operations already
arranged for (Recommendation 11) and those intended by Recommendation
12, they advocated incorporating in the second-stage scenario retalia-
tory operations and overt military pressures against North Vietnam.
They also urged including border control operations of battalion-size
or larger, low-level reconnaissance by U.S. aircraft, and VNAF air
operations in Laos that include strikes on bridges and armed route
reconnaissance. In justifying such actions, they stated:

"...military operations against the DRV to help stabilize
the situation in the Republic of Vietnam, and other opera~
tions planned to help stabilize the situation in Laos,
involve the attack of the same target systems and to a
considerable extent the same targets. Assistance in the
achievement of the objective in the Republic of Vietnam
through operations against NVN could likewise have a
similar result in Laos, offering the possibility of a
favorable long-term solution to the insurgency problem

in Southeast Asia." 66/

However, the deliberate, cautious approach continued to hold sway.
Secretary McNamara's trip to Saigon, called for early in the second-
stage scenario as a means to obtain General Khanh's agreement to initiate
overt operations against the North, did not include this purpose. On the
contrary, a week prior to the visit General Khanh had raised with
Ambassador Lodge the issue of putting his country on 4 fully mobilized
war footing -- accompanying it with a declaration that further inter-
ference by Hanoi in South Vietnamese affairs would bring reprisals --
and Secretary McNamara was instructed to impress upon Khanh that such
drastic measures and threatening gestures were unnecessary at the
moment. 67/ More important, it was stressed that the GVN "“systematic-
ally and aggressively demonstrate to the world that the subversion of
the South is directed from Hanoi," through sending "capable ambassadors
to the important capitals of the world to convince governments of this
fact." Moreover, while assuring General Khanh that our commitment to
his country and Laos "does not rule out the use of force...against North
Vietnam,” the Secretary was advised to remind him that "such actions
must be supplementary to and not a substitute for successful counter-
insurgency in the South" -- and that "we do not intend to provide
military support nor undertake the military objective of ‘rolling back'
communist control in North Vietnam." 68/

19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
