Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Fourth, the so-called liberation front for South Viet-Nam is a
subordinate unit of the Central Office for South Viet-Nam, en integral
part of the governmental machinery in Hanoi.

"Fifth, the key leadership of the. Viet-Cong--officers, specialists,
technicians, intelligence agents, political organizers and propagandists--
has been trained, equipped and supplied in the north and sent into the
Republic of Viet-Nam under Hanoi's military orders.

"Sixth, most of the weapons, including new types recently intro-
duced, and most of the ammunition and other supplies used by the Viet-
Cong, have been sent from North to South Viet-Nam.

"Seventh, the scale of infiltration of men and arms, including
regular units of the armed forces of North Viet-Nam, has increased
appreciably in recent months.

"Eighth, this entire pattern of activity by the regime in Hanoi
is in violation of general principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, and is in direct violation of the Geneva
Accords of 1954. Such a pattern of violation of the treaty obligations
undertaken at Geneva was confirmed by a special report of the Interna-
tional Control Commission in 1962 and it has been greatly intensified
since then.

"These facts about the situation in Viet-Nam make it unmistakably
clear that the character of that conflict is an aggressive war of con-
quest waged against a neighbor--and make nonsense of the cynical allega-
tion that this is simply an indigenous insurrection.

"I request that you circulate copies of the Report, together with
copies of this letter, to the Delegations of all Member States as a
Security Council document.

"In making this information available to the Security Council, my
Government wishes to say once more that peace can be restored quickly
to Viet-Nam by & prompt and assured cessation of aggression by Hanoi
against the Republic of Viet-Nam. In that event, my Government--as it
has said many times befcre--would be happy to withdraw its military
forces from the Republic of Viet-Nam and turn promptly to an interna-
tional effort to assist the economic and social development of Southeast

Asia.

"In the meantime, my Government awaits the first indication of any
intent by the government in Hanoi to return to the ways of peace and
peaceful resolution of this international conflict.

"Accept, Excellency, the assurance of my highest ea ei

"ADIAI E. STEVENSON.”

D-29
