Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

#

- -TOP SOCKET SECUMLTY INvOnisn TION

5. French immed brought up ad hoc comite conclusions,
said French Govt had asproved them ons month ago and
wished have US-UK views. iden said he could meke no
(rat no) comnuitment but he evissged, as he had stated

at Columbia University, UN action on basis similarity

to aggression in hores. He reserved position end said
would not discuss with colleagues. ie comite conclu-
sions he could not (rpt not) comment except to say they
had been exomined. French ssid attention should be
given: both on timing and form of warning 48 wrong timing
might provoke Ghinese Comuies and be used as pretext
extending conflict. It was agreed this subject vould
Giscussed in future political-military talks. Letourneau
asked that some perts ad hoc comite conclusions, on which
there had been no (rpt no) difference of opinion, be
lifted out for spproval by three govts, stressin;; ever
present danger (although he did not (rpt not) consider
it immed probable) of Chinese Comuie massive ettack
endangering t'rench Expeditionary Corps and civilians :--
Indochina and need, therefore, for advence planning on
evacuation and transport. The Secretary while noting
lack of agreement in ad noc comite conclusions, agreed
.Ye-examine it and noted desirability picking out cer-~
tain points upon which action could be taken now. There
wes general agreement with desirability drawing up
general political principles as guide to military talks
and the Secretary said Department would prepare draft
for forwarding to London and Paris Binbassies guide for
military talks efter whish Mins could later examine
overall subject.

6. Importence French attach to question increased aid
for Indochinese effort end concern French Govt fesls

over this question in face of National Assembly and
general pudlic attitudes are evidenced both by presence
of rinay at this conference and tone and content of
remarks of French hepresentétives. Pinay, Pleven and
Schuman each brou,ht out that France could not (rpt not)
increase its present effort in indochins and that there
was serious concern over difficulties vhich sovt expected
to face in National assembly. Finay, for example, while
expressing agreement with principle that each of three
nations had its individual problems and responsibilities,

sald. that

TOP SLCnST SLCUAITY Ll POwlA TION

51.3
