Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

1963 in connection with a progrem to train Vietnamese to replace Americans
in all essential functions by 1965.

To bring political pressure on the Diem regime to end its repressive
policies, the following measures were recommended; (a) a continued with-
holding of funds in the commodity import program, but without formal
announcement 5 (b) suspension of approval of AID loans for the Saigon-
Cholon Waterworks and the Saigon Hlectric Power Project ; (c) suspension
of support for Colonel Tung's forces unless they were transferred to the
field and placed under JGS authority; (d) maintenance of purely "correct"
relations between the Ambassador and Diem (General Harkins’ contact with
the regime not to be suspended, however). In subsequent evaluations of
the success of these sanctions, the report stated:

-..the situation must be closely watched to see what steps
Diem is taking to reduce repressive practices and to improve
the effectiveness of the military effort. We should set no
fixed criteria, but recognize that we would have to decide in
2-1 months whether to move to more drastic action or try to
Sige on with Diem even if he had not taken significant steps.
12h /

Finally, the report recommended against our actively encouraging 2 coup,
although it recommended seeking "urgently to identify and puild contacts
with an alternative leadership if and when it appears." 125/

The report is a curiously contradictory document. It was, no doubt,
@ compromise between General Harkins’ view of the war's progress as sup-
ported by General Taylor, and Secretary McNamara's growing conviction of
the gravity of the political crisis and its dire potential for the war
effort. Its recommendations for aid suspensions and the announcement of
U.S. troop withdrawals were obviously designed as measures, short of a
withdrawal of U.S. support, that would create doubt within the Diem regime
about U.S. intentions and incentives for policy changes. 126/ The fact
that these sanctions would be seen by the generals as 4 signal of our
willingness to accept alternative leadership -~ i.e., @ Coup -- does not
seem to have figured in the recommendation, however, because elsewhere
the report specifically rules out U.S. encouragement of "a change of
goverrment." 127/ This is an important lapse in view of the generals’
clear statement in August that they would regard an aid suspension as a
coup signal.

Nevertheless, the recommendations of the Mission met with swift
approval at the NSC on October 2 and later thet day Secretary Mciiamara
made the Presidentially approved statement to the press that included the
announcement of the 1,000 man troop withdrawal by the end of the year. 128/
The statement reiterated the U.S. commitment to the struggle against in-
surgency and aggression in South Vietnam, noted the progress of the war,

3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
