Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

used except in the common interest. The Congress hereby finds
that the efforts of the United States and other countries to
promote peace and security in furtherance of the purposes of

the Charter of the United Nations require additional measures

of support based upon the principle of continuous and effective
self-help and mutual aid. These measures include the furnishing
of military assistance essential to enable the United States

and other nations dedicated to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter to participate effectively in arrange-
ments for individual and collective self-defense in support

of those purposes and principles. In furnishing such military
assistance, it remains the policy of the United States to con-
tinue to exert maximum efforts to obtain agreements to provide
the United Nations with armed forces as contemplated in the
Charter and agreements to achieve universal control of weapons
of mass destruction and universal regulation and reduction of
armaments, including armed forces, under adequate safeguards to
protect complying nations against violation and evasion.

"The Congress hereby expresses itself as favoring the cre-
ation by the free countries and the free peoples of the Far
East of a joint organization, consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations, to establish a program of self-help and
mutual cooperation designed to develop their economic and
social well-being, to safeguard basic rights and liberties
and to protect their security and independence,

"The Congress recognizes that economic recovery is essen-
tial to international peace and security and must be given
clear priority. The Congress also recognizes that the increased
confidence of free peoples in their ability to resist direct or
indirect aggression and to maintain internal security will
advance such recovery and support political stability." 78/

While Congress was deliberating on MDAP, the staff of the National
Security Council, at the request of the Secretary of Defense, had been
reexamining U.S. policy toward Asia. In June, 1949, the Secretary had
noted that he was:

",..inereasingly concerned at the...advance of communism

in large areas of the world and particularly the successes of

communism in-China...."

"A major objective of United States policy, as I understend
it, is to contain communism in order to reduce its threat to
our security. Our actions in Asia should be part of a care-
fully |considered and comprehensive plan to further that objec-
tive." 79/ ay

A-5h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
