Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Accordingly, the only purpose of intensification of the
bombing campaign in the North and the addition of further
targets would be to endeavor to break ti.e will of the North
Vietnamese leaders. CIA forecasts indicate little if any
chance that this would result even from a protracted bombing
campaign directed at population centers.

A change in our bombing policy to include deliberate
strikes on population centers and attacks on the agricultural
population through the destruction of dikes would further
alienate domestic and foreign sentiment and might well lose
us the support of those European countries which now support
our effort in Vietnam. It could cost us Australian and
New Zealand participation in the fighting.

Although the North Vietnamese do not mark the camps
where American prisoners are kept or reveal their locations,
we know from intelligence sources that most of these facili-
ties are located in or near Hanoi. Our intelligence also
indicates that many more than the approximately 200 pilots
officially classified by us as prisoners of war may, in
fact, be held by North Vietnam in these camps. On the
basis of the debriefing of the three pilots recently
released by Hanoi, we were able to identify over 40 addi-
tional American prisoners despite the fact that they
were kept in relative isolation. Heavy and indiscriminate
attacks in the Hanoi area would jeopardize the lives of
these prisoners and alarm their wives and parents into
vocal opposition. Reprisals could be taken against them
and the idea of war crimes trials would find considerable
acceptance in countries outside the Communist bloc.

Finally, the steady and accelerating bombing of the
North has not brought North Vietnam closer to any real
move toward peace. Apprehensions about bombing attacks
that would: destroy Hanoi and Haiphong may at some time
help move them toward productive negotiations. Actual
destruction of these areas would eliminate a threat
that could influence them to seek a political’ settlement
on terms acceptable to us. 31/

170 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
