Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

~ OF
ay yA ee hos oe
‘ vie Sikri
TOP SECRET - Sensitive Pee ey Or

foaee tried to persvade General Minh to travel around the countryside to
build a following and convince the people that the government cared about
them, but with Little success . 6f | The overall. USG appraisal was that the
GVN was weak and drifting at the-top level, failing to set firm national
policies and to issue detailed instructions, and that at lower levels it
was in complete turmoil because of the turnover of personnel following

the coup and because of the lack of firm national leadership. ia

Whether to push the GVN harder was 4 subject of disagreement be-
tween State and Ambassador Lodge. ‘the State view was that the GVN must
prove its resolution to adopt economic, secial and political measures to
support the effort against the VC, and must move toward self-support.
Moreover, State said:

"We will obscure the actual need for GVN adjustments
if we yield too easily at this stage to GVN pressure for
more commercial inport aid." 8/

In contrast, Lodge said it was essential

"to provide some increase in overall level of
economic aid...It is in my view politically unacceptable
and psychologically impossible to tell Big Minh that he
is going to get less than Dien."

Besides wanting to go easy on the GVN on aid leverage, he opposed pressure
for early elections. Iodge's position is clear from the Honolulu Conference
(November 1963) Report, which stated:

"The Awbassador...considers it essential that the U.S.
not press the new government unduly. He stated that they are
in a most delicate state, and are not ready for a system
which replaces governments by elective process rather than
by violence; that this is beyend their horizon at this time
and we should not seek to recreate in Vietnam our image of
the democratic ideal."

Tarly in Jenuary, 1964, Lodge restated this view in a cable:

"Tt is obvious that [the Vietnamese generals] are all
we have got. and that we must try as hard to make them into
successful politicians as we are trying to make them into
successful. military men." 10/

Behind Shese differences within the USG and between the USG and
the GVN Jay a certain Jack of confidence in future behavior. Some in the
U.S. were concerned that the GVN might drift toward a “neutralism" like
that of Iaos. 11/ At the same time, the GVN feared the U.S, would nego-
tiate behind its back or force it to accept an unfevorable settlement. 12/
These concerns made it appropriate for the President to issue his New
Year's greeting to the GVN:

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
