Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

attitude in the central government, and the strength of the RVNAF declined.
Viet Cong depredations continued and pacification efforts ed behind.

As we pressured Khanh to adopt reforms to remedy the deficiencies of
the GVN administration of programs within South Vietnam, his frustrations
over these difficulties and failures were increased. He had no taste for
the long, unspectacular social reform and social rebuilding that were the
tasks of pacification. He soon began to talk increasingly of a scapegoat--
a march to the North. He wanted to get the struggle over with. This cor-
responded to the means that we had considered but had for the time being
rejected--seeking escape from our own frustrations in South Vietnam by
pressure on the North. We moved gradually in this direction, impelled almost
inevitably to ultimate actions of this sort, but always reluctantly and
always hesitant to commit ourselves to more than very minor moves, until
suddenly and dramatically the Tonkin Gulf affair of early August provided
an occasion to make a move of the sort we had long been anticipating but
had until then always deferred. But during this period the debate over pos-
sible measures of this sort, and the instability of the Khanh government,
increasingly distracted attention from programs focussed directly on the
problems of pacification and of winning the loyalties of the Vietnamese for
the GVN.

In the immediate aftermath of the Tonkin Gulf affair, Khanh, feeling
his position strengthened, took il] advised measures to consolidate the
gains that he believed had been made thereby, and quickly precipitated an
overriding governmental crisis. Thereafter, the stability of the regime
became the dominant factor in all considerations. Attention had to shift
from pacification of the millions of rural Vietnamese, who made up the vast
majority of the people, to the very few in Saigon, Hue and Danang who were
struggling for power.

2. NSAM-288 Programs Mid-March to Mid-May 1964 :
NSAM-200 Programs Mid-March to Mid-May 1964

Recommendation #3 of NSAM-288 was "to support a program for national
mobilization (including a national service law) to put South Vietnam on a
war footing." Responsibility for this was shared between ASD/ISA and AID.

A first step was taken on 20 March when the country team was asked to
report on the status of GVN plans and also country team views concerning
the adoption of a national service act. The points of greatest concern
were what would be the main provisions of the act, and what would be the
administrative machinery set up to implement it. The Country Team was also
advised that economic mobilization measures should be deferred until after
a joint U.S. -GVN ‘survey had been completed. 68/

On 1 April Ambassador Lodge replied, with MACV concurrence, that
Premier Khanh planned two categories of mobilization, one civil and one

: “ TOP SECRET - Sensitive

58
