Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

on the ground and hard bargaining. Moreover, it is very hard
for us to look these questions in the eye with Quat & Company
lest each of us begins to suspect the determination of the
other.

It is perhaps worth observing that these very same questions were
still as difficult to. answer and as devisive in April, 1968 as they
seemed to Bundy in April, 1965. But at that time Bundy felt that a
different approach might be more productive. Thus the main purpose of
bis memorendum was:

«+-to suggest that there is a better place to begin on
. this problem; namely, by getting a clearer and more compre-
hensive statement of the elements of a good eventual solution
inside South Vietnem. We can ami should work out with Quat
a& program whose elements could include:

1. Internationally validated free elections, first
locally, then regionally, and finally on a national basis.

2. A broad and generous offer of political amnesty to
all who abandon the use of force, coupled with the right
of repatriation to the North, or opportunities for peaceful
resettlement in the South.

3. A clear opportunity for the people of South Vietnam
themselves to express themselves directly on the peaceful
presence of Americans and other foreigners in helping with
the peaceful progress of Vietnam.

4, Reciprocel gusrantees egainst any border violetion
with all neighbors of South Vietnam, and a readiness to
accept international patrols along these borders.

5. A declaration of intent to work for the unification
of all Vietnam by the free choice of its people and a readi-
ness to accept nationwide free elections for this purpose
if this position is:

a. Supported by the people of South Vietnam in
. appropriate constitutional process.

b. Accepted by the Government of North Vietnam, and
c. Validated by effectively guaranteed rights of
free political activity for all parties in both parts of the
country.
There are other elements to a strong GVN program, and

closer study may well show thet the GVN has already accepted
a number or these positions. My present point is simoly that

104 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
