Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

too late. Ultimately, he could not overcome his allegiance to com~
munism." During negotiations for a modus vivendi with the French in
Paris in autumn, 1946, Ho appealed to the French to "save him from the
extremists" within the Viet Minh by some meaningful. concession to Viet-
namese independence, and he told the U.S. Ambassador that he was not a
communist. He is reputed to have asserted at that time that Vietnam
was not ready for communism, and described himself as a Marxist. In
reply to a journalist's inquiry, Ho claimed that he could remain neutral,
"like Switzerland” in the developing world power struggle between com-
munism and the West. But these and other such statements could have
come either from a proper Leninist or a dedicated nationalist. Ho's
statements and actions after 1949, and his eventual close alignment with
the Sino~Soviet Bloc, support the Ieninist construction. But, then,
U.S. insistence on Ho's being a doctrinaire communist may have been a
self-fulfilling prophesy. (Tab 2)

There remains, however, the matter of Ho's direct appeals for U.S.
intervention in Vietnam, at which even a Leninist might have scrupled.
These occurred (late 1945, early 1946) just after France has reasserted
itself militarily in South Vietnam, while Chinese Nationalist warlords
were ensconced in Hanoi, and before the 6 March 1946 Accord with France.
Desperately, Ho turned to the United States, among other powers, asking
for "immediate interference” in Vietnam.

There were, at least, eight communications from Ho to the President
of the United States, or to the Secretary of State, from October, 195,
to February, 1946. Ho had conveyed earlier, in August and September, ~
1945, via 0.5.8. channels, proposals that Vietnam be accorded "the same
status as the Philippines," for an undetermined period of tutelage pre-
liminary to independence. With the outbreak of hostilities in South
Vietnam, September-October 1945, he added formal requests for U.S. and
U.N. intervention against French aggression, citing the Atlantic Charter,
the U.N. Charter, and a foreign policy address of President Truman in
October, 1945, endorsing national self-determination. Ho's last direct ¢&
communication with the U.S. was in September, 1946, when he visited the
U.S. Ambassador in Paris to ask vaguely for U.S. assistance in obtaining
independence for Vietnem within the French Union.

There is no record of U.S. reply to any of Ho's appeals for aid.
Extant instructions to a U.S. diplomat in contact with Ho in December,
1946, reveal U.S. preoccupation with his known communist background, and
apprehension that he might establish a “communist-dominated, Moscow~
oriented state." Two months later, when the Franco-Viet Minh war in
North Vietnam was underway, Secretary of State Marshall emphasized that
"we do not lose sight /of the/ fact that Ho Chi Minh has direct Con-
munist connections and it should be obvious that we are not interested
in seeing colonial empire administrations supplanted by philosophy and
political organizations emanating from and controlled by the Kremlin."

ch TOP SECRET - Sensitive
