Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This is a tough question. What do we do if there is
a military coup this summer and the elections are aborted?
There would then be tremendous pressure at home and in
Europe to the effect that this negated what we were fighting
for, and that we should pull out.

But against such pressure we must reckon that the
stakes in Asia will remain. After all, the military rule,
even in peacetime, in Thailand, Indonesia, and Burma. Are
we to walk away from the South Vietnamese, as least as a
matter of principle, simply because they failed in what was
always conceded to be a courageous and extremely difficult
effort to become a true democracy during eo guerrilla war.

We should not decide this lightly if the case arises,
and above all we should not get into a negative frame of
mind suggested by the DOD draft until we see what the situ-
ation actually looks like. As in Latin American cases, a
great dealwould depend on how the military ruled, and
whether they made some pledge of returning to the Constitu-
tion and holding elections in the not-distant future. And
a great deal would depend on whether the military coup
appeared in any sense justified by extremist civilian
actions from any quarter. At any rate, let us not look
at this contingency--or any like it--in quite the negative
way that the DOD draft suggests. For the effects in Asia may
not be significantly reduced if we walk away from Viet-lam
even under what we ourselves and many others saw as a gross
failure by the South Vietnamese to use the opportunity that
we had given them. 33/

If the ISA group proposing a stabilized ground strategy took heart
with the Bundy memorandum, it was positively elated when the reply came
from Under Secretary of State Nicholas deB Katzenbach. 3)/

Katzenbach quote skillfully outlined the outstanding disagreements
ineluded in the draft Presidential memorandum. First, Westmoreland and
McNamara disagreed on whether Course A, the infusion of 200,000 troops
would end the war sooner. Under Secretary Vance and the CIA disagreed
on the ability of North Vietnam to meet the force increases in the South
although, as Katzenbach later noted in his paper, the CIA figures were
somewhat outdated and the analysis was not "good." He listed a Wheeler-
Vance disagreement on the military effectiveness of cutting back bombing
to below the 20th parallel and on whether it would save U.S. casualties.
(The Wheeler label on this disagreement is not completely accurate since
JCSM 288-67 and the later JCSM 312-67, the bases for this disagreement,

*

183 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
