Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Another major attribute of Komer was his strong public and private
optimism. He produced for any journslist willing to hear him out facts
and figures that suggested strongly that the war was not only winnable,
but being won at an accelerating pace. .

To the President he sounded the seme theme:

"After almost a year full-time in Vietnam, and six trips
there, I felt able to learn a good deal more from my 11 days
in country, 13-23 February. I return more optimistic than
ever before. The cumulative change since my first visit last
April is dramatic, if not yet visibly demonstrable in all re-
spects. Indeed, I'll reaffirm even more vigorously my prognosis
of last November (which few shared then) that growing momentum
would be achieved in 1967 on almost every front in Vietnan." 17/

Komer believed in the concept of "sheer mass" -- that in time we
would just overwhelm the Viet Cong:

"Wastefully, expensively, but nonetheless indisputably, we
are winning the war in the South. Few of cur programs -- civil
or military -- are very efficient, but we are grinding the
enemy down by sheer weight and mass. And the cumulative impact
of all we have set in motion is beginning to tell. Pacification
still lags the most, yet even 1% is moving forward.

"Indeed, my broad feeling, with due allowance for over-
simplification, is that our side now has in presently programmed
levels all the men, money and other resources needed to achieve
success..." 18

In summary, Komer's 13 months in Washington were spent steadily
raising the priority of the pacification and other non-military efforts
in Vietnam. While he never was in a controlling position within the
Washington bureaucracy, he succeeded in making those who were more
aware of the "other war" (a term he used continually until Ambassador
Bunker announced in May of 1967 thet he did not recognize that there
was such a thing). While it can be no more than speculation, it would
also appear that Komer played an important role in inserting into high-
level discussions, including Presidential discussions, the pacification
priority. Thus, when General Westmoreland visited the President at the
IBJ ranch in August, 1966, Komer put before the President a series of
pacification-related subjects to be used during the discussions. This
happened again at Menile, where some of the points in final communique
were similar to things Komer had been pushing warlier, as outlined in
his August memorandum,

73 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
