Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to company level was not necessary, and that the current advisory structure
to ARVN was adequate.

The problem areas cited in all of these proposals to extend the
advisory system were the questionable acceptability to the Vietnamese of
further intrusion by American advisors, the shortage of interpretors, and
finally the inevitable increase in U.S. casualties. 99/

* The political problems demanding solutions in order to permit the GVN
to proceed effectively in its struggle against the VC were identified in
the U.S. preparations for the Honolulu Conference as:

a. The disposition of the senior political and military prisoners
from the two coups (there was resentment by some groups over the
detention of prisoners at Dalat; on-the other hand, there was possible
danger to the Khanh regime if they were released).

b. The rising religious tension both Catholic and Buddhist.

ce. The split between Buddhists under Thich Tam Chau (moderates )
and under Thich Tri Quang (extremists).

de Petty politicking within the GVN.

e. GVN failure to provide local lectures.

f. GVN failure to appoint Ambassadors to key governments.
&- Inadequate GVN arrangements to handle third country aid.
he RVNAF failure to protect the population. 100/

It was not within the competence of the Honolulu Conference to come to
any decisions concerning the touchy matter of additional pressures against
the North; this could be done only at the White House level. Agreement was
reached, however, on certain specific actions to be taken with respect to
the critical provinces and very shortly after the return of major parti-
eipants to Washington these actions were approved and instructions were
sent to the field accordingly.

On 5 June the Department notified the Embassy in Saigon that actions
agreed upon at Honolulu were to be taken with respect to the critical

provinces as follows:

1. Move in added South Vietnamese troops to assure numerical
superiority over the VC.

81
