Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAPF
Washington, D.C.

2 May 1950
MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE:

Subject: Southeast Asia

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have formulated the following comments,
from the military point of view, on the Department of State draft position
paper entitled "Southeast Asia" (FM D C-2a, dated 25 April 1950).

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff concur fully in the expressions in the
subject paper as to the importance of the area of Southeast Asia to the
United States. They concur in general as to the need for British and
French action along the lines indicated in the draft position paper.
Moreover, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the currently unfavorable
situation in Southeast Asia, an area important both to the United States
and to the Communist movement, warrants assumption by the United States of
a much more forceful and positive position than is expressed or implied in
the draft position paper.

3. As stated in the CONCLUSIONS in NSC 68, -- "Our position as the
center of power in the free world places a heavy responsibility upon the
United States for leadership. We must organize and enlist the energies
and resources of the free world in a positive program for peace which will
frustrate the Kremlin design for world domination by creating a situation
in the free world to which the Kremlin will be compelled to adjust. Without
such a cooperative effort, led by the United States, we will have to make
gradual withdrawals under pressure until we discover one day that we have
sacrificed positions of vital interest."

4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the United States and the
other Western Powers should take immediate and positive steps to achieve
the initiative in the present conflict. Further, they consider that suc-
cess in Southeast Asia might well lead to the gaining of the initiative in
the struggle within the Far East.

5. In light of the foregoing and in order to retrieve the losses
resulting from previous mistakes on thepart of the British and the French,
as well as to preclude such mistakes in the future, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff consider it necessary that positive and proper leadership among the
Western Powers be assumed by the United States in Southeast Asia matters.
They, therefore, recommend that the draft position paper on "Southeast
Asia" be revised along the lines of NSC 68 and paragraph 4} above.

CO Le Y
