Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECURITY 1 SOMATicn

5. The JCS strongly recommend the ad@ition of a stipulation that
the UeS.e will consider tekins military action unilaterally if necessary
ageinst Comnunist-Ohina.

Ge. Aoorovel of the ynolicies would recuire a substantial uovard
revision of our economic and military assistancs programs for SEA and
Fornosa, some (nossibly substant sal) inerease in our forees in being --
primarily, Havel and Air force units ~-, and a substantial and immediate
inereuse in the scale of U.S. production.

Ve irther military studies relating to the magnitude of military
requirements to carry out these courses of action and the manner in

which they could best be met will be furnished in due course to the IS0

M0 » eae 283
fhe Joint Secretaries have not yet submitted any written comments.

IUTRLLIGNNCE ESTIMA IS

| A CIA Specisl Estimate (sH22) (Tab B), and NIN 35/1, "Prob-
able Developments in Indochina in 1952", (Tab C), relate to NSC 124.

RECOM OSNDATIONS

le That you discourazse ERe mains of any policy decisions by tne
NSC at this meoting,

This natter was put on the agenda of this meeting so that

' the President could discuss i th the Council befors
leaving on his vacation. He under thei the matter
has not progressed far enovgh for final decision. There
has not been sufficient time for anyone fully to consider
the comments of the JOS. ‘The JOS themselves need further
tine to complete their studies of the military recuire-
ments involved and the impact of fulfilling these require-
ments on other programs and on our global stratesy.

2. That the paver be referred back to the Senior Steff for revision
in the lisht of the Council's discussion and the additional information
which will be brought to bear on the vroblene

The Senior Staff Beas of courses, teke into account the
general end syecific comnents of the JCS together with the
further military aiunies which the JCS will subsit to then.

3. That you advise the Council that in your oninion
decision involved in this paper should not be taken unt peat
implications bave been fully explored; thet you are reque:

re
4

ck ct
a
Dm oO

ot

i

u
to proceed immediately with studies of the na
memorandum, with a view to providing the fullest couaitie

to the 35¢ — this on the nlennins asswistion that the dec

cr
bh O
Jute
iS ct

pte

SS
ped

ad

