Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnamese military effort in South Vietnam that the
enemy operations in the south cannot, on the basis of
any reports I have seen, be stopped by air bombardment--
short, that is, of the virtual annihilation of North
Vietnam and its people. 13/

Nor could bombing the ports and mining the harbors stop the infiltration
of supplies into SVN. The total tonnage required in SVN (15 tons a

day) could be quintupled and would still be dwarfed by NVN's actual
imports of about 5800 tons a day and its even greater import capacity

of about 14,000 tons a day. Even if Haiphong and the other ports were
closed -- "and on the unrealistic assumption that closing the ports would
eliminate seaborne imports" -- NVN could still import over 8400 tons a
day by rail, road, and waterway. Even if the latter amount could be
further eut by 50 percent through air attacks, NVN could still maintain

70 percent of its current imports, only a fraction of which -- 550 tons per
day -- need be taken up with military equipment. In fact, however,
eliminating Haiphong and the other ports would not eliminate seaborne
imports. The POL experience had shown that NVN could revert to lightering
and over-the-beach operations for unloading ocean freighters, and it

could also make greater use of the LOCs from China, and still manage

quite well.

Accordingly, the Secretary urged that the limited objec-
tives and the restrained nature of the bombing campaign be maintained as
is:

A selective, carefully targeted bombing campaign, such
as we are presently conducting, can be directed toward
reasonable and realizable goals. This discriminating use
of air power can and does render the infiltration of men and
supplies more difficult and more costly. At the same time,
it demonstrates to both South and North Vietnam our resolve
to see that aggression does not succeed. A less discriminating
bombing campaign against North Vietnam would, in my opinion,
do no more. We have no reason to believe that it would break
the will of the North ‘Vietnamese people or sway the purpose
of their leaders. If it does not lead to such a change of
mind, bombing the North at any level of intensity would not
meet our objective. We would still have to prove by ground
operations in the South that Hanoi's aggression could not
succeed. Nor would a decision to close /the ports/, by
whatever means, prevent the movement in and through North
Vietnam of the essentials to continue their present level
of military activity in South Vietnam.

On the other side of the equation, our report to a less

selective cempaign of air “attack against the North would

97 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
