Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the U.S. should minimize this risk by full backing of the existing GVN, 53/

Taylor returned to Saigon with an approved statement and program
for GVN that embodied his principal recommendations. Its public aspect
was an across the board increase in the approved strengths of all elements
of RVNAF and the paramilitary, in support of the Hop Tac pacification plan
and its outgrowths thet had been in the works since July. Its unannounced
aspect. included a rationale showing a clear shift of emphasis from the
views at the highest levels that had developed in the first half of the
year. As presented to GVN, it said:

"It was the clear conclusion of the recent review in
Washington of the situation in South Vietnam that the unsatis-
factory progress being made in the Pacification Program was
the result of two primary causes from which many secondary
causes stem. The primary cause has been the governmental
instability in Saigon, and the second the continued rein-
forcement and direction of the Viet Cong by the Government of
North Vietnam. It was recognized that to change the down-
ward trend of events, it will be necessary to deal adequately
with both of these factors.

"However it was the clear view that these factors are
not of equal importance. First and above all, there must
be @ stable, effective Vietnamese Government able to con-
duct a successful campaign against the Viet Cong even if the
aid from North Vietnam for the Viet Cong should end. It
was the view that, while the elimination of North Vietnam
intervention would raise morale on our side and make it
easier for the Government of Vietnam to function, it would
not in itself bring an end to Viet Cong insurgency. It
would rather be an important contributory factor to the
creation of conditions favoring a successful campaign against
the Viet Cong within South Vietnam.

"Thus, since action against North Vietnam would only
be contributory and not central to winning the war against
the Viet Cong, it would not be prudent to incur the risks
which are inherent in an expansion of hostilities until there
were a government in Saigon capable of handling the serious
problems inevitably involved in such an expansion, and capa~
ble of promptly and fully exploiting the favorable effects
which may be anticipated if we are successful in terminating
the support and direction of the Viet Cong by North Vietnam.”

Then it went to the point:

",..In the view of the United States, there is a certain
minimum condition to be brought about in South Vietnam before
new measures against North Vietnam would be either justified
or practicable. At the minimum, the Government in Saigon

51 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
