Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On the record, Secretary McNamara and Under Secretary Katzenbach had
been quite frank in telling the American public that they had found paci-
fication lagging during their October trip to Vietnam. Katzenbach said
he was “concerned” and, after emerging from the meeting with the President,
told the White House press corps that "We have to do a good deal more to
get the ‘other war' moving and I think we can." 50/ Even Komer, who remained
more optimistic than McNamara and Katzenbach, was quoted as "acknowledging"
that pacification was lagging.

While "military progress hes exceeded our expectations," the Defense
Secretary said, progress in pacification has "been very slow indeed." His
trip also raised fears, for the first time, in Saigon that the military
would take over the pacification effort. Thus, at almost the very moment
that the President was hearing Katzenbach's recommendation thet the civilians
he reorganized and given ea last chance (see previous action), Ward Just
was writing from Saigon:

"McNamara, left behind the impression that his visit to
South Vietnam last week marked the beginning of the end of
civilien supremacy in the American effort...

"Sources here were saying today that McNamara, a stickler
for detail, was unimpressed with civilian descriptions of
progress, or luck cf it, in the pacification effort. The
American who bears most of the authority for that, Deputy = as
Ambassador William C. Porter; was in the U.S, during the
McNamara visit.

"There has always been, as one official here put it, a
‘military component’ to pacification. But it is understood
noy that that component will be increased and the military
will more and more take control of pacification -- the task
called nation-building.

",..0he cther likely outconie of McNamara's four days in
Vietnam is that the role of ARVN will change.

"Informed. sources said that Mcliamara heard no complaints
whatsoever from American militery sources regarding the per-
formance of the ARVN, but the fact is that he did. It has
beén @n open secret in Saigon that the role of the ARVN would
change next year. Their work would be in pacification, not
in striking at main force units...

"There is now increased certainty that the war effort
despite public homage to the ‘other war’ end the ‘hearts and
minds of the people’ is more thoroughly military than ever --
and more thoroughly American. n

"In the end, the military is thought to have carried the
day not by force or logic or force of wisdom, although their

*

105
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
