Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

iS A
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Meanwhile, routine continued, with CINCPAC recommending
programs thirteen days prior to the beginning of a month and the JCS
acting on thes2 recommendations two days later. 66/ In consequence,
McNamara received from the Chiefs on 19 February the same advice that
had been given during the pause. 67/ He and the President responded
much as before, though now permitting armed reconnaissance within the
geographical limits fixed just before the pause and authorizing a sig-
nificant increase -- to above 5,000 -- in numbers of sorties. 68

On 1 March, when this slightly enlarged campaign opened,
the Chiefs filed a memorandum stressing the special importance of an
early attack on North Vietnamese POL. 69/ They had singled out POL
somewhat earlier, writing McNamara in November, 1965, that attack on
this target "would be more damaging to the DRV capability to move war-
supporting resources within country and along infiltration routes to
SVN than an attack against any other single target system." While causing
relatively little damage to the civilian economy, it would, they reasoned
force a sharp reduction in truck and other road traffic carrying men and
supplies southward. They held also that the attack should be made soon,
before North Vietnam succeeded in improving air defenses and in dispersing
POL storage. 70/

McNamara had rejected this recommendation, not only because
of the planned pause, but also because CIA sources questioned some of
the Chiefs’ reasoning and stressed counterarguments which they tended to
minimize. Assessing the probable results of not only taking out North
Vietnamese POL, but also mining harbors and bombing military and indus-
trial targets in the northeast quadrant, the Board of National Estimates
said, "Damage from the strikes would make it considerably more difficult
to support the war in the South, but these difficulties would neither be
immediate nor insurmountable." can With regard to the POL system alone,
the Board observed "It is unlikely that this loss would cripple the Com-
munist military operations in the South, though it would certainly
embarrass them." Pointing out that the bulk of storage facilities stood
near Haiphong and Hanoi, the Board went on to say that "the Communists
would unquestionably regard the proposed U.S. attacks as opening a new
stage in the war, and as a signal of U.S. intention to escalate the
scale of conflict." 72/ This appraisal did not encourage adoption of
the JCS recommendation.

The Chiefs continued nevertheless to press for a favorable

decision. Before and during the pause, they presented fresh memoranda

to McNamara. 73/ A more detailed CIA study, obtained just after Christ-
mas, provided somewhat more backing for their view. It conceded that the
" Communists were dispersing POL facilities and that an early attack on

those at Hanoi and Haiphong "would add appreciably to the DRV's difficulties
in supplying the Communist forces in the South." Nevertheless, it fore-
cast that "adequate quantities of supplies would continue to move by one
means or another to the Communist forces in South Vietnam." Th]

.

85 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
