Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

resulted (one in which the DRV in fact complied with our demands to the
extent that we ceased our pressure actions) “we would then have to
consider...whether or not to make compromises -- such as, for example,
accept less then perfection for international supervisory mechanism,
agree to permit the NLF to become a legitimate political party in. the
South, or agree to political consultations between GVN and DRY. 76/

In other words, at the level of the Working Group's enalysis, the ;
political stekes for which the game in Vietnam was really being played
end the very powerful and relevant cards held by the DRV and the VC
were not really considered. To continue the analogy, the Working Group
concerned itself only with the various opening bids the United States
might make in order to achieve e position from which it could attempt

@ finesse,

fhe main problem apparently recognized by the Working Group
was that, given its current objectives, the United States had few bar-
gaining points with which to negotiate. In essence, it was primarily
to fill this lack that many grouvn members and Administration officials
favored initiation of direct military pressures against North Vietnam.
To some, bombing attacks were something that might then be removed as
an inducement for the DRV to stov or to reduce its support of the mili-
tary operations. in South Vietnam and Laos. To others, such vigorous
measures might at least serve as a demonstration of U.S. resolve to
combat external aggression but also as a screen behind which to extract
ourselves should the situation in South Vietnam deteriorate further.

Gaining maximum bargaining edvantage from the military measures
contemplated under each of the options was one of INS ee emphases in
the Working Group's analyses. For example, under "A," emphasis was
placed on obtaining meximum leverage from exploiting the threat of
further escalation -- to be demonstrated primarily through reprisal
actions and deployments. Under "EB," a similar kind of psychological
leverage was to be achieved through the clearly ascending nature of
the actions, particularly if some time were permitted to assess results.
Under "C," the effect was to be achieved by the. combined effects of
(1) meximizing the threat of impending escalation after each gradusted
and carefully paced step and (2) minimizing the Communist governments
problems of "face" as they moved toward negobvietion. Tt/

, It was the recognized lack of strong bargeining points thet led
the Working Group to consider the introduction of ground forces into the
northern provinces of South Vietnam. In advancing this proposal, the
State Policy Planning Council menber pointed out thet “whatever the
stated U.S, intentions," the Commumists would probably expect to put an
end to ell air and nayal attacks on North Vietnam merely by agreeing to
enter negotiations. In that event, he pointed out, the United States
could not use these pressures (or the promised relief from them) as a
bargaining counter during negotietions. If ground forces were deployed
prior to an obvious need to combat invading enemy troops, this dis-
position could be used as such a counter. Their deployment "would,

‘oh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
