Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Joint Chiefs’ belief that "attainment of United States objectives in Asia
can only be achieved by ultimate success in China."

Results of the decision were mixed. Although implementation of the
decision was partially successful in that it enabled the French to continue
the military campaign in Indochina to the time of the Geneva Accords, mili-
tary assistance was by and large a failure as an instrument of U.S. policy:
the U.S. neither assured the French a military success, influenced. the
political situation to advantage, nor prevented the loss of North Vietnam
to the communists at Geneva.

The U.S. MAAG Indochina was unable to perform even the limited func-
tions assigned it. The French, never eager for U.S. advice, succeeded
in limiting the function of MAAG to order-taking in the commercial sense.

Contributing to the initial U.S. decision to aid the French, and to
limiting the effectiveness of the U.S. program of assistance, were (1)
setting impracticable preconditions for assistance upon the French, (2) the
U.S. proclivity to accept a slender chance of success without weighing alter-
natives, (3) the suppression of alternatives leading to decisional circu-
larity and reinforcement of existing policies, (4) repeated failures of
the U.S. to bargain effectively with the French, and (5) the vulnerability
of the U.S. policy-making machinery to spoofing, particularly as regards
U.S. credulity in accepting French information at face value and in being
susceptible to "red" scares.

The decision to provide assistance to France and the Associated States
is the focus of this discussion; it was but one issue among hundreds pre-
occupying the United States Government in the time period under considera-
tion -- the fall of China and the Korean War -- and it was probably not
regarded by those who made policy as among their critical decisions. There
is no evidence of any high U.S. official arguing that any significant commit-
ment threshold was being crossed. There were, however, those who maintained
that the important anti-colonial stand of the U.S. was being undermined.
These voices (and they were basically from the public domain) were drowned
out by those who advocated immediate security needs. The importance of the
decision was that when the U.S. was faced with an unambiguous choice between
a policy of anti-colonialism and a policy of anti-communism, it chose the
latter. And, although the decision was not perceived as getting the U.S.
more deeply "involved" in Indochina, it did mark a tangible first step in
that direction.

i =: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
