Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

should give priority to: (1) bringing the armed forces to authorized strength,
(2) improving their morale, (3) carrying out conscription more effectively,
and (4) obtaining qualified civilian workers. 70/ :

Before he was able to make this report of 2 May, however, Ambassador
Todge had a showdown meeting with Khanh over the failure of the GVN to carry
out many of the necessary actions called for by the NSAM-288 programs. On
30 April, accompanied by Westmoreland and Brent (USOM chief), Lodge met with
Khanh, Oanh, Khien, and Thieu, to discuss the GVN failure to provide operating
funds to provincial and lower local levels, and to correct Inanpower deficien-
cies.

lodge opened the meeting with a prepared statement which he read in
French. He said that direct observation by U.S. provincial advisors through-
out Vietnam proved that nowhere was there an adequate effort to provide
piastres to Corps, Division and sectors, to increase the pay of ARVN and
paramilitary forces, to bring these troops to authorized strength, to recruit
added forces, or to compensate incapacitated soldiers or families of those
killed. In fact, he said, there were confirmed reports from Corps and Divi-
sion headquarters of deceased soldiers being kept on the roles as the only
means of compensating their families and preventing further deterioration of
ARVN and paramilitary morale. There had been a steady decline in the strength
of RVNAF since October 1963, notably including a decrease of 4,000 in March
alone; and the current strength was almost 20,000 below the authorized figure
agreed necessary by both governments. Likewise, the force level of SDC had
decreased in the same period by almost 13,000, leaving that force 18,000
below its authorized strength. The Civil Guard was almost 5,000 below the
required strength. The ARVN and CG desertion rate was double what it had
been in February, and SDC desertion rate was up 4o%. Only 55% of the con-
scription quotas were being met and volunteers were below the expected level. |

Failure to provide funds was blamed as a major reason for these mili-
tary manpower deficiencies, The shortage was 50 great that the current
trend in effectives could not be reversed before August in any event. Lodge
went on to say that USOM and MACV visits to the provinces also eonfirmed
that failure to provide piastres to local headquarters also led to shortages
of resources for pacification efforts. The result was that most of the
McNamara program of reforms and improvements (of NSAM-288) was failing, not
due to lag in support promised by the United States, but simply because the
Saigon government did not provide piastre support for the joint pacification
program agreed upon by the two governments. ‘The war, lodge concluded, was
being lost for want of administrative initiative in printing and distribut-
ing the necessary local funds for the agreed programs. ledge conceded that .
the government had made a forward step in announcing its intentions to de-
centralize procurement avthority from the Director General of the Budget
and Foreign Aid to the ministries, but further decentralization to provin-
cial and district authorities was advisable.

: - OP SECRET - Sensitive

60
