Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

their recommendations tended toward immediate and forceful military
measures. The State-ISA planning group, on the other hand, viewed it as
a contingency planning exercise and its scenarios and recommendations
stressed a more deliberate, cautious approach, carefully tailoring pro-
posed U.S. actions in SEA to the unique political context of each country.
Ambassador Lodge, in turn, developed yet a third "carrot and stick"
approach, stressing a diplomatic effort at persuasion, i.e., combining a
threat of punitive strikes with an offer of some economic assistance to
the DRV. These divergences in approach and concept persisted, though
varying in degree and emphasis, throughout the planning period.

By June, with increasing recognition that only relatively heavy
levels of attack on the DRV would be likely to have any significant com-
pelling effect, with a greater awareness of the many imponderables raised
by the planning effort, and with the emergence of a somewhat more hopeful
situation in SVN and Laos, most of the President's advisers favored
holding off on any attempts to pressure North Vietnam through overt mili-
tary operations. Only the JCS, Ambassador Lodge, and Walt Rostow continued
to advocate increased military measures, and even Rostow qualified his
recommendations with the claim that a firm public stance, and supporting
actions giving the impression of increased military operations, would be
the best assurance of avoiding having to employ them. Moreover, most of
the advisers recognized the necessity of building firmer publie and con-
gressional support for greater U.S. involvement in SEA before any wider
military actions should be undertaken.

Accordingly, with the political conventions just around the corner
and the election issues regarding Vietnam clearly drawn, the President
decided against actions that would deepen the U.S. involvement by
broadening the conflict in Laos, Cambodia or North Vietnam. In his view,
there were still a number of relatively mild military and intensified
political actions in the South open to him that would serve the national
interest better than escalation of the conflict.

ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
