Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and the occurrence of several large secondary explosions. We have
determined that the attack created a drastic effect within the VC
military headquarters. Individual components were disrupted for
several days, and even though these components now appear to be
functioning again, they have not re-assembled into an integrated head-
quarters complex as they were before the attack. In spite of the
apparent success of the attack we still have no information concerning
the number of casualties caused and have only fragmentary information
.concerning other damage accomplished.

3. During the attack the target area became completely covered
by smoke and resulting bomb pattern was spotty. BDA photography shows
that as a result, the distribution of bombs throughout the target was
poor. Some areas received a heavy concentration of bomb impacts while
other parts of the target area received no hits. If an attack could
have been launched in which the bombs were evenly distributed, results
would have been far more effective. An attack compressed into a
shorter period of time would also have been much more likely to kill
Ve before they could evacuate the area and would have allowed ground
troops to enter the area the same day.

_ 4. It is essential that we keep these selected VC headquarters
and units under attack. We are developing target information on the
headquarters of the 325th PAVN Division, Headquarters Military Region
V and Headquarters Military Region VII where current reports indicated
a large VC troop build-up. We know from interrogation of VC captives
and from agent reports that VC fear air attacks. We also know that
their plans can be upset by mexpected events. The best way for us
to keep them off balance and prevent large-scale VC attacks is to keep
them under constant pressure in their base areas.

ie Continued use of tactical fighters for pattern bombing does
not get the job done properly; it diverts them from other important
work for which they are better suited; it creates an unacceptable
drain on ordnance assets; and it disrupts all SEA air programs in and
out of country. We will, of course, continue to use tactical fighters
as the major punch against tactical targets which constitute the vast
majority of the in-country air requirements, but for attacks on VC
base areas, we must provide a capability which will permit us to
deliver a well planned pattern of bombs over large areas and prefer-
ably within a short period of time.

6. The problem has been discussed with representatives of the
Strategic Air Command and believe that their conventional bombing
tactics basel on pattern bombing techniques are ideally suited to
meet this requirement, T strongly recommend, therefore, that as 4
matter of urgency, we be authorized to employ SAC B-52 aircraft against
selected area targets in RVN...

Th seks TOP SECRET - Sensitive
