dum.

In I

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. RVNAF, knowing the availability of support from
U.S. reaction forces, would perform more aggressively.

h, This would permit the patrolling and securing of
populated areas to be accomplished primarily by Vietnamese
forces.

5. U.S. forces would keep active in what is now the
enemy's zone Of movement, no longer presenting static posi-
tions against which the enemy can mass and attack. This,
plus his increased logistical problems, would reduce U.S.
casualties while increasing his. In effect, we would force
him to come to us, fight on terrain of our choosing.

6. The increased patrolling of the populated areas by
RVNAF combined with U.S. actions in the zone of movement
would make it harder for the enemy to mass against and
attack targets within the populated areas. This would
reduce civilian casualties and refugee generation.

7. Garrisoning U.S, forces closer to RVNAF would facili-
tate joint operations at the maneuver level (battalion,
company), again increasing RVNAF aggressiveness.

8. With RVNAF thus supported by U.S. forces, it can be
expected to remain in uniform and engage in operations as
long’as it is paid and fed. 54/

No disadvantages of this strategy were noted. or listed in the memoran-

Details of this strategy, by Corps area, were examined in an appendix.
Corps, our present precarious position could be relieved.

Were MACV to be provided guidance to forego position
defense in areas remote from population centers and concen-
trate upon mobile offensive operations in and contiguous
to the coastal plain, one division equivalent - eight to
10 U.S. maneuver battalions - could eventually be relieved
from operations in, or related to defense of Khe Sanh.
Undoubtedly, however, these eight to 10 battalions would
be required to restore tactical flexibility to and insure
logistical sufficiency for the forces presently disposed in
the Quang-Tri-Hue-Danang area.  MACV presently is planning
operations in the Aeschau [sic] Valley after April 1968;
the new guidance would preclude these.

Guidanee to MACV in II Corps

"should counsel continued economy of force and should
specifically exclude determined defense of all but province

39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
