A fo
out in st
troops wo
tion of t

To deny the request for troops, or to attempt to again cut it to a size which
could be sustained by the thinly stretched active forces, would just as surely

signify t
reached.

3.

his first

reassessment of U.S. strategy. Present, in addition to Clifford, were McNamara,

General T

Habib. 17/

President

pe addressed was not whether we should send 200,000 additional troops to Viet-

nam. The
could it

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

rk in the road had been reached. Now the alternatives stood

ark reality. To accept and meet General Wheeler's request for

uld mean a total U.S. military commitment to SVN -- an Americaniza-
he war, a callup of reserve forces, vastly increased expenditures.

hat an upper limit to the U.S. military commitment in SVN had been

"A to Z%" Reassessment

These thoughts were very much on Secretary Clifford's mind during
meeting on 29 February with the people who were to conduct the

aylor, Nitze, Fowler, Katzenbach, Rostow, Helms, Bundy, Warnke, and
Mr. Clifford outlined the task as he had received it from the
. He indicated to the group that he felt that the real problem to

real questions were: Should we follow the present course in SVN;
ever prove successful even if vastly more than 200,000 troops were

sent? The answers to these questions, the formulation of alternative courses

open to t
general a
were to b

he U.S., was to be the initial focus of the review. To that end,
ssignments were made concerning papers to be written. These papers
e prepared for discussion among the Group on Saturday, March 2.

The general division of labor and outline of subjects assigned was indicated
by Mr. Bundy in a memorandum the subsequent day, as follows:

1. What alternative courses of action are available to

the US?

addi

Assignment: Defense - General Taylor - State (Secretary)
2. What alternative courses are open to the enemy?
Assignment - Defense and CIA

3. Analysis of implications of Westmoreland's request for
tional troops.

series of papers on the following.

Military implications = JCS

Political implications - State
(Political implications in their broadest
domestic and international sense to include

internal Vietnamese problem).

Budgetary results - Defense

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
