Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

These risks would be run, Ball observed, for the sake
of a bombing program that would nevertheless be ineffective in pro-
ducing the political results being asked of it. Ten days before sending
his memorandum to the President, Ball had asked the CIA's Office of
National Estimates to prepare an estimate of likely reactions to various
extensions of the bombing, and also an assessment of the effects they
would be likely to have on North Vietnam's military effort in the south. 59/
He cited the estimate's conclusions in his Presidential memorandum. WNone
of the types of attacks he had specified -- on Haiphong harbor, on the
POL, or on power stations -- "would in itself, have a critical impact on
the combat activity of the Communist forces in South Viet-Nam." This
was, of course, scarcely a new conclusion. In various formulations it
had figured in intelligence estimates for the preceding six months. From
it Ball was led to the premises which motivated him to write his vigor-
ously dissenting paper: "if the war is to be won -- it must be won in
the South,” and "the bombing of the North cannot win the war, only enlarge
ace

Ball's paper was at its most general (and perhaps least
persuasive) in its discussion of "enlargement" of the war. He started
from a historical example -- the catastrophic misreading of Chinese
intentions by the United States during the Korean war -- and a logical

premise:

Quite clearly there is a threshold which we cannot
pass over without precipitating a major Chinese involve-
ment. We do not know -- even within wide margins of error --
where that threshold is. Unhappily we will not find out
until after the catastrophe.

In positing his own notions of possible thresholds, Ball could only reiter-
ate points he had already made: that forcing the North Vietnamese air
force to use Chinese bases, by bombing their own airfields, would be likely
to escalate into armed conflict between the U.S. and China, and that the
destruction of North Vietnam's industry would call in increased Chinese
assistance to a point "sooner or later, we will almost certainly collide
with Chinese interests in such a way as to bring about a Chinese involve-

- ment."

There were, strikingly enough, no recommendations in Ball's
memorandum. Given his assumption that "sustained bombing" would acquire
Ma life of its own," and invariably escalate, the only consistent recom-
mendation would have been that the U.S. should not resume bombing the
North, but should instead confine the war to the South. There were no
- compromise positions. To a President who placed the avoidance of war
with China (not to mention with the U.S.S.R,) very high on his list of
objectives, and yet who felt -- for military and political reasons --
that he was unable not to resume bombing North Vietnam, but that, once

hg | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
