Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

military personnel are needed for such contingencies as
‘strikes, but the requirements should vary with the degree
of criticality of the functions involved. For example,
I understand that MACV's policy is to maintain at least
50% U.S. manning at each deep draft port. Why 50% and not
40% or 60%? Must this rule be followed for all types of
port personnel? USARV's use of Pacific Architects and
Engineers contract civilians for most of the repair and
utility work at 67 SVN locations suggests that neither
forward operations nor contingencies are adequate reasons
for using as many military personnel for support as we are
now.

I also doubt we have adequately explored the use of
"Type B"units which are a mix of military cadres and civilian
workers. A preliminary review indicates that there are
over 72,000 U.S. Army personnel in units which have alter-
native "Type B" TO&E's. Converting these units to "Type B"
would cut military personnel in support roles by over 25,000
men: this might provide another combat division. 44

5. The McNamara Visit to Saigon

As the Pentagon feverishly prepared the background briefings for
Secretary McNamara's forthcoming trip to Vietnam an article discussing
the problem of mobilization and force levels in Vietnam broke in the
Washington Daily News. It touched a nerve around the Pentagon generating
a flurry of correspondence and studies. The article by Jim Lucas,
entitled "Partial Mobilization?" with dateline Saigon, observed that
the manpower squeeze was on in Vietnam. The United States had 472,000
men in Vietnam according to General William C. Westmoreland, who Lucas
quoted as having asked Washington for 200-250,000 more, bringing the
total to about 700,000. Lucas concluded on the basis of this remarkably
accurate estimate that such a total could not be achieved without some
sort of mobilization -- at least a partial Reserve call. He wrote that ~_
it was equally cbvious that the White House did not want any sort of
mobilization if it could be avoided before the elections upcoming next
year. Most Americans in Saigon, he noted, realized this, but they
weren't happy about it. He quoted a helicopter pilot as saying, "A lot
of us are going to die before then." The military officers that he had
interviewed were especially loathe to discuss manpower with anything
approaching candor. "I'll be damned if I'm going to tell Charlie how
much he has hurt us," one exploded. Iwucas also questioned the credi-
bility of military reports and estimates emanating from the White House.
He saw clear indications that some records were being camouflaged if not
falsified to hide the facts. Many commanders, among them a Marine air
group commander, said their reports on personnel and materiel were
being consistently upgraded in DaNang and Honolulu before going to
Washington. The article wound up on an equally sour note pointing out
the various personnel deficiencies by rank and by skills which existed

+

192 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

