Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Resolution was adopted identifying the United States as the main
obstacle to the realization of the hopes of the Vietnamese people, and
as an enemy of peace. The Resolution of the Fifteenth Plenum called

for a strong North Vietnam as a base for helping the South Vietnamese to
overthrow Diem and eject the United States. A Communist Party history
captured in South Vietnam in 1966, and the testimony of high-ranking
captives, indicate that South Vietnamese communists still regard the
resolution of the Fifteenth Plenum as the point of departure for DRV
intervention.

Within a month of the Fifteenth Plenum, the DRV began to commit its
armed forces in Laos, and steadily escalated its aid to the Pathet Lao,
By the time the National Liberation Front issued its manifesto in
December 1960, the conflict in Laos had matured to the point that Pathet
Iao-NVA troops controlled most of NE Iaos and the Laotian panhandle;
moreover, by that time, the Soviet Union had entered the fray, and was
participating in airlift operations from North Vietnam direct to
Pathet Iao-NVA units in Laos. Also, by the fall of 1959, the insurgency
in South Vietnam took a definite upsurge. Viet Cong units for the first
time offered a direct challenge to the Army of Vietnam. Large VC
formations seized and held district and province capitals for short
periods of time, and assassinations and kidnappings proliferated markedly.
The Preamble of the Constitution of the DRV, promulgated on 1 January
1960, was distinctly bellicose, condemning the United States, and
establishing the reunification of Vietnam as a DRV national objective.
During 1959 and 1960, the relatively undeveloped intelligence apparatus
of the U.S. and the GVN confirmed that over 4,000 infiltrators were
sent from North Vietnam southward -- most of them military or political
cadre, trained to raise and lead insurgent forces.

In September 1960, the Lao Dong Party convened its Third National
Congress. There Ho Chi Minh, Le Duan, Giap, and others presented
speeches further committing the DRV to support of the insurgency in the
South, demanding the U.S. stop its aid to Diem, and calling for the
formation of a unified front to lead the struggle against "My-Diem."
The Resolution of the Third Congress, reflecting these statements, is
another of those historic benchmarks referred to in captured party
documents and prisoner interrogations.

In November 1960, the Moscow Conference of Communist and Workers'
Parties of Socialist Countries once again declared its support of the
sort of "just" war the DRV intended to prosecute. The United States
was identified as the principal colonial power, and the right and
obligation of communist parties to lead struggles against colonial
powers was detailed. By the time Khrushchev cited that Declaration in
his "wars of national liberation" speech, the "liberation war" for South
Vietnam was nearly a year and a half old.

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
