Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

resent too great involvement by U.S. Excessive U.S. in-
volvement may defeat objectives of U.S. policy: developmen
of free, independent non-communist nation. PROV properly
recognizes that success can only be attained through support
of Vietnamese people, with support coming from the grass
roots up. Insensitive U.S. actions can easily defeat
efforts to accomplish this. U.S. manipulations could easily
become an American takeover justified by U.S. compulsion

to "get the job done." Such tendéneies must be resisted.

It must be realized that there are substantial difficulties
end dangers inherent in implementing this or any similar
program, 18) i

NO DECISION AS A DECISION

Events remained stuck on this fundamental disagreement. The subject
of leverage ceme, during 1967, to be discussed more fully, but there was
no real authoritative decision to employ it or to reject its use under
all circumstances. Thus, when CORDS completed its first major study of
pacification programs (Project TAKEOFF) in June 1967, it included some
candid discussion of the need for some kind of leverage. Entitled "U.S.
Influence -- The Necessity, Feasibility and Desirability of Asserting
Greater Leverage," the analysis proceeded from problem to alternative
courses of action:

A. Necessity of Leverage.

1. The most crucial problem in achieving the goals and
objectives of the RD program is that the programs must be
carried out by the Vietnamese. Present US influence on Viet-
namese performance is dependent upon our ability to persuade,
cajole, suggest, or plead. Political and practical consider-
ations usually have argued against developing any systematic
use of the various levers of power at our disposal. The
potential reaction of the Vietnamese may become even greater
now that they appear to be reasserting themselves and when
the question of sovereignty is an increasingly sensitive one.

2. However, the factors of corruption, antique adminis-~
trative financial procedures and regulations, and widespread
lack of leadership probably can be overcome in the short run
only if the US increases its influence on Vietnamese performance.
The increasing magnitude of corruption and its damage to any
program make the need for developing and applying a system of
leverage which forces the Vietnamese to take US views into
account greater now than ever before. Even the best conceived
and executed RD program will result in failure in terms of
gaining the allegiance of the people so long as such extensive
corruption prevails. 185/

97 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
