Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in Da Nang and their organic heavy engineer equipment will
be effective in developing the defensive works needed for
accomplishing the task. The Marine MEB includes tanks and
artillery. The airborne battalions, on the other hand,
being designed for a different task, are deficient in each
of these important particulars -- in varying degrees -- and
are thus less desirable for the assignment.

"The situation in Southeast Asia has now reached a point
where the soundness of our contingenc lanning may be about
to be tested. The tasking has been completed. Logistic
arrangements and lines of communication are establishing and
operating. Command arrangements have been made and agreed
upon and plans for landing and disposition of forces ashore
have been made and these forces are ready to execute then.
It therefore seems imprudent, at this time, to shift forces
in a major sector and to force changes in contingency
posture for other parts of Southeast Asia. /Emphasis ace

"Whatever force is landed, its strength should be -ade-
quate for the job. The airborne force, if selected, would
require substantial and diverse augmentation to achieve the
desired combat capability.

"If the final decision is to deploy and /sic/ Army Brigade
instead of the MEB to Da Nang, then I would recommend a one
Brigade Task Force of the 25th Infantry Division. This would
provide a ground combat capability reasonably similar to the
ground elements of the MEB. The command and control elements
and the initial light infantry elements of this task force
could be airlifted to provide some early security at Da Nang.
Achievement of a more adequate capability similar to the MEB
would require air and sealift from Hawaii end CONUS augmenta-
tion of some support units for the task force. The DAFFD should
not be used since it is an essential element of other contin-
gency plans.

"I recommend that the MEB be landed at.Da Nang as pre-
viously planned." 14/

F. Final Approval

The objections were sustained, and on 6 March 1965 the Pentagon
issued the following news release:

"TWO U.S. MARINE BATTALIONS TO BE DEPLOYED IN VIET NAM. _
After consultation between the governments of South Vietnam and
the United States, the United States Government has agreed to
the request of the Government of Vietnam to station two United
States Marine Corps Battalions in the Da Nang area to strengthen
the general security of the Da Nang Air Base complex.

.

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
