Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. Assign control over all troops in each province to the
province chief.

3. Execute clear-and-hold operations on a hamlet-by-hamlet
basis following the "oil spot" theory for each of the approxi-
mately 40 districts within the seven critical provinces.

4, Introduce population control programs (curfews, ID
papers, intelligence networks, etc.).

5. Increase the number of provincial police.
6. Expand the information program.
{+ Develop special economic programs for each province.
8. Add U.S. personnel as follows:
a. 320 military advisors in provinces and districts.
b. 40 USOM advisors in provinces and districts.

e. 74 battalion advisors (2 for each of 37 battalions).
434 TOTAT,

9. Transfer military personnel as needed to fill USOM
shortages.

10. Establish joint US/GVN teams to monitor the program at
both National and Provincial levels. 101/

2- Preparation for Increased Pressure on North Vietnam

The critical question of pressures against North Vietnam remained
theoretically moot. The consensus of those formulating policy proposals
for final approval by highest authority appears to have been that these
pressures would have to be resorted to sooner or later. But the subject
was politically explosive, especially in a presidential election year.
Accordingly, not only did the basic foreign policy issues involved need
careful exploration, but the domestic political framework needed prepara-
tion before any binding commitments to serious actions could be decided
upon.

On 15 June 1964, McGeorge Bundy eddressed a menorandum to the Secre-
taries of State and Defense announcing a meeting in the Secretary of
State's conference room that same day at 6:00 p.m.

The principal question for discussion will be to assess
the desirability of recommending to the President that a
Congressional resolution on Southeast Asia should be sought

promptly.

82 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
