Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
“SECURITY INFORMATION

anc immediate increase in the scale of United States pro-
‘duction, and pending thet increase, would reduce the mili-
tary aéssisteance programs to other nations, especially those
in high priority.

TEL, ~ “Fhe Joint Chiefs of Steff concur in varegraph 67 of
the study in the Annex to NSC 124, which is quoted below for
ready reference:

"In order to pursue the military courses of action
envisaged in this vaper to a definite favorable conclu-
sion within 4 reasonable period, it will be necessary
to divert military strength from other areas thus re-
ducing our military capabilities in those areas, with
the recognized increased risks involved therein, or to
increase our military forces in being, or both. The
magnitude of the United States military requirements to
carry out these courses of action and the manner in which
they could best be met can be determined only after study
by the Joint Chiefs of Stafr."

Such determinetion will follow conpletion of the military
studies called for in subparagraph 6¢(3) of the draft policy
statement in NSC 124 dealing with the military meesures celled
for in subperegrephs 6d, 7f, 8c, 9b, and 10c thereof. In

this connection, an armistice in Korea will not of itself
permit major redeployment or redisposition of ground forces

in tne Par East in the near future except at the risk of
losing Korea and endangering Japan in the event hostilities

in that area are resumed.

18. In sonnection with the foregoing, the Joint Chiefs of
Starf contemplate no employment of United States ground force
units in French Indochina, Theilend, or Burma; rather the
Joint Chiefs of Staff anticipate that the major increase in
United States forces required for contemplated operations
against aggression in that area would be naval and air force
units. It should be noted that the creation of any new units
would, in general, strengthen the United States military posi-
tion for the eventuality of global war and that such forces
would be capable of rapid redeployment in that eventuality.

19. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, from the United States
militery point of view, do not wish to join in a combined
military command at this time or under present circumstances
for the defense of Southeast Asia against Chinsse Communist
eezression. In this connection, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
believe that the United States should not at this time con-
template relieving the French of their responsibility in
TIncdochinea if present United Stetes global strategy, includ-

Lat TOP SECRET
