fins

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(It should be noted that progress in pacification, more than anything else,

will persuade the enemy to negotiate or withdraw. )

e. Press for nezotiations. I am not optimistic that Hanoi or the VC
will respond to peace overtures now (explaining my recommendations above that
we get into a level-off posture for the long pull). The ends sought by “the two
sides appear to be irreconcilable end the relative power balance is not in their
view unfavorable to them. But three things cat) be. done, I believe, to increase
the prospects: :

(1) Take steps to increase the credibility of our peace gestures
in the minds of the enemy. There is considerable evidence both in private state-
ments by the Communists and in the reports of. competent Western officials who
have talked with them that charges of US bad faith are not solely propagandistic,
but reflect deeply held beliefs.- Analyses of Comnunists' statements and actions

‘indicate that they firmly believe that American leadership really does not want

the fighting to stop, and that we are intent on winning a military victory in
Vietnam and on maintaining our presence there through a puppet regime supported
by US military bases,

As a way of projective US bona fides, I believe that. we should consider two
possibilities with respect to our bombing program against the North, to be
undertaxen, if at all, eat a time very carefully selected with a view to maxim-
izing the Ghanees of influencing the enemy and world opinion and to minimizing
the chances that failure would strengthen the hand of the "hawks" at home:

, First, without fanfare, conditions, or avowal, whether the stand-down was

permanent or temporary, stop bombing all of North Vietnam. It is generally
thought that Hanoi will not agree to negotiations until they can claim that the
bombing has stopped unconditionally. We should see what develops, retaining
freedom to resume the bombing if nothing useful was forthcoming.

Alternatively, we could shift the weight-of-effort away from "Zones 6A
and 6B" -~ zones including Hanoi and Haiphong and areas north of those two
cities to the Chinese border. This alternative has some attraction in that
it provides the North Vietnamese a "face saver" if only problems of "face!’
ere holding up Hanoi peace gestures; it would narrow the bombing down directly
to the objectionable infiltration (supporting the logic of a stop-infiltration/
full-peuse deal); and it would reduce the international heat on the US. Here,
too, bombing of the Northeast could be resumed et any time, or "spot" attacks
could be m 2 from time to time to ne North Vietnam off balance and
to require her to pay sane the full cost oy maintaining her repair crews
in place. The sorties diverted from Zones 6A and 6B could be concentrated

on the infiltration routes in Zones 1 and 2 (the southern end of North Vietnan,
including the Mu Gia Pass), in Laos and in South Vietnam.,/

a/ Any limitation on the bombing of North Vietnam will cause serious psycho-

logical problems among the men who are risking their lives to help achieve our
political objectives; among their commanders up to and including the JCS; and
amons those of our people who cannot understand why we should withhold punish-
ment from the enemy. General Westmoreland, as do the JCS, strongly believes in
the military value of the bombing program. Further, Westmoreland reports that
the morale of his Air Force personnel may already be showing signs of erosion --~
an erosion resulting from current operational restrictions.

87 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
