Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ignored. Moreover, the Soviet Union indicated to the French that it would
not accept the presence of delegates from the Associated States unless the
DRV were admitted to the conference. 6/ The principal Western objection
concerning the DRV was that the invitation had been tendered to the Viet
Minh not only by the Soviet Union but also by Communist China, a move
admitted by Molotov at the first plenary session on 8 May and protested
by France and the United States. 7/

Word. of the DRV's admission naturally angered the Bao Dai
government. When informed of Franco-Soviet Agreement on the DRV's admission,
the Bao Dai government decided that Vietnam would go to the conference
only upon invitation of the Western Big Three -- that is, only if the SVN
status differed from that of the DRV. On 2 May the invitations arrived
with the Soviets being informed that GVN participation would in no way
confer de jure recognition on the DRV. 8/ Although the Bao Dai govern-
ment could not bar the DRV from the conference table, it did not accord
Ho's regime anything more than the status of a belligerent.

There was, then, a distinction between the status of the
DRV and. the GVN at the Geneva Conference. Whereas all the major powers
implicitly or explicitly recognized the full status of the GVN as a state,
the Western powers conceded only belligerent status for the DRV/Viet Minh.
In practice, however, the Viet Minh were much more a part of the negotiat-
ing process, particularly as regards military arrangements. The GVN, in
its own right, pursued a consistent public line, emphasizing its independence
and its hope for the continued political unity of Vietnam -- under Bao Dai.

2. GVN Unable to Forestall Partition

a. GVN Requests Written Assurance Country Will Not be Partitioned

At the time the Conference began, the State of Vietnam was
concerned and suspicious about the possibilities of a partitioning of
the country. Mindful of past instances of partition in Korea and Germany,
and deeply in doubt of French willingness to stand firm against Viet Minh
territorial claims, the GVN urged the French government to give written
assurance that Paris would not seek a division of Vietnam. On 25 April,
Bao. Dai had served notice on the French that his government would not
tolerate partition. GVN representatives in Paris issued a communique
in the name of Bao Dai's cabinet which noted various plans in the air for
@ partition of Vietnam. The communique stated that a partition "would
be in defiance of Vietnamese national sentiment which has asserted itself
with so much strength for the unity as well as for the independence of its
country. Neither the Chief of State nor the national government of Viet-
nam admit that the unity of the country can be severed legally..." In
calling for French assurances that they would not negotiate a sacrifice
of Vietnamese interests with the "rebels," the communique implied that
the Vietnamese government would not sign the April treaties until such
assurances were received. And, the GVN cabinet warned that a compromis-
ing agreement would never receive Vietnam's approval:

B-7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
