[ Yo.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But a change and a new start is of the essence and in considering
opinion we may note that Diem's flavor is not markedly good in
Asia.

A time of crisis in our policy on South Vietnam will come when
it becomes evident that the reforms we have asked have not come off
and that our presently proferred aid is not accomplishing anything.
Troops will be urged to back up Diem. It will be sufficiently
clear that I think this must be resisted. Our soldiers would not
deal with the vital weakness. They could perpetuate it. They
would enable Diem to continue to concentrate on protecting his
own position at the expense of countering the insurgency. Last
spring, following the Vice President's promise of more aid, pro-
posals for increased and reform taxes which were well advanced
were promptly dropped. The parallel on administrative and political
reform could be close.

It will be said that we need troops fora show of strength and
determination in the area. Since the troops will not deal with
fundamental faults -- since there can't be enough of them to give
security to the countryside -- their failure to provide security
could create a worse crisis of confidence. You will be aware of my
general reluctance to move in troops. On the other hand I would
note that it is those of us who have worked in the political vine-
yard and who have committed our hearts most strongly to the political
fortunes of the New Frontier who worry most about its bright promise
being sunk under the rice fields. Dulles in 1954 saw the dangers in
this area, Dean Acheson knew he could not invest men in Chiang.

* x % *

My overall feeling is that despite the error implicit in this
last move and the supposition that Diem can be reformed, the situa-
tion is not hopeless. It is only hopeless if we marry our course
to that of a man who must spend more time protecting his own posi-
tion and excluding those who threaten it than in fighting the in-
surgency. Diem's calculation instinctive or deliberate is evident.
He has already been deposed once and not by the Communists. He
can see his clear and present danger as well as anyone. 25/

Two things are particularly worth noting about Galbraith's advice:
the first, to the extent it had an influence on Kennedy, it counselled him
to avoid sending troops, but also not to teke seriously the quid pro quo
with Diem because Diem was not going to do anything anyway. Consequently,
Galbraith, with a limitlessly bleak view of the prospects for success
under Diem, really had no quarrel with those who argued against putting
pressure on Diem and for trying to win his confidence. He had no argu-
ment, because he thought both approaches (pressure and no pressure) were
equally hopeless, And indeed, both had been tried during the year --

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
45
