Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

=

the other hand, they would be engaged in a rather
inglorious static defensive mission unappealing to them and
unimpressive in the eyes of the Vietnamese. Operating in
major population areas would maximize the points of contact
with Yietnemese and hence maximize the possible points of
friction. The division would be badly fragmented to the
extent that its command, control and supervision would be
awkward.

H] .

"The foregoing analysis leads me to the following tenta-
tive conclusions. First, it is not desirable to introduce
a U.S5 division into South Vietnam unless there are clear
and tangible advantages outweighing the numerous disadvan-
tages, many of which have been noted above. One must make
a definite determination of the numbers and-types of GVN
forces relieved by the introduction of the U.S. unit and
thus the effect of the increased U.S. presence in closing
the manpower gap of 1965. Obviously, our division would
make some contribution but it remains to be proved that it
will be sufficient to reverse the downward trend and give
such & lift to the GVN forces that they would perform better
by the stimulation of the U.S. presence rather than worse in
a mood. of relaxation at passing the Viet Cong burden to the
US: F

. "If the evidence of the probable effectiveness of this

U.S. contribution is convincing, then the matter of mission
becomes the primary question. The inland mission in the
highlands is clearly the more ambitious and, if well done,
will make a greater contribution during the present critical
period. On the other hand, it is the more exposed and even
permits one to entertain the possibility of a kind of Dien
Bien Phu if the coastal provinces should collapse and our
forces were cut off from the coast except by air.

he coastal enclave mission is safer, simpler but less
impr ‘ssive and less productive than the inland mission. The
contrast of the pros and cons of the two suggests the de-
sirability of reexamining the question to see whether the
advantages of the inland disposition could not be combined
in sqdme way with the retention of a base coastal area, linked
withia position inland. In any case, considerable additional
study is required before we are prepared to make a recommen-
dation either for the introduction of a division or for the
assignment of its mission. In the meantime, we should be
giving much thought both in South Vietnam and in Washington
as tg the right course of action /if/ and when this issue
becomes pressing -- as it shortly will."

| 58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
