Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

d. Limitation on American Leverage

The United States attempted to use its military assistance
program to gain leverage over French policies, but was severely con-
strained in what it could do. The U.S. military mission (MAAG) in Saigon
was small and limited by the French in its fumctions to a supply-support
group. Allocation of all U.S. aid to the Associated States had to be
made, by agreement, solely through the French. Thus, MAAG was not allowed
to control the dispensing of supplies once they arrived in Vietnam.

MAAG officers were not given the necessary freedom to develop intelligence
information on the course of the war; information supplied by the French
was limited, and often unreliable or deliberately misleading. The French
resisted repeated U.S. edmonitions that the native armies of the Associ-

ated States be built up and consequently they did not create a true national

Vietnamese army. With some minor exceptions, the French excluded American
advisors from participating in the training for the use of the materials
being furnished by the U.S.

General Navarre viewed any function of MAAG in Saigon be-
yond bookkeeping to be an intrusion upon internal French affairs. Even
though it would have been difficult beyond 1952 to continue the war
without American aid, the French never permitted participation by U.S.
officials in strategic planning or policy making. 7/ Moreover, the
French suspected the economic aid mission of being over-sympathetic to
Vietnamese nationalism. The director of the economic aid program, Robert
Blum, and the DCM of the American Embassy, Edmund Guillion, were subjected
to French criticisms of their pro-Vietnamese views, although the American
Ambassador, Donald Heath, remained staunchly pro-French. Thus, French
officials insisted that American assistance be furnished with "no strings
attached" and with virtually no control over its use. Underlying this
attitude was a deep-seated suspicion that the United States desired to
totally supplant the French, economically as well as politically, in
Indochina. 8/

2. French Leverage on the United States

French leverage over the United States was made possible by the
conviction, apparently firmly held in Washington, that the maintenance
of a non-Communist Indochina was vital to Western -- and specifically
American -- interests.

@. Primarily it was France's War

The most fundemental fact was that the French were carrying
on a war which the United States considered, rightly or wrongly, to be
essential. Thus, the French were always able to threaten simply to end
the war by pulling out of Indochina. By the early 1950's, with the
French nation tired of the "la sale guerre," this would not have been an
unpopular decision within France. Paris was thereby able to hint --

A-38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
