Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

The specific form which Lansdale's supra-departmental organizational
proposal advanced was that of a Presidential Agent to manage the U.S.
effort in RVN. On 12 April 1961, Walt W. Rostow sent a memorandum to
President Kennedy which suggested, among other things, that it was impera-
tive to appoint a "fulltime, first-rate back-stop man in Washington" to
oversee the U.S, involvement in RVN. 39/ Lansdale was either aware of
a meaning not conveyed literally by the memorandum or interpreted it to fit
his preferences. In any event, he used this springboard to propose, in a
19 April memorandum to Secretary McNamara and his deputy, Roswell Gilpatric,
that the President create an interdepartmental task force on Vietnam to
"supervise and coordinate the activities of every U.S. agency carrying
out operations...in Vietnam to ensure success of the /President's/ approved
plan." 40/ On the following day Secretary McNamara, presumably after
discussing the matter with the President, requested Gilpatric to prepare
within a week a report for the President, setting forth any actions
necessary to "prevent communist domination of thet country." }1/

On 27 April Secretary Gilpatric submitted his recommendations. Much
of the flavor of the earlier Lansdale pleas for a select, individualistic
advisory effort was missing from this product of an interdepartmental
committee. The earlier recommendations for an expanded U.S. effort were
still there, however. These included an RVNAF force increase of 20,000
with @ corresponding increase of 100 MAAG advisors, @ MAAG takeover of
the entire CG and spc programs, the employment of U.S. advisors in field
operations, the continuation of U.S. Mission efforts to get GVN to carry
out reforms, the initiation of covert operations with CIA assistance
against lines.of communications in Laos and North Vietnam, and a U.S.
economic team to help GVN speed up national development. he] One would
be hard pressed to identify any other document which, over six months
before the operative decision, so closely foreshadowed the U.S, actions
that would be agreed to at the end of 1961.

But beyond these programmatic recommendations (hence, contrary to
Lansdale's initial proposals) Gilpatric recommended the creation of a
Presidential Task Force to provide “over-all direction, interagency
coordination and support" for this program of action. Gilpatric was to
be Director of the Task Force; Lansdale its operating head in Vietnam.
In order to appear not to fly into the face of Ambassadorial primacy in
Saigon the memo was forced into some rather faney obfuscation:

The Ambassador as head of the Country Team is assigned
the authority and the responsibility to see that the Program
is carried out in the field and to determine the timing of
the actions. He is authorized to advise the Director of the
Task Force of any changes which he believes should be made in
the Program.

In carrying out his duties in the field, the operations

officer of the Task Force will cooperate with the Ambassador
and the Country Team. 43/

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
