Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of MAYFLOWER were William Sullivan in Vientiane, Foy Kohler in Moscow,
and Winthrop Brown in Seoul -- the latter only for the purpose of inform-
ing President Park Chung Hee who was about to embark on a state visit to
Washington and who, the Department felt, should be. forewarned so that he
might more effectively fend off press probings-

On the evening of May 11, Secretary Rusk made two moves designed to
inform "the other side” of the fact that a bombing halt was being called
and of its political purpose:

1. He sent a cable 128/ to Foy Kohler in Moscow, instructing him
to make urgent contact with the DRV Ambassador in Moscow to convey 2
carefully prepared message to him, as quoted below. The cable set forth
the instructions end rationale as follows:

...We are using you as channel to avoid using Soviets as
intermediaries and also to insure that message is accurately
and directly delivered. We leave appropriate method of
arranging contact to you and are not concerned if Soviets
should become aware you are making such contact. You should
of course make maximum effort avoid any attention by any third
party.

Message you should deliver should be oral but confirmed by
. written piece of paper which you should hand to Ambassador with
request he deliver message to Hanoi. Message is as follows:

BEGIN TEXT. The highest authority in this Government has
asked me to inform Hanoi that there will be no air attacks on
North Viet-Nem for a period beginning at noon, Washington time,
Wednesday, May 12, and running into next week.

In this decision the United States Government has ,taken
account of repeated suggestions from various quarters, includ-
ing public statements by Henoi representatives, that there can
be no progress toward peace while there ere air attacks on
North Viet-Nem. The United States Goverrment remains convinced
that the underlying cause of trouble in Southeast Asia is armed
action against the people and Government of South Vietnam by
forces whose actions can be decisively affected from North
Vietnam. The United States will be very watchful to see whether
in this period of pause there are significant reductions in such
armed actions by such forces. (The United States must emphasize
that, the rodd toward the end of armed attacks against the people
and Government of Vietnem. is the only road which will permit the
Government of Vietnem(and the Governments of tne Unite ates
to bring a permanent end to their attacks on North Vietnam.)...

In teking this action the United States is well aware of
the risk that a temporary suspension of these air attacks mey

114 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
