Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The present situation in SVN was painted in somber tones of declining
GVN control and deterioration within ARVN while VC strength and NVN-supplied
arms were on the rise. To introduce U.S. combat troops for the protection
of Saigon under these circumstances, McNamara. stated, would create "serious
adverse psychological consequences and should not be undertaken." A U.S.
movement from the advisory role to a role which would amount to command of
the war effort was similarly rejected without discussion because of anticipated
adverse psychological effects. Thus, the fear of undesirable impacts upon
a weak GVN caused at least one major course of action to be ruled out.
Although fears of adverse impacts in domestic U.S. politics were not mentioned
it is inconceivable that such fears were not present.

Having ruled out U.S. active leadership and the commitment of U.S.
troops, Secretary McNamara analyzed three possible courses of action:
(1) negotiations leading to the "neutralization" of SVN; (2) the initiation
of military actions against NVN; and (3) measures to improve the situation
in SVN. The first of these was incompatible with the U.S. objective stated
at the beginning of the NSAM; the time was not propitious for adoption of
the second; the third was recommended for adoption. Additionally, Secretary
McNamara recommended NSAM 288 proclaimed that plans be made so that the U.S.
would be in a position at a later date to initiate military pressures against
NVN within a relatively brief time after any decision to do so might be made.

Many of the steps approved in NSAM 288 were highly programmatic. It
should be observed that they were also palliative, both in scope and degree.
Of the twelve approved actions, two addressed possible future actions beyond
the borders of South Vietnam. Of the remaining ten, three were declaratory
in nature (e.g., "To make it clear that we fully support the Khanh government
and are opposed to any further coups"). The seven actions implying additional
U.S. assistance (some of it advice) dealt with such matters as exchanging
25 VNAF aircraft for a newer model, replacing armored personnel carriers with
a more reliable model, and trebling the fertilizer program within two years.
The additional cost of the programs was only slightly more than $60 million
at the most: $30-$40 million to support a 50,000 man increase in RVNAF and
to raise pay scales; $1.5 million to support an enlarged civil administrative
cadre; and a one time cost of $20 million for additional and replacement
military equipment.

It is clear with the advantage of hindsight that these steps were
grossly inadequate to the magnitude of the tasks at hand -- particularly
if the broad U.S. objectives stated in the NSAM were to be realized. But
such hindsight misses the policymakers' dilemma and the probable process
by which the approved actions were decided upon. President Johnson had
neither a congressional nor a popular mandate to Americanize the war or to
expand it dramatically by "going north." U.S. hopes were pinned on assisting
in the development of a GVN strong enough to win its own war. Overt U.S.
leadership might undercut the development of such a government in Saigon.

The course of policy adopted was not the product of an attempt to select

the "best" alternative by means of examining expected benefits; it resulted
from a determination of the "least bad" alternative through an examination

.

iv TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
