Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Target No. 33 - Dong Hoi Barracks i
36 - Vit Thu Lu Army Barracks
39 - Chap Le Army Barracks
'52 - Vinh Army Supply Depot E
71 - Ben Thuy Port Facilities

All of these preparations came to a head at the end of January, when
a tentetive decision had evidently been reached in Washington to authorize
resumption of the DESOTO Patrols on or about 3 February. A JCS directive
to that effect went out to CINCPAC on 28 January, 28/ requesting CINCPAC
to issue the necessary Operational Plan, covering a two destroyer Patrol
Group with on-line Crypto RATT and Star Shell illumination capabilities.
Interestingly, the instructions were explicit to the effect that the
"Patrol track shall not be provocative, with the Patrol Group remaining
30 nautical miles from both NV mainland and Heinan Island and South of
20 degrees North latitude." The Patrol was to be continued for a period
of three days, during which time SP-2 aircraft with searchlight and flare
capability were to support the Patrol Group during hours of darkness by
assisting in contact investigation and clarification, and a Combat Air
Patrol was to be airborne in the vicinity of the Patrol during daylight
and to be on immediate call during darkness: Instructions also called
for carefully dissociating the Patrol from OPLAN 34uA operations in and
over the Gulf of Tonkin 48 hours before, during, and 48 hours following
eompletion of the Patrol.

Rules of engagement, in the event of atteck, were as follows:

a. The Patrol ships and aircraft are authorized to attack
with the objective of insuring destruction of any vessel or
aircraft which attacks, or gives positive indication of intent
to attack, US forces operating in international waters or air-
space over international waters.

be In event of hostile attack, the Patrol ships and aircratt
are directed to fire upon the hostile attacker with the objective
of insuring destruction. Ships are authorized to pursue the
enemy to the recognized three mile territorial Limit. Aircraft
are authorized hot pursuit inside territorial waters (three miles)
against surface vessels and into hostile air space (includes DRY;
Hainan Island and Mainland China) against attack aircraft when
necessary to achieve destruction of identified attack forces.
Ships and aircraft will confine their actions to the attacking
ships and/or aircraft.

In the days following, attention centered on plans for the reprisal
strike. A number of last-minute changes were made in the targets that
had been recommended by CINCPAC and the JCS, in order to reduce the risk
of aircraft losses and to reduce sortie requirements. The launcaing
date for the DESOTO Patrol was postponed from the 3rd to the 7ta of
February, and the JCS asked CINCPAC 29/ to re-order its reprisel targets

17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
