Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ue : Ad
TS TOP SECRET - Sensitive

action concerning infiltration would be a tremendous
psychological blow to the VC and would constitute an
admission which they have always declined really to make.

Whichever form of trade might be pursued if the issue
even arose -- as it conceivably might through such nibbles
as the present Ronning effort -- I fully agree with General
Taylor that we should do all we can to avoid the pitfalls
of ceasing bombing in return simply for a willingness to talk. 143/

Concerned that the current spate of international peace moves might entice
the Administration in another bombing pause, Bundy reminded the Secretary

that,

-. during our long pause in January, we pretty much
agreed among ourselves that as a practical matter, if Hanoi
started to play negotiating games that even seemed to be
serious, we would have great difficulty in resuming bombing
for some time. This was and is a built-in weakness of the
"pause" approach. It does not apply to informal talks with
the DRV, directly or indirectly, on the conditions under
which we would stop bombing, nor does it apply to possible
third country suggestions. As to the latter, I myself believe
that our past record sufficiently stresses that we could stop
the bombing only if the other side did something in response.
Thus, I would not at this moment favor any additional public
statement by us, which might simply highlight the issue and
bring about the very pressures we seek to avoid. 14)/

Hence, he concluded,

As you can see, these reactions are tentative as to the
form of the trade, but quite firm that there must in fact be
a trade and that we should not consider another "pause" under
existing circumstances. If we agree merely to these points,
I think we will have made some progress. 15

Bombing was thus seen from within the Administration as a counter to be
+raded during negotiations, a perception not shared by large segments of
the international community where bombing was always regarded as an
impediment to any such negotiations. Hanoi, however, had always clearly
seen the bombing as the focal point in the test of wills with the U.S.

While Secretary Rusk was fending off this international
‘pressure for an end to the bombing and de-escalation of the war as a
means to peace, the President was having increasing trouble with war-
dissenters within his own party. The US had scarcely resumed the bombing

115 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
