ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

taking away MAP support involved two fishing boats owned by the Vietnam
Navy that were found ineligible for such support. In his reaction to

the PROVN Report in May 1966, in his directives to advisers around the

time of the Chinh-Hunnicutt affair in the fall of 1966, and in his reaction
to Washington inquiries in May 1967, COMUSMACV consistently brushed aside
criticism of ARVN and told both his superiors and his subordinates to lay
off. Whatever interest in leverage there was at lower levels in the field
received no backing from COMUSMACV. In March 1966, a decision to transfer
MAP for Vietnam to service funding had no effect on leverage because MACV
continued to put material swpport in Vietnamese hands as soon as it entered
the country.

Although AID tried some leverage in this period, and although the
Ambassador, the Mission, and officials tuned to U.S, domestic pressures
urged U.S. leverage for GVN reforms, there is still no documented study
of GVN's failures, of the reasons for it, and of the ways that leverage
of different types might help improve GVN permanently. The basic problem
of concern is GVN's overall failure to do its civil and military jobs.
Leverage in the hands of U.S. personnel might assure that GVN would do
particular things we want; but we have no information on what kind of .
leverage, if any, would reform GVN. From 1964 onwards, high U.S. officials,
including McGeorge Bundy and Secretary McNamara, have said at one time and
another than thorough reform of GVN is necessary; but no one has found or
even seriously proposed a way to do it. Encadrement proposals, prominent
before June 1965, still received occasional mention; but these proposed to
make up for GVN's deficiencies by substituting U.S. control for GVN control,
and do not purport to reform GVN itself. If this problem has a solution,
we have yet to find it.

The Embassy's Lack of Political Contact

The turbulent events of 196 and early 1965 had shown that the Embassy
had no effective system, either through overt or covert contacts, for finding
out what was going on. Nothing was done subsequently to correct this prob-
Jem. CAS people talked to a few official contacts, who told them things the
Vietnamese wanted the U.S. to believe; but CIA had and has no mandate or
mission to perform systematic intelligence and espionage in friendly countries,
and so lacks the resources to gather and evaluate the large amounts of informa-
tion required on political forces, corruption, connections, and so on.

General Thi began sounding out his U.S. contacts on whether the U.S.
appreciated his superior quelities as a potential leader of Vietnam as early
as August 1965: and in other ways we had plenty of warning that there would
be trouble. However, we showed no feel for cause and effect. President
Johnson's embrace of Ky at Honolulu in February, 1966, could only have had
a divisive effect when Ky commanded so little solid support within his own
country. On the one hand, civilians and the military had flouted U.S. wishes
so often in the past that express U.S. support scarcely counted for much; but
on the other hand, Ky's weakness and Thi's known ambitions tempted Ky to get
whatever mileage he could out of our support. In the subsequent turbulence,

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
