Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The mediator himself, however, was to be rent asunder within days of
Quat's assumption of office in one of those explosions that had become
so typical in Vietnam since Diem's demise. That political explosion

' was particularly unfortunate in its timing in relation to the "dramatic”
new ROLLING THUNDER program just then set to set under way.

B. ROLLING THUNDER I is Laid On--ana Cancelled

A refinement of the February 13 decision on ROLLING THUNDER,
including determination of the timing and character of the first air
strike, was evidently made by the President on February 18. A NODIS ,
cable 65/ of that date informed nine American posts in the Far East of
the decisions in the following words:

‘Policy on Viet-Nam adopted today calls for following:

1. Joint program with GVN of continuing air and naval
action against North Viet-Nam whenever and wherever necessary.
Such action to be against selected military targets and to be
limited and fitting and adequate as response to continuous
aggression in South Viet-Nam directed in Hanoi. Air strikes
will be jointly planned and agreed with GVN and carried out
on joint basis.

2. Intensification by all available means of pacification
program within South Viet-iiam, including every possible step to
find and attack VC concentretions and headquarters within SVN by
all conventional means available to GVN and US.

3. Barly detailed presentation to nations of world and to
public of documented case against DRV as aggressor. Forum and
form this presentation not yet decided, but we do not repeat
not expect to touch upon readiness for talks or negotiations at
this time. We are considering reaffirmation our objectives in
some form in near future.

4. Careful public statements of USG, combined with fact of
continuing air action, are expected to make it clear that mili-
tary action will continue while aggression continues. But
focus of public attention will be kept as far as possible on
DRV aggression, not on joint GVN/US military operations. There
will be no comment of any sort on future actions except that all
such actions will be adequate and measured and fitting to aggres-
sion. (You will have noted President's statement of yesterday,
which we will probably allow to stand.)

Addressees should inform head of government or State (as
appropriate) of above in strictest confidence and report re-
actions. In the case of Canberra and Wellington you may indicate
we would be prepared respond to questions through embassies here
tomorrow.

52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
