Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

public relations and public information programs of the

government of Viet Nam directed both internally to wes
free Vietnamese and externally to north Viet Nam....

"Assist Free Viet Nam to build up indigenous armed forces,
including independent logistical and administrative services,
which will be capable of assuring internal security and of
providing limited initial resistance to attack by the Viet
Minh." **

Otherwise, however, the new policy paper (NSC 5809 of April 2,
1958) was identical to its 1956 predecessor.

In late May of 1958 the Operations Coordinating Board submitted a
progress report on U.S. programs in Vietnam which held that “in general we
are achieving U.S. objectives in Viet-Nam." Among major operating problems
facing the U.S., the report cited Vietnam's continued dependence on foreign
aid: "In spite of some evidence of greater economic stability, Viet-Nam
continues to depend on foreign aid, the largest part of which goes to sup-
port the military establishment. U.S. aid still accounts for approximately
85 percent of imports in two-thirds of the budgetary revenues." Also cited
were the "political and security problems of the Viet-Nam Government”:

"President Ngo Dinh Diem's policy of strict control in the
political and economic fields has caused a certain amount of
internal dissatisfaction. Should the President's exercise of
personal authority develop too far there may be danger that the
resultant frustration of government officials might weaken the
united support for his regime which the situation requires. Other-
wise, the President's stern police measures and his emphasis on
internal security have led to some criticism of the government.
This emphasis on internal security stems from the recent emergence
of the country, continuation of communist-inspired violence and
subversion, and such incidents as the assassination of local
officials in rural areas of southern Vietnam...."

The OCB report took up the note that the U.S. should "encourage and assist
elements of the Army of Vietnam to establish and utilize specific anti-
subversive guerrilla formations and operations,” but stated that anti-
guerrilla operations interfered with the efficient training of the army:

* Proposed by CIA and evidently adopted, although this is not altogether
clear in DOD files. A further CIA revision, not adopted, would have
added: "In this effort priority should be given to areas of greatest
dissidence, particularly in the extreme south."

** A CIA proposed amendment, evidently not approved, would have added:
"Also encourage and assist elements of the Army of Viet Nam to establish
and utilize specific anti-subversive guerrilla formations and operations.
In the anti-guerrilla campaign encourage the government of Viet Nam to
use the Vietnamese Army in a way which will help win the favor of the
local populace in order to obtain its support for their campaigns, partic-
ularly for intelligence purposes." ;

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
