Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from The Arrogance of Power, 1966, by Senator J. Williem Fulbright

Pages 111-114

At the heart of the Vietnam tragedy is the fact that the most
powerful nationalist movement in that country is one which is also com-
munist. Ho Chi Minh is not a mere agent of Communist China, much less
of the "international communist conspiracy" that we used to hear so much
about. He is a bona-fide nationalist revolutionary, the leader of his
country's rebellion against French colonialism. He is also a communist,
and that is the essential reason why since at least 1950 he has been re-
garded as an enemy by the United States.

i hk

This outline, highly abbreviated though it is, illustrates a most
important fact -- the merger of nationalism and communism in Vietnam under
the leadership of Ho Chi Minh. It is not meaningful to speak of the Viet
Minh as more nationalist than communist or as more communist than national-
ist; it is both. The merger is a misfortune from the viewpoint of American
interests and preferences, but it is also a fact, a fact with which we
can and. should come to terms. Even today, after all that America has done
to sustain the South Vietnamese government, there is only one politician
whose name is known to peasants all over Vietnam: Ho Chi Minh.

It is important to be very clear about what is meant by "nationalism."
It has been best described, by Hans Kohn as a "state of mind” which regards
the nation as "the ideal form of political organization and the nationality
as the source of all creative cultural energy and of economic well being."
Understood in this way, nationalism is not necessarily humane or democratic,
socially constructive or responsive to individual needs. It is merely
powerful -- powerful in a sense of being able to mobilize the loyalty ang
active support of vast numbers of ordinary people. When one describes
Ho Chi Minh or the Viet Minh or the Viet Cong as "nationalist," it is not
to be inferred that they are regarded as saints. Far from it: they have
demonstrated again and again that they are fanatical and cruel, but they
have also shown that they are patriots, that they have identified them-
selves with the nation and:its mystique, with that "state of mind” which
more than any other in our time inspires ordinary people to acts of loyalty,
bravery, and self-sacrifice.

For our purposes, the significance of Ho Chi Minh's nationalism is
that it is associated with what Bernard Fall has called "the 2,000-year-
old distrust in Vietnam of everything Chinese." Vietnamese communism is
therefore a potential bulwark -- perhaps the only potential bulwark --
against Chinese domination of Vietnam. It is for this reason that I be-
lieve that we should try, if it is not yet too late, to come to terms with
North Vietnam and the Viet Cong.

c-28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
