Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As early as April 1, 116/ McGeorge Bundy expressed his concern that
the eventual bargaining tradeoffs had not received the careful considera-
tion that they deserved. As he saw it:

We have three cards of some value: our bombing of North
Vietnam, our military presence in South Vietnam, and the
political and economic carrots that can be offered to Hanoi.
We want to trade these cards for just as much as possible of
the following: an end to infiltration of men and supplies,
an end of Hanoi's direction, control, and encouragement of
the Viet Cong, a removal of cadres under direct Hanoi control,
and a dissolution of the organized Viet Cong military and
political forces. We do not need to decide today just how we
wish to mesh our high cards against Communist concessions.
But we will need to be in such a position soon, if only to
exchange views with Quat. On this more general point, we be-
lieve more exploratory conversation with the President is
needed today. [Boril v/

Apparently, however, any exploratory conversation that took place
on that and other occasions failed to lead to a clarification of what
the U.S. and the GVN could regard as "a satisfactory outcome" in Vietnem.
McGeorge Bundy continued to feel a sense of urgency about beginning dis-~
cussions with the Saigon Government on this matter. Thus on April 25 he
circulated a Memorandum to the Principals, lementing the lack of progress
toward such discussions:

We have had a lot of discussion among ourselves and with
Embassy Saigon on the negotiating track, but we have not yet
had serious discussions with the Republic of Vietnam. Such
serious discussions are the necessary preliminary of any
substantial improvement in our political posture, because our
whole position depends on the legitimacy of thet indenendent
government.

But we have had great difficulty in telking to Quet so far
because our thinking has focused so sherply on the complexi-
ties of the bargaining problem itself:

At what stage would we stop bombing?

At what point and with what guarantees could
we begin to withdraw?

What are the real terms of an effective cease-fire?
These are very difficult questions and the truth is that

they cannot be answered today. They are precisely the prob-
lems which will have to be settled by a combination of action

103 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
