Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Tt is evident that morale in Vietnam will rapidly crumble -- and
in Southeast Asia only slightly less quickly -- if the sequence of
expectations set in motion by Vice President Johnson's visit and
climaxed by General Taylor's mission are not soon followed by a
hard UeS. commitment to the ground in Vietnam." [Emphasis adaed/]

"Te elements required for buying time and assuming the offensive
in Vietnam are, in the view of this mission, the following:

1. A quick U.S. response to the present crisis which
would demonstrate by deeds -- not merely words -- the American
commitment seriously to help save Vietnam rather than to dis-
engage in the most convenient manner possible. To be per-
Suasive this commitment must include the sending to Vietnam
of some U.S. military forces.

2, A shift in the American relation to the Vietnamese
effort from advice to limited partnership. The present character
and scale of the war in South Vietnam decree that only the Viet-
namese can defeat the Viet Cong; but at all levels Americans
must, as friends and partners -- not as arms-length advisors ~~
show them how the job might be done -- not +el1l1 them or do it
for them. 23/ Cn ae ee

"Perhaps the most striking aspect of this mission's effort is the
unanimity of view -- individually arrived at by the specialists in-
volved -- that what is now required is a shift from U.S. advice to
limited partnership and working collaboration with the Vietnamese.
The present war cannot be won by direct U.S. action; it must be won
by the Vietnamese. But there is a general conviction among us that
the Vietnamese performance in every domain can be substantially im-
proved if Americans are prepared to work side by side with the Viet-
namese on the key problems. Moreover, there is evidence that Diem
is, in principle, prepared for this step, and that most -- not all --
elements in his establishment are eagerly awaiting it."2h/

Here is a section titled "Reforming Diem's Administrative Method":

The famous problem of Diem as an administretor and politi-
cian could be resolved in a number of ways:

~- By his removal in favor of a military dictatorship
which would give dominance to the military chain of command.

-- By his removal in favor of a figure of more dilute power
(e.g., Vice President Nguyen Ngoc Tho) who would delegate
authority to act to both military and civil leaders.

102
, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
