Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRUT - Sensitive

Integration of substantial numbers of U.S. combat personnel (e.g., 50)
into each of several ARVN battalions (e.g., 10); or combined operations of
three additional U.S, battalions with three or more ARVN battalions.
General Westmoreland asked his Deputy to give detailed study to three
methods: :

(1) Assumption of officer and senior NCO command positions
within the ARVN battalion by U.S. personnel.

(2) Assignment of U.S, persomel as staff officers, and
in technical and specialists positions, within the ARVN battalion.

(3) Employment of U.S. troops as fire support elements
within the ARVN battalion.

These approaches were studied in relation to: Language, security,
support, mutual us/cvi acceptance, conditions and capabilities within ARVN
units. Problems common to all three were the language barrier, increased
exposure of U.S. personnel, difficulty of U.S. personnel adapting to ARVN
living conditions, and the greatly expanded support requirement that would
be generated. The following conclusions were reached: _

Method (1) was not feasible nor desirable owing to the language
barrier, as well as to probable non-acceptance by GVN. ;

Method (2) would not materially improve ARVN capabilities.

Method (3), therefore, was the only concept that would
benefit ARVN and not detract from GVN morale. A fire support element of
six U.S. officers and 49 enlisted men was suggested for each ARVN battalion.

Because of the difficulties of supply and service support, medical
support, leadership in ARVN battalions, and anticipated morale problems
amongst those U.S. personnel assigned to ARVN battalions, Deputy COMUSMACV
opposed the adoption of the principle of encadrement. He recommended that
COMUSMACV not support it and that if it were directed, it be initially
applied to only one battalion, 23/

At the seme time, as a result of the Warrenton conference of

mid-January, serious consideration was being given in Washington to the

use of military government by means of Army civil affairs procedures. A
straw in the wind which indicated what the Saigon reaction was to be at

the forthcoming Honolulu conference was the response by Ambassador Taylor

on April 15 to notification that General Peers was coming to Saigon. "If

GVN gets word cf these plans to impose U.S. military government framework

on their country...it will have a very serious impact on our relations.

We eve rocking the boat at a time when we have it almost on an even keel." 2h/

5. Honolulu Conference, April 19-20, 1965; Encadrement and Combined

Command Fade Out

At Honolulu General Westmoreland had his way with respect to
military encadrement. Notes of the meetings reveal:

72 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
