Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"(a) To deter Chinese Communists from direct interven-
tion in SHA.

The JCS listed three general areas of military effort that they felt
should be pursued in the war:

"(1) Operations against the Viet Cong/North Vietnamese
Army (VC/NVA) forces in SVN while concurrently assisting the
South Vietnamese Government in their nation-building efforts.

"(2) Operations to obstruct and reduce the flow of men
and materials from North Vietnam (NV) to SVN.

"(3) Operations to obstruct and reduce imports of war-
sustaining materials into NVN.

They continued by assessing the achievements of the US and allies in these
three areas:

"In the first area, the United States and its allies
have achieved considerable success in operations against
ve/NVA forces. However, sufficient friendly forces have not
been made available to bring that degree of pressure to bear
on the enemy throughout SVN which would be beyond his abil-
ity to accommodate and which would provide the secure environ-
ment essential to sustained progress in Revolutionary Develop-
ment. The current reinforcement of I CTZ by diversion of forces
from II and III CTZs reduces the existing pressure in those
areas and inevitably will cause a loss of momentum that must
be restored at the earliest practicable date.

"In the second area, US efforts have achieved appreci-
able success. Greater success could be realized if an
expanded system of targets were made available.

"In the third area, relatively little effort has been
permitted. This failure to obstruct and reduce imports of
war-sustaining materials into NVN has affected unfavorably
the desired degree of success of operations in the other areas. 39/

The Joint Chiefs strongly recommended not only the approval of addi-
tional forces to provide an increased level of effort in SVN but thet action
be taken to reduce and obstruct the enemy capability to import the material
support required to sustain the war effort. They argued that the cumulative
effect of all these operations, in South Vietnam, in North Vietnam and
against the enemy's strategic lines of communication would hasten the
successful conclusion of the war and would most likely reduce the overall
ultimate force requirements. Their rationale for the 1968 forces was sum-
marized as follows:

Th TOP SECRET - Sensitive
