Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

have completed the majority of the training task by that time.
This, in General Taylor's view and mine, is what we should be
able to do. If we do, we should bring our men back.

"I don't believe we should leave our men there to substitute
for Vietnamese men who are qualified to carry out the task, and
this is really the heart of our proposal. I think it was a sound
proposal then and I think so now...."

Unsureness about the actual state of affaiys in Washington spread
eventually to the highest levels of government, and prompted the dis-
patching to South Vietnam in early February of a CIA "Special CAS Group”
for an independent evaluation of the military situation. A series of
four reports, dated 10, 11, 14 and 18 February 1964, were produced, each
transmitted by the Deputy Director, CIA, to the Secretary of Defense,
Secretary of State, and others as soon as it came out. Instead of finding
progress, these reported a serious and steadily deteriorating situation.
Cited were VC gains in the past several months, and particularly noted was
that VC arms were increasing in quantity and quality. As for the Strategic
Hamlet Program, they found it "at present at virtual standstill." The
Special CAS Group's concluding appraisal was pessimistic: "Tide of
insurgency in all four corps areas appears to be going against GVN." 58/
COMUSMACV (who had no prior knowledge of the Special CAS Group's reports)
took issue with the Group's findings, contesting less the data used than
the conclusions, especially the "personal" evaluational opinions as to
degree of deterioration. He suggested that in the future such reports
be first coordinated before being dispatched. 59/

On 6 March a major Secretary of Defense Conference again convened at
CINCPAC headquarters for a broad reassessment. The consensus was that the
military situation was definitely deteriorating. No longer was the issue
whether it was progressing satisfactorily or not. The question now was
how much of a setback had there been and what was needed to make up for it.
An opinion shared by many was that the insurgency could be expected to go
beyond 1965. This general reorientation of perspective was reflected in
the Secretary of Defense's observation that attention should be focused on
the near-term objectives of providing the greater U.S. support that would
be necessary, and suspending for the time being consideration of longer-
range concerns such as 5-year MAP projections. 60/ The visit to Vietnam
on 8 March corroborated the gravity of the immediate problems at hand.

Following his return from Vietnam, Mr. McNamara, on 16 March, sub-
mitted to the President a formal report. In it the Secretary of Defense
acknowledged, "The situation has unquestionably been growing worse, at
least since September." RVNAF desertion rates were increasing, and the GVN
military position generally was weakening noticeably. The VC position, on
the other hand, showed signs of improving. He referred pointedly to the
increase in North Vietnamese support. The conclusion was that greater
U.S. support was needed.

33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
