Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

XIII. DEBATE OVER BOMBING STRATEGY AND EFFECTIVENESS CONTINUES

A. The Rostow "Victory" Thesis

With the resumption of the bombing at 0600 on 18 May (Saigon time),
the arguments over the usefulness and intensity of the U.S. air attacks
against the North were taken up again with full energy.

ROLLING THUNDER XV (week of 18-24 May) was designed to attack
principally fixed military installations, while continuing the interdiction
of LOC's south of the 20th parallel. The attacks were carried out with a
weight of effort similar to the pre-pause level, i.e., hO sorties per day,
with a maximum of 200 sorties for the entire week. 147/

It was at this time that Walt W. Rostow, then State Department
Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, floated a memorandum
entitled "Victory and Defeat in Guerrilla Wars: The Case of South Vietnam,"
148/ in which he argued that a clear-cut victory for the U.S. in Vietnam
was a possibility and that what it required mainly was more pressure on the
North and effective conduct of the battle in the South. Rostow's memo
follows: c

In the press, at least, there is a certain fuzziness about the pos-
ibility of clear-cut victory in South Viet-Nam; and the President's
statement that a military victory is impossible is open to misinter-
pretation.

Aye Historically, guerrilla wars have generally been lost @ won
cleanly: Greece, China mainland, North Viet-Nam, Malaya, Philippines.
Laos in 1954 was an exception, with two provinces granted the Com-

.munists and a de facto split imposed on the country.

Ze In all the cases won by Free World forces, there was a phase
when the guerrillas commanded a good part of the countryside and, in-
deed, placed Athens, Kuala Lumpur, and Manila under something close to
siege. They failed to win because all the possible routes to guerrilla
victory were closed and, in failing to win, they lost. They finally
gave up in discouragement. The routes to victory are:

a) Mao Stage Three: going to all-out conventional war and
winning as in China in 1947-9;

b) Political collapse and takeover: North Viet-Nam;
c) Political collapse and a coalition government in which

the Communists get control over the security machinery; that is, army
and/or police. This has been an evident Viet Cong objective in this

; 121 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
