Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ways Of conciliating its most important opponents among the
minority groups. The United States Government is prepared
to help by oral statements of support and by further assis- _
tance to show our faith in the future of South Vietnam." 56/

Taylor, Westmoreland, and Johnson met Huong, Deputy Premier Vien,
and Khanh on December 7 to present them with the new U.S. program. The
Vietnamese group politely suggested that they did not know what the USG
meant by a stable effective goverrment able to campsign successfully against
the Viet Cong, and able to speak for and to its people. Moreover, they
noted that the U.S, program said nothing about Viet Cong use of Cambodie.
At the next meeting, on December 9, Taylor gave them the paper "Actions
Designed to Strengthen the Government of Vietnam," coverning the eight
areas of desired progress and measures of GVN effectiveness listed above.
The Prime Minister replied that the issue of political prisoners from
previous regimes was a very delicate matter; Khanh said there was no
problem about military support of the existing government. Taylor cabled
President Johnson that the USG proposals:

“have been received with an understanding reasonable-
ness in the light of the current situation but without great
enthusiasm since they necessarily omit some of the more
dramatic actions which the Vietnamese desire."

The only decisons reached were for joint study and consultation. 57/

This was the last time the USG tried to set GVN performance preconditions
for U.S. force use and deployments. Its effect, if any, was the opposite
of that intended.

9. The Goverrment's Support Vanishes, and Taylor Confronts the Generals

A new threat of crisis boiled up immediately; first, the leading
Buddhists declared their opposition to the government and went on a forty-
eight hour hunger strike. Huong stood fast, but then the Young Turks
picked a fight through a sudden demand that the HNC dismiss nine generals
and thirty other officers. (These included some, like Minh and the "Dalat"
generals expelled by Khanh, who no longer had jobs but still held their
yank and received Army pay.) ‘Taylor backed Huong and the HNC against all
comers, and tried to get Buddhists and others to support them. The HNC
refused to retire the 39 officers. But the Young Turks, playing for Buddhist
support, would not be denied. In the early morning hours of Sunday, Decem-
ber 20, they arrested twenty-two or more officials and politicians, includ-
ing several. members of the HNC, and made dozens of other political arrests.
They @lso created an "Armed Forces Council” over or replacing the MRC,
to consolidate their power. 58/

Through Huong and indirsect contacts, Taylor found out about the
dissolution of the HNC several hours before Khanh announced it at a press
conference; and one hour before the conference Khanh spoke to Taylor about
it. Teylor protested in the strongest terms, but without effect; Khanh
went ahead with the announcement. Taylor and Johnson also met with the

5h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
