Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive elle
a fret Mises. - Ze

On May 13, during a trip to Saigon to review progress on the
March decisions, McNamers, met with Khanh to express his concern over GVN
inaction. McNamare's main complaints were that RVNAF was failing to reach
authorized strength levels and that budget delays were holding up pacifica-
tion. He felt that GVN should announce that failure to disburse funds
is a crime. He also expressed concern about the replacement of incompe~
tent officers, such as the Commanding General of the ARVN Fifth Division.
The meeting went agreeably, and produced the following consensus:

(1) All present expressed satisfaction at Khenh's having
accepted the importance of speeding up disbursements.

(2) ‘The case of the commander of the Fifth Division "pre-
sented something of an internal problem, but it would
be arranged." (This was the second time around for
the Fifth Division case. As the result of a personel
request from General Harkins, Khanh had agreed on
April 25 to change this same officer "immediately." 66/)

(3) Khanh hoped to spend more time on military and pacifi-
cation matters if only “this political stomach trouble”
that took so much of his time could be quieted. 67/ c

MACV presented McNamara with a proposal to give the province ad-
visors a total of 278, 000 in petty cash and "seed money," to be used solely
at the U.S, advisors’ discretion. This initial proposal suggested putting
the money under control of the psychological operations committee. The
idea, received mixed reactions, and went on the agenda, of the Honolulu Con-
ference in June. 68/

M, Forrestal of the White House Staff came with Mcilamara, and ted
a negotiating team that met Minister Oanh and his staff to discuss budgetary
and economic matters. The U.S, team wanted GVN to keep its budget under
strict control; GVN wanted the USG to increase CIP, and to give it an addi-
tional $18 million from fiscal 1964 funds. On May 27, when the talks ended,
the USG had released the requested $18 million, and committed itself to a
fiscal 1965 CIP of $135 million, $40 million more than in fiscal 1964, plus
a standby arrangement, for an additional $30 million. GVN protested that
this commitment was not enough to prevent inflation, and did what it pleased
about its own budget; the talks ended with an agreement to disagree. 69/

6. The Political Climate and Prevailing Views of the War, May 1964

Khanh’s "political stomach trouble" was merely a fresh case of a
chronic Vietnamese problem. His troubles with General Minh over the four
jailed generals continued, and coup rumors abounded. On May 21, Lodge told
him of the harmful effects of such rumors, and suggested he talk tough with
his cabinet. When their conversation turned to General Minh, Khanh insisted
that Minh could be proved to have conspired with the others and with the
french to make Vietnam neutral. Khanh and the MRC planned to try the four
generals in Dalat by the egth of May. State then directed lodge to try to
prevent the trial, and failing that to soften its effects and prevent Minh's
deposition. lodge put this position to, Khanh on May 28, asserting the

19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive .
