Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for approximate time-phasing of the various steps in "the scenario";
(2) urged a fusion-of the scenario with CINCPAC operational planning
(OPLAN 37/64); and (3) attempted to incorporate Secretary McNamara's
requested border control operations into the political actions recom-
mended for the current time period. Moreover, the JCS developed a
"political/military scenario" for graduated overt military pressure
against North Vietnam, as called for in Secretary McNamara's Recommenda-
tion No. 12, 16 March 1964. Within this scenario the JCS included
"expanded U.S. overt military pressures" against the DRV. In effect,
they outlined a continually intensifying program of military pressures
which increasingly involved U.S. military participation. 57/

Complementing the thrust of JCS advice, the next draft, 8 April,
removed current political actions from the list of political scenarios
and treated them in a section entitled "Steps Which Should be Taken
Now." The current scenarios included: (1) GVN/FARMGATE graduated overt
military pressures against North Vietnam; (2) separate Laotian and
Cambodian border control actions; (3) separate GVN retaliatory actions
against North Vietnam; and (4) overt U.S. graduated military pressures
against North Vietnam. The detailed scenario for the GVIN/FARMGATE opera-
tions was reviewed by Mr. McNaughton with William Sullivan of the Depart-
ment of State and Michael Forrestal of the White House staff. The
scenario version resulting from this conference, contains the JCS-
recommended time-phasing, in terms of D-Day minus X approximations. It
also incorporates specific military actions recommended by the JCS sub-
mission. Apparently, only this scenario and the detailed description
of "Steps Which Should be Taken Now" were circulated for comment by other
agencies. Apparently, this draft provided the basis for scenario dis-
cussions held in Saigon among Secretary Rusk, Assistant Secretary William
Bundy, CJCS Wheeler, Ambassador Lodge and certain military and civilian
members of the Country Team on 19-20 April 1964.

A later version was prepared on 20 April and forwarded to the Chairman,
Joint Chiefs of Staff, on 23 April. Significantly, it contained only three
scenarios: I. "Uncommitting" steps which should be taken now; Il. Gvn/
FARMGATE graduated overt pressures on DRV; III. Contingency Plan for U.S.
overt response to DRV/CHICOM reactions. It also carried the following
comment concerning their relationship:

"It should be noted that carrying out Scenario I does
not necessarily commit the U.S. to commence Scenario IT; and
that Scenario II may be carried out without requiring resort
to Scenario III. However, since Scenario II cannot be launched
without our being prepared to carry out Scenario III, you should
assume that it may be necessary for the D-Day of Scenario IIT to
occur as soon as 10 days after the D-Day of Scenario II. Scenario
III is a contingency plan of action which we would contemplate
putting into effect only if the DRV's or Chicom's reaction to
Scenario II was judged by the President to require overt U.S.
response." 58/

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a
