Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Public Works, and, in fact, into any other agency concerned with pacifica-
tion. Finally, the U.S. personnel so assigned should come from among
those Americans already on the spot -- partly from civilians and partly
from military officers already on assignment there -- and the vacancies
caused by these reassignments should be filled by recruitment from the

U.S. 97/

A cable from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs to CINCPAC and COMUSMACV
indicated that (in addition to some questions on Laos) the Secretary of
Defense wanted the views of the two senior commanders in the Pacific
(CINCPAC and MACV) on a series of questions largely but not exclusively
military in nature:

1. What militery actions, in ascending order of gravity, might
be taken to impress Hanoi with our intentions to strike North
Vietnam?

2. What would be the time factors and force requirements involved
in achieving readiness for such actions against North Vietnam?

3. What should be the purpose and pattern of the initial air
strike against North Vienam?

4, What was their eoncept of the actions and reactions which
might arise from progressive implementation of CINCPAC plans 37-6)
and 32-647

de How might North Vietnam and Commmist China respond to these
escalating pressures?

6. What military help should be sought from SEATO nations?

There was a second group of queries which referred not to the possibility
of military pressures of one sort or another against North Vietnam, but
rather were directed mainly to the counterinsurgency efforts within South
Vietnam.

1. What were their views on providing four-man advisory teams ,
at once, for each district in the seven selected provinces, and later
in all of the 239 districts in SVN? :

2. ‘In what other ways could military personnel be used to advan-
tage in forwarding the pacification program in the seven selected
provinces?

3. What was the current status of:

a. The proposed increase in regular and paramilitary Porces
of the GVN, including the expansion of the VNAF, the reorganization

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

19
