Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

Perhaps the most important discussion at the meeting was that
engendered by Robert Kennedy over the fundamental purpose of the U.S,
involvement. According to Hilsman, Robert Kennedy said:

As he understood it we were there to help the people
resisting a Communist take-over, The first question was
whether a Communist take-over could be successfully resisted
with any government. If it could not, now was the time to
get out of Vietnam entirely, rather than waiting. If the
answer was that it could, but not with a Diem-lNhu government
as it was now constituted, we owed it to the people resisting
Communism in Vietnam to give Lodge enough sanctions to bring
changes that would permit successful resistance, But the
basic question of whether a Communist take-over could be
successfully resisted with any government had not been
answered, and he was not sure thet anyone had enough informa-
tion to answer it, 79/

Kennedy's trenchant analysis, however, did not generate a searching
reappraisal of U.S, policy. It did stimulate further efforts to get
more information on the situation. McNamara proposed sending General
Krulak on an immediate fact-finding trip. It was agreed that a senior
Foreign Service Officer with Vietnam experience, Joseph Mendenhall,
would accompany him, and that they would bring John Mecklin, the USIS
director, and Rufus Phillips, the director of rural programs for USOM,
back with them to report. 80/ Krulak and Mendenhall left later that
day. State, for its part, sent Saigon a long comprehensive cable of
questions on Vietnamese attitudes at all levels of society. 81/

The purpose of the Krulak-Mendenhall mission was to assess, in
Krulak's words, "the effect of recent events upon the attitudes of the
Vietnamese in general, and upon the war effort against the Viet Cong.” 82/
In a whirlwind four-day trip, the two men visited throughout Vietnam and
returned to Washington to report. Krulak went to ten different locations
in all four corps areas and spoke with the Ambassador, General Harkins
and his steff, 87 U.S. advisors, and 22 Vietnamese officers. 83/
Mendenhall went to Saigon, Hue, Da Nang, and several other provincial
cities and talked primarily to old Vietnamese friends, Not surprisingly,
their estimates of the situation were almost completely opposite.

The NSC convened on the morning of September 10, immediately after
their return, to hear their reports. Krulak gave a very optimistic
appraisal of the progress of the war and discounted the effect of the
political crisis on the army. The following, in his own words, were
his general conclusions: ‘

The shooting war is still going ahead at an impressive
pace, It has been affected adversely by the political
crisis, but the impact is not great.

There is a lot of war left to fight, particularly in
the Delta, where the Viet Cong remain strong.

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
