Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Diem replied civil guard not trained so needs bring back
20,000 reservists. He asked that I urge Dept to give
favorable consideration force level request and I reiterated
matter under careful study in Washington. + » " (Saigon 1216
to SecState, December 24, 1960, pp. 1-2)

When the Ambassador told Diem of approval to give him
eleven H~3} helicopters as soon as possible, "he made no comment.”
He rejected notions that the Assembly might investigate executive
departments (dismissing Durbrow's comment that we have the same
system in America) and then commented on the Department's earlier
recommendations with respect to the agroville program:

" | , . Although I had not mentioned corvee labor this time,
Diem stated this only way collect equivalent of taxes from
peasants and that this system is in Vietnamese tradition, but
peasants in Cochin-China under French had not been asked to
contribute labor. Therefore they now resent corvee labor and of
course would not think of paying any monetary taxes. He pointed
out peasants in central Viet-Nam willingly contribute free labor
instead of taxes. I remarked one reason for discontent in south
is arbitrary action of officials and the failure to explain needs
to peasants before forcing them to work. Diem insisted peasants
had been told of needs but they just lazy." (Zbid-, p- 3)

In view of Diem's expressed attitudes in this area, and the actual
practice of his regime in implementing the agroville program, there

was scarcely a basis for surprise when U.S.-urged provisions for pay-
ing peasants for their labor on the strategic hamlets went generally
unfulfilled. In any event, Durbrow's report left little doubt that
persuasion in pursuit of liberalizing reforms that Durbrow and State --
put not Diem, or, it would appear, MAAG or the DOD -- believed essential
to counter the Viet Cong, had reached an impasse:

"On few occasions he let me talk, I urged he adopt reforms
soonest since it essential to win further support of the people
if Viet Cong menace is to be overcome, but he gave me no
indication of reforms he may adopt. Before leaving I again
expressed hope that he would accept our suggestion that he
announce all liberalizing programs at one time in order to make
best impact. Diem replied he would think about this but made no
commitment .

"Comments. We have heard that Nhu, Thuan and others have
been running into resistance when urging Diem to adopt worth-
while reforms. I also received impression he very reluctant
to adopt reforms and is still basically thinking in terms of
force to save the day, hence his insistence several times that

19 TOP SECRET -. Sensitive
