Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in advance of U.S. commitment to intervene with own combat forces....

We are resolved not to get drawn in to training program to reverse
situation training program has virtually no chance of success...." 13/
Although O'Daniel repeatedly requested a reversal of this decision, ©
going as far as to request his plea by passed on "to the highest authority
on 26 June, 1/ the denial stood to the end of the Indochina war.

"

5. This prolonged involvement with the problem of affording
U.S. assistance in training of the Vietnamese National Army lost hardly
any of the momentum given it by General O'Daniel during the final days
of the Indochina war in spite of the U.S. decision to stop all aid ship-
ments to Indochina on 30 July 1954 and to reconsider the entire problem
of U.S. actions relating to Indochina. 15/ On 27 July, General O'Daniel
apain urged that the U.S,, without French interference, undertake a
priority program for training the Vietnamese Army, and took steps to
expand the authorized roster of MAAG personnel prior to the Geneva~imposed
strength ceiling deadline of 11 August without Washington approval of the
program. 16/ It is believed that this momentum, generated in Saigon and
supported by the Department of State, was of itself of considerable
importance in the actual taking of the decision to organize and train
Vietnamese forces. :

B. How was the decision to organize and train Vietnamese forces
taken? : a

; Ambassador Heath and his superiors in the Department of State
"strongly concurred" with General O'Daniel's recommendation of 27 July
that the U.S. undertake a priority program to train the Vietnamese Army. i7/
‘The JCS, however, recommended that "before the United States assumes
responsibility for training the forces of any of the Associated States
certain preconditions were four in number: "a reasonably strong, stable
civil government in control"; a request from each of the Associated States
that the U.S, "assume responsibility for training their forces and pro-
viding the military equipment, financial assistance, and political advice
necessary to insure internal stability"; arrangements with the French
"sranting full independence to the Associated States and providing for
the phased orderly withdrawal of French forces, French officials, and
French advisors from Indochina"; and "the size and composition of the
' forces...should be dictated by the local military requirements and the
over-all U.S, interests." 18/ These recommendations were transmitted
by the Secretary of Defense to the Secretary of State by letter. 19/

In response to this letter, Secretary Dulles indicated that
Cambodia had already met the recommended conditions, and that elithoush
Vietnam had not yet done so, the U.S. should nonetheless undertake a
training program since stréngthening the army was in fact prerequisite
to stability ("one of the most efficient means of enabling the Viet-
namese Government to become strong is to assist it in reorgenizing the
National Army and in training that Army.") 20/ Although in approving

Sa. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
