Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The Estimate noted that the French might decide that
in order to preserve their relationship with the U.S., "it is
essential to support an anti-Communist South Vietnam, postponing
elections if necessary. The French would feel, however, that such a
course would involve a substantially increased risk of renewed
hostilities with the Viet Minh. . . . " (Ibid., p. 8)

"We believe that the French estimate that South Vietnam —
cannot be held over the long term, except at very high cost."
(Ibid., p. 8)

The French were unlikely to provide Diem with the "full
and positive support" -- despite a French-U.S. understanding of
September 29, in which the French agreed "to support Diem in the
establishment of a strong, anti-Communist regime in Vietnam" (ibid.,
p- 7)- "Diem will probably not be able to reestablish the authority
of the government throughout South Vietnam and to tackle effectively
the multitude of pressing problems now facing the country." (Ibid.,
p.- 8) Thus, the Estimate ended on a gloomy note: "We believe, on the
basis of present trends, it is highly unlikely that South Vietnam
will develop the strength necessary to counter growing Communist sub-
version within its border; it almost certainly would not be able’ to
defeat the Communists in countrywide elections. Even before the
elections scheduled for 1956, the probable growth of Communist
influence in the South may result in strong pressures within South
Vietnam for coalition with the North." (Ibid., p- 9)

Subsequently, reassured by Diem's successes in subduing ©
a variety of non-communist challenges to his leadership, the U.S.
moved into the key role in support of Diem it had earlier hoped the
French might undertake. Yet the question posed by the French apprecia-
tion of the situation remained hanging: Was it possible to hold South
Vietnam "over the long term" without a "very high cost"?

3. Sect Warfare, 1955-1957

By the spring of 1955, Diem was engaged in a sharp con-
frontation with the Binh Xuyen gangsters and with the religious sects
of the Hoa Hao and Cao Dai, and the possibility was recognized that
he might (as in fact, he did) win victory and increase his prestige
and authority. Nevertheless, an estimate of 26 April 1955 was still
pessimistic about his longer-term prospects:

"Even if the present impasse were resolved, we believe
that it would be extremely difficult, at best, fora Vietnamese
government, regardless of its composition, to make progress
toward developing a strong, stable anti-Communist government
capable of resolving the basic social, economic, and political

rf TOP SECRET - Sensitive
