Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

these two challenges by improvements in his methods of
conducting war against communists and in vigorous action to
build greater popular support. We should help and encourage

him to take effective action. Should he not do so, we may well
be forced, in not too distant future, to undertake difficult task
of identifying and supporting alternate leadership." (Saigon
1151 to SecState, 4 December 1960, Section 2 of 2, pp. 2-3)

At the same time that Durbrow turned to an emphasis on
pressure, his dispatch contained strong hints that U.S. ability to
influence Diem and his immediate entourage without pressure might
have declined, as an immediate result of the abortive coup and the
perceived relation of the U.S. to it.

"Nhu and Diem still deeply rankled particularly by
critical American press stories about autocratic regime and
entourage, and Diem made the ridiculous statement to
Ladejinsky November 30th that he believes some Americans may
have backed coup because one of coup leaders, Colonel Dong,
"told him so during negotiations.' This may represent rationaliza-
tion blame others not selves .. . both Nhu and Diem now express-
ing deep displeasure because Americans equated Diem regime with
rebels because both anti-Communists and therefore we urged both
sides negotiate. While under circumstances their attitude
understandable, we have made point clear to them that we did all
in our power to prevent that he should be given active role in any
government established . ..." (Ibid., Section 1 of 2, p. 2)

At best, a state of affairs in which Diem believed we
had been sympathetic to a rebellion against him could only be ominous
for our relationship with him, and Durbrow implicitly acknowledged
this in recommending a conciliatory gesture of reassurance, Of a type
that was to characterize our relations with the Diem regime in subse-
quent years:

"Since Diem believes we do not understand seriousness of
vc threat and he suspects we may have encouraged rebels, we
should make arrangements immediately to ship six H-34 helicop-
ters which are not only most urgently needed fight VC effectively
but would reassure Diem we trying give effective help." (Ibid.,
Section 2 of 2, p. 2)

In the eyes of those who regarded Diem as the indispensable
kingpin of effective anti-communist policy in Vietnam, and thus a mutual
feeling of confidence and trust between Diem and the U.S. of paramount
importance, such a gesture seemed pitifully inadequate -- and, indeed,
Durbrow's continuing presence as Ambassador possibly counter-productive
-- in the situation prevailing after the attempted coup. For example,
another Lansdale memorandum:

65 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
