Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
TIT. D. 2. THE OUTCOME FOR THE WEST

1. U.K. Diplomacy is_an Unqualified Success
a. British Prestige is Heightened

The diplomacy of the Geneva Conference can be viewed as a
success for the co-chairmen -- the U.K. and the USSR. Although some
have described Chou En-lai as the most influential delegate at Geneva, 1/
and though Molotov rightfully has been credited with a key role in the
initiation of needed compromises, Anthony Eden's presence and leadership
made a difference in the results of the conference and in Britain's world
image. Eden repeatedly acted as an intermediary not only between the
Communists and the West, but also among the U.S., France, and the GVN
as well. He aided Molotov in seeing proposals for compromise through to
agreements, but he was also capable of espousing and maintaining unyield-
ing support for firm Western positions. In particular, he was able to
keep the Soviets convinced that the U.K. would be at the side of the
U.S. if Communist intransigence led to a stalemate at Geneva. One
specific pay-off for the U.K. was Peking's agreement on 17 June (after
four years of silence on the point) to exchange charges d'affaires with
London.

b. Danger of a Wider War is Averted

Tensions at Geneva were high. The Viet Minh was forcing the
initiative on the battlefield in Indochina, the French Government was
unstable, and at that time it seemed to many that all of strategic
Vietnam would fall into Communist hands. Convictions were strongly held
by many that that fall was inevitable unless the West took some united
military action, or unless the diplomacy of Geneva brought unsuspected
agreement. The danger of a wider war was very real. The U.K. wanted
to support France and the United States, but not at the price of British
troops and money. London's goal was to terminate the war and reduce
international tensions -- to do all this without acceding to a Communist
victory, and without adversely affecting British interests in that area
of the world. The U.K. maneged to steer a course close to its goals
despite the fact that the British public was against U.K. military
involvement in Indochina. In the end, Eden was able to help avert the
risks of a wider war and to bring the U.K. into SEATO -- presumably to
help protect British gains at Geneva.

2. For France, the Results are Better Than Expected
a. France is Extricated without Dishonor
The French, probably more than any other party to the conference,

had cause for satisfaction. With cooperation from the other major powers,
needless to say, the French found themselves a political beneficiary at

D-12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
