Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

. forces are allied with them, In addition, the generally inadequate
indigenous forces of the independent states are actively engaged
in attempting to maintain internal security in the face of Communist

ageression tactics,

5. It appears obvious from intelligence estimates that the
situation in Southeast Asia has deteriorated and, without United ©
States assistance, this deterioration will be accelerated, In
general, the basic conditions of political and economic stability
in this area, as well as the military and internal security con-
ditions, are unsatisfactory. These factors are closely inter-
related and it is probable that, from the long-term point of view,
political and economic stability is the controlling factor, On
the other, hand, the military situation in some areas, particularly
Indochina, is of pressing urgency. -

6,-..With respect to the measures which, from the United States
military point of view, might be taken to prevent Communist

expansion in Southeast Asia, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend

early implementation of military aid programs for Indochina,

Indonésia, Thailand, the Philippinés;~and Burma, Malaya might

also be included provided the British by their actions in the

areas in Asia where they have primary interest evince a deter-,.

mined effort to resist the expansion of communism and present ;
surficient military justification for aid. The effectiveness of
_ these military aid programs would be greatly increased by appro- :
priate public statements of United States policy in Southeast Asia, .

fe The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the military aid
from funds already allocated by the President for the states
of Southeast Asia be delivered at the earliest practicable date,
They further recommend that the presently unallocated portion
of the President's emergency fund under Section 303 of Public
Law 329 (81st Congress, 1st Session), be planned and programmed
as a matter of urgency.

8, Precise determination of the amounts required for military
aid, special covert operations, and concomitant economic and
psychological programs in Southeast Asia cannot be made at this
time since the financial requirements will, to a large extent,
depend on the success of aid and other programs now in the process
of implementation. In the light of the world situation, however,
it would appear that military aid programs and other measures will
be necessary in Southeast Asia at least during the next fiscal
yeur and‘in at least the same general over-all order of magnitude.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff, therefore, strongly recommend that
appropriations for over-all use in the general area of Asia be
sought for the next fiscal year in terms similar to those under
Section 303 of Public Law 329 (81st Congress, 1st Session). It
is bolicved that approximately $100,000,000 will be required for
the military portion of this program.

ay wT
