Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. Division of Far Eastern Affairs (FE) forwards
comments and suggested changes to HUR version of the
Memorandum on Indochina policy. FE recommends additions
to the BUR proposals as well as not opposing restoration
of Indochina to France, provided France gave adequate
assurances on five major points chiefly concerning Indo-
chinese independence. Memorandum by Mr. Stanton, FE,

POM EDGE) LL ADEE: LOUG y cies aisiacereieeleie cies ein neelte we eos Stein eeeree 9

ec. Mr. Donn feels that it is better to let the Indo-
china policy matter drift rather than base it on the FE
version of the Memorandum. Dunn message to Mr. Grew,
Under Secretary of State, 23 April 1945..... W Keahivc ene Sia Oe a ate LSet

d. ‘The final compromise Memorandum to the President
includes extracts from both the FE and EUR versions,
but does include mention that the U.S. would seel the
French views on the five points raised by FE. Memoran-
dum to the President, subject: American Policy with
Respect to Indochina, undated, not Sent..+++sre+e- mlenesueesa cownee 19

e. The draft cable,which was approved by all
Divisions concerned, requests French indication of in-
tensions (Gn TIVE POLNGSs 2 ceca cee see cose Mralpuscetaralay Bratgrony pedal” tte

(1) ‘Indochinese self-government within a French
Union.

(2) Economie and commercial non-discrimination.
(3) Haiphong as a free port.
(4) Recognition of an Indochins-Thei border.

' (5) International security arrangements for South-
east Asie. Unnumbered cable, 9 May 1945.

Assistant Secretary of War proposes "so far as practic-

able" the U.S. should avoid “unnecessary or long term"

commitments of assistance to French resistance forces

in Indochina. Memorandum, R.E. Cox, SWNCC, to Mr. Bon-

prient, WE, 2 Mey TONS. cos esse ces os os Bene ee eee SR orale ons 5 es

French Foreign Minister is informed by Stettinius at

San Francisco thet "the record is entirely innocent...

of this government questioning...French sovereignty over
Indochina.” Grew 1949 to Caffery, 9 May 1945..-.cecsecsesceee 27

Li TOP SECRET - Sensitive
