Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to occur in strength whenever there is danger either that the Viet Minh
will fail to attain its military objective of driving the French out of
Indochina, or that the Bao Dai Government is succeeding in undermining
the support of the Viet Minh." 21/ NIE 5 appeared on December 29, 1950.

Although the threat of intervention to be expected from Communist
China did not again reach this intensity or certainty during the remainder
of the war -- the estimated probability of intervention declined consistently
after the publication of NIE 5 -- estimates throughout the period indicate
continuing Communist Chinese provision of military arms, materiel, and
training to the Viet Minh, and the existence of Communist Chinese potential
for direct intervention. No direct reference was made to possible Viet
Minh resentment toward, or resistance to, direct Chinese intervention.

In sum, the U.S. perceived a major Chinese threat at the time
the decision to support France and the Associated States was made; a high
probability was assigned direct Chinese Communist intervention at the time
this decision was being confirmed; this assigned probability declined rapidly,
and it remained low through the post-Korean war period. It was believed
that the Chinese were providing assistance to the Viet Minh throughout
the period late 1949-195).

5- U.S. Perceptions of the Situation within Vietnam

On April 5, 1950, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, referring to intelli-
gence estimates, indicated to the Secretary of Defense their view that
"the situation in Southeast Asia has deteriorated," and that, further,
"without United States assistance, this deterioration will be accelerated." 22/
(The implication that U.S. assistance would result in improvement over and
above the present situation cannot be detected in this carefully worded
statement.) The Joint Chiefs of Staff went on to state that: "In general,
the basic conditions of political and economic stability in this area, as
well as the military and internal security conditions, are unsatisfactory.
These factors are closely interrelated, and it is probable that, from the
long-term point of view, political and economic stability is the controlling
factor. On the other hand, the military situation in some areas, particu-
larly Indochina, is of pressing urgency."

NIE 5 was the over-all U.S. assessment of the situation in Vietnam
closest in time to the U.S. decision to support the French and the Associated
States. It estimated the French position as "critically endangered by the
Viet Minh," and as "precarious." 23/ Combining the more detailed estimates
of this document with statements and estimates contained in other U.S. docu-
ments contemporary with NIE 5, the following picture emerges:

a. The Military Situation

(1) French-Viet Minh areas of control - see maps

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
