Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

SECRET

of the Indochina war, and French apprehen-
sions concerning eventual German rearma-
ment not only make them reluctant.to in-
crease the military establishment in Indo-
china but impel them to seek the early return
of French troops to Europe. The French
Government will therefore remain under
strong and increasing domestic pressure to
reduce its military commitment in Indo-
china. On the other hand, the French Goy-
ernment is under strong pressure to main-
‘tain its position in Indochina. There is still
considerable sentiment against abandoning
the heavy investment which France has
poured into Indochina. More important,
there is great reluctance to accept the ad-
verse effects on the cohesion of the French
Union and on French prestige as a world
power which would accompany the loss of
France’s position in Indochina. In these cir-
cumstances, we believe that the French will
continue without enthusiasm to maintain
their present levels of troop strength through
mid-1954 and will support the planned devel-
opment of the National Armies of the Asso-
ciated States. At the same time, France will
’ probably continue to seek maximum financial
and material assistance for the French Union
effort while resisting any measures which
would impair French pre-eminence among
the Associated States, including the making
of any commitments concerning the eventual
political status of the Associated States.

28. Political strength in Vietnam may grow
slightly during 1953 as progress is made
toward a stronger national army, as the Viet-
namese assume increasing governmental re-
sponsibilities, and as Premier Tami’s social
and political programs serve to decrease dis-
trust of French intentions. There will prob-
ably also be a growing understanding, and
fear, of the true Communist nature and pur-
pose of the Viet Minh. However, these de-
velopments will not bring about a significant
increase in Vietnamese will and ability to
resist the Viet Minh during the period of
i this estimate because the Vietnam leadership
‘cannot in this brief period overcome popular
| apathy and mobilize the energy and resources
Jof the people. Moreover, if events should

persuade Vietnam leaders that no progress
toward national independence is possible un-
der the French or that French Union forces
cannot defeat the Viet Minh, it is probable
that the political strength of Vietnam would
decline rapidly. Substantial Viet Minh mili-
tary victories in the Tonkin delta or else-
where in Indochina would also produce such a
decline.

29. In Cambodia, political stability is likely
to decline as the result of tension between the
monarchy, the politically divided people, and
the French colonial administration. Even if
French concessions to the King insure his
adherence to the French Union, unrest in
Cambodia or a Viet Minh penetration into
southern Laos might force the deployment of
strong French forces to Cambodia.

30. In Laos, political attitudes will be de-
termined almost entirely by military develop-
ments. The Laotians will probably remain
loyal to the French Union if they are de-
fended aggressively. They will not, however,
offer efiective resistance to Communist efforts
to consolidate political control if French
Union forces retreat from the country or if
the French Union forces defend only a few
strong points.

PROBABLE TRENDS IN VIET MINH AND
CHINESE COMMUNIST CAPABILITIES
AND COURSES OF ACTION

31. Viet Minh Canabilities and Probable
Courses of Action. Barring serious Viet Minh
military reverses, which could occur if Viet
Minh forces should overextend themselyes or
make frontal attacks on French Union strong
points, the Viet Minh regime will probably in-
crease its total strength slightly during the
period of this estimate. Viet Minh prestige
will be increased by their recent gains in Laos.
The organizational and administrative effec-
tiveness of the regime will probably continue
to increase with experience and Chinese Com-
munist guidance. The program of expropria-
tion and distribution of lands to tenants now
being carried out probably weakens the Viet
Minh appeal among some classes, but will

SECRET

o1
