Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

48. Address by Secretary Rusk at the Founder's Day Banquet of the
Boston University School of Public Communications at Boston,

Massachusetts on March 14, 1966, "Keeping Our Commitment to
Peace"; Department of State Bulletin, April 4, 1966, p. 515.

* * * .
",..-The lesson of World War II was that it was necessary to
organize and defend a peace--not merely to wish for it--and to ‘unite
our strength to maintain international peace and security.'

"Article 1 of the United Nations Charter is utterly fundamental
and, although some may think it old-fashioned to speak of it, I should
like to remind you of what it says:

"Po maintain international peace and security, and to that
end: to take effective collective measures for the prevention and
removal of threats to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of
aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by
peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and
international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes
or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace;...!

"Unhappily and tragically, the ink was not dry on the United Nations
Charter before it became fully apparent that Joseph Stalin had turned to
world revolution and a policy of aggressive militancy. The first major
issue before the Security Council was his attempt to keep Russian forces
in Iran. Then came guerrilla operations against Greece, pressure on
Turkey, the Berlin blockade, and the Korean aggression. These moves
led to defensive action by the free world and a number of mutual defense
treaties--the Rio Pact, NATO, the ANZUS treaty with Australia and New
Zealand, and bilateral treaties with the Philippines and Japan.

"Under President Eisenhower we concluded the Southeast Asia treaty,
which, by a protocol, committed us to help the three non-Communist states
of former French Indochina--South Viet-Nam, Laos, and Cambodia--to repel
armed attacks, if they asked for help. Under Eisenhower we also entered
mutual defense pacts with the Republic of Korea and the Republic of China
on Formosa.

"All of those commitments to oppose aggression--through the United
Nations and through our various defensive alliances--were approved by the
Senate by overwhelming majorities of both parties. And these and related
obligations have been sustained over the years by authorizations, appro-
priations, and other supporting measures enacted by bipartisan votes in
both Houses of Congress.

"THE BACKBONE OF WORLD PEACE

"I have read that I have drawn 'no distinction between powerful

*

D-75
