Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

",,.Serious officials -- both civilian and military --
realize there are limitations on how far an officer will go
in reporting 'negative' information, and how hard a civilian,
now his subordinate, will fight for realism.

",,..Officials today sought to mitigate the effect of the
announcement by saying that Komer and his staff, physically
located in the American Military Command in Saigon, will be
in a fer better position to influence the course of Pacifica-
tion than he would among 'all the guys with glasses and sack
suits' in the Office of Civil Operations.” 6/

The Vietnamese reaction to the reorganization was more difficult to
gauge. Ward Just, in the same story cited above, said "There was surpris-
ingly little comment today from South Vietnamese, who have seen so many
efforts at pacification and so many efforts to attempt to organize and
reorganize themselves. One high American who professed to have spoken
with the South Vietnamese command reported they are ‘delighted.'" But
Komer's talk with General Nguyen Duc Thang, the Minister for Construc-
tion (RD), did not reveal any delight on Thang's part. Indeed, Thang's
first reaction was that the GVN should emulate the U.S. and turn pacifi-
eation over to the Ministry of Defense -- an action which would have run
directly counter to the U.S. objective of encouraging civilian govern-
ment in Vietnan.

There is no telegraphic record of the first series of talks that
Komer and Bunker had with Ky, Thieu, Vien, and Thang on the reorgeniza-
tion. Not wntil a Komer-Ky talk of May 15 does the cable traffic reflect
the GVN reaction to the reorganization. By this time, it should be noted,
the GVN knew that the U.S, did not want the GVN to follow suit, and it
knew all our arguments and could play them back to us with ease;

"Ky said that General Thang had suggested that the RD
effort be brought under Defense Ministry to conform to the
U.S. reorganization. Ky and General Vien had demurred on
grounds that such a reorganization on the GVN side would be
far more complex than on U.S. side, would disrupt RD process,
and would stretch General Vien and MOD too thin. Besides it
would not be politically advisable at the very time when there
was a hopeful trend toward a more civilianized and representa-
tive government. Komer agreed with Ky-Vien reasoning..." 7/

. Bi
