Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

operations. Recruiting, it was agreed, was less a problem of organiza-
tion and method than it was a product of the limited manpower base and
competing agencies (including the Viet Cong). The plan to improve

_ MEDCAP was endorsed with enthusiasm, and it was agreed to experiment
with a "single manager” concept in three pilot provinces. Finally, the
proposed plan to distribute food to some RVNAF troops, an earlier ver-
sion of which had merely encouraged greater corruption, was quietly
deferred pending further study.

As a final note, the conferees considered the guidance which

. the Ambassador had prepared for himself in the event that more U.S. and
Third Country forces were to be committed in Vietnam. The text remained
essentially as Taylor had written it in his cable of 17 April. A few "
changes were made to reflect that the commitment was not limited to the
current proposed deployments and that the U.S. was anxious to seize the
initiative from the enemy. Taylor had said, "if the ground war is not to
drag into 1966 and even beyond." That phrase was changed to read, "if
the ground war is not to drag on indefinitely." 82/ [fmphasis addea/

The conferees appear to have realized not only that the forces they had
recommended be deployed to Vietnam might not be enough, but also that

it would be unwise to attempt to affix any time limit to the war.

The President received the Honolulu recommendations in a memo-
randum from Secretary McNamara on the 2lst of April. Noted therein, but
not recommended, were possible deployments of an Army Airmobile Division
and the remainder of the III MEF. 83/

The Honolulu Conference omitted to provide for reconstitution
of CINCPAC's airborne reserve after the deployment of the 173rd to Bien
Hoa-Vung Tau, largely because the designation and type of brigade which
was to go to that location had not been specified. That the 173rd would
go, however, was common knowledge and, indeed, had been recommended by
the PACOM-JCS planning conference on 10 April and abortively approved by
the.JCS on the llth. CINCPAC cabled the JCS on the 23rd to remind them
that the 173rd should be replaced by a CONUS brigade as soon as possible.84/

Discussion and refinement of the Honolulu proposals continued
on after the Conference. On 30 April, a JCSM summarized the planning
as the Chiefs saw it and presented a detailed program for the deployment
to Vietnam of some 48,000 U.S. and 5,250 Third Country forces, all of
which were listed as approved. Included were all the units mentioned
in the Honolulu recommendation plus a healthy support package. These
forces were, according to the JCS, to "bolster GVN forces during their
continued build-up, secure bases and installations, conduct counterin-
surgency combat operations in coordination with the RVNAF, and prepare
for the later introduction of an airmobile division to the central
lateau, the remainder of the III MEF to the Da Nang area, and the

remainder of a ROK division to Quang Ngai. Emphasis added/ Logistic

forces of all services were "to strengthen support of in-country forces,

78 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
