Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

then, the costs no doubt appeared much higher. In any event, it proved to
be unwilling to accept the implications of predictions for a bleak future.
The Administration hewed to the belief that if the U.S. be but willing to
exercise its power, it could ultimately always have its way in world affairs.

Nonetheless, in view of the widely divergent views of the principals
in Saigon, the Administration sought independent judgments with two successive
fact-finding missions. The first of these whirlwind inspections, by General
Victor Krulak, JCS SACSA, and a State Department Vietnam expert, Joseph
Mendenhall, from September 7-10, resulted in diametrically opposing reports
to the President on the conditions and situation and was, as a result, futile.
The Krulak~Mendenhall divergence was significant because it typifies the
deficient analysis of both the U.S. civilian and militery missions in Viet-
nam with respect to the overall political situation in the country. The
U.S. civilian observers, for their part, failed to fully appreciate the im-
pact Diem had had in preventing the emergence of any other political forces.
The Buddhists, while a cohesive and effective minority protest movement,
lacked @ program or the means to achieve power. The labor unions were
entirely urban-based and appealed to only a small segment of the population.
The clandestine political parties were small, urban, and usually elitist.
The religious sects had a narrow appeal and were based on ethnic minorities.
Only the Viet Cong had any real support and influence on a broad base in
the countryside. The only real alternative source of political power was
the Army since it had a large, disciplined organization spanning the country,
with an independent communications and transportation system and a strong
superiority to any other group in coercive power. In its reports on the
Army, however, General Harkins and the U.S. military had failed to appre-
ciate the deeply corrosive effect on internal allegiance and discipline
in the Army that Diem's loyalty based promotion and assignment policies
had had. They did not foresee that in the wake of a coup senior officers
would lack the cohesiveness to hang together and that the temptations of
power would promote a devisive internal competition among ambitious men
at the expense of the war against the Viet Cong.

Two weeks after the fruitless Krulak-Mendenhall mission, with the
Washington discussions still stalemated, it was the turn of Secretary
McNamara, and General Taylor, the Chairman of the JCS, to assess the problem.
They left for Vietnam on September 23 with the Presidential instruction
to appraise the condition of the war effort and the impact on it of the
Buddhist political turmoil and to recommend a course of action for the
GVN and the U.S. They returned to Washington on October 2. Their report
was @ somewhat contradictory compromise between the views of the civilian
and military staffs. It affirmed that the war was being won, and that it
would be successfully concluded in the first three corps areas by the end
of 1964, and in the Delta by 1965, thereby permitting the withdrawal of
American advisors, although it noted that the political tensions were start-
ing to have an adverse effect on it. But, more importantly, it recommended
a series of measures to coerce Diem into compliance with American wishes
that included a selective suspension of U.S. economic aid, an end to aid
for the special forces units used in the August 21 raids unless they were
subordinated to the Joint General Staff, and the continuation of Lodge's
cool official aloofness from the regime. It recommended the public

Vv TOP SECRET = Sensitive
