a,

¥e,
~~

“3

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

result." 88/ Quite similar language also appeared in the 26 August
memorandum.

Whether or not or in what form General Wheeler presented this pro-
posal to the assembled officials on 7 September is not indicated in the
documentary sources available. The JCS belief in the necessity of bombing
North Vietnam was discussed, as was some of their rationale. Made explicit,
for example, was their argument that there was no reason to delay the
bambing since (in their view) the situation in South Vietnam would only
become worse. 89/ That the idea of deliberately provoking a DRV reaction
was discussed in some form is indicated in a record of the consensus arrived
at in the discussions. 90/ However, the JCS were not the only officials
who favored such an idea. Assistant Secretary McNaughton’s “Plan of Action
(3 September 1964) also called for actions that "should be likely at some
point to provoke a military DRV response.” The latter, in turn, should be
likely to provide good grounds for us to escalate if we wished.” 91/

The principal confereees did not believe that deliberately provocative
actions should be undertaken "in the immediate future while the GVN is still
struggling to its feet." However, they apparently reached a consensus
that they might recommend such actions -- "depending on GVN progress and
Communist reaction in the meantime" -- by early October. o2/,

The reasons cited for their opposition to provocative acts were also
applied in rejecting proposals for an immediate bombing campaign. The
GVN was expected to be too weak for the United States to assume the "delib-
erate risks of escalation that would involve a major role for, or threat
to, South Vietnam." 93/ In the discussion, Mr. MeCone observed that
undertaking a sustained attack on the DRV would be very dangerous, due to
the weakness and unpredictability of the political base in South Vietnam.
Secretary Rusk stated the view that every means short of bombing must be
exhausted. Secretary McNamara affirmed his understanding that "we are not
acting more strongly because there is a clear hope of strengthening the ;
GVN." But he went on to urge that the way be kept open for stronger actions
even if the GVN did not improve or in the event the war were widened by :
the communists. It is interesting to note that the President asked speci-
fically, "Can we really strengthen the GVN?" gh/

Even though the principals did not accept the JCS proposal and appar-
ently did not agree with their assessment of the chances for improvement
in South Vietnam, they did indicate accord with the JCS sense of the
gravity of the U.S. predicament. In response to General Wheeler's state-
ments that "if the United States loses in South Vietnam, it will lose all
of Southeast Asia" and that its position throughout all of Asia would be
damaged, both McCone and Rusk indicated agreement. Ambassador Taylor
‘stated the view that the United States could not afford to let Ho Chi Minh -
win in South Vietnam. Secretary Rusk added the consideration that the
whole world doubted our ability to pull it off. 95/

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
