Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20! 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the GVN and the U.S. Mission. This absence caused prolifera-
tion of various armed and unarmed elements not clearly related
to each other. Seventh, a quantitative and qualitative lack
of trained and motivated manpower to carry out pacification
existed. In addition, insufficient emphasis has been given

to training and orientation of local officials associated
with the pacification program. Eighth, lack of a well de-
fined organizational structure in the U.S. Mission created
some confusion and conflicting direction of the pacifica-

tion effort...

"During 1965, military plans were developed to support
revolutionary development; national priority areas were
selected where special emphasis would be placed on revolu-
tionary development, and a structure was established by the
GVN extending an organizational framework for revolutionary
development from national to district levels. Meanwhile,
the U.S. Mission has begun action to centralize direction
for revolutionary development to ensure coordination of
all Mission activities in support of revolutionary develop-
ment.

"A new approach was also taken in 1965 to bring coher-
ence to the use of cadre in the pacification process. Draw-
ing on a concept of armed political action teams, whose
relative success locally was at least partly owing to direct
U.S. sponsorship and control, a combined cadre team approach
was developed. A new organization, the Revolutional Develop-
ment Cadre, was established, which brought together and re-
placed a number of disparate cadre organizations. The com-
bined cadre team approach includes armed units and special
skills of relating to and assisting the people. The combined
teams form the basis of the present pacification program.

"While these measures have helped to alleviate some of
the problem areas which previcusly frustrated pacification
efforts, some areas of major concern remain: First area
security where Revolutionary Development is being initiated
is not always adequate because of manpower problems; second,
continued existence of various overlapping security forces
further reduces effectiveness; third, approved pacification
concepts, roles, and missions agreed to by the U.S. and the
GVN are lacking; fourth, the effectiveness of the new RD
eadre teams remain to be tested and evaluated; fifth, exten-
sive training of local and other officials associated with
RD still must be accomplished; sixth, emphasis on rapid
expansion and the desire for immediate visible and stetisti-
eal progress would operate against lasting results; and,
seventh, organizational development and functioning on
poth the GVN and U.S. sides are as yet incomplete. 25/

% * x “% Bs

81 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
