Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Me help toward economic development that we provide these countries
is a means to forestall such crises. Our assistance is thus insurance
against rising tensions and increased dangers of war, and against defense
eosts that would skyrocket here at home should tragedy befall these strug-

gling peoples.

“These revolutionary developments in distant parts of the world are
borne on the crest of the wave sent out a century and a half ago by the
example of our own successful struggle for freedom. The determination of
the people of these nations to better their lot and to preserve their
newly gained liberty awakens memories of our own noblest traditions. Our
helping hand in their struggle is dictated by more than our own self-
interest. It is also a mirror of the character and highest ideals of the
people who have built and preserved this nation."

et

"In the many unstable regions of the world, Communist power is today
probing constantly. Every weakness of free nations is being exploited in
every possible way. It is inevitable that we shall have to deal with such
critical situations in the future. In America's own interest, we must
stand ready to furnish special assistance when threatened disaster abroad
foretells danger to our own vital concerns.”

—

21. Radio and Television Address to the American People on the Need for
Mutual Security in Waging the Peace, May 21, 1957, Public Papers
of the President--Eisenhower, 1957, p. 356.
* * x

"The common label of ‘foreign aid' is gravely misleading--for it
inspires a picture of bounty for foreign countries at the expense of our
own. No misconception could be further from reality. These programs
serve our own basic national and personal interests.

"They do this both immediately and lastingly.

"In the long term, the ending or the weakening of these programs
would vastly increase the risk of future war.

"And--in the immediate sense--it would impose upon us additional
defense expenditures many times greater than the cost of mutual security
today.

"This evening it is my purpose to give you incontestable proof of
these assertions.

B-33
