Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Neither Diem's GVN nor the U.S. knew a great deal about
the Viet Minh in the period 1954-1960. By 1967, however, new informa-
tion had begun to accumulate from interrogations of prisoners and
defectors, and captured documents. For example, in March, 1967, a
study was published of 23 Viet Minh who stayed behind during the regroup-
ment of 1954-1955. 126/ All the men of the sample told consistent
stories, and although an admittedly narrow basis for generalization, the
stories ring true. Upon departure, the Viet Minh leaders assigned some
of these stay-behinds active roles; others were simply told to return to
their homes as inactives, and wait for further instructions. It is quite
clear that even the activists were not instructed to organize units for
guerrilla war, but rather to agitate politically for the promised Geneva
elections, and the normalization of relations with the North. They drew
much reassurance from the presence of the ICC, and up until mid-1956, most
held on to the belief that the elections would take place. They were dis-
appointed in two respects: not only were the promised elections not held,
but the amnesty which had been assured by the Geneva Settlement was denied
them, and they were hounded by the Anti-Communist campaign. After 1956, for
the most part, they went "underground." They were uniformly outraged at
Diem's practices, particularly the recurrent GVN attempts to grade the
populace into lettered categories according to previous associations with
the Viet Minh. Most of them spoke of terror, brutality and torture by GVN
rural officials in carrying out the Communist Denunciation campaigns, and
of the arrest and slaying of thousands of old comrades from the "resistance."
Their venom was expended on these local officials, rather than on Diem, or
the central government, although they were prepared to hold Diem ultimately
responsible. A veteran who had been a Party member since 1936 characterized
the years 1955-1959 as the most difficult years of the entire revolution.

What these cadre did in those years is revealing. Only four
of the 23 were engaged in military tasks. Most spent their time in prepara-
tion for a future uprising, in careful recruitment in the villages -- con-
centrating on the very families with Viet Minh ties who were receiving
priority in the GVN's attentions -- and in constructing base areas in the
mountains or jungles. The Viet Minh activists sought out the inactives,
brought them back into the organization, and together they formed the
framework of an expanding and increasingly intricate network of intelligence
and propaganda. Few spoke of carrying weapons, or using violence before
1959, although many boasted of feats of arms in later years. They felt
that they lacked the right conditions to strike militarily before 1959;
. their mission was preparation. In several instances, the Viet Cong used
terror to recruit former Viet Minh for the new movement, threatening them
with “treason” and elimination; caught between the GVN and the VC, many
old Resistance members joined the "New Resistance." But most spoke of making
person-to-person persuasion to bring in new members for the movement,
relying mainly on two appeals: nationalism and social justice. They
stressed that the Americans had merely substituted a new, more pernicious
form of tyranny for that of the French, and that the My-Diem combine was
the antithesis of humane and honest government. One respondent summed up
this activity in these terms:

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
