Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the decision-making will be. I think this again argued for a CIA-only
paper at the outset, to be completed perhaps Ly next Wednesday night
[March 137." 43/

: A more complicated draft memo to CIA asking for a review
of various bombing alternatives was prepared at about the same time in
ISA, but apparently not sent. It contained twelve highly specific different
bombing alternatives, including three different bombing reduction or halt
options: (1) a concentration of bombing in Route Packages 1, 2 and 3 with
only 5% in the extreme north; (2) a complete halt over North Vietnam; and
(3) a complete halt over both North Vietnam and Laos. 44/ No particular
attention was focused on a partial halt, again indicating that knowledge
of the proposal was being restricted to the immediate circle of Presidential
advisors. Presumably the CIA did prepare a memo in response to Bundy's
request, but it does not appear in the available material.

Meanwhile, a separate set of escalatory options had been pro-
posed to Mr. Nitze by Air Force Secretary Brown on March lh in response to
the latter's February 28 request. 45/ Brown's view was that apart from
the various ground strategy alternatives, there were also a number of ways
the air war, both north and south, could be expanded to meet the changed
situation after Tet. The three alternatives he suggested were:

1. First, actions against North Vietnam could be intensi-
fied by bombing of remaining important targets, and/or neutraliza-
tion of the port of Haiphong by bombing and mining.

2. Second, air actions could be intensified in the
adjoining panhandle areas of Laos/NVN.

3. Third, a change to the basic strategy in SVN is
examined, in which increased air actions in SVN are sub-
stituted for increased ground forces. 46/

Brown appraised the relative advantages of the various proposed campaigns
in this way:

Intensification of air actions against NVN would be aimed
at forcing the enemy to the conference table or choking off
imports to NVN to an extent which would make their level of
effort in SVN insupportable. The second and third campaigns,
individually or together, are more limited in aim. It
appears likely that, given adequate sortie capability, the
greatest adverse effect on the enemy would result from a
plan which simultaneously employed all three campaigns. 47/

Under program #1, Brown envisaged the elimination of virtually all the
constraints under which the bombing then operated and an aggressive attack

182 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
