Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Government interprets /Under Secretary: of State/ Welles'
statement of 1942 concerning the restoration of French
sovereignty over the French BEupire as including Indo-
China, the press continues to imply that a special status
will be reserved for this colonial area. It was made quite
clear to Bidault that the record is entirely innocent of
any official statement of this government questioning, even
by implication, French sovereignty over Indo-China. Certain
elements of American public opinion, however, condemned
French governmental policies and practices in Indo-China.
Bidavlt seemed relieved and has no doubt cabled Paris that
he received renewed assurances of our recognition of French
sovereignty over that area." 20,

In early June 1945, the Department of State instructed the United
States Ambassador to China on the deliberations in progress within the
‘U.S. Government and its discussions with allies on U.S. policy toward
Indochina. He was informed that at San Francisco:

.",,.the American delegation has insisted upon the neces-
sity of providing for a progressive measure of self-govern-
ment for all dependent peoples looking toward their eventual
independence or incorporation in some form of federation
according to circumstances and the ability of the peoples
to assume these responsibilities. Such decisions would
preclude the establishment of a trusteeship in Indochina
except with the consent of the French Government. The latter
seems unlikely. Nevertheless it is the President's intention
at some appropriate time to ask that the French Government
give some positive indication of its intentions in regard to
the establishment of civil liberties and increasing measures
of self-government in Indochina before formulating further
declarations of policy in this respect." 2

The United Nations Charter (June 26, 1945) contained a "Declaration™
Regarding Non-Self-Governing Territories":

Article 73

"Members of the United Nations which have or assume respon-
sibilities for the administration of territories whose peoples
have not yet attained a full measure of self-government recog-
nize the principle that the interests of the inhabitants of
these territories are paramount, and accept as a sacred trust
the obligation to promote to the utmost, within the system of
international peace and security established by the present
Charter, the well-being of the inhabitants of these terri-
tories, and, to this end:

A-21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
