— a a a Se ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

found that the price of acceptance without leverage was the virtual
absence of influence. Robert Shaplen summarized this phenomenon in
& pessimistic 1965 evaluation of the U.S. advisory effort:

The advisory program, while it had been a tribute to
the politeness of both parties, had failed in its primary
aim of persuading the Vietnamese officers to get their
men out into the countryside and to stay there, if neces-
sary, day and night, for weeks on end in order to beat the
Communists at their own game. This view of the failure of
American efforts at persuasion was privately expressed to
me by most of the advisers I spoke with during my trip
through the vital plateau area, end it was reinforced by
whet advisers from other battle areas told me. ‘The con-
sensus was that the system was inherently anomalous and
unworkable in that it reflected the American predilection
for trying to get a difficult and probably impossible job
done in what a British friend of mine described as "your
typical nice American way." 17)1/

Having rejected proposals for a combined command (presumably under
U.S. leadership) and for the encadrement of U.S. troops with RVNAF
units, the U.S, was left -- in late 1965 -- with the continuing and
perplexing issue of whether or not to adopt the use of leverage in some
comprehensive and planned manner. Earlier decisions had been to avoid
the issue by side-stepping it. But the isolated occasions on which its
use had been attempted did little to substantiate the argument that
cries of neocolonialism were simply the price one had to pay for short
run effectiveness. Indeed, some backfires tended to have the opposite
effect. Ambassador Taylor, for instance, had had a disastrous experi-
ence in trying to use the U.S. decision to commence bombing North Vietnam
as a lever to get GVN reform in December 1964. The net outcome was a
violent reaction by General Khanh who very nearly had Taylor thrown
out of the country as personna non grata. In the end, it was Khanh who
went, but the political turmoil that this produced in the first months
of 1965, when the course of the war was taking a dramatic turn against
the GVN, convinced Taylor that such attempts should not be made again
at the national level.* It was at this time that the "troika sign-off"
was abandoned because of claims that it stifled GVN development. Then
in late 1965 USOM began to have second thoughts on the wisdom of aban-
doning control of its resources in the field and proposed a restoration
of the troika sign-off. The Mission Council endorsed the plan and had
already launched discussions with the GVN when the State Department
objected to the idea, insisting that it wovld undermine U.S. efforts
to make the Vietnamese more independent and effective. 175/ There
the matter died.

* See Task Force Paper, Evolution of the War: US/GVN Relations, 1963-67,

Part I, pp. 54-59.

93 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
