Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnamese Non-Performance and Sensitivity

Although population control statistics began to improve in 1966 and
continued to do so in the first half of 1967, and although this seemed
partly associated with the creation of the Ministry of Revolutionary Develop-
ment and with the emphasis on its programs, few suggested that this progress
could beheld if U.S. forces withdrew. The drumbeat of criticism from field
personnel, and the documented cases of non-performance on high-level matters,
made it clear that there was no real improvement in GVN performance. Corrup-
tion and inaction showed no signs of improvement; province chiefs and mili-
tary commanders singled out by U.S. advisers as urgently needing removal
were simply shuffled around, if moved at all, and often promoted. Increasing
traffic in the Port. of Saigon led to acute congestion problems, which GVN
failed to clear up or materially improve.

Moreover, on issues purportedly relating to sovereignty or "face," the,
Vietnamese continued to be quite sensitive, and the U.S. was afraid to inflame
this sensitivity. Both sides avoided many delicate topics. A prime example
is the lack of 4 bilateral treaty. The U.S. presence has always been based
on the Pentalateral Protocol of 1950, signed by France, the Bao Dai govern-
ment, Laos, Cambodia and the U.S., which gave U.S. advisers and officials
virtual diplomatic status--an arrangement reasonable back when there were
less than two hundred of them in all Indochine, but of dubious applicability
to the hundreds of thousands now there. This matter has cropped up from
time to time, as in the case of American civilians being tried for currency
violations in Vietnamese courts, where they were subject to extortion. Both
governments cooperated in smoothing things over after a momentary disagree-
ment over jurisdiction, and have avoided stirring things up.

Shared sensitivity (and legitimate concern for an independent RVNAF
role), closely related to the lack of a bilateral treaty, prevented any move
toward joint command and U.S. control of all military operations in Vietnam.
Both Westmoreland and the Vietnamese preferred to operate either separately
or in loosely coordinated joint operations. The Embassy looked the other
way from repressive police measures and political arrests unless these led
to embarrassing press stories; and when the Ambassador would raise this type
of issue with the GVN, it proved always to be touchy. Especially under Lodge,
the Embassy tried to protect GVN from the press and to help it build a
favorable image.

Vietnamese sensitivity sometimes led to open displays of anti-Americanism.
These displays reached a climax in the Struggle Movement crisis in the first
half of 1966, when the Buddhists openly accused the U.S. of helping GVN crush
them, and they sacked and burned the U.S. Consulate in Hue. Moreover, news-
papers reflecting officials views would occasionally publish stories expressing
fear of a U.S. sellout in negotiations, anger at U.S. intervention in Viet-
ramese affairs (as happened during the Chinh-Hunnicutt affair), and other
anti-American themes.

ae TOP SECRET - Sensitive :
