Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

It

TOP SECRET — Sensitive

RECOMMENDATIONS

In the light of the foregoing, the Secretary of State and the
Secretary of Defense recommend that:

1. We now take the decision to commit ourselves to the objective
of preventing the fall of South Viet-Nam to Communism and that, in
doing so, we recognize that the introduction of United States and other
SEATO forces may be necessary to achieve this objective. (However, if
it is necessary to commit outside forces to achieve the foregoing ob-
jective our decision to introduce United States forces should not be
contingent upon unanimous SEATO agreement thereto. )

2. The Department of Defense be prepared with plans for the use
of United States forces in South Viet-Nam under one or more of the fol-
lowing purposes:

(a) Use of a significant number of United States forces to
signify United States determination to defend South Viet-Nam and
to boost South Viet-Nam morale. ‘

(b>) Use of substantial United States forces to assist in
suppressing Viet Cong insurgency short of engaging in detailed
counter=guerriila operations but including relevant operations
in North Viet—Nam.

(c) Use of United States forces to deal with the situation
if there is organized Communist military intervention.

3. We immediately undertake the following actions in support of
the GVN:

(a) Provide increased air lift to the GVN forces, including
helicopters, light aviation, and transport aircraft, manned to
the extent necessary by United States uniformed personnel and
under United States operational control.

(b) Provide such additional equipment and United States uni-
formed personnel as may be necessary for air reconnaissance,
photography, instruction in and execution of air-ground support
techniques, and for special intelligence.

(c) Provide the GVN with small craft, including such United
States uniformed advisers and operating personnel as may be

necessary for quick and effective operations in effecting sur-
veillance and control over coastal waters and inland waterways.

129

TOP SECRET — Sensitive
