Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Senator Fulbright had launched his public hearings on Vietnam, and
on February 4 had subjected David Bell of AID to a nearly four-hour
grilling in the committee, That same day, the conference was announced.

The emphasis at Honolulu was clear from before the conference
started. In his press conference announcing the meeting, the President
said that he would take Secretary Freeman and Secretary Gardner, not
previously involved in Vietnam, as well as experts from their staffs.
Freeman would go on to Saigon, the President added “to explore and
inaugurate certain pacification programs in the fields of health,
education, and agriculture.” The President then added:

"We are going to emphasize, in every way we can, in
line with the very fine pronouncements that the Prime
Minister /Ky7 has made concerning his desires in the field
of education and health and agriculture. We want to be
sure that we have our best planning and our maximum effort
put into it. But we will, of course, go into the military
briefing very thoroughly..." 46/

Even before the conference began, there were early reactions from
the press to this emphasis. The New York Times editorialized on
February 6:

"Programs in health, education and agriculture of the
kind President Johnson evidently has in mind, can make an
important contribution. To combat the revolutionary idea
the Communists have set loose in Vietnam, a better idea is
needed. Vigorous social reform -- and particularly, land
reform, which has received little more than lip-service so
far -- could well be made the price of increased economic
aid, which is now to be doubled.

"But an effort to seek political 'victory' in South
Vietnam is likely to prove as fruitless as the long
attempt at military ‘victory.' A more limited and
realistic objective is essential." 47/

The conference itself, and its repercussions both in Washington
and Vietnam, will be discussed in a following section, so there is
little need to dwell on the pre-Honolulu period. In Saigon, where
the word of the conference barely preceded the departure of the
participants, the New York Times bureau chief wrote a perceptive
article which reflected thinking of many junivr and mid-level
officials in both the U.S. Mission and the GVN., The theme it stated
was not new then, and still has a very familiar ring today:

"| ,.There are now 230,000 to 250,000 pro-Commnist
troops in South Vietnam, including the Vietcong guerrillas

: 29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
