Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of French forces. In the meantime, the British withdrew from Cochinchina;
on 4 March 1946, the Allied Southeast Asia Command deactivated Indochina
as a territory within its purview. In February, the French deployed an
amphibious task force prepared for operations in North Vietnam. On

28 February, they obtained Chinese agreement (from Chunking, not the
Chinese satraps in North Vietnam) to turn over the occupation to France
by April. Ho Chi Minh, faced with French military power and Chinese with-
drawal, and denied succor from the United Nations or the U.S., had no re-
course save to negotiate with the French.

The Accord signed by Ho with the French on 6 March, 1946, taxed Ho's
popularity to the utmost. The VNQDD had vehemently opposed compromise, and
even negotiations with the French, but Ho was careful to bring. opposition
representatives into his talks with Sainteny, the French spokesman, and to
see ot it that the March 6 Accord was signed not only by Ho and Sainteny,
but also by Vu Kong Kanh, the leader of the VNQDD. Still, feeling ran
high against the French, and it took all of Ho's prestige to prevent re-
bellion against the Viet Minh. On 7 March, Ho and Vo Nguyen Giap defended
the Accord before a crowd of 100,000 in Hanoi, in which Ho assured his
people that: "You know that I would rather die than sell our country." 50/
On 8 March French troops landed in Haiphong, and re-entered Hanoi ten days
later.

Upon French return -- Ho's coalition cabinet and Vu Kong Kanh's signa-
ture on the March 6 Accord notwithstanding -- a number of VNQDD leaders
withdrew their support of Ho's government in protest against what they
termed a “pro-French" policy of the Viet Minh. The Emperor Bao Dai left
the country on 18 March, the day the French entered Hanoi. Ho, thereupon,
moved to merge the Viet Minh into a larger, more embrasive Front organiza-
tion, which would consolidate the several parties of the DRV, and thereby
ease political stress. On 27 May 1946, the formation of the Popular National
Front (Lien Hiep Quoe Dan Viet Nam) ~- subsequently known as the Lien Viet --
was announced, to bring about "independence and democracy." Prominent leaders
of all political parties were among the founders, and they jointly pledged
"to safeguard our autonomy, so as to later attain complete independence.” 51/
The Viet Minh, VNQDD, the Dong Minh Hoi, the Socialist Party and the Demo-
cratic Party were all roofed under the Lien Viet, but maintained separate
organizations.

(3) Chinese Withdrawal

Agreement among the several parties in the Lien Viet
lived, however, only so long as the Chinese remained in North Vietnam.
Despite Chungking's contract to withdraw by April,1946, the warlords
lingered at their looting into June. On June 10, 1946, Chinese Nationalist
troops evacuated Hanoi, and on June 15, the last detachments embarked at
Haiphong. On June 19, the official Lien Viet organ Qui Quoc published
a sharp rebuke of "reactionary saboteurs of the March agreement," pointedly
directed at the VNQDD. Reaffirming a policy of cooperation with France,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-L7
