Sa

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ee

rr

ce CEASy 2
02 Seu HE!
SECURITY LiVGs MATION NSC 116th Meeting _

i
f

5 March 1952

WISE
a G2 50 con ihise Aces Wea aee TSC 124)

STURIARY a %

A summa le es our present policy and of the pronosed policy contained
in NSC 124 is annexed, (fab A).

COMMENES OF THS JOTHT CHIEFS OF SBARF

Tae Joint Chiefs of Staff have submitted eight vages of comments,
including an Annex, which have veen circulated to the Council. The
primary points made by the JCS are;

le WSC 124 involves the making of a single, basic decision, which
is political in its nature, i.e., whether or not the United States would
be willing to tale military action which wovld in effect constitute war
against Communist-China to vrevent Southeast Asian from passing into the
Communist orpit. They prozose in effect that the NSC affirm this will-
ingness in order to provide the basis for deteruining the cost of the
courses of action in terns of men, money, material, impact on the U.Se
economy and. uwnon U.S. military assistance pected.

2. The JOS recort that their prelininary @iscussions with ti
Chiefs of Staff of the UX and France indicate that both are onnos
the concent of action against Commumist-China other than that limited
to the area of or apyroaches to the land battle in opposition to the
ageressor forces.

S$ Tae JCS believe that such limitations of the military action
would result in the action being defensive in character and at best
indecisive and indefinite in duration. They recommend solely from the
point of view of military operations that in order to offer a chance of
success military operations in defense against Chinese~Commmist invasion
of French Indochina, Thailand, and/or Bure, must be accompanied by mili-
tary action against the sources of that aggression, namely, Comnunist-
China itself. The JCS concede that this course of action might result
in a long war anc an expensive one, at least ietae! ol etae.s

4, The JOS therefore netst that the U.S, must be accorded free»
fon of action and if possivdle supsort in the undertakings of apnropriate
military action to include action against Communist-China itself. Fail-
ing such freedom of action, the U.S. should accant the nqssibility of
the loss of mainland Southeast Asia. The JCS oppose the use of U.S.
ground forces in SEA and onpose joining a combined military command of
the derense of those countries, i. 2 4 r ee dP rh sn a ee

on ey E
ade .
ec Sita. EP 2
iui Gin itis &
SUSITY HiFORUATIGH

Lic = BO?
