Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

d. Use a small number of US troops with South
Vietnamese forces in pacification, targetted
primarily on enemy provincial main force units.
Recognize that pacification is not the ultimate
answer--we have neither the time nor the manpower.
In any event, only the Vietnamese can make mean-
ingful pacification progress. The GVN should
therefore hold what it has and expand where possible.
Any progress will (1) discourage the enemy and
(2) deprive him of manpower.

e. We should stimulate a greater refugee flow through
psychological inducements to further decrease the
enemy's manpower base. Improve our ability to
handle the flow and win the refugees' loyalty.

f. Devote more attention to attacking the enemy
infrastructure. Consider giving MACV primary
responsibility for US efforts in this regard.

g. Use all the political pressure we have to keep
the GVN clean in its running of the elections.
Press for some form of international observation,
Play down the elections until they are held,
then exploit them and their winner (probably Ky)
in the international and domestic press.

h. After the elections, but prior to the Christmas-
Tet period, press hard for the GVN to open
negotiations with the NLF and for a meaningful
National Reconciliation program.

2. In the North--the object is to cut the North off from
the South as much as possible, and to shake Hanoi from its
obdurate position. Concentrate on shaking enemy morale in
both the South and North by limiting Hanoi's ability to
support the forces in South Viet-Nam.

a. A barrier, if it will work.... or

b. Concentrate bombing on lines of communication
throughout NVN, thus specifically concentrating
on infiltration but not running into the problems
we have had and will have with bombing oriented
towards "strategic" targets in the Hanoi/Haiphong
area. By continuing to bomb throughout NVN in
this manner we would indicate neither a lessening
of will nor undue impatience. 37/

188 | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
