Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

To meet this challenge successfully, troops must be maneu-
vered fully, deployed and redeployed as necessary. 2/

To demonstrate how completely the initiative changes on the sub:ject
of combined command, Saigon announced to Washington in mid-June its in-
tention within the next few days to conduct a backgrounder on command
relationships. 3/ A reply from the Secretary of Defense said,

As basis for Washington review of proposed Westmoreland -
backgrounder on command relationships and MACV organizational
structure, please furnish draft of text he will use... /

In late June, General Westmoreland was authorized by Washington to
"commit U.S. troops to combat, independent of or in conjunction with GV
forces in any situation in which use of such troops is requested by an
appropriate GV) commander and when, in COMUSMACY's judgment, their use
is necessary to strengthen the reletive position of GVN forces."5/

Premier Ky, obviously wishing to play down an issue sensitive to both
govermments, told Ambassador Taylor he saw no particular reason for any
drastic chenge from the previous practice of combat support. Im any speci-
fice situation, he said that command should be worked out in accordance
with "good sense and sound military principles." 6/ Additional deploy-
ments caused no problem, and indeed GVN now asked for more US/M forces
then could be deployed or were approved. But in response to a query,

Taylor waved aside any hope of using deployments for leverage. Discus~-
sions of combined command avoided joining issue and left matters unchanged. v/

Although Taylor's initial reaction to Ky was one of apprehension, he
was soon impressed by Ky's aggressive performance including his 26: point
program. He doubted Ky's ability to implement the program, but concluded
that military government was less likely to abandon the war effort and
thus should be supported. 8/

Barly in 1965, AID had decided to stop buying piasters for U.S.-con-
trolled sector funds, and in June agreed with the GVi) to change the province
procedures. iffective June 22, 1965, the Vietnamese Province Chief would
requisition and release AID commodities on his own authority, and all. sup-
porting funds came through regular GVi) channels. The new procedures
included elaborate reporting steps both when the U.S, advisers concurred
and when they nonconcurred with the Province Chief's actions. In practice,
the change reduced U.S. adviser's leverage. 9/

On July 1, Secretary McNamara submitted a memorandum to the President
reviewing all aspects of -Vietnam policy. However, he naturally concen-
trated on U.S. deployments, and had little to say on GVN's problems. In
a section titled, "Initiatives Inside Vietnam," his only significant

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
