Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

peace which they ardently desire," possibly with "irreparable injury
to Franco-American relations ...." 19/

e. Dulles Lists Objections

On 10 July these objections to Mendés-France's pleadings
were forcefully reised in a direct message to the French Premier from
the Secretary. Dulles stated that the presence of high-ranking Western
Big Three delegates at Geneva would be no "substitute for a clear agree-
ment on a joint position which includes agreement as to what will happen
if that position is not accepted by the Communists." Denying that a
true united front existed even with the seven-point memorandum, Dulles
went on to say that the seven points seemed to be "merely an optimum
solution" not only for the British, but equally for the French. He
cited French willingness to permit communist forces to remain in northern
Laos, to accept a demarcation line "considerably south of Donghoi," to
neutralize and demilitarize Laos and Cambodia, and to permit "elections
so early and so ill-prepared and ill-supervised as to risk the loss of
the entire area to Communism... ." These, said Dulles, were illustra-
tive of a "whittling-away process" which, cumulatively, could destroy
the intent of the seven points.

Thus, believing that the French had already gone far toward
nullifying some of the major provisions of the U.S.-U.K. memorandum,
Dulles reiterated the long-standing position that the U.S. had the right
"not to endorse a solution which would seem to us to impair seriously
certain principles which the U.S, believes must, as far as it is con-
cerned, be kept unimpaired, if our own struggle against Communism is to
be successfully pursued." Dulles added that a U.S. position that created
uncertainty in the minds of the enemy "might strengthen your hand more
than our presence at Geneva . . . ." 20

d. Dulles and Mendés-France Agree on the Seven Points

Mendés-France, in reply, stated that France would accept
nothing unacceptable to the U.S. 21/ Apparently, this move had some
effect on Dulles, for he flew to Paris for talks that resulted in a
Franco-American endorsement of the U.S.-U.K. memorandum, 22/ In
addition, Mendés-France and Dulles signed a position paper on the same
day (14 July) that reiterated the U.S. position at the conference as
"a friendly nation" whose role was subordinate to that of the primary
non-communist parties, the Associated States and France. This paper
went on to describe the seven points as those acceptable to the "pri-
marily interested nations" and as those which the U.S. could "respect."
However, should terms ultimately be concluded which differed markedly
from the seven points, the U.S. would neither be asked nor expected to
accept them, and "may publicly disassociate itself from such differing
terms." Dulles further obtained from the French certain assurances

A-40 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
