Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

are important if not decisive reinforcements. He has not seen
evidence of negative result of deployments to date, and does
not wish to wait any longer than is essential for genuine

GVN agreement,

President always intended these plans be reviewed with you
and approved by Quat before final execution, and we regret
i gta hae a> given by our messages in recent days.
Lf

The message stated that "highest authority" believed that, in addition
to the actions against the North, something new had to be added in the
South, to achieve victory.

le Experimental encadrement by U.S. forces of South Vietnamese
ground troops both to stiffen and increase their effectiveness and
also to add to their fire power. ‘Two approaches were to be carried
out concurrently, one involving integration of a substantial number
of U.S. combat personnel in each of several ARVN battalions, the
other involving the combined operation of approximately three addi -
tional Army/Marine battalions with three or more South Vietnamese
battalions for use in combat operations,

2. Introduction of a brigade force into the Bien Hoa-Vung Tau
area to act both as a security force for installations and to
participate in counterinsurgency combat operations.

3. Introduction of a battalion or milti-battalion forces into
three additional locations along the coast, such as Qui Nhon, The
purpose here would be to experiment further with using U.S. forces
in counterinsurgency role in addition to providing security for the
base,

In addition to these three steps, which were intended basically to
increase the military effectiveness of the counterguerrilla campaign, a
series of other steps was proposed. One was a substantial expansion of
the Vietnamese recruiting campaign using U.S. recruting experts, tech-
niques and procedures. A second was an experimental program to provide
expanded medical services to the countryside EE EEZ ANS, mobile dispensaries,

The next one -- and the one that caused considerable subsequent dis-
cussion -- was the experimental introduction into the provincial govern-
ment structure of a team of U.S. Army civil affairs personnel to assist
in the establishment of stable provincial administration and to initiate
and direct the necessary political, economic and security programs, It

116 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
