Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Westmoreland was convinced that there would be an enemy offen-
sive in the II Corps highlands sometime during the 1965 sumer monsoon.
_ If Allied forces weren't there to meet it, he was sure the highlands

would be lost to the DRV/VC forces, who would then proceed to establish
a front government there. Westmoreland expected this to happen if U.S.
and 3rd Country forces went into coastal enclaves in lieu of moving
directly into the interior.

CINCPAC expected the Airmobile Division to exhaust its supply
lines if it were to move directly inland. He was not convinced that it
could be supplied adequately by air as Westmoreland had suggested. The F
Ambassador expected the vc/DRV to try for another Dien Bien Phu if a
U.S, division were to go inland to the highlands.

Westmoreland expected U.S. troops to have an abrasive effect on
the Vietnamese population if they were in too close proximity to one
another. The Ambassador was inclined to agree with hin, but CINCPAC
expected U.S. and 3rd Country forces to concentrate their efforts in
areas where there were plenty of people, and he expected them to succeed.
The Ambassador was prepared to put up with the prospect of poor relations
between foreign troops and the Vietnamese in return for the low risk pros-
pects offered by the enclave strategy.

It is not at all clear that the JCS ever endorsed the enclave
strategy with any enthusiasm or that they expected much from it. From
analysis of their recommendations it seems that they strove constantly
to override the enclavists and get enough force into the country to do
some good. In their three-division plan, they derided those who wanted
to "merely keep pace” with the enemy or "slow dowm the rate” of his ad-
vance. The JCS said that to turn the tide of the war required "an objec- |
tive of destroying the vc." 174/ The only way to win was to provide
enough force to both stem the tide and assume the offensive. They
recommended three divisions to accomplish the latter. The enclave
strategists advocated neither the objective nor the amount of force.

Probably the last enclavist to be heard during the build-up
debate was William Bundy. His "A Middle Way Course of Action in South
Vietnam" memorandum was submitted to the President on the lst of July.
Bundy expected 18 battalions and 85,000 men operating in conservative
fashion from coastal enclaves to be enough to hold the whole facade
together while the U.S. made concerted efforts to shore up Southeast
Asia and extricate itself honorably from South Vietnam. He did not
expect a victory from such a move, but he did not expect a loss either.

The reaction of the intelligence community to the enclave
strategy was consistently less than optimistic. Immediately following
the NSC meetings of the lst of April, CIA Director McCone circulated a
memorandum in which he argued that changing the mission of U.S. troops
in Vietnam to offensive operations would merely lead to requests for

aISES TOP SECREL - Sensitive
