Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

army -~ conventionally organized, trained, and equipped -~ which had

been created under different circumstances and for different purposes.

One is forced to wonder, if Vietnamese institutions are as difficult to
remould as their American counterparts, whether the later advisory

effort was not faced from its inception with an almost insurmountable task.

THE EARLY MAAG AND THE RQUIPMENT RECOVERY MISSION

The number of U.S. advisors to the fledgling Republic of Vietnam
Armed Forces (RVNAF) were, as already indicated, limited by the Geneva
Accords. Article 16 of the Accords limited military personnel in Vietnam
to the number present at the time the Accords were signed. The magic
number was 342. The U.S. MAAG Chief, General O'Daniel, complained that
he needed twice this number to train the new RVNAIF and to oversee the
redistribution of U.S. equipment already in RVN as a result of U.S,
support for the French during the war just ended. 10/ The eventual out~
pate when it was learned informally that the Indian Government would

nstruct its representative on the ICC to interpose no objection, was
the creation of the Temporary Equipment Recovery Mission (TERM) with 350
military personnel. TERM served as the principal manager for the redis-
tribution of equipment, assisted in developing RVNAF's enbryonic logistical
support system, and provided a convenient cover for a larger intelligence
effort. 11/

This combined administrative-advisory force remained stable in size
during the period prior to 1961. American military advisors were located
physically at only a very few locations in RVN. They were notable by
their absence in field wnits. ‘The U.S. effort was concentrated in training
centers and in Saigon. In the former it was largely technical; in the
datter it consisted primarily of attempts to persuade GVN to adopt measures
recommended by the U.S, advisory group. It was essentially an attempt to
give advice from the top. This does not mean that the question of leverage
was never considered; it was. Early in our involvement, in January 1955,
the JCS laid out available U.S. courses of action in South Vietnam and
urged that a decision be made at "the highest level" to indicate which of
these should be followed:

a. To continue aid to South Vietnam as currently being
developed with the cooperation of the French and Vietnamese.

b. To institute a unileteral program of direct guidance
to the Vietnamese government through an "advisor" system.
Under this course of action, the amount of U.S. aid should be
dependent wpon Vietnamese adherence to U.S. direction.

c. In the event the courses of action in a and b above
are not sufficient to insure retention of South Vietnam to the

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
