Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

MAAG Comments:

The military requirement for this force inerease to
accomplish the current mission had been demonstrated in
MAAG considered opinion as early as August 1960. This
force increase was badly needed before the peginning of the
Soviet airlift in laos. The recent Viet Minh overt aggression
against Laos merely reinforces this requirement.

The four divisions in the North in I and II Corps Areas
are committed in anti-guerrilla and static guard duty to the
extent which not only cuts down on their ability to resist
overt attack, and thus magnifies the risk to a militarily
unacceptable degree, but also prohibits required training to
adequately counter either external or internal aggression.

But otherwise, the CIP represented agreement on what the problem was
in Vietnam, and what steps were necessary to solve it:

"I. SITUATION...

Developments in South Viet-Nam over the past year
indicate a trend that is adverse to the stability and
effectiveness of President Diem's government. Beginning in
December 1959 and continuing to the present, there has been
a mounting increase throughout South Vietnam of Viet Cong
terrorist activities and guerrilla warfare- += >

Politically, discontent with the Diem Government has
been prevalent for some time among intellectuals and elite
circles and has been rising among the peasantry and, to some
extent, labor and urban business groups. Criticism of these
elements focuses on Ngo family rule, especially the roles of
the President's brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, and Madame Nhu and the
influence of the clandestine Can Lao political apparatus of
the regime. An even more important element in the political
situation is the criticism of the President's Jeadership within
government circles, including the official bureaucracy and the
military. In the past, such discontent and criticism had been
centered on Diem's brothers, Ngo Dinh Nhu and Ngo Dinh Can, as
directors of the allegedly corrupt Can Iao Party.

Further aggravating many of the government's problems
is the active and partly successful campaign of the Viet Cong
to discredit President Diem and weaken the government's
authority through political subversion, 4s well as through
military action. Among other factors making this possible is

87 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
