Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

with his counterpart. The natural tendency of the US professional soldier
was toward immediate reaction. He expected the same in others, but it was
necessary to temper counterpart relationships with patience and restraint.

General Westmoreland affirmed this view in his remarks at a confer-
ence of his senior subordinate commanders.

In order for ARVN to be successful, a re-education process
is necessary, from the generals on down...The attitude of the
soldiers toward the people frequently is poor....We must do all
we can toward to change this...

.-.In conduct of operations in support of Revolutionary
Development, we will frequently have units buddy up with ARV
units...A word on command relations in these combined opera-
tions is appropriate. We have had great success with our
cooperative efforts in the past. We should establish a proper
relationship from a technical command standpoint. Proper types
of missions are general suoport and direct support. When con-
ducting operations where we have the preponderance of forces
committed...their association will be in direct support or
general support of our operations. - This is good militery
terminology and quite proper for us here. General Vien agrees
in this terminology. 36/

Sometimes ARVN was not receptive to advice. In November, recognizing
the validity of a recommendation from the Corps Advisor that an additional
battalion be activated in the ARVN 23d Battalion, COMUSMACV suggested this
to JGS. Inactivation of a marginally effective battalion in another
division was suggested as compensation. Chief JGS, for reasons of his
own, declined to authorize the 23d Division to have an additional battalion,

Still, the effort moved forward. Training of RD Mobile Training Teams
from each ARVF Division was conducted in December. The actual conversion
training of divisions started in early 1967, and a similar program for
RF/PF was planned. In fact, planning was viewed as the surest sign of
progress. The 1967 Combined Campaign Plan was ceremoniously signed by
Generals Westmoreland and Vien on December 8. Its significant innovations
were requirements for subordinate commands to prepare supporting plans and
for quarterly reviews to maintain the plan's viability. 37/

8. Constitution-Writing in January, 1967

#

Progress within the Constituent Assembly and preliminary jockeying
over the new constitution were persistent concerns during the first
quarter of 1967.

At times the Assembly seemed remarkably independent. It publicly
fought against a law which gave the military junta the right to over-rule

h3 . OP SECRET - Sensitive
