Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C. President Diem

Ngo Dinh Diem's perspective and expectations were the most
different of all. U.S. groups differed in dregre; Diem's expectations were
different in kind. He wanted, first of all, to obtain unequivocal U.S.
support, not just to his nation but to his administration. It was essential,
in his eyes, that this support not compromise his authority or Vietnamese
sovereignty. He did not want to give credence to communist claims that
he was a puppet of the U.S., on one hand, or concentrate the coercive in-
struments of power in the hand of potential antagonists, on the other.

A revealing assessment of Diem's frame of mind is provided by
Ambassador Nolting. Diem invited increased U.S. aid and U.S. participa-
tion because he feared that, especially with an impending settlement in
Laos, South Vietnam would come under increasing communist pressures.

If Diem's government could not win over these pressures -- and Diem feared
it could not -- it had only the choice of going down fighting or of being
overthrown by @ coup. Thus, in requesting additional U.S. help, Diem had
“adopted an expedient which runs ageinst his own convictions, and he is
apparently willing to accept the attendant diminution of his own stature
-as an independent and self-reliant national leader." 67/

But when Ambassador Nolting presented to Diem the U.S. guid pro
quo for its "limited partnership," this apparent acceptance of decreased
stature and independence suddenly sesmed less apparent. 68/ Then, as
Nolting reported, President Diem feared the reaction even among his own
cabinet aides. 69/ Secretary Thuan, in whom Diem did confide, said that
the President was brooding over the fact that the U.S. was asking great
concessions of GVN in the realm of its sovereignty in exchange for little
additional help. 70/ Diem argued that U.S. influence over his govern-
ment, once it was known, would play directly into the communists' hands.
The first priority task, he added, was to give the people security, not
to make the government more popular. To try it the other way around was
to place the cart before the horse. Ty

Diem saw himself caught in a dilemma in which he was doomed if he
did not get outside assistance and doomed if he got it only at the price
of surrendering his independence. To him the trick was to get the U.S.
committed without surrendering his independence. One possible solution
lay in getting U.S. material aid for a program that would be almost wholly
GVN-implemented. The strategic hamlet program offered a convenient vehi-
cle for this purpose and one which was also appealing for other reasons.
It put achieving security before winning loyalty -- in an operational con-
text in which it was difficult to differentiate between security for the
rural populace and control of thet populace, since many of the actions
to achieve one were almost identical to the acts to realize the other.

D. The Central Issue

The U.S., for its part, was asking Diem to forego independence by
accepting the wisdom of the American recommendations for reform. The

ig: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
