Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

would participate with the national reserve battalions in
operations against VC main force units in order to engender
the buildup of an offensive spirit within the RVNAF.

b- US and Allied forces would oceupy and secure
bases at which their major items of heavy equipment, such as
aircraft, would be stationed. Thereafter they would operate
in coordination with the RVNAF reserve battalions to seek out
and destroy major Viet Cong units, bases and other facilities.
individual units would rotate between security tasks and
mobile offensive operations. Secure base areas would be
expanded by deep patrolling.

The JCS Study Group estimated that this strategy would have the following
results;

Military operations in SVN. Presently organized and
planned GVN forces, except for reserve battalions (possibly

including a limited number of ranger and infantry battalions),
would retain control over areas now held, extend pacification
operations and area control where permitted by the progress of
major offensive operations, defend critical installations and
areas against VC attack and seek out and eliminate VC militia
units. US, SVN, and Third-Country forces, by offensive land
and air action, would locate and destroy vc/DRV forces, bases
and major war-supporting organizations in SVN. The cumulative
effect of sustained, aggressive conduct of offensive operations,
coupled with the interdiction of DRV efforts to provide the
higher level of support required in such a combat environment,
should lead to progressive destruction of the VC/DRV main force
battalions. ng

As can be seen, the strategy was essentially that which has governed the
conduct of the war ever since. However, it did not take escalatory re-
actions into account nor did it address the problems of pacification or
rural development.

The strategic concept which the JCS developed was predicated on their
estimate of what strength was available to the Viet Cong and North Viet-
namese, and on their judgment about what the enemy was trying to do with
his forces. The estimate of enemy strength given in the Study Group's
1+ July 1965 report was that the Viet Cong organized combat units con-
Sisted of 10 regimental headquarters, 65 battalions, 188 companies, for
a total strength of approximately 48,500. The 101st Regiment, 325th PAVN
Division, with its subordinate battalions, is included in this total. In
addition, 17,600 personnel were considered to be engaged in combat support
type operations. At that time, the Viet Cong were continuing to expand
their control in rural areas and had succeeded in isolating several pro-
vineial and district towns from the bulk of the rural population. Their

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
