Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

hk. Lodge on the Use of U.S. Troops in Pacification:

"The presence of American troops does provide the oppor-
tunity for thorough pacification of the areas in which they are
stationed and full advantage should be taken of this oppor-
tunity. It is a very big dividend from our investment of men
and money. For example, the Third Marine. Division has scored
impressive successes north, south, and west of Da Nang...If
our American troops can emulate this performance (of the proto-
CAC units) of 60 Americans and 150 Vietnamese, we ought to get
a tremendous amount of small unit nighttime effective pacifica-
tion, and we would be neglecting an opportunity not to use
fmerican troops for this purpose, thereby pacifying the country
and transforming the ARVN, making it into a much more vital and
effective element of Vietnamese society, able at some not too
remote date to carry on by themselves without outside help...
We are already discussing with the Vietnamese the possibility
of singling out areas that look like good prospects, that are
potentially pretty much over on our side, and then pacifying
them so as to get a little smell of across-the-board success in
the air...I am not ready to say, "What areas would be chosen
for pacification, when should the plan be started, what objectives
would be best,’ but hope to be able to do so soon, I am now
encouraging General Ky to concentrate GVN efforts and enthusiasm
on pacification so that this can have sustained, wholehearted
GVN participation...Development of popular electoral processes
is part of all our current planning for counter subversion/
terrorism in 'rural construction (pacification)'." 2k/

COMMENT: Here, for the first time, Lodge addresses a key point: the
Yole of U.S. troops on pacification. The whole concept of the use of
U.S..troops was being worked out during this period (see following
section on Marines), and Lodge now began to weigh in with qualified
support for the Marine approach, based on an overly optimistic view of
the situation.

5. lLansdale's Weekly Report, October 4, 1965:

"Past week devoted to getting GVN into sound start again
on pacification program...U.S. Mission Liaison Group shaping
up into realistic instrument for working level teamwork on
pacification by all U.S. Missions..." 25/

COMMENT: Lansdale was responding to the direction given him by Lodge.

6. Lodge on the GVN's Attitude Towards Pacification:

"During my talk with General Co, the deputy Prime Minister
in charge of six ministries, I was impressed by the amount of

13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
