Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in successfully prosecuting the war through the implementation of the
Navarre Plan. The result of this was that the encouragement and support
of the non-communist nationalist governments in the Associated States was
almost inadvertently given lower priority. The United States was reluctant
to press the French too strongly on taking measures to foster Vietnam
nationalism because of its overriding interest in halting the potential
sweep of communism through Southeast Asia. Moreover, it was easier to
develop a policy for dealing with the external threat of intervention
than to meet the internal threat of subversion, or the even more difficult
process of finding and sustaining a genuine nationalist alternative to

the Viet Minh.

b. The "domino theory" and the assumptions behind it were never
questioned. The homogeneity of the nations of Southeast Asia was taken
as a given, as was the linkage in their ability to remain democratic, or
at an acceptable minimum, non-communist, nations. Undoubtedly, in the
first decade of the cold war there existed an unfortunate stereotype of
a monolithic communist expansionary bloc. It was reinforced by a somewhat
emotional approach on the part of many Americans to communism in China
and Asia. This “syndrome” was, in part, the result of the "fall" of China,
which some felt could have been averted, and a few hoped. would still be
reversed.

Accordingly, not sufficient cognizance was taken of the in-
dividuality of the states of Southeast Asia and the separateness of their
societies. Probably there was some lack of knowledge in depth on the part
of Washington policy-makers about the area. No one before World War II
had expected that the United States would be called upon to take a position
of leadership in these remote colonial territories of our European allies.

In hindsight, these shortcomings may have led to the fallacious belief

that a neutralist or communist Indochina would inevitably draw the other
states of Asia into the communist bloc or into neutralism. But the "fallacy"
was neither evident then, nor is it demonstrable now in retrospect.

A-52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
