Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Chapter III - A Seven Nation Conference, Legitimate Government
and High Hopes for the Future, October 1906 - September 1967

1. The Menila Conference, October 1966

In the first week of October, just as planning was beginning for a’
seven-nation conference at Manila on Southeast Asia, latent mistrust
between Southerners and Northerners in Ky's cabinet broke into an open
split. A Northerner persuaded Colonel Loan, the Police Director, to
arrest one of the Southerners, and although Loan released him on Ky's
-order a few hours later, six Southerners took it as an affront to all
of them and threatened to resign from the cabinet. While conference
planning was going forward, the crisis simmered on for almost three
weeks, up to the eve of the conference. Lodge tried to mediate, but the
six proved difficult to mollify; he conjectured that they were trying to
get all the mileage they could out of the embarrassment the crisis would
cause Thieu and Ky if it were not resolved before the conference. It was
patched up at the last minute. 1/

In preparing for the conference, Lodge was particularly concerned
that Ky or Thieu, if put in the limelight through the opening speech to
the conference, should avoid embarrassing the USG:

One crucial factor must be degree to which you believe
they can be persuaded to make constructive and reason-
able speech, avoiding talk of invasion of the North or
any other subjects thet put us openly at variance with
each other...We hope that the GVN can delegate Tran Van
Do and Bui Diem as its drafting representatives so that
even before they arrive in Manila we would be a long
way toward common agreement on the kinds of language
we need. 2/

The USG was also concerned that GVN should announce a broad and ettrac-
tive program thet would put a good face on itself and its prosecution of
the war: ;

We welcome your news that Tran Van Do and Bai Diem will
arrive Manila October 21...

Since this gives us at least a solid day, the 22d, to
refine drafts, we are inclined here not repeat not to
ask you to work with GVN on detailed submissions...
Rather and absolutely vital to favorable conference
result, we believe you should be working with Ky to get
his concurrence on the following list of action areas
in which we believe forthcoming statement by GVN is not
only wise in itself, but essential to US strong and suc-
cessful public statement from the conference,

=i 34 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
