Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

REI

POST-TONKIN POLICY ASSESSMENTS

The Tonkin Gulf incidents were important not only because of
what they enabled the United States to do in response -- but also
because of the way what was done began to be regarded by policy-
makers. The fact that U.S. forces had responded to hostile acts by
making direct attacks on North Vietnam, albeit limited ones under
unique circumstances, had rather significant impacts on the Adminis-
tration's policy judgments. These impacts appeared as it became
increasingly evident that the United States actually had fewer options
than it once believed available.

DILEMMAS IN LAOS

One of the areas where the Administration first saw its freedom
of action being impaired was Iaos.

Prior to the events in Tonkin Gulf, the situation in Laos had
become increasingly complex, thus making U.S. policy choices increasingly
delicate. Since the end of May, U.S. hopes for a stabilized Laos had
been based largely on a Polish proposal to convene a preliminary con-
ference among six nations. he / Particularly promising was the Soviet
Union's willingness to support the proposal. Toward the end of June,
as the Laotian government warned of the imminent threat of a major
communist offensive near Muong Soui, the Soviet Union asked Great
Britain to postpone efforts toward such a conference, and the Poles
seemed to back away from their original initiative. On 25 July the
Soviet Union announced her return to the 14-Nation formula, and threatened
to resign her co-chairman role if a conference were not called. 48/ The
Soviet threat to withdraw from the international machinery that is basic
to the neutralist Lactian government's claim to legitimacy was a matter
of considerable mutual concern in Vientiane and Washington. 49

One of the major reasons for U.S. support of the Polish 6-Nation
preliminary conference was its value in forestalling pressure for a
Geneva-type meeting. It was hoped that such a conference could be pro-
longed well into the autumn to give the political and military situation
in South Vietnam time to be improved, and to build a more favorable
political climate for an eventual 14-Nation conference on Laos. The
latter could be accomplished, it was hoped, by: (1) demonstrating the
extent of communist responsibility for Iaotian instability; (2) getting
the I.C.C. to function more effectively; (3) strengthening international
backing for Souvanna's position; and (4) thereby obtaining support for
his insistence on Pathet Lao withdrawal from the Plaine des Jarres as a
precondition for a new Geneva settlement. 50/ insofar as [aos was
concerned, the United States recognized that a new conference was probably
desirable, as long as it did not oceur too soon. However, it also recog-
nized the suspicion with which the GVN would regard any kind of negotiations

. 16 TOP SHCRMIT - Sensitive
