Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

without fanfare. An ebortive Buddhist "peace" movement died away, and re-
ligious groups generally laid low. u/

Following a State message expressing renewed concern, the USOM
resumed meetings with the Vietnamese Internal Security Council (an enlarge-
ment of its old NSC) on February 27 to discuss pacification.

"It was agreed that both sides would prepare joint pro-
posals for accelerating pacification and for solving manpower
problems and go forward together in program for effective
execution of agreed programs."

At a March 13 meeting, General Thang gave a "pessimistic but realistic"
account of Binh Dinh Province, and Quat said measures would be taken to
prevent the situation from spreading. The USG and GVN reverted to the
pattern of a year earlier of urging and advice politely received. 5/

Throughout early 1965, it was evident that Pacification plans
were failing. Even Hop Tac was at a standstill. When a stop gap alloca-
tion of 3 million piasters per province was made, pending release of regu-
lar funds, province chiefs were reluctant to spend the funds. They wanted
specific authority and direction from higher authorities. "

Planning continued unabated between MACV and GVN. Development
of a revised budget began on March 6, 1965, when guidelines for budget
preparation were furnished the RVN Ministry of Defense. The proposed
revision was duly received from RVN. 6/

On March 24, Ambassador Taylor formulated a 41-point program for
stability and pacification in preparation for a trip to Washington. ‘This
program, without any hint of leverage on GVN, in fact put pacification
on the back burner, while main attention focused on bombing and deploy-
ments.

In April 1965, General "Little" Minh, Minister of Armed Forces,
directed I, II, and IV Corps commanders to develop Hop Tac plans for their
areas. ‘the delay between the COMUSMACV memorandum of the previous Decem-
ber that recommended the extension and the order itself is not explained,
put in May the Vietnamese indicated to the U.S. Ambassador their dissatis-
faction with the Hop Tac program. The Vietnamese wanted to make Region A
of the Hop Tac area, part of the Capital Military Region and the remaining
regions part of the III Corps Commander's area of responsibility. COMUS-
MACV told the mission council that the Hop Tac organization should be
retained for the foreseeable future because Hop Tac had been unique in
providing a8 forum for military end civil authorities to address common
problems.

Quiet consultation continued on the evaluation of Vietnamese
counterparts in the provinces, on Third Country Forces, on military and
paramilitary psy, and so on. Following Taylor's return from Washington
early in April, he presented his pacification ideas (now having the stamp
of President Johnson's approval), and discreetly got approval for the

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
