NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

obligations of Article IV only in respect to Communist aggression.
For this reason, the United States attached an ‘understanding'

to the Treaty in this sense. All other participants accepted the
Treaty with the U.S. ‘understanding.'” 33/

In the "understanding" the U.S. further complicated the matter by changing
"aggression by means of armed attack" of ArticleIV to "aggression and armed
attack"; in the same sentence, the understanding uses "aggression or armed
attack" to refer to paragraph 2 of ArticleIV, which in fact is worded
"threatened in any way other than by armed attack." The admixture of terms
accentuates one of the major difficulties of the alliance: the governments
of the SEATO treaty area were threatened by a complicated variety of destruc-

’ tive movements that might be called aggression against a member state.

The appellation could be fitted in anywhere between "armed attack" and
"fact or situation which might endanger the peace." The U.S. insistence on
this point of "understanding" was probably superfluous. The latitude that
the U.S. wanted already was built into the treaty, in Article IV. The
emphatic nature of such an appendix to the treaty may have been calculated
as a way to call the attention of the world to a powerful U.S. stand against
further encroachments of communism. Such a call would have been consistent
with the U.S. feeling of a necessity to re-establish a psychological posi-
tion in the face of the "defeats" of Geneva. Nevertheless, the confirma-
tion of U.S, single-mindedness that made a communist threat the only valid
call for immediate response narrowed SEATO at its inception.

h. The Vietnam-Laos-Cambodia Protocol

The final item of the SEATO Treaty is a "protocol," which
states unanimous agreement among the members to include Cambodia, Laos,
and "the free territory under the jurisdiction of the State of Vietnam"
under the protection of Articles III and IV of the Treaty. In other words,
these countries, without actually becoming members of the pact, would be
entitled to "economic measures including technical assistance" and also
to defense against any attack, overt or not, from without or within. The
U.S. had wanted to include these countries in SEATO, but membership might
have seemed legally a contravention of the Geneva Agreements. At Geneva,
laos had not signed any agreement prejudicial to such a pact, but the
Isotian Government, on the final day of that conference, had made the
following declaration:

"The Royal Government of Laos will never join in any agree-
ment with other states if this agreement includes the obligation
for the Royal Government of Laos to participate in a military
alliance not in conformity with the principles of the United
Nations or with the principles of the /Geneva/ Agreement on
the Cessation of Hostilities..." 3h/

South Vietnam, on the other hand, was coextensive with one of the "zones"
described in Article 19 of the armistice, which specifies:

A-21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
