77

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ourselves militarily in Laos, depending instead upon this neutralist
government?

"As Because the situations are different. That's why the remedy has
been different. We have had a commitment for a good many years to the
integrity of South Vietnem. We are anxious to maintain the neutrality of
Leos. It may not be possible to do so and it may be necessary to seek
other remedies. But ye have adopted what we considered to be, considering
the geogravhy, the history, the nature of the threat and the alternate  —
solution -- we've adopted for each country what we regarded as the best
strategy. And we'll have to wait and see what happens on them.”

x* FF

33. Secret Rusk's Address Before the Economic Club of New York, at
New York, April 22, 1963. "The Steke in Viet-Nam,” Department of
State Bulletin, May 13, 1963, p. 727:

¥°  # *

"“Viet-Nam is a narrow strip along the South China Sea, nearly as large
as California, with a population of some 30 million people -- about 16 mil-
lion in the North and 14 million in the South.

"With Cambodia and Leos, Viet-Nam formed what was formerly known as
French Indochina. During the Second World War, the Vichy regime yielded
control of French Indochina to the Japanese. In the spring of 1945 the
Japanese proclaimed the independence of Viet-Nam. And in August of that
year they permitted the Communist-oriented Viet Minh to seize rule.

"Tn the Indian subcontinent and in Burma and the Philippines, Western
countries recognized at war's end that national demands for independence
would have to be met promptly. But this was not the case with Indochina. -
Instead, we ourselves were somewhat at a loss for a policy with regard to
that particular part of the world. So our people in charge of war plans
in 1944 sent a colonel out there who sent a cable back to the Joint Chiefs
of Staff saying ‘Request policy guidance on American policy toward Indo-
china, because we are beginning to get military access to that country and
we need direction.’

"Well, there ensued a vast silence which lasted for months. We sent
steff officers back to try to find the answer. We sent cables out there,
and after ebout 6 months the reply came and it said, ‘When asked by the
Joint Chiefs of Staff for a statement of American policy toward Indochina,
the President' -- that was President Roosevelt -- ‘replied, I don't went
to hear any more about Indochina.’

"Yell, now the result of no significant Allied policy at that point
was that the French did return and take over where they left off at the
time of the Japanese occupation, and they encountered therefore a militant
resistance movement. For 8 years, with material help from the United States,
they sought to pacify the country. At the seme time they granted increasing

C-31
