Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"SECRETARY RUSK: Well, Mr. Abel, one can't be a reliable prophet when
the other side helps to write the scenario. But I do want to insist upon
one point, that the purpose of the United States in Southeast Asie for
these past 10 years or more has been a part of a general policy of the
United States since World War II, that is, to organize a decent world commu-
nity in which nations will leave their neighbors alone and in which nations
can have a chance to live at peace with each other and cooperate on a basis
of their common interests.

"Now, in Southeast Asia we have been saying over and over again, in '
conferences such as the Geneva conference of 1962 and elsewhere, that there .
is only one problem with peace in Southeast Asia and that is these pressures
from the north, that if the north would leave their neighbors to the south
alone, these peoples of that area could have their peace and could have
a chance to work out their own lives in their own way. That is the problem,
and to come to the decision to leave their neighbors alone is a necessary
decision which Hanoi and anyone supporting Hanoi must reach.

"Q. Why was it necessary, Mr. Secretary, for us to strike as swiftly
and abruptly as we did without taking time even to notify our allies?

"A. Well, in the first place, we had some ships in the Gulf of Tonkin

who were under attack, and they were dodging torpedoes. Here is a vast
expanse of international waters in which we have a perfect right to be.
We had to strike immediately because we didn't expect to ask those ships
to run a continuing gauntlet of torpedoes on their way back to the Gulf
of Tonkin when their mission was completed, nor were we prepared to have
them denied international waters in the Gulf of Tonkin.

"Further than that, if under these attacks there had not been an imme-
diate and appropriate response, then Hanoi and those who might be standing
behind Hanoi in this might well have come to a very formidable mistaken
judgment about what is possible in the Southeast Asian situation.

"Q. You mean their view that we are a paper tiger might have been
confirmed?

"A. That's correct. They could have made a basic miscalculation about
what the commitment of the United States means in a situation of this sort.

aah uae Shay

~

12. Text of Joint Resolution, August Department of State Bulletin,
2h August 1964, p. 268:

"fo promote the maintenance of international peace and security in
Southeast Asia.

"Whereas naval units of the communist regime in Vietnam, in violation
of the principles of the Charter of the United Netions and of international

D-16
