Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

would provide for 1k NMCB in RVN for direct construction support
and an adequate rotation base to maintain these deployments.

The additional medical /dental/chaplain personnel will provide
for bringing recalled Marine units up to strength, sustaining
the Navy personnel in the additional deploying RLT, and adding
some medical staffing to forward hospital facilities. Recall
of an additional 2,800 personnel would be required to augment
the logistic operations in Vietnam. The increased requirement
for naval gunfire support for the larger deployments would
necessitate the activation of two heavy cruisers to fill CINCPAC's
requirements for additional shore bombardment capability to
maintain two large calibre gun ships on station in the SEA
DRAGON area and off RVN. Additionally, 15 destroyers should

be activated from the mothball fleet to replace 15 Naval Reserve
Training destroyers to be called to active duty. This would
fill CINCPAC's requirement for an additional five destroyers

on station off Vietnam and provide the rotation base to support
them. The recall of 6,000 Naval Reserve personnel would provide
the additional manpower and skills base to man these reactivated
ships.

"a. Air Force. The deployment of the remainder of the 82nd
Airborne Division to Southeast Asia will require the support of
three tactical fighter squadrons, a tactical reconnaissance
squadron, necessary elements of the Tactical Air Control System,
one PRIME BEEF unit, and one security squadron. In order to
provide support of the deployment and the broadening of the
training and rotetion base and to retain a minimum acceptable
number of combat-ready deployable squadrons in the CONUS, these
Air Force organizations will have to be replaced by activation
of the following Air Reserve Forces: eisht tactical fighter
squadrons, five tactical reconnaissance squadrons, one Tactical
Control Group, two military airlift groups, and one tactical
airlift wing, totalling 22,497 spaces. Activation of these Air
National Guard/Reserve units include organizations not currently
manned under COMBAT BEEF standards (100 percent)."

The Joint Chiefs reiterated their recommendation that legislation
be sought to: "(1) provide authority to call selected individual
Reservists to active duty; (2) extend beyond 30 June 1968 the existing
authority to call Reserve units to active duty; and (3) extend terms
of service for active duty personnel." The provisions of such legisla-
tion would, the Joint Chiefs indicated, impact on the Services in the
following manner:

to, Army.

(1) Extension of terms of Service. Provides an immediate
impact on readiness worldwide in that critical skill specialists
in short supply are retained on active duty, It is estimated that

9 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
