Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The Counselor of Embussy in China (Smyth) to the Sceretary of State

SECRET i _ Cnuenextxe, February 28, 1946—5 p.m.
TS URGENT . [Received 11:12 p. m.]
394. Embassy's 280, February 132° This afternoon Dr. Wang

*Not printed, but see telegram of February 19 to Sateon, p. —-
Shih-chieh, Minister for Foreign Affairs. called me to Foreign Office
and said that Sivo-French treaty on Indochina would be signed at
4p.m.todayv. Te said main points in treaty were as given to me by
Vice Minister Liu Chieh on February 12.

- Dr. Wang said that Chinese forces would hand over control of their
area in Indochina at end of March. Chinese troops would withdraw
from Indochina at end of March. Chinese troops would withdraw
from Tndochina dnring March, by sea and land, but due to difficulties
of shipping and of withdrawal by land, Chinese forces would probably
not be able to complete withdrawal patil a short time after end of
March, not later, he felt sure, than April 15.

He said that Chinese Government had informally buf emphatically
ureed French authorities to reach a “bloodless” agreement with the
Tndochinese: he expressed opinion that present French Government
js Jess intransigent than that of de Gaulle. We said that Chinese in
Indochina had also urged the Indochinese to reach a “bloodless” agree-
ment with French. el AG

Dr. Wang said that the Chinese Government would be willing to
mediate between French and Indochinese, if requested by both sides.
He then asked me to ascertain the views of the Secretary of State
regarding the possibility of joint Chinese-American mediation, if re-
quested by both French and Indochinese. He referred to the great
interest which the late President Roosevelt had shown in dependent
peoples, remarking that due to oppesition from certain count ries, the
President had been unable to esiablish trusteeship principle for
colonies of European powers. He indicated that, if US Government
should agree to joint mediation, the matter of requesting such media-
tion could be “suggested” to the French and Indochineze. Dr. Wang
commented that, as result of Chinese actions during recent months, he
felt that Freneh were convinced of Chinese good faith.

Dr. Wang expressed opinion that, if Joint Chinese-American media-
tion is agreed upon, it should be undertaken during the coming month.
He said that he would appreciate very much receiving the views of the
Secretary of State as soon as possible. -

_ Savi *
