Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Thus, although U.S. defense policy in the mid-1950's called for
main but not sole reliance on nuclear weapons, and on use of massive re-
taliatory power in response to acts deemed hostile to the interests of
the United States, definition of and planning for use of such weapons,
in retaliation or otherwise, were so ambiguous, and the concepts them-
Selves so unclear taat, particulerly when applied to specific remote
local defense situations, their value as guidance was virtually nil.

2. The nature of SEATO, and of U.S. views concerning fulfillment
of its obligations under the S#ATO treaty, necessarily reflected the con-
fusion in overeli U.S, defense policy and planning. Added to this general
problem was the more specific matter of matching U.S. resources to the
worldwide conmitments, including SHATO, that had been assumed since the
end of World War II. Thus the Joint Chiefs stated that "U.S. commitments
to Formosa, Japan and Korea, which nations have been excluded from the
[seato] treaty, make it imperative that the United Stetes not be restricted
by force commitments in the subject treaty area; 56/ to these commitments
must be added the numberous U.S. obligations outside Asia.

As is well-knowm, the SEATO treaty, pressured into existence by
' the United States and intended to deter overt aggression by China or other
Communist nations, relied heavily in concept on the military participation
of the U.S. Faced with the magnitude of U.S. commitments, particularly
in relation to the cavabilities of the defense establishment, and con- :
tinually confronted by the considerations ard requirements of general war,
the JCS sought a way in which U.S, SFATO obligations might be carried out:

5. a Continued development of combat effective indigenous
forces, with their structure and training mutually coordinated
to develop local leadershin and prestige, and with improved
capabilities to create a eohesive fighting force through inte-
gration of their operations with adjacent indigenous forces and
with support by operations of forces of other Manila Pact
members.

be Readiness to retaliate promptly with attacks by the
. most effective combination of U.S. armed forces against the mili-
tary pover of the aggressor.

c. Encouragement of other Manila Pact countries to main-
tain forces in readiness to counter aggression,

a. Discussion, in general terms, of unilateral militery
plans by the Military Representatives to the Council to the extent
necessary to insure maximum particivation and cooperation by other
member nations but not to the extent that U.S. ‘strategic plans or
the availability of U.S. forces for implementing such plans might
be revealed.

11
