Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

would guard against external aggression. 7/ On 22 October 195)

Ambassador Heath and General O'Daniel in Saigon were instructed to
"collaborate in setting in motion a crash program designed to bring

about an improvement in the loyalty and effectiveness of the Free

Vietnamese forces." 8/ Four days later the JCS were directed to pre-

pare a "long range program for the reorganization and training of the

minimum number of Free Vietnamese forces necessary for internal security.” &a/
The earlier objections of the JCS were neither refuted nor ignored; they

were accepted tacitly as part and parcel of the policy gamble.

FROM INTERNAL TO CONVENTIONAL DEFENSE

The language of this decision to train the Vietnamese National Army
(VNA), as it was then called, would indicate that internal (rather than
external) security would be the principal purpose of that force. That is
not the way it developed, for three reasons. First, basic U.S, national
strategy (embodied in NSC 162 and NSC 5602 during the period under exam~
ination) and Southeast Asia policy (NSC 5429 and NSC 5612) were both
ambiguous on a key point: to what degree were indigenous militery forces
to be expected to defend against a conventional, "Limited wer" attack by
an aggressor? The continuous, unbroken tendency throughout the 1950s
was to desire ever more capability for conventional defense.

Second, U.S. military forces were unprepared by their own experience
to assist in the structuring of forces designed for other than conventionaL
warfare. The U.S, advisory experiences that were current in terms of
institutionalized memory were those of aid to Greece and Korea. where the
job had been one of training for technical and tactical competence along
conventional lines. It was eminently natural for the U.S. advisory effort
to follow in this identifiable path. Indeed, to have expected the
advisory effort to have stressed "counterinsurgency"” early in this period
would have been completely unrealistic: the term had not been invented
and its concepts had not been either developed or articulated. This
natural tendency to devellop conventional forces was not only in step with
the dominant trend in U.S. military strategy, it was also reinforced by a
third factor, the generalized assumption that the ability to promote
internal security was automatically provided for in the creation of forces
capable to promote external security.

The confluence of all three factors led, in fact, to an attempt to
create Vietnamese forces along lines which were later called "mirror images"
of conventional U.S. force structures. MAAG Vietnam proposed and led in
the creation of the Army of Vietnam (ARVN) in formations comprising divisions,
regiments, battalions, and companies organized as closely parallel to U.S.
organization as local differences in equipnent end support would permit. 9/
This was not, for the reasons already indicated, an unreasonable or indefens~
ible development -~ at least not until about 1959 or 1960 -- and by that
time efforts were underway to transform the focus of ARVN to internal
security. These later efforts were faced with the reality of a sizeable

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
