Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Along with the concept Westmoreland presented, without any time
frame, a crude sketch showing the evolution of strategies for U.S./Allied
forces in the Vietnamese war. The war was to evolve through four phases.
During Phase I coastal enclaves were to be secured and improved. In
Phase II, operations would be conducted against the enemy from the above.
In Phase III the forces would move inland to secure additional bases and
areas, and finally in Phase IV would operate from the latter. At the
time the concept was forwarded, the U.S. combat forces in Vietnam were
in Phase I, Stage I. Progress to a more ambitious stage was stymied
while negotiations went on with the GVN to refine the ground rules. In
the meantime, the Ambassador observed that the troops would suffer from
boredom and lose their edge. 9h/

The long official silence between the sanction for U.S. offensive
operations contained in NSAM 328 and the final approval of the conditions
under which U.S. troops could be committed was not without cost. The
President had admonished each of the NSC members not to allow release of
information concerning the provisions of the NSAM, but the unduly long
interregnum inevitably led to leaks. The Marines incurred some 200
casualties, including 18 killed, as they went about tidying up their
TAOR's in April and May. The Commandant of the Marine Corps raised the
tempo of speculation by saying to the press during an inspection trip to
Vietnam in April that the Marines were not in Vietnam to "sit on their
dittyboxes” -- they were there to "kill Viet Cong." 95/ An honest and
superficially innocuous statement by Department of State Press Officer
Robert McCloskey on 8 June to the effect that "American forces would be
available for combat support together with Vietnamese forces when and if
necessary" 96/ produced an immediate response. The press reaction to
McCloskey'’s candor is best summed up in this New York Times clip of

9 June: 97/

"The American people were told by a minor State Department
official yesterday that, in effect, they were in a land war on
the continent of Asia. This is only one of the extraordinary
aspects of the first formal announcement that a decision has
been made to commit American ground forces to open combat in
South Vietnam: The nation is informed about it not by the
President, not by a Cabinet member, not even by a sub-Cabinet
official, but by a public relations officer."

_The White House was hoisted by its own petard. In an attempt to quell the
outcry, a statement was issued on the 9th of June which, because of its
ambiguity, only served to further exacerbate the situation and to widen
what was being described as "the credibility cap." The White House state-
ment said in part: 98/

"There has been no change in the mission of United States
ground combat units in Vietnam in recent days or weeks. The

; 81 | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
