Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201]

"These countries demonstrate the power and vitality of the ideals of
our own American Revolution; they mark the sweeping advance across the
world of the concepts of freedom and brotherhood. To lose these coun-
tries to the rulers of the Kremlin would be more than a blow to our mili-
tary security and our economic life. It would be a terrible defeat for
the ideals of freedom -- with grave spiritual consequences for men
everywhere who share our faith in freedom.

"All these considerations make it essential for the United States to
help the free countries of Asia in their struggle to make good their
independence and bring economic and social progress to their people.
Where the governments of these countries are striving to establish free
and stable political institutions, to build up their military defenses,
and to raise the standard of living above the level of bare subsistence,
we can and should give them assistance. We cannot replace their own
strong efforts, but we can supplement them.

"This Mutual Security Program is intended to do that. On the military
side, it will supply certain of the Asian countries with items of military
equipment and the training they need for their defense forces. On the
economic side, it will provide a number of the Asian countries with the
most urgently needed commodities, machinery, and tools, and with technical
advice in such fields as agriculture, industry, health, and governmental
administration.

"The assistance I am recommending for Asian countries, 555 million
dollars in military aid and 375 million dollars in economic aid, is so
planned as to meet the most pressing needs in the various countries, and
is intended to provide the crucial margin of resources which will enable
them to move forward.

"Military assistance under this program will go to the Chinese armies
on Formosa, to help keep that island out of the hands of Communist China.
It will go to Indo-China, where over 100,000 French toops are fighting
side-by-side with the forces of Viet Nam, Laos, and Cambodia against
communist-led forces. It will go to the Philippines and to Thailand, to
help build forces strong enough to insure internal security and discourage
outside attack. Some of these military assistance funds will also be
available for allocation to other countries in the area if a critical need
arises.

"The military aid under this program will supplement other military
efforts against communism in Asia. The countries we will be aiding, and
a number of other$S, are supporting military forces with their own funds.
France is supplying the largest part of the military supplies needed in
Indo-China, and Britain is supplying her forces which are fighting guerrillas
* jn the Malay States. The substantial military aid we are giving to the
forces of the Republic of Korea is included in the budget'for our military
services.

A-k
