Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

70% - To avoid a humiliating US defeat (to our reputation
as a guarantor). !

20% - To keep SVN (and then adjacent) territory from
Chinese hands,

10% - To permit the people of SVN to enjoy a better,
freer way of life.

ALSO - To emerge from crisis without unacceptable taint
from methods used.

NOT - To “help a friend," although it would be hard to
stay in if asked out.

McNaughton then proceeded to enumerate some twenty-odd ways in which the
GVN might collapse, and noted that in spite -- or perhaps precisely
because ~- of the imminence of this collapse and the unpromising nature
of remedial action, U.S. policy had been drifting. As he saw it, the
"trilemme.” of U.S. policy was that the three possible remedies to GVW
collapse -- (2) heavy will-breeking air attacks on the DRV, (b) large
U.S. troops deployments to SVN, and (c) exit by negotiations -- were all
beset with difficulties and uncertainties. Strikes against the North,

he felt, were balked "(1) by flash-point limits, (2) by doubts that the
DRV will cave and (3) by doubts that the VC will obey a caving DRV.
(Leaving strikes only a political and anti-infiltration nuisance.)"
Deployment of combat forces, he believed, was blocked "by French-defeat
end Korea snydromes, and Quat is queasy. (Troops could be net negetives,
and be besieged.)" And negotiations he saw as "tainted by the humiliation
likely to follow."

McNaughton then proceeded to review in deteil the purposes, alterna-
tives, and risks of the bombing program as it then stood, treating the
issue more comprehensively and systematically than it has been considered
elsewhere. His schematic exposition is, therefore, reproduced here in
py OH

Strikes on the North program of progressive military pressure

a. Purposes: (1) Reduce DRV/VC activities by affecting DRV

will.

(2) To improve the GVN/VC relative "balance
of morale."

(3) To provide the US/GVI with a bargaining
counter, :

(4) To reduce DRV infiltration of men and
materiel.

(5) To show the world the lengths to which US
will go for a friend.

86 -° TOP SECRET - Sensitive
