Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

enough to have influenced significantly the then intensive VC efforts

in South Vietnam. 49/ Hence, if the desired military operations were
undertaken without Souvanna's approval, and it was discovered that the
infiltration was not really crucial to the war in the South, a long-term
interest would have been compromised without receiving any real short-
term advantage.

To further complicate the picture, direct strikes against North Viet-
nam were being advocated as a means to obtain both long and short-term
goals. On the one hand, overt military actions had been recommended. to
convince the DRV of our resolve. On the other hand, they were proposed
as a means to force Hanoi to stop the flow of material assistance to the
South. 50/ Moreover, it was generally agreed within policy circles that
such actions must be supported by public disclosures of the kind of con-
vincing evidence of Hanoi's support for the VC that the Administration
did. not yet possess.

By the end of March, one aspect of policy puzzle had been resolved.
On 17 March, Ambassador Lodge reported a long conversation between General
Khanh and a Laotian representative, with Souvanna's permission, at which
a, working agreement between military forces of the two governments was
obtained. Khanh and Phoumi Nousavan, Laotian rightist military comman-
der, arranged to resume diplomatic relations between the two countries
during that week and came to other more specific agreements as follows:

1. lLIaotians agreed to allow South Vietnam to have
free passage in Southern Laos, to create a combined
Iaotian-Vietnamese staff to use all the bases including
Tchepone, and to conduct bombardment with unmarked T-28
planes (in the areas where FAR (Phoumi's) forces were
engaged).

2. The 10-kilometer limit on hot pursuit is abro-
gated; commando raids and sabotage can be undertaken
without limit by combined Laotian and South Vietnamese
units; South Vietnamese officers will serve the Laotian
units to provide added leadership. 51

Previously, President Johnson had indicated approval of cross-border ground
penetrations into Iaos "along any lines which can be worked out between
Khanh and Fhoumi with Souvanna's endorsement." Although asking Secretaries
Rusk and McNamara to develop a joint recommendation concerning U.S. parti-
cipation in air strikes within Laos, the President went on to state a posi-
tion consonant with that of the State-ISA view:

"My first thought is that it is important to seek
support from Souyanna Phouma and to build a stronger case
before we take action which might have only limited mili-
tary effect and could trigger wider Communist action in
Laos." 52/

Gy ~Ma,

Planning Overt Actions on Contingency Basis (April

The planning efforts of April and early May attempted to accommodate
the remaining contradictory aspects of the policy dilemma. On the same

\ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
=}; Se eee Te
