Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

explicitly the "Marxist-Leninist Party of South Vietnam" and claimed
to be the "vanguard of the NLF, the paramount member." It denied
official links with the communist party of North Vietnam beyond
"fraternal ties of communism." Although the PRP did not come into
existence until 1962, it is evident that communists played a paramount
role in forming the NLF, and in its rapid initial growth. The official
U.S. view has been that the PRP is merely the southern arm of the

DRV's communist party, and a principal instrument through which Hanoi
instigated and controlled the revolt against "My-Diem." The organiza-
tional genius evident in the NLF, as well as the testimony of Vietnamese
communists in interrogations and captured documents supports this
interpretation.

But significant doubt remains. Viet Minh stay-behinds testified
in 1955 and 1956 that their mission was political agitation for the
holding of the general elections promised at Geneva. Captured documents
and prisoner interrogations indicate that in 1957 and 1958, although there
was some "wildcat" activity by local communists, party efforts appeared
to be devoted to the careful construction of an underground apparatus
which, though it used assassinations and kidnapping, circumspectly
avoided military operations. All evidence points to fall of 1959 as
the period in which the Viet Cong made their transition from a
clandestine political movement to a more overt military operation.
Moreover, throughout the years 1954-1960, a “front” seems to have been
active in Vietnam. For example, the periodic report submitted by
USMAAG, Vietnam, on 15 July 1957 -- a time of ostensible internal peace
-- noted that:

"The Viet Cong guerrillas and propagandists, however, are
still waging a grim battle for survival. In addition to an
accelerated propaganda campaign, the Communists have been
forming 'front' organizations to influence portions of anti-
government minorities. Some of these organizations are
militant, some are political. An example of the former is the
"Vietnamese Peoples' Liberation Movement Forces,' a military
unit composed of ex-Cao Dai, ex-Hoa Hao, ex-Binh Xuyen, escaped
political prisoners, and Viet Cong cadres. An example of the
latter is the 'Vietnam-Cambodian Buddhist Association,’ one of
several organizations seeking to spread the theory of "Peace
and Co-existence.'"

Whether early references to the "front" were to the organizations which
subsequently matured as the NLF cannot be determined. Indeed, to shed
further light on the truth or falsehood of the proposition that the

DRV did not intervene in South Vietnam until after the NLF came into
existence, it is necessary to turn to the events in North Vietnam during
the years 195}-1960.

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
