Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"That is why our national security is involved in South Viet-Nam.

"Integrity of American Commitment
"Mr. Reasoner: And the honor, Secretary Rusk?

"Secretary Rusk:. Mr. Reasoner, the answer to this question is
extremely simple and need not be complicated.

"When President Johnson talks about our national honor, he is not
using some empty phrase of 18th-century diplomacy. He is talking about
the life and death of the Nation. Now, the essential fact from which we
start is that North Viet-Nam has sent tens of thousands of men and large
quantities of arms into South Viet-Nem to take over that country by force.
We have a very simple commitment to South Viet-Nam. It derives out of
the Southeast Asia Treaty, out of the bilateral arrangements that Presi-
dent Eisenhower made with the Government of South Viet-Nam, out of regu-
lar authorizations and appropriations of the Congress in giving aid to
South Viet-Nam, out of the resolution of the Congress of last August,
out of the most formal declarations of three Presidents of both political
parties.

"Now, there is no need to parse these commitments in great detail.
The fact is that we know we have 8 commitment. The South Vietnemese
know We have a commitment. The Communist world knows we have ea commit-
ment. The rest of the world knows it.

"Now, this means that the integrity of the American commitment is
at the heart of this problem. I believe that the integrity of the Amer-
ican commitment is the principal structure of peace throughout the world.
We have 42 allies. Those alliances were approved by overwhelming votes
of our Senate. We didn't go into those alliances through some sense of
amiability or through some philanthropic attitude toward other nations.
We went into them because we consider these alliances utterly essential
for the security of our own nation.

"Now, if our allies or, more particularly, if our adversaries should
discover that the American commitment is not worth anything, then the
world would face dangers of which we have not yet dreamed. And so it
is important for us to make good on that American commitment to South
Viet-Nam.

"ur. Kendrick: But, sir, don't you have to reckon honor at its
cost? I mean, it is not an abstract thing. It has to be evalued and
weighed according to what it costs you. And what about dishonor? What
about the world image that we now present? We are burning villages, we
are killing civilians. Now, don't you weigh one against the other?

"Secretary Rusk: Well, let me sey that you also weigh the costs of

dishonor, that is, the failure of an American commitment. And I would
hope that our own American news media would go to some effort to present

D-55
