HG

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

APPENDIX

Extracts from CIA/DIA Report "An Appraisal of the Bombing of North Vietnam
through 12 September 1966"
1. There is no evidence yet of any shortage of POL in North Vietnam and

stocks on hand, with recent imports, have been adequate to sustain necessary
operations, :

2. Air strikes against all modes of transportation in North Vietnam increased
during the past month, but there is no evidence of serious transport problems
in the movement of supplies to or within North Vietnam.

3. There is no evidence yet that the air strikes have significantly weakened

_ popular morale.

4, Air Strikes continue to depress economic growth and have been responsible
for the abendonment of some plans for economic development, ne essential
economic activities continue.

Extracts from a March 16, 1966 CIA Report "An Analysis of the ROLLING THUNDE
__Air Offensive aceinst North Vi Vietnam"

1, Although the movement of men and supplies in Werth Yietnan 1 nas been
hampered ead lade somewhat more costly [by our bombing], the Corben toca have
been able to increase the flow of supplies and manpower to South Vietnam.

2, Hanoi's determination [despite our bonding] to continue its policy of
supporting the insurgency in the South appears as firm as ever.

3. Air attacks almost certainly cannot bring about a meaningful reduction
in the current level at which essential supplies and men flow into South Vietnem.

Bomb Damage Assessment in the North by the Institute for Defense Analysis’
"Summer\Study Group"

Whet surprised us [in our assessment of the effect of bombing North
Vietnean] wes the extent of agreement among verious intelligence egenctes -on
the effects of past operations and probable effects of continued and expanded
Rolling Thunder. The conclusions of our group, to which we a11 subscribe,
are therefore merely sharpened conclusions of numerous Intelligence summaries.
They are that Rolling Thunder does not limit the present logistic flow into
SVN because NVN is neither the source of supplies nor the choke~point on the
supply routes from China and USSR. Although an expahsion of Rolling Thunder
by closing Haiphong harbor, eliminating electric power plants and totally
destroying railroads, will at least indirectly impose further privations on
the populace of NVN and make the logistic support of VC costlier to maintain,
such expansion will not really change the basic assessment. This follows
because NVN has demonstrated excellent ability to improvise transportation,
and because the primitive nature of their economy is such that Rollins Thunder
can affect directly only a small fraction of the population. There is very
little hope that the Ho Chi Minh Government will Lose control of population
because of Rolling Thunder. The ‘lessons of the Korean War are very relevant
in these respects. Moreover, foreign economic aid to NVN is large compared

90 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
