32

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Navarre plan, which contemplated a rapid buildup of national native
forces. The United States then agreed to underwrite the costs of this
pian.

"But last winter the fighting was intensified and the long strain
began to tell in terms of the attitude of the French people toward a
war then in its eighth year. Last March, after the siege of Dien-Bien-
Phu had begun, I renewed President Eisenhower's proposal that we seek
conditions which would permit a united defense for the area. I went to
Europe on this mission, and it seemed that there was agreement on our
proposal. But when we moved to translate that proposal into reality,
some of the parties held back because they had concluded that any steps
to create a united defense should await the results of the Geneva Con-
ference.

"Meanwhile, the burdens of a collective defense in Indochina have
mounted. The Communists have practiced dilatory negotiating at Geneva,
while intensifying their fighting in Indochina. The French and national
forces feel the strain of mounting enemy power on their front and of
political uncertainty at their rear. I told the Senate Foreign Rela-
tions Committee last week that the situation is grave but by no means
hopeless. The future depends largely on decisions awaited at Paris,
London, and Geneva.

"The situation in Indochina is not that of open military aggression
by the Chinese Communist regime. Thus, in Indochina, the problem is
one of restoring tranquillity in an area where disturbances are fomented
from Communist China, but where there is no open invasion by Communist
China. This task of pacification, in our opinion, cannot be successfully
met merely by unilateral armed intervention. Some other conditions need
to be established. Throughout these Indochina developments, the United
States has held to a stable and consistent course and has made clear the
conditions which, in its opinion, might justify intervention. These
conditions were and are (1) an invitation from the present lawful
authorities; (2) clear assurance of complete independence to Laos, Cam-
podia, and Viet-Nam; (3) evidence of concern by the United Natioris;
(4) a joining in the collective effort of some of the other nations of
the area; and (5) assurance that France will not itself withdraw from
the battle until it is won.

"Only if these conditions were realized could the President and the
Congress be justified in asking the American people to make the sacri-
fices incident to committing our Nation, with others, to using force to
help to restore peace in the area.

"Another problem might, however, arise. If the Chinese Communist
regime were to show in Indochina or elsewhere that it is determined to
pursue the path of overt military aggression, then the situation would
be different and another issue would emerge. That contingency has
already been referred to publicly by the President and myself. The

B-19
