Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In sum, the total incremental need for war-related man-
power of roughly 750,000 people appears to have been off-
set (Table 5) with no particular strain on the population.
Future manpower needs may outstrip North Vietnamese popula-
tion growth, but the North Vietnamese government can import
more manpower (though there may be limits to how many Chinese
they want to bring into the country), use women and/or
underemployed workers, and draw workers from productive
employment, replacing their output with imports. Given these
options, it appears that the North Vietnamese government is
not likely to be hampered by aggregate manpower shortages. 64/

dD. The Year Closes on a Note of Optimism

The negative analyses of the air war, however, did not reflect
the official view of the Administration, and certainly not the view of
the military at any level in the command structure at year's end. The
latter had, for instance, again vigorously opposed any holiday truce
arrangements, and especially the suspension of the air war against North
Vietnam's logistical system. 65/ On this they had been duly overruled,
the holiday pauses having become the standard SOP to domestic and inter-
national war protesters. The 1967 pauses produced, as expected, no major
breakthrough towards peace between the belligerents through any of their
illusive diplomatic points of contact.

Averell Harriman had stopped in Bucharest in late November to
test whether the Romanians had any new information from Hanoi. Despite
their intensive effort and even stronger desire to bring the two sides
together (primarily through a bombing halt), the Romanians apparently
could only reformulate the previously held positions of the Hanoi leader-
ship without any substantive change. Harriman, therefore, patiently
explained again the full meaning and intent of the President's San Antonio
offer and urged its communication to Hanoi.

What was absent of course for both sides was any fundamental
reassessment that could move either or both to modify their positions
on negotiations. The DRV was at the time in the midst of the massive
preparations for the Tet offensive in January while the U.S. remained
pouyed by the favorable reports from the field on seeming military progress
in the last months of 1967. The missing ingvedient for peace moves at thas
time was motivation on both sides. Each had reason to wait. When, just
‘nefore Christmas, Pope Paul called on the U.S. to halt the bombing and
the DRV to demonstrate restraint as a step towards peace he received a
personal visit from President Johnson the following day (on return from a
Presidential trip to Australia). The President courteously but firmly
‘explained the U.S. policy to the Pope, “mutual restraint” was necessary
before peace talks could begin.

131 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
