Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

vigorously pushing the project forward, there is no indication that

he had officially raised the matter with the President, although it

is hard to imagine that some discussion of the Jason Summer Study recom-
mendations had not taken place between them. In any case, as McNamara
prepared to go to Vietnam again to assess the situation in light of new
requests for troop increases, he made arrangements to have General Starbird
remain for the first day of his visit and placed the anti-infiltration
barrier first on the agenda of discussions. 52/ a a age

3. A Visit to Vietnam and a Memorandum for the President

McNamara's trip to Vietnam in October 1966 served a variety
of purposes. It came at a time when CINCPAC was involved in a force
planning exercise to determine desired (required in his view) force levels
for fighting the war through 1967. This was related to DOD's fall DPM
process in which the Pentagon reviews its programs and prepares its budget
recommendations for the coming fiscal year. This in turn engenders a
detailed look at requirements in all areas for the five years to come. As
a part of this process, just three days before the Secretary's departure,
the Joint Chiefs of Staff had sent him an important memo reviewing force
posture the world over and recommending a call-up of the reserves to meet
anticipated 1967 requirements. 53/ This recommendation as a part of the
overall examination of force requirements needed his personal assessment
on the spot in Vietnam. Other important reasons for a trip were, no
doubt, the ones to which we have referred in detail: McNamara's dissatis-
faction with the results of the POL attacks; and the reports of the Jason
Sumner Study. Furthermore, the off-year Congressional elections were
only a month away and the President had committed himself to go to Manila
for a heads of state meeting later in October. For both these events
the President probably felt the need of McNamara's fresh impressions
and recommendations.

Whatever the combination of reasons, McNamara left Washington
on October 10 and spent four days in Vietnam. Accompanying the Secretary
on the trip were Under Secretary of State Katzenbach, General Wheeler,

Mr. Komer, John McNaughton, John Foster, Director of DDR&E, and Henry

Kissinger. In the course of the visit McNamara worked his way through
a detailed seventeen item agenda of briefings, visited several sections
of the country plus the Fleet, and met with the leaders of the Gyn. 54/

His findings in those three days in South Vietnam must have

confirmed his disquiet about the lack of progress of the war and the

: ineffectualness of U.S. actions to date, for when he returned to Washington
he sent the President a gloomy report with recommendations for leveling

‘off the U.S. effort and seeking a solution through diplomatic channels. 55/

Melamara recommended an increase in the total authorized final troop
strength in Vietnam of only about 40,000 over Program #3, for an end
strength of 470,000. This was a direct rejection of CINCPAC's request
for. a 12/31/67 strength of 570,000 and marked a significant turning point

162 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
