Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The Department of State believes that within the
limitations imposed by existing commitments and strategic
priorities, the resources of the United States should be
deployed to reserve Indochina and Southeast Asia from further
Communist encroachment. The Department of State has accord-
ingly already engaged all its political resources to the end
that this object be secured. The Department is now engaged
in the process of urgently examining what additional economic
resources can effectively be engaged in the same operation.

"It is now, in the opinion of the Department, a matter of
the greatest urgency that the Department of Defense assess the
strategic aspects of the situation and consider, from the mili-
tary point of view, how the United States can best contribute
to the prevention of further Communist encroachment in that

area." 29/

In a memorandum for the President of March 6, 1950, the
pasiotary of Defense described U.S. options as follows:

"The French are irrevocably committed in Indochina and
are supporting the three states as a move aimed at achieving
non-Communist political stability... The choice confronting
the United States is to support the legal governments in
Indochina or to face the extension of Communism over the
remainder of the continental area of Southeast Asia and
possibly westward..." 30/

b. The Griffin Mission

While the choice among alternatives awaited provision of the
views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the military departments, 31/ the
Secretary of State sent to the Far East "the Griffin Mission," which was
given the task of surveying "the kinds and approximate value of assistance
needed" 32/ in Indochina (among other countries). Departing when it did,
some five months following the fall of Nationalist China, and headed by
the former Deputy Chief of the Aid Mission to Mainland China, the Griffin
Mission was probably intended to ayoid further attacks on the State
Department's Asia policy as well as to determine how U.S. economic
resources might effectively be employed in Southeast Asia.

On March 22, the Griffin Mission report recommended U.S. aid
for a program of rural rehabilitation, the provision of limited amounts of
commodities and industrial equipment, and a program of technical assistance.
These measures were estimated to cost $23.5 million for the period through
June, 1951. The mission also recommended the "psychological shock of
ships with military aid material in the immediate future" 33/ as a measure
to dramatize the U.S. commitment to those on the scene.

ec. JCS Views

On April 5, the Joint Chiefs of Staff responded to a request
by the Secretary of Defense with recommendations for measures which, from

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
