Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

what results might be expected immediately. It was pointed out that
adverse weather would continue to inhibit operations for several months
and partially cffset the new measures,

13. Authorization to conduct a campaign against North
Vietnam employing air and naval forces under the proposed
operating authorities should have a significant impact on
the ability of NVN to continue to prosecute insurgency.

It is not anticipated that this impact will be immediately
apparent. Unfavorable weather, while partially offset by
the expanded use of naval forces, will preclude air strike
forces from applying the desired pressures at the most
advantageous time and place. The cumulative effects of
the air strikes and naval bombardment will gradually
inerease to significant proportions as erosion of the
distribution system progresses. In addition to the mater-
jal effects against NVN's capability to wage war, approval
of the proposed operating authorities and execution of the
campaign, envisioned will signal to NVN and the remainder
of the world the continued US resolve and determination to
achieve our objectives in Southeast Asia. 39/

The ISA memo on bombing policy, drafted in Warnke's own
office, tersely and emphatically rejected all of these JCS recommendations
for expanding the air war, including mining the harbor approaches. ‘The
case against further extension of the bombing was made as follows:

The Campaign Against North Vietnam: A Different View

Bombing Polic

It is clear from the TET offensive that the air attack
on the North and the interdiction campaign in Laos have not
been successful in putting a low enough ceiling on infiltra-
tion of men and materials from the North to the South to
prevent such a level of enemy action. We do not see the
possibility of a campaign which could do more than make
the enemy task more difficult. Bombing in Route Packages 6A
and 6B is therefore primarily a political tool.

The J.C.S. recommend a substantial reduction in previous
political control over the attacks in the Haiphong and
Hanoi areas. Except for General Wheeler, we do not recom-
mend such a reduction.

It is not until May that more than fqur good’ bombing
days per month can be anticipated. The question arises as

177 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
