Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"President Diem continues to be the undisputed ruler
of South Vietnam; all important and many minor decisions
are referred to him. Although he professes to believe in
representative government and democracy, Diem is convinced
that the Vietnamese are not ready for such a political
system and that he must rule with a firm hand, at least so
long as national security is threatened. He also believes
that the country cannot afford a political opposition which
could obstruct or dilute the government's efforts to estab-
lish a strong and secure state. Although respected for his
courage, dedication, and integrity, Diem has remained a some-
what austere and remote figure to most Vietnamese and has not
generated widespread popular enthusiasm.

"Diem's regime reflects his ideas. A facade of repre-
sentative government is maintained, but the government is in
fact essentially authoritarian. The legislative powers of
the National Assembly are strictly circumscribed; the judici-
ary is undeveloped and subordinate to the executive; and the
members of the executive branch are little more than the
personal agents of Diem. No organized opposition, loyal or
otherwise, is tolerated, and critics of the regime are often
repressed. This highly centralized regime has provided
resolute and stable direction to national affairs, but it
has alienated many of the country's educated elite and has
inhibited the growth of governmental and political institu-
tions which could carry on in Diem's absence...."

"Although the popular enthusiasm attendant on the achieving
of independence and the end of colonial rule has subsided and
some disillusion has arisen, particularly among the educated
elite, there appears to be little identifiable public unrest.
There is some dissatisfaction among military officers largely
because of increasing Can Lao meddling in military affairs.
The growth of dissatisfaction is inhibited by South Vietnam's
continuing high standard of living relative to that of its
neighbors, the paternalistic attitude of Diem's government
towards the people and the lack of any feasible alternative
to the present regime.

"The Communist apparatus in South Vietnam is essentially
an operating arm of the North Vietnamese Communist Party (Lao
Dong), but there have been recent indivations of Chinese Com-
munist participation in its operations. It is estimated that
there are about 2,000 active guerrillas. They are in small
units scattered along the Cambodian border, the south coast,
and in the remote plateau region of the north. There are
probably several thousand others, now inactive, who have access

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
