Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN
—, THROUGH MID-1954

INDOCHINA

THE PROBLEM

-To estimate French Union and Communist capabilities and probable courses of
action with respect to Indochina and the internal situation atc Be Indochina

through mid-1954.

ASSUMPTION

There is no major expansion of the Korean war.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Unless there is a marked improvement
in the French Union military position in
Indochina, political stability in the Asso-
ciated States and popular support of the
French Union effort against the Viet
Minh will decline. We believe that such
marked improvement in the military sit-
uation is not likely, though a moderate
improvement is possible. The over-all

- French Union position in Indochina

therefore will probably deteriorate during
the period of this estimate.

| 2. The lack of French Union military suc-

cesses, continuing Indochinese distrust
of ultimate French political intentions,
and popular apathy will probably con-
tinue to prevent a significant increase in
Indochinese will and ability to resist the
Viet Minh.

. 3. We cannot estimate the impact of the

new French military leadership. How-
ever, we believe that the Viet Minh will

retain the military initiative and will con-
tinue to attack territory in the Tonkin
delta and to make incursions into areas
outside the delta. The Viet Minh will
attempt to consolidate Communist con-
trol in “Free Laos” and will build up sup-
plies in northern Laos to support further
penetrations and consolidation in that
country. The Viet Minh will almost cer-
tainly intensify political warfare, includ-
ing guerrilla activities, in Cambodia.

4, Viet Minh prestige has been increased
by the military successes of the past year,
and the organizational and administra-
tive effectiveness of the regime will prob-
ably continue to grow.

5. The French Government will remain
under strong and increasing domestic
pressure to reduce:the French military
commitment in Indochina, and the pos-
sibility cannot be excluded that this pres-
sure will be successful. However, we be-

SECRET

HE
