Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ii. Planning for Larger Pressures

As indicated by reservations expressed by an ad hoc interdepart-
mental committee on "pressures" against North Vietnam chaired by General
Krulak, covert operations were seen as possessing several shortcomings
with respect to influencing decisions in Hanoi. In appraising these
operations, attention was drawn increasingly to the potential for under-
taking punitive measures that appeared likely to be more compelling.

The Krulak committee assessed the likely North Vietnamese response 4s
follows:

"Toughened, as they have been, by long years of hard-
ships and struggle, they will not easily be persuaded by
a@ punitive program to halt their support of the Viet Cong
insurgency, unless the damage visited upon them is of great
magnitude." 15/

Moreover, the committee rationale reflected the idea generally held that
the DRV would be responsive to more damaging actions. For example, Walt
Rostow pressed the view on Secretary Rusk thet "Ho [Chi Minh/ has an in-
dustrial complex to protect: he is no longer a guerrilla fighter with
nothing to lose." 16/

A. Conceptual Origins and Motivations

In early February, several conceptual elements converged to focus
Administration attention on the question of whether U.S. policy should
embrace readiness to undertake larger punitive actions against North Viet-
nam. One element was the realization that the GVN would be incapable of
increasing the number or size of its maritime operations beyond the modest
"yin pricks" included in the Phase I covert actions program. Should
stronger pressures be called for before May or June, they would have to be
applied through direct air strikes, probably with USAF/FARMGATE assistance.
17/ Another element was the prospect of serious deterioration within Laos
and South Vietnam, resulting from recent North Vietnamese troop influxes
into Laos, fear of similar trends in South Vietnam, and heightened VC
activity in the wake of the latest GVN coup of 30 January. 18/ Concern
within the State Department was such that discussions were held on the
desirability of the President's requesting a congressional resolution,
drawing a line at the borders of South Vietnam. 19/

A third element was the increasing articulation of a direct rela-
tion between the challenge of halting North Vietnam's assistance to the
Southeast Asian insurgents and broader U.S. strategic interests. Stopping
Hanoi from aiding the Viet Cong virtually became equated with protecting
U.S. interests against the threat of insurgency throughout the world.

For example, in support of their recommendation to "put aside many of the
self-imposed restrictions which now limit our efforts" and "undertake a
much higher level of activity" than the covert actions against external
assistance to the Viet Cong, the JCS argued:

"In a broader sense, the failure of our programs in South
Vietnam would have heavy influence on the judgment of Burma,

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
