Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

“Somewhat along the same line, on 11 May, Walt W. Rostow prepared
a paper devoted to what he termed a "troop community chest operation
for Vietnam." Rostow had seen the ISA Annex which we just mentioned,
and commented that he felt that a project that Bill Leonhart had been
working on which related to Vietnamese force deployments to the level
of each contributor's armed forces might be more meaningful and realistic
plus having the very desirable characteristic of being more negotiable
because it would require no country to increase its total armed forces
in order to send troops to Vietnam. The table that he attached to the
paper showed that if each country dispatched the same percentage of its
‘total armed forces to Vietnam as the United States had done, about 14%,
that there would now be an additional 70,000 troops in that country.
Furthermore, if you asked each country to contribute an increment to
match an additional United States increase of 100,000, and if those
increments represented the same percentage of each country's total
armed forces, then the result would read something like this: Korea -
18,700; Australia - 2,000; New Zealand - 400; Thailand - 4,000; and
the Philippines - 1,300; for a total of 126,400 troops added. This
approach is interesting because later in July President Johnson was to
begin "arm twisting" a number of national Heads of State, and the force
totals developed here by Leonhart provided the base line from which he
negotiated. 22/

The other events of note, both directed at increasing the effec-
tiveness of American forces already in Vietnam, occurred during early
May. The first was the issuance of NSAM 362, entitled "Responsibility
for U.S, Role in Pacification," in which Mr. R. W. Komer was appointed
the Deputy for Pacification (Revolutionary Development) with the personal
rank of Ambassador to operate under COMUSMACV. This, as we noted earlier,
was partially the outcome of President Johnson's desire to get the
pacification program back on the track. Komer as well as most of the
officials concerned with the decision, had known that this development
was coming since the time of the Guam Conference. In the NSAM the
President noted:

Our purpose of unifying responsibility for Pacifica-
tion (RD) under COMUSMACV is to permit logistic and admin-
istrative economies through consolidation and cross-
servicing. I expect sensible steps to be taken in this
direction. Any inter-agency jurisdictional or other
issues which may arise in country will be referred to the
U.S. Ambassador....

This new organizational arrangement represents an

unprecedented melding of civil and military responsibil-
ities to meet the overriding requirements of Viet Nam.

131 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
