Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"2--To carry out a broad and progressive democracy, promul-
gate the freedom of expression, of the press, of belief,
reunion, association and of movement and other democratic
freedoms; to carry out general amnesty of political detainees,
dissolve the concentration camps dubbed ‘prosperity zones' and
"resettlement centers,’ abolish the fascist law 10-59 and other
antidemocratic laws.

"3--Abolish the economic monopoly of the United States and
its henchmen, protect homemade products, encourage the home
industry, expand agriculture, and build an independent and
sovereign economy; to provide jobs to unemployed people, increase
wages for workers, armymen, and office employees; to abolish
arbitrary fines and apply an equitable and rational tax system;
to help forced evacuees from North Vietnam who now desire to rejoin
their native places; and to provide jobs to those who want to
remain.

"h--To carry out land rent reduction, guarantee the peasants'
right to till their present plots of land, and redistribute com-
munal land in preparation for land reform.

5--To eliminate the U.S.-style culture of enslavement and
depravation; to build a national and progressive culture and
education, eliminate illiteracy, open more schools, and carry
out reform in the educational and examination system.

"6--To abolish the system of American military advisers, elin-
inate foreign military bases in Vietnam, and to build a national
army defending the fatherland and the people.

"T--To realize equality between men and women, and among
different nationalities, and realize the right to autonomy
of the national minorities in the country; to protect the legit-
imate interests of foreign residents in Vietnam; to protect and
take care of the interests of overseas Vietnamese.

"8--To carry out a foreign policy of peace and neutrality;
to establish diplomatic relations with all the countries which
respect the independence and sovereignty of Vietnam.

"9Q--To reestablish normal relations between the two zones
of Vietnam for the attainment of peaceful reunification of the
country.

"10--To oppose aggressive wars, actively defend world peace."

‘The manifesto concludes by calling on various strata of the

people to close their ranks and to carry out the above program.
The appeal was addressed to the workers, peasants, and other

65 ‘MOP SECRET - Sensitive
