Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In a follow-up memorandum, 99/ the CJCS forwarded to the Secretary
of Defense a DIA analysis of VC attacks on the South Vietnamese railway
system during 1963 and 1964, and indicated his concurrence with fmbassa-
dor Taylor that these attacks justified US/GVN strikes against the rail
system in North Vietnam. The CJCS then added the following recommenda-
tion:.

As discussed with you on 13 February, while I strongly
recommend that we attack the North Vietnamese rail system as
soon as possible, I would recommend against first striking
the southern elements thereof. Should we do so I would anti-
cipate that the DRV would tske both passive and active defense
measures to protect rolling stock and bridges and, probably,
would start work on train ferries or truck by-passes in order
to ameliorate the effects of our strike. As pointed out
earlier I would advocate militarily that the entire southern
segment of the rail system be struck simultaneously. Should
this be politically objectionable, I would recommend that the
two northern targets -- Dong Phuong rail/highway bridge and
Thanh Hoa bridge (prestige bridge) -- be the first targets
attacked in order to trap the maximum quantity of rolling
stock south of the 20th parallel where we could destroy it
at least.

The. Secretary of Defense responded to this recommendation by invit-
ing the JCS to develop a detailed plan for an integrated attack on the
DRV rail system south of the 20th parallel, with the ootion of attacking
the targets individually on an incremental basis rather than all at
once. 100/ This request set in motion a plenning effort by the Joint
Staff and by U.S. militery commands in the Pacific area, and gave rise
to spirited discussions and recommendations that culminated at the end
of March in the submission of the JCS 12-week bombing program, essentially
puilt around the LOC interdiction concept.

General Westmoreland, with Ambassador Taylor's concurrence, strongly
endorsed the interdiction rationale in mid-March. In a LIMDIS cable to
Admiral Sharp and General Wheeler, 101/ he called attention to the -
mounting VC attacks on transportation targets in South Vietnam, and
argued that;

The Viet Cong's intensive efforts against lines of communi-
cations would make strikes against DRV LOC's highly appropriate
at this time. In view heavy traffic recently reported moving
south, such strikes would also be military desirable. Moreover,
these attacks by interrupting the flow of consumer goods to
southern DRV would carry to the NVI man in the street, with
minimum loss of civilian life, the message of U.S. determination.
Accordingly, early initiation of ROLLING THUNDER strikes and
armed reconnaissance is recommended ageinst DRV lines of communi-
cation with initial emphasis on railroad and highway bridges
south of 19 desrees north.

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
