Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

However, the July 1956 NIE took the position that the
DRV was unlikely to use its capabilities for instituting such large-
scale guerrilla action within South Vietnam during the next year or
so. Yet, Diem's unforeseen success in dealing with non-communist
challenges led to increasing hope that he would be able to survive
even a later confrontation with the communists.

", . » Diem's success in by-passing the July 1956 election
date without evoking large scale Communist military reaction
will reassure many Vietnamese and encourage them to cooperate
with GVN programs to expose and root out Communists. Continued
improvement in internal security will depend in some measure on
the government's ability to deal with economic and social problems
and on the effectiveness of the administrative apparatus.

"If the Communists were to undertake large scale guerrilla
action in South Vietnam, they probably would not be able to
develop widespread popular support, especially if the VNA were
to register some early military success. The GVN is being
increasingly accepted as a nationalist alternative to Communist
leadership. Public confidence in the GVN, combined with general
war-weariness, may have already reached the point where any
effort to upset the government by force would lead to a strong
popular reaction against the guerrillas. (JIbid., p. 14)

This NIE came close to being a high-water mark in optimism

concerning Diem's ability to meet his dual challenges, both short and
long run. But political trends that could restore the vigor of his
non-communist opposition were seen:

",...The trend toward authoritarian rule through the
political parties led by Diem's relatives and small circle of
trusted associates will probably continue. Isolation and
neutralization of government critics and men disliked or dis-
trusted by Diem will also continue. Diem and his associates
are likely to exert strong pressures against any opposition in
the Assembly. Thus it is not likely that Diem or his govern-
ment will meet any serious opposition in the National Assembly
during the period of this estimate /through mid-1957/; however,
over a longer period the accumulation of grievances among
various groups and individuals may lead to development of a
national opposition movement...." (Ibid., p. 14)

in January, 1957, MAAG Vietnam's semi-annual report to the
Secretary of Defense (Country Statement on MDAP, Non-NATO Countries, date

eited) noted hopefully that:

"The internal security situation in Vietnam has improved
during the last year in regards to the dissident sects. Viet
Minh armed cadrés total approximately 1,370 effectives, Hoa Hao

LS. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
