Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

{7

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In mid-January, the DIA prepared an estimate considerably
more favorable to the scheme. 15] But in early February appeared a.
SNIE estimatin; effects on "DRV physical capabilities to support the
insurgency in the South" of the various measures, including attacks on
POL, previously recommended by CINCPAC and the JCS. Its conclusion, sub-
seribed to by all intelligence services except that of the Air Force,
was that, even with a campaign extended to port facilities, power plants,
and land LOC's from China, "with a determined effort, the DRV could still
move substantially greater amounts than in 1965." 76/

In renewing their recommendation on 1 March, and again on
10 March, the JCS once more disputed such assessments. In an appendix
+o their long March 1 memorandum to the Secretary, the Chiefs outlined a
concept of operations upon which they proposed to base future deployments.
With respect to the air war, they urged that it be expanded to include POL
and the aerial mining of ports and attacks on Hanoi and Haiphong. Their
rationale was as follows:

To cause...NVN to cease its control, direction, and
support of the communist insurgency in SVN and Laos, air
strikes are conducted against military and war-sustaining
targets in all areas, including the Hanoi/Haiphong complex
and areas to the north and northeast. Armed reconnaissance
within NVN and its coastal waters is conducted to interdict
LOGs, harass, destroy and disrupt military operations and
the movement of men and materials from NVN into Laos and SVN.
Aerial mining of ports and interdiction of inland waterways
and coastal waters, harbors and water LOCs are conducted to
reduce the flow of war resources. Air reconnaissance and
special air operations are conducted in support of the over-

all effort." 77/

Ten days later the Chiefs again requested attacks on the POL together with
authorization to mine the approaches to Haiphong. This time they noted
that Ambassador Lodge and Admiral Sharp had each recently endorsed such
measures (no documents so indicating are available to the writer). Sup-
porting their request they cited recent intelligence reports of North

. Vietnamese orders for expedited delivery of additional trucks. With the
arrival of more trucks, POL would become even more critical to the North
Vietnamese logistical effort. Once POL reserves were initially destroyed,
however, the mining of Haiphong harbor would be the next immediate priority
to prevent resupply by North Vietnam's allies. 78/ The Chiefs argued that
the elimination as a package of these high value targets would signifi-
cantly damage the DRV's war-susteining capability.

This time, moreover, the Chiefs possessed support in the
intelligence community. A study by CIA addressed the question which had
_ been deliberately omitted from the terms of reference for the 4 February

86 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
