Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ce. The military objective, concept, and strategy for
the conduct of the war in Vietnam as stated in JCSM-218-67
be approved by the Secretary of Defense.

They were evidently unaware that the President had already seen the DPM
ten days before. 12)/

At about this time, the latter part of May, CIA also pro-
duced an estimate of the consedQuences of several different U.S. actions,
including de~escalating the bombing. The actions considered were
essentially those of the DPM: increase U.S. troop levels in SVN by
another 200,000; intensify the bombing against military, industrial,
and transportation targets; intensify the bombing plus interdict the
harbors; or level off rather than increase troop comnitments; and
reduce rather than intensify the bombing. 125/

The tone of this estimate was not quite as favorable to
further bombing or quite as unfavorable to de-escalation as the January
CIA analysis had been. The estimate said that NVN was counting upon
winning in the South, and was willing to absorb considerable damage in
the North so long as the prospects were good there. More intensive
bombing was therefore not likely to be the decisive element in breaking
Hanoi's will and was not likely to force Hanoi to change its attitude
toward negotiations: ;

Short of a major invasion or nuclear attack, there is
probably no level of air or naval actions against North
Vietnam which Hanoi has determined in advance would be so
intolerable that the war had to be stopped. 126/

The pressure would be greater if, in addition, NVN’s ports were closed.
If, as was most likely, the USSR did not accept the challenge and NVN
was forced to rely primarily on rail transport across China, and if,

as a consequence, the situation in NVN gradually deteriorated, it was
"conceivable" that NVN would choose to negotiate or otherwise terminate
the war; but even this was unlikely unless the war in the South was also
deteriorating seriously. 127/

As for reducing the bombing by restricting it to southern
NVN, it would depend upon the circumstances:

In seme circumstances North Vietnam would attribute
this to the pressure of international opinion and domestic
criticism, and it would confirm the view that the US would
not persist. This view might be dispelled if the US made

“it clear that the bombing was being redirected to raise
the cost of moving men and supplies into the South; and
even more if the US indicated it intended to increase US
forces in the South and take other action to block or
reduce infiltration from North Vietnam. 128 /

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
