Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Io

TOP SECRET -— Sensitive

4. Ambassador Nolting be instructed to make an immediate ap-
proach to President Diem to the effect that the Government of the
United States is prepared to join the Government of Viet—-Nam in a
sharply increased joint effort to cope with the Viet Cong threat
and the ravages of-the flood as set forth under 3., above, if, on
its part, the Government of Viet-Nam is prepared to carry out an
effective and total mobilization of its own resources, both material
and human, for the same end. Before setting in motion the United
States proposals listed above, the United States Government would
appreciate confirmation of their acceptability to the GVN, and an
expression from the GVN of the undertakings it is prepared to make
to insure the success of this joint effort. On the part of the
United States, it would be expected that these GVN undertakings
would include, in accordance with the detailed recommendations of
the Taylor Mission and the Country Team:

(a) Prompt and appropriate legislative and administrative
action to put the nation on a wartime footing to mobilize its
entire resources. (This would include a decentralization and
broadening of the Government so as to realize the full potential
of all non-Communist elements in the country willing to contrib-
ute to the common struggle.)

(b) The establishment of appropriate Governmental wartime
agencies with adequate authority to perform their functions
effectively.

(c) Overhaul of the military establishment and command
structure so as to create an effective military organization
for the prosecution of the war.

5. Very shortly before the arrival in South Viet-Nam of the
first increments of United States military personnel and equipment
proposed under 3., above, that would exceed the Geneva Accord ceil-
ings, publish the "Jorden report" as a United States “white paper,"
transmitting it as simultaneously as possible to the Goverments of
all countries with which we have diplomatic relations, including
the Communist states.

6. Simultaneous with the publication of the "Jorden report,"
release an exchange of letters between Diem and the President.

131

TOP SECRET = Sensitive
