Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

its intent to build 80 "prosperity and density centers" along a

"strategic route system." By the end of 1963, each of these 80 agrovilles
was to hold some 400 families, and each would have a group of satellite
agrovilles of 120 families each. In theory, the agroville master plan

was attractive: there were provisions for community defense, schools,
dispensary, market center, public garden, and even electricity. Despite
these advantages, however, the whole program incurred the wrath of the
peasants. They resented the corvee labor the GVN resorted to for agro-
ville construction, and they abhorred abandoning their cherished ancestral
homes, tombs, and developed gardens and fields for a strange and desolate
community. Passive peasant resistance, and then insurgent attacks on the
agrovilles, caused abandonment of the program in early 1961 when it was
less than 25% complete.

Yet, for all Diem's preoccupation with rural security, he poorly
provided for police and intelligence in the countryside. Most of the
American aid the GVN received was used for security, and the bulk of it
was lavished on the Army of Vietnam. Security in the villages was
relegated to the Self-Defense Corps (SDC) and the Civil Guard (CG) --
poorly trained and equipped, miserably led. They could scarcely defend
themselves, much less secure the farmers. Indeed, they proved to be
an asset to insurgents in two ways: they served as a source of weapons;
and their brutality, petty thievery, and disorderliness induced innumer-
able villagers to join in open revolt against the GVN. The Army of
Vietnam, after 1956, was withdrawn from the rural regions to undergo
reorganization and modernization under its American advisors. Its
interaction with the rural populace through 1959 was relatively slight.
The SDC and CG, placed at the disposal of the provincial administrators,
were often no more venal nor offensive to the peasants than the local
officials themselves, but the corrupt, arrogant and overbearing men the
people knew as the GVN were among the greatest disadvantages Diem faced
in his rural efforts.

Nor was Ngo Dinh Diem successful in exercising effective leader-
ship over the Vietnamese urban population or its intellectuals. Just as
Diem and his brothers made the mistake of considering all former Viet
Minh communists, they erred in condemning all non-Diemist nationalists
as tools of Bao Dai or the French. The Diem family acted to circumscribe
all political activity and even criticism not sanctioned by the oligarchy.
In late 1957, newspapers critical of the regime began to be harassed,
and in March 1958, after a caustic editorial, the GVN closed down the
largest newspaper in Saigon. Attempts to form opposition political
parties for participation in the national assembly met vague threats
and bureaucratic impediments. In 1958, opposition politicians risked
arrest for assaying to form parties unauthorized by Nhu or Can, and by
1959 all opposition political activity had come to a halt. In the
spring of 1960, however, a group of non-communist nationalist leaders
eame together -- with more courage than prudence -- to issue the
Caravelle Manifesto, a recital of grievances against the Diem regime.

19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
