Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a
Sy

D. Wheat was the mission of Vietnamese forces?

The mission initially envisioned for the forces of Free Vietnem
by the principal advocate of a U.S. role in organizing and training
those forces, the Secretary of Stete, was simply that of providing ana
maintaining security within the borders of their country, 49/ ‘and it
was on this basis that the decision to assume responsibility for the
organization and training of the Vietnemese National Army was teken.
This single mission concept was in dispute, however, before, during, enc
after its pronouncement; the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in an attempt logi-
cally to trace through the web of U.S. commitments woven largely by the
Secretary of State, were on the record in opposition to it; 50/ end, in
fact, by early 1956 a two- or three-fold mission for South Vietnemese
forces was considered more or less established by the Chiefs and by
others more directly concerned with the organization and training of the
Vietnamese forces, 51/

The evolution of the mission of the Vietnamese forces from that
of mainteining internel security to (a) maintaining internal security;
(b) resisting external aggression; and (c) contributing to regional
defense with other non-Communist countries was affected critically by
five factors; the state of U.S. strategic militery policy in the mic-1950's;
the nature of SEATO and of U.S. views concerning fulfillment of its com-
mitments under that treaty; the withdrawal of the French Expeditionary
Corps; pressures exerted by the Diem government; and recent U.S. experi-
ences in Korea,

1. U.S. strategic military policy in the mid-1950's, eas has
been well documented, 52/ was both complex and confused, end confusion
over the issue of massive retaliation versus local defense was particuler-
ly intense. The JCS ~- among others -- were unable ever to resolve the
dilemma posed by U.S. policy in this regard with respect to the defense of
Southeast Asia.

The JCS had contended, first, that "from the point of view of the
United States, with reference to the Fer East as a whole, Indochina is
devoid of decisive [oreswmably narrowly defined/ military objectives" 53/
when considering U.S. intervention in the Indochina wer, and that the main
target of U.S. air and naval forces should be the source of the aggression
(i.e., China). But they also contended both during and after the Indochina
war thet atomic weapons should be used within Vietnam in the local defense
of that country -- and that if permission to use such weapons were denied
(a svectre which appeared constantly to haunt the Chiefs), U.S. force
reguirenents end the time required to achieve victory would soar. 53/, 54/
Finally, after the French defeat, the Chiefs argued thet a ground defense
against eggression from orth Vietnam by South Vietnamese forces would be
necessary to provide time for the U.S. to intervene with ground forces,
again using atomic weapons for local defense. eS] ‘ a

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
