Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

deprive VC of recruiting potential and rice growers, and is
partly indicative of growing peasant desire seek security on
our side.

"Question arises, however, of whether we and GVN ade-
quately set up to deal with increased refugee flow of this
magnitude. AID has programmed much larger refugee program
for FY 67, but is it enough?...Only Mission would have answers,
so intent this cable is merely to pose question, solicit bids
for increased support if needed, and assure you I would do all
possible generate such support.” i4/

On another controversial issue, Land Reform, Komer repeatedly pressed
the Mission for public signs of progress, but by the time he went out to
Saigon as General Westmoreland's deputy in 1967, he -- and apparently the
President -- were still unsatisfied.

But perhaps the most important role Komer played was to keep the
general subject of pacification before the President, to encourage
Ambassador Lodge to talk pacification up, and to constitute a one-man,
full-time, nonstop lobby for pacification within the USG.

After his first trip to Vietnam, for example, Komer reported to the
President that "while our splendid military effort is going quite well,
our civil programs leg behind...To achieve the necessary results, we must
ourselves give higher priority to (and expand) certain key pacification

programs, especially cadres and police -- if necessary at some expense to
the military effort." 15/

Komer's memorandum constitutes only a small proportion of the infor-
mation and suggestions reaching the President and his senior advisors on
Vietnam, and the intention of this paper is not to suggest that they were
in any sense definitive documents which show the direction of U.S. strategy
in Vietnam. But it seems clear that Komer was the first senior official
in Washington to make a major effort to put pacification near the top of
our combined civil-military effort, and that he had a particularly ad-
vantagesous spot from which to try. He hed authorized back-channel com-
munications with the Ambassador and Deputy Anibassador in Saigon, apparent
access to the President, and the umbrella of the White House,

His memoranda to the President over his year in Washington showed
considerable change in thinking on many issues, but a consistent support
for more pacification. A small sample is revealing:

"Key aspects of pacification deserve tighest priority --

and greater emphasis. Unless we and the GVN can secure and
« hold the countryside cleared by military operations, we either
face an ever larger and quasi-permanent military commitment or
risk letting the VC infiltrate again...I personally favor more

65 ‘ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
