Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to encourage the peoples of India, Pakistan, the Philippines
and other Asian states to take the leadership in meeting the
common problems of the area....

"Tt would be to the interest of the United States to make
use Of the skills, knowledge and long experience of our European
friends and, to whatever extent may be possible, enlist their
cooperation in measures designed to check the spread of USSR
influence in Asia. If members of the British Commonwealth,
particularly India, Pakistan, Australia and New Zealand, can
be persuaded to join with the United Kingdom and the United
States in carrying out constructive measures of economic,
political and cultural cooperation, the results will certainly
be in our interest. Not only will the United States be able
thus to relieve itself of part of the burden, but the coopera-
tion of the white nations of the Commonwealth will arrest any
potential dangers of the growth of a white-colored polarization." 80 /

On December 30, 1949, the National Security Council met with President
Truman presiding, discussed the NSC staff study, and approved the fol-
lowing conclusions:

"As the basis for realization of its objectives, the United
States should pursue a policy toward Asia containing the following
components:

"a. The United States should make known its sympathy
with the efforts of Asian leaders to form regional associations
of non-Comnunist states of the various Asian areas, and if in
due course associations eventuate, the United States should be
prepared, if invited, to assist such associations to fulfill
their purposes under conditions which would be to our interest.
The following principles should guide our actions in this respect:

(1) Any association formed must be the result of
a genuine desire on the part of the participating nations to
cooperate for mutual benefit in solving the political, economic,
social and cultural problems of the area.

(2) The United States must not take such an active
part in the early stages of the formation of such an associa~
tion that it will be subject to the charge of using the Asiatic
nations to further United States ambitions.

(3) The association, if it is to be a constructive
force, must operate on the basis of mutual aid and self-help in
all fields so that a true partnership may exist based on equal
rights and equal obligations.

(4) United States participation in any stage of the

development of such an association should be with a view to sccom-
plishing our basic objectives in Asia and to assuring that any

A-56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
