Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

from the enemy to a grueling and painfully slow effort to pacify the
villages of the central coast in their three TAORs. It was a job that
Americans were not equipped for, and the Marine effort raised some basic
questions about the role of U.S, troops in Vietnam, but nonetheless, the
Marines began to try to sell the rest of the U.S. Government on the
success and correctness of their still unproved strategy. The result
was a major commitment to the pacification strategy by a service of the
U.S. Armed Forces, and influence on the other services, particularly the
Army.

Dp. Washington Grumbles About The Effort

When Lodge was Ambassador, there was widespread concern about the
management of the Mission. Lodge was admittedly not a manager. This
concern led to a major conference at Warrenton in January of 1966, dur-
ing which increased emphasis on pacification and better organization
within the U.S. Mission were the main topics. Improving the Washington
organizational structure was raised, but not addressed candidly in the
final report; Washington seemed far readier to tell Saigon how to reorganize
than to set their own house in order. But Warrenton symbolizes the growing
dissatisfaction in Washington with the Mission as it was.

E. Presidential Emphasis on the "Other War" and Press Reaction

Finally, there was the need of the President, for compelling domestic
political reasons, to give greater emphasis to “the other war." With the
first full years of major troop commitment ending with victory not yet in
sight, there was a growing need to point out to the American public and to
the world that the United States was doing a great deal in the midst of
war to build a new Vietnam. While this emphasis did not necessarily have
to also become an emphasis on pacification, it did, and thus the President
in effect gave pacification his personal support -- an act which was
_ acutely felt by Americans in Vietnan.

F. Meanwhile, Back at the War...

A summary of the MACV Monthly Evaluations and other reports is con-
tained here, showing how the U.S. command saw its own progress. The
summary suggests that MACV foresaw heavy fighting ell through 1966, and
did not apparently agree with Ambassador Lodge's predictions and hopes
that a major pacification effort could be started, but the issue was not
analyzed before decisions were made.

II. Honolulu

A. The Conference - February 1966

The details of the working sessions at the Honolulu conference do
not appear, in retrospect, to be nearly as important on the future

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
