Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

EES fs THE VIET MINH POSITION AND SINO-SOVIET STRATEGY

SUMMARY

It has been charged that Ho Chi Minh was robbed at the conference
table of what he had won on the battlefield, that the Geneva Accords were
prejudicial in content and implementation to legitimate Viet Minh inter-
ests, and that, therefore, the subsequent actions of the Viet Minh are un-
derstandable in light of these disappointments. While it is fair to state
that the immediate implications of the Accords did not reflect (even accord-
ing to CIA reports) Viet Minh strength and control in Vietnam at the.time
of the conference, it is equally important and revealing to understand
why. Viet Minh ambitions were thwarted, not so much by Western resistance
or treachery, as by Sino-Soviet pressures on them to compromise. If the
Viet Minh were to look for villains at the Geneva Conference, in honesty
they would have to admit that their interests were compromised by their
own communist allies, not the West.

Viet Minh ambitions were broad. The Viet Minh were not only inter-
ested in gaining rights to the three-quarters of Vietnam they claimed
to have controlled, but in extending their authority throughout Indochina
into Laos and Cambodia, Although their offshoots, the Pathet Lao and
the Free Khmers, controlled little territory in Laos and Cambodia, the
Viet Minh pressed for their full representation in these countries. Argu-
ing that they spoke for all the Indochinese people, the Viet Minh wished
to compel or persuade the French to leave the area and then to settle
directly with the indigenous and weakened non-communists. They were
pressing for a political settlement prior to a military armistice, or, .
in other words, they wanted. to fight while talking. Their specific objec-
tives were: partition at the 13th parallel, a deadline for complete French
withdrawal from the North, and nation-wide elections to be held six months
after an armistice (Tab 1).

The source of DRV disappointments with the Accords can be traced
not so much to Western strength and unity or Western "treachery" as to
efforts by the Soviet Union and Communist China to make the conference
@ success; that is, to bring stability to the area and a settlement to
the fighting. Together and separately, Moscow and Peking pressed con-
eessions on the Viet Minh. Invariably, the two principal communist dele-
gates, Chou En-lai and Molotov, played major roles in breaking deadlocks
with conciliatory initiatives. While the exact motives of the Soviet
Union and Communist China must remain a matter of speculation, the most
acceptable explanation for their behavior is that both sought to achieve
their objectives in Southeast Asia without triggering U.S. intervention.
"Peaceful co-existence" was the hallmark of their diplomacy. The Chinese,

C-1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
