Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECREL - Sensitive

of both sides who were fearful that the armistice would be used to conceal
construction of military bases or other preparations for aggression; but
these provisions depended on a credible international supervision which
never materialized. Partition and regroupment pitted North against South
Vietnam, and arms control failed patently and soon. Geneva traded on
long-run risks to achieve short-run disengagement. France withdrew

from Vietnam, leaving the Accords in the hands of Saigon. Lasting peace
came between France and the Viet Minh, but the deeper struggle for an
independent, united Vietnam remained, its international implications

more grave, its dangers heightened.

The Southeast Asia policy of the U.S. in the aftermath of the
Geneva Conference was conservative, focused on organizing collective
defense against further inroads of communism, not on altering status quo.
Status quo was the two Vietnams set up at Geneva, facing each other across
a demilitarized zone. Hanoi, more than other powers, had gambled: hedged
by the remaining Viet Minh, it waited for either Geneva's general elections
or the voracious political forces in the South to topple the Saigon
government. In South Vietnam, Diem had begun his attempt to gain control
over his people, constantly decried DRV subversion and handling of would-be
migrants as violations of the Geneva Accords, and pursued an international
and domestic policy of anti-communism. Both Vietnams took the view that
partition was, as the Conference Final Declaration stated, only temporary.
But statements could not gainsay the practical import of the Accords.
The separation of Vietnam at the 17th parallel facilitated military
disengagement, but by establishing the principle that two regimes were
separately responsible for "civil administration" each in distinct zones;
by providing for the regroupment of military forces to the two zones,
and for the movement of civilians to the zone of their choice; and by
postponing national elections for at least two years, pexmitting the
regimes in Hanoi and Saigon to consolidate power, the Geneva conferees
in fact fostered two governments under inimical political philosophies,
foreign policies, and socio-economic systems.

The Geneva powers were imprecise -- probably deliberately indefinite
“~~ concerning who was to carry out the election provisions. France,
Which was charged with civil administration in the "regrouping zone" of
South Vietnam, had granted the State of Vietnam its independence in June
1954, six weeks before the Accords were drawn up. Throughout 195) and
the first half of 1955, France further divested itself of authority in
South Vietnam: police, local government, and then the Army of Vietnam were
freed of French eontrol, and turned over to the Saigon government. Con-
currently, the U.S. began to channel aid directly to South Vietnam, rather
than through France. The convolution of French policy then thrust upon
the U.S. a choice between supporting Diem or the French presence in
iIndechina. The U.S. opted for Diem. By the time the deadlines for
election consultations fell due in July 1955, South Vietnam was sovereign
de facto as well as de jure, waxing strong with U.S. aid, and France was
no longer in a position to exert strong influence on Diem's policy or
actions.

4 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
