1&G-

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

At same time CAS /CIA/ also has from Vietnamese government sources
reports (C-3) of movement of certain platoon to company-size VC
units (totalling perhaps 200-500 men) toward Saigon to profit from
any disturbances or confusion which may occur. Knowledge these
reports within GVN apparently tending deter disaffected officials
from developing radical pace at this moment.

Situation here thus one of insecurity, uneasiness and emergent
instability. A genuine and important military victory over VC
would do more than anything else to redress balance and allay
for moment high-level mutterings of need for change. On other
hand, further deterioration of situation over next few weeks or
months or new VC success similar Phuoc Hhanh incident might
well bring situation to head. 41/

From MAAG Chief McGarr, Washington received an account of Taylor's
meeting with "Big Minh," then Chief of Staff, later Head of State for a
while after Diem was overthrown. It is interesting because it was one of
the very few reports from Saigon in the available record suggesting that the
Diem regime might be in need of more than administrative reforms. Minh com-
plains that the Vietnamese army was "losing the support of the people” as
indicated by a “marked decrease in the amount of information given by the
population." He warned, further, that "GVN should discontinue favoring
certain religions..." But McGarr stressed the administrative problems,
particularly the need for an “overall plan." His reaction explicitly con-
cerns what he saw as the "military’ aspects of Minh's complaints. But
Ambassador Nolting's cables and the main paper of the Report show a very
similar tendency to take note of political problems, but put almost all the
emphasis on the need for better military tactics and more efficient admin-
istrative arrangements.

«-oBig Minh was pessimistic and clearly and frankly outlined

his personal feeling that the military was not being properly
supported. He said not only Viet Cong grown alarmingly, but that
Vietnamese armed forces were losing support of the people. As
example, he pointed out marked decrease in amount of information
given by population. Minh said GVN should discontinue favoring
certain religions, and correct present system of selecting province
chiefs, At this point Minh was extremely caustic in commenting
on Jack of ability, military and administrative, of certain
province chiefs. Minh was bitter about province chief's role in
military chain of command saying that although Gen. McGarr had
fought for and won on the single... command which had worked for
few months, old habits were now returning. Also, on urging from
Gen. McGarr he had gone on offensive, but province chiefs had not
cooperated to extent necessary. He discussed his inability to
get cooperation from GVN agencies on developing overall plans for
conduct of counterinsurgency. Minh also discussed need to bring
sects back into fold as these are anti-communist. Although above

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
