Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"(1) We believe it important to attain further national
unity that Diem make reasonable offer take one or two non-commie
oppositionists into cabinet.

"(2) I stated we still receiving allegations and rumors
about Can Lao Party secret activities which, whether true or
not, are harmful to GVN. I again urged that party come out
in open or dissolve itself and suggested might be worthwhile
pass law or issue decree stating against law have any secret ;
parties Viet-Nam, pointing out this would help give legal basis
act against various secret parties even covert communist-front
organizations.

"Diem interrupted me at this point to describe what he
called favorable evolution among non-communist oppositionists
which now taking place. He stated many of those who took part
in coup see errors their ways and now realize if they had won
they would have only assisted communist take-over. According
Diem most oppositionists, whether those arrested because of coup
or others, now in process changing their attitude and realize
it in national interests they try to work more closely with GVN.
For this reason too soon to make offer cabinet posts to
oppositionists but, without making firm promise, he stated that
if some non-commies could agree basic policy GVN he might take them
into government after election.

"He did not directly reply to my Can Lao suggestion but
stated that more and more oppositionists and public in general
coming to realize allegations and rumors re party are not true.
I interjected these developments all more reason why Can Iao
Party should come into open or dissolve and why he should
seriously make reasonable offers non-communists enter govt.
Diem made no promises." (Saigon Deptel 1466 to SecState,

16 March 1961, Section 1 of 2, p. 2)

In connection with the proposed Central Intelligence
organization, Diem stated he had finally chosen an officer to run
this; on the issue of better relations with the Cambodian Government,
to the end of working out border control arrangements, Diem Was, as
always, very negative on the possibilities. Raising once more the
issue of dealings with the peasants in connection with agrovilles:

"I again urged he make modest payments to peasants called
upon furnish labor, particularly those for instance who work
On agrovilles but would not live there and would thus get no
benefit from their labor. Diem replied peasants everywhere
except those in Cochin-China area gladly contributed to

98 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
