Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SEGRET - Sensitive

couldn't threaten the Saigon government. For example, a threat to
"withdraw unless" would be “quite a gamble." The issue of neutralism
was raised and "Ambassador Taylor noted that 'neutralism’ as it existed
in Saigon appesred to mean throwing the internal political situation
open and thus inviting Communist participation." Mr. Ball observed
that a neutralist state could not be maintained unless the VC were
defeated and that the GVN must continue to be free to receive external
aid until that occurred. Therefore, "neutralism in the sense of with-
drawal of external assistance" did not seem to be a hopeful alternative.
In apparent reply to Taylor's briefing comments to the effect that the
United States might continue military action against North Vietnam de-
spite a GVN collapse, Rusk commented that he "couldn't see a unilateral
war" in this event. Taylor indicated that he meant "only punitive
actions." Secretary McNamara agreed with Rusk, but added that if the
GVN continued to weaken we would need to try Option C or A. "The con-
sensus was that it was hard to visualize continuing in these cireun-
stances fat the GVii collapsed or told us to get out/, but that the
choice must certainly be avoided if at all possible.” 131/

After a discussion of some of the administrative problems in
the GVN, “Ambassador Taylor noted that General Westmoreland had pre-
pared a report of the militery situation” in South Vietnam. (The
report was later distributed to the group.) He indicated that
"Westmoreland was generally more optimistic than he (Taylor)" and that
he saw better morale, increased defections and the like as signs of
improvement in the military situation. Further, he stated that
Westmoreland would be inclined to wait six months before taking further
actions in order to have a firmer base for them. However, Taylor added
that "he himself did not believe that we could count on the situation
holding together that long, and that we must do something sooner than
this." Secretary Mcllamara also disagreed with Westmoreland's view,
expressing doubts that the military situation would improve. In answer
to specific questions, Mcliamara stated his opinions that (1) no, the
political situation would not become stronger, but (2) yes, we would
be justified in undertaking Option C even if the political situation
did not improve. Taylor replied that "stronger action would definitely
have a favorable effect" in South Vietnam, "but he was not sure this
would be enough really to improve the situation." Others, including
McNamara, agreed with Taylor's evaluation, but the Secretary added that
"the strengthening effect of Option C could at least buy time, possibly
measured in years." 132/

Ambassador Taylor then urged that "over the next two months
we adopt a progrem of Option A plus the first stages of Option Cc."
He argued that the GVN was badly in need of some "pulmotor treatment,"
that any other alternative would probably result in e worsened situation
-- perhaps militarily. He added that the likelihood of GVN improvement
seemed so doubtful that "we should move into C right away." Secretary
Rusk asked if Option C would give Taylor the "bargaining leverage”

” 6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
