Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Vietnemese General Staff has become so involved in political
affairs thet it has neglected the required planning of an ade-
quate internal security program. This neglect has fostered a
spirit of insubordination and irresponsibility throughout the
army. The army in some instances has been incapable of execut-
ing occupation end pacification operations in areas formerly
under Viet Minh control. Almost all units, particularly those
from North Vietnem, require a-period of intensive training and
reorganization to bring them up to strength and improve their
effectiveness.

2h. BAS ODY and press aid is provided by approximately
4,800 French officers and NCO's currently serving in the French
Militery Mission to Vietnam. This mission is to be increased to
6,000 by the end of 195. These individuals serve in commend,
staff, and advisory roles on the Vietnamese General Staff in the
territorial command structure, and in training esteblishments.

About 20 percent. of Vietnamese infantry units end 50 percent of

Support and technical units are cadred at least partially by the

. French. The army is still under French operational control and

continues to be Cate ae dependent on the Set for logistic
support.

25. A major reason for the ineffectiveness of the Vietnamese
National Army is its lack of adequetely trained officers. Only
about one percent have received training roughly equivalent to
that of a US army officer of field grade and virtually none has

-& comparable background of staff end commend experience. Very

few of the Vietnamese officers would be competent even in
assignments justified by their training end experience, end
even fewer are capable of an adequate performence at the higher
positions of responsibility which they now hold. Their back-
ground is one of subordination to French command, and they are
inclined to rely heavily on French advisers even when given
positions of authority and responsibility.

26.. The other serious deficiencies in the South Vietnamese
national forces, ineffective organizetion and training and
absence Of logistics and technical services, are related to the
lack of leadership and stem from the seme basic cause, i.e.,
French failure to train and develop qualified leaders. This
situation can be resolved only over a period of time and only
if an intensive progrem for the progressive development of an
effective officer corps is soon initiated.

28. We have little information on the strength and status
of other semi-military and volice forces....

29. South Vietnem's mobilizeble manpower pool is estimated
at 1,500,000 physically fit, military-age males, of which about
eO percent are now under erms. An additional 10 percent could

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
16 ee
