Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

By

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

in the highlands. In his plans concerning Saigon and the sur-
rounding areas, the enemy intended to dominate all routes
leading into the city, to isolate the city economically, and
to create an atmosphere of insecurity in and around the city.
It appeared that the enemy intended to capture and hold im-
portant areas in an arc above the Capital Military District
(CMD). For this purpose several special units had been formed
and were operating in the area of Saigon. 33/

On 23 November, General Westmoreland analyzed the impact of the
increased infiltration upon his Phase II requirements as follows:
°

x * * *% *

2. The VC/PAVN buildup rate is predicated to be double that
of U.S. Phase IJ forces. Whereas we will add an average of
seven maneuver battalions per quarter the enemy will add fifteen.
This development has already reduced the November battalion
equivalent ratio from an anticipated 3.2 to 1, to 2.8 to 1, and
it will be further reduced to 2.5 to 1 by the end of the year.

If the trend continues, the December 1966 battalion equivalent
ratio, even with the addition of Phase II, will be 2.1 to l.

3. Thus far the PAVN increase has been concentrated in the
central highlands and the Viet Cong increases have largely been
in the northern part of III Corps. There is little evidence so
far that there is any appreciable enemy increase south of the
Mekong, and in fact it appears that the local forces in the lower
delta may have lost some capability as a result of the movement
of guerrillas to Tay Ninh for training and organization into
battalions.

hk. MACV must, as an absolute minimum, free at least one US

division for mobile operations against new PAVN units in the
general area of II Corps. Im addition, there is a vital need to
open Highway 15 from Vung Tau to Saigon to utilize the port
capacity there and to project US forces into the delta at least
as far as My Thiem, this will strengthen the GVN hand in this

_ eritical population and food preducing area and interdict the
main infiltration route from the delta to War Zone C. The addi-
tion of a ROK division (or US division) to II Corps, for location
at coastal bases near Duc My, Nha Trang, Cam Ranh and Phan Rang,
will permit the entire 4th Infantry Division (with its bases pro-
tected by +he coastal division) to be used for sustained combat
against the new PAVN forces. The opening of Highway 15 to Vung
Tau would be facilitated by adding a brigade to the lst Infantry
Division to be located in the Ba Ria area and additional brigade
for the 25th Division to be located at Tan Hiep would provide

21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
