Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

contained 427 targets, of which only 359 had been recommended by the-
Chiefs. Of the latter, strikes had been authorized against 302, or

85 percent. Of the 57 recommended by the JCS but not yet authorized,

7 were recognized by the JCS themselves as of little value to Nyl's
war effort, 9 were petroleum facilities holding less than 6 percent

of NVN's remaining storage capacity, 25 were lesser targets in popu-
lated, heavily defended areas, lh were more signficant targets in such
areas, 3 were ports, 4 were airfields, and 5 were in the China, buffer
gone. Some of these targets did not warrant the loss of American lives;
others did not justify the risk of direct confrontation with the
Chinese or the Soviets; still others would be considered for authoriza-
tion as they were found to be of military importance as compared with
the potential costs and risks. 8/

The Secretary argued that those who criticized the limited
nature of the bombing campaign actually saght to reorient it toward
different -- and unrealizable objectives: :

Those who criticize our present bombing policy do
so, in my opinion, because they believe that air attack
against the North can be utilized to achieve quite
different objectives. These critics appear to argue
that our airpower can win the war in the South either
by breaking the will of the North or by cutting off
the war-supporting supplies needed in the south. In
essence, this approach would seek to use the air
attack against the North not as a supplement to, but
as a substitute for the arduous ground war that we and
our allies are waging in the South. 9/

: First, as to breaking the will of the North, neither the
nature of NVN's economy nor the psychology of its people or its leaders
suggested that this could be accomplished by a more intensive bombing
campaign. For one thing, it was difficult to apply pressure against
the regime through bombing the economy:

«..the economy of North Vietnam is agrarian and
simple. Its people are accustomed to few of the modern
comforts and conveniences that most of us in the Western
World take for granted. They are not dependent on the
continued functioning of great cities four their welfare.
They can be fed at something approaching the standard to

: which they are accustomed without reliance on truck or
rail transportation or on food processing facilities. Our
air attack has rendered inoperative about 85 percent of
the country's electric generating capacity, but it is
important to note that the Pepco plant in Alexandria,

Va., generates five times the power produced by all of

95 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
