Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

JOP SECRET - Sensitive

concentration on the mission of resistance to overt aggression;
training from the top down; employment of U.S. standards and
techniques; and optimistic assessment of the future capabilities
of paramilitary organizations outside the purview of MAAG.

~- The result of U.S. efforts was more a reflection of the
U.S. military establishment than of the type of threat or
terrain. With regard to the overall effectiveness of U.S.
aid, it seems to have had, unfortunately, all the depth the
term "mirror image" implies. Furthermore, U.S. performance in
creating an effective Vietnamese military establishment was
adversely affected by the lack of well-founded bargaining
techniques vis-a-vis the Government of Vietnam, and by fragnenta-
tion and other inadequacies in the American system of determining
and administering the overall program of assistance.

-- The U.S. quickly became so deeply and so overtly com-
mitted to the Diem government that any leverage inherent in
the assistance program rapidly approached zero. Perhaps the
best illustration of the lack of leverage concerning the
defense establishment is the case of the Civil Guard, in which
the principal effects of the U.S. bargaining were negative and
most directly affected the very organization the U.S. was
trying to improve. ;

-~ The case of the Civil Guard, a primary internal security
force, also affords excellent examples of two sorts of frag-
mentation affecting the U.S. effort: U.S. interagency com-
petition (the CG was ultimately transferred to the MOD on the
advice of MAAG, but against not only the prior advice of the
MSU advisory team but also against the wishes of the Bnbassy)*;
and lack of coordination at Embassy level by which the entire ~
military assistance effort could be evaluated and resources
more rationally allocated (the Civil Guard was evaluated
completely differently by MAAG and by the Mnbassy).

-- A third variety of frasmentation ts revealed in the
relations between Washington and its various representatives
in the field. Both the GVN and the several U.S. agencies
relied heavily on Washington for arbitration of disputes

* Fragmentation in the U.S. community had an obvious and adverse
effect on the U;S. capability to bargain with the GVN. By devoting
minimal care to the selection of the U.S. official he would talk to
first, Diem could often become the arbiter of, rather than a participant
in, the bargaining process. Thus General Williems; "I can't remember one
time that President Diem-ever did anything of importance concerning the
military that I recommended against." "Why U.S. Is losing in Vietnam,"
U.S. News and World Report, November'9, 1964.

hod TOP SECRET - Sensitive
