Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Following the military takeover, a National Leadership Committee
was formed. On 21 June, Major General Nguyen Van Thieu was installed as
Chief of State with Air Vice Marshall Nguyen Cao Ky as the new Prime
Minister. The accession of Thieu-Ky ended for the moment any hopes of _
Ambassador Taylor and others for the establishment of effective civilian
government in Vietnam. 2

The sole bright spot in an otherwise very gloomy situation was
the total absence of any violence associated with the military takeover.
The new leaders came to office with an announced determination to maintain
stability and to vigorously prosecute the war. 5/ Given the military
situation at that time, little credence could be lent to their pronounce-

ments. ‘

B. The Military Situation

The Viet Cong were unusually inactive throughout March and April.
There had been no major defeat of the enemy's forces and no signs of any ©
major shift in strategy on his part. Hence it was assumed that he was
merely pausing to regroup and to assess the effect of the changed American
participation in the war embodied in air strikes and in the Marines. 6/

During the spring months an emboldened ARVN displayed a new
offensive spirit and scored a few successes at the expense of an elusive
enemy. Most of the standard statistical indicators used by MACV to
measure ARVN effectiveness showed favorable trends. The rate of enemy to
friendly killed inclined in the government's favor, and for a brief but
encouraging spell the rate of weapons lost to the enemy compared with
weapons captured from him approached parity. 1/ A major effort by the
GVN forces in March to open highway 19 from Qui Nhon in Binh Dinh Province
to Pleiku in the highlands met with surprisingly light enemy resistance.
Despite reports of heavy enemy force concentration and an impending offen-
sive in that area, the road remained open. 8/ Incremental gains all over
the country contributed to an air of euphoria manifested in the occasional
expression of cautious optimism which crept into weekly or monthly situation
reports, such as Ambassador Taylor's NODIS to the President (Saigon to
SecState 3359, 13 April 1965) quoted below:.

"We have just completed another quite favorable week in terms
of losses inflicted upon the Viet Cong, 643 of whom were killed in
action to 135 on the government side. Binh.Dinh Province which
was considered to be in critical condition two months ago has now
been restored to what might be called normalcy; that is to say,
the fear of the loss of major towns appears to be past although
a large part of the province remains under Viet Cong control.

The success in Binh Dinh is attributable to three factors; a new
and aggressive division commsnder, the commitment of five general
reserve battalions to the province, and the improved morale
generated by the air actions in the North.

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
