Zt

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

series of Pecific mutual security pacts and to the creation under the
North Atlantic Treaty of a powerful defensive force-in-being.

"The violent battles now being waged in Viet-Nem and the armed
aggressions egainst Laos and Cambodia are not creating any spirit of
defeatism. On the contrary, they are rousing the free nations to measures
which we hope will be sufficiently timely and vigorous to preserve these
vital areas from Commimist domination.

"Tn this course lies the best hope of achieving at Geneva the
restoration of peace with freedom and justice."

x * *

9. Statement by Jameson Parker, Department Press Officer, Made to
Correspondents April 17, 1954 on U.S. Policy Toward Indochine
Department of State Bulletin, April 26, 1954, p. 623:

"Certain remarks with regard to United States policy toward Indo-
china have been attributed to a high Government official [Nice President
Nixon/. The contents of the speech referred to and questions and
answers which followed were off the record, but a complete report of the
speech has been made available to the State Department.

"The speech enunciated no new United States policy with regard to
Indochina. It expressed full agreement with and support for the policy
with respect to Indochina previously enunciated by the President and
the Secretary of State.

"That policy was authoritatively set forth by the Secretary of
State in his speech of March 29, 1954, in which he said:

‘Under the conditions of today, the imposition on Southeast
Asia of the political system of Communist Russia and its Chinese Com-
munist ally, by whatever means, would be a grave threat to the whole
free community. The United States feels that that possibility should
not be passively accepted but should be met by united action. This
might involve serious risks. But these risks are far less than those
that will face us a few years from now if we dare not be resolute today.'

"In regard to a hypothetical question as to whether United States
forces should be sent to Indochina in the event of French withdrawal,
the high Government official categorically rejected the premise of
possible French withdrawal. Insofar as the use of United States forces
in Indochina was concerned, he was stating a course of possible action
which he was personally prepared to support under a highly unlikely
hypothesis.

"the answer to the question correctly emphasized the fact that the
interests of the United States and other free nations are vitally

B-14
