Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

4 - To teach the population the national script and elementary
hygiene.

5 - To study the customs of each region so as to be acquainted
with them in order to create an atmosphere of sympathy first, then
gradually to explain to the people to abate their superstitions.

6 - To show to the people that you are correct, diligent, and
disciplined."

"STIMULATING POEM

The above-mentioned twelve recommendations
Are feasible to all.
He who loves his country,
Will never forget them.
When the people have a habit,
All are like one man,
With good army men and good people,
Everything will be crowned with success.
Only when the root is firm, can the tree live long,
And victory is built with the people as foundations.

April 5, 1948" —57/

Appraisals of Vietnamese nationalist parties available to the U.S.
Départment of State in 1949, on the eve of U.S. involvement in the Indochina
war, were, on the whole, perceptive. A paper submitted in February, 1949,
by George M. Abbott, one of the few American diplomats who had talked with
Ho face to face, summarized issues in the following terms:

"CG, International Relations.

1. United States - Post war relations between the United
States and Indochina got off to a bad start with President Roosevelt's
views on international trusteeship for strategic areas in the hands
of powers unable to defend them, followed by the overenthusiastic
activities of certain OSS agents in the period just before and after
the Japanese surrender. The belief that the policy of the United
States is to throw the French out of Indochina still persists in
many circles both in Indochina and in France. We are also blamed
for permitting the Chinese and English to occupy the northern
and southern halves of the country to disarm Japanese troops. Our
persistent refusal to supply equipment and arms for French military
operations in Indochina is a sore subject with most French army
officers. Another source of irritation has been the almost uni-
versal tendency of American correspondents visiting Indochina to
write articles extremely critical of the French...

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-63
