Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This McNaughton DPM on bombing was prepared as an, adjunct
+o a larger DPM on the overall strategy of the war and new ground force
deployments. Together they were the focus of a frantic weekend of work
in anticipation of a White House meeting on Monday, May 8. That meeting
would not, however, produce any positive decisions and the entire drafting
exercise would continue until the following week when McNamara finally
transmitted a draft memorandum to the President. Among those in the
capital that weekend to advise the President was McGeorge Bundy with whom
McNamara conferred on Sunday. 86/

Walt Rostow at the White House circulated a discussion
paper on Saturday, May 6, entitled "U.S. Strategy in Viet Nam." Rostow's
paper began by reviewing what the U.S. was attempting to do in the war:
frustrate a communist takeover "by defeating their main force units;
attacking the guerilla infrastructure; and building a South Vietnamese
governmental and security structure...." 87/ The purpose of the air
war in the North was defined as "To hasten the decision in Hanoi to
abandon the eggression...," for which we specifically sought:

(i) to limit and harass infiltration; and

(ii) to impose on the North sufficient military and
civil cost to make them decide to get out of the war
earlier rather than leter. 838/

Sensitive to the criticisms of the bombing, Rostow tried to dispose of
certain of their arguments:

We have never held the view that bombing could stop
infiltration. We have never held the view that bombing of
the Hanoi-Haiphong area alone would lead them to abandon the
effort in the South. We have never held the view that
bombing Hanoi-Haiphong would directly cut back infiltration.
We have held the view that the degree of military and
civilian cost felt in the North and the diversion of
resources to deal with our bombing could contribute
marginally--and perhaps significantly--to the timing of
a decision to end the war. But it was no substitute for
making progress in the South. 89/

Rostow argued that while there were policy decisions to be made about

the war in the South, particularly with respect to new force levels,
there existed no real disagreement with the Administration as to our
wweneral strategy on the ground. Where contention did exist was in the
matter of the air war. Here there were three broad strategies that could
be pursued. Rostow offered a lengthy analysis of the three options which
is included here in its entirety since to summarize it would sacrifice

much of its pungency,

53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
