Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

inscribed on the Geneva agenda. Foreign Minister Bidault reportedly
warned that if the United States did not acquiesce on this point, EDC
would doubtlessly be scuttled.

Dulles did succeed in opposing Soviet efforts to gain for
Communist China the status of a sponsoring power at Geneva and forced
the acceptance in the Berlin communiqué of a statement that no diplo-
matic recognition would be implied in the Chinese invitation to the
conference. In return for this concession, however, the French were
able to give highly visible evidence of their interest in ending the
war soon through negotiations. TIronically, this had a double-edged
effect: in Paris the “peace faction" was mollified; but in Hanoi plans
were made to step up the intensity of the war so as to make a show of
strength prior to the beginning of the Geneva Conference. ‘Thus, the
coming battle of Dien Bien Phu came to have a crucial significance in
large measure because of the very inclusion of the Indochina item for
the Geneva Conference. As Elien Hammer has written:

"This was the last opportunity before the Geneva Confer-
ence for the Viet Minh to show its military strength, its
determination to fight until victory. And there were those
who thought that General Giap was resolved on victory, no
matter the cost, not only to impress the enemy but also to
convince his Communist allies that the Viet Minh by its own
efforts had earned a seat at the conference table and the
right to a voice in its own future. For the French....upon
the outcome of the battle depended much of the spirit in
which they would send their representatives to Geneva." 15/

e. Conclusion: Incompatibility of American and French
Objectives

In summary, one must take notice of the paradox of U.S.
policy vis-4-vis the French with respect to Indochina, 1950-1954. Amer-
ican interests and objectives were basically different from those of the
French. The United States was concerned with the containment of com-
munism and restricting the spread of Chinese influence in Southeast Asia.
The immediate U.S. objective was supporting a domino. France, on the
other hand, was fighting primarily a colonial war designed to maintain
the French presence in Southeast Asia and avoid the crumbling of the
French Union. Despite occasional pledges to the "perfectionment" of
independence for the Associated States -- pledges which were usually
given under circumstances which were forcing France to "justify" the
war, in part to receive further American assistance -- France was not
fighting a long and costly war in order to thereafter completely pull out.

The fact that the American and French means -~ pushing for

military victory -- converged in 1950-1954 obscured the fact that the
ends of the two nations were inherently incompatible. This further led

A-41 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
