Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

by a Communist force which is far from beaten, has un-
limited (if unattractive) reserves available in China,

and is confident that it is fighting for a just principle.
To spell out such "capitulation" in explicit terms is

more likely to subject us to ridicule than to produce a
favorable public reaction. It follows that the hard-line
objectives should be blurred somewhat in order to maximize
favorable public reaction, even though such blurring would
reduce the chances of DRV acceptance of the terms.

If McNaughton was reluctant to spell out U.S. “hard-line”
objectives, he was nevertheless anxious not to allow a situation to
develop where the enemy could make its mere participation in negotia-
tions a sufficient quid pro quo for a continuation of the pause. Regard-
ing negotiations, McNaughton suggested, the American position should be:
"We are willing to negotiate no matter what military actions are going
on." Moreover, when bombing was resumed, the ending of the pause should
be tied to Hanoi's failure to take de-escalatory actions. "People might
eriticize our Pause for not having been generous," McNaughton wrote, “but
they will be unlikely to attack the US for having failed to live up to the
deal we offered with the Pause.” 37/

McNaughton recommended that the first strikes after a
resumption should be “identified as militarily required interdiction,"
in order to minimize political criticism. "Later strikes could then be
escalated to other kinds of targets and to present or higher levels."
(At the time McNaughton wrote, the pause had not yet gone into effect. )
Similar advice came from William Bundy, writing on 15 January during the

pause:

Resumed bombing should not begin with a dramatic
strike that was even at the margin of past practice (such
as the power plant in December). For a period of two-
three weeks at least, while the world is digesting and
assessing the pause, we should do as little as possible
to lend fuel to the charge -- which will doubtless be

the main theme of Communist propaganda -- that the pause

was intended all along merely as a prelude to more dras-
tic action.

Moreover, from a military standpcint alone, the
most immediate need would surely be to deal with the
communications lines and barracks areas south of the
20th parallel. A week or two of this would perhaps
make sense from both military and political stand-
points. After that we could move against the northeast
rail and road lines again, but the very act of gradual-
ness should reduce any chance that the Chicoms the

. 28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
