Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

LT
: TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The July 20 memo to the President was followed up by two
others on specific aspects of the problem before the end of July.
On July 28, he replied to a series of eighteen points made by
Senator Mansfield with respect to the Vietnam war. In so doing,
Secretary McNamara informed the President of his doubts that even
a "greatly expanded program" could be expected to produce signifi-
cant NVN interest in a negotiated settlement “until they have been
disappointed in their hopes for a quick military success in the
South." Meanwhile he favored "strikes at infiltration routes" to
impose a ceiling on what NVN could pour into SVN, "thereby putting
@ ceiling on the size of war that the enemy can wage there." He
warned that a greatly increased program would create even more seri-
ous risks of "confrontations" with the Soviet Union and China. i/

McNamara stated that the current bombing program was on the
way to accomplishing its purposes and should be continued. The future
program, he said, should:

a. Emphasize the threat. It should be structured
to capitalize on fear of future attacks. At any time,
‘pressure’ on the DRV depends not upon the current level
of bombing but rather upon the credible threat of future
destruction which can be avoided by agreeing to negotiate
or agreeing to some settlement in negotiations.

b. Minimize the loss of DRV 'face.’ The program
should be designed to make it politically easy for the
DRV to enter negotiations and to make concessions during
negotiations. It may be politically easier for North
Vietnam to accept negotiations and/or to make concessions
at a time when bombing of their territory is not currently

taking place.

ec. Optimize interdiction vs. political costs. Inter-

diction should be carried out so as to maximize effective-
ness and to minimize the political repercussions from the
methods used. Physically, it makes no difference whether
a rifle is interdicted on its way into North Vietnam, on
its way out of North Vietnam, in Laos or in South Vietnam.
But different amounts of effort and different political
prices may be paid depending on how and where it is done.
The critical variables in this regard are (1) the type of
targets struck, (e.g., port facilities involving civilian
casualties vs. isolated bridges), (2) types of aircraft
(e.g-, B-52s Vs. F-105s), (3) kinds of weapons (e.g.,
napalm vs. ordinary bombs), (4) location of target (e.g.,
in Hanoi vs. laotian border area), and (5) the accompanying
declaratory policy (e.g., unlimited vs. a defined inter-

diction gone).

“15 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
