Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The belief that POL strikes would overload the negative
side of the scale on political grounds had to do with the possibility
that, since the targets were situated in relatively populated "urban"
areas (even though outside of the center cities), the strikes would be
construed as no less than’ the beginning of an attack on civilian targets
and/or population centers. This possibility, too, could widen the war
if it were taken by NVN and its allies as indicating a U.S. decision to
commence "all-out" bombing aimed at an "unlimited" objective. But even
if it did not widen the war, it could cause a storm of protest world-wide
and turn even our friends against us. The world had been told repeatedly
that the U.S. sought a peaceful settlement, not a total military victory;

that the U.S. objectives were limited to safeguarding SVN; that bombing
NVN was confined to legitimate military targets related to the aggression
against SVN; and that great care was taken to avoid civilian casualties.
Any or all of this could be called into question by the POL strikes,
according to the argument, and the U.S. could be portrayed as embarking
on a course of ruthless brutality against a poor defenseless population.

The argument about the escalatory implications of the pro-
posed POL strikes was difficult to deal with. Official intelligence
estimates were available which said, on balance, that Chinese or Soviet
intervention in the war was unlikely, but no estimate could say that such
intervention was positively out of the question, and of course intelli-
gence estimates could misjudge the threshold of intervention, it was said,
as they had in Korea. 93/

The argument about the political repercussions made some
headway, however. Progress became possible because of the development of
military plans to execute the strikes with "surgical" precision, thus
minimizing the risk of civilian casualties, and because of the develop-
ment of a "scenario" for the strikes in which military, diplomatic, and
public affairs factors were coordinated in an effort to contain adverse
reactions. There slowly unfolded a remarkable exercise in "crisis manage-

ment."

2. The April Policy Review

Though McNamara's memorandum, and the President's indica-
tion that he might later approve POL, brought the Administration somewhat
nearer to a decision for escalation, there was as yet no new consensus on
how the air war against the North might be tailored to serve American
objectives or, indeed, on what those objectives were or ought to be. The
" study group in the Joint Staff, completing its work early in April, offered
a straightforward answer: "The overall objective is to cause NVN to cease
supporting, directing, and controlling the insurgencies in South Vietnam
and Laos." With his understanding, they could recommend a three phase

92 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
