‘ —_

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"3, We understand General Westmoreland is already considering
a MACV Special Assistant for Pacification or a Deputy for Paci-
fication. We presume that the appointment of such a Special
Assistant or Deputy could be timed to coincide with the changes
on the civilian side, making possible the highest-level command
focus and consolidation to MACV's RD concerns and staff.

"lh, Careful definition and delineation of responsibili-
ties of the U.S. civilian and U.S. military sides would be
necessary in the whole RD establishment in South Viet-Nam to
ensure that nothing falls between the stools and that the tyo
efforts fully mesh.

"We are most anxious, as we know you are, to make progress
in RD. So this new organizational arrangement would be on
trial for 90-120 days, at the end of which we would take stock
of progress and reconsider whether to assign all responsibility
for RD to COMUJSMACV." 52/

As mentioned above, this cable was not repeated to Saigon until after
the Manile Conference. Presumably, in the intervening period,the President

had had a chance to talk directly to Lodge and Westmoreland about the matter,

since they were both at Manila (Porter was not). In addition, Komer had
gone from Manila back to Saigon for a week's stay, and had given Porter a
clear warning that the reorganization was impending. When he left, Komer
left behind two members of his staff to assist Porter with the planning
for the reorganization, althoush Porter and Ledge, for some reason not
clear today, still seemed doubtful thet the reorganization Washington was
pressing on them was really necessary, and really desired by the President.

The cable -- unchanged from the text cited above -- erxvived in Vietnam
on November 4, 1966. 53) It was slugged "Literally Eyes Only for Ambessa-
dor from Secretary, SecDef, and Komer," and because Lodge decided to inter-
pret that slug line literally, the entire process was delayed. one week --

@ sorry spectacle and wholly unnecessary on all counts. When Lodge answered

the cable by requesting permission to discuss it with his assistants, there
was an understandable suspicion in Washington that he was simply doing so
to delay action a little while longer. But on the other hand, the cable
had received the highest slug normally available to State Department mes-
sages -~ "Literally Eyes Only" -- and Lodge could say truthfully that he
was just following instruction. ’

In any event, Lodge sent his answer to Washington November 6:
"Tl agree that progress has been ‘slight and unsatisfac-

tory' and, undoubtedly some organizational changes can be

helpful.. However, before commenting on that I would like

to set out some basic considerations.

"Crux of the problem is not defective organization. It
is security. Civilian reorganization can affect progress only

108 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
