Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was probably going to be overthrown sooner or later, barring major changes
from within. In contrast to the May 1959 NIE's confident statement that
Diem "almost certainly" would remain president "for many years," we find
the August 1960 NIE predicting that the recent "adverse trends," if con-
tinued, would “almost certainly in time cause the collapse of Dien's
regime." 6/

__ The simple, unhappy fact was that whatever his triumphs in 1955
and 1956, by the end of the 1950s the feeling was growing that the best
thing that could be said for Diem was that he was holding the country to-
gether and keeping it from succumbing to the communists. Once even this
came into doubt, talk among Vietnamese and eventually among Americans of
whether it might be better to look for alternative leadership became
inevitable.

The sense of trouble shows through even among the optimists. We
find Kenneth Young, U.S. Ambassador to Thailand and a strong believer in
Diem, warning him in October, 1960 that "there seems to be somewhat of a
crisis of confidence in Vietnam." aE

But the long list of measures Young suggested were all tactical
in nature, and required no basic changes in the regime.

Our Ambassador in Saigon (Eldridge Durbrow) was more pessimistic:

--- Situation in Viet-Nem /December, 1960/ is highly
dangerous to US interests. Communists are engaged in
large-scale guerrilla effort to take over country-

side and oust Diem's Government. Their activities have
steadily increased in intensity throughout this year.

In addition, Diem is faced with widespread popular dis-~
satisfaction with his government's inability to stem the
communist tide and its own heavy-handed methods of op-
eration. It seems clear that if he is to remain in
power he must meet these two challenges by improvements
in his methods of conducting war against communists and
in vigorous action to build greater popular support. We
should help and encourage him to take effective action.
Should he not do so, we may well. be forced, in not too
distant future, to undertake difficult task of identify-
ing and supporting alternate leadership.

But the difficulties (and risks) of that task looked forbidding.
During the November, 1960 coup attempt the U.S. had apparently used its
influence to get the coup leaders to negotiate with Diem for reforms ,
allowing Diem to retain his position with reduced powers. Whether because
of their own indecision or U.S. pressure, the coup leaders allowed a delay
that let Diem bring loyalist troops in to regain control. (Three years

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
