Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Sder g 19s 7,

The MAAG “Nerrative Statement" for january 1958" reported that "the
Communists have been joining 'front' organizations to influence portions
of anti-government minorities..../Examples are/ the "Vietnamese Peoples’
Liberation Yqvement Forces ' [and]: .., the 'Vietnam-Cambodian Buddhist
Association’ =

A number of authorities, mainly French, have lent
credence to an assertion that the NLF was formed by a group of Viet
Minh veterans in March, 1960, somewhere in Cochinchina; but the NLF,
as such, received no international publicity until after December 20,
1960. 166/ On January 29, 1961, Hanoi Radio broadcast in English
to Europe and Asia its first announcement concerning the NLF:

"\ "National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam"
was recently formed in South Vietnam by various forces
opposing the fascist Ngo Dinh Diem regime. This was revealed
by Reuters in Saigon and by different papers published in...
Phnom Penh, capital of Cambodia. This Front was created
after a period of preparation and after a conference of repre~
sentatives of various forces opposing the fascist regime in
South Vietnam. According to these forces, the ‘National
Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam’ on December 20,
1960, issued a political program and a manifesto.../the
manifesto/ reads: 'For a period of nearly a hundred years,
the Vietnamese people repeatedly rose up to fight against
foreign aggression for national independence and freedom...
When the French colonialists invaded our country for the
second time, our compatriots -~ determined not to return to
the former slavery -~ made tremendous sacrifices to defend
national sovereignty and independence. The solidarity and
heroic struggle of our compatriots during nine years led the
resistance war to victory. The 1954 Geneva Agreements re-
installed peace in our country and recognized the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Vietnam.
Under these circumstances, our compatriots in South Vietnem
would have been able to live in peace, earn their livelihood
in security and build a life of plenty and happiness. How-
ever, American imperialists who had in the past helped the
French colonialists massacre our people have now replaced
the French in subjugating the southern part of our country
through a disguised colonial regime....The National Front
for the Liberation of South Vietnam calls on the entire people
to unite and heroically rise up and struggle with the following
program of action:

‘NORTH VIETNAM
"Jan. 31, 1961
"]7.-To overthrow the disguised colonial regime of the imperi-

alists and the dictatorial administration, and to form a national
and democratic coalition administration.

6) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
