Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET + Sensitive

Dulles agreed the

task in South Vietnam was difficult (but) regarded basic
factors as favorable. People were opposed to communism

and had great natural resources...they received greater

aid from abroad than North...situation was much improved
now that there was full cooperation between French and
American authorities. The problem must not be approached
in spirit of defeatism. Only serious problem we have not
yet solved is that of indigenous leadership. We cannot
expect it to be solved ideally because there is no tradi-
tion among indigenous people for self-government. We must
get along with something less good than best....(The US was)
not repeat not committed to Diem in any irrevocable sense.
We have accepted him because we knew of no one better.
Developments have confirmed our fears as to his limitations
but no substitute for him has yet been proposed. Those
suggested in past varied from month to month. Now it is
claimed that only Bao Dai can save situation. If that is
case, then we must indeed be desperate....We should continue
to back Diem but exert more pressure on him to make changes
we consider necessary. 89/

Mendes-France suggested the U.S. and France approach
Bao Dai and mentioned the French Viceroy plan to replace Diem. Dulles
countered by saying the U.S. and French might use Bao Dai but "we must
go to him prepared with our own ideas and not...simply accept his."
Dulles did not expect any Viceroy to be able "to decide on alternate to
Diem and to set up machinery to implement our ideas...our job (is) to
create this machinery." He added,

We must exhaust all our pressures on Diem to get things
done before considering alternate solutions....He asked
Mendes not to think we had obstinately closed our minds to
possible alternate solution. We had not repeat not, but
our investigation of alternate must be done on careful basis
and we must for present support Diem. 90

Mendes-France agreed. He summarized his position as
follows:

First, to support Diem; second, to study alternatives.
Collins and Ely should be instructed to explore further
possibilities including Bao Dai with great discretion...
third point was that Ely and Collins should be requested to
investigate matter of timing. How much further delay can
be tolerated?...We must set deadline.... g1/

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
