Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

151 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

phrase ‘internal squabbling’ -; that we have no national
interest in being here ourselves; and that if some of

them don't want us to stay, we ought to get out is to

me fallacious. In fact, I doubt whether we would have

the moral right to make the commitment we have made here
solely as a matter of charity towards the Vietnamese and
without the existence of a strong United States interest.
For one thing, the U.S. interest in avoiding World War

III is very direct and strong. Some day we may have to
decide how much it is worth to us to deny Viet-lNam to Hanoi
and Peking -- regardless of what the Vietnamese may think. 150/

‘Apparently unable to get the matter off his mind, Lodge brought it up
again in his weekly NODIS to the President on May 25,

I have been mulling over the state of American opin-
ion as I observed it when I was at home. I have also been
reading the recent Gallup polls. As I commented in my
EMBTEL 4880, I am quite certain that the number of those
who want us to leave Viet-Nam because of current ‘internal
squabbling’ does not reflect deep conviction but a super-
ficial impulse based on inadequate information.

In fact, I think one television fireside chat by you
personally -- with all your intelligence and compassion --
could tip that figure over in one evening. I am thinking of
a speech, the general tenor of which would be; ‘we are
involved in a vital struggle of great difficulty and
complexity on which much depends. I need your help.’

I am sure you would get much help from the very
people in the Gallup poll who said we ought to leave
Viet-Nam -- as soon as they understood what you want them
to support. 151/

Lodge's reassurances, however, while welcome bipartisan political support
from a critical member of the team, could not mitigate the legitimate
Presidential concerns about the domestic base for an uncertain policy.
Thus, assailed on many sides, the President attempted to steer what he
must have regarded as a middle course.

.-The President's unwillingness to proceed with the bombing
of the POL storage facilities in North Vietnem continued in May in spite
of the near consensus among his top advisors on its desirability. As
already noted, the JCS recommendation that POL be included in Program 50
of the ROLLING THUNDER strikes for the month of May had been disapproved.152/
An effort was made to have the strikes included in the ROLLING THUNDER

=cL8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
