Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

diplomatic preliminaries had to be arranged, before the program could

be launched. More important, it was feared that possible enemy reactions
to the program might subject the GVN to severe counter-pressures which,
in its then enfecbled state, might be more than it could bear. Thus
securing some GVN leadership commitment to improved performance was made
@ prerequisite to mounting the more intensive actions contemplated. In
fact, Ambassador Taylor returned to Saigon with instructions to hold out
the prospect of these more intensive actions as an incentive to the GVIN
to “pull itself together" and, indeed, as a quid pro quo, for achieving,
in some manner, greater stability and effectiveness. The instructions,
however, contained no reference to U.S. intentions with respect to negoti-
ations. Any mention of U.S. interest in a negotiated settlement before
the initiation of military operations against North Vietnam was regarded
as likely to have the opposite effect from the desired bolstering of GVN
morale and stamina, as well as being premature in terms of the hoped-for
improvement in the U.S. bargaining position vis-a-vis Hanoi that might
result from the actions.

The President's 1 December decisions were extremely closely held
during the ensuing months. The draft NSAM that had been prepared by the
working group was never issued and the decisions were only informally
communicated. Ambassador Taylor, upon returning to Saigon, began his dis-
cussions of the proposed actions with the GVN, and received certain assurances.
Several allies, including the UK, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, were
given a fairly complete description of U.S. intentions. Others, such as
Thailand and Laos, were informed about Phase I only. Still others, like
Nationalist China, Korea, and the Philippines, were simply given a vague
outline of the projected course of action. 6

The first intensified military pressures in the program--more high
level reconnaissance missions over North Vietnam, more extensive 344 mari-
time operations with VNAF cover south of the 18th parallel, and RIAF air
strikes against PL/NVA forces in Laos--were begun on 1h December, along =
with a new program of limited USAF-Navy armed reconnaissance missions against
infiltration routes and facilities in Northern Laos under the code name
BARREL ROLL. The strikes were not publicized and were not expected to have
a significant military interdiction effect. They were considered useful
primarily for their political value as another of a long series of signals
to Hanoi to the effect that the U.S. was prepared to use much greater force
to frustrate a communist take-over in South Vietnam.

C. Signals to Hanoi

Throughout 1964, a basic U.S. policy in Vietnam was to severely
restrain any expansion of the direct U.S. combat involvement, but to carry
out an essentially psychological campaign to convince Henoi that the United
States meant business. The campaign included repeated reaffirmations of
the U.S. commitment to the defense of Southeast Asia, made both in public
and in diplomatic channels; hints and warnings that the U.S. might expand

*

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
