oo}

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"There used to be much talk a few years ago about the inevitable
triumph of communism. We hear such talk much less now. No one who
examines the modern world can doubt that the great currents of history
are carrying the world away from the monolithic idea toward the pluralist
idea -- away from communism and toward national. independence and freedom.

"No one can doubt thet the wave of the future is not the conquest of
the world by a single dogmatic creed, but the liberation of the diverse
energies of free nations and free men. No one can doubt that cooperation
in the pursuit of knowledge must lead to freedom of the mind and of the
soul. i

"The specter of thermonuclear war will hang over mankind; and we must
heed the advice of Oliver Wendell Holmes of 'freedom leaning on her spear'
until all nations are wise enough to disarm safely and effectively.

% %*®

"We must seize the vision of a free and diverse world -- and shape
our policies to speed progress toward a flexible world order.

"This is the unifying spirit of our policies in the world. The pur-
pose of our aid programs must be to help developing countries to move
forward as rapidly as possible on the road to genuine national indepen-
dence.

"Our military policies must assist nations to protect the processes
of democratic reform and development ageinst disruption and intervention."

~+ +
20. President Kennedy's News Conference, April 11, 1962, Public Papers of
the Presidents, Kennedy, 1962, p. 322:

"VIET-NAM

"Q: Sir, what are you going to do about the American soldiers getting
killed in Viet-Nam?

"A: ...We are attempting to help Viet-Nam maintain its independence
and not fall under the domination of the communists.:.But we cannot desist
in Viet-Nam. _* a

i HK

21. President Kennedy's News Conference, May 9, 1962, Public Papers of
the Presidents, Kennedy, 1962, p. 377:

"THR BROKEN CEASE-FIRE

"Q: Mr. President, last February at a news conference you told us
that the cease-fire was becoming frayed ‘in Laos and in the event that it

C-19

’
