Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section opel
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

" |. U.ยง. would as Plan provides expect GVN absorb local
currency costs these increases and does not contemplate further
US-? dollar grants to generate additional local currency for
this purpose." (Joint State-Defense-ICA Message, Deptel 1054
to Saigon, 3 February 1961, p- 1)

The Department suggested that the Ambassador and the Chief, MAAG,
prepare an abridged version of the plan to present to Diem and
emphasized:

" . . . Immediate purpose Plan is to enable GVN defeat
insurgency, but Plan also envisages that GVN must move on
political front towards liberalization to retain necessary
popular cooperation; that various economic steps be taken;
and that there be adequate cooperation with RKG on frontier
control. Tt considered US view that success requires
implementation entire plan."

" . . . Future funding will require Congressional approval.
Views Congress likely be influenced by developments in political
as well as security situation. FY 61 component represents large
increase in US support Viet-Nam. If GVN willing to accept the
obligations involved in its implementation, the US = ready

give full and immediate support in carrying it out.

(Ibid., pp. 1-2)

In a passage suggesting some naivete on the part of the Department
as to actual working procedures and the rhythm of negotiations in
Saigon, the Department suggested:

" . . . proposing to Diem that members US Missions ready
confer with GVN opposite numbers work out agreed version Plan
within, say two week time limit ..- " (Ibid., P- 2)

The guidance concluded:

"If Ambassador considers GVN does not provide necessary
cooperation, he should inform Washington with recommendations
which may include suspension US contribution." (Ibid., p- 3)

On 2 February 1961, Walt W. Rostow showed the new
President the memorandum on Vietnam written by General Lansdale
(reproduced above). The President read it in Rostow's presence,
and said, "This is the worst yet . . . You know Ike never priefed _
me about Vietnam..." It has been reported that shortly thereafter
Iansdale was summoned unexpectedly to the White House, and was ushered
into a meeting of principle Cabinet and National Security Council

96 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
