Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

unobligated, participant. The U.S., Dulles cabled him, was to be "an
interested nation which, however, is neither a belligerent nor a princi-
pal in the negotiation." Its primary aim would be to:

",,.help the nations of that area /Tndochina/ peace-

fully to enjoy territorial integrity and political
independence under stable and free governments with the
opportunity to expand their economies, to realize their
legitimate national aspirations, and to develop security
through individual and collective defense against aggres-
sion, from within and without. This implies that these
people should not be amalgamated into the Communist bloc
of imperialistic dictatorship.”
Accordingly, Smith was told, the U.S. should not give its approval to
any settlement or cease-fire.

",..which would have the effect of subverting the
existing lawful governments of the three aforementioned
states or of permanently impairing their territorial
integrity or of placing in jeopardy the forces of the
French Union of Indochina, or which otherwise contra-
vened the principles stated...above." 14/

£. U.S. Takes Hard Line for Geneva

The NSC decision of May 8, Smith's comments at the second
and third plenary sessions, and Dulles' instructions to Smith reveal the
hardness of the U.S. position on a Geneva settlement. The U.S. would
not associate itself with any arrangement that failed to provide ade-
quately for an internationally supervised cease-fire and national
elections that resulted in the partitioning of any of the Associated
States; or that compromised the independence and territorial integrity
of those States in any way. Smith was left free, in fact, to withdraw
from the conference or to restrict the American role to that of
observer. 15/

g. French Military Situation Deteriorates

The pessimistic American view of the conference was founded
also on the deterioration of the Franco-Vietnamese military effort,
particularly in the Tonkin Delta. After the debacle at Dien Bien Phu,
the French gradually shifted their forces from Laos and Cambodia into the
Delta; but the Viet Minh naturally did likewise, moving several battalions
eastward. U.S. Army intelligence reported on May 26, on the basis of
French reports, that the Viet Minh were redeploying much faster than
anticipated, to the point where only 2,000 of 35,000 troops originally in
northwestern Tonkin remained. To thwart the communist military threat,
General Ely told General Trapnell (on May 30) that French forces were
forming a new defensive perimeter along the Hanoi-Haiphong axis; but Ely

A-11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
