Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"3. We shall approve no territorial changes in any friendly
part of the world unless they accord with the freely expressed
Wishes of the people concerned.

"h. We believe that all peoples who are prepared for self-
government should be permitted to choose their own form of
government by their own freely expressed choice, without inter-
ference from any foreign source. That is true in Europe, in
Asia, in Africa, as well as in the Western Hemisphere.

"5. By the combined and cooperative action of our war allies,
we shall help the defeated enemy states establish peaceful demo-
cratic governments of their own free choice. And we shall try to
attain a world in which Nazism, Fascism, and military aggression
cannot exist.

"6. We shall refuse to recognize any government imposed upon
any nation by the force of any foreign power. In some cases it
may be impossible to prevent forceful imposition of such a govern-
ment. But the United States will not recognize any such government.

"7, We believe that all nations should have the freedom of
the seas and equal rights to the navigation of boundary rivers and
waterways and of rivers and waterways which pass through more than
one country.

"8. We believe that all states which are accepted in the
society of nations should have access on equal terms to the trade
and the raw materials of the world.

"9. We believe that the sovereign states of the Western Hemis-
phere, without interference from outside the Western Hemisphere,
must work together as good neighbors in the solution of their
common problems. ¢

"10. We believe that full economic collaboration between all
nations, great and small, is essential to the improvement of living
conditions all over the world, and to the establishment of freedom
from fear and freedom from want.

"11. We shall continue to strive to pranote freedom of expres-
sion and freedom of religion throughout the peace-loving areas of
the world.

"12. We are convinced that the preservation of peace between
nations requires a United Nations Organization composed of all the
peace-loving nations of the world who are willing jointly to use
force if necessary to insure peace." *

® Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States (Harry S. Truman,
April-December 1945), 433-434.
C~61
