Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

MACV Dir 10-12
28 May 1967

(c) A Single team chief, cesicnated Senior District Ad-
visor will be assigned to each district. The senior districi advisor will be
chosen hy the senior province advisor with the concurrence ce 6 of the Deputy
CORDS to the foree commancar/senior advisor on the basis of pect rity in
ae ee civil-miliiary balance in the RD Se and qualifications and
experience of the current CO cistrict representative and MACV sub-sector
adv isor. ‘The individual not selected will serve as the other's deputy as well
aS being his principal advisor ior civil operat HOHE or military support as the
case may he.

ate

(d) Where no COCO district representative is present,
the MACV sub-sector team will become the district Civil Operations and
Revolutionary Development siaff and the sub-sector adyisor will be desig~
nated senior district advisor,

(4) The Id CTZ organization for Civil Operations and Revo~
lutionary Development Support will conform generally to the schematic organi-
zational ciagram atiached at Annex B, '

(5) ¥or the time being there will be no change in the present
IV CPZ organization, Implementing instructions for the IV CTZ organization
aos oe oe erations and Revolutionary Development Support will be provided

(6) Force commanders/serior advisors will revise their
organizations and redraft their statements of functions to comply with the
guidance set out in this directive. The revisions will be forwarded to this
heacquarters for approval by 15 Jun 67. -

4, ADMINISTRATIVE AND LOGISTICS SUPPORT,
SA te Ad VE IND

2. For the time being, there will be no change in administrative .
and logistics support. Civilian elements of the intesrated or oe de
continue to be ee (funds, personel, and other requixements) by theix

respective agencies, i.e., Embassy, AID, JUSPAO, USIA and OSA. .

b. Itis intended that a continuing effort be undertaken toward
logistic and administrative economy throu a onsolidation and cross~
servicing of appropriate support activities.

5. REFERENCE, State Department MSG DTG 092304% May 1967 (C).
