Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

the belief that they can count on us if they are attacked. To leave
Viet-lNam to its fate would shake the confidence of all these people in
the value of an American commitment and in the value of America's word.
The result would be increased unrest and instability, and even wider
war.

"We are also there because there are great stakes in the balance.
Let no one think for a moment that retreat from Viet-Nam would bring
an end to conflict. The battle would be renewed in one country and
then another. The central lesson of our time is that the appetite of
aggression is never satisfied. To withdraw from one battlefield means
only to prepare for the next. We must say in Southeast Asia--as we did
in Europe--in the words of the Bible: ‘Hitherto shalt thou come, but
no further.'

“There are those who say that ell our effort there will be futile--
that China's power is such that it is bound to dominate all Southeast
Asia. But there is no end to that argument until all of the nations of
Asia are swallowed up.

"There are those who wonder why we have a responsibility there.
Well, we have it there for the same reason that we have a responsibility
for the defense of Europe. World War II was fought in both Europe and
Asia, and when it ended we found ourselves with continued responsibility
for the defense of freedom.

"Our objective is the independence of South Viet-Nam and its free-
dom from attack. We want nothing for ourselves--only that the people
of South Viet-Nam be allowed to guide their own country in their own
way. We will do everything necessary to reach that objective, and we
will do only what is absolutely necessary.

"In recent months attacks on South Viet-Nam were stepped up. ‘Thus
it became necessary for us to increase our response and to make attacks
by air. This is not a change of purpose. It is a change in what we
believe that purpose requires.

"We do this in order to slow down aggression.
"We do this to increase the confidence of the brave people of South

Viet-Nam who have bravely borne this brutal battle for so many years
with so many casualties."
