48

.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"The lesson of the defense of Greece and Turkey ten years ago
has since been repeated in the saving of other lands and peoples.
A recent example is the Southeast Asian country of Viet-Nam, whose
President has just visited us as our honored guest.

"Pwo years ago it appeared that all Southeast Asia might be over-
run by the forces of International Communism. The freedom and security
of nations for which we had fought throughout World War II and the
Korean War again stood in danger. The people of Viet-Nam responded
bravely--under steadfast leadership.

"But bravery alone could not have prevailed.

"We gave military and economic assistance to the Republic of Viet-
Nam. We entered into a treaty~--the Southeast Asia Security Treaty--
which plainly warned that an armed attack against this area would endanger
our own peace and safety, and that we would act accordingly. Thus Viet-
Nam has been saved for freedom.

"This is one of the nations where we have been spending the largest
amounts of so-called ‘foreign aid.' What could be plainer than the fact
that this aid has served not only the safety of another nation-=-but also
the security of our own.

"The issue, then, is solemn and serious and clear.

"When our young men were dying in the Argonne in 1918 and on the
beaches of Normandy and in the Western Pacific in 1944 end at Pusan
in 1950--and when the battlefields of Europe and Africa and Asia were
strewn with billions of dollars worth of American military equipment,
representing the toil and the skills of millions of workers--no one for
an instant doubted the need and the rightness of this sacrifice of blood
and labor and treasure.

"Precisely the same needs and purposes are served by our Mutual
Security programs today--whether these operate on a military or an
economic front. For on-both fronts they are truly defense programs."

he age Bye

22, Radio and Television Report to the American People Regarding the
Situation in the Formosa Straits, September 11, 1956, Public Papers
of the Presidents-~Eisenhower, 1958, Dp. 69h.

"My Friends: .
"Ponight I want to talk to you about the situation, dangerous to

peace, which has developed in the Formosa Straits, in the Far Hast. My
purpose is to give you its basic facts and then my conclusions as to

B-35
