Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Khanh passed the buck to Oanh, who explained that the MRC had inherited
enormously complicated bureaucratic procedures based on older French prac-
tices, with checks and counterchecks before actions could be effected, and
that these practices were being reformed. New regulations were about to go
into effect and it was hoped that they would improve the situation. T/

Recommendation #5 of 288 had been “to assist the Vietnamese to create
a greatly enlarged administrative corps." Effective action upon this recom-
mendation was considered essential to effective progress in the pacifica-
tion program, as is clearly implied by the following list of the lines of
action that were to be strengthened by the enlarged administrative corps.
These were: z

i. Training and pay of new hamlet action cadres, of new village
secretaries, of district chiefs and other district staff, of a new
assistant for pacification for each Province Chief, and of hamlet
school teachers, health workers, district agricultural workers, and
rural information officers.

2. Special incentive pay for government workers in rural areas.
3. Selective pay raises for some civil servants.

4, Increasing enrollment in the National Institute of Administra-
tion (NIA) to full capacity (this was a training school for civil
servants), including provision of short term in-service training by
NIA. ;

De Organization of a joint U.S.-GVN Committee on governmental
reform to review, recommend, and install needed provisions in govern-
mental procedures. ;

6. Expanding and training National Police especially for rural
areas consistent with other recommendations to strengthen military
and paramilitary forces. 72/

Along with this increase in Vietnamese administrative personnel there
was to be an increase in U.S. advisory personnel to assist them. On 2 April
the Mission advised Washington that a general agreement had been reached with
the GVN and estimated that 12 additional USOM public administration person-
nel were needed. On the following day, however, the Ambassador expressed
his reservations over the large increase in staff. On 30 April in an EXDIS
to the President, Lodge said that Khanh was willing to accept U.S. adminis-
trators in pacified areas provided the U.S. felt willing to accept casual-
ties. Lodge recommended a high level civil administrative advisor to Khanh
himself; and on 4 May in an EXDIS to the Secretary of State he recommended
four AID public administrative advisors, one to each of the four Corps areas,
all to be directly under the Ambassador. B/ ;

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

61
