Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

ig not merely political question involving a mission with
which we have fully concurred. It also involves impor-
tance of cur knowing whether there is ary change in the
thus far harsh and unyielding attitude of Hanoi. 168/

Much on his mind in making the request, as he revealed in S BapAreSs
cable to McNamara the following day, was the likelihood of "...general
international revulsion...." toward an act that might sabatoge Ronning's
efforts.

---L am deeply disturbed by general international
revulsion, and perhaps a great deal at home, if it becomes
known that we took an action which sabotaged the Ronning
mission to which we had given our agreement. I recognize
the agony of this problem for all concerned. We could
make arrangements to get an immediate report from Ronning.
If has a negative report, as we expect, that provides a
firmer base for the action we contemplate and would make
a difference to people like Wilson and Pearson. If, on
the other hand, he learns that there is any serious break-
through toward peace, the President would surely want to
know of that before an action which would knock such a
possibility off the tracks. I strongly recommend, there-
fore, against ninth or tenth. I regret this because of my
maximum desire to support you and your colleagues in your
tough job. 169/

The President responded to the Secretary's request and suspended action
until Ronning returned. When Ronning did return, William Bundy flew to
Ottawa and met with him on June 21. Bundy reported that he was "markedly
more sober and subdued" and had found no opening or flexibility in the
North Vietnamese position. 170/

While these diplomatic efforts were underway, McNamara had
informed CINCPAC of the high level consideration for the POL strikes, but

stated:

Final decision for or against will be influenced by
extent they can be carried out without significant civilian
casualties. What preliminary steps to minimize would you
recommend and if taken what number of casualties do you
believe would result? 171/

CINCPAC replied eagerly listing the conditions and safeguards for the
attack that the Air Staff study had suggested in early May. He would
execute only under favorable weather conditions, with good visibility
and no cloud cover, in order to assure positive identification of the
targets and improved strike accuracy; select the best axis of attack to

, 1eh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
