Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Warrenton, we can assume, reflected the evolution of thinking that had
been going on, particularly among the civilians, as the first year of
U.S. combat troop and deployment began to end. Indeed, in its catch-all
approach to pacification, Warrenton had something for everyone.

The final recommendations from the Warrenton conference were addressed
to Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, Admiral Raborn, Mr, Bell, Mr. Marks,
and Mr, McGeorge Bundy, from the meeting's co-chairmen, Ambassador Unger
and Ambassador Porter. The conclusions included the following points
(with comments as required):

1. “There was a consensus that the designation of
priority rural construction areas for 1966 was important
and that the modest goals set for these areas were
realistic, However, it was emphasized that the contrast
between the massive input of U.S, resources and the
modest priority area goals made success in those areas
imperative..." 31/

COMMENT: ‘The National Priority Areas did not meet their 1966 goals.

2. "In view of the prime importance to the U.S. of
success in the four National Priority Areas, there was
discussion of the need for designating U.S. team chiefs
to head the U.S. advisory effort in those areas. It was
agreed that the U.S. Mission Council would consider this
matter promptly and report its conclusions to the VNCC." 38/

COMMENT: The designation of team chiefs for the priority areas did not
take place. Here is another example of the Washington effort to
reorganize Saigon, with Saigon resisting.

3. "There was widespread recognition of the need
to provide within the U.S. Mission a single focus of
operational control and management over the full range
of the pertinent U.S. efforts in order to gear all such
U.S. activities and resources effectively into implementa-
tion or the rural construction concept, However, some
concern was expressed that too drastic organizational
changes within the U.S. Mission would create problems with
the counterpart GVN organization and would not ensure
success of rural construction programs. No agreement was
reached on the precise form for organization changes but
there was general consensus that the focal point of control
and management had to rest just below the Ambassador and
that there must be a senior Mission official solely concerned
with this subject. Disagreement was registered as to: .(1)
whether the Deputy Ambassador, assisted by a staff, should
serve this function or whether another senior official

24 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
