Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

-O»
4 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In contrast, the appendices contemplate (if not always recommend)
the more drastic alternatives. The military appendix argues (in a para-
phrase of the JCS position quoted earlier) that the U.S. ought to move
into Southeast Asia, preferably Laos, in force. The appendix by Sterling
Cottrell of State (Chairman of the Vietnam Task Force) suggests an oppo-
site view:

Since it is an open question whether the GVN can succeed
even with U.S. assistance, it would be a mistake for the U.S. to
commit itself irrevocably to the defeat of the communists in

SVN. 30/

And Cottrell, in the only explicit statement in the available record
on why the U.S. would not want to give Diem the treaty he had asked for,
states:

The Communist operation starts from the lowest social
level -- the villages. The battle must be joined and won at
this point. If not, the Communists will ultimately control
all but the relatively few areas of strong military concen-
trations. Foreign military forces cannot themselves win the
battle at the village level. Therefore, the primary respon-
sibility for saving the country must rest with the GVN.

For the above reason, the U.S. should assist the GVN.
This rules out any treaty or pact which either shifts ulti-
mate responsibility to the U.S., or engages any full U.S.
commitment to eliminate the Viet Cong threat. 31/

(And a treaty which did not apply to the Viet Cong threat would hardly
be a very reassuring thing to Saigon; while one that did would face an
uncertain future when it came to the Senate for ratification. )

Yet, Jorden and Cottrell had nothing much to recommend that was parti-
eularly different from what was recommended in the summary. The effect of
their papers is to throw doubt on the prospects for success of the inter-
vention proposed. But their recommendations come out about the same way,
so that if their papers seem more realistic in hindsight than the main
paper, they also seem more confused.

Cottrell, after recommending that the U.S. avoid committing itself
irrevocably to winning in South Vietnam, goes on to recommend:

The world should continue to be impressed that this situation
of overt DRV aggression, below the level of conventional war-
fare, must be stopped in the best interest of every free
nation. 32/

. 105
. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
