Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. A. 3.
THE U.S. AND FRANCE'S WITHDRAWAL FROM VIETNAM, 1954-1956

A. Introduction: Post-Geneva Expectations
1. France Will Stay in Vietnam

After 100 years of investment, interest and influence,
France got out of Vietnam in less than a year after the Geneva Conference
of July 1954. And France did not want to leave. On July 25, three days
after signing the Geneva Accords, Prime Minister Mendes-France said
France would maintain cultural and economic ties with North Vietnam and
would assist the development of Free (South) Vietnam. 1/ The predecessor
Laniel Government had recognized "Vietnam as a fully independent and
sovereign state in possession of all qualifications and powers known
in international law" on June 4, 1954; Mendes-France pledged to uphold
and further that treaty. 2/ In August he announced a three-phase
formula to implement it. Economic, administrative and financial ties
with the Associated States would be terminated as fast as possible. 3/
By December 1954, the last vestiges of the French colonial apparatus
had been eliminated. h/ However, Mendes-France's formula viewed
membership in the French Union as compulsory -- indicative of French
desire to stay in Vietnam but inimical to demands lodged by Diem and
the United States for independence which included the right to with-
draw from the French Union. 5/

Also in August, General Paul Ely, French High Commissioner
in Vietnam, reaffirmed French support of Vietnamese independence and
French readiness to further Vietnamese development. That the French
had a role to play was clear: French economic investment, cultural
institutions, military, political and administrative operations were
already part of South Vietnamese life. That France must play a role
was also clear. Under the Geneva Accords, France had pledged to
guarantee all-Vietnam elections in 1956, guarantee execution of the
armistice agreement, guarantee Vietnamese sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity, pledged to maintain the French Expeditionary
Corps until Vietnam requested its removal. General Ely had been
delegated extensive political and military authority to enable him
to meet these obligations. He worked sincerely to persuade both
Vietnamese and French that mutual cooperation would be mutually
beneficial, to erase the colonialist tinge of French presence, to
both speed and smooth the French transition from master to equal
partner of Vietnam. 6/

u TOP SECRET - Sensitive
