Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

From time to time certain members of this elite suffered an apparent
eclipse, but Ho Chi Minh ostensibly intervened on their behalf, mediated
the dispute in which they were involved, and restored them to the inner
circle -- usually in a different position. Thus, Truong Chinh was "fired"
as First Secretary of the Party in 1956 after the Land Reform Campaign
had been pressed too far and fast, but after a period of absence from

the public scene, re-emerged in 1958 as Vice Premier, and became in

1960 Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly. Vo
Nguyen Giap, who delivered a sharp critique of Truong Chinh in October
1956, disappeared for two months in October 1957, while Ho Chi Minh was

on a Bloc trip, amid rumors of a realignment of DRV leadership. Ho's
return brought Vo's resurrection. Other examples of this phenomenon
attest both to the immutability of the core leaders, and to the centrality
of Ho to their position. 16/

A similar testimony to Ho's eminence lies in the murky
evidence of factional dispute within the Lao Dong. In 1946 Truong Chinh
and Giap appeared to foreign observers as "extremists," urging violence
on Ho; in 1956 Truong was the Maoist extremist, Vo a Soviet-style moderate;
in 1966, Vo was rated a moderate, but Truong had become a neutral, and
reportedly himself had come under fire of "extremist" Le Duan. 17/ In-
creasingly, Ho has risen above the politics of personalities and intramural
clashes, and to the extent that he became involved, seems to have mediated
and reconciled rather than disciplined. Demonstrably, his personal leader-
ship qualities kept the DRV elite a cooperative, integrated team, with
individual ambitions and hardline-moderate factions delicately in balance.

The larger circle of the Central Committee of the Lao Dong
exhibited no different complexion from the inner leadership, except that
while most of the Politburo members are considered generalists, the 33
other Central Committee members include Party administrators, State
specialists, or military and internal security leaders. More than half of
the Central Committee have been identified as ICP members before World
War II. 18/ The DRV of 1960, was, then, a state dominated by a coterie
or revolutionaries of a particularly hardened breed. Ho himself, in a
1960 speech, paid this tribute to his colleagues:

"I wish to remind you that thirty-one of the comrades
who are now in the Central Committee were given altogether
222 years of imprisonment and deportation by the French
imperialists before the Revolution, not to mention the sen-
tences to death in absentia and the years of imprisonment
evaded by those who escaped from prison....Our comrades made
up for the years in prison in discussing and studying political
theory. Once more, this not only proves that the enemy's
extremely savage policy of repression could not check progress,
but on the contrary, it became a touchstone, it has further
steeled the revolutionaries. And the result was that the E
Revolution has triumphed, the imperialists have been defeated...." 19/

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
