Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On 18 June, McGeorge Bundy sent this memorandum to the Secretary
of Defense: 159/

"The President mentioned to me yesterday his desire that

‘we find more dramatic and effective actions in South Vietnam.

_ He also mentioned his desire for a report on the progress of

his idea that we need more light planes for operations there.
Finally, he asked if we have enough helicopters."

On the 16th of June Secretary McNamara had given the Army permission
to proceed with the organization of an Airmobile Division using the assets
of the llth Air Assault Division and the 2nd Infantry Division. 160/ On
the 2end, four days after the Bundy Memorandum, the Secretary proceeded
with readiness preparation of the Airmobile Division for deployment to
South Vietnam, and the number of maneuver battalions being considered for
eventual deployment rose from 23 U.S. to 34 U.S. or 44 U.S./3rd Country
total. 161/ On the 23rd of June the deployments of one Marine BLT to
Da Nang and one to Qui Nhon were approved. 162/ The latter move pro-
vided the needed security for the port of Qui Nhon in preparation for
the arrival of the Airmobile Division and elso allowed Westmoreland to
divert the Army brigade originally scheduled for Qui Nhon to Cam Ranh Bay
and Bien Hoa. 163/

F. Presidential Sanction for Phase I

On 17 July, McNamara was in Saigon with the new Ambassador,
Mr. Lodge, when he received the cable from Vance telling him that the
President had decided to proceed with the deployment of all 34 U.S.
battalions then under consideration. At that time, the Chief Executive
was said by Vance to be favorably inclined toward calling up reserves
to make the deployments a little less of a strain on the military estab-
lishment. 16)/

Upon his return from Vietnam, Secretary McNamara prepared a
draft release to-the press which stated that the total increase in U.S.
forces with the latest approved add-ons would be about 100,000. 165/
That information was not given out. Instead, after a week of deliberation,
the President held a press conference on the 28th of July in which he
told the American people "the lesson of history" dictated that the U.S.
commit its strength to resist aggression in South Vietnam. He said: 166/

“We did not choose to be the guardians at the gate, but
there is no one else.

"Nor would surrender in Vietnam bring peace, because we
learned from Hitler at Munich that success only feeds the
appetite of agssression. The battle would be renewed in one
country and then another country, bringing with it perhaps
even larger and crueler conflict, as we have learned from

the Tessons of history.

110 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
