Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

$51G.00/S-1746: Telezram
The Consul at Suigon (Reed) to the Secretary of State

_ CONFIDENTIAL Satcon, Aueust 17, 1946—10 a. m.
= [Received August 18—2:43 a. m.J°
342, At Dalat conference. which closed on lth, delegations were
reasonably unanimous as to desired structure and scope of federation
and relationship of member states with federation and each other.
Cochin-Chinese delegations vowed [delegution showed] more inde-
pendence of thought than other delegations and followed less slay-
ishly French pattern for Indochina of future. Tlis is part to
impress Cochin-Chinese and to help lessen belief present Coehin-
Chinese Govt only a puppet, but as previously reported members of
this govt sincerely want more freedom of action and less domination
by French. While findings and recommendations of conference not
binding they appear to be reasonable basis for future, but it is certain
Viet Nam will find much fault therewith, as they fall short of the
larger degree of independence desired by that state. Growing belief
High Conuissioner and Commissioner for Cochin-China * may go as
their policy subjected increasine eriticisrm here and reportedly in
France, particularly in, calling Dalat conference knowing Viet Nam
eould object and in creatine Cochin-China Govt without reference
toreferendum. Tlowever, they argne no reason why French Viet Nam
negotiations shonkl devide futire without reference to other states and
that necessary atmosphere for referendum is lacking (latter probably
true as any referendum under existing conditions might well tnerease
partisan activities). Unauestionably both officials ave less liberal in
views re nafive peoples than when first came to French Tidochina,
Next move will be submission Dalat pronosals to French Govt and
attemn! to reconcile proposals with Fontaineblean aeenda, Tlowever,
regardless soundness inany these pronosals. diffiewlt foresee any great
degree success in above so lone as Cochin China stays apart from Viet
Nam, which is one point of French policy in French Indochina.

Beit ts Reep

851(7.00/78-2946: Telecram

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul at Saigon (Reed)

SECRET Wasnixatox, September 4, 1946—5 p. m.
240, Action urtel 354 Aug 26 commended.** Lose no opportunity

® Not printed.
counteract with persons responsible press orientation, and in manner
you deem most effective, French colonial tendency picture TS as ag-
gressive and imperialistic. This brines certain French colonials, un-
wittinely for most part, very close fo Conimumist Party line.

With his knowledge US Clarac (veurtel 857 Aug 29) should know
better than enconrage anti-American suspicions this juncture Franco-
American relations, and Dent believes he can be persuaded take and
foster attitude required by logic events.

Chaxton

18
