Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

commitment of US force in the Pacific to the Asian mainland.
The French tied up some 200,000 troops during the unsuccessful
Indo-China effort.

This might significantly weaken the Diem regime in the long run,
having in mind the parallel of Rhee in Korea. 22/

This language is not solely the State Department's. In a Gilpatric
memo to be cited shortly, we will see that the JCS, for example, had a
hand in describing the role for US troops. Even so, the overall effect
of the draft, as already noted, tones down very drastically the commit-
ment implied by the May 1 Defense version:

1. The proposal is no longer for a unilateral, unlimited commit-
ment to save Vietnam from communism. It only proposes consideration
of a new treaty with South Vietnam (unlike the Defense draft which
proposed reading a unilateral commitment into the existing Manila
Treaty); and its purpose is to "bolster the will" of the South
Vietnamese to resist the communists, not (as the Defense draft appar-
ently meant) to guarantee that the US would join the war should the
South Vietnamese effort prove inadequate.

2. It gives pro and con arguments for sending US troops, in con-
trast to the Defense draft which included a flat recommendation to
send at least the 3600 men of the two division training teams and the
special forces training team.

A reasonable judgment, consequently, is that State thought the Defense
draft went too far in committing the US on Vietnam. (And in view of the
positions he would take in 1965, George Ball's role as senior State repre-
sentative on the Task Force obviously further encourages that interpreta-
tion.) But that is only a judgment. It is also possible to argue, in
contrast, that perhaps State (or State plus whatever White House influence
may have gone into the draft) simply was tidying up the Defense proposals:
for example, that the redrafters felt that a new bilateral treaty would be
& firmer besis for a commitment to save Vietnam than would reliance on a
reinterpretation of the SEATO Treaty. Similar arguments can be made on the
other points noted above.

Consequently, on any question about the intent of the redrafters, only
a judgment and not a statement of fact can be provided.

But on the question of the effect of the redraft, a stronger statement
can be made: for’whatever the intent of the redrafters, the effect cer-
tainly was to weaken the commitments implied by the Defense draft, and
leave the President a great deal of room for maneuver without heving to
explicitly overrule the recommendations presented to him.
