Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

not employed as a basis for planning and for programming. It was not
emphasized, and the lack of emphasis was consistent with the general
tone of optimism in the report as a whole. This general optimism

in fact reflected the judgments proferred by most of the senior -
officials upon whom the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of

the Joint Chiefs had principally relied for advice, It is obvious,
however, that the optimism was scarcely consistent with the grave
apprehension with which the political situation was viewed at the
time.

Ever since the Buddhist crisis began in early summer, the fear
had been felt at the highest U.S. policy levels that the explosiveness
and instability of the political situation in Vietnam might undermine
completely our efforts there, This apprehension had been the reason
why the President first dispatched the Mendenhall-Krulak mission
to Vietnam in early September, and then, a fortnight later, sent the
McNemara-~Taylor mission. The political crisis existing in Vietnam
was indeed a subject of great concern at the very time of the latter
visit. During this visit a decision was made that a proposed
Presidential letter of remonstrance to Diem for his repressive
policies concerning the Buddhists was tactically unwise and that,
instead, a letter over the signature of the Joint Chiefs, ostensibly
directed primarily to the military situation, should be delivered
to Diem carrying a somewhat modified expression of protest. That
letter dated October 1 was delivered to Diem on October 2 and in-
eluded these judgments:

Now, as Secretary McNamara has told you, a serious
doubt hangs over our hopes for the future. Can we
win together in the face of the reaction to the
measures taken by your government against the -
Buddhists and the students? As a military man I
would say that we can win provided there are no
further political setbacks, The military indi-
cators are still generally favorable and can be
made more so by actions readily within the power of
your government. If you allow me, I would mention
a few of the military actions which I believe neces-
sary for this improvement. 8,

And, in closing the letter the CJCS expressed himself in these

words:

in closing, Mr. President, may I give you my most
important overall impression? Up to now the battle
against the Viet Cong had seemed endless; no one

3 has been willing to set a date for its successful
conclusion. .After talking to scores of officers,
Vietnemese and American, I am convinced that the
Viet Cong insurgency in the North and Center can

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
