Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of administration lacking here. The Province Chief structure
has caused a breakdown of coordination and a fragmentation of
command structure which has blocked an effective attack on the
internal security problem." (Ibid., pp. 8-9)

(The splitting of responsibility for internal security between the Province
Chief, who controlled Provincial forces, and the military chain of command
none ie ARVN was a constant complaint by MACV during the later Diem
period.

-e. "Political Factors"

" ...The VC reportedly estimate that 70% of the people in
the rural areas of South Viet-Nam are either embittered by or
indifferent toward the present government...." (Ibid., p. 8)

"It is highly unlikely that any final solution can be found
to the internal security situation in South Viet-lNam if the
GVN does not enjoy the support and cooperation of the rural
population. At the present time indications are that the rural
population is generally apathetic towards the Diem Government
and there are signs of considerable dissatisfaction and silent
opposition. In part this attitude appears to result from wide-
spread fear of the Viet Cong and a belief that the GVN is
relatively helpless to protect the rural population from Viet
Cong depredations. Unfortunately the longer serious insecurity
continues to exist in the countryside despite GVN efforts to
control it, the more serious is the effect on the GVN's prestige.
Another effect is a growing belief among the peasants that the
Viet Cong will always be here as long 4s North Viet-Nam remains
under Communist control and that they must adjust to live with
them. (A realization of the long-range nature of the problem among
officials responsible for dealing with it could be an advantage.
In Malaya it has taken 11 years to reduce the security situation
to the minimum, and it is even more aifficult to deal with it in
a divided country with long exposed frontiers).

"There appear to be other reasons contributing to the diffi-
culty experienced by the GVN in attempting to rally the rural
population:

(a) Until recently it was becoming more and more
apparent that Diem was not being given accurate information on
the internal security and political situation in rural areas.
As late as the end of December, 1959, he was telling all
callers how much better the internal security situation had
become, despite many doubts raised by his listeners. Informa-
tion was apparently being presented to him by loeal officials

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
