Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

8. In view of their experience and the languase difficulties
involved, it is considered that the French are better qualified
to conduct the training of the indigenous forces than United
States personnel would be. However, it is believed that the
French might profit by applying some of the methods the United
States forces in Korea are using in training Kepublie of Korea
troops and officers. In this connection the Commander in Chief
Far East (CINCFE), and General Juin have agreed to exchange
French and Vietnam officers from Indochina to Korea, and Korean
Military Advisory Group (KMAG) personnel to Indochina. Accord-
ingly, there appears to be no need for further United States
participation in the training of the Vietnamese forces unless
specifically invited,

9. The formation of effective Vietnamese forces is handicapped
by deficient Vietnamese Incentive and lack of qualified indi-
genous military leadership. Consequently the French should be
given encouragement to grant Vietnemese forces more military
autonomy and to train indigenous officers, to assume more respon-
sibility for control of local forces.

10. Although the U.S, Air Force has recently assigned some
aircraft maintenance crews, on a temporary basis, to help the
French overcome a critical period in their aircraft operations,
it is considered that the French have the ability and can pro-
vide the personnel which would permit maximum utilization of
their aircraft. Current practice provides for Military Assist-
ance Advisory Group (MAAG ) to obtain the aid of special technical
groups from the U.S. Services whenever there 1s a need to in-
struct the French in the maintenance and operation of United
States supplied equipment. This type of assistance is deemed
adequate to meet current maintenance requirements.

11. In studying possible courses of action to be talen in the
defense of Indochina, the inadequate port facilities at Haiphons
and air facilities in the Hanol area have been pointed up as
major items in restricting the support of military operations.
The Chief, MAAG, Indochina, has mentioned that the movement of
supplies into the delta could be speeded by two or three months
if Haiphong were able to receive and unload deep-draft vessels.
The air depot at Bien Hoa is in particular need of expansion in
order to accelerate alr shipments. The improvement of the port
and air facilities would not only provide impetus to military
operations, bub'would benefit the economic status of Vietnam,
such improvement could be made with U.S. monetary and material
ald, but Jn order to avoid possible Chinese reaction, signifi-
cant numbers of U.S. personnel should not be utilized,
