Or at

Chier of “staff as me as staff. discussions between Vietnamese officers

brought -a. new, | eancosive GerCneices to the war in Indochina. Asa. [a4

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

and members of my mission. Discussions were also held with both
political and military representatives of Cambodia and Laos. At training
centers visited, pepresenbatives of the Associated States were playing a
prominent part ‘and participated extensively in the activities of my
mission. ,

53. Participation of MAAG Indochina in Activities of the Mission:

'. General Trapnell, in addition to supervising all administrative arrange-

ment s concerning our activities in Indochina, worked in close coordination
with the mission at all tines, Members of MAAG accompanied the mission
on all trips and eriefings: General Trapnell was informed of his
paameneiesitt ea tn following up actions of the mission.

54. Attitude of New French Command in Indochina: During my

stay in Indochina I became more and more impressed with the

sincerity of " General Navarre-and his top commanders to see

this war through to success at an early date. Progress in offensive

planning and increased agsressiveness in attitude and follow-through

were noted even during our brief stay. Once the French became convinced
’ ‘ *

of the soundness of our original recommendations they were not only very

receptive to all subsequent recommendations which we advanced but actually

appeared ‘to be groping for any new ideas which might contribute toward
winning the war in Indochina. Furthermore, their repeated invitations

Re Spot. ’
for me to come pack in & ge months "to witness the progress we will

have made" is, in ny opinion, concrete evidence that the new command has

closing thought I propose that henceforth we think in terms of the . Co)

'Navarre concept" in association with the war in Indochina,

se

MEE oa eg Z :
ga oe tay a Saree oe, cg

ey OHN W. O'S ANTEL P
ieutenant General, USA .
Chief of Mission
