Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET -— Sensitive

LOC targets in ROLLING THUNDER 10-13, Phese II armed recce would
be conducted concurrently with these actions and would be con-
tinued indefinitely to make DRV support to the VC in SVN and
PL/VM in Laos as difficult and costly as possible.

As these recommendations reached the JCS, the Joint Chiefs were
intensely pre-occupied with an interservice division over the issue of
the nature and extent of proposed large-scale U.S. troop deployments to
South Vietnam, requiring adjudication among at least 10 separate pro-
posals, and among widely differing views of the several Service Chiefs.
There were also substential differences over the future character of the
panbing program. On this latter issue, Air Force Chief of Staff General
McConnell took a maverick position, onting for a 28-day air progrem
ageinst North Vietnam to destroy all targets on the 94-target list. He
proposed beginning the air strikes in the southern part of North Vietnam
and continuing at two- to six-day intervals until Henoi itself was
attacked. "While I support appropriate deployment of ground forces in
South Vietnem," McConnell wrote, "it must be done in concert with /an/
overall plan to eliminate the source of /the/ insurgency." McConnell
believed that his proposal was consistent with previous JCS views on
action against the North and would be a strong deterrent against open
Chinese intervention. 104/

General McConnell withdrew his 28-day proposal from JCS considera-
tion when it became epparent thet the Joint Chiefs were inclined to
accept much of the CINCPAC recommendation for a "LOC-cut program” as
summarized above, and to incorporate some of McConnell's concepts in a
l2-week air strike program that the Joint Staff was preparing in response
to the Secretary of Defense's request and in accordance with his guidance.
The JCS 12-week program was briefed to the Secretary of Defense con-
ceptually on March 22 and submitted to him formally on March 27 under
cover of a JCS memorandum of that date. 105/

The program is described in a detailed Annex to the memorandum as
follows:

1. Concept. The concept, simply, stated, is to conduct an
air strike. program during the remaining 10 weeks of a 12-week
program which increases in intensity and severity of damage
over the period. The program can be considered in four phases.

a. The initial phase consists of a three-week inter-
diction campaign against the vulnerable Democratic Republic of
Vietnam (DPV) LOCs south of the 20th parallel. The concent of
this campaign is to conduct strikes against = number of inter-
related but separated choke points which will disrupt the flow
of militery supplies and equipment and tax the DRV capability
to restore these facilities. FEssential to the success of this
phase is the initial attacks on targets No. 14 and 18.8 /Thanh

T7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
