Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET --Sensitive

Vietnam to the free world the U.S. might deploy "self-sustaining forces
to South Vietnam either unilaterally or as part of a Manila Pact force"
or the U.S. could withdraw all U.S. support from South Vietnam and con-
centrate on "saving the rest of Southeast Asia."

No specific course of action was recommended but the
JCS predicted the loss of Cambodia and Laos would follow a communist
take-over of South Vietnam; they felt a greatly expanded aid program
would be necessary to retain a friendly government in Thailand. In any
event, the chance that U.S. armed forces would be reguired to support
American policy in Southeast Asia would be greatly increased if South
Vietnam fell. The Chiefs concluded by saying "a firm decision at the
national level as to the implementation of US policy in Southeast Asia
is mandatory, recommended...against a 'static' defense for this area and
»+-recommended adoption of a concept of offensive actions against the
military power of the aggressor." 96/

5- January 1955: U.S. Backing for Diem is Reaffirmed

General Collins' recommendations to the National Security
Council on January 20, 1955 underscored the crucial position South Viet-
nam held within the context of American policy toward Southeast Asia.
Like Dulles and the Joint Chiefs before him, Collins said:

In view of the importance of Vietnam to all of Southeast
Asia, I am convinced that the United States should expend the
funds, material and efforts required to strengthen the country
and help it retain its independence. I cannot guarantee that’
Vietnam will remain free even with ovr aid. But I know that
without our aid Vietnam will surely be lost to Communism. If
the chances of success are difficult to calculate, the results
of a withdrawal of American aid are only too certain not only
in Vietnam but throughout Southeast Asia. Such a withdrawal
would hasten the pace of Communist advances in the Far East as
@ whole and could result in the loss of Southeast Asia to
Communism. In my opinion the chance of success is not only
worth the gamble; we cannot afford to let free Vietnam go by
default. 97/

Collins was more sanguine about Diem than he had been a
month before. Diem had shown some progress: General Minh was named
Minister of Defense and seemed to be doing an adequate job; Diem had
launched an anti-corruption drive (and in closing the Grande Monde
Casino, Diem threw down the gauntlet before the Binh Xuyen) and had made
some advances in land reform. Collins recommended continued U.S. support
for him:

On balance I believe that Diem's integrity, strong
nationalism, tenacity and spiritual qualities render him
the best available Premier to lead Vietnam...against com-
munism....Considering all factors, although the situation

25 TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
