Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The resultant U.S. policy has most often been termed "neutrality."
It was, however, also consistent with the policy of deferring to French
volition announced by President Roosevelt's Secretary of State on
3 April 1945. It was a policy characterized by the same indecision
that had marked U.S. wartime policy. It was, moreover, a policy formu-
lated with an undertone of indifference: at the time, Indochina
appeared to be one region in which the U.S. might enjoy the luxury of
abstention. .

When open warfare broke out between the DRV and France in December,
‘1946, John Carter Vincent, Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs,
in a memorandum to Under Secretary Acheson of 23 December 19h6, recom-
mended that the latter call in the French Ambassador to highlight inher-
ent dangers. The memorandum included this acute analysis:

"Although the French in Indochina have made far-reaching
paper-concessions to the Vietnamese desire for autonomy,
French actions on the scene have been directed toward whittling
down the powers and the territorial extent of the Vietnam
‘free state.' This process the Vietnamese have continued to
resist. At the same time, the French themselves admit that
they lack the military strength to reconquer the country. In
brief, with inadequate forces, with public opinion sharply at
odds, with a government rendered largely ineffective through
internal division, the French have tried to accomplish in
Indochina what a strong and united Britain has found it unwise
to attempt in Burma. Given the present elements in the situ-
ation, guerrilla warfare may continue indefinitely.”

Secretary Acheson acted on Mr. Vincent's suggestion, and expressed to
the Ambassador views summarized as follows:

"We had anticipated such a situation developing in November
and events have confirmed our fears. While we have no wish to

A-43 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
