Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

are involved in the situation there. Now that we are once again confronted
with what apparently is a critical situation, could you define for us the
precise nature and extent of those vital Western interests, as you see them?

"A, Well, our interest in Southeast Asia has been developed and expressed
throughout this postwar period. Before SEATO (Southeast Asia Treaty Organi-
zation) came into existence, we and Britain and France were in very close
touch with that situation. SEATO underlined the importance we attached to
the security of the countries of that area.

"But actually the American interest can be expressed in very simple
terms. Where there is a country which is independent and secure and in
a position to work out its own policy and be left alone by its neighbors,
there is a country whose position is consistent with our understanding of
our interests in the world. It's just as simple as that.

"Tf we have military personnel in Southeast Asia, it is because we feel
that they are needed to assist South Vietnam at the present time to maintain
its security and independence. If South Vietnam’s neighbors would leave it
alone, those military people could come home.

"We have no desire for any bases or permanent military presence in that
area. We are interested in the independence of states. That is why we have
more than 40 allies. That is why we are interested in the independence and
security of the nonalined countries. Because, to us, the general system
of states represented in the United Nations Charter is our view of a world
that is consistent with American interests. So our own interest there is
very simple.

"But it is very important, because we feel that we have learned in the
last many decades that a persistent course of aggression left to go unchecked
can only lead to a general war and therefore that the independence of particu-
lar countries is a matter of importance to the general peace.

"Peiping's Militant Doctrine:

"Q. Mr. Secretary, could I put that question slightly differently?
In the last decade or so, over three or four administrations, this Govern-
ment has taken the position that the Indochina peninsula had an importance
to. this country beyond the actualities of the countries involved; that is,
that it had a relationship to the American problem with China, and out of
this developed, over a long period of time, the so-called falling-domino
theory. Could you tell us whether you subscribe to that theory and whether
you look upon our interest in Vietnam and Laos -- or how you look upon our
interest in Vietnam and Laos in relation to China?

"A, Well, I would not myself go to the trouble of trying to outline
a ‘domino’ theory. The theory of the problem rests in Peiping. It rests
ina militant approach to the spread of the world revolution as seen from
the communist point of view. And we know, given their frequently and publicly

D-19
