Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

TV. FLAMING DART I AND II -- THE IMPERCEPTIBLE TRANSITION
A. The First Reprisal

The lorg months of contingency planning, hesitation, and agonized
debate were suddenly cut short on February 7th, when the VC struck the
American installations at Pleiku and Camp Holloway. This time the Presi-
dent showed the same decisiveness and swift reaction that he had displayed
six months earlier in the Gulf of Tonkin. The decision to strike back was
reached in a 75 minute meeting of the National Security Council on the
evening of February 6 (Washington time) in the Cabinet Room of the White
House, and in the presence of Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield and
House Speaker John McCormack. McGeorge Bundy, on his mission to Saigon
at the time, had joined Ambassador Taylor and General Westmoreland in
recommending prompt retaliation in telecoms with the President from the
communications center in Saigon.

The strike, carried out during the early morning hours of the 7th
(Washington time) was, at least militarily, something of a fizzle. The
mildest of the three attack options was selected for the strike, but when *
the executive order was flashed, only one of the three CVA's (USS Ranger)
was on station at Point Yankee. The other two (Han cock and Coral Sea)
had been stood down to a 96-hour alert after the cancellation of the
DESOTO Patrol and were enroute to assignments elsewhere. They were
urgently recalled by CINCPAC to participate in the strike, which had to
be delayed until the CVA's returned to points from which their aircraft
could reach the assigned targets. The weather, however, was very adverse,
causing a large number of sorties to abort, with the result that only one
of the three assigned targets was struck in force. 36/ In order to
stiffen the reprisal and to make it clearly a joint US-GVN response, the
target was restruck the following day (Februery 8) by the US carrier
aircraft that had aborted the previous day, end a VNAF strike by 24 A-lH's
supported by USAF pathfinder, flak suppression and CAP aircraft, was
carried out against target 32 (Vu Con Barracks) concurrently. 37/

B. Timing of Pleiku and the Kosygin Visit

As was indicated earlier, the U.S. had put off the DESOTO Patrol
that had been scheduled for February 7 so as to avoid any appearance of
provocetiveness vis-a-vis Kosygin, who was to arrive in Hanoi on February 6.
And yet it was precisely then, at the very beginning of the Kosygin visit,
that the VC launched their spectacular attack on the US installations.

This had led many to conjecture thet the raid was deliberately organized
and timed by the hardliners in Hanoi so as to nip in the bud any possible
Soviet peace initiative or in other ways to put Kosygin on the spot.

Whether Hanoi specifically ordered the Pleiku attack or whether
the VC merely received Henoi's blessing for the attack remains speculative.
There can be little doubt, however, that Hanoi was fully informed and had
ample reason to favor the action. Robert Shaplen argues that, from Hanoi's
point of view,

*

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
