Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Argued in another way, I would now reckon that
the odds are considerably better than 50-50 that there will
be @ renewal of convulsion in China in the next few months.
In December and January, I think this was the added factor
that caused Hanoi to give off a “tremor” and at least to
make a significant tactical change in its position. If con-
vulsion now occurs again, it will offset whatever encourage-
ment Hanoi may have received from the apparent recent promise
of additional Soviet aid and the easing of whatever transit
tensions may have existed between Moscow and Peking. In fact,
renewed convulsion in China could at some point become a really
major factor to Hanoi. This is a dubious effect on which we can-
not and should not rely. But it serves to put into focus the
relative importance of any additional military actions, particu-
Jarly in the North. And it is a very strong argument indeed
against any additional step-up in our bombing of the North,
or mining Haiphong. :

"CG. Over-All Estimate. If we go on as we are doing, if
the political process in the South comes off well, and if the
Chinese do not settle down, I myself would reckon that by the
end of 1967 there is at least a 50-50 chance that a favorable
tide will be running really strongly in the South, and that
Hanoi will be very discouraged. Whether they will move to
negotiate is of course a slightly different question, but we
could be visibly and strongly on the way.

If China should go into a real convulsion, I would
raise these odds slightly, and think it clearly more likely
that Hanoi would choose a negotiating path to the conclusion." 62/

Just as many others were doing, Bundy revealed an increasing sensi-
tivity for the urgent development of a coherent negotiating strategy. On
this he wrote:

“While we need a thorough review of our whole objec-
tives and negotiating position, I doubt very much if we
shall find any points on which we now wish to change our
public position or to take any new initiative vig-a-viz
Hanoi.

"Basically, in line with the idea of conveying an
impression of steady firmness to Hanoi, I think we should
avoid new initiatives except 8s We have to respond to some
significant third party such as U Thant or the Canadians.
I would certainly not go into the UN or the World Court.

"Behind this strategy lies the judgment that Hanoi is

88 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
