ae nt A cea Sy aah fol we ae

ee ee

epee Sankaran Memento

ek

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

“direct channels. The United States should also use every
effort to prevent the Chinese Communists from obtaining
from non-Soviet sources supplies of materiels and equipment
of direct military utility (1A items). The United States
should, on the other hand, permit exports to China of 1B

\i tems Within quantitative limits of normal civilian use and
iunder controls which cen be applied restrictively if it be-
lcomes necessary to do so in the netional interest, and
ishould place no obstacle in the way of trade with Chine in /“
non-strategic commodities. The United Stetes should seek +
the support and concurrence of its principal European allies
in these policies. The United States should not extend gov-
ernmental economic assistance to Communist China or encour-
age private investment in Communist China.

£. (1) The United States should continue the policy set
forth in NSC 37/2 and 37/5 of attempting to deny Formosa
end the Pescadores to the Chinese Communists through diplo-
matic and economic means within the limitations imposed by
the fact that successful achievement of this objective will
primarily depend on prompt initietion and faithful implemen-
tation of essential measures of self-help by the non-Commun-
ist administration of the islands, and by the fact that
freedom of U.-S. diplomatic and economic action will be
influenced, necessarily, by action taken-by other countries.

4

0) (2) Since the United States may not be eble to achieve’
its objectives through political and economic means, and in
view of the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (reaffirmed
in NSC 37,/7 of August 22, 1949) thet, while Formosa is stra-
tegically important to the United States, "the strategic
gmportence of Formosa does not justify overt military action
~ee-8O long as the present disparity between our military
strength end cur global obligations exists", the United

States should make every effort to strengthen the over-all

U, S. position with respect to the Philippines, the Ryukyus,

and Japan. The United States shouid, for example, proceed

apace with implementation of the policy set forth in regard

“to the Ryukyus in paragraph 5 of NSC 13/3.

h. The United States should continue to use its influence
in Aste toward resoiving the coloniel-nationalist conflict in
such a wey as to satisfy the fundementel demands of the nation-
alist movement while at the same time minimizing the strain on
the colonial powers who ere our Western allies. Particular at-
tention should be given to the problem of French Indo-China and
action should be tekken to bring home to the French the urgency
of removing the carriers to the obtaining by Beo Dai or other
non-Conmunist nationalist leaders of the support of a substen-
tial proportion of the Vietnamese. With the successful conclu-
sion of the Round Table Conference at The Hague the United

i>
20
“SC 48/2 Ty TOP SECRET
