2k.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33

3h.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

President Johnson relates aggression in SVN as “part of

wider pattern of aggressive purposes” urged on by Peiping;

vows to fulfill U.S, commitment supported by his three

DE CCOCEREON Be isis 40's le's/4'0 41s'4.e.alsiolnis WaNIb BMS ole ANNle ed eee Sane es ae nmr Oe

Leonard Unger emphasizes strategic significance of region to

U.S. and "test case for wars of liberation” strategy in ex-

plaining U.S. concerns in Ns ech a9 'b acd'e ele wle{e laa sereleratetalaleve lam alae levele'e D-33 5

Secretary Rusk defines "wars of liberation" as endorsed by
Communist leaders, explains SVN's right of self-defense in
legal terms and details the nature of the struggle in SVN..... D-35

President Johnson cites aggression as requiring firm stand by
U.S. Secretary McNamara in response to a question defines the
"wars of liberation" strategy as urged by Communist leaders... D-39

Secretary Ball cites "wars of liberation" as threatening the

‘existence of small states everywhere...csseccsccccvcevccevecss Do¥l

President Johnson states the Communist aim in VN is to show the
"American commitment is worthless"; success in that effort, he
predicts, would remove the one obstacle standing between "ex-
panding communism and independent Asian nations."..esseseeveee DHL

William Bundy explains myths surrounding the question of
"reunification election” and the relationship between the
opposition to Diem and the Viet Cong; he documents U.S. con-

cerns regarding the "wars of liberation” threat......sseeeses- D-H2

President Johnson states Communist China's "target is not

merely SVN, it is Asia" and their objective in VN is "to erode

and to discredit America's ability to help prevent Chinese
domination over) Al Lvof Asia. isin cc cwacicesesleescc veesecesicccene, Dato

Williem Bundy discusses the threat of Communist China which
underlies the American presence in Asia, and the relationship
of Hanoi to the Communist movement......sscscsscccsccccceccces DHh6

President Johnson states our failures in the 1930's resulted
from inaction rather than action.....ccccccccccccccccccccecess DS

Secretary Rusk discusses the fundamental role which American
commitments play in maintaining world peace and the need to

find a "complete answer" to the problem of "wars of libera-

tion” threat.cccrcccccsvcctvscccccccccscsscccssesesscsssccoces DalQ

D-23
