Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

VIII. TARGET RATIONALE SHIFTS TOWARD INTERDICTION

Late February and early March, 1965 saw a significant refocusing of

_ target emphasis. Up to that time -- in the initial U.S. reprisal strikes
and the first ROLLING THUNDER actions -- target selection had been com-
pletely dominated by political and psychological considerations. Para-
mount in the Administration's target choices were such complex and often
conflicting objectives as boosting the GVN's morale, evidencing the firm-
ness of U.S. resolve, demonstreting the potential for inflicting pain upon
the DRV, providing a legal rationale for our actions, and so forth.
Relatively little weight was given to the purely physical or more directly
military and economic implications of whatever target destruction might be
achieved.

With the gradual acceptance, beginning in March, of the need for a
militarily more significant, sustained bombing program, serious attention
began to be paid to the develonment of a target system or systems that
would have a more tangible and coherent military rationale. The first
and most obvious candidate for such a target concept was that of inter-
dicting the flow of men and supplies into South Vietnam by striking the
lines of communication (10C's) of the DRV. Since North Vietnamese
"aggression" was the principal legal justification for U.S. bombing raids
upon the DRV, attacking and impeding the visible manifestations of this
aggression -- the infiltration -- also seemed logical and attractive from
this international legality point of view.

The Secretary of Defense's attention was called to this target con-
cept as early as 13 February, when the Joint Chiefs briefed McNamara in
the Chairman's office on an analysis of the southern portion of the North
Vietnamese railway system. It was pointed out in the briefing that South
of the 20th parallel there exists about 115 miles of operable rail systems
and that the vulnerable points on this southern portion of the system are
five bridges of 300 feet or greater length and the railway classification
yards at Vinh. It was argued that the bridges were very lightly defended
and that only the rail yards at Vinh would pose any serious anti-aircraft
defense problem. - The CJCS felt that:

There is no doubt but that the six targets mentioned com-
prise an attractive, vulnerable and remunerative target system
which would hurt the North Vietnamese psychologically, econo-
mically and militarily. As regards the latter, the destruction
of the southern bridge system would hamser and delay the move-
ment of DRV/CHICOM ground forces to the south and, Likewise,
would place a stricture on the quantities of materiel and per-
sonnel which can be infiltrated through Laos and South Vietnam.
A minimum of 201 strike sorties would be required to attack
with a high degree of assurance the six targets simultaneously

_which would be militarily the most desirable timing of attack.

: Th. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
