Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"GENERAL THIEU: In spite of what you say, it should
be noted that the Vietnamese Comnander-in-Chief is in a special
situation. He therefore needs advisors. We do not want to
force General Khanh; we advise him. We will do what he orders...
"AMBASSADOR TAYLOR: Would your officers be willing to
come into & government if called upon to do so by Huong?
IT have been impressed by the high guality of many Vietnamese
officers. I am sure that many of the most able men in this
country are in uniform. Last fall when the HNC and Huong
Government was being formed, I suggested to General Khanh there
should be some military participation, but my suggestions were
not accepted. It would therefore be natural for some of them
now to be called upon to serve in the government. Would you
be willing to do so?...

"GENERAL KY: Nonetheless, I would object to the idea’
of the military going back into the government right away.
People will say it is a military coup.

"AMBASSADOR TAYLOR and AMBASSADOR JOHNSON: (Together)
People will say it anyway....

"AMBASSADOR TAYLOR: You have destroyed the Charter.

The Chief of State will still have to prepare for elections.
Nobody believes that the Chief of State has either the power
or the ability to do this without the HNC or some other ad-
visory body. If I were the Prime Minister, I would simply
overlook the destruction of the HNC. But we are preserving
the HNC itself. You need a legislative branch and you need
this particular step in the formation of a government with
National Assembly... :

"AMBASSADOR TAYLOR: It should be noted that Prime Minister
Huong has not accepted the dissolution of the HNC...

"GENERAL THIEU: What kind of concession does Huong want
from us?

“Ambassador Taylor again noted the need for the HNC
function.

"GENERAL KY: Perhaps it is better if we now let General
Khanh and Prime Minister Huong talk.

"GENERAL THIBU: After all, we did not arrest all the
menbers of the HNC. Of nine members we detained only five.
These people are not under arrest. They are simply under
controlled residence...

"AMBASSADOR TAYLOR: Our problem now, gentlemen, is to
organize our work for the rest of the day. For one thing,
the government will have to issue a4 communique.

57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

wf
