Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

United States acquiesce in what the Nhus had done," was given great
weight, 19/ Admiral Felt telephoned Washington from CINCPAC to support
a strong U.S, stand against the Nhus, 20/ The unanswered question, of
course, was whether the Nhus could be removed without also sacrificing
Diem, and if not, whether the resulting political instebility would not
have an even more detrimental effect on the war effort than maintaining
Diem,

The August 24 cable of instructions to Lodge resulting from these
deliberations outlined an important, and subsequently controversial, new
policy approach for the U.S. in South Vietnam. Its opening paragraphs
crisply set forth the new American view:

It is now clear that whether military proposed martial
“law or whether Nhu tricked them into it, Nhu took advantage
of its imposition to smash pagodas with police and Tung's
Special Forces loyal to him, thus placing onus on military
in eyes of world and Vietnamese people. Also clear that Nhu
has maneuvered himself into commanding position.

US Government cannot tolerate situation in which power
lies in Nhu's hands, Diem must be given chance to rid himself
of Nhu and his coterie and replace them with best military and
political personalities ayaileble.

If, in spite of all your efforts, Diem remains obdurate
and refuses, then we mist face the possibility that Diem
himself cannot be preserved. 21/

Lodge was instructed to tell the GVN the U.S. could not accept the
actions against the Buddhists and that prompt dramatic steps to redress
the situation must be taken. The key military leaders were to be
privately informed that,

- - . US would find it impossible to continue support
GVN militarily and economically unless above steps are taken
immediately which we recognize requires removal of Nhus
from the scene. We wish give Diem reasonable opportunity
to remove Nhus, but if he remains obdurate, then we are
prepared to accept the obvious implication that we can no
longer support Diem. You may also tell appropriate military
commanders we will give them direct support in any interim
period of breakdown central government mechanism. 22/

Finally, the message recognized the need to publicly exonerate the army
from the raids and asked Lodge to approve a VOA broadcast to that effect.
Lodge was requested, as well, to survey urgently for alternative leader-
ship.

Clearance of the draft message was complicated by the coincident
week-end absence from Washington of most of the top level members of
the Administration, The President was in Hyannis Port; Rusk was in
New York; and McNamara and McCone were away on vacation. Both the

15 TOP SECRET - vcensitive
