Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3s What of French Obligations Under the Geneva Accords?

But an important question remained. Under the Geneva agreements
_ France was responsible for protection and support of the International Con-
trol Commission; representatives of the People's Army of North Vietnam and
France sat on the Joint Armistice Commission charged with ensuring provisions
of the armistice agreement were met. France could not lightly cast off these
obligations nor could France transfer them to South Vietnam: Diem denounced
the Geneva accords and refused to be bound by them in any way.

In February, French Foreign Minister Pineau described the dif-
ficult French position as a result of certain conditions:

These are the independence granted to South Vietnam and the
Geneva accords some provisions of which have up to date demanded
and justified our presence in this country. 157/

Particularly difficult was the question of ICC support. Diem
refused to associate South Vietnam openly with the ICC but did agree to’
assume responsibility for its servicing if France would leave a small mis-
sion in Vietnam to fulfill French obligations. 158/ Dulles liked this idea.
His view was: "while we should certainly take no positive step to speed up
present process of decay of Geneva Accords, neither should we make the
slightest effort to infuse life into them." 159/

Eight months later, Diem finally relaxed his uncompromising stand
against Geneva, agreed to respect the armistice and provide security for the
IcC. In July 1956, Vietnam promised to replace the French liaison mission to
the ICC. France maintained membership on the Joint Armistice Commission and
continued to bear ICC expenses. 160/ But France was never able to meet Geneva
obligations concerning the elections of 1956, for Diem matched his refusal
to consult with the Vietminh about elections with an adamant refusal to ever
hold them. Neither Britain nor the Soviet Union pressed the matter; the
United States backed Diem's position.

ho
