Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

war to that date, began. This operation took place in the area south
of the DMZ. As the operation continued, heavy contact was made with the
NVA 325B Division, which had infiltrated through the DMZ with the sus-
pected purpose of attacking and seizing Quang Tri Province. Operation
HASTINGS was followed by Operation PRAIRIE, which began on 3 August,
when one battalion was retained south of the DMZ to keep track of the
NVA 324B and 341st Divisions which had been driven back into the DMZ in
Operation HASTINGS. Contact with the enemy began immediately and con-
tinued to increase. The Marine Corps forces were redistributed and
Operation PRAIRIE continued until the end of the year. During this
period of time, amphibious Operation DECK HOUSE IV was launched against
enemy units which had been detected trying to infiltrate from the DMZ
southward along the coast. 21/

In II Corps, General Westmoreland set forth his strategy for the
highlands in the immediate future. It was apparent that, although the
enemy had begun his final SW monsoon campaign, the US SW monsoon cam-
paign was proceeding admirably and had only to continue to keep the
enemy Off balance. General Westmoreland envisioned a series of opera-
tions in which the lst Brigade, 101st Airborne Division, the 3rd Brigade
of the 25th Infantry Division, and a brigade of the lst Cavalry Division
would provide surveillance and a screen to the west of Kontum and
Pleiku. 22/

Late in the spring, on 10 May, the 3rd Brigade of the 25th Infantry
Division had initiated Operation PAUL REVERE along the Cambodian border
near Chupong Mountains. This operation was to be evaluated by MACV 23/
as "probably the single most significant Allied action in keeping the
eneny from mounting his vaunted SW monsoon offensive." By July, when
the NVA infiltration appeared to have become too much for them to handle,
the lst Air Cavalry was called in to assist. When the lst Cavalry Division
became involved the operation was renamed PAUL REVERE II. It continued
for another 25 days when the major threat seemed to abate, at which time
the operation was again redesignated, this time, PAUL REVERE IIT.

In III Corps, BIRMINGHAM was followed by EL PASO II, which ran
from 2 June through July. This search and destroy operation marked
the entrance of the Ist Infantry Division into the War Zone C. The
results of this operation included killing of over 800 enemy, destruc-
tion of a substantial quantity of rice, salt, and fish, and the engage-
ment of three VG regiments, the 27lst, 27end, and 2/3rd -- the regiments
of the 9th VC Division. 2h/

By August, Operations HASTINGS south of the DMZ in I Corps, PAUL
REVERE IT along the Cambodian border in the Central Highlands of II Corps,
and EL PASO II along the Cambodian border in III Corps had indicated to
COMUSMACV that infiltration was increasing from sanctuaries outside the
boundaries of South Vietnam. The most pressing of these infiltration
routes appeared to be the one through the -IMZ. On 8 August, Ambassador
Iodge sent a message to the Department of State.

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
