Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

retain their power to threaten and harass the government until the
National Army is strong enough to neutralize their forces." 33/

The sects thus were regarded as an internal security
threat--and more specifically as a threat to the Diem government. By
some in Saigon they were regarded as the major internal threat. 3h/
Long subsidized by the French as their partners in the Indochina war,
and faced with the end of French financial assistance, major elements
of the sect forces were integrated into the Vietnamese National Army;
other elements, including the Hoa Hao forces of Ba Cut, were fragmented
and reduced to low-level dissidence by government forces, according to
contemporary intelligence estimates, by 1956. 35/ There is some evi-
dence that these fragmented groups were penetrated by the communists,
however, and that they were used by the communists throughout the period.
In this role the sects represented a continuing, if low-level, insurgent
threat as an element in the overall internal security problem not
qualitatively different from -that repre ented by the communists them-
selves.-

2. The Viet Minh Residue in South Vietnam was generally
regarded as the instrument with which "the Communists" would pursue
their “objective of securing control of a11 Indochina." 36/ Contem-
porary (1954) intelligence reports indicated the belief that

..-the Viet Minh will seek to retain sizeable military
and political assets in South Vietnam. Although the [Geneva]
agreements provide for the removal to the north of 211 Viet
Minh forces, many of the regular and irregular Viet Minh
soldiers now in the south are natives of the area, and large
numbers of them will probably cache their arms and remain in
South Vietnam. In addition, Viet Minh administrative cadres
have been in firm control of several large areas in Central
and South Vietnam for several years. These cadres will
probably remain in place.... 37/

later reports confirmed this statement and continued to describe the
situation as "precarious." 38/

Estimates during the period of relevance were consistent
on the issue of control of the Viet Minh movement in the South: They
did not question unity of purpose among the communists of the north
and south (or, for that matter, among the members of the communist
bloc); they did continue to assert or infer that the Viet Minh in the
south were under the control of the Viet Minh in the north. 39/

Viet Minh-force levels in the south were variously esti-
mated by the U.S. during this period but never exceeded 10,000; GVN
estimates, which tended to include all organized dissidents, were con-
sistently lower than the U.S. estimates, never exceeding 8,000. Of

:

[/k TOP SECRET — Sensitive
