Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Over and above organizational considerations, the NCP provided for
systematic intensification of aggressive operations in all CTZs to keep
the VC off balance, while simultaneously conducting clear and hold opera-
tions in support of the expanding Strategic Hamlet Program. Priority
of military tasks was first to concentrate on areas north of Saigon,
then gradually shift toward the south to Saigon and the Delta. 5/

The proposed NCP was submitted to the GVN in October and a month
later was adopted in concept and outline. On 26 November, President Diem
promulgated the necessary implementing decrees and directives to effect
the reorganization of the SVN armed forces and realign the chain of com-
mand. An integrated Joint Operations Center (JOC) was also established and
became operational on 20 December, with representation from JGS and its
counterpart in USMACV to centralize control over current operations. The
following January the draft of a detailed implement:ing plan for the NCP
itself was completed and subsequently approved. 6/

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR SOUTH VIETNAM

Meanwhile, the first cut at the CPSVN was also completed by the MACV
planners. It was forwarded to CINCPAC on 7 December, but CINCPAC, upon
reviewing the proposed plan, considered it infeasible because of the high
costs involved and the marginal capacity of the RVNAF to train the neces-
sary personnel in the required skills within the time frame specified. As
a result of CINCPAC's reaction to the initial version, the CPSVN was revised
and resubmitted by COMUSMACV on 19 January 1963. di The new CPSVN covered
the period FY 1963-1968. In transmitting it, COMUSMACV recommended that
future Military Assistance Programs (MAPs) be keyed therefore to the CPSVN.
He also indicated that the CPSVN had been coordinated with the Ambassador,
who concurred in it. 8/

Force levels laid out in the CPSVN provided for total personnel
inereases reaching a peak of 458,000 (regular and para-military) in FY 6,
with RVNAF manning strength raised from 215,000 to a peak of 230,000 in
the same FY period and remaining on that plateau thereafter. Order of
magnitude costs (in $ millions) of the CPSVN would come to:

FY 63 = FY _ 64 FY 65 FY 66 ~=- FY: 6 FY 68 TOTAL,
187 218 153 138 169 213 978

CINCPAC approved the CPSVN as submitted and sent it on to the JCS.
However, in the interim, OSD had issued dollar guidelines for MAP planning
for Vietnam. The ceilings indicated therein were significantly at variance
with the costing figures employed by MACV in developing the CPSVN. 9/ When
CINCPAC forwarded the plan, therefore, he went to considerable lengths to
explain the discrepancies and to support and justify the higher costs.
Comparison of the DOD dollar guidelines with the CPSVN, projected through
FY 69, showed a net difference of approximately 66 million dollars, with

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
