Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

moments of crisis and diminishing in quieter periods. Moscow's
willingness to give overt backing to Hanoi, however, seems to
be in inverse proportion to the level of threat to North Viet-~
nem." 40/ (Underlining added)

4. Perceptions and Development of U.S. Pressure Options

The NSC Working Group began its deliberations with a variety of
U.S. actions in mind end with an apparently flexible approach to the
objectives that the Administration might reasonably seek to achieve. As
ideas were exchanged and debated, however, objectives became somewhat
less flexible and options seemed to narrow. Such &® process could have
resulted from either: (1) preconceptions on the part of particularly
influential members; (2) a bureaucratic tendency to compromise; or (3)
simply the limited availability of practical alternatives. A combination
of these factors may even have been et work in the case of the Working
Group. An assessment of this nature is beyond the scope of this pri-
marily documentary research effort. Still, the question is an important.
one to reflect on in tracing the development of Working Group recommen-
dations. Mos

fe Rereepeion of Ug.) Onjech ines ere everescs. National. ob-
jectives in Southeast Asia were regarded in two categories: existing
(sometimes called "initial") policy objectives and those comprising a
possible fallback position. The former did not change and did not
undergo any reinterpretation during the course of the Working Group's
study. These were seen as (1) "helping a government /of South Vietnen/
defend its independence," and (2) "working to preserve /in Laos/ an
international neutralized settlement." Three basic "factors" were
recognized as "standing behind" these policy objectives:.

"a. The general principle of helping countries that try
to defend their owm freedom against communist subversion and
attack.

"b. The specific consequences of commmist control of
South Viet-Nem and Leos for the security of, successively,
Cambodia, Thailand (most seriously), Melsysia, and the
Philippines -- and resulting increases in the threat to
India and -- more in the realm of morale effects in the short
term -- the threat to [other nations in Asia/.

"ce. South Viet-Nam, and to a lesser extent, Leos, as test
cases of communist “wars of national liberstion" world-wide.” 41/

' Current U.S, objectives in South Vietnam and Laos were seen as
an integral part of the "overall policy of resisting Communist expansion
world-wide," and particularly a part of the "policy of resisting the
expension of Communist China and its allies, North Viet-Nam end North

ie TOP SECRET - Sensitive
