Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The first battalion of Marines splashed ashore at Danang about
0900, March 8. ‘The next day a second battalion came in by air.

The trip of Army Chief of Staff Johnson to Saigon in mid-March,
1965, signalled the beginning of consideration and planning for the intro-
duction of significant numbers of ground combet forces. General Johnson
observed in closing his report:

"In order for the USG to evaluate his (COMUSMACV's)
request properly when submitted, a policy determination must
be made in the very near future that will answer the question,
what should the VN be expected to do for themselves and how
much more the U.S, must contribute directly to the security
of VN." 14/

Secretary McNamara answered on the margin of his copy of the report, "Policy
is: Anything thet will strengthen the position of the GVN will be sent." 15/

On March 8, Taylor talked with Prime Minister Quat about his con-
cept of joint command, a matter which had been raised with General Johnson
on the occasion of his visit March 6 (EmbTel 2877). Taylor found Quat's
ideas very hazy, but:

"his purpose was very clear. He hopes by some joint
command device to bring his maverick generals under the
steadying influence of General Westmoreland. Taylor told
him he sympathized with motive but had never hit upon a
command relationship which offered much hope of accomplish-
ing this end. Although Quat's ideas hard to disentangle,
he seems to have in mind a mixed US/ARVN staff element re-
porting to General Westmoreland and a VN c/Stafr. He visualizes
the staff element as a clearing house for joint studies which
would pass recommendations on to the two senior officers.

By implication General Westmoreland would have the power of
ultimate decision based upon an unofficial understanding
which Quat hopes generals would accept. Quat concedes their
acceptance far from certain." 16

Washington was looking toward combined command arrangements that
would recognize that the U.S. was no longer limited to the role of advisors
to RVNAF. When asked for his input COMUSMACV replied that gradual transition
would be more palatable to GVN and suggested only cooperation in the initial
phase, followed by establishment of a small combined coordinating staff
headed jointly by himself and CINCRVNAF. The staff's powers would be limited
solely to coordinating combined operations. 17/

These comments were sketchy, but indicative, for in Saigon COMUS-
MACV and his staff were putting together the Commander's Estimate of the
Situation, a standard document in the military planning process. Started
on March 13, the cay after General Johnson left Saigon and issued on
March 26, it more clearly revealed the MACV concept of command. While

*

69 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
