Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

That this version of events from 1954 through 1959 is the orthodox
Viet Cong account is further indicated by the report of interrogation of
one of the four members of the Civilian Proselyting Section of the Viet
Cong Saigon/Gia Dinh Special Zone Committee, captured in November, 1964;
the prisoner stated that:

"The period from the Armistice of 1954 until 1958 was the
darkest time for the VC in South Vietnam. The political agitation
policy proposed by the Communist Party could not be carried out
due to the arrest of a number of party members by RVN authorities.
The people's agitation movement was minimized. However, the
organizational system of the party from the highest to the lowest
echelons survived, and since the party remained close to the
people, its activities were not completely suppressed. In 1959
the party combined its political agitation with its military
operations, and by the end of 1959 the combined operations were
progressing smoothly." 128

Viet Cong “political agitation" was a cunning blend of the Viet
Minh nationalist charisma, exploitation of GVN shortcomings, xenophobia,
and terror. Drawing on the years of Viet Minh experience in subversive
government and profiting fran Viet Minh errors, the Viet Cong appealed to
the peasants not as Marxist revolutionaries proposing a drastic social
upheaval, but quite to the contrary, as a conservative, nationalist force
wholly compatible with the village-centered traditionalism of most farmers,
and as their recourse against "My-Diem" modernization. One American
authority summed the Viet Minh experience evident in Viet Cong operations
as ten political precepts:

"1. Don't try for too much; don't smash the existing social
system, use it; don't destroy opposition organizations, take them
over.

"2. Use the amorphous united front to attack opposition political
forces too large or too powerful for you to take over; then fragment
their leadership, using terror if necessary, and drown their followers
in the front organization.

"3. At all times appear outwardly reasonable about the matter
of sharing power with rival organizations although secretly working
by every means to eliminate them. Don't posture in public.

"h. Divide your Organization rigidly into overt and covert
sections and minimize traffic between the two. The overt group's
chief task is to generate broad public support; the covert group
seeks to accumulate and manipulate political power.

"5. Use communism as dogma, stressing those aspects that are
well regarded by the people; don't hesitate to interpret Marxism-
Ieninism in any way that proves beneficial. Soft-pedal the class-
struggle idea except among cadres.

"6. Don't antagonize anyone if it can be helped; this forestalls
the formation of rival blocs.

54 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
