Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In response to a query by General Johnson, Army Chief of Staff, as to
how much the U.S, must contribute directly to the security of South
Vietnam, the Secretary said: 147/

"Policy is: anything that will strengthen the position
of the GVN will be sent."

On 2 April, the JCS sent the Secretary a bold memorandum in which
they recommended clearing the decks of all "administrative and procedural
impediments that hamper us in the prosecution of this war." They went
on to list a whole panoply of problems which they felt were causing
unnecessary headaches in providing support to General Westmoreland. 148 /
The JCSM was a direct slap at some of the Secretary's management tech-
niques and an appeal that the military staff be allowed to run the show.
McNemara was silent for a long time. -He replied to the memorandum on
14 May and addressed each of the JCS recommendations in turn. The gist

‘of his reply was that he was not yet ready to yield the reins to the
military. He said: 149/

"I am sure it is recognized that many of these recom-
mendations have received, or are now receiving, separate
action review in appropriate channels. Also, it appears
clear that many of the actions recommended should be im-
plemented enly if execution of a major CINCPAC OPLAN were
ordered."

There are plenty of other indications in the files that the Secretary was
very carefully and personally insuring that the Defense Establishment was
ready to provide efficient and sufficient support to the fighting elements
in Vietnam. From the records, the Secretary comes out much more clearly
for good management than he does for any particular strategy.

During the more heated debate following Westmoreland's request
of 7 June, there is hardly a trace in the files of the Secretary's opinion.
In a letter to Representative Mahon of the House Appropriations Committee
on 9 June, McNamara indicated that the reserve stocks provided for combat
consumption in the Fiscal Year 1966 Budget might have to be replenished
as the situation in South Vietnem developed. He was not sure, however,
and in any case could afford to wait and see. Perhaps there would be a
request for a supplementary appropriation when the Congress reconvened
the following January. 150/ (The President asked for a 1.7 billion
supplementary appropriation in August of 1965 for military operations in
Vietnam.)

Secretary McNamara went out to Vietnam for a firsthand look from
16 to 20 July. He wanted to hear Westmoreland'’s concept for the employ-
ment of the 4 battalions, and he sought the answers to a number of other
questions including what forces Westmoreland thought would be required

108 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
