Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I do not believe that we should assume from Gromyko's
remarks that we ourselves should not put to Moscow our own
most serious views of the situation, whether they are will-
ing to discuss them or not. It is quite clear, however,
that Gromyko wanted me to believe that tiey are not prepared
to work toward a settlement in Hanoi and Peiping and that,
indeed, unless we abandon our effort in South Viet-Nem there
will be very serious consequences ahead.

E. Resuming the Bombing

Having thus been unmistakably rebuffed by Moscow, Hanoi, and
Peking, the President determined on the evening of May 16 that the bomb-
ing raids should be resumed, beginning on the morning of May 18 Saigon
time. In addition to the ROLLING THUNDER XV execute message sent by ;
“the JCS to CINCPAC on the 16th, Secretary Rusk sent messages of 4 poli-
tical nature to Saigon, London, and Ottawa on May 17, so that the action
could be cleared with Premier Quat (which Taylor promptly accomplished) ,
and so that the foreign ministers of the Commonwealth countries would
be informed beforehand. l2/

You should see Fon Min immediately to inform that be-
ginning Tuesday morning, Saigon time, bombing of North
Viet-Nam will be resumed by US and South Vietnamese forces,
marking the end of a five-day suspension.

You should convey message from me that we regret that
the reception of the other side to the idea of a pause was
not merely negative but hostile. Gromyko told Rusk that
our message to Dobrynin on subject was "insulting."

_Nevertheless we do not exclude possibility of other such
attempts in future.

There will be no public announcement of the resumption
of bombing. When press questions are asked, it will be
pointed out that there have been and may again be periods
when no bombing will take place in response to operational
factors and that we do not discuss these operational
questions.

Ambassador Kohler, upon receiving word of the resumption, suggested
that the US might inform the NATO Council and the 17 non-aligned nations
of our actions, in advance of eny resumption, to underline the serious-
ness of the President's response to the Unaligned Appeal. The Department,
however, responded negatively to Kohler's suggestion: 143//

There will be no official public statement from here con-

cerning suspension or resumption. Decision at highest levels
is to avoid any discussion Project MAYFLOWER, which now

126 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
