Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

discontent in the army are sources of political weakness.
This dissatisfaction is caused primarily by the authoritarian
and pervasive political controls of the Ngo family and its
associates.

Status of U.S. Actions: The desirability of liberalizing
political and administrative controls is brought to the attention
of the Vietnamese Government, when considered appropriately by
the U.S. Ambassador. Possible lines of U.S. action are greatly
limited due to the extreme sensitivity of Vietnamese leaders on
this subject.

"3h. Internal Security. It has become increasingly clear
that the communists, no longer expectant that Free Viet-Nam
will fall to their control through peaceful methods, are executing
a carefully planned campaign of violence aimed at undermining the
stability of the Diem Government. Their concentration of activi-
ties in rural areas where communications and terrain make it
difficult for the government to cope with them recalls the tactics
used against the French during the Indochina War. Assassinations,
particularly of officials in rural areas, continue at an alarming
rate of about fifteen to thirty-five a month. Attacks on rubber
plantations and reported communist plans to break up the land
development, land reform and agricultural credit programs indi-
cate deliberate efforts to interfere with Viet-Nam's economic
programs." -

The subsequent OCB Progress Report of August, 1959--by which
time the insurgency was spreading rapidly--illustrates well the policy
difficulties of the United States in responding to the situation within
the constraints of the Geneva Settlement. The report noted that the
GVN:

"_,..-Has undertaken or planned such countermeasures as the
use of armed force, special military courts for the prompt
trial of terrorists, the removal of peasants from isolated
spots to larger villages, and the publicizing of internal
security incidents to counteract the ‘peaceful’ propaganda
of the North Vietnamese communist regime. Vietnamese mili-
tary forces have improved under the MAAG training program,
but the continuance of training at present levels would be
inhibited by any action of the International Control Commission
erising from its opposition to the indefinite retention in
Viet-Nam of certain United States military personnel originally
sent out for equipment salvage work and now largely used to
supplement MAAG personnel in training duties. This necessi-
tates efforts to work out with the Canadian, British and
Indian Governments an acceptable basis in consonance with
the Geneva Accords for an increase in MAAG personnel adequate

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

