Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In 1927, Chiang Kai-shek broke with the communists, and Borodin was
forced to return to Moscow. Ho Chi Minh returned to Moscow with him,
but before departing turned over leadership of the Youth League to a
trusted assistant who was arrested within the year. The League leader-
ship then fell to Thu, who was still living sumptiously in Hong Kong on
French blood money. Thu called a congress in Hong Kong in 1929 which
resulted in the Vietnam delegates walking out in disgust, and forming an
Indochinese Communist Party (ICP) in Tonkin. The emigré leadership of
the League conceded the necessity of organizing a communist party, but in
reality, was unwilling to deviate from the political line set by Ho Chi
Minh -- which was to build a revolutionary nationalist party with socialist
tendencies. 10/ As the ICP grew in strength, the Youth League adopted
the name "Annamese Communist Party.”

After leaving China in 1927, Ho Chi Minh travelled to Moscow, Berlin,
and in 1929 was in Thailand working secretly with 30,000 Viet ‘emigrés.
Ho returned to Hong Kong in January, 1930, and resolved the disunity among
the several Indochinese Communist factions. A new party was set up, with
a central committee at Haiphong, named the Vietnam Communist Party. In
October, 1930, at Comintern insistence, it was renamed the Indochinese
Communist Party, to include Cambodian and Laotians; the Central Committee
was transferred to Saigon. 11/ French police repression of communists
shortly after nearly destroyed the organization; a number of Ho's lieutenants,
Pham yan Dong, Giap and others, were sent to Poulo Candou for long prison
terms.

3. Prison and Obscurity

Ho, who had been sentenced to death in absentia by the French,
was arrested in Hong Kong in 1931 by the British. Bernard Fall wrote
this account:

"Legality, however, prevailed in the genteel world of Hong
Kong's Anglo-Saxon law. Defended by Sir Stafford Cripps before
Britain's Privy Court, Ho was found not subject to extradition
since he was a political refugee. Still, the British did not
want him and he was a marked man. He slipped out of Hong Kong,
into the nearby but isolated Chinese province of Fukien.

"Somehow, only a year later, Ho was in Shanghai, the only
foreign place in Asia then where a substantial Vietnamese com-
munity could be found. He was desperately seeking contact with
the Comintern apparatus, which was now prudently concealing its
operations in China. It was understandable that what was left
of the Chinese Communist Party outside of Mao's forces was not
about to advertise its presence all over Shanghai. But there
may have been another reason as well for Ho's difficulties in
making contact with the Communists: Ho had been released from
British prison for reasons which a suspicious Communist “might
find difficult to swallow. To a Communist apparatus emerging
from the blows it had been subjected to ‘in the early Thirties,
it was normal procedure to isolate Ho Chi Minh as a potential

C-36
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
