Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In their discussion of the American predicament in Vietnam,
some Civilian officials go significantly further and suggest
that the Administration should concede that ‘you cannot completely
defeat the enemy.’ The United States, they say, should instead
"buy time' with its present forces while the non-Commmist South
Vietnamese can strengthen themselves to the point where they
‘believe in their ability to survive against the Communists
after some sort of internal compromise. '

Officials are vague about the ingredients of this compromise,
put they acknowledge that it would probably involve negotiations
between the Vietcong and the non-Communists in the South.

Although it clearly entails abandonment of the military
solution that is implicit in current Administration policy, they
argue that such a compromise would not violate any public
American commitment to South Vietnam.

While avoiding any decision so far, President Johnson has
gained time by putting pressure on General Westmoreland to obtain
maximum use of the troops he now has. The President has instructed
the general to justify in detail his request for reinforcements.

Mr. Johnson has also set in motion extensive staff studies of
the full political, economic and military ramifications of giving
General Westmoreland more troops. Included among these may be an
examination of the possibility of acquiring additional forces
from Washington's allies in South Vietnam--Australia, South Korea,
Thailand and the Philippines.

The thrust of the President's concern, however, has been with
the consequences of troop increases. There is no indication at this
time that Mr. Johnson and his closest advisers, Mr. Rusk, Mr.
Clifford and Mr. Rostow are seriously interested in extending the
war to Cambodia and Laos or in changing to a strategy of close-in
defense of populated areas.

They reject @ political compromise with the Vietcong at this
point. Some senior civilian officials, in fact, believe Mr.
Johnson is ‘still intensely committed to a military solution.'

These officials consider General Westmoreland's request for

an additional 206,000 men ‘unrealistic,’ however, and do not believe
the President will grant it. 79/

69 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
