54.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

THE SPRING DECISIONS - I

CHAPTER IU

I. THE "PRESIDENTIAL PROGRAM"

The development of what eventually came to be called "The Presi-
dential Program for Vietnam" formally began with this memorandum from
McNamara to Gilpatric:

20 April 1961
MEMORANDUM FOR THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

This will confirm our discussion of this morning during
which I stated that the President has asked that you:

a. Appraise the current status and future prospects of
the Communist drive to dominate South Viet-Namn.

b. Recommend a series of actions (military, political
and/or economic, overt and/or covert) which, in your
Opinion, will prevent Communist domination of that
country.

The President would like to receive your report on or
before Thursday, April 27.

During the course of your study, you should draw, to the
extent you believe necessary, upon the views and resources of
the State Department and CIA. Mr. Chester Bowles was present
when the President discussed the matter with me, and I have
reviewed the project with Mr. Allen Dulles. Further, the
President stated that Mr. Walt Rostow would be available to
counsel with you. 1/

Gilpatric, although obviously given a completely free hand under the
terms of the memo, nevertheless set up an interagency task force to work
on the report. A draft was ready April 26, and Gilpatric sent it to the
President the following day. But this turned out to be only the first,
and relatively unimportant phase of the effort. For the Laos crisis came
to a boil just as the first Gilpatric report was finished, and the Task
Force was continued with the essentially new mission of a recommending
additional measure to keep our position from falling apart in the wake of
what was happening in Laos. Consequently, to understand these late-
April, early-May decisions, we have to treat separately the initial
Gilpatric effort and the later, primarily State-drafted revision, dated
May 6. ‘The same general factors were in the background of both efforts,

19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
