Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnamese morale, and international opinion would react strongly to
any serious escalation, Closing out his analysis, Bundy argued for

a decision soon, possibly before the upcoming one-day truce on Buddha's
birthday, May 23, when the new program might be presented.

On the basis of this analysis of the pros and cons, Bundy
concluded that options A and B had been clearly eliminated. Of the three
remaining courses he urged the adoption of D, thus aligning himself
generally with McNaughton and Rostow. The specific reasons he adduced for
his recommendation were the following:

Option D Elaborated and Argued

fhe first element in Option D is that it would not
carry the April program to its logical conclusion by hitting
the Hanoi power station, the Red River bridge, and the
Phue Yen airfield, even once.

The argument against these targets is in part based
on reactions already discussed. Although we do not believe
that they would have any significant chance of bringing the
Chinese into the war, they might have a hardening effect on
immediate Soviet decisions, and could significantly aggravate
eriticism in the UK and elsewhere.

The argument relates above all to the precise nature
and location ‘of these targets. The Hanoi power station is
only a half mile from the Russian and Chinese Embassies, and
still closer to major residential areas. The Red River
bridge is the very area of Hanoi that got us into the greatest
outery in December. In both cases, the slightest mistake
could produce really major and evident civilian casualties
and tremendously aggravate the general reactions we have
already assessed.

As to the Phuc Yen airfield, we believe there is a
significant chance that this attack would cause Hanoi to
assume we were going to make their jet operational airfields
progressively untenable. This could significantly and in
itself increase the chances of their moving planes to China
and all the interacting possibilities that then arise. We
believe we have gone far enough to hurt them and worry them.
Ts it wise to go this further step?

The second element in this stratesy is that it would
level off where we are, but with specific provision for
periodic re-strikes against the targets we have already hit.
This has clear pros and cons.

Te) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
