(28

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ambassador Lodge, on the other hand, waxed ecstatic over the
involvement of U.S. units in pacification work. The crux of the prob-
lem, he argued, was security. To promote security U.S. units should be
used in @ kind of advisory function. They would energize ARVN by example:

To meet this need we must make more U.S. troops avail-
able to help owt in pacification operations as we move to
concentrate ARVN effort in this work. U.S. forces would be
the catalyst; would lead by example; and would work with the
Vietnamese on the “puddy' system. They would be the 1O per-
cent of the total foree of men under arms (90 percent of whom
would be Vietnamese) which would get the whole thing moving
faster.

This has been done on a small scale already by elements
of the U.S. Marines, 1st and 25th U.S. Infantry Divisions, and
the Koreans. We think it can be made to work and the gains
under such a program, while not flashy, would hopefully be
solid. Everything depends on whether we can change ARVN habits.
Experi already made indicate that U.S. casualties would be
few. 172/

General Taylor's doubts about the benefits of involving U.S, troop
units in pacification carried some weight in Washington. State was later
to signal Saigon to go slow on U.S. participation:

We understand General Westmoreland plans use of limited
number of US forces in buddy system principle to guide and
motivate RD/P. However, we have serious doubts about any
further involvement US troops beyond that....We fear this would
tempt Vietnamese to leave this work more and more to us and we
believe pacification, with its intimate contact with population,
more @ppropriate for Vietnamese forces, who must after all as
arm of GVN establish constructive relations with population.

Hence we believe there should be no thought of US teking sub-

stantial share of pacification. The urgent need is to begin
effectively pressing ARVN. 173/

THE 1967 COMBINED CAMPAIGN PLAN

The wpshot of these exchanges, which illustrate the wide acceptance
in U.S. quarters of the proposed division of effort between U.S. forces
and RVNAF, was that the MACV/JGS Combined Campaign Plan for 1967 (AB 142),
published 7 November 1966, reflected "primary missions" for US/FVMAF and
RVNAF and implied that few U.S. forces would be committed directly to the
pacification effort. The exact number of such forces was not specified;
it was left to COMUSMACV's discretion within the restraints already sug-
gested by Washington. The JGS did agree, however, to keep 53 ARVN battalions
in support of revolutionary development during 1967. In addition, 230-cdd
RF companies and over 800 RF platoons were to support the pacification
program.

8h, TOP SECRET - Sensitive

