t

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
DRAFT

REPORT BY THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
on

THE POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES WITH RESPECT £0 INDOCHINA

i THE PROBLEM

1. To undertake a determination of all practicable United
States measures to protect its security in Indochina and to prevent
the expansion of communist aggression in that area,

ANALYSIS

Cele It is recognized that the threat of communist aggression/
egainst Indochina is only one phase of anticipated communist plans’
to seize all of Southeast Asia. It is understood that Burma is
weak internally and could be invaded without strong opposition or
even that the Government of Burma could be subverted, However,
Indochina is the area most immediately threatened. It is also the
only area adjacent to communist China which contains a large Ruro-
pean army, which along with native troops is now in armed conflict
with the forces of communist agsression. A decision to contain
communist expansion at the border of Indochina must be considered
as a part of a wider study to prevent communist aggression into
other parts of Southeast Asia,

Sn: A large segment of the Indochinese nationalist movement
was seized in 1945 by Ho Chi Minh, a Vietnamese who under various
aliases has served as & communist agent for thirty years, He has
attracted non-communist as well as communist elements to his. support,
In 1946, he attempted, but failed to secure French agreement to his
recognition as the head of a government of Vietnam. Since then he
has directed a guerrilla army in raids against French installations
end lines of communication. French forces which have been attempt-
ing to restore law and order found themselves pitted against a

‘determined adversary who manufactures effective arms locally, who

“

=

received supplies of arms from outside sources, who maintained no

capital or permanent headquarters and who was, and is able, to dis-
rupt and-harass almost any area within Vietnem (Tonkin, Anném and
vochinchina) at will. |

hy The United States has, since the Japanese surrender,
Pointed out to the French Government that the legitimate nationalist
-Spirations of the people of Indochina must be satisfied, and that
- return to the prewar colonial rule is not possible. The Depart-
<snt of State has pointed out to the French Government that it was

°

nS Aa

ee

O*

i | he : TOP SECRET

See OE ———
