Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

MILITARY PRESSURES AGAINST NORTH VIETNAM

ACTION AND DEBATE, FEB - JUN 1964

I. Initiation of Covert Operations

On 1 February 1964, the United States emburked on a new course of
action in pursuance of its long-standing policy of attempting to bolster
the security of Southeast Asia. On that date, under direction of the
American military establishment, an elaborate program of covert military
operations against the state of North Vietnam was set in motion. There
were precedents: a variety of covert activities had been sponsored by
the American CIA since 1961. Intelligence agents, resupplied by air,
had been dispatched into North Vietnam; resistance and sabotage teams
had been recruited inside the country; and propaganda leaflets had been
dispensed from "civilian mercenary" aircraft. 1/ But the program that
began in February 1964 was different, and its impact on future U.S.
policy in Southeast Asia was far-reaching.

A. Covert Action Program: Scope and Character

The covert action program beginning in February 1964 was different,
first of all, because it was a program. Designed +o extend over a period
of 12 months, it was divided into three phases distinguished by the
character and intensity of their respective operations. The first phase
(February through May) called for intelligence collection through U-2
and communications intelligence missions and psychological operations
involving leaflet drops, propaganda kit deliveries, and radio broadcasts.
It also provided for about "20 destructive undertakings, all within...
early prospective /GVN/ capabilities.../and/ designed to result in sub-
stantial destruction, economic loss and harassment." ‘The second and
third phases involved the same categories of action, but- of increased
tempo and magnitude, and with the destructive operations extending to
"targets identified with North Vietnam's economic and industrial well-
being." Once started, the program was intended to inflict on North
Vietnam increasing levels of punishment for its aggressive policies. ar

The 1964 program was different also because‘it was placed under
‘ control of an operational U.S. military command. Though the program was
designed to be carried out by GVN or third country personnel, plans were
developed by COMUSMACV and the GVN jointly and given interagency clear-
ance in Washington through a special office under the JCS. CINCPAC and
the appropriate CIA station furnished the necessary training and equip-
ment support and COMJSMACV exercised operational control. 3/ Since
subsequent phases of the covert program were to be based on a continuous
evaluation of acsions already taken, operation reports were submitted
periodically through JCS staff channels for review by various Washington
agencies.

Normally such routine staffing arrangements tend to encourage

expectations of continued program actions. Moreover, they foreshadow
bureaucratic pressures for taking stronger measures should previous cones

Paik TOP SECRET - Sensitive
