Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

II. B. TOWARD A NEGOTIATED SETTLEMENT

SUMMARY

Among the more frequently cited misapprehensions concerning U.S.
policy in Vietnam is the view that the Eisenhower Administration flatly
rejected intervention in the First Indochina War. The record shows
plainly that the U.S. did seriously consider intervention, and advo-
cated it to the U.K. and other allies. With the intensification of the
French-Viet Minh war and the deterioration of the French military posi-
tion, the United States was forced to take a position on: first, a
possible U.S. military intervention in order to avert a Viet Minh victory;
second, the increasingly likely contingency of negotiations between Paris
and Ho Chi Minh to end the war through a political settlement. In order
to avoid a French sell-out, and as an alternative to unilateral U.S.
intervention, the U.S. proposed in 1954 to broaden the war by involving
a number of allies in a collective defense effort through "united action."

The U.S. Government internal debate on the question of intervention
centered essentially on the desirability and feasibility of U.S. military
action. Indochina's importance to U.S. security interests in the Far
East was taken for granted. The Eisenhower Administration followed in
general terms the rationale for American interest in Indochina that was
expressed by the Truman Administration. With respect to intervention,
the Truman Administration's NSC 124 of February 1952 recognized that the
U.S. might be forced to take some military action in order to prevent
the subversion of Southeast Asia. In late 1953 - early 1954, as the fall
of Indochina seemed imminent, the question of intervention came to the
fore. The Defense Department pressed for a determination by highest
authority of the size and nature of the forces the U.S. was willing to
commit in Indochina. Some in DOD questioned the then operating assump-
tion that U.S. air and naval forces would suffice as aid for the French.
The Army was particularly concerned about contingency planning that
assumed that U.S. air and naval action alone could bring military victory,
and argued for realistic estimates of requisite land forces, including
the degree of mobilization that would be necessary. The State Department
thought that Indochina was so critical from a foreign policy viewpoint
that intervention might be necessary. But DOD and the JCS, estimating
that air-naval action alone could not stem the surging Viet Minh, recom-
mended that rather than intervening directly, the U.S. should concentrate
on urging Paris to train an expanded indigenous army, and should exert
all possible pressures -- in Europe as well as in Asia -- to motivate
the French to fight hard for a military victory. Many in the U.S. Govern-
ment (the Ridgway Report stands out in this group) were wary that U.S.
intervention might provoke Chinese Communist intervention. In the latter
case, even a considerable U.S. deployment of ground forces would not be
able to stem the tide in Indochina. A number of special high-level
studies were unable to bridge the evident disparity between those who

Bel TOP SECRET - Sensitive
