Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

has not yet been validated by CINCPAC, but is currently under
consideration here by the Joint Staff in anticipation of early
action by Admiral Sharp's headquarters.

Finally, General Westmoreland recognizes that the forces
which were contained in the Committee's recommendations were
apparently based upon the capabilities of the Services to
produce troops for deployment. He states that there has been
no change in his appraisal of the situation since my visit to
Vietnam and thus there has been no change in his reauirements
as originally proposed. 78/

From the 4th of March until the final Presidential decision was announced
to the country, the written record becomes sparse. The debate within the
Administration was argued and carried forward on a personal basis by the
officials involved, primarily, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary
of State.

The decision, however, had been placed squarely on the shoulders of
the President. The recommendations of the 4 March memorandum had left him
a profound political/military dilemma. The memorandum had recommended "a
little bit more of the same" to stabilize the military situation, plus a
level of mobilization in order to be prepared to meet any further deteriori-
ation in the ground situation. Any new strategic guidance, any new direction
in policy, however, were to be left to a subsequent study.

But many political events in the first few weeks of March 1968 gave
strong indications that the country was becoming increasingly divided over
and disenchanted with the current Vietnam strategy, and would no longer
settle for "more of the same" with no indication of an eventual end to the
conflict. That the President was aware of these external political pres-
sures and that they influenced his decision is evident.

Focus to this political debate and sense of dissatisfaction was given
by a startlingly accurate account, published in The New York Times on
10 March, of General Westmoreland's request and of the strategic reassess-
ment which was being conducted within the executive branch of the government.
Tt also indicated the growing doubt and unease in the nation concerning this
policy review.

Written by Neil Sheehan and Hedrick Smith, the article stated:

General William C. Westmoreland has asked for 206,000
more American troops for Vietnam, but the request has touched
off a divisive internal debate within high levels of the
Johnson Administration.

A number of sub-Cabinet civilian officials in the Defense

Department, supported by some senior officials in the State
Department, have argued against General Westmoreland's plea

65 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
