Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

1. The Continuing Issue of Independence for Associated States

A final, but by no means negligible, French objection to
the U.S. proposals was the independence issue. Far from having been
settled, as Dillon supposed, the French were still unhappy about
American pressure for concessions even after tne State Department's
May 27 revisions. The French were particularly disturbed (as Bidault
implied) at the notion that the Associated States could leave the Union
at any time, even while French fighting men were in the field on Indo-
china's behalf. France was perfectly willing, Bidault remarked, to
sign new treaties of association with the three Indochinese States, to
allow them a larger voice in defense matters, and to work with them
toward formation of truly national governments; but, to judge from
his commentary, Faris would not go the whole route by committing itself
in advance to Indochina's full freedom of action. And while this and
other issues remained unresolved, as Dulles observed on June 4, Laniel's
reported belief that the U.S. and France were politically agreed was,
to Washington, a "serious overstatement." 27/

3. United Action Option Withdrawn

a. Issues Begin to Lose Relevance in a Changing War

Early in June, the unsettled issues separating the U.S.
from France began to lose their relevance to the war. Even if they
could be resolved, it was questionable whether U.S. involvement could
any longer be useful or decisive. Thus, on the matter of training the
VNA, we were no longer certain that time would permit our training
methods to take effect even if the French promptly removed themselves
from responsibility in that area. State Department opinion now held
that the Vietnam situation had deteriorated "to point where any com-
mitment at this time to send over U.S. instructors in near future might
expose us to.being faced with situation in which it would be contrary
to our interests to have to fulfill such commitment. Our position
accordingly is that we do not wish to consider U.S. training mission or
program separately from over-all operational plan on assumption condi-
tions fulfilled for U.S. participation war Indochina." 28/

Simply put, the Department had determined that the grave
but still retrievable military situation prevailing at the time united
action was proposed and pursued had, in June, altered radically.
Morale of the Franco-Vietnamese forces had dropped sharply, the whole
Tonkin Delta was endangered, and the political situation in Saigon was
dangerously unstable. 29/ Faced with this uniformly black picture,
the Administration moved to withdraw united action from consideration
by the French.

b. Dulles Considers Withdrawing Option of United Action

By mid-June, American diplomacy was in an unenviable
position. At Geneva, very little progress had been made of a kind

A-23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
