78

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

knowing the meaning of freedom in their own lives -- wonder whether the

‘Commmist system holds the secret of organizing the resources of the state

in order to bring them a better life.

"and what is true of Africa is true of Asia, and what is true of Africa
and Asia is true in some degree of Latin America. The Communists move
among them, disciplined, organized, subject to an international discipline,
promising under their system that all will be well, knowing that if they
can win just once, then the iron grip of the totalitarian state goes upon
the population -- those who resist become refugees, or are shot -- and they
manage to control the population.

“Tonight, in Viet-lam, where the President was re-elected recently in
the last 2 weeks by 2 majority of 75 to 80 percent, yet a small army of
guerrillas, organized and sustained by the Communist Viet Minh in the north,
control most of the countryside in the nighttime -- in the last 12 months
have assassinated over four thousand civil officers, two thousand state
employees and two thousand police, believing if they can ‘spill the wine, '
that then they can win control of the population. And when they have won,
they do not intend to give way.

"Now our great responsibility is to be the chief defender of freedom,
in this time of maximum danger. Only the United States has the power and
the resources and the determination. We have committed ourselves to the
defense of dozens of countries stretched around the globe who look to us
for independence, who look to us for the defense of their freedom.

"We are prepared to meet our obligations, but we can only defend the
freedom of those who are determined to be free themselves. We can assist
them -- we will bear more than our share of the burden, but we can only
help those who are ready to bear their share of the burden themselves.

"Phe Russians and the Chinese, containing within their borders nearly
a billion people, totally mobilized for the advance of the Communist system,
operating from narrow, interior lines of communication, pressuring on
Southeast Asia with the masses of the Chinese armies potentially ready to
move -- of the Russians who hold great power potentially in the Middle Rast
and Western Europe -- the United States stands as the chief defender of
freedom.

"T said in my Inaugural Address that no group of people in any genera-
tion since democracy was first developed by the ancient Greeks nearly
twenty-four or -five hundred years ago, have ever borne a responsibility
ag great as ours. And I welcome it -- and I welcome it tonight.

"There is no easy answer to the dilemmas that we face. Our great ally
is the fact that people do desire to be free, that people will sacrifice
everything in their desire to maintain their independence. And as the true
nature of the Commmist conspiracy becomes better known around the globe,
when people come to realize -- as they surely will -- that the Communist
advance does not represent a means of liberation but represents a final

c-10
