Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

= .

Ce. Fartacuine Problems Bncountered an Tadochicin

ES
[e)
se)
te]
|—
pe
tae
et
re?

‘The civil war in Indochins and tho’ fact that Saigon

charm is a besieged city have a direct bearing on the day to day
activities of USiS. Among Frencnmen in Indochina the belief persists
that the United States wishes for economic reasons to supplant French
power and influence here. These factors have in the past led to of-
ficial Fronch protests against one or another activity of USIS and

still soneibien its functioning. To plain clothes men habitually
loiter ncoar the entrance to tho Reading Room. Aside from the question
of whether anyons is actually moléstei for attending the American
Reading Room, the presonec of these dstecbhives may cause some interested

persons to stay away.

The showing and lending of films is encumbered with controls and
red tape. To be shown at all a film must have been granted a “visa”
by the Bureau of Press and Infermition. Anyone wishing te borrow
films for showings must have the specific acre of the Bureau.

For instance, an owner of rubber plantations requests USIS in writing
to place his plantations on a list. for regular film loans. He
states that the audiences will consist of Vietnamese employees,
French supervisors, local ce and French soldiers, USIS writes
to the Bureau, encloses a copy of the Ictter from the plantation
owner, and asks approval. This is granted prommtly, and USIS is the
free to circulate films, cach of which must have been "visaed" to th
plantations in question. «Although the precise effect carmot be esti-
.mated, these formilitics mist ack as a brake on applications to

borrow USIS films.

pa

(2)

The Director of the Bureau of Press and Information has stated
informally that application for permission to issue the wireless
bulletin must bo made to him in writing. He added thet he sae
immediately grant approval. Nevertheless, this required procscure
illustrates the close control exercised over printed matter. The
French authorities will certainly protest against and endeavor to
stop any USIS activities to which they take ebjection. Expansion
of the program here or additions to the american staff of USIS must
be carried out with circumspection in order to avoid suspicion and

obstruction.

*

The shorts f offieo space is accompanied by a scarcity of

Cc
The unsolved and harassing housing probloms

of the tio Amcrican csuples are cyidernce that somo tims must elapse
5 fora S assigned to USIS Saigon. On the

j
other hand, jonal local personnel will be employed as soon a
additional o is obtaincd,. This prospective inerease in
loenl start ition to producing the wireless bulletin,
enable USi8 he distribution of photo exhibits and to set

up a Joncing recorded misic.s
xchange of porsons working here are
have applied for scholarships at

severcly Vimited. A Lows f
has forwarded their epplientions.
ri

Piberlamen in piaes' Ce eis and

=

eT
cy 4 ==> . * las - -. Pad 4
Certain adverse faccors exist independently of +

one Givil war and of

.

the -impossibili

