Pei

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I

PROLOGUE: ACTIONS AND PROGRAMS UNDERWAY

Several forms of pressure were already being applied against
North Vietnam by July of 1964. Moreover, contingency plans for
other forms -- should political and military circumstances warrant
a’ decision to use them -- were continually being adjusted and modi-
fied as the situation in Southeast Asia developed.

The best known of these pressures was being applied in Iaos.
Since 21 May, U.S. aircraft had flown low-level reconnaissance missions
over communist-oceupied areas. 1/ In early June Premier Souvanna
Phouma both gave and reaffirmed his permission for armed escort of
these missions, which included the right to retaliate against hostile
fire from the ground. 2/ This effort was supplemented at the end
of the month when the United States decided to conduct transport and
night reconnaissance operations and furnish additional 1-28 aircraft
and munitions to support a Royal Laotian counteroffensive near Muong
Soul. This decision came in response to Souvanna's request, in which
he equated the protection of Muong Soui with the survival of the Laotian
neutralist army. 3/ Air strikes conducted by the Royal Lao Air Force,
with T-28s obtained from the United States, were later credited with
playing a major role in the success of the RLG's operations.

Other actions obviously designed to forestall communist ageressive
intentions were taken in different parts of Southeast Asia. In June,
following the Honolulu strategy conference, State and Defense Depart-
ment sources made repeated leaks to the press affirming U.S. intentions
to support its allies and uphold its treaty commitments in southeast
Asia. h/ U.S. contingency ground-force stockages in Thailand were
augmented and publicly acknowledged. 5/ Revelations were made that
USAF aircraft were operating out of a newly constructed air base at
Da Nang. Moreover, the base was characterized as part of a network
of new air bases and operational facilities being developed in South
Vietnam and Thailand. 6/ On 10 July, the Da Nang base was the site
of a well-publicized Air Force Day display of allied airpower, including
aircraft from a B-57 Wing recently acknowledged to have been permanently
deployed to the Philippines from Japan. 7

less known were parallel actions taken within the Government.
U.S. resolve to resist aggression in Southeast Asia was communicated
directly to North Vietnan by the newly eppointed Canadian member or
the International Control Commission, Blair Seaborn. Stressing that
U.S. ambitions were limited and its intentions were "essentially peace-
ful," Seaborn told Pham Van Dong that the patience of the U.S. Govern-
ment was not limitless. He explained that the United States was
fully aware of the Gegreee to which Hanoi controlled the Viet

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
pat i ath inate SNe ari ge B
