Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

Vietnamese officers of all ranks are well aware of the
Buddhist issue. Most heve viewed it in detachment and have not
permitted religious differences significantly to affect their
internal military relationship.

Vietnamese military commanders, at the various echelons,
are obedient and could be expected to execute any order
they view as lawful.

The U.S./Vietnamese military relationship has not been
damaged by the political crisis, in any significant degree.

There is some dissatisfaction, among Vietnamese officers,
with the national administration. It is focused far more on Ngo
Dinh Nhu than on President Diem. Nhu's departure would be
hailed, but few officers would extend their necks to bring oh
about,

Excluding the very serious political and military factors
external to Vietnam, the Viet Cong war will be won if the
current U.S, military and sociological programs are pursued,
irrespective of the grave defects in-the ruling regime.

Improvements in the quality of the Vietnamese Govern-
ment are not going to be brought about by leverage applied
through the military, They do not have much, and will
probably not use what they have. 84/

This sanguine view of the situation was forcefully disputed by Mendenhall,
He argued that the disaffection with the regime had reached the point ;
where a breakdown of civil government was threatened, and the possibility
of a religious civil war could not be excluded. The war could not be
won with the present regime, he concluded. 85/ The polar opposition of
these two reports prompted Kennedy's now famous query, "You two did
visit the same country, didn't you?" 86/

The critical failure of both reports was to understand the funda-
mental political role that the army was coming to play in Vietnam, It
was the only potential force with sufficient power to constitute an
alternative to Diem. Diem and Nhu fully understood this fact, and had
coped with it by usurping the prerogative of senior officer promotion,
and basing those promotions on loyalty to the palace. This had sown deep
seeds of distrust among the senior military men, and fragmented their
potential power. Krulak failed to see that once the internal political
situation deteriorated to the point where massive disaffection with the
regime threatened a communist victory, the generals would unite and
plunge into politics out of common necessity. But more importantly,
neither Krulak nor Mendenhall seemed to anticipate that, if the army
achieved power, the divisive effect of Diem's preferential promotion
policies would surface in an internal army power struggle. Nor did
they fully understand the negative effect on the war effort this pre-
occupation with politics among the generals would have.

26 TOP SECRET Sensitive
