Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

That is when this opening phase of the Task Force effort has to be
separated from what followed. As just noted, it was remarkable mainly
for the strength of the commitment implied to South Vietnam, which the
President never did unambiguously endorse, and for the organizational
arrangement it proposed, with the key role for Lansdale and Gilpatric,
which was eliminated from the later drafts. All of the factors behind the
May reappraisal (cited at the beginning of this chapter) undoubtedly con-
tributed to the decision to set up the Task Force. But Rostow's memoran-
dum and the modest dimensions of the resulting proposals suggest the main
idea really was to sharpen up existing policy and its administration,
rather than to work out a new policy on the assumption that the existing
program had become substantially obsolete. Immediately after April 27,
this changes. Although Gilpatric and Lansdale continued to head up the
Task Force through the Presidential decisions of May 11, their personal
role became increasingly unimportant. The significance no longer was in
putting new people in charge of a new style for running the program, but
in developing a new program that would offset the impact of Laos.

V. THE LAOS ANNEX

On April 28, an annex had been issued to the basic report which went
far beyond the modest military proposals in the original. The most
reasonable assumption is that the annex was drawn up in response to
comments at the April 27 NSC meeting at which the Report was to have
been considered, but which turned out to be devoted to the by-then acute
state of the crisis in Laos. On the grounds that the neutralization of
laos would solidify communists de facto control of eastern Iaos (including
the mountain passes which were the historic invasion route to southern
Vietnam), the annex advocated U.S. support for a two-division increase in
the RVNAF. To rapidly train these forces, there was now a recommendation
on U.S. manpower commitments that dwarfed the previous recommendation for
a MAAG increase: specifically, a 1600-man training team for each of the
two new divisions, plus a 400-man special forces contingent to speed up
counter-insurgency training for the South Vietnamese forces: a total of
3600 men, not counting the MAAG increase already authorized.

It is interesting that in the annex this force increase (and the
bulk of the U.S. troop commitment) was specifically justified as insur-
ance against a conventional invasion of South Vietnam. Some earlier drafts
show the evolution of this concept. There is an alternate draft, appar-
ently by Lansdale, which was not used but which recommended a U.S. troop
commitment as reassurance to the Vietnamese of U.S determination to stand
by them. It did not recommend any increase in South Vietnamese forces.
Instead, it stressed very heavily the damage to U.S. prestige and the
credibility of our guarantees to other countries in Southeast Asia should
we go through with the Laos settlement without taking some strong action
to demonstrate that we were finally drawing a line in Southeast Asia.

4

213 TOP SECREL - Sensitive

