Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

bombing was unable to beat the birth rate. This is how Systems’
Analysis assessed the problem:

III. Effects on Total North Vietnamese Manpower
Supply

In addition to the economic effects, the air
wer has drawn North Vietnamese labor into bomb damage
repair, replacement of combat casualties, construction,
transportation, and air defense. Over the last three
years, these needs have absorbed almost 750,000 able-
bodied North Vietnamese (Table 5).

But, again there are offsetting factors. First,
over 90% of the increase in manpower has been provided
by population growth (Table 5). Since the start of the
bombing, 720,000 able-bodied people have been added to the
North Vietnamese labor force.

Second, the bombing has increased not only the
demand for labor but also the supply. ‘The destruction of
much of North Vietnam's modern industry has released an
estimated 33,000 workers from their jobs. Similarly, the
evacuation of the cities has made an estimated 48,000
women available for work on roads and bridges in the
countryside. Both of these groups of people were avail-
able for work on war-related activity with little or no
extra sacrifice of production; if they weren't repairing
bomb damage, they wouldn't be doing anything productive.

Third, North Vietnam has been supplied with man-
power as a form of foreign aid. An estimated 40,000 Chinese
are thought to be employed in maintaining North Vietnam's
road and rail network.

Finally, additional workers could be obtained
in North Vietnam from low productivity employment. In
less developed countries, agriculture typically employs
more people than are really needed to work the land, even
with relatively primitive production methods. Also, further
mobilization may be possible through greater use of women
in the labor force. The available statistics are not precise
enough to identify the magnitude of this potential labor
pool, but the estimates given in Table 6 show that even after
two years of war the total North Vietnamese labor force is
only 54% of its population - scarcely higher than it was in
1965.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
130 fiona baa
