Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

There is no record of General Westmoreland's reply, if any.

Little if anything new was revealed in the discussion but it serves
to indicate the President's concern with the opportunity costs associated
with the large force increase. The discussion also reveals the kind of
estimates about the duration of the war which were reaching the President.

Two other memoranda outlining alternatives to the Westmoreland
March request for additional troops were written by Mr. Richard Steadman
of ISA and Mr. William Bundy of State for Undersecretary Katzenbach. 58/
The Steadman memo was nothing more than a brief review of the original
MACV request and as such did not outline strategic alternatives. It was
to provide a basis for portions of the analysis in the DPM prepared by
McNaughton later in May. The Bundy memo, on the other hand, did analyze
possible changes in our military strategy. He analyzed several factors
which he believed seriously affected the direction of our military actions.
Among these were:

"Force Increases. In terms of contribution to our
strategy over the next nine months, I believe any increase
directly related to meeting the threat in the northern part
of SVN, and at the same time, not reducing our effort in
II and III Corps unacceptably, must be considered essential.
(I have just lunched with Paul Nitze, who gives an off-the-
cuff estimate that we may need a total increase of 50,000 to
meet this specification. )

"To the extent that any increase is related to needs in
the Delta, I would be most skeptical of the total advantage
of such action at least this year. The Delta does not lend
itself to the most effective application of our forces, and
the Viet Cong in the Delta are in key areas so deeply dug in
that in the end they will be routed out only by a major change
in the over-all situation, and particularly in the prestige
and effectiveness of the GVN. (For example, this is already
Colonel Wilson's conclusion with respect to key areas in
Long An.)

"In sum, we should leave IV Corps basically to the GVN,
trying to deny it as a source of food and men, but leaving
it to be truly pacified more slowly and later.

"Apart from the military merits, any force increase
that reaches the 'Plimsoll Line' -- calling up the Reserves --
involves a truly major debate in Congress. Under present
circumstances, I believe such a debate could only encourage
Hanoi, and might also lead to pressures to go beyond what is
wise in the North, specifically mining Haiphong. Unless

85 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
