tf}

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV.B. CHAPTER V

I. THE DECISION TO SEND TAYLOR

As of early October, there were several proposals for more active
intervention in Southeast Asia on the table. One was the JCS-favored plan
to intervene on the ground in Laos to seize and hold major portions of the
country, principally to protect the borders of South Vietnam and Thailand.
A second plan (referred to in a staff paper as the "Rostow proposal") would
hava put a SEATO force of about 25,000 men into Vietnam to try to mount a
guard on the Vietnam/Laos border between the DMZ and Cambodia. Finally,
there were various schemes, dating from the Task Force review, for putting
a U.S. force into the highlands, or at DaNang with or without a nominal
mission of training South Vietnamese troops.

Except for the Rostow proposal all these plans pre-dated the spurt of
Viet Cong activity in September and Diem's subsequent request for a treaty.
The record does not tell when and why the Rostow proposal was drawn up. It
was probably a direct response to Diem's request, but it may have been simply
a part of the on-going Laos contingency planning. In any event, Rostow's
proposal was submitted to the JCS for Comment October 5. On the 9th, the
JCS responded with a counter-proposal for a substantial (initially about
20,000 men, but expected to grow) commitment of U.S. forces in Vietnam,
centered on Pleiku in the highlands. 1/

In hindsight, the JCS reasoning in rejecting the Rostow proposal looks
unchallengeable. The JCS stated:

as SEATO forces will be deployed over a border of several
hundred miles, and will be attacked piecemeal or by-passed at the
Viet Cong's own choice.

b. It may reduce but cannot stop infiltration of Viet Cong
personnel and material.

eo. It deploys SEATO forces in the weakest defense points
should DRV or CHICOM forces intervenes

d. It compounds the problems of communications and logistical
support.

The Chiefs also argued against an alternative border proposal to put
the SEATO force along the 17th parallel. Their first preference, very
emphatically, was to go into Laos:

76
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
