Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

points are identified and the expectations of decision-making principals
involved are analyzed. Ancillary reasons for advancing proposals are
identified as such and discussed. The position of each of the principals
is described only as clearly as it emerges from the files of the Secretary
of Defense. Thus, the JCS are treated as a monolith, although it is
common knowledge that there is always considerable dissension and debate
amongst the Chiefs themselves. While they might have been unanimous in
their recognition that U.S. bases needed securing, the Chiefs did not

see eye to eye during ensuing debates over enclave or search and destroy.
The Chief of Staff of the Air Force and the Commandant of the Marine
Corps were known proponents of the enclave concept, but the Chairman of
the JCS and the Chief of Staff of the Army were equally determined to

see the deployment of several divisions of troops for unlimited combat
operations. The record of their debate, interesting though it may be,
remains in the JCS files.

Through all of the strategy debate in early 1965 ran a common thread
-- the concern with possible intervention in the conflict by elements of
the North Vietnamese Army or the Communist Chinese Army or a combination
of both. A variety of CINCPAC contingency plans were in existence at the |
time which addressed the problem and called for various deployments, some
of them pre-emptive, to deal with it. The JCS consistently mentioned the ©
problem as an additional justification for deployments they were advo-
cating, but the National Intelligence Board just as consistently dis-
counted the possibility of such intervention. Covert infiltration of
elements of the North Vietnamese Army, however, was another matter. It
was recognized early in the debate as something to be reckoned with even
though the real extent of the infiltration was not confirmed for some
time. In any case, contingency deployments were not intended to deal
with the latter type of provocation.

VY. issues

In conclusion, it seems clear that the debate over ground commitments ,
and accompanying strategy followed closely the course of expectations about
the Rolling Thunder bombing program and the development of the situation
in South Vietnam itself. The strategy of security was eclipsed because
Rolling Thunder was taking too long. The enclave strategy was never
unanimously endorsed and it never got off the ground. It was based on
the assumption that victory could be denied to the enemy in the South
while Rolling Thunder punished him in the North. Eventually, the U.S.
would achieve its objectives because the enemy in frustration would give
up. The whole enclave idea was conceived in a period of relative quiet,
and certainly the experimentation aspect of it pre-supposed a relatively
stable situation. In the heat of the summer monsoon offensive, it became
a moot question whether or not a negative approach like the enclave
strategy could deny victory, and more important, whether or not there
would be an KVNAF left to shore up.

, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
