Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

area of unquestionable strategic importance -- and one in which GVN had
already initiated some pacification efforts. If the Americans wish to
concentrate in one province and if they are willing to underwrite the effort
with resources, why not begin in an important strategic area where work

is already underway?

GVN had initiated, in August 1961, a "Rural Reconstruction Cam-
paign" in the Eastern Region of South Vietnam to secure the provinces of
Tay Ninh, Binh Duong, and Phuoc Tuy. 56/ Most of the effort prior to
December 1961 had been concentrated in the Cu Chi District of Binh Duong.
Xom Hue Hamlet of Tan An Hoi was, during December, in the process of being
fortified as a strategic hamlet. 57/ General McGarr was under the impres-
sion that "considerable progress" had already been made in these three
provinces in the establishment of the GVN village level activities so
necessary to winning popular support. 58/

In mid-January General McGarr met (just prior to his departure
for Honolulu) with President Diem and Secretary Thuan to discuss pacifica-
tion plans. As McGarr told Secretary McNamara, Diem stressed that the
MAAG-endorsed military operation in War Zone D might merely close the
string on an empty bag. Such a failure would be detrimental to ARVN morale.
Besides, the President observed echoing Thompson, "sweeps" solved nothing;
the problem was to hold an area and to separate the VC from the rest of the
populace. Diem preferred a concentrated effort in Binh Duong, a heavily
infiltrated province, close to Saigon, of great strategic importance, and
in which only 10 of 46 villages were under GVN control -- but in which the
groundwork for a sound government infrastructure had already been laid. 59/

The discussions at the Secretary of Defense's Conference in
Honolulu turned on whether or not the War Zone D operation offered more
hope for a concrete gain than a "single province” pacification scheme.
McNamara concluded that it did not. General McGarr dissented mildly from
the selection of Binh Duong. He would have favored Phuoc Tuy (where U.S.
troops were scheduled to land if a decision were ever made to commit them).
But Binh Duong was GVN's plan and the "limited partners" finally agreed
to back Diem's preferred attempt. 60/ Thus, the U.S. came to a roundabout
decision to support as a "test" of what would later be called the "strategic
hamlet program” an operation about whose details they knew little, in an
area that all recognized to be difficult, because it allegedly represented
' @ long-sought example of GVN initiative in planning and civil-military
preparation. Much of the public image of the strategic hamlet program was
to be established by this operation, as it turned out. Its name was
"Operation Sunrise." But it was not -- U.S. desires to the contrary --
the only strategic hamlet effort to be carried forward during this period.
It was only one of several -- and several grew very quickly into many.

B. Concurrent GVN Activity

It has already been suggested that President Diem responded with
some enthusiasm to the early proposals from Thompson's British Advisory
Mission. In mid-February 1962, President Diem approved orally Thompson's

16
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
