Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fvinec, Lo wuom the colonists tuve lon; ecmeealad the truth on
Indochina, instead of ciuberiia; into peacerble ne-otiabious .
resorted to an ausressive iuvesion, with ull the meang at ‘ine
coca eb ‘cucyn nuabion. worcover, haying persuaded the
sritish that tue Vietuauese ure wisiing for a return of the

French rule, tuey obteinced, tirst fron the Brivish coumang in
Southeast Asia, buen frem London, 4 tacit recognition of their
Sovercigney ond, administrative responsidility os far as South
Vietuen is conderned. ‘the British gave to understand tht bey
aad asrecd to this on the ground that the reestablishwentof :
French administration and, censeyuently, of “ranco-Vietnamese
collaboration would help tiem to speed up the demobilization .
and tie disarmament of the Japunese. But subsequent aetate .
Wi.11 prove the fallacy of tus argunent. The whole Vietnamese
nation rooe up As one inon awiningst trench 9~ ression. The first
street-suiping: which was launched by the french in the guall
hours of oceptenber 2ard soon devélored into real anu or.-anized
wartare in whicn losses are heavy oa,both sides. ‘The bringing
in of #reneh iuportant reinforcements on board of the sost =
powertul of their remaining warships will extend the war zone
furboer. As murderous Cisuting 18 still going on in Indonesia
and as sfivase acts on the part of #renepmen are revorted ovory.
es pine the flaring up of a general conflagration in
she Mare wast.

ds it _is, the sityuitis
ate faterfertnes. The eetil islnent of the Consultative Com-
mission Gor the far-sust las oven enthusiastically welcomed here
ag the first effective step towards an equitable settlenent of
tie pending problems. The people of Vietnam, which only asks
for full inependence and for the respect of truth and justice,
puts before your “xcellency our following desiderata;

Jo - the South Vietnam incident should be discussed at
the first meeting of the Yonsult:tive Connmssion for the Har-
ast;

20 - Vietnamese delrgates should be admitted to state the
views of the Vietnamese Government;

$0 - An Inquiry Commission should be sent to south Vietnam;

4o = the full independence of Vietnam should be recosgnizea
by the United Nations.

I aveil myself of this opportunity to send your sxeellency
my best wishes,

sa Respectfully,
b]

President HO CHI MIN

pds
c-81
