Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

expansion, General Westmoreland had requested a significant increase
in the number of U.S. troops for Vietnam (the famed "))-BattaLion"
request). After more than a month of deliberation, the President
finally approved the request sometime in mid-July. His historic
announcement of the expanded U.S. effort came on 28 July.” Under-=
standably, this momentous expansion of the U.S. involvement in the
war completely overshadowed the advisory program and the growth of
RVNAF during the remainder of 1965.

NEW POSSIBILITIES

But the deployment of U.S. forces to South Vietnam did, however,
open up & new range of possible relationships which would not have
been possible without the presence of substantial U.S. combat forces.
Each of these relationships might conceivably promote one or all of
the several purposes which this study has reasoned to be behind the
U.S. military advisory effort; the development of improved tactical
and technical competence in RVNAF, the generation of better intelligence
(both friendly and enemy), and increased U.S. influence.

Two categories of new relationships were considered: the encadre~
ment of U.S. and ARVN units (in several forms) and the establishment of
a joint command to conduct the war. Both of these courses were rejected
by COMUSMACV. In their place General Westmoreland attempted to create
a Joint US-RVNAF staff to coordinate independent national efforts. The
basic arrangement enabling tactical independence--within limits--was the
creation of mutually exclusive Tactical Areas of Responsibility (TAORs )
for each combat maneuver force.

ENCADREMENT CONSIDERED AND REJECTED

Deficiencies in ARVN leadership had long been recognized by U.S.
military advisors as one of the key impediments to increased ARVN
performance. In April, when the first major imput of U.S. combat troops
took place, consideration was given to the encadrement of U.S. officers
in ARVN units as a way of solving this problem. The proposal was touched
off by a DoD request on 15 April for COMUSMACV's opinion about the feasi-
bility of using U.S. cadres to improve effectiveness in the ten ARVN
divisions. 139/ The same day, McGeorge Bundy sent a personal NODIS
message to Ambassador Taylor steting among other things, that "The
President has repeatedly emphasized his personal desire for a strong
experiement in the encadrement of U.S. troops with the Vietnamese." 140
General Westmoreland turned the issue over to his deputy, General
Throckmorton, for a recommendation. Throckmorton's study considered

* See Task Force Paper IV.C.6., Phase One in the Build-Up of U.S, Forces:

The Debate, March-July 1965.

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
