Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

would be inaugurated to meet fully the aspirations of the people. That
these plans miscarried was due in part to the resistance of the farmers
they were intended to benefit, reacting sometimes under Viet Cong leader-
ship, sometimes simply out of peasant conservatism. But a principal portion
of the blame for failure must be attributed to Diem's inept, overbearing,

or corrupt officials, to Diem's own unremitting anti-communist zeal, and

to the failure of both he and his American advisers to appreciate the
magnitude of the tasks they set for themselves, or the time required to
enact meaningful reform.

2. Reoccupying Viet Minh Territory

The first steps were faltering. In early 1955, ARVN units
were sent to establish the GVN in the Camau Peninsula in the southernmost
part of the country. Poorly led, ill-trained, and heavy-handed, the troops
behaved towards the people very much as the Viet Minh had led the farmers
to expect. Accompanying GVN propaganda teams were more effective, assailing
communism, colonialism, and fuedalism--meaning the rule of Francophile
Vietnamese, such as Bao Dai's--and distributing pictures of Diem to replace
the omnipresent tattered portraits of Ho. 59/ A subsequent operation in
Quang Nai and Binh Dinh, Operation Giai Phong, reportedly went off more
smoothly. Under ARVN Colonel Le Van Kim, the troops behaved well toward
the people, and the propagandists exploited Viet Minh errors to the extent
that, as the last Viet Minh soldiers marched down toward their ships, the
populace jeered them. American advisers were active, and Diem himself
visited this operation a week after the last Viet Minh had left, receiving
what the Americans present considered a spontaneous welcome by the peasants. 6o/
Nonetheless, the Cau Mau experience became more typical of the ARVN than the
Binh Dinh affair. Foreign observers frequently expressed opinion of the
ARVN in terms similar to the 1957 view of correspondent David Hotham, who
wrote that "far from giving security, there is every reason to suppose that
the army, buttressed by the Civil Guard...is regarded by the Southern
peasant as a symbol of insecurity and repression." 61/

3. Civic Action

Nor were the follow-up Civic Action teams significantly more
effective. These were patterned after the GAM's (Groupes Administratifs .
Mobiles) with which the French had experimented, modified to incorporate
U.S.-Filipino experience. In theory, they were to have been drawn from
the urban elite, to help the government establish communications with the
rural folk. Acting on the doctrine of "Three Withs: eat, sleep, and
work with the people” -- some 1400 to 1800 "cadre" undertook: census and
surveys of the physical needs of villages; building schools, maternity
hospitals, information halls; repairing and enlarging local roads; digging
wells and irrigation canals; teaching personal and public hygiene; distri-
buting medicines; teaching children by day, and anti-illiteracy classes by
night; forming village militia; conducting political meetings; and publicizing
agrarian reform legislation.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

\
