Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

: ~ FAN ETHhOLT

HUT -< j

atte SEIU Grin 2 CP eters SECURITY INFORMATION
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.

od

ll August 1953 | or

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Subject: The Navarre Concept for Operations
in Indochina,

1. In a memorandum for you, dated 21 April 1953, subject:
"Proposed French Stratezie Plan for the Successful Conclusion
of the War in Indochina," the Joint Chiefs of Staff pointed
out certain weaknesses in the LeTourneau-Allard plan, but
felt that it was workable. During the visit of the U.S.
Joint Military Mission to Indochina, Lieutenant General
Navarre submitted in writing to Lieutenant General O'Daniel,
Chief of the Mission, a paper entitled, “Principles for the
Conduct of the War in Indochina” appended hereto, which
appears to correct these wealnesses and which presents a
marked improvement in French military thinking concerning
operations in Indochina.

SAe

~

7 — ~
2. In his report Lieutenant General O'Danicl stated that, Vy)
in his opinion, the new French command in Indochina will ms &
accomplish under the Navarre concept the decisive defeat of ‘ar
the Viet Minh by 1955 and that the addition of two or more te
French divisions from outside of Indochina would expedite ° é
this defeat. Additions other than in divisional organization a
would be in error since it is the divisional team, with its }
combat proven effectiveness, which is sorely needed in Indo- =
china. Lieutenant General O'Daniel further reported that x
French military leaders were most cooperative with the mission, im

that several agreements were accomplished to improve the
effectiveness of the proposed military operations, and that
repeated invitations were extended to the U.S. mission to
return in a few months to witness the progress the French
will have made.

3. Based on’past performances by the French, the Joint
Chiefs of Stafv have reservations in predicting actual re-
sults which can be expected pendin:, additional proof by
demonstration of continued French support and by further
French performance in Indochina. However, if vigorously
pursued militarily in Indochina and supported politically
in France, the Wavarre concept offers a promise of success
sufficient to warrant appropriate additional U.S. aid re-
guired for implementation. “Such aid to France and the
Associated States resulting from U.S. support of the Navarre

Cr ee a rao ae FY . i}

- -_
2 Coch

r
Fy -
* LS 4 ca
of__.2 pases Series A ts i Le | } iy} BS =

