Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

5
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Taylor and I had advised and visited that country. At that time,
the progress of the counter insurgency effort was so great it
appeared that we would be able to withdraw much of our training
force by the end of 1965, and not 1964, and we would -~ we so stated
upon our return. But following that -- and I should also mention

that in that same statement, we made in September, 1963, we pointed
out the very serious nature of the political difficulties that were
building up in South Vietnam, because of the conflict between the
Buddhists and the Catholics, and the government.

"In any event, as I say, in November, 1963, the government was
overthrown. There was another change of government January 30th,
and this completely changed the outlook and the political instability
that followed the two coups has given the Viet Cong an opportunity
to take advantage of the political and military weakness. They have
taken advantage of it. It is now necessary to add further U.S. mil-
itary assistance to counter that Viet Cong offensive....

"We have never made the statement since September, 1963, that we
believed we could bring the bulk of the training forces out by the
end of 1965, because the actions in November and January made it
quite clear that would not be possible.

"We have said -- as a matter of fact, I say today -- as our
training missions are conpleted, we will bring back the training
forces. JI think this is only good sense, and good judgnent. We
have certain training missions that I hope we can complete this
year, and others next year, and the forces associated with those
missions should be brought back.

"We have forces there training the Vietnamese to fly spotter
aircraft, for artillery spotting purposes. I am very hopeful
that we can bring the U.S. forces out as the Vietnamese acquire
that capability.

"On the other hand, the Vietnamese quite clearly need addi-
tional assistance in training for counter guerrilla operations,
because of the increased guerrilla activities of the Viet Cong,
and we are sending additional special forces to Vietnam for that
purpose.

"There will be a flow in both directions, but I am certain in
the next several months the net flow will be strongly toward South
Vietnam." 69/

After Tonkin Gulf, the policy objective of gradual disengagement
from Vietnam was no longer relevant. The hope, as well as the concept
of phase out and withdrawal, dwindled, since such withdrawal was now seen
as tantamount to surrendering SVN to Hanoi. The issue for the future
would no longer be withdrawals, but what additional U.S. forces would be
required to stem the tide--and how fast they would have to be thrown into
action.

ho. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
