Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Unlike the guidance under which U.S. negotiators helped to frame
NATO, U.S. representatives to the conference establishing SEATO were
given four uncompromisable pre-conditions:

(a) The U.S. would refuse to commit any U.S. forces
unilaterally;

(b) Were military action to be required, one or more of the
European signatories would have to participate;

~ (¢c) The U.S. intended to contribute only sea and air power,
expecting that other signatories would provide ground forces;

(ad) The U.S. would act only against conmunist aggression.

These instructions not only clearly exempt the use of U.S. ground forces,
but presuppose multilateral action before the U.S. would act in any
eapacity.

With respect to the comparative development of SFATO and NATO, U.S.
behavior also indicates great restraint and avoidance of commitment.
NATO was formed in 1949, and within two years it was well institution-
alized -- combined command forces in-being and a Standing Group for
policy guidance. The U.S. consistently resisted the efforts of its
SEATO partners for comparable institutions. Secretary Dulles, in fact,
sought to discourage public identification of SEATO with NATO. Only
in 1959, did the U.S. accede to the formation of a modest SEATO secre-
tariat. Moreover, SEATO had to wait until 1960 before the U.S. would
participate in the development of a series of SEATO contingency plans.
Most important, no U.S, troops have ever been designated specifically
for SEATO.

Comparing the specific terminology of the operative sections of the
SEATO and NATO treaties gives additional credence to the non-obligation
argument. The key articles of both treaties are those calling for action
against an enemy threat. Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty declares
that the member nations "agree that an armed attack against one or more
of them in Europe or North America shall be considered an attack against
them all," and that in that event each will take "forthwith...such action
as it deems necessary, including the use of armed force...." The cor-
relative phraseology in the Southeast Asia Collective Defénse Treaty
Article IV declares that "each Party recognizes that aggression by means
of armed attack against any of the Parties, or against any state or
territory which the Parties by unanimous agreement may hereafter desig-
nate, would endanger its own peace and safety, and agrees that it will
in that event act to meet the common danger in accordance with its
constitutional process." The SEATO wording is thus intentionally ambig-
uous on the point of just what response would be made by the members in
the event of an armed attack. Such an attack against one of the SEATO
members would be viewed as a “common danger" rather than as an "attack

2A ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
