Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ra

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The loss of South Viet-Nam to Communism would not only destroy
SHATO but would undermine the credibility of American commitments
elsewhere. Further, loss of South Viet-Nam would stimulate bitter
domestic controversies in the United States and would be seized upon
by extreme elements to divide the country and harass the Administra-
tion.

2. The Problem of saving South Viet—Nam.

It seems, on the face of it, absurd to think that a nation of
20 million people can be subverted by 15-20 thousand active guer-
* tllas if the Government and people of that country do not wish to
be subverted. South Viet-Nam is not, however, a highly organized
society with an effective governing apparatus and a population ac-
customed to carrying civic responsibility. Public apathy is encour-
aged by the inability of most citizens to act directly as well as by
the tactics of terror employed by the guerrillas throughout the coun-
tryside. Inept administration and the absence of a strong non-
Communist political coalition have made it difficult to bring avaii-
able resources to bear upon the guerrilla problem and to make the
most effective use of available external aid. Under the best of con-
ditions the threat posed by the presence of 15-20 thousand guerrillas,
well disciplined under well-trained cadres, would be difficult to
meet.

3. The United States' Objective in South Viet—Nam.

The United States should commit itself to the clear objective of
preventing the fall of South Viet-Nam to Communist. The basic means

for accomplishing this objective must be to put the Government of
South Viet-Nam into a position to win its own war against the guer—
rillas. We must insist that that Government itself take the measures
necessary for that purpose in exchange for large-scale United States
assistance in the military, economic and political fields. At the
same time we must recognize that it will probably not be possible for
the GVN to win this war as long as the flow of men and supplies from
North Viet-Nam continues unchecked and the guerrillas enjoy a safe
sanctuary in neighboring territory.

We should be prepared to introduce United States combat forces
if that should become necessary for success. Dependent upon the cir-

cumstances, it may also be necessary for United States forces to
strike at the source of the aggression in North Viet—Nam.

126

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
