Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"POLITICAL CHANGE IN SOUTH VIET-NAM

"This was the policy followed from early 1962 right up to February
of 1965. Within this period, however, political deterioration in South
Viet-Nam compelled, in the fall of 1963, decisions that I think must
be counted as the ninth critical point of United States policymaking.

Tt was decided at that time that while the United States would do every-
thing necessary to support the war, it would no longer adhere to its
posture of all-out support of the Diem regime unless that regime made
sweeping changes in its method of operation. _ The record of this period
has been described by Robert Shaplen and now by Hilsman. Undoubtedly,
our new posture contributed to the overthrow of Diem in November 1963."

+ + *

"In early 1964 President Johnson expressly reaffirmed a11 the
essential elements of the Kennedy administration policies publicly
through every action and through firm internal directives. It is simply
not true to say that there was any change in policy in this period
toward greater military emphasis, much less major new military actions.
Further actions were not excluded--as they had not been in 1954 or 1961--
but President Johnson's firm object right up to February 1965 was to make
the policy adopted in late 1961 work if it could possibly be done, inclu-
ding the fullest possible emphasis on pacification and the whole police
and civilian aspect.

"The summer of 196} did bring a new phase, though not a uae in
policy. The situation was continuing to decline, and North Viet-Nam may
have been emboldened by the trend. Certainly, infiltration was rising
steadily and, as we now know more clearly, began to include substantial
-numbers of native North Vietnamese. But, more dramatically, American
nayal ships on patrol in the Gulf of Tonkin were attacked, and there were
two responding United States attacks on North Vietnamese naval bases.

"This led President Johnson to seek, and the Congress to approve
overwhelmingly on August 7, 196+, a resolution--drafted in collaboration
with congressional leaders--that not only approved such retaliatory
attacks but added that:

'The United States regards as vital to its national interest
and to world peace the maintenance of international peace and security
in southeast Asia. Consonant with the Constitution of the United States
and the Charter of the United Nations and in accordance with its obliga-
tions under the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, the United
States is, therefore, prepared, as the President determines, to take all
necessary steps, including the use of armed force, to assist any member
or protocol state of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting
assistance in defense of its freedom.'"

a 36 ae

D-117
