Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

capabilities at present are 149 ARVN bn equivalents.
Course of action A represents a 34% increase (200 bn
equivalents) over our present offensive capability.

Course of action B represents only a 4% increase (155)
Over our present offensive capability. These offensive
forces are what remain after commitment of forces to
containment of the enemy threat and pacification and
security. (The end FY 67 column was the actual distri-
bution of units as of 30 June 1967. However, during

any given week the forces in the containment and offensive
roles, and to a lesser degree, those performing pacifica-
tion/security missions will vary. It would be misleading
to say they represent precise estimates, rather the
numbers are representative of the basic distribution of
our forces to varying roles and illustrative of the type
of war we are fighting.) It is possible that additional
forces may be required for containment since the 27 bat-
talions represent only an estimate of what will be
necessary. If so, we may be required to take units from
the pacification and security or offensive roles. Should
this be required, course of action A provides a greater
operational flexibility for offensive action or reinforce-
ment of our containment forces. Under course of action B,
however, response to contingencies must be met at the
expense of forces committed to pacification and security
or offensive roles.

In summary, the reduced forces under course of
action B; the limitation of air operations north of 20°
lJatitude; and the restriction of ground action to South
Vietnam could reinforce Hanoi's determination to prolong
the conflict. In particular, the restriction of out-of-
country air and ground operations would increase the
enemy's capability to concentrate his defense, maintain
his LOC's and require us to divert additional ground forces
to the containment role. Under these circumstances, we
present the enemy increased options to prolonging the
war. Course of action B does not provide us with reason-
able assurance that, given the present objectives, there
would be any prospects of an early settlement of the
conflict. This is not to imply we might not eventually
win the war of attrition but it would be a long drawn
out process and would postpone the time when US forces
could redeploy from South Vietnam. 67/

208 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
