Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

My concern continues, however, in other respects. This is because T
See no reasonable way to bring the war to an end soon. Enemy morale has not
broken -- he apparently has adjusted to our stopping his drive for military
‘victory and has adopted a strategy of keeping us busy and waiting us out
(e strategy of attriting our national will). He knows that we have not been,
and he belieyes we probably will not be, able to translate our military
successes into the "end products" -- broken enemy morale and political
achievements by the GYN.

The_one thing demonstrably goings for us in Vietnam over the past year

2 gx

has been the large nunber of enemy killed~in-action resulting from the big

military op operations. Allowing for possible exaggeration in reports, the
eneny must be taking losses ~— deaths in and after battle -- at the rate of
more then 60,000 a year. The infiltration routes would seem to de one-way
trails to death for the North Vietnamese. Yet there is no sign of an im-
pendin: Se ean my morale and it appears that ne can more then replace

NY Reeth antenna ee ntl “

his loss 3 by. infiltration from North Vie nam end recruitment in South
Vietnam. ~o, a es

Pacificstion is 8 bad disannointment. We have good grounds to
_by the recent elections, by Xy's 16 months in power, and by the-fai
of developient of nations] political institutions and of a legitin
6 aba Bul none of this has translated itself into political achi
ments at Province level or below. Pactfication nes tf anything gone |

As compared with two, or four, years ago, enemy full-time regiousl 3 an
part-time guerrilla forces are larger; attacks, terrorism and sabotage heme’
increased in scope and intensity; more railroads are closed and highways - cus
the rice crop expected to come to market is smaller; we control little, if any,

more of the population; the VC political infrastructure thrives in most of the
country, continuing to give the enemy his enormous intelligence advantage; full
security exists nowhere (not even behind the US Marines' lines and in Saigon);
in the countryside, the enemy almost completely controls the night.

Nor has the ROLLING THUNDER . program of bombing the North either significant)

affecte -d infiltration or erecked the morale of Hanoi. There is agreement’ a the

intelligence community on these facts (see the attached Appendix).

In_essence, we find id _ ourselves ~- from the point of view of the important
war (for _the complicity of the people) ~~ no ) better, and if anything worse off.

This importent war must be fought and won by the Vietnamese themselves : We have
_known this from the beginning. But the discouraging truth is that, es was the ~

“case in 1962 anc J 1963 and 1965, we have not found the formula, the catalyst,

for training and inspiring them into effective action.

82 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
