Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

French in Paris in autumn, 1946, Ho appealed to the French to "save him
from the extremists" within the Viet Minh by some meaningful concession
to Vietnamese independence. 22/ In reply to a journalist's inquiry,
Ho claimed that he could remain neutral, "like Switzerland” in the
developing world power struggle between communism and the West. 23/

7. U.S. Perceptions of Ho

Personally, Ho was charming, and he was especially captivating
with Americans. Ho's public statements resonated well with the anti-
colonial sentiments of most Americans, and he presented an appealing
figure, fragile, humble, ascetic, yet humorous and cosmopolitan. 2k/
General Gallagher, who was the senior U.S. officer in contact with Ho
in 1945, was impressed with Ho's resoluteness and nationalist dedication.
Upon his return, he told State Department officials that "Ho was willing
to cooperate with Great Britain, USSR, or the United States and would
perhaps even settle for French tutelage if that were subordinated to
control by other nations."

"Asked how ‘communist’ the Viet Minh were, General
Gallagher replied that they were smart and successfully
gave the impression of not being communist. Rather, they
emphasized their interest in independence and their
interest in independence and their Annamese patriotism,
Their excellent organization and propaganda techniques,
General Gallagher pointed out, would seem to have the
earmarks of some Russian influence. General Gallagher
stated that the minority Cao Dai group were definitely
Communist. In his opinion, however, the Viet Minh should
not be labeled full-fledged doctrinaire communist." *

On 11 September, 1946, the U.S. Ambassador in Paris reported a visit fs
from Ho:

* From Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard L. Sharp, of the
Division of Southeast Affairs, Department of State, dated Janu-
ary 30, 1946.

c-41 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
