Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

: : SECRET ' American Consulate General,
Saigon, Indochina, February 12, 1949.

AEMGRANDUN OW INDOCHINA FOR EEwW DELHT FOREIGN SERVICS CONFERENCE

SECTION I. POLITICAL SITUATION

Internal Politiceal Situation in the Vietnam

Ae
1, General Situation - Postwar developnents in the Annamite provinces
of Indochisa, Erown as the Vietnam, are fundamentally similer to those in

i ;
othor parts of a
ism. The Victn out from other regions in that Communism has
gained control of ! tionalist movoment and created a situation which
is & Glassi¢ exenpie of see cuceessiul, application of Communist stratesy
in a colonial areca. A small Moscow and Chinese trained group has scized
leadership and contro) of ‘the sereue war aluest universally supported
independence movemente “The country nas bean Kept in @ seate of strive ena
-eonfusion for thres eis On? hundred thousand Fronch troops are pimed
down in Indochina ane nov availiable in turope, The aren is a serious
drain on France's resources inshead ef a saurce of wealth and raw mote-+
rials for France and tho world. Finally thezve is a Snir chance that the
French muy be driven out and the first Communist outpost in Soutnoast

*

fe)
+
u -

n that they stem from a vowerful upsurge of National-
s
a

Asia established.

fhe French have pelatedly come to's partial wndorstendins of the
situation with which they are Faced and cre endeavering to erscat a non-
Communist auteonemous gevernment under the leadership of former Emperor
Bao DAI. They hope to retuin the Victnam within the nebulous French

Union and ma

ne
intain French militery and sconcmic vositions.

on Background - fo understand how the present situation erose es,

bricf review of the history of the colony is necessary. Indochina came
under Eyropean domination considerably later than Inconesin, india, or
the Philippines, the Freneh first occupying part of Cochinchina in 1864,
The area of this colony was exnanded while protectorate S were established
over the remaining parts of the peninsula curing SHUR AGL years. The
adininistration bonded to become more eontralized and eventually evolved
into # tightly knit political and economic fedcration in Which the rights
and newors of the Emperor of Annam, King of Cambocia, and Princes of Leos
had pxv.cticzlly disappcared. There was little autonomy or self govern-

2 cai level and little place for natives in the adminis-
tiner or cssentially honerary oosus.

rar
LS
a

in building rosds an 2S aa

of the Cochinenine nto rie

a sources of Tonki T alse mode consi
ho French lanzua @ throus}

anc. scout i310 million ne ray Catholics

populrticn) iasarly cll Acated inna

Rho occupation and pacification of tne country was not accom
i

plished titheut numercus revolts ich WoeLEe. put dovire wisth Ero OG SOE ivy»
Tho Wetionnlist movement, however, was reaver. completely suppressed and

. z: ae i é : ry cr
= SEG|5g Si Paws land
