Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

TVG U.S. PROGRAMS IN SOUTH VIETNAM, NOV 1963 - APR 1965;

NSAM 273 - NSAM 288 - HONOLULU
SUMMARY AND ANALYSTS

During the period from the overthrow of the Diem government in
November 1963 until the Honolulu Conference in April 1965, U.S. policy-
makers were concerned with a continuing, central dilemma in South Vietnam.
An agonizing, year-long internal debate took place against the double
backdrop of this dilemma and Presidential election year politics. Although
the results of this debate could not be clearly seen until mid-1965, the
seeds which produced those results are clearly visible in the official
files at least a year earlier.

The basic problem in U.S. policy was to generate programs and other
means adequate to secure the objectives being pursued. The central dilemma
lay in the fact that while U.S. policy objectives were stated in the very
most comprehensive terms the means employed were both consciously limited
and purposely indirect. That is, the U.S. eschewed employing all of its
military might -- or even a substantial portion of it -- in a battle which
was viewed in Washington as determinative of the fate of all. of Southeast
Asia, probably crucial to the future of South Asia, and as the definitive
test of U.S. ability to counteract communist support for "wars of national
liberation." Moreover, this limited U.S. resource commitment to practically
unlimited ends took an indirect form. U.S. efforts were aimed at helping
the Government of Vietnam (GVN) to win its own struggle against the insurgents.
This meant that the newly established GVN had to somehow mobilize its human
and other resources, improve its military performance against the Viet
Cong, and shift the tide of the war.

As events in 1964 and 1965 were to demonstrate, the GVN did not
succeed in achieving political stability. Its military forces did not
stem the pattern of VC successes, Rather, a series of coups produced
"revolving door" governments in Saigon. The military pattern showed,
particularly by the spring of 1965, a precipitous decline in the fortunes
of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN). Yet there was no serious
debate in Washington on the desirability of modifying U.S. objectives.
These remaired essentially fixed even as the means for their realization --
limited U.S. material support for GVN -- underwent one crisis and disappoint-
ment after another.

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
