Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

1S
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

logistic difficulties faced by the other side, I believe we can
assume that the maximum U.S. forces required on the ground in
Southeast Asia will not exceed 6 divisions, or about 205,000 men
(CINCPAC Plan 32-59, Phase IV). Our military posture is, or
with the addition of more National Guard or regular Army divi-
sions, can be made, adequate to furnish these forces without
serious interference with our present Berlin plans.

6. To accept the stated objective is of course a most serious
decision. Military force is not the only element of what must be
a@ most carefully coordinated set of actions. Success will depend
on factors many of which are not within our control -- notably the
conduct of Diem himself and other leaders in the area. Laos will
remain a major problem. The domestic political implications of
accepting the objective are also grave, although it is our feeling
that the country will respond better to a firm initial position
than to courses of action that lead us in only gradually, and that
in the meantime are sure to involve casualties. The over-all
effect on Moscow and Peiping will need careful weighing and may
well be mixed; however, permitting South Vietnam to fell can only
strengthen and encourage them greatly.

7. %iIn sum:

a. We do not believe major units of U.S. forces should
be introduced in South Vietnam unless we are willing to make an
affirmative decision on the issue stated at the start of this
memor andium.

b. We are inclined to recommend that we do commit the
U.S. to the clear objective of preventing the fall of South Viet-
nam to Communism and that we support this commitment by the neces-
sary military actions.

e. If such a commitment is agreed upon, we support the
recommendations of General Taylor as the first steps toward its
fulfillment.

Sgd: Robert S. McNamara 16/

A number of things are striking about this memorandum, including of
course the judgment that the "maximum" U.S, ground forces required, even
in the case of overt intervention by not only North Vietnam, but China
as well, would "not exceed" 205,000 men. This estimate of the requirement
to deal with a large scale overt invasion is consistent with the Chief's
earlier estimate that the addition of 40,000 U.S. troops to the South
Vietnamese forces would be sufficient to "clean up” the Viet Cong.

But the strongest message to the President in the memorandum (growing
out of points 3, 4, and 7c) was surely that if he agreed to sending the
military task force, he should be prepared for follow-up recommendations

123
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
