Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

D. Johnson Administration

a Secretary Rusk Interviewed on Voice of America, 15 February 1964,
Department of State Bulletin, 2 March 1964, p. 333:

Kye nag ry

"wR, O'NEILL: Well, Hanoi has just publicly now identified itself
as supporting the guerrillas in South Vietnam and also threatening that
Red China would intervene in any action against North Vietnam. Do you
see any connection between that and the French recognition, or do you
think this is an isolated development?

"SECRETARY RUSK: I haven't seen anything that would lead me to say
there was an organic connection between what Hanoi has just said and what
Paris has done. It is true that Hanoi has made no secret of this policy
since 1959. They have publicly declared that they are out to take over
South Vietnam, and in this same statement to which you are referring they
made it very clear that North Vietnam is not going to be neutralized and
that their interest in South Vietnam is not so much neutrality as taking
it over. So I think the issues have been drawn very clearly out there.

"MR. O'NEILL: While we are on that area, how is the fighting in South
Vietnam? Are we going to be able to win out, and do you have any idea as
+o how soon that might be?

"SECRETARY RUSK: Well, I think we will have to wait a bit before we
ean speak with complete confidence about it in the short run. In the long
run, I have no doubt that the resources, the will, the material are present
in South Vietnam to enable the South Vietnamese to do this job. We are
determined that Southeast Asia is not going to be taken over by the com-
munists. We must insist that these basic accords be adhered to. And so
we are in this to the point where the South Vietnamese are going to be
independent and secure.”

% + *

"MR. WARD: Mr. Secretary, I wish you'd say something about this word
‘neutralization’ -- not whether Southeast Asia or some parts thereof should
be neutralized, but what the word itself means. It seems to me there is
a great deal of misunderstanding that flows from varied uses of the word.

"SRCRETARY RUSK: Well, the word gets confused because it has meant
so'many different things to different people. I suppose in the strictest
sense 4 neutral is, in time of peace, a so-called ‘unalined' country, that
it is not committed to one of the two major power bloes in the world, the
NATO bloc or the communist bloc.

D-3

,
