Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

Af

Carrier pilots would remain the major Naval shortage. The Air Force,

upon completion of the required deployments (in September of 1967)

"would not have the capability to deploy rapidly any combat-ready
tactical fighter forces." With one exception, all tactical and recon-
naissance units in the United States were assigned and executing training
tasks. To meet CINCPAC requirements would require drawing down from 21
TFS (486 aircraft) in Europe to 13 squadrons or 288 aircraft. Given all
Air Force commitments and responsibilities to respond to NATO and provide
other reinforcements a short-fall of some 22 TFS (445 aircraft), 5 TRS (90
aircraft) and 4 TCS (64 aircraft) would result.

In the "guts" portion of the memorandum detailed consideration was
given to the extent which mobilization of the reserves could alleviate
shortages. It noted these:

Army. Significant withdrawals of equipment have been
made fron the reserve components to support new activations.
This has resulted in a degradation of the training capability
and the mobilization potential of the reserve components.
Therefore, full or partial mobilization of reserve units would
have only limited effectiveness in accelerating Army deploy-
ments. However, mobilization of reserve units would permit a
more rapid restoration, personnel-wise, of the STRAF. In
addition, reserve unit mobilization and subsequent deployment
of these units to Europe or Korea would accelerate restoration
of Army forces in those areas. Selective mobilization of
reservists possessing critical skills could greatly improve
the quality.of the training and sustaining base and the quality
of deploying units which are now having to deploy with shortaces
of skills and experienced leaders. Selective mobilization would
permit some acceleration of unit deployments.

‘Air Force. Mobilization could provide 20 deployable ANG
tactical fighter squadrons (409 aircraft minimum) and 12 ANG
tactical reconnaissance squadrons. While not nuclear capable
and possessing less modern aircraft, the TFSs would partially
provide for the 22 TFS shortfall anticipated. By using older
equipment, shortfalls in TRSs would be reduced to zero, and
‘the CONUS base posture improved. TCS shortfalls would be reduced
through use of C-119 aircraft. Some personnel shortages would
be alleviated.

St = = Ft

in conclusion, the Services cannot fully respond to
CINCPAC's CY 1966 (adjusted) and CY 1967 force requirements on
the time schedule he has prescribed and under the conditions
stated in paragraph 4, above. Providing the preponderance of
his requirements, even on a delayed schedule, would further
impair the US military posture and capability to maintain for-
ward deployments to deter aggression world-wide. It would

80 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
