Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and intermingled with the people on a long-term basis.
Their capacity to establish and maintain publie order and
stability must be physically and continuously credible.

The key to achieving such security lies in the conduct

of effective area saturation tactics, in and around popu-
lated areas, which deny VC encroachment opportunities." 22/

Finally, the study advocated a far stronger system of leverage for
American advisors in the field -- "mechanisms for exerting U.S. influence
must be built into the U.S. organization and its methods of operation." 23/

The PROVN study concluded with a massive "Blueprint for National Action"
which was never implemented. But the influence of the study was substan-
tial. Within the Army staff, a responsible and select group of officers
had recommended top priority for pacification. Even if the Army staff
still rejected parts of the study, they were on notice that a study had
been produced within the staff which suggested a substantial revision
of priorities.

The PROVN study had some major gaps. Proceeding from the unstated
assumption that our commitment in Vietnam had no implicit time limits,
it proposed a strategy which it admitted would take years -- perhaps well
into the 1970's -- to carry out. It did not examine alternative strate-
gies that might be derived from a shorter time limit on the war. In fact,
the report made no mention of one of the most crucial variables in the
Vietnam equation -- U.S. public support for the Administration.

Further, the report did little to prove that Vietnam was ready for
pacification. This "fact" was taken for granted, it seems -- a fault com-
mon to most American-produced pacification plans. While PROVN did suggest
geographic priorities, they were derived not even in part from the area's
receptivity to pacification but exclusively from the location and strate-
gic importance of the area. Thus, the same sort of error made in Hop Tac
was. being repeated in PROVN's suggestions.

MACV analyzed the report in May of 1966, calling it “an excellent over-
all approach in developing organization, concepts and policies..." In
a lengthy analysis of PROVN, MACV cabled:

"As seen here, PROVN recommends two major initiatives
essential to achieving U.S. objectives in South Vietnam:
‘ereation of an organization to integrate total U.S. civil-
militery effort, and exercise of greatly increased direct
U.S. involvement in GVN activities.

"MACV has long recognized need for the greatest possi-
ble wiity of effort to gain U.S. cbjectives in South Vietnam.
MACV agrees with PROVN concept to achieve full integration
of effort in attaining U.S. objectives in South Vietnam.
Evolution of U.S. organization in Saigon is heading towards
this goal. Deputy Ambassador now has charge of revolutionary

77 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
