Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Lodge: You have certainly done your duty. As I told you only
this morning, I admire your courage and your great
contributions to your country. Wo one can take away
from you the credit for all you have done. Now I am
worried abowt your physical safety. I have a report
that those in charge of the current activity offer you
and your brother safe conduct out of the country if
you resign. Had you heard this?

Diem: Wo. (And then after a pause) You heve my telephone
number,

Lodge: Yes. If I can do anything for your physical safety,
please call me.

Diem: I am trying to re-establish order. pa)

There is no evidence available as to whether Washington issued further
instructions with respect to the personal safety of Diem and lihu at this
time. 1e/ The above conversation was the last that any Americen had

with Diem. lodge, as was his custom, retired that night at about 9:30
p.m. 13/

Shortly after Diem's call to Lodge, the generals called the palace
again and put Colonel Tung on the phone. ‘Tung told Nhu he had sur-
rendered. The generals then demanded the inmediate surrender of the
brothers or they would put the palace under air and ground attack. Wach
general at JGS, in turn, was put on the phone to assure Diem of safe con-
duct if he would resign, but ihu apparently dissuaded him.14/ General Minh
himself made a separate telephone call to Diem in a final attempt to get
him to surrender, but Diem hung up. 15/ The two brothers now began
frantically calling unit commanders throughout the country on their pri-
vate communications system to get them to come to their aid. In most
cases they could not get through, and when they did they were told to
surrender by officers who now supported the coup. When they could get
no help from the reguler military, they made a vain effort to enlist the
support of paramilitary units and their Republic Youth groups. Sometime
in the early evening, probably by eight o'clock, they recognized the
hopelessness of the situation and escaped from the palace, unbeknown to
its defenders, through one of the secret underground exits connected
to the sewer system. They were met by a Chinese friend who took them
to his home in Cholon where they had previously set up e communications
channel to the palace for just such an emergency. There they spent
their last night.

in the face of the brothers’ intransigent refusal to surrender and
confident that they were now in control of the entire country and that

58 . TOP SECRET = Sensitive
