Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

From 1949 through 1953 the National Security Council maintained the view
that a broader regional defense pact or association should be initiated

by the countries of the area. 15/ In the following 1950 exchange with

Congressman Fulton, Secretary of State Acheson expressed Administration

policy:

"MR. ‘FULTON: May I read to the Secretary from the second.
paragraph of the Mutual Defense Assistance Act:

"The Congress hereby expresses itself as favoring the crea-
tion by the free countries and free peoples of the Far East, of
a joint organization consistent with the Charter of the United
Nations to establish a program of self-help and mutual coopera-
tion designed to develop their economic and social well-being,
to safeguard the basic rigs and liberties, and to protect their
security and independence. '

"Now may I point out that is a bipartisan policy, because
it was two Republicans and two Democrats on this committee who
put that amendment in. My question then is to the Secretary
and to the State Department, why, when this was passed clear
back in 1949, October 6, has not the State Department taken
steps to put into effect the declared bipartisan foreign policy
of the Congress? "

"SECRETARY ACHESON: Mr. Fulton, I think it is important
for you to really look at your own words. You said that the
Congress expresses itself as favoring the creation by the free
countries and free peoples of the Far East of certain things.
Now the President stated he favors that. On all occasions he
has stated it and I have stated that that is the attitude of
the Government of the United States. I should think that the
President and I and the Congress are all agreed. that the very
important words are that this organization should be created by
the free peoples of the Far East and not created by the United
States. We are not calling these nations together and you never
asked us to call these nations together and tell them they should
create something. I know that your knowledge of the Far East
is sufficient to lead you to conclude that if we did that it would
have exactly the opposite effect of the one which you wish to
achieve. The President of the Philippines has been going forward
to accomplish this. We have stated to him, and publicly, that
we are most sympathetic to this activity on his part, but it
is most important that it should be a spontaneous Asian action." 16/

g- Indochina and United Action, 1954

"In the spring of 1954, however, the deterioration of the
French situation in Indochina caused a re-evaluation of U.S, policy on
collective security in Asia and precipitated proposals by the U.S. to
the French, the British and several other countries to establish some

A-10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
