Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Page
Shaplen, Robert; The Lost Revolution.
There was a strong possibility in 1945 and 1946 that French
and American policy could have "Titofied" Ho Chi Minh, and
that Vietnam--albeit under left-wing leadership--might have
been a bulwark against Communist Chinese expansion. But
the possibility of Vietnam's now becoming a Yugoslavia is
POMC Rua vac sale Pee Aine aia leer ateatelg anh arlatasavaratets| Gane eileen see ee

Zinn, Howard; Vietnam: The Logic of Withdrawal.
A Communist government in Vietnam is the best avenue for
improving the lot of the Vietnamese; Ho Chi Minh's dicta-
torship would be preferable to any elitist dictatorship in
South Vietnam. If the U.S. wants to contain China, the
U.S. should recognize that Ho Chi Minh would strive to
maintain his independence, and thus would accomplish what
Our mney POLES CANNOb. «simian gin mera $08 is dele wlelele/eserereratereiete ts c-18

Bator, Victor; Vietnam: <A Diplomatic Tragedy.
1954: China is most important problem facing Vietnam.
Double-satellite relationship affords the DRV potential
independence. Diem's fanaticism obtruded........c.cecccecee CHO

Sacks, Milton; "Marciem in Southeast Asia."
1946-1949: Ho attempted to preserve neutrality, uoueh
this conflicted with his desire for international support
SVG Ere GOST OL POY LIM Viatiia «Rinne aiaik Fs iace latsustata akaclereeere tere metintete ae eee C-21

Buttinger, Joseph; Vietnam: <A Dragon Embattled.
1946-1947: Ho realized that he could not rally Vietnamese
to his struggle for independence with the banner of com-
munism. Hence, the facade of democracy to lend righteousness
to the forceful communist campaign to align the people with
he VWELEE Mh ariel 5 es Rs ere owl e nn spel we w/e eunie lee a lars aha ea sie . 0-23

Kennedy, John F., quoted in Schlesinger, Arthur M., ed.,
A Thousand Days. in
1951: U.S. has joined France in a desperate attempt to
preserve empire. U.S. must not rely on arms alone to halt
southward thrust of communism, but must harness nationalism..(C- ol,

Schlesinger, Arthur M.; The Bitter Heritage.
The most effective bulwark against an aggressive communist
state may well be national communism. A rational U.S,
policy aimed at containing China could have recognized
communist Vietnam in 1954, vice backing a shaky Saigon
regime led by right-wing mandarins or generals......seene00e2072)

Fall, Bernard B.; Viet-Nam Witness.
The Vietnamese Communists had to conduct their revolution
without aid from abroad, even from French Communists.........C-26

= TOP SECRET - Sensitive
