Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

believed that his outlook on life was “born of a profound, of an immense
nostalgia for the Vietnamese past, of a desperate filial respect for the
society of ancient Annam." 29/ There was some thought of his becoming
a priest, but he elected public administration; his elder brother Thuc,
the cleric, is said to have speculated that Diem found himself too inflexi-
ble, too willful, too severe for the priesthood. 30/ But above all
else, Diem's early years impressed upon him the importance of family in
performing the duties of station: the family was the first means of
extending personal power, the essential mode of political expression.

It is possible that Diem resorted to nepotism simply because he lacked

a personal political apparatus which would have permitted him to operate
otherwise, but nepotism became the style of his rule, and it was quite
consistent with his upbringing.

"Society," said Diem, "functions through personal relations among
men at the top." 31/ One brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, received the title of
Advisor to the President, and controlled the semi-covert Personalist
Labor Revolutionary Party. His wife, Madame Nhu, became the President's
official hostess, a deputy in the National Assembly, and the founder-
chairman of the Woman's Solidarity Movement. Her father became one of
Diem's ambassadors, and his wife the GVN observer at the UN. A second
prother of Diem, Ngo Dinh Can, became the virtual overlord of Annam,
holding no official position, but ruling the region in all respects.

A third brother, Ngo Dinh Thuc, the Archbishop of Hue and Primate of
Vietnam, also held no office, but functioned as Presidential advisor,
and levered Catholic opinion on behalf of Diem. A fourth brother, Ngo
Dinh Luyen, became an Ambassador. Three family members~Tran Van Chuong,
Tran Van Do, and Tran Van Bac~served in Diem's first cabinet, and two
other in-laws, Nguyen Huu Chau and Tran Trung Dung, held the key port-
folios of Secretary of State at the Presidency and Assistant Secretary
of State for National Defense. One of the reasons General Collins
opposed Diem may be a letter he received in April, 1955, from a group
of nationalists headed by former Premier Nguyen Phan Long, urging the
United States to withdraw its support of Diem on the grounds that his
brothers were effectively isolating Diem politically. 32/ The obser-=
vation proved to be correct: Ngo Dinh Nhu and Ngo Dinh Can increasingly
gathered power into their owm hands, and non-family politicians found
themselves quietly shumted aside. Gradually, a concentration of power
also occurred within the family circle, again toward Nhu, Mme. Nhu and
Can, and at the expense of the more remotely related. The President's
family thus became an entirely extra-legal elite which in elass and
geographic origin, as well as religion, was distinct from the South
Vietnamese as @ whole.

The Diem family circle was promptly targeted by gossipers. In
Saigon, rumors were the political medium, and stories were soon rampant
that members of the family were looting the government. 33/ By 1957,
the whispering campaign against the Nhus mounted to such proportions
that they issued a public statement denying that they had ever removed

1h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
