Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

780) .
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and chemicals since the terrain in question would make actual on-the-
ground physical construction of a barrier difficult and would probably
evoke fierce military opposition. In his memo, Fisher dealt at length
with the pros and cons of such a proposal including a lengthy argument
for its political advantages.

The memo must have struck a responsive cord in McNaughton
Dpecause six weeks later he sent McNamara an only slightly revised
version of the Fisher draft. 30/ McNaughton's changes added little to
the Fisher ideas; they served merely to tone down some of his assertions
and hedge the conclusions. The central argument for the barrier concept
proceeded from a negative analysis of the effects of the bombing,

B. Present Military Situation in North Vietnam

1. Physical consequences of bombing

a. The DRV has suffered some physical. hardship and
pain, raising the cost to it of supporting the VC.

b. Best intelligence judgment is that:

(1) Bombing may or may not - by destruction
or delay - have resulted in net reduction in the flow of men or
supplies to the forces in the South;

(2) Bombing has failed to reduce the limit on
the capacity of the DRV to aid the VC to a point below VC needs;

(3) Future bombing of North Vietnam cannot be
expected physically to limit the military support given the VC
by the DRV to a point below VC needs.

2. Influence consequences of bombing

a. There is no evidence that bombings have made
it more likely the DRV will decide to back out of the war.

b. Nor is there evidence that bombings have
resulted in an increased DRV resolve to continue the war to
- an eventual victory. /Fisher's draft had read "There is some

evidence that bombings...."/

C. The Future of a Bombing Strategy

Although bombings of North Vietnam improve GVN morale
and provide a counter in eventual negotiations (should they
take place) there is no evidence that they meaningfully reduce

146 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
