Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that was authorized was the increase of B-52 sorties from 600 to 800
in February 1967 as proposed by CINCPAC and the JCS. 8h/

2, Stabilization of the Air War

With the President's decision not to increase squadrons
or sorties for the air campaign in 1967 added to McNamara's strong
recommendation on stabilizing the level of the bombing, activity for
the remainder of 1966 was kept at about the current level. Among the
continuing constraints that was just beginning to alleviate itself was
an insufficiency of certain air munitions to sustain higher levels of
air combat. 85/ The real constraints, however, as CINCPAC and the
JCS correctly stated were political.

The principle supporters of halting the expansion of the
air war, as we have already seen, were the Secretary of Defense and his
civilian advisors. The arguments they had used during the debate over
Program #4 and its associated air program were reiterated and somewhat
enlarged later in November in the backup justification for the FY 1967
Southeast Asia Supplemental Appropriation. Singled out for particular
eriticism was the ineffective air effort to interdict infiltration.
The draft Memorandum for the President began by making the best case
possible, on the basis of results, for the bombing, and then proceeded
40 demonstrate that those accomplishments were simply far below what
was required to really interdict. The section of the memo in question

follows:

A substantial air interdiction campaign is clearly
necessary and worthwhile. In addition to putting a ceiling
on the size of the force that can be supported, it yields
three significant military effects. First, it effectively
harasses and delays truck movements down through the
southern panhandles of NVN and Laos, though it has no effect
on troops infiltrating on foot over trails that are virtually
invisible from the air. Our experience shows that daytime
armed reconnaissance above some minimum sortie rate makes
it prohibitively expensive to the enemy to attempt daylight
‘movement of vehicles, and so forces him to night movement.
Second, destruction of bridges and cratering of roads
forces the enemy to deploy repair crews, equipment, and
porters to repair or bypass the damage. Third, attacks
on vehicles, parks, and rest camps des‘roy some vehicles
with their cargoes and inflict casualties. Moreover, our
bombing campaign may produce a beneficial effect on U.S.
and SVN morale by making NVN pay a price for its enemy.

But at the scale we are now operating, I believe our bombing
is yielding very small marginal returns, not worth the
eost in pilot lives and aircraft.

174 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
