Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

counter-escalation. He authorized naval gunfire up to the 20th parallel
against targets ashore and afloat, artillery fire across the DMZ, a
slight expansion of operation in Laos, the mining of rivers and estu-
aries south of 20°, and new bombing targets for ROLLING THUNDER 54. ‘The
latter included the remaining thermal power plants except Hanoi and
Haiphong, and a reiteration of authority to strike the Thai Nguyen Steel
Plant and the Haiphong Cement Plant (initially given in RT 53 but targets
not struck). 4h] The President was neither ready nor willing, however,
to consider the mining of the ports nor, for the moment, the removal of
the Hanoi sanctuary. A decision on basing B-52s in Thailand was also
deferred for the time being.

CINCPAC promptly took steps to bring the newly authorized
targets under attack. On February 24 U.S. artillery units along the DMZ
began shelling north of the buffer with long-range 175mm. cannon. ‘The
same day the Secretary told a news conference that more targets in the
North might be added to the strike list, thereby preparing the public for
the modest escalation approved by the President two days before. On
February 27 U.S. planes began the aerial mining of the rivers and coastal
estuaries of North Vietnam below the 20th parallel. The mines were
equipped with de-activation devices to neutralize them at the end of
three months. Weather conditions, however, continued to hamper operations
over North Vietnam and to defer sorties from several of the authorized
targets that required visual identification weather conditions before
strike approval could be given. The Thai Nguyen Iron and Steel complex,
for example, was not struck until March 10. The slow squeeze was once
more the order of the day with the emphasis on progressively destroying
North Vietnam's embryonic industrial capability.

But the President intended that the pressure on the North
pe slowly increased to demonstrate the firmness of our resolve. Thus
William Bundy in Saigon in early March told Thieu on behalf of the Presi-
dent that:

GVN should have no doubt that President adhered to
basic position he had stated at Manila, that pressure must
continue to be applied before Hanoi could be expected to
change its attitude, while at the same time we remained
completely alert for any indication of change in Hanoi's
position. If was now clear from December and January events
that Hanoi was negative for the time being, so that we were
proceeding with continued and somewhat increased pressures
including additional measures against the North.

The President perceived the strikes as necessary in the psychological
test of wills between the two sides to punish the North, in spite of the
near-consensus Opinion of his advisers that no level of damage or destruc-
tion that we were willing to inflict was likely to destroy Hanoi's

Bee - TOP SECRET - Sensitive
