Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Soviet and Chinese reactions to these measures were expected to be
confined to increased aid, some "volunteers" and an overall worsening
of relations with the U.S, All these were regarded as manageable if not
desirable. But in evaluating the likely results of such a bombing
program, Brown was forced to admit that:

Barring that effect, I would judge that Campaign #1
can, in military terms, limit SVN actions by NVN near
their pre-Tet level, and below the level of February 1968.
This campaign cannot be demonstrated quantitatively to be
likely to reduce NVN capability in SVN substantially below the
1967 level, but in view of possible disruption of North Viet-
namese distribution capability around Hanoi and Haiphong, such
an effect could take place. The campaign would take place
beginning in March, and should conceivably have its maximum
effect by October. During the following season of poor
weather, the North Vietnamese transportation system would begin
to be reconstituted.

The other possible impact is on the North Vietnamese will
+o continue the war. Clearly their society would be under
even greater stress than it is now. But so long as they have
the promise of continued Soviet and Chinese material support,
and substantial prospect of stalemate or better in SVN, the
North Vietnamese government is likely to be willing to undergo
these hardships. Its control over the populace will remain
good enough so that the latter will have no choice but to do
sO, 50/

The other two programs were regarded as having even less
potential for inhibiting communist activity in the south. Program #2
involved simply a greatly intensified program of strikes in the panhandle
areas of North Vietnam and Laos, while Program #3 proposed the substantial
relocation of South Vietnamese population into secure zones and the desig-
nation of the remaining cleared areas as "free strike" regions for intensi-
fied air attack. Brown's three alternatives apparently did not get wide
attention, however, and were never considered as major proposals within
the inner circle of Presidential advisors. Nevertheless, the fact that
they were supported by over fifty pages of detailed analysis done by the
Air Staff-is a reflection of the importance everyone attached to the reassess-
ment going on within the Administration.

r Of the other major advisors, Katzenbach had participated
to a limited degree in the Clifford Group work and reportedly was opposed
to the subsequent proposal for a partial suspension because he felt that
a bombing halt was a trump card that could be used only once and should
not be wasted when the prospects for a positive North Vietnamese response

on negotiations seemed so poor.. He reportedly hoped to convince the

18), TOP SECRET - Sensitive
