Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

announcement of the U.S. intention to withdraw 1,000 troops by the end

of the year, but suggested that the aid suspensions not be announced in order
to give Diem a chance to respond without a public loss of face. It con-
cluded by recommending against active U.S, encouragement of a coup, in

spite of the fact that an aid suspension was the one step the generals had
asked for in August as a sign of U.S. condemnation of Diem and support for

a change of government. The report was quickly adopted by Kennedy in the

NSC and a brief, and subsequently mich rued, statement was released to the
press on October 2, announcing the planned withdrawal of 1,000 troops by
year's end.

The McNamara-Taylor mission, like the Krulak-Mendenhall mission before
it and the Honolulu Conference in November after the coup, points up the
great difficulty encountered by high level fact-finding missions and con-
ferences in getting at the "facts" of a complex policy problem like Viet-
nam in a short time. It is hard to believe that hasty visits by harried
high level officials with overloaded itineraries really add much in the
way of additional data or lucid insight. And because they become a focal
point of worldwide press coverage, they often raise public expectations or
anxieties that may only create additional problems for the President. There
were many such high level conferences over Vietnam.

Of the recommendations of the McNamara-Taylor mission, the proposal for
a selective suspension of economic aid, in particular the suspension of
the commercial import program, was the most significant both in terms of
its effect, and as an example of the adroit use or denial of American assis-
tance.to achieve our foreign policy objectives. In.this instance economic
sanctions, in the form of selected aid suspensions in those programs to which
the regime would be most sensitive but that would have no immediate adverse _
effect on the war effort, were used constructively to influence events rather
than negatively to punish those who had violated our wishes, our usual re-
action to coups in Latin America. ‘The proposal itself had been under con-
sideration since the abortive coup plot of August. At that time, Lodge
had been authorized to suspend aid if he thought it would enhance the like-
lihood of the success of a coup. Later in September he was again given
specific control over the delay or suspension of any of the pending aid
programs. On both occasions, however, he had expressed doubt about the
utility of such a step. In fact, renewal of the commercial import program
had been pending since early in September, so that the adoption of the
McNamara-Taylor proposal merely formalized the existing situation into
policy. As might have been expected (although the record leaves ambiguous
whether this was a conscious aim of the Administration), the Vietnamese
generals interpreted the suspension as a green light to proceed with a
coup.

While this policy was being applied in October, Lodge shunned all
contact with the regime that did not come at Diem's initiative. He wanted
it clearly understood that they must come to him prepared to adopt our
advice before he would recommend to Washington a change in U.S. policy.
lodge performed with great skill, but inevitably frictions developed within

vi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
