f

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

7

any restriction on the spokesman of the administration regarding
what he says to the press afterward and what he releases. T he only
suggestion was a very helpful intention by the chairman suggesting
that the Secretary of Defense hold any statement when he goes out of
this mecting such as releasing the testimony he is about to give us
until we will have the whole record considered. aitase

I only raised a point there, understanding the motivation of the
chairman to be of the highest, that I would not support placing any
restriction, under the separation-of-powers doctrine, on Secretary
McNamara, That is how all this occurred. We were not talking, Frank,
about the problem that you are raising, and I do not think we ought
to be taking the time of the Secretary to be talking about that now,
That is for us to handle in our own executive session.

The Cuairwan. Mr. Secretary, will you go ahead. I think we ought
to proceed. eo

Senator Lavscrre. I want to make this statement, and then I will
close.

In the-report that was filed by the staff, theré was an addendum,
and in the addendum there was stated that X contacted the staff and
told about the truth that there were no missiles seen fired at our ships.
Y spoke to the staff. Well, as a member of the bench for 10 yea rs, when
you begin offering that type of proof to establish a fact, I simply
cannot accept it.

The Crratrsran. Proceed, Mr. Secretary.

STAFF STUDY REFUSED

Secretary McNamara. Mr. Chairman, I have sought in my state-
ment to be as responsive as I can to what I believe to be are the ques-
tions in the mind of the committee regarding the Tonkin Gulf incident.
I have not had the advantage, however, or the privilege of exposure
to the staff study that I know has been completed and circulated among
you. I asked for that several weeks ago but was denied access to it,
and I may, therefore, not entirely respond to all of the information
that you wish to query me about. I will be very happy to take ques-
tions concerning the statement.

Senator Mansrrerp. Do I understand the Secretary requested a
copy of the study and was denied? '

The CHamwaN. That is correct. I also requested their command and
control documents and it was denied. : aK

Senator Mansri=ip. I was thinking of those in juxtaposition.

The Cuairwan. That is correct.

Senator Gore. Perhaps we can exchange those’ now. That might

solve it. fF

The Cratruay. I think we ought to go on. on

Go on, Mr. Secretary. : sane
Secretary McNasani. Let me comment, Mr. Chairman. These are
not to be equated. You can have any raw material we have. We tried to
supply all of if to you. Some of it is very highly classified, and we as-
sume you will treat it with the care that its classification deserves. We
also are quite willing to let you have evaluation reports, but only after
we have ascertained that the authors of those reports had access to all
the appropriate information. It turns out that the author of this par-
ticular study you mentioned did not haye access. I never heard. of the
