Order 13526, Section 3.3

Declassified per Executive +: DOL

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Da

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C. THE MACY REQUEST AND THE SEARCH FOR OPTIONS

1. The Guam Conference, 20-21 March 1967

In late March, President Johnson, along with members of the White
House Staff, DoD and State met with President Thieu, Premier Ky, General
Westmoreland and other key military officials at Guam. The President was
determined to accelerate the rate of progress in the collective military

and nation-building task confronting the United States and South Vietnam

and he believed that a face-to-face meeting with Thieu and Ky could best
speed up the process and possibly relieve some of the heavy political
pressures on what he termed "the absolutely vital political base in the
country." L The basic objectives of the Guam meeting in the Secretary
of State's words were to:

"1. Stimulate good relations between them /Thieu and
Ky/ and our new team /Bunker and Locke/.

2. Provide an opportunity to impress upon them the high
importance of expeditiously completing and bringing the consti-
tutions into effect, and holding effective and honest elections.
Continued GYN unity and broadly based government are critical
to the maintensnce of the U.S, political base.

3. Help to dramatize post-war planning and the role of
David Lilienthal and his opposite number.

hy Closely examine the current status of the land
reform program and determine what steps can be taken to accel-
erate the rate of progress in this field."

Noticeably missing from the list of objectives was any detailed discussion
or reevaluation of the military situation. In fact, the Agends, for the
conference included but two short sessions on the military effort. 2/
President Johnson had publicly announced that his purpose in calling the
Guam Conference was to introduce the newly appointed U.S. team of Bunker,
Locke and Komer to the leaders of the GVN. 3/ Just as the Agenda had
indicated it would, and as had been the case in the two previous occasions
of top US-GYN talks (Honolulu and Manila), the conference communique of
the two-day meeting emphasized political, economic end social concerns. uf
The military picture was presumed to be so encouraging and improving that
it required no special attention. However, three general impressions about
the thrust of the military briefings emerge from the conference documents
and notes.

First, is the basically optimistic view held by General Westmoreland.
He noted that we were pursuing a constant strategy aimed at destroying the
eneny's main forces, providing security for the populace so that pacifica-
tion could proceed, improving the lot of the people, pressing the North

.

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
