Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

U.S. aid (e.g., through France). Obstaclesshould not per-

mit indecision to allocate aid money or materials; the

Norux of the situation lies in prompt decisive action if

desired political effect is to be attained." Griffin file

copy of telegram sent to Acheson, 16 March 1950...c.cseesaves 292

115. The U.S. assumes that France is determined to protect

Indochina from communist encroachment, that success de-

pends on indigenous support, and that France supports Bao

Dai, but that the French position and ultimate intentions

ere not clear to the rest of the world. The U.S. requests

France to make a public statement of the concessions to
Indochinese nationalism. Acheson 1363 to Paris, 29 March

USO s wc cle\slew cninl6y ais aie aus oe 6 vised a 6.e ws ale ciwiele:s ou 6s a ute ous oe pe itie's 301

116. Acheson advises Griffin Mission of the implications for U.S.
policy in Vietnam: (1) The prospect of U.S. aid indirectly
would cause crisis (induce hyper-confidence in Viets);
(2) Viets bitter at Huu appointment (end the U.S.) may
magnify the U.S. role; (3) it is better for the U.S. if a
national union government is set up; and (4) the aid program
ean more easily be worked out with Hou Government. Acheson
SNE ep EL iy) ol Amal SO reatuatace ccs talacehacelalete ajatee scare were aveieca 3205

117. Department of State requests en assessment of the strategic
aspects of Indochina from a military point of view because
of the threat of communist domination. The Joint Chiefs of
Staff indicate that the “mainland states of Southeast Asia
also are at present of critical strategic importance to the
United States," because of the requirement to stockpile
strategic materials acquired there, as well as the threat
to other states on the "line of containment." JCS Memoran-
dum for the Secretary of Defense, 10 April 1950..ceccssecess 308

118. The Joint Chiefs of Staff concur with the Stabe Department
on the importance of Southeast Asia to the U.S. However,
the JCS urge a more forceful and positive U.S. position
than expressed by State -- "....in order to retrieve the
losses resulting from previous mistakes on the part of the
British and French, as well as to preclude such mistakes in
the future, the Joint Chiefs of Steff consider it necessary
that positive and proper leadership among the Western
Powers be assumed by the United States in Southeast Asia
matters." JCS Memorandwa for SecDef, 2 May 1950.....ccsseces 315

119. The JCS recommend telling the French that the U.S. is pre-
pared to assist France and the three Associated States and
that arrengements for U,8. militery aid be made. JCS
Memorendum for SecDef, 2 May 19506... cccecsetewersustecssere 318

re)
jt

xviii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
