Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Secretary McNamara said that before we undertook
attacks against the North, we certainly had to be prepared
to meet threats at the level stated by General Taylor.

Mr. McCone agreed with this point, but went on to say
that there was a serious question about the effect of
major deployments on Communist Chinese reactions. The
intelligence community was inclined to the view that the
more substantial the deployment, the greater the possi-
ble chance of a drastic Communist Chinese reaction.
General Taylor commented that under present plans it was
not contemplated that we should have deployment of all
the potentially necessary forces at the outset. We were
thinking along the lines of a brigade to the northern
part of South Vietnam, two to three brigades to Thailand,
considerable naval deployments, and some alerting of other
forces in the U.S. and elsewhere. Even this, however,
added up to a significant scale of activity...

Secretary McNamara noted that all this planning was
on the basis that a really drastic communist reaction
was possible, and was not based on any judgment that it
was probable. The best current view was that appropri-
ately limited attacks on the North would not bring in
Communist Chinese air or North Vietnam or Communist
Chinese ground forces. However, it was still essential
that we be prepared against these eventualities.

Ambassador Lodge asked whether the Communist Chinese
could not in fact mount almost any number of forces they
chose. General Taylor and Admiral Felt said they could
not do so and support them to the extent required...Secre-
tary McNamara then went on to say that the possibility of
major ground action also led to a serious question of ,
having to use nuclear weapons at some point. Admiral
Felt responded emphatically that there was no possible
way to hold off the communists on the ground without the
use of tactical nuclear weapons, and that it was essential
that the commanders be given the freedom to use these as
had been assumed under the various plans. He said that with-
out nuclear weapons the ground force requirement was and
had always been completely out of reach. General Taylor
was more doubtful as tothe existence or at least to the
degree of the nuclear weapon requirement, and again the
point was not really followed up.

Secretary Rusk said that another possibility we must
consider would be the Soviets stirring up trouble else-
where. We should do everything we could to minimize this
risk, but it too must be considered. He went on to stress
the nuclear question, noting that in the last ten years
this had come to include the possibility of a nuclear ex-
change, with all that this involved.

32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
