Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Cardinal Spellman...has been followed by those of Cardinal
Gillroy and the Archbiship of Canberra. Great sums are spent
on organized demonstrations for visitors, and an impression is
given that the Catholic Church is occidental and an ally of the
United States is the cold war....

"In the whole of Vietnam the proportion of Catholics to the
population is roughly the same as in England--one in ten, a ratio
insufficient to justify a Catholic government. Mr. Diem's
ministers are not all Catholic, but Mr. Diem, justifiably suspi-
cious of many of his supporters, has confined the actual government
to himself and members of his family. He undertakes personally
the granting of exit and entry visas....The south, instead of
confronting the totalitarian north with evidences of freedom, had
slipped into an inefficient dictatorship: newspapers suppressed,
strict censorship, men exiled by administrative order and not by
judgment of the courts. It is unfortunate that a government of
this kind should be identified with one faith. Mr. Diem may well
leave his tolerant country a legacy of anti-Catholicism...." 98/

While Vietnam has an ample record of religious intolerance--especially
intolerance for Catholics--calling into question Mr. Greene's contrary
characterization, his prediction of Diem's impact proved correct. Open
Opposition to his government by civilians finally manifested itself on

the issue of "religious freedom" in Hue and Siagon in 1963, coalescing
around militant Buddhists and students--two groups that were, thereto-
fore, for all practical purposes politically mute. 99/ There is no

doubt, however, that Diem's Catholicism from 1954 on acted to his dis-
advantage among the non-Catholic masses, and enhanced the My-Diem image of
his government's being an instrument of alien power and purpose.

F. Tensions With the Armed Forces.

The soldiers of Vietnam presented Diem with his first, and his last
political challenges. Part of the Army's political involvement stemmed from
patent military inefficiency in Diem's tight control, for which RVNAF
leaders correctly held Diem responsible. Part also correctly can be attri-
buted to vaulting ambition and venality among certain of Diem's officers.
And since the United States paid, schooled, and advised the RVNAF, it
would also be correct to consider the U.S, involved, if not responsible.

The record of Diem's relations with RVNAF, like his relations with other
parts of Vietnamese society, is a history of increasing tensions, and of
lowering mutual understanding and support.

1. Clashes with Francophiles, 1954-1955

Diem's first interactions with his army were inauspicious.
From September to November, 1954, Army Chief of Staff General Nguyen Van
Hinh--a French citizen who held a commission in the French Air Force--

ho TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
