85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

Dulles and Eden exchange frank and heated words over the
British pressuring France for a cease-fire. The U. 8.
indicates that the tripartite position is poor, i.e.,
not "very impressive or cohesive" and that "the other
side" was worried -- but not about Britain. The U. S,
is also concerned over the affects on NATO, EDC and the
entire defense structure in Europe. DULTE 13, 27 April

BS canine eer nr oD/ Nad cre ACA nee Rocio caxane Seattle ncr cist ea ee

Dulles makes an estimate of rapidly moving developments;
(1) when Dien Bien Phu falls, the French Government will
change, probably to the left, committed to liquidate
China. A withdrawal of forces to defensible enclaves
under U.S. protection with subsequent U.S. training of
native armies is considered. Open intervention at this
point would be answered by Chinese intervention, (2) U.K.
attitude is one of increasing weakness, (3) "the decline
of France, the great weakness of Italy, and the consider-
able weakness of England create a situation where...we
must be prepared to take the leadership...." DULTE 21,
QO pe Ler GaN ae otk nua ceteris A Oa Eel ae oaislaateacae wel ea bendaeme. ol Sek

In the event of a cease-fire in Indochina, the JCS

recommend that shipment of U. S. military aid under

MDAP be immediately suspended and the entire program

of aid to Indochina be re-examined. JCS Memorandum

for the Secretary of Defense, 30 April 1954. ...cceeccccceesss 399

The Intelligence Advisory Committee concludes that the
fall of Dien Bien Phu would have far~reachinp and ad-
verse repercussions, but would not signal the collapse
of the French Union political and military situation in
Indochina, nor would it substantially alter relative
military capabilities of French end Viet Minh forces.
The French Union could retain control of the cities
though there would be a serious decline in the Viet~-
namese will to continue the war. NI® 63-5, 30 April

EGPSIE a alaverave a wie ao ae oe otal aianwiava''e/ese mieiuraca won aula ya ae erie x dips ate ba erwla es

400

Major General Thomas J. H. Trapnell, former Chief of
MAAG, Indochina comments in his debriefing on the French
situstion in Indochina. His comments cover in detail
the strategic position of Indochine, the government and
its prosecution of the war, the performance of MDAP sup-
ported forces, the objectives of the opposing forces,
the organization and tactics of both the French and

Viet Minh forces. In Trapnell's view, few of the aims
of the Navarre concept are progressing satisfactorily.
"Dien Bien Phu is not only another Na San, but a grave

.

xiv . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
