Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

: TOP SECRET

could only be bad, the GENERAL explained, if somebody was
attempting to “put rocks" into the machinery of the
Vietnam-Franco relationships and into the machinery of
Franco-American friendship, particularly when the French
Commonwealth was involved. He had informed him that
since such projects were not under State Department
jurisdiction, it would be advisable that the General
explain his difficulties to Mr. Blum. Discussion had
taken place with Mr. Blum early in August at which time
the General explained that, while direct aid might
rightly be sent directly to the Associated States, such
economic assistance should remain within the frame-

work of the concept of the French Union. He had also
explained to Mr. Blum at that time that if economic aid
were used to extend American influence, great harm would
result. However, these discussions had proved most
successful and a basis of agreement had been reached
regarding the relationship between the economic.aid
program and the French Union. He had been informed

that Mr. Blum was no-longer in Indochina but hoped that
his relationship with Mr. Blum's successor would be
equally harmonious. MINISTER HEATH commented that he
thought the past misunderstanding had been cleared up.
MR. GRIFFIN concurred, saying that he did not feel —
that future misunderstandings would arise because
liaison channels between ECA and the General's staff
had improved and a continued exchange of information
through informal talks had been planned. By a more
acute examination of the places in which economic

aid would have the most advantageous military results

it would be possible to build greater faith in the
program. MR. GRIFFIN added that the major purpose

of the U.S. program was to make the people of Indo-
china feel that the economic aid was contributing to the
welfare of all. GENERAL de LATTRE reiterated that the
earlier disagreements were due largely to the overly
zealous activity of the "young missionaries" and suggested
that future programs should be directed more toward

TOP SECRET

LST
