Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(probably 80% of the total) and which were becoming increas-
ingly fed up with the totalitarian methods and discipline of
the Communist leaders of the Viet Minh and discouraged by
months of hardship in the jungle.

e. Gradually Bae Dai's strength would increase and Ho's
decline until the latter would either have to surrender, flee
the country, or become a minor guerrilla leader.

It is obvious that the success of such a plan required granting
sufficient authority and concessions to Bao Dai to enable him to es-
tablish a stable government in at least a restricted area and to con-
vinee native leaders that their essential demands had been met and
that there was no longer any reason for continuing to fight. In this
Bollaert failed, largely because of the political situation in France.
The various "Third Force" governments were not only weak but sharply
divided on colonial policy. They were particularly anxious not to
give ammunition to the growing strength of de Gaulle's forces, always
ready to exploit the average Frenchman's out-of-date views on colonial
matters. Thus Bollaert was not even able to persuade the Government
to request Assembly ratification of the extremely vague Baie d'Along
Protocol of June 5, 1948, This fact was largely responsible for Bao
Dai'ts decision not to return to Indochina which made further stops in
the implementation of the plan impossible, even though a Provisional
Central Government had been set up under General XUAN, former President
of the Cochinchina Provisional Government.

Bollaert gave up in disgust and was replaced by M. Leon PIGNON,
a young career colonial officer with much experience in Indochina.

4, Present Situation - M, Pignon, being a civil servant rather
than a politician brought a fresh viewpoint to the situation, and
appears to have made considerable progress towards a solution in
his short period of office.

He has adopted the policy of his predecessor but has been
successful in having it accepted as that of the French Government
rather than as a personal policy of the High Commissioner. In this
he was aided by a number of factors, the most important, of course,
being recent developments in China. Even the most die-hard French
political leader can realize that with the arrival of Chinese Com-
minist forces on the Tonkin frontier which would assist or perhaps
even join with Ho Chi Minh, the precarious French military position
would become impossible. Moreover, a growing number of prominent
Frenchmen in and out of the Government has in recent months adyo-
cated liberal. concessions to Vietnam Nationalism. Even the Indochina
resolution of the RPF (Gaullist) Congress last fall was surprisingly
moderate, (although General de Gaulle himself has been less liberal).

Pignon reopened negotiations with Bao Dai in November and
continued them in January after his return from a brief turn in Indo-
china. little definite is known as to the exact status of these
negotiations, but apparently concessions have been made on both sides.
Bao Dai has azreed to return to Indochina if the French Assembly
ratifies the Baie d'Along Agreement and changes the status of

Cochinchins
163
