Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

it had more to gain than lose by having the attack take

place while Kosygin was present, even though it might embarrass

hin,
the

as it very likely did. If the Americans failed to respond,
North Vietnamese could argue that the United States was

indeed a psper tiger, and that all that was needed for the war
to be brought to a successful conclusion in the south was some
additional military assistance. If the United States did
respond, the North Vietnamese could claim that more aid was
necessary to prosecute the war under more difficult circum-
stances, and they could then reasonably.ask for planes and de-
fensive missiles with which to protect their own cities, too.
Since Kosygin was wooing North Vietnam for Russia's own purposes
as much as Hanoi was wooing him to help it regain some balance
between Moscow and Peking, the Russian Premier was hardly in a
position to leave Hanoi in a huff, which besides would have made

him

surprise,

look foolish. 38/

Although the onset of the bombing no doubt took the Russians by
they probably viewed it as a futile last-ditch effort by

Washington to strengthen its bargaining position rather than as a prelude
to new escalation. In any event, Kosygin's reaction in Hanoi was re-

strained.

He pointed out that the situation was "fraught with serious

complications" and seemed to be favoring a negotiated termination. 39/
In any event, in keeping with the view held in several influential
Administration quarters that the USSR might be a valuable moderating
influence upon Hanoi, Washington took pains to assure Moscow that
Kosygin's presence in Hanoi during the US reprisal strikes of February
7-8 was an unfortunate coincidence and no affront to the Soviet Union
was intended.

Cc.

The Reprisel Rationale and Its Public Handling

On the morning after the reprisal order had been issued -(Febru-

ary 7), a second NSC meeting was convened et the White House to agree on
an appropriate text for the White House statement and to discuss the
content of a McNamara press briefing at the Pentagon, called for that
afternoon. The public handling of the raids was of crucial importance
in conveying to Hanoi some inkling of what the implications of the

reprisal
role in t
anxieties

action were for future U.S. responses and for the future U.S.
he Vietnamese war, without at the same time arousing undue
at home and in the rest of the world. ;

It is worth noting that there were important differences between

the February 7-3 raids and the earlier strike; in the Gulf of Tonkin

incident.

The August Tonkin strikes had clearly been presented as a one-

time retaliatory action in response to a North Vietnamese attack on US
naval power in international waters. In more or less tit-for-tat fashion,

the strikes had been carried out by US Navy aircraft and had been directed

primarily against the offending NVN patrol boats in their bases. As an
extra punitive measure, POL storage tanks associated with one of the

oh TOP SECRET - Sensitive

>
