289.

290.

291.

29 2.

293.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Page

The Department of State submits a draft revision of NSC
5429/5, U.S. policy in the Far East. The principle
objectives of U.S. policy: should be: (1) preservation
of territorial and political integrity of Asian nations
against communist expansion, (2) deterrence of local or
general war, (3) bring about desirable changes in the
Communist Bloc, (4) strengthen the economic, political
and military position of the Free Far East, (5) promote
Free World unity, and (6) identify the U.S. with Asian
aspirations. NSC Memorandum for the Planning Board,

29 JUNE 19D. wee cece eee r cree seen eee eeecccscceesrccesesseooss 1196

The JCS submits their and the Services’ views on U.S.

policy in the Far East. "The U.S. faces a delicate

problem in presenting its Far Eastern policy to the

world. A U.S. policy will not be very sympathetically

received if it is presented in the purely negative

terms of preventing communist expansion or the reduc-

tion of its power." JCS Memorandum for NSC Staff,

lite lay! LOSE cos «os Seas aer cele ned esine Ga Gabe ees iveesseceeen TET

A resurgence of tensions between Vietnam and Cambodia

threatens to frustrate U.S. objectives in Cambodia.

In Vietnam the Diem Government continues its strong

controls which antagonize the Vietnamese elite.

"Vietnamese military forces have improved mder the

MAAG training program.” OCB Report on Southeast Asia,

AZ AUZUSE L950 caw cesceseeessevevecssceseseeretesesseswaseses 1236

An intelligence analysis of Communist capabilities and

intentions in Laos concludes that the Communist resump-

tion of guerrilla warfare in Laos is a reaction to

initiatives of U.S. support of Lacs. The chances of

Communist success are high at a low risk. Non-Asian

forces intervening in Laos increase the likelihood of

Communist invasion, but preference would be to diplo-

macy, propaganda, and guerrilla action to cause the

West to back down. SNIE 68-2-59, 18 September 1959.......... 2hO

The U.S. seeks to increase the MAAG ceiling on per-

sonnel before furnishing the ICC with plans for with-

drawal or ~hase-out of TERM. ISA Memorandum for Joint

SURE Ts AO OC GONE LORG Latele pci tt Gee Re SSS Seco nis wee meleasiapeeee Tone

XLIX TOP SECRET - Sensitive
