Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

tenes ‘SECRET

I believe President Diem is more screened in by his "palace
guard" than he realizes - - but then much the same could be gaid of m
other leaders elsewhere. I noted that he still has a personal informant
net and J managed to talk to some of them privately. The largest influence,
but not the only one, is wielded by his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu. However,
I found President Diem unusually well informed on the situation in Vietnam,
including the had aspects - - better informed than any cther Vietnamese
among the many with whorn J talked, j

; “In reflecting on our conversations, I have cencicd that most folks
meebo talk to him have little empathy for, or sensitve understanding of,
him, They fail to realize that Diem is human and doesn't like the idea
of people trying to kill him out of hatred; the coup attempt of 11 November
peta: at3a.m, ky bursts of heavy machine gun fire into his bedroom
in an obvious try at liquidating him in his bed. On top of this, he has
now had nearly 7 years of vencmous attack ky the Communists who know
that he is 2 major chstacle which must te destroyed before they can win.
This is a daily psychological attack on him in his own country, in his
own language, and listened to by his own people. The only way he
cowd shut this off today would ke to give up what he, and we, believe in.
On top of this, he has criticism heaped cn him ky many who are simply
being destructive, he has administrators who are disloyal or whose
vanity is expressed in talking a Letter jos of work than in doing it. And
then, to cap the criticisms, he feels that many Americans have con-
tempt for him - - that the U.S, which sould be Vietnam's staunchest
friend is somehow taking the sarne psychological line with him as do
the Communists, that sormnehow our nobly-expressed policies pet carried
out with much pettiness in actual practice.

If the next American official to talk to President Diem would have
tie good sense to see him as a human being who has been through a lot
of hell for years -- and not as an opponent to be beaten to his knees --
we would start regaining our influence with him in a healthy way. What-
ever else we might think of him, he has been unselfish in devoting his
life to his country and hae little in personal belongings to show for it.

‘lf we dox't like the heavy influence of Erother Nhu, then let's move
someone of ours in clase, This-someone, however, must be able to
look at problems with understanding, suggest better solutions than
aces Nhu, earn a position of influence.

‘The next.time we become "holier than thou", we might find it
S* tering to reflect on the DRV. Do the Soviets and the Chinese Com-
tmunists give Ho Chi Minh a similar ha rd time, or do they aid and
a toch d him? Noh Men. = Pre Bp Ge aie o ie casts Ae .

epg are ey BAD ; h
rh See a 3 . ‘ ad 5 -

at : & = : s ots = 7 a =. “s
