Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

sustained Vietnam's intellectual life, and had been the epi-centers of

such political life as the French had permitted the Vietnamese to pursue.
Opposition to Diem formed around the old nationalist movements, including
the pro-Bao Dai groups Diem labeled "feudalists," around intellectual and
individual professional politicians, and eventually around military leaders.
Diem's policies successively alienated each.

1. "Feudalists"

The Civic Action teams which Diem projected into the former
Viet Minh areas in 1955 trumpeted against "Communism, Colonialism, and
Feudalism," the last inveighing against Bao Dai, who was, at the time,
still Head of state. 90/ "Feudalist™ was one epithet applied sweepingly
to the religious sects, and to all those whose position or fortune depended
upon Bao Dai, from the Binh Xuyen who had purchased its control over Saigon-
Cholon from the Buperor, to civil servants and army officers loyal to Bao Dai.
The label was virtually as damning as "Communist" in incurring the ungentle
attentions of Nhu or Can. In the early years "feudalists" and "communists"
were often tarred by the same brush. For example, the Anti-Communist
Denunciation Campaign got underway in Quang Tri Province in 1955, under
Ngo Dinh Can. But Can was also in pursuit of the anti-communist Dai Viet
(Great Vietnam) Party there, which had armed units and, for a time, an
anti-government radio station. As with the communists, many Dai Viet were
killed, imprisoned, or driven into exile. 91/ Diem's defeat of Bao Dai
at the polls in October, 1955, strengthened his hand against pro-Bao Dai
groups. With the withdrawal of the French the following spring, it became
imprudent for any politician or group who wished to avoid Can lao and NRM
scrutiny to maintain ties with "feudalists" in hiding in Vietnam, or
operating from abroad. Despite the fact that opposition Vietnamese
nationalist parties had been strongly influenced in their organization and
methods by the Kuomintang, they had never developed sufficient internal
discipline, cohesion or following to admit of challenging Diem after 1956.
Such opposition political forces as developed centered around individuals.
(Only two non-Diem, non-communist political parties survived the Diem era;
the Nationalist Party of Greater Vietnam (Dai Viet Qhoc Dan Dang, the Dai
Viet) and the Vietnamese Nationalist Party (Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang, the

WNQDD)). 92/ So he aa eee

2. Dr. Dan.

Until November, 1960, Diem's most prominent political opponent
was Doctor Phan Quang Dan. Dr. Dan was a northern physician who had been
caught up in nationalist politics in 1945, and lived in exile after 197.

He returned to Vietnam in September, 1955, to head up a coalition of opposi-
tion to the GVN arrangements for the March, 1956, elections for the National
Assembly. 93/ He was arrested on the eve of those elections, accused of
communist and colonialist activities, and though released, deprived of his
position at the University of Saigon Medical School. His subsequent political
career underscores the astringent nature of Diem’s democracy. In May, 1957
Dr. Dan formed another opposition coalition, the Democratic Bloc, which

32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
