Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

c. China Sees Creation of a Neutral Buffer Zone

Beyond Vietnam, the Chinese apparently believed that the final
agreements would preclude the three Indochinese states from involvement
in the American security system. When Chou communicated to Eden his concern
about Laotian, Vietnamese, and Cambodian participation in a Southeast
Asia treaty organization, the Foreign Secretary said he knew of no proposal
for those States to join. 2/ The next day Eden told Molotov that a security
pact in Southeast Asia was inevitable and completely in line with British
policy; but he added that no consideration was being given to the inclu-
sion of Cambodia and Laos (a comment which Smith regarded as a "mistake"
inasmuch as the U.S. hoped to use the threat of their inclusion to get
a better settlement). 3/ When the conference closed, the Chinese felt
sufficiently assured about the matter, it would seem. On 23 July, a Chi-
nese journalist confided: "We have won the first campaign for the neu-
tralization of all Southeast Asia." 4/

d. China's Domestic Economy is Protected

China, at this time, was greatly concerned with her own in-
ternal problems, and anxious to consolidate at home before moving further
into Asia. The Korean War had exacerbated the pressing economic and polit-
ical problems within China, as had the attempts by Peking to push an economic
reconstruction beyond the limits of possibility. The Chinese were satis-
fied that the Indochina situation after Geneva allowed, at least, temporary
assurance that a major effort could be turned inward without fear of reper-
cussions along China's ‘southwestern border.

e. U.S. Threat of Massive Intervention is Forestalled

The USSR and. China had watched warily the sporadic attempts
of the U.S.; first, to keep the Indochina problem out of Geneva, and second,
to gather the Western nations into united action to prevent communist con-
solidation of Indochina. There was an element of unpredictability concern-
ing U.S. action in Southeast Asia, fostered purposely to a great extent
by the U.S. and UK (with calculated moves such as the bilateral military
talks in Washington), but also emphasized by the inordinate number and.
wide variety of public statements on Indochina that were made by official
and semi-official Washington during the months of June and July, while
the Geneva Conference sat. Peking and Moscow, then, had some reason to
believe that they had preemted U.S. military moves by diplomacy.

f. Prospects of Short-Run Stability Please the Russians

The Soviet government was not dedicated to the furtherance
of Chinese goals in Southeast Asia, nor did the USSR want to see an in-
crease in U.S. influence in this area. For these reasons, it was greatly
in the interest of the Soviets to press for the withdrawal of French power
from Indochina -- but in a way calculated to inhibit any major increase
in U.S. or Chinese power to replace the French. The creation, therefore,

‘

D-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive -
