Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

threat; trying to overthrow Diem had been a blunder and his popularity was
very low. On May 10, a relatively unknown group of "technicians" was

named as Diem's cabinet, to function until elections for a national assembly
¢e1d on March 4, 1956). General Collins left Vietnam on May 14; Ambassador
G. Frederick Reinhardt replaced him later in the month. And on June 2,
General Ely's mission terminated. General dJacquot assumed military duties
as Commissioner-General, duties which consisted primarily of supervising

the increasingly rapid pace of the French military pull-out.

1. All-~Vietnam Elections

Although political concessions made to the United States in May
and economic and military actions taken before and after that time had re-
duced -- almost eliminated -- French presence and influence in Vietnam
France still was obligated to carry out the provisions of the Geneva Accords.
Under increasing pressure from French public opinion to give Hanoi no
pretext for renewing hostilities as long as the French Expeditionary Corps
remained in South Vietnam, the French Government urgently sought to persuade
Diem to accept consultations about the elections scheduled to begin in July
19552 146/ Britain wanted to prevent any public repudiation of the Accords
and joined France in urging Diem to talk to the Vietminh. But Diem had not
changed his view of the Accords: he had refused to sign them and continued
to insist he was not bound by them. 147/

The United States stood between these extremes. A draft policy
toward all-Vietnam elections -- finally produced in May 1955 -- held that to
give no impression of blocking elections while avoiding the possibility of
losing them, Diem should insist on free elections by secret ballot with
_ Strict supervision. Communists in Korea and Germany had rejected these
conditions; hopefully the Vietminh would follow suit. 148/

Diem could not bring himself to sit down with the Vietminh. Consul-
tations would give the appearance of having accepted the Geneva settlement;
consultation with the Vietminh without the kind of Western backing given Rhee
and Adenouer would be futile. 149/ On July 16, Diem said South Vietnam
could "not consider any proposal from the Communists" without proof that
they had mended their ways and were prepared to hold genuinely free elec-
tions. 150/ But another reason was Diem's belief that he could not re-
present a sovereign nation -- or be free of Vietminh propaganda charges of being a
‘colonialist puppet -- until the French High Command and the French Expedi-
tionary Corps were gone. 151/ Minister Nguyen Huu Chau was dispatched to
Paris to negotiate the withdrawal of the FEC from Vietnam (except naval
and air forces which Diem wanted under VNA command) and revision of economic,
cultural and financial accords. 152/ Diem also wanted Vietnamese affairs
transferred from the Ministry of Associated States to the French Foreign
office; he insisted the post of High Commissioner be abolished and that
Ely's successor (Henri Hoppenot) be credited as Ambassador.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

38
