Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

With respect to the word "win," this I think means that we
succeed in demonstrating to the VC that they cannot win; this,
of course, is victory for us only if it is, with a high degree
of probability, a way station toward a favorable settlement in
South Vietnam. I see such a favorable settlement as one in
which the VC terrorism is substantially eliminated and, obvi-
ously, there are no longer large-scale VC attacks; the central
South Vietnamese government (without having taken in the
Communists) should be exercising fairly complete sovereignty
Over most of South Vietnam. I presume that we would rule out
the. ceding to the VC (either tacitly or explicitly) of large
areas of the country. More specifically, the Brigadier
Thompson suggestion that we withdraw to enclaves and sit it
out for a couple of years is not what we have in mind for pur-
poses of this study.

9. At the moment, I do not see how the study can avoid
addressing the question as to how long our forces will have to
remain in order to achieve a "win" and the extent to which the
presence of those forces over a long period of time might, by
itself, nullify the "win." If it turns out that the study cannot
go into this matter without first getting heavily into the poli-
tical side of the question, I think the study at least should
note the problem in some meaningful way.

10. I believe that the study should go into specifics --
e.g., the numbers and effectiveness and uses of the South
Vietnamese forces, exactly where we would deploy ours and
exactly what we would expect their mission to be, how we would
go about opening up the roads and providing security for the
towns as well as protecting our own assets there, the time frames
in which things would be done, command relationships, etc. Also,
I think we should find a way to indicate how badly the conclu-
sions might be thrown off if we are wrong with respect to key
assumptions or judgments.

As to timing, the Secretary said he would like to have a “quick

answer" followed by a "longer-term answer." He set no specific

dates; I gather that he expects your team to work as fast as you
reasonably can.

General Vogt and General Seignious of ISA are available to work
with you on this project, as am I.

Copies to: Sed: JOHN T. McNAUGHTON
General Vogt
General Seignious i Sf

The McNaughton memorandum is of interest because it demonstrates several
important items. First, the fact that the question about assurance of

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
