Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ote. De THE INTENT OF THE GENEVA ACCORDS

SUMMARY

One of the principal controversies surrounding the Geneva Conference
concerns the intent of the Armistice and the Final Declaration. While it
is clear that the Armistice between the French and the Viet Minh was de-
signed to end the actual hostilities, the political intent of the bellig-
erents, and that of the Conference participants expressed in the Final
Declaration, is in doubt. The central issue in dispute is whether or not
the participants intended to unify Vietnam, and if so, whether the subse-
quent actions of the U.S. and the GVN in frustrating that intent make them
culpable for the present war. :

China and Russia were, in general, pleased with the results of the
Geneva Conference, even though they had been forced to accept a settlement
considerably at variance from their initial demands. Since these powers
were primarily interested in attaining their political goals without
triggering a massive response from a united West, cessation of the war on
even minimally advantageous terms would allow them time to consolidate
gains and to extend their control further into Southeast Asia with fewer
risks. They recognized that the DRV did not receive concessions commensu-
rate with its military power and political control, but the Communists,
probably miscalculating the future U.S. commitment to South Vietnam, no
doubt felt that they could safely transfer the combat from the battlefield
to the sphere of politics. However, the final settlement severely compro-
mised DRV expectations and objectives: the line of partition was at the
17th parallel,not the 13th; elections were envisaged after two years, not
immediately; supervision was to be by an international body, not by the
belligerents themselves; and Communist movements in Laos and Cambodia
were denied identity and support, not sanctioned by the Conference. Yet, .
despite these setbacks and disappointments, the DRV apparently expected
to fall heir to all of Vietnam in fairly short order, either through a
plebiscite on unification, or by default when the GVN collapsed from
internal disorder. (Tab 1)

For the United Kingdom as well as for France, the final outcome at
Geneva was in the main satisfactory. The bloodshed had ceased; the
danger of broadened conflict was averted. The U.S. understanding of the
Accords is more difficult to fathom. Immediately upon the conclusion of
the conference, the U.S. representative, Under Secretary of State Walter
Bedell Smith, stated that the results were the best possible under the
circumstances. Both he and President Eisenhower stated that the U.S.
"would view any renewal of the aggression in violation of the [Geneva/
agreements with grave concern and as seriously threatening international
peace and security." President Kennedy in December 1961 used this quote
as justification for his support of South Vietnam. But the purpose of

D-1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
