Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

751G65/3-1953: Secret File
OUTGOING TELEGRAM

SENT TO: Amembkassy PARIS 4907 March 19, 1953

Recent Paris working-level discussions added sub-
stantially to our factual background on Indochina,
Please express to Foreign liinister my appreciation for
cooperation all concerned. Also take early opportunity
discuss informally on my behalf with Mayer or Bidault
forthcoming conversations along following general lines:

QTE Secretary Acheson in December 1952 and I last
month have discussed with our French colleagues the
Indochina situation. On both occasions we received indica-
tions French Government was planning to request US GOVT to
increase already considerable share of financial burden
of the struggle which it is now bearing. I assume that
when Mayer, Bidault and Letourneau come to Washington
they will furnish further particulars regarding French
Government's plans and resulting requirements. It may
be helpful to them in formulating their position to ex-
press to them informally some of considerations involved
not only in matter of additional aid but also in continv-
ation American assistance at present substantial level.
Considerations are:

First, Government and people of US are fully aware
of importance -to free world of war being waged in Indo-
china by armies of France and Associated States. They
appreciate sacrifices which have been and are being made
and degree to which Communist plans have been thwarted by
magnificent defense carried out in Indochina against
Communist aggression,

Second, we envisage Indochina situation with real
sense of urgency. We believe continued military stale-
mate will produce most undesirable political consequences
in Indochina, France and U.S. Therefore, we heartily
agree that ‘considerable inereased effort having as its aim
liquidation principal regular enemy forces within period
of, say, twenty-four months is essential. We obviously

SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

L5
