Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(7) Maintain an anti-infiltration screen along the coast and
support forces ashore with naval gunfire and amphibious lift.

(8) Provide air and sea lifts necessary to transport the
necessary but minimum supplies to the civil populace.

(9) Open up necessary critical lines of communication for
essential military and civil purposes.

(10) Preserve and defend, to the extent possible, areas now
under effective governmental control.

Phase IT
(1) All Phase I measures.

(2) Resume and/or expand pacification operations. Priority will
be given to the Hop Tac area around Saigon, to that part of the Delta along
an east-west axis from Go Cong to Chau Doc, and in the provinces of Quang
Nam, Quang Tri, Ruane Ngai, Binh Dinh and Phu Yen.

(3) Participate in clearing, securing, reserve reaction and
offensive operations as required to support and sustain the resumption
of pacification.

Phase III
_(1) All Phase I and IT measures.

(2) Provide those additional forces necessary to extend and
expand clearing and securing operations throughout the entire populated
area of the country and those forces necessary to destroy VC forces and
their base areas.

General Westmoreland went on in his Concept to lay out the tactics
to be associated with the various military tasks and to list explicit
tasks to be accomplished within each RVNAF Corps area. The above is suf-
ficient for the needs of this paper, however; as it shows that General
Westmoreland expected by the end of 1965 to have effectively stemmed the
tide of the VC insurgency through the input of 44 US/FWMAF maneuver
battalions and their accompanying support. It further shows that in the
first half of 1966, with the input of more force, Westmoreland expected
to shift his emphasis from the strategic defensive to the strategic
offensive.

In his 25 June interview with McNaughton, Deputy Ambassador Johnson

summed up the expectations for Ambassador Taylor and himself. 183/ In
Johnson's view what was expected depended on how serious the situation

119 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
