Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and, if after Diem had been given an opportunity to rid himself of Nhu
and did not, "then, we must face the possibility that Diem himself cannot
be preserved." This message was to be communicated to the generals, and
Diem was to be warned that Nhu must go. lodge agreed with the approach

to the generals, but felt it was futile to present Diem with an ultimatum
he would only ignore and one that might tip off the palace to the coup
plans. lodge proceeded to inform only the generals. They were told that
the U.S. could no longer support a regime which included Nhu, but that
keeping Diem was entirely up to them. This was communicated to the gener-
als on August 27. The President and some of his advisors, however, had
begun to have second thoughts about switching horses so suddenly, and with
so little information on whether the cowp could succeed, and if it did,
what kind of government it would bring to power. As it turned out, Washing-
ton's anxiety was for naught, the plot was premature, and after several
uncertain days, its demise was finally recognized on August 31.

Thus by the end of August, we found ourselves without a leadership
to support and without a policy to follow in our relations with the GVN.
In this context a month-long policy review took place in Washington and in
Vietnam. It was fundamentally a search for alternatives. In both places.
the issue was joined between those who saw no realistic alternatives to
Diem and felt that his policies were having only a marginal effect on the
war effort, which they wanted to get on with by renewing our support and
communication with Diem; and those who felt that the war against the VC
would not possibly be won with Diem in power and preferred therefore to
push for a coup of some kind. The first view was primarily supported by
the military and the CIA both in Saigon and in Washington, while the latter
was helf by the U.S. Mission, the State Department and members of the
White House staff. In the end, a third alternative was selected, namely
to use pressure on Diem to get him to remove Nhu from the scene and to
end his repressive policies. Through September, however, the debate con-
tinued with growing intensity. Tactical considerations, such as another
Lodge approach to Diem about removing the Nhus and the effect of Senator
Church's resolution calling for an aid suspension, focused the discussion
at times, but the issue of whether to renew our support for Diem remained.
The decision: hinged on the assessment of how seriously the political deteri-
oration was affecting the war effort.

In the course of these policy debates, several participants pursued
the logical but painful conclusion that if the war could not be won with
’ Diem, and if his removal would lead to political chaos and also jeopardize
the war effort, then the war was probably unwinnable. If that were the
case, the argument went, then the U.S. should really be facing a more basic
decision on either an orderly disengagement from an irretrievable situa-
tion, or a major escalation of the U.S. involvement, including the use of
U.S. combat troops. These prophetic minority voices were, however, rais-
ing an unpleasant prospect that the Administration was unprepared to face
at that time. In hindsight, however, it is clear that this was one of
the times in the history of our Vietnam involvement when we were making
fundamental choices. The option to disengage honorably at that time now
appears an attractively low-cost one. But for the Kennedy Administration

iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
