Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20! 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

recommended steps that would give the Ministry of RD too much strength,
reflecting the worry of their Public Safety Division. The Constabulary
recommendations, which had far-reaching implications, were given a
particularly rough going-over. For example, to protect its own embryonic
structure, the Police Field Force USAID made the following comment on the
recommendation that the PFF be integrated as units into the Constabulary:

"USAID concurs with the reservation that PFF remain a
separate entity with its essential police powers." 32/

The CIA also thought the report was "constructive and helpful," but
listed a few "disagreements." Once again, these pertained to those items
in which the ICA had a strong vested interest. They opposed strenuously,
for example, the suggestion that the MACV subsector advisor -- the only
American at the district level in almost every district -- "be given pri-
mary responsibility for monitoring the activities of the cadre." Using
the argument that everything possible be done to retain the civilian
nature of the cadre, the CIA refused to let the MACV subsector advisors
do what they were already doing in many cases.

The CIA and MACV both opposed the suggestion thet a single Director
of Intelligence be appointed to command civilian and military intelligence
structures. The CIA said that this was "unwieldly and unworkable" because
"this is not a theater of war." 33/

The Political Section of the Embassy also thought the study was
"Valuable," but added that "it appears to neglect a number of political
considerations." Beyond that, they supported every specific suggestion,
while noting how hard it would be to carry some of them out.

JUSPAO shared the fears of USAID that the report would concentrate
more power in the hands of the Ministry of RD than it could usefully
employ. JUSPAO thought that the Constabulary should be created, therefore,
but placed under the Ministry of Defense. JUSPAO also found the removal
of the Division from the RD chain of command "hardly feasible or realistic
at this juncture” -- begging the issue of whether or not the United States
should seek this as a valuable objective.

When the exercise was over, there were many in the Mission in Saigon
who felt that the Study Group recommendations should have formed a blue-
print for action throughout the Mission. They pointed out that almost all .
the recommendations were concurred in by every egency, and that these could
be carried out immediately. The remaining 15 which were still not unani-
mously accepted could then be discussed and perhaps resolved.

In Washington, at least one high official, R.W. Komer, felt the same
way, and urged the Mission to use the recommendations as policy. But
somewhere between August 24, when the paper was submitted, and the end
of 1966, the paper was relegated to the useful but distinctly secondary-
role of another "study group," as its name suggests. While everyone was

: r 87 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
