Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

“If it would be an error to evaluate the effectiveness of the
U.S. program in terms of war outcome, and if the efficiency of MAP and
MAAG cannot meaningfully be analyzed, it remains to evaluate the degree
to which France met the conditions under which assistance was tendered,
which presumably impinged directly on U.S. political objectives:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The United States objective of insuring "that the.
primary responsibility for the restoration of peace
and security in Indochina rests with the French"
was fulfilled; in fact, it was insisted on by the
French. On the one hand, U.S. military forces

were never directly engaged in the Indochina war.
On the other hand, the French, in retaining this
primary responsibility, preserved the prerogative
to determine policy and the freedom to reject U.5.
advice. U.S. "leverage" was minimal.

The condition of basing the assistance program on
"an urgently prepared French plan acceptable to
the Associated States and to the U.S." was frus-
trated in several ways. At the dutset no overall
plan was presented, and those portions of existing
plans to which U.S. authorities were privy (e-g.,
Allessandri's pacification plan for the Tonkin
Delta) were not acceptable to U.S. thinking. Second,
when the Letourneau-Allard and Navarre plans were
finally prepared (in 1953, three years after the
U.S. decided that a plan was a necessary precondi-
tion for aid), some U.S. observers realized that
these were more concepts than plans. U.S. accep-
tance of the plans was more reluctant than the
granting of $385 million in additional assistance
might indicate. 51/ Finally, the plans, once
"accepted," were not vigorously carried out. 52/

The French met pro forma the condition that they
provide the U.S. assurances that they would grant
self-government for Indochina, and form national
armies for the Associated States. But it was clear
throughout the war that, regardless of the amounts
of U.S. assistance rendered, France's declarations
of intent were grudgingly issued, and were seldom
followed by action, The French Indochina war had
to be lost before Vietnam was granted genuine in-
dependence.

Although France did expand its forces in Indochina,

these forces were never sufficient to the task. French
Graftees were never employed in Indochina. France

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
