Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

accordance with plans discussed at a meeting with
COMUSMACV and the Ambassador.

Pg Revise the pacification plans for critical
provinces to insure that they reflect scheduling
and programming "based on a realistic appraisal of
the actual status of the hamlets, the SDC and Civil
Guard and ARVN as well as the rehabilitation mate-
rials available,"

3. Increase U.S. military advisory strength in the
thirteen critical provinces (agreed to be critical at
Honolulu) in accordance with a table submitted by
COMUSMACYV.

4, Reinforce USOM representation in thirteen eritical
‘provinces starting with Long An in accordance with a
proposal from USOM Saigon.

5. Provide unifcims for the SDC with priority on the
Delta area.

6. Press the GVN for a clear statement, in form of ;
orders to province chiefs, for continuance and reshaping
of the hamlet program.

{- Press the GVN to provide for a Joint General Staff
(JCS) chief, and for a III Corps commander with no other
responsibilities.

8. Continue to stress to the GVN the need for forceful
central leadership and effective and visible popular
leadership, 26/

The Secretary's report for the President dated 21 December '63 was
gloomy and expressed fear that the situation had been deteriorating
long before any deterioration had been suspected (officially). ‘The
report began by saying that the situation was "very disturbing," and
that unless current trends-were reversed within two or three months
they would "lead to neutralization at best and more likely to a Commu-
nist-controlled state." The new government of Big Minh was identified
as the greatest source of concern because it seemed indecisive and
drifting. There seemed to be a clear lack of administrative talent and
of political experience. While on the other hand generals who should
have been directing military affairs were preoccupied with political
matters fies working to assure or to. increase their own political
power within the RMC/.

A second major weakness seemed to the wecretary te be the Country
Team. He felt that it lacked leadership and had been "poorly informed"
and was "hot working according to a common plan." He had found as an

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

19
