Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B. Under a situation such as now as an emergency stimulant
hopefully to create unity at home and restore failing
morale,

C. As a unilateral U.S, action to compensate for a reduced
in-country U.S. presence." (Underlining added)

‘In other words, under any conceivable alliance condition short of complete
U.S. abandonment of South Vietnam, Ambassador Taylor and his top-level
associates in Saigon saw the graduated air strikes of Phase Two as an
appropriate course of action. As they concluded, "Without Phase IT opera~
tions, we see slicht chance of moving toward a successful solution. 225/

Within the more influential sections of the State Department ,
policy reexamination took a similar, though not identical, tack. Rather
than adjust the substance or projected extent of the pressures policy, |
the tendency was to recalculate and adjust the conditions under which it
was considered appropriate to apply it. The notivation for & reassess-
ment was the sense of impending disaster in South Vietnen. What the
Saigon Embassy reports appear to have portrayed at the time as concrete
instances of foot-dragsing, political maneuvering, and sparring for ad-
ventage among political and military leaders seem to have been interpre-
ted in Washington as an impending sell-out to the NLF. For example, the
Assistant Secretary for Far Hastern Affairs, who had been an important
participant in the policy and decision-making processes through most of
1964, offered the following prognosis:

"++.the situation in Vietnam is now likely to come apart
more rapidly than we had anticipated in November. We would
still stick to the estimate that the most likely form of
coming apart would be a government or key groups starting to
negotiate covertly with the Liberation Front or Hanoi , perhaps
not asking in the first instance that we get out, Ps with
that necessarily following at a fairly early stage." 226/

the perceived impacts of a collapse in Ssigon on other nations --
perhaps even more than the political fortunes of South Vietnam atselt --
were @ significant part of the State Department calculations (Tab F). Big
a unilateral "Vietnam solution" were to be arranged, so the thinking went

in January 1965, not only would Leos and Cambodia be indefensible, but
Thailand's position would become unpredictable. Bundy wrote:

"Most seriously, there is grave question whether the Thai
in these circumstances would retain any confidence at all in
our continued support....As events have developed, the Ameri-
can public would probably not be too sharply critical, but the
real question would be whether Thailand and other nations were
weekened and taken over thereafter."

16 TOP SECRET -~ Sensitive
