Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

central question was whether he would -- or could -- do so. Among those
who responded to this question in the negative, J. Kenneth Galbraith wasmost
trenchant:

In my completely considered view . . . Diem will not
reform either administratively or politically in any
effective way. That is because he cannot. It is
politically naive to expect it. He senses that he
cannot let power go because he would be thrown out. 12/

The U.S. decided that Diem could make meaningful reforms and that he
would do so -- or at least it decided that it was likely enough that he
would do so and that support for his administration constituted the best
available policy alternative.

H. ‘The Problem of Assessment

The differences in perspectives and expectations outlined above
are important in their own right. They loom even larger, however, when
one considers the difficulty of assessing progress in the program about
to be undertaken. These groups were about to embark upon a long, arduous
joint voyage. Their only chart had never been to sea. This was the
. newly-articulated and imperfectly understood doctrine of counterinsurgency
which stressed the interaction and interdependence of political, military,
social, and psychological factors. It posited the necessity for certain
actions to follow immediately and successfully behind others in order
for the process of pacification to succeed. Above all -- and this point
eannot be overstressed -- while this doctrine recognized the need for both
the carrot and the stick (for coercive control and appealing programs )
it made gaining broad popular acceptance the single ultimate criterion
of success. Neither kill ratios nor construction rates nor the frequency
of incidents was conclusive, yet these were all indicators applicable to
phases within the larger process, The gains of doing well in one phase,
however, could be wiped out by inactivity or mistakes in a subsequent
phase. It was, in short, very difficult to know how well one was doing
until one was done,

VI. THE NATIONAL PLAN EMERGES

A, Awareness of the Unifying Potential

Before examining the quality of execution of the operational pro-
grams for which some detailed record is available it will be useful to
outline the process by which the strategic hamlet program became -- by late
1962 -- a comprehensive national program embodying the major effort of GYN
in pacification.

"Operation Sunrise” in Binh Duong Province was launched on 22
March 1962 in what was initially called the "Ben Cat Project." 73/ The
Delta project, however, languished in a "planning stage” until May, when
it first became known that Diem was considering incorporating it into the
Strategic Hamlet Program. 74/ By August the IMCSH proposed a priority
plan for the construction of strategic hamlets on a nation-wide basis.

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
