Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SE ry TR

i Coy eee hea
Rie SP He

u =

5. General de Gaulle and his Government have made it abundantly
clear that they expect a proposed Indo-Chinese federation to function
within the framework of the "French Union." There is consequently not
the slightest possibility alt the present time or in the foreseeable
future that France will volunteer to place Indo-China under an inter-
national trusteeship, or will consent to any program of international
accountability which is not applied to the colonial possessions of
other powers. If an effort were made to exert pressure on the French
Govermment, such action would have to be taken by the United States
alone for France could rely upon the support of other colonial powers,
notably, Great Britain and the Netherlands. Such action would likewise
run counter to the established American policy of aiding France to
regain her strength in order that she may be better fitted to share
responsibility in maintaining the peace of Europe and the world.

Recommendations

In the light of the above considerations, the following recommenda~
tions, which have been commmicated to the War and Navy Departments, are
submitted for your approval.

1. The Government of the United States should neither oppose the
‘ restoration of Indo-China to France, with or without a program of
international accountability, nor take any action toward French over-
seas possessions which it is not prepared to take or suggest with
regard to the colonial possessions of our other Allies.

2. The Government of the United States should continue to exert its
influence with the French in the direction of having them effect a libera-
lization of their past policy of limited opportwmities for native partici-
pation in government and administration, as well as a liberalization of
restrictive French economic policies formerly pursued in Indo-China.

3. The French Provisional Government should be informed confi-
dentially that, owing to the need of concentrating all ovr resources in
the Pacific on operations already planned, large-scale military operations
aimed directly at the liberation of Indo-China cannot be contemplated at
this time.

lh, French offers of military and naval assistence in the Pacific
should be considered on their merits as bearing upon the objective of
defeating Japna, as in the case of British and Dutch proposals. The
fact that acceptance of @ specific proposal might serve to strengthen
French claims for the restoration of Indo-China to Trance should not be
regarded as grounds for rejection. On the contrary, acceptance of French
proposals for militery assistance in the defeet of Japan should be re-
garded as desirable in principle, subject always to military requirements
in the theater of operations.

CG Oe bet (i BE fe Poe
