Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The first detailed feedback from the circulation of the 19 May
McNaughton Draft Presidential Memorandum came from William P. Bundy
on 2 June when he wrote an incisive and highly perceptive memorandum
which argued that the "gut" point in Vietnam was not necessarily the
military effect of our bombing or the major force increases and all
the rest, but the effect that they had on the South Vietnamese. He
wrote:

If we can get a reasonably solid GVN political struc-
ture and GVN performance at all levels, favorable trends
could become really marked over the next 18 months, the
war will be won for practical purposes at some point, and
the resulting peace will be secured. On the other hand,
if we do not get these results from the GVN and the South
Vietnamese people, no amount of US effort will achieve our
basic objective in South Viet-Nam--a return to the essential
provisions of the Geneva Accords of 1954 and a reasonably
stable peace for many years based on these Accords....

It, follows that perhaps the most critical of all
factors in assessing our whole strategy--bombing, major
force increases, and all the rest--lies in the effect they
have on the South Vietnamese. On the one hand, it is
obvious that there must be a strong enough US role to
maintain and increase GVN and popular confidence and
physical security; although the point is not covered in
the CIA papers, it surely is the fact that in early 1965

_ virtually all South Vietnamese believed they were headed
‘for defeat, whereas the general assumption today is strongly
in the opposite direction, that with massive US help the
country has a present chance to learn to run itself and
a future expulsion of the North Vietnamese will take place
although not perhaps for a long time. We have got to main-
tain and fortify this underlying confidence and sense that
it is worthwhile to get ahead and run the country properly.

On the other hand, many observers are already reporting,
and South Vietnamese performance appears to confirm, that
the massive US intervention has in fact had a significant
adverse effect in that South Vietnamese tend to think that
Unele Sam will do their job for them. This point was not
included in the levy on CIA, and it may be that we need
@ judgment from the Agency, recognizing that it will be
"broad brush" at best. The tentative judgment stated
above need not be considered a shocking one; in our calcu-
dations of two years ago, we anticipated the possibility.

180 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
