Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In the hope that the unilateral U.S. initiative would
"permit the contending forces to move closer to a political settlement,”
the President celled on the UK and the Soviet Union to do what they could
to get negotiations started. Repeating his offer to meet at any time
and place he designated his representative should talks actually occur:

T am designating one of our most distinguished Ameri-
eans, Ambassador Averell Harriman, as my personal repre-
sentative for such talks. In addition, I have asked
Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, who returned from Moscow
for consultation, to be available to join Ambassador Harriman
at Geneva or any other suitable place -- just as soon as
Hanoi agrees to a conference.

I call upon President Ho Chi Minh to respond positively,
and favorably, to this new step toward peace.

But if peace does not come now through negotiations,
it will come when Hanoi understands that our common resolve
is unshakable, and our common strength is invincible.

Turning his attention to other matters, the President outlined
the limited steps that the U.S. would take to strengthen its forees in South
Vietnam and the measures he would push to improve the South Vietnamese Army.
He then discussed the costs of the new efforts, the domestic frugality they
would require, and the balance of payments efforts necessary to their imple-
mentation. Next he outlined his own views of the unlikelihood of peace, in
an attempt to head off any false hope that the bombing cessation might
generate:

Now let me give you my estimate of the chances for
peace:

-- the peace that will one day stop the bloodshed in
South Vietnam,

-- that all the Vietnamese people will be permitted
to rebuild and develop their land,

-- that will permit us to turn more fully to our own
tasks here at home.

I cannot promise that the initiative that I have
announced tonight will be completely successful in achieving
peace any more than the 30 others that we have undertaken
and agreed to in recent years.

But it is our fervent hope that North Vietnam, after
years of fighting that has left the issue unresolved, will

199 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
