Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

Although the U.S. communicated to Diem its conviction that proposing such
conditions to the DRV during pre-plebescite consultations would lead
promptly to a flat rejection, to Diem's marked advantage in world opin-
ion, Diem found it preferable to refuse outright to talk to the North,
and the U.S. indorsed his policy. 31/

4. Divided Vietnam: Status Quo Accepted

The deadline for the consultations in July 1955, and the
date set for elections in July 1956, passed without further international
action to implement those provisions of the Geneva Settlement. The DRV
communicated directly with the GVN in July, 1955, and again in May and
June of 1956, proposing not only consultative conference to negotiate
"free general elections by secret ballot," but to liberalize North-South
relations in general. 32/ Each time the GVN replied with disdain, or
with silence. The 17th parallel, with its demilitarized zone on either
Side, became de facto an international boundary, and -- since Ngo Dinh
Diem's rigid refusal to traffic with the North excluded all economic ex-
changes and even an interstate postal agreement ~- one of the most restricted
boundaries in the world. The DRV appealed to the U.K. and the U.S.S.R. as
co-chairmen of the Geneva Conference to no avail. 33/ In January, 1956,
Communist China requested another Geneva Conference to deal with the situ-
ation, but the U.S.S.R. and the U.K. responded only by extending the
functions of the International Control Commission beyond its 1956 expir-
ation date. 3h/ By early 1957 the partition of Vietnam was generally
accepted throughout the international community. In January, 1957, the
Soviet Union proposed the admission of both the GVN and the DRV to the
United Nations, the U.S.S.R. delegate declaring that "in Vietnam two
separate States existed, which differed from one another in political
and economic structure...." 35/

Professor Hans Morganthau, writing at the time, and following
a visit to South Vietnam, described the political progress of the GVN as
a "miracle," but stated that conditions for free elections obtained in
neither the North nor the South. 36/ He concluded that:

"Actually, the provision for free elections which would
solve ultimately the problem of Vietnam was a device to hide
the incompatibility of the Communist and Western positions,
neither of which can admit the domination of all of Vietnam
by the other side. It was a device to disguise the fact that
the line of military demarcation was bound to be a line of
political division as well...."

5. The Discontented

However, there were three governments, at least, for which
the status quo of a Vietnam divided between communist and non-communist
governments was unacceptable. The GVN, while remaining cool to the DRV,
pursued an active propaganda campaign prophesying the overturning of
communism in the North, and proclaiming its resolve ultimately to reunify
the nation in freedom. The United States supported the GYN, having
