Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The proposal ("an effort to arrest and hopefully reverse the deterior-
ating situation in Vietnam") was a blend of Rostow's border force and the
Chief's "possible limited interim course of action.” Johnson's paper
listed both the Rostow mission of the force (attempt to close the border)
and that of the Chiefs (win control of the central highlands); otherwise
the paper followed the JCS plan. What probably happened, considering the
haste with which the paper must have been drafted, was that Johnson simply
blended the two proposals together and assumed the fine points could be
worked out later. For if the paper is somewhat confusing on the immediate
military proposal, it is clear on the long-run thinking that underlays the
proposel. And this long-run thinking made the immediate military mission
relatively inconsequential, since as with the earlier combat-troops-for-
training proposals, it was pretty clear that the main idea was to get some
American combat troops into Vietnam, with the nominal excuse for doing so
quite secondary.

The plan was described under the heading "Initial Phase." A subsequent
section, titled "Anticipated Later Phases" states:

This initial action cannot be taken without accepting as our real
and ultimate objective the defeat of the Viet Cong, and making Vietnam
secure in the hands of an anti-Communist government. Thus supple-
mental military action must be envisaged at the earliest stage that is
politically feasible. The ultimate force requirements cannot be esti-
mated with any precision. JCS are now considering. Three divisions
would be @ guess...

Earlier the paper, in a similar vein, had remarked:

While a staisfactory political settlement in Laos would consider-
ably reduce Viet Minh infiltration through Laos into South Vietnam, it
would not entirely eliminate it. While such a reductiom would material-
ly assist the GVN in meeting the Viet Cong threat, there is no assur-
ance that, even under these circumstances, the GVN will in the fore-
seeable future be able to defeat the Viet Cong. Under these circum-
stances, although the need of South Vietnam for outside assistance such
as proposed in this plan would probably still be very strong, it would
be much more difficult to find a political base upon which to execute
this plan. 3/

This judgment was probably influenced by a special NIE issued October 5th,
which stated that 80-90% of the estimated 17,000 VC had been locally recruited,
and that there was little evidence that the VC relied on external supplies.

The relation of this paper to Diem's request for treaty can only be
guessed at. The paper never mentions Diem, or any South Vietnamese request
for further assistance. But the paper supplemented one published about a
