Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Dp. Washington Grumbles About the Effort

Throughout the period of the buildup in Vietnam, there was a
growing chorus of discontent in Washington over the management of the
U.S. effort in Vietnem, most of it directed at the civilian agencies --
USIA, AID, and the CIA. Unheppiness with the way the Mission ran was
to lead to three major reorganizations in the 15-month period from the
Honolulu conference to the arrival of Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker, The
first reorganization took place immediately after Honolulu, and assigned
to the Deputy Ambassador, William J. Porter, specific duties and
responsibilities which had previously been dispersed throughout the
Mission and handled on an ad hoc basis. The second reorganization,
which took place in November-December 1966, reorganized the internal -
components of ATD, USIA, and the CIA so that the Deputy Ambassador
could control directly a single Office of Civil Operation (000), by-
passing the agency chiefs. The latest reorganization, which was
announced in May 1967, transferred responsibility for OCO from the
Deputy Ambassador to COMUSMACV, who in turn was given a civilian Deputy
with the rank of Ambassador (R. W. Komer). This section outlines events:
leading to the first reorganization in March 1966, a reorganization which
raised the priority of the pacification effort, but left most of the
basic problems in the U.S. Mission unsolved. The actual reorganization,
and its effects, will be covered in Part ITI. 1.

Efforts to reorganize the Saigon Mission are a recurring theme in
recent history. The impetus for reorganization has consistently come
from Washington, and the Mission has usually resisted. Its resistance
is not hard to understand, since almost every reorganization scheme
tended to diminish the authority end autonomy of senior members of the
Mission Council such as the JUSPAO Director, the USAID Director, and the
CIA Station Chief.

Skeptics have said that whenever things are going poorly, "Americans
reorganize." But the opponents of various reorganization schemes have
been unable to defend the existing Mission Council system, which must
definitely be rated one of Vietnam's casualties. Not since the beginning
of the "country team" concept in the 1950's ("Mission Council” being |
another term for the same structure) had the concept been tested the
way it was to be tested in Vietnam. The pressure of events, the tension,
the unprecedented size of the agencies and a host of other factors made
the system shaky even under the strong manager Maxwell Taylor, Under
the man who didn't want to manage, Lodge, it began to crumble. Each
' agency had its own ideas on what had to be done, its own communication
channels with Washington, its own personnel and administrative structure --
and starting in 1964-65, each agency began to have its own field personnel
operating under separate and parallel chains of command. This latter
event was ultimately to prove the one which gave reorganization efforts
such force, since it began to become clear to people in Washington and
Saigon alike that the Americans in the provinces were not always working

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
