Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

defenders to one side while on the other set fire to the houses
and killed allsuspicious persons. If we departed, believing

a region pacified, they would arrive on our heels and the terror
would start again. There was only one possible defense: to
multiply the posts, to fortify them, to arm the villagers, and
to train them for a coordinated and enlightened self-defense
through a thorough job of information and policing.

"But this required men and weapons. What was needed was
not 35,000 men (of which Leclerc was then disposed) but 100,000,
and Cochinchina was not the only problem.” 41/

c. Nationalist Government in North Vietnam, 1945-1946
(1) The Government of 2 September 195

The salient problem other than Cochinchina facing the
French in the fall of 1945 was the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. The
Hanoi government of Ho Chi Minh claimed dominion over all of Vietnam,
but as far as French challenge to its authority was concerned, ruled in
fact only in Annam and Tonkin. The DRV was neither wholly Viet Minh nor
communist composition. Despite the vigor and initiative of the Viet Minh,
the salient political fact of life in North Vietnam was Chinese Nationalist
army of occupation, and the Chinese presence had forced Ho Chi Minh and
the Viet Minh to accommodate Chinese-backed Viet Nationalists, and defer
to Chinese policy in other respects.

The numbers of Chinese who entered North Vietnam is not known precisely,
the totals having been obscured not only by inadequate reports, but by
the Nationalists' use of Tonkin for passage of troops from Yunnan and
Kwangsi en route to other parts of China. French estimates ran as high
as 180,000, but the Chinese occupation forces per se probably numbered
about 50,000. he/ Even fewer foreign troops would have gravely overbur-
dened North Vietnam, where because of a bad crop year, and war-disturbed
commerce, famine was rampant. Most of the Chinese troops were ill-
disciplined and poorly-equipped, living, perforce, off the land. Their
exactions of the peasantry stirred the traditional animosities of the
Vietnamese for the Chinese -- resentments untempered by gratitude to the
Chinese as liberators, since the Vietnamese believed they had already
been liberated by the Viet Minh. And the transgressions of the Chinese
troops were matched by the Chinese high command; the warlords promptly be-
gan to plunder North Vietnam. The Chinese dollar was made legal tender
at an exorbitant rate of exchange with the Vietnamese piastre, which
exacerbated an already serious inflation, and opened new vistas for the
black market. Chinese profiteers began large scale buying of French and
Vietnamese enterprises and real estate. 43/

As the Chinese forces marched into North Vietnam, they ousted local
Viet Minh governments, and replaced them with VNQDD, and Dong Minh Hoi
groups; Phuc-Quoc (Restoration League ) groups seized power elsewhere.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-L0
