42.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

people, is surrounded by persons less admirable and capable than
he. The country can be saved -- if we move quickly and wisely.
We must decide whether to support Diem -- or let Vietnem fall.
We must have coordination of purpose in our country team, diplo-
matic and military. The Saigon Embassy, USIS, MAAG and related
operations leave much to be desired. They should be brought up
to maximum efficiency. The most important thing is imaginative,
creative, American management of our militery aid program. The
Vietnamese and our MAAG estimete that $50 million of U.S. mili-
tary end economic assistance will be needed if we decide to
support Vietnam. This is the best information available to us
at the present time and if it is confirmed by the best Washington
military judgment it should be supported. Since you proposed
and Diem agreed to a joint economic mission, it should be ap-
pointed and proceed forthwith.

b. In Thailend, the Thais and our own MAAG estimate
probably as much is needed as in Vietnam -- about $50 million
of military and economic assistance. Again, should our best
military judgment concur, I believe we should support such a
program. Sarit is more strongly end staunchly pro-Western than
many of his people. He is and must be deeply concerned at the
consequence to his country of a communist-controlled Laos. If
Sarit is to stand firm against neutralism, he must have -~ soon
~~ concrete evidence to show his people of United States military
and economic support. He believes that his armed forces should
be increased to 150,000. His Defense Minister is coming to
Washington to discuss aid matters.

% * * *

To recapitulate, these are the main impressions I have brought
back from my trip.

The fundamental decision required of the United Stetes -- and
time is of the greatest importance -- is whether we are to attempt
to meet the challenge of Communist expansion now in Southeast Asia
by a major effort in support of the forces of freedom in the area
or throw in the towel. This decision must be made in a full reali-
zation of the very heavy and continuing costs involved in terms of
money, of effort and of United States prestige. It must be made
with the knowledge thet at some point we may be faced with the
further decision of whether we commit major United States forces
to the area or cut our losses and withdraw should our other efforts
fail. We must remain master in this decision. What we do in
Southeast Asia should be part of a rational program to meet the
threat we face in the region as a whole. It should include a
clear-cut pattern of specific contributions to be expected by each
partner according to his ability and resources. I recommend we
proceed with a clear-cut end strong program of action.

BT.
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
