Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The JCS were apparently not in complete sympathy with
the gradual phasing of stronger attacks ove: several months, as pro-
posed in the study. In their formal memoranda to the SecDef they
continued to restate their mid-January recommendations for the sharp
blows with maximum shock effect as "the soundest program from a mili-
tary standpoint" which offered "the greatest return for the air effort
expended." 52/ Apparently sensing that this was more than the traffic
would bear, however, they began to push for early strikes against POL
as "one of the highest priority actions not yet approved." They pointed
out that NVN was busily expanding and improving its LOCs, and its
"offensive and defensive" air capabilities; it was expediting its
import of trucks. POL was becoming increasingly significant to NVN's
war effort, and its destruction would have an "immediate effect on the
military movement of war supporting materials." 53/

3. The CIA Recommends Escalation

While the JCS kept up its barrage of recommendations during
March, CIA broke into the debate with an apparently very influential
report on the past accomplishments and future prospects of the bombing.
The report virtually wrote off the bombing results to date as insignifi-
eant, in terms of either interdiction or pressure; blamed "the highly
restrictive ground rules" under which the program operated; and took
the bold step, for an intelligence document, of explicitly recommending
a preferred bombing program of greater intensity, redirected largely
against "the will of the regime as a target system." 5h/

The report held that the economic and military damage sus-
tained by NVN had been moderate and the cost had been passed along to
the USSR and China. The major effect of the bombing had been to disrupt
normal activity, particularly in transportation and distribution, but
with considerable external help the regime had been singularly successful
in overcoming any serious problems. It had been able to strengthen its
defenses, keep its economy going, and increase the flow of men and sup-
plies South. Most of the direct damage so far had been to facilities
which NVN did not need to sustain the military effort, and which the
regime merely did without. It had been able to maintain the overall
performance of the transportation system at the levels of 1964 or better.
Tt had increased the capacity of the LOCs to the South and made them less
vulnerable to air attack by increasing the number of routes and bypasses.
Despite the pombing, truck movement through Laos, with larger vehicles
and heavier loads, had doubled.

The program had not been able to accomplish more because
it had been handicapped by severe operational restrictions:

Self-imposed restrictions have limited both the choice

of targets and the areas to be bombed. Consequently, almost
80 percent of North Vietnam's limited modern, industrial

_ 80 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
