Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"W. On the positive side, we have found many reasons
for encouragement in the performance of the Khanh government
to date. Although its top layer is thin, it is highly re-
sponsive to U.S, advice, and with a good grasp of the basic
elements of rooting out the Viet Cong. Opposition groups are
fragmentary, and Khanh has brought in et least token representa-
tion from many key groups hitherto left owt. He is keenly
aware of the danger of assassination or coup and is taking ©
resourceful steps to minimize these risks. All told, these
evidences of energy, comprehension, and decision add up to
@ sufficiently strong chance of Khanh's really taking hold
in the next few months for us to devote all possible energy
and resources to his support." 4h/

A memorandum of the conversation held at Joint General Staff (JGS)
headquarters between Secretary McNamara and General Khanh, the Prime Minister,
on Merch 12, shows that the U.S. pressed for a national service act. General
Khanh agreeably assured the Secretary that the GVN was prepared to embark
on &@ program of national mobilization. The principal question raised by
the Vietnamese was the desirability of raising the Civil. Guard to the same
relative status as ARVN on such matter as salary, pensions, and survivor
benefits at a total additional cost of 1 billion piasters. Mr. McNamara's
reply that he thought this highly desirable was obviously interpreted by
the Vietnamese as an agreement to underwrite much of the bill. 45/

After considering various options in his reports, McNamara recom-
mended the following basic U.S. posture:

"lL. The U.S. at all levels must continue to make it em-
phatically clear that we are prepared to furnish assistance
and support, for as long as it takes to bring the insurgency
under control.

"2. The U.S, at all levels should continue to make it
clear that we fully support the Khanh government and are totally
opposed to any further coups. The ambassador should instruct
all elements, including the military advisors, to report in-
telligence information of possible coups promptly, with the
decision to be made by the ambassador whether to report such
information to Khanh...

"3, We should support fully the Pacification Plan now
announced by Khanh...This so-called "oil spot" theory is
excellent, and its acceptance is a major step forward. How-
ever, it is necessary to push hard to get specific instruc-
tions out to the provinces, so that tnere is real unity of
effort at all levels.... ;

Many of the actions described iin succeeding para-
graphs fit right into the framework of the Plan as announced
by Khanh. Wherever possible, we should tie our urging of such
actions to Khanh's own formulation of them, so that he will

12 “TOP SECRET - Sensitive
