Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

/ol

"Phe strategic importance of South Viet-Nem is plain. It controls
the mouth of the Mekong River, the main artery of Southeast Asia. The
loss of South Viet-Nam would put the remaining states of Southeast Asia
in mortal danger.

"But there are larger reasons why the defense of South Viet-Nam is
vital to us and to the whole free world. We cannot be indifferent to the
fate of 14 million people who have fought hard against communism --
including nearly 1 million who fled their former homes to avoid living
under Communist tyranny. Since we went to the aid of Greece and Turkey
16 years ago, it has been the attitude of the United States to assist
peoples who resist Communist aggression. We have seen this form of attack
fail in Burma, Malaya, and the Philippines. The South Vietnamese are de-
termined to win their battle, and they deserve our help.

"Critics have complained that South Viet-Nam.is not a full constitu-
tional democracy end that our aid has been subject tovwaste and mismanage-
ment. Let us be clear that these criticisms are not merely alibis for
inaction. For in passing judgement, let us recall that we are talking
about a nation which has been responsible for its own affairs for less
than a decade, about a people who have had no peace since 1941 and little
experience in direct participation in political effairs. Their four
national elections, their thousands of elected hemlet councils, and their
forthcoming village council elections show steady movement toward a con-
stitutional system resting upon popular consent.”

3 = ae

34. Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs, Roger W. Hilsman, Address
Made et 1963 Conference on Cold War Education, Tampa, Florida, June 1
1963, “The Challenge to Freedom in Asia," Department of State Bulletin
July 3, 1963, p. :

a

"As to the nature of the danger, the ideology of communism is a threat,
to the United States today mainly because it is joined with the population,
resources, and military strength of the countries of the Soviet Union and
Communist China, because it is joined with two bases of power.

"But the fact that ideology has been joined to these two bases of power
should not be misinterpreted: the threat is not just military; it is also
political. And of the two, the political threat is probably the more per-
vasive. This is true because this nation and its allies have made sure that
their military defenses are adequate and up to date.

"The political threat is. also serious because of the Commmists' skill
in manipulating all the elements of power -- political, economic, and
psychological as well as military. They use these instruments with con-
siderable sophistication, playing first one then another according to the

C-33
