Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As the cable continued, the American commander in Vietnam briefly
restated his earlier assessment of enemy trends: That the enemy had
increased his force structure appreciably and was now confronting Free
World Military Forces with large bodies of troops in and above the DMZ,
in the Laotian and Cambodian sanctuaries and certain areas within SVN.
In light of this new appraisal, he had established an early requirement
for an additional 2-1/3 divisions which he proposed be accommodated by
restructuring the original 555,741-man force package proposed during
Program 4. This force was required "as soon as possible but not later
than 1 July 1968." Part of the reasoning was that this in effect con-
stituted no more than a 6-month "extension" of the CY 67 program and as
such would permit shifting force programming from a Calendar Year toa ~
Fiscal Year basis, a shift long needed in COMUSMACV's estimation to make
force programming for Vietnam compatible with other programs and to pro-
vide essential lead time in the procurement of hardware. Westmoreland
then looked further ahead, noting:

"elt is entirely possible that additional forces, over
and above the immediate requirement for 2-1/3 Divisions, will
materialize. Present planning, which will undergo continued
refinement, suggests an additional 2- 1/3 division equivalents
whose availability is seen as extending beyond FY 68." 18/

Then as if to take the edge off his request, COMUSMACV turned attention
to two programs which were becoming increasingly attractive to American
decision-makers. These were development of an improved RVNAF and an
increase in the other Free World Military Forces committed to the war

in Vietnam. He comuented that despite the force ceiling on RVNAF cur-
rently in effect some selective increase in Vietnamese capabilities was
required, such as creation of a suitable base for establishing a constab-
ulary, an organization vital to the success of the Revolutionary Develop-
ment program. Westmoreland stated that it was the position of his head-
quarters that provision for any and all Free World Military Forces was
welcomed as "additive reinforcements," but they would be treated as addi-
tions only, thereby having no effect upon U.S. force computations.

The concept of operations under which the new forces he requested
were to be employed varied little in its essential aspects from that out-
lined in MACV's February “Assessment of the Military Situation and Concept
of Operations," 19/ which had reached Washington but a week earlier.
However, the new cable integrated the new forces as part of the MACV opera-
tional forces.’ Westmoreland reviewed the period just past then turned to
the future:

",..our operations were primarily holding actions
characterized by border surveillance, reconnaissance to
locate enemy forces, and spoiling attacks to disrupt the
enemy offensive. As a result of our buildup and successes,

62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
