Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from The Lost Revolution by Robert Shaplen

Chapter II - Ho Chi Minh - the Untried Gamble, pp. 27, 46-50

I have always shared the belief of many, if not most, observers
who were in Indochina at the time that a serious mistake was made by
both the French and the Americans, especially by the dominant French
policymakers in Paris, in not dealing more realistically with Ho in
1945 and 1946, when there was a strong possibility that he might have
been "Titofied" before Tito and Titoism were ever heard of; that the
whole course of events might thereby have been altered and a great
deal of bloodshed averted; and that today a unified Vietnam, even
under some form of left-wing leadership, might have been the bulwark
of a neutral bloc of Southeast Asian states seeking, above all, to
avoid Chinese Communist domination. Some of the highest American
officials have privately told me, in recent years, that they now
believe the gamble with Ho should have been taken; in fact, a con-
siderable number of them are again talking about Vietnam becoming a
Southeast Asian Yugoslavia, a possibility that seems to me now rather
remote.

x gh oe

In Biarritz, where he first rested, in Paris and then at the
conference in Fontainebleau, Ho enjoyed huge personal success. He
charmed everyone, especially the press. He distributed roses to girl
reporters, signed his name in blood for an American male correspondent.
He was widely compared to Confucius, to the Buddha, to St. John the
Baptist, to anyone's doting grandfather, and it was noted that he was
an ascetic, since, among other things, he refused to take a drink.
Everywhere he went, whether to the opera, to a fancy reception, to
a picnic, or to a press conference, he appeared in his simple, high-
buttoned linen work suit. "As soon as one approaches this frail man,
one shares the admiration of all men around him, over whom he towers
with his serenity acquired from wide experience," wrote one reporter.
Noting his “tormented face and his eyes of blue which burn with an
inner light,” another declared that he "hides a soul of steel behind
a fragile body." His wit, his Oriental courtesy, his savoir-faire,
his mixed profundity and playfulness in social intercourse, his open
love for children, above all his seeming sincerity and simplicity,
captured one and all.

Unfortunately, in point of accomplishment Ho's trip was far less
successful. The fault, now generally admitted, was chiefly that of

c-14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive -
