Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECREL - Sensitive

organizations in futile causes; submerge the Party in a broader cause,
behind a national front.

The example of successful revolution most often held out
by DRV leaders has been the “August Revolution" of 1945. The official
DRV history points out that this uprising was successful because,
under Party leadership, there had been: (1) a careful preparing of the
people in both ideology and organization, including the training of
cadres, the build-up of bases of resistance, and the organization of

armed forces -- peoples' war, peoples' army; (2) a seizing of the
right opportunity; (3) "launching the revolutionary high tide of the
whole people" -- meaning the forming of a "national front" organization

which could command the support of the majority of the people, including
"all classes, nationalities, and religions"; (4) a skillful combining
of military and political "struggle" -- that is, the employment of both
forms of revolutionary endeavor, and the gradual shift in emphasis

from political to military methods; (5) dividing the enemy by proselyting
his armed forces, civil service, and citizenry. 179, The first two
lessons, on preparation for and careful timing of revolution, have
received particular stress. Party history is accurate: Ho Chi Minh
carefully husbanded his forces and waited for the moment to strike.
Virtually all the energies of the Viet Minh from 1943 through the
spring of 1945 were devoted to the patient development of a political
infrastructure in rural areas, and the building of guerrilla strong-
holds in the mountains adjacent to China. Ho permitted his armed
forces to begin systematic guerrilla warfare only after the Japanese
set up an independent Vietnam under Bao Dai in March, 1945. Even then,
however, he used them sparingly. There was supposed to have been a
Viet Minh conference in June, 1945, to signal the "seneral uprising, "
but Ho Chi Minh delayed convening of this conference because he was
convinced that uprising would be premature. Although DRV histories

do not say so, there is, in fact, every indication that when the
"August Revolution" was launched, it came not as a conscientious,
coordinated effort controlled by Ho and his lieutenants, but as

another more or less spontaneous rebellion. 180/ Confronted with the
prospect of being a bystander while others won victory, Ho hastily
convened the deferred conference on 16 August 1945, and formally com-
mitted the Viet Minh to the overthrow of Bao Dai and the expulsion of
the French and Japanese. Within three weeks, the independence of the
DRV was proclaimed, and Ho was installed in Hanoi as its president.

One example DRV historians do not often cite is the
inception of the long and ruinous Resistance War which began in
December, 1946. From all appearances, the DRV leaders still entertain
serious doubts over the wisdom of going to war against France at that
juncture. There is evidence that the incidents which opened the war
in December, 1946, had not been condoned by Ho, and that he re-committed
the Viet Minh to military action only reluctantly, and after events
had issued their own dictum. Moreover, communist literature on the
Resistance War of 1945-1954 abounds with reproach for local leaders

5h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
