Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of stress. This leadership includes setting an example of high morale,
by their own conduct, to encourage enthusiastic esprit de corps among
subordinates, and to project an unfailing image of confidence to the
outside world. Such men are likely to find it almost impossible to
recognize and to acknowledge existence of a situation seriously adverse
to their assigned mission, It is contrary to their lifetime training
never to bé daunted. This characteristic makes them good leaders for
difficult missions but it does not especially qualify them for render~
ing dispassionate judgements of the feasibility of missions or of the
progress they are making. Admiral Felt and General Harkins in the field,
and General Krulak in Washington, appear to have been more the gung ho
type of leaders of men in combat situations than the cautious reflective
weighers of complex circumstances and feasibilities, including political
complications,

Officials and agencies in Washington who depended directly or pri-
marily upon these officers for an understanding of the situation tended,
very naturally, to put their greatest faith in the judgement of those
in the field who were administratively responsible and who had access
to the most comprehensive official reports and data, If there were
disadvantages in the position of these people, a major one was that
most of their information was supplied by GVN officials, who often had
a vested interest in making things look good. Moreover, the U.S. offi-
cials in positions of operational responsibility had a professional
commitment to programs which, often, they had had a hand in establish-
ing. This normally inhibited them from giving the worst interpretation
to evidence that was incomplete, ambiguous or inconclusive -- and most evi-
dence was one or more of these, Moreover, the public relations aspects
of most positions of operating responsibility make it seem necessary to
put a good face on things as a part of that operating responsibility. The
morale of the organization seems to demand it. Finally, the intelligence
provided on an official basis generally followed formats devised for
uniform formal compilation and standard statistical treatment, All along
the line, lower echelons were judged, rewarded or penalized by higher eche-
lons in terms of the progress revealed by the reports they turned in,

This practice encouraged and facilitated feeding unjustifiably optimistic
data into the reporting machinery. .

The darker view was easier for those who lacked career commitment
to the success of the programs in the form in which they had been
adopted. The more pessimistic interpretations were generally based,
also, upon sources of information which were intimate, personal, out-
of-channels, and with non-official personages. They were particular-
istic rather than comprehensive, intimate and intuitive rather than
formal, impressionistic rather than statistical.

‘ Moreover, some of the principal Cassandras were newsmen whose
stories, whether correct or incorrect, made the front page and some-
times even the headlines. This suggested a vested interest in what
for one reason or another was sensational, Other Cassandras were
military advisors of junior grades, or lesser USOM officers especially
those in the provinces, whose views were easy to discount by senior

it TOP SECRET - Sensitive ~
