Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

there is a fairly good chance that Communist presssures
will result in a serious weakening of the GVN/ARVIN apparatus
and an end to its effective functioning in parts of the
country. In these circumstances, virtually the entire
burden of the war would fall on US forces.

* + %*

In sum, there is a high risk that both the ARVN
and GVN will be seriously weakened in the next months,
and perhaps decisively so. Our best estimate is that
in the assumed circumstances the overall situation 10
months hence will be no better than a standoff.

Q. What is the likely Communist reaction to a change
in US strategy toward greater control over population
centers, with or without increased forces?

A. In general the Communists would view this move
as a success for their strategy. Their tactical response
in such circumstances would depend mainly on the nature
of US enclaves. If these were fairly large and embraced
much of the outlying countryside, the Communists would
pelieve them to be porous enough to infiltrate and harass,
much as they are doing now. If the defensive perimeters
were fairly solid, however, the Communists would not try
to overrun them in frontal assaults. Instead, they
would concentrate for a time on consolidating the country-
side and isolating the various defended enclaves, in
particular interdicting supply lines and forcing the US
to undertake expensive supply movements from out of
country. A Communist-controlled regime with a "coalition"
facade would be set up in "liberated" areas and attempts
at terrorist activity inside the enclaves would be under-
taken. Hanoi. would hope that a combination of military and
political pressure, together with the dim prospect for
achievement of the original US aims in the Vietnam struggle,
would eventually persuade the US to extricate itself through
negotiations.

Q@. Wheat is the likely NVA/VC strategy over the next
10 months if US forces are increased by 50,000, by 100,000,
or by 200,000? :

A. We would expect the Communists to continue the ware

They still have resources available in North Vietnam and
within South Vietnam to increase their troop strength. Their

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
