Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

Ve De JUSTIFICATTON OF THE WAR -- PUBLIC STATEMENTS
JOHNSON ADMINISTRATION
1964
CONTENTS
1. Secretary Rusk stated, "Our troops are there assisting the

South Vietnamese because people in the north have been putting
pressures on Southeast Asia.”............ TOOL HOA e  ae hao

President Johnson expresses Support of President Kennedy's

Helter in: ihe, “domino CheOry” sic cai nisce's ceo okies palacesiewis

Secretary McNemara cites organized aggression from NVN as re-

quiring U.S. to fulfill its SEATO commitment. He emphasizes

the strategic significance of Southeast Asia in the forward
defense flank and the importance of meeting squarely the "test
ease for the new Communist strategy," wars of liberation........

Ambassador Stevenson stresses the point that the U.S. presence
in Vietnam is in response to request from government of South
Vietnam to assist in combatting aggression from the North.......

Secretary McNamara discusses the forward defense nations and

their relationship to U.S. SECULILYs cere eee ceeeeeee reece ceceeees

Secretary Rusk states that withdrawal from Vietnam would re-

sult in "a drastic loss of confidence in the will and capacity

of the free world to oppose aggression”.........-. ni oste

President Johnson cites four basic themes: (1) America keeps
her word; (2) the issue is the future of Southeast Asia; (3)

eens

eee

our purpose is peace and (4) this is a struggle for freedom.....

President Johnson tells the Nation, "Aggression by terror

against the peaceful villagers of South Vietnam has now been

joined. by open eggression on the high seas against the United
Rtetes of America” Bialave evelevavalude svelisieisimn sraletecs wlecdietsie rel aieelera oiere etame ala vacie

President Johnson cites aggression, the commitments of his
predecessors, SEATO, the attack on the Maddox and our es-

tablished policy of assisting countries victimized by
aggression as leading to U.S. actions.......s.seseeeees

D-10

D-11

D-11

D-12
