6/

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

2. The U.S. was never satisfied with French efforts concerning
the Vietnamese National Army and was continually frustrated by apparent
French reluctance to act on this score. Particularly disturbing to
U.S. officials were French inaction concerning formation of the VNA
into divisional units, French training procedures, and French reluctance
to develop a Vietnamese officer corps: in short, acute frustration
was caused by French refusal to initiate changes U.S. officials believed,
rightly or wrongly, that the U.S..could and would initiate if the U.S.

were in charge.

3. The U.S, had the capability to train "native armies," as
demonstrated by Korean forces. Although U.S. pressure on the French
culminated in a French visit to Korea to observe U.S. training methods
and procedures, the French were most impressed with the unsuitability
of Korean forces and the methods used to train them to the situation in
Indochina. 5/

4, The U.S. had been considering the idea of U.S. training of
Vietnamese forces since early in the Indochina war; in fact, the U.S.
had been asked as early as 1950 to participate in a Vietnamese plan for
a Vietnamese National Army trained and equipped by the U.S. without
French participation. 6/ The U.S, attitude was ambivalent. As early
as April 1952 the Service Secretaries suggested that the U.S. expand
the Indochina MAAG to undertake training and equipping of a national
army should the French declare their intention to withdraw from Indo-
china; 7/ in January 1954 General Erskine suggested elevating MAAG
to the status of a mission "to help in training." 8/ On the other
hand, although the theme of U.S. training of Vietnamese forces became
increasingly prominent from early 1953 on, a high-level committee in

Defense recommended against seeking direct American participation in

training in January of that yéar, and the JCS agreed with this recom-
mendation, which stemmed from French opposition to any such role for
the U.S., relatively higher French qualifications to train the local
armies, and from the language problem. 9/ As the war neared its close,
however, CHMAAG General O'Daniel, in face of firm and consistent opposi-
tion from the French, pressed harder and harder for a direct American
involvement in the training of Vietnamese forces; in May 1954 General
Ely, the French High Commander, apparently succumbed to O'Daniel's pressure
to agree to U.S, training of, and the positioning of U.S. advisors with,
Vietnamese units. 10/ On 9 June 1954, Ely, through O'Daniel, requested
the U.S. to organize and supervise the training of Vietnamese divisions,
and to do the same for all other Vietnamese training. 11/ By this
time, however, U.S. decisionmakers believed that the "situation in
Vietnam has: degenerated to point where any commitments at this time to
send over U.S. instructors in near future might expose us to being

faced with situation in which it would be contrary to our interests to
have to fulfill such commitments," 12/ and they. feared thet, "It may
be that in effort to draw U.S. into conflict without having U.S. con-
ditions on intervention met, French military may now seek U.S. training

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
