Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The reasoning behind the move to commit more troops to the relatively
static missions involved in pacification had been laid out in documents
and briefings by people as varied as Major General Tillson, in his August
briefings of the Mission Council (cited in Section TII.C.7) and Robert
Komer, in his meuoreandum te the President. But a key assumption under-
lying the new emphasis on population control was the growing belief, in
late 1966, that, the main force war was coming to a gradual end. Wo other
single factor played as great a role in the decision to commit troops to
pacification as the belief that they were going to be less and less
needed for offensive missions against main force units. The enemy-
initiated large unit action statistics showed a sharp drop all through
1966, with a low point of less than two battalion sized or larger enemy
initiated actions per month in the last quarter of 1966. There was in-
creasing talk of the "end of the big battalion war," both in the press
and in the Mission. Moreover, the first big U.S. push into VC base areas
was getting under way, and it was possible to believe that when operations
like Junction City and Cedar Falls were completed, the VC would have few
placed left to hide within the boundaries of South Vietnam. Thus, some
people were arguing in late 1966 and early 1967 that the number of troops
that could be conmitted to RD was considerably higher than the amount
that General Westmoreland was then contemplating; that the "substantial
number" of the Manila communique could well be over half of all ARVIN.
These arguments were usually made orally and tentatively, rather than in
formal written papers, since they usually raised the ire of the military.
When nilitary opposition to such a large RD commitment stiffened, the
suggestions of civilians were often hedged or partially withdraw. But
nonetheless, the fact remains that the undeniable success against the
main forces in 1966 was the major justifying factor for those advocating
increased commitment of regular units -- even some U.S. units -- to
pacification. At that time, officials were less worried about the possi-
bility of a major resurgence of the enemy than about the possibility of a
new guerrilla war phase. The fighting in and near the DMZ during Opera-
tions Hastings and Prairie (August-December 1966) had been the heaviest
of the war, and had been judged not only as a major defeat for the enemy
put as a possible turning point for the enemy, after which he “had begun
to shift some of his effort away from conventional, or ‘mobile warfare,'
toward the more productive (from his stendpoint) guerrilla tactics." 60/
The Marines considered Hastings and Prairie a foolhardy aberration on the
enemy's part, although they noted that the region of the DMZ “is remote,
favoring him with interior lines and working to our disadvantage through
extension of our own supply lines." 61/

The Marines, felt that the enemy attacks at the DMZ had been designed
primarily to drew down resources from the Marine pacification efforts
near Da Nang, an interesting example of how important they thought their
embryonic pacification effort was. But, the Marines added, whenever the
enemy probed or patrolled, he was "pursued by Marine infantry and pounded
by air, artillery, and navel gunfire. The effort cost him an estimated
5,000 to 6,000 NVA troops killed or disabled and 414 weapons lost...and
meant a severe loss of prestige, and a further erosion of the morale of

his troops.” 62/
117
TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
