Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2, A New Look At the "Plimsoll Line": Alternatives to Increases
Restudied

Shortly after the first hard signs of resistance began to surface
in May an SNIE analyzing Soviet attitudes and intentions toward the
Vietnam war was published. It was an SNIE which in effect reinforced
the fears which many held about increasing the intensity of the Viet-
namese conflict. The SNIE concluded that at some point the USSR would
create an atmosphere of heightened tension with the United States if,
in fact, U.S. force increases and intensified bombing continued. In
the words of the estimate:

The Soviets might take certain actions designed to
bolster North Vietnam and possibly to warn the United
States such as the provision of limited numbers of volun-
teers or crews for defense equipment or possibly aircraft.
They might also break off negotiations with the United
States on various subjects and suspend certain agreements
now in effect. The mining or the blockade of the North
Vietnamese coast would be most likely to provoke these
responses, since this would constitute a direct challenge
to the Soviets and there would be little they could do
on the scene. 20/

This document, coming as it did at such a crucial juncture in the
deliberations over ground force strategy and deployments in Vietnam, had
a Significant impact upon the thinking of those charged with making the
decision of "go" or "no go," and the document itself was quoted through-
out some of the explicit development of alternatives which followed its
publication in both Systems Analysis and in ISA.

As McNaughton worked on a series of drafts preparing the 19 May
DPM which was to follow, a number of leads were being pursued through-
out the government, all related in some way to relieving the pressures
for more United States troops in Vietnam. One of these was a directed
effort to obtain more allied troops especially from the nations on the
periphery of South Vietnam or near Southeast Asia. On 4 May McNaughton
asked that an analysis of South Vietnamese troop deployments in relation
to population of the participating countries be prepared. This analysis,
based upon population of the countries involved, concluded that for an
increase of 100,000 U.S. troops the "allocable" share for various
countries would range from 14.5 thousand for Korea to 53.4 thousand
for Indonesia. For the debails of this particular study see the following
table: 21/

129 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
