Lag|

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Director, DIA, in a special report to the Secretary of Defense,
expressed concern that the declaration of martial law "will have serious
repercussions throughout the country." He foresaw further coup or counter-
coup activity in the making, though for the time being the military had
effectively assumed full control. So far, he saw little military effect
on the war effort; relatively few troops had been withdrawn from normal
missions. 37/ At an August 31 review of the problem for Vice President
Johnson, Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary McNamara agreed that U.S.
planning had to be based on two principles--that the U.S. would not pull
out of Vietnam until the war were won, and that it would not participate
in a coup d'etat against Diem. 38/

For the next month, as the precarious political situation balanced on
the brink of imminent disaster, U.S. anxieties mounted. The Administration
was confronted by a dilemma. It was helpless to ameliorate conditions as
long as Diem remained in power--nor did it want to approve and support such
a regime. Yet at the same time, it was equally helpless to encourage 4
change of government-~there was no feasible replacement anywhere on the
South Vietnamese political horizon. The upshot was an ambivalent policy
of watchful waiting toward the GVN, while the main preoccupation and focus
of attention was on the conduct of the South Vietnamese military forces
and the progress of the counterinsurgency programs. These still remained
the first order of business.

MeNAMARA-TAYLOR MISSION TO SOUTH VIETNAM, OCTOBER 1963

By the middle of September, the President was deeply concerned over
the critical political situation, but more importantly, over its effect
on the war. A decision juncture had been reached. At issue was the U.S.
military commitment in South Vietnam; a redirection of U.S. policy and
objectives might be required. On 21 September, the President directed
the Secretary of Defense, in company with the Chairman, JCS, to proceed
to South Vietnam for a personal examination of the military aspects of the
situation. The President gave as the purpose of the trip ". . . my desire
to have the best possible on-the-spot appraisal of the military and para-
military effort to defeat the Viet Cong." He stated that there had been,
at least until recently, “heartening results," but that political deteriora-
tion since May had raised serious questions about the continued effective-
ness of these efforts and the prospects for success. The President, there-
fore, needed an assessment of the present situation, and if the McNamara-
Taylor prognosis were not hopeful, they were to recommend needed actions
by the SVN and steps the U.S. should take to bring about those actions. 39/

The Secretary of Defense and the CJCS, accompanied by a team of civ-
ilian and military assistants to help in the survey, arrived in South Vietnam
on 26 September and returned to Washington on 2 October. During their visit,
' detailed data were compiled for them, presentations prepared, extensive
briefings given, conferences convened, and consultations held. Bnerging
from the investigations and appraisals was a body of positive evidence

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
