Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

North Vietnam's power plants before the bombing. It
appears that sufficient electricity for war-related
activities and for essential services can be provided
by the some 2,000 diesel-driven generating sets which
are in operation. 10/

Second, the people were inured to hardship and by all the evidence
supported the government:

-«sthe people of North Vietnam are accustomed to
discipline and are no strangers to deprivation and
death. Available information indicates that, despite
some war weariness, they remain willing to endure hard-
ship and they continue to respond to the political
direction of the Hanoi regime. There is little reason
to believe that any level of conventional air or naval
action short of sustained and systematic bombing of
the population centers will deprive the North Vietnamese
of their willingness to continue to support their
govermment's efforts. ita

Third, NVN's leaders were hard to crack, at least so long as their cause
in the South was hopeful:

There is nothing in the past reaction of the North
Vietnamese léaders that would provide any confidence that
they can be bombed to the negotiating table. Their regard
for the comfort and even the lives of the people they
control does not seem to be sufficiently high to lead them
to bargain for settlement in order to stop a heightened
level of attack.

The course of the conflict on the ground in the south,
rather than the scale of air attack in the north appears
to be the determining factor in North Vietnam's willingness
to continue. 12/

The second alternative aim might be to stop the flow of
supplies to the South, either through an expanded campaign against the
supply routes within NVN or by closing sea and land importation routes
to NVN, or both. But it was doubtful whether heavier bombing of the
L0Cs could choke off the required flow:

..-the capacity of the lines of communication and of
the outside sources of supply so far exceeds the minimal
flow necessary to support the present level of North

P TOP SECRET - Sensitive
i,
