Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(5) " ... the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend the immediate
establishment of a small United States military aid group in Indochina...
The Joint Chiefs of Staff would expect the senior member of this group to
sit in consultation with military representatives of France and Vietnam and
possibly of Leos and Cambodia. In addition to screening requests for materiel,
he would be expected to insure full coordination of military plans and efforts
between the French and Vietnamese forces and to supervise the allocation of
materiel."

(6) "Lhe Joint Chiefs of Staff believe in the possibility
of success of a prompt coordinated United States program of military,
political, and economic aid to Southeast Asia and feel thet such a success
might well lead to the gaining of the initiative in the struggle in that
general area."

The last of these points is clearly fundamental to the under-
taking of any program of assistance; yet in the Chiefs' memorandum it |
appears only as the concluding portion of the paragraph (paragraph 15) recom-
mending establishment of a military aid group in Indochina, and is subse-
quently subjected to the qualification that “attainment of United States
objectives in Asia can only be achieved by ultimate success in China."

More remarkable, however, is the rarity with which even such equivocal
predictions of suecess appear in the available documents relating directly

to the decision to provide assistance to Indochina. Direct statements on
the probable effectiveness of such United States programs of the period

are typically absent; indirect statements are typically of the implied-
imperative ("we must do X iff Asia is to be saved"), or the negative-imperative
(if we do not do X, Asia will be lost"). There was no assurance of military
success given; and the calculus of the decision-making process relating to
the weighing of the probability of success against the costs of failure of
U.S. programs in the 1950 period is not evident, wfortunately, in available
documents.

d. Presidential Approval

On May 1, 1950, President Trwnaan approved the allocation of
$10 million to the Department of Defense to cover the early shipment of
urgently needed military assistance items to Indochina, 35/ thus taking
the first crucial decision regarding U.S. military involvement in Vietnam.
On May 8, the Secretary of State, in a statement at the ministerial level
meeting in Paris, announced United States assistance to the Associated
States and France. And on May 24, the governments of France and the
Associated States were notified of the United States intention to establish
an economic aid mission to the Associated States, thus marking the imple-
mentation of the recommendations of the Griffin Mission.

On June 27, 1950, President Truman, in announcing the onset
of the Korean war, also stated that he had "directed acceleration in the
furnishing of military assistance to the forces of France and the Associated
States in Indochina and the dispatch of a military mission to provide close

10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
