Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

IS”
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Secretary Enthoven pointed out that differences in spending associated
with different deployments were small in CY 67 relative to the uncer-
tainty about spending for a given deployment. However, he also added
that if Lodge's expenditure program were achieved, it was likely that
at best the rate of inflation would be reduced to about 20% per year.
At this rate, he estimated that even Program 3 would cost nearly 50
billion piasters.

3. The JCS: Issue Papers and World Wide Posture

Meanwhile, the Joint Chiefs of Staff had completed their review
of CINCPAC's 18 June requirements for CY 66 and 67 and the issue papers
which the Secretary of Defense had given them on 5 August. On 24 September,
they forwarded their review of these requirements and their answers to the
issue papers. L6/ This document was reviewed by Dr. Enthoven's office
and on 29 September, he sent a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense. He
reported that deletions of requirements by CINCPAC and the JCS totaled
49,000 personnel of the 215,000 add-on requirements for US forces in
PACOM (excluding Hawaii). Of the deletions, 39,000 were included in the
issue papers. He added that his SEA Programs Division was in the process
of analyzing the detailed rationale for the remaining requested units and
that new deployment issue papers would be provided to the Secretary of
Defense for his approval on 3 October. 46a/ Apparently, the Secretary of
Defense approved them for on 6 October he forwarded another set of deploy-
ment issue papers to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, asking
that they review the issues and have their recommendations for him by
1 November when he planned to make his decision on the papers. The items
considered in the issue papers totaled some 54,000 troops out of CINCPAC's
total request of 569,000 for deployment to South Vietnam. The leading
items considered were the 15,000 troops (9,000 Army and 6,000 AF) which
were involved in IV Corps operations and 12,000 Artillery troops.

By this time, Secretary Mclamara. had already decided to make a trip
to Saigon to see if he could get a better feel for the situation there.
However, before he departed, the Joint Chiefs of Staff forwarded to him
& paper analyzing the world-wide military posture of the United States in
light of the August CINCPAC requirements study for CY 1967. 47]

Assuming that there would be no call-up of reserves, no change in
rotation policies, and thet resources for the proposed deployments would
be obtained from the world-wide military structure, the impact of meeting
the CINCPAC 1967 requirements, as they saw it, would be tremendous. The
Army would suffer most, meeting the CINCPAC requirements (12 additional
maneuver battalions) on the average six to eight months late, and in the
process emasculating CONUS STRAF, leaving it but two airborne brigade
forces for 1967 and the first part of 1968. Other NATO reinforcing
division forces could not be ready from the Army until late 1968. USAREUR,
USARAL and PACOM reserve would all be at a reduced level because of
~ “qualitative personnel withdrawals." In total, the Army would have a

force deficiency of three and two-thirds active division forces if it
were to satisfy strategic reserve and*sustaining base requirements.

79 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
