Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Military and other related actions were also discussed:
Secretary Rusk indicated the need to surface the GVN maritime operations,
and Ambassador Taylor Suggested that they and other morale-raising ac-
tions could be made public "in one package." In discussing the possible
need for additional airfields in the northern part of South Vietnam, it
was pointed out that a new jet field might take two years. Secretary
McNamara said he thought there were enough fields to suppert Option C
now if certain readily accessible improvements were added. He and the
generals (‘heeler and Taylor) reminded the group that stopping the move-
ment of U.S. dependents to South Vietnam or Withdrawing those already
there could not be concealed and that this problem must be resolved
promptly -- certainly within the initial 30 days. Taylor cautioned that
actions regarding dependents could not be taken until our full course
was decided, presumably because of potential GVN fears of a U.S. with-
drawal. The question of resumed DE SOTO Patrols was raised with the
reminder that CINCPAC wanted them for intelligence purposes. Taylor,
MclNemara and McGeorge Bundy opposed the idea, while General Wheeler
strongly supported it. Hotes of the meeting indicate resolution to the
effect that the patrols should not be resumed during the first 30-day
period. It was also agreed to recommend joint U.S/GVi planning of
reprisal actions and of further escalatory measures, 139/

At some point during the meeting it was determined that William
Bundy would undertake preparation of a draft national security action
paper containing policy guidance for the approaching period. The paper
was to describe the strategic concept, outline the actions to be taken
during the initial 30-day period, and indicate likely follow-on measures
and the conditions under which they might be implemented. It was decided
that the paper would be reviewed at another meeting of the Principals on
30 November, before submission to the President. A White House meeting
had been scheduled for the following day. 140/

On the afternoon of the 30th, in Secretary Rusk's conference
room, the Principals met again. Bundy's draft paper had been distri-
buted to them earlier after being generally approved (re format) by Rusk
and reviewed for substance by Messrs. McNaughton and Forrestal. ly/

In describing the basic concept, the paper presented U.S, objec-
tives as "unchanged," although giving primary emphasis to our aims in
South Vietnam, However, getting the DRV to remove its support and direc-
tion from the insurgency in the South, and obtaining their cooperation
in ending VC operations there, were listed among the basic objectives
-- not presented as a strategy for attaining them. The objectives were
to be pursued in the first 30 days by measures including those contained
in Option A, plus U.S, armed route reconnaissance operations in Laos.
They were linked with Ambassador Taylor's rationale that these actions
would be intended primarily "to help GVN morale and to increase the costs
and strain on Hanoi." The concept also included Taylor's emphasis on

. 49 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
