Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

OEULKE]

bitter and destructive guenes te pees In this the French supsri-
ority in arms and equipr wes Dhisneea by the size or the country,
the Gifficnlty of gin, and “ne hostisacy of whe preas Sulit of
the pepulatione

Tho realization thet pacification of the sountry by force, even
4f possible, Would De a lung and costly prosess, and fear that world
public opinion might force Ui0 or amcrican intervention caused the
French eoverninent to shift policy im the spring of 1946 end replace
Admiral c’Arcenlieu by & civilian, I Emilie BCLLABRT, as High Con-
missioner. He was sen? to Saigon yith no precise instructions but
with the hope thot he could reach agreement with someone and step the

fighting.

fo the situation on April i, fee when he arrived in
Inaockins, developments in the- Prone and in mache 1 politicel situ-
eek ees, co 8. mu NS be kept in mind. The st important was un-
‘ 4.

208
tyeen the Western powers anc Moscov.
oO neg i

(S VEX ic
When “the ‘Fronch pivee necented to negotiate with ilo Chi Minh, his
Communist background was of minor importance. France was an ally of
Russian; and the French Communists were an important element in the

conlition gavernment in-Parise in the year that nassed befors Pollacrt
arrived on the seens, the internationnl crisis hai become clear, ths
Commun ae were no longer in the French Government, and the fact that
the Vict tinh was Cemmimist controzled became an cee ortant political

% g50n decided that the resumption of negotiations

ari
ch

actor. Thus Roliner
with Ho was impossible.
ae deci Sion t9 crestoa new political foree areand the ex+
Emperor Enc Daa cnd the lengthy and Gerace nIBOcLAGIcnSs “xhich fol-
lowed is are deseribed in come: detas 1 in the annox to this memo-~
randum- As it finally tock form, what. is eontaniy called the Rollaert-—

= 4
Ps) vw
Bao Dai soluticn may be summarized as follows:

a. It wee nocessary to recapture from the Communists
control ef the ees Nationalist movements.

be To do this it was necessary to ereup together anti-
Communist forces around some political fifure with nations
restigo aud influence. Pao: Dai was selected - with ecnsider-

able reivevance” - Since it was felt thet traditional monarchism

fc
wae still a foree amene tho people, (and because it was fels
that his French ccuc.tion and the faet that his wife is « devout

Catnaolic would miko Aim /a. more reasonable person to dernl with).

¢. An agreorens would be negotiated VEEh Rao Dai granting
the minimum Nationalist demends.

a, eo Dei would. return
which weld bo a pole of aber
ing Eo Cha Minh irish wera x

( To Foes bly

* This reluctance was net only

« bao Dai has no
enthusiasm to exchange the picasures of the Riviere fer a difficuls
oe

<n eee “ = og
and @angerous posivien in Hus.
