Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

power. On 25 August 1945, the Viet Minh sponsored a meeting at which a
government entitled "Provisional Executive Committee of the Southern
Vietnam Republic" was formed. The Committee of the South, though domi-
nated by Tran Van Giau and other members of the ICP, purported to repre-
sent both the Viet Minh and the United National Front, and to be the
southern arm of Ho Chi Minh's Hanoi government. The United National
Front was represented at the 25 August meeting, but formal negotiations
for an alliance between the Viet Minh and the Front did not commence until
30 August. The following is purported to be a transcript of the proceed-
ings of this meeting, following a report by Tran Van Giau as Chairman of
the Executive Committee of the South:

“Huynh Phu So (Hoa Hao leader) - 'Will Mr. Giau let us know
what groups formerly secretly collaborated with the Viet Minh,
and later publicly participated in it?’

"Tran Van Gieu - 'In Nembo (Cochinchina) during the under-
ground stage, these were the parties in the Viet Minh Front:
the Indochinese Communist Party, the New Vietnam Democratic
Party (Tan Dan Chu Dang), the Youth for National Liberation
(Than-Nien Cuu. Quoc), the officials for National Liberation
(Quan-Nhan Cuu Quoc), the Vietnam National Party (Viet-Nam
Quoc Cia Dang), and now the United National Front.’

"Tran Van Thach (Trotskyist ['Struggle"7 leader) - 'When was
the Executive Committee established and who chose it? Will Front
policy be followed and will there be communication with the Front?
Adn since this assembly is held today, would the Government act
in line with the Assembly, or is this the only meeting to be
held?'

"“Pran Van Giau - 'Now, I will answer Mr. Thach. The establish-
ment of the Executive Committee was not my sole decision. It was
established some time ago in order to take over the government.

The Executive Committee is only a temporary one, pending the t
national election. In the interim, no one is willing to take

power or obey orders. Although Mr. Thach's questions was not

fully explained, I can tell what is in his mind. He would like

to ask why a man like himself did not have a position in the
government. Isn't that so, Mr. Thach? I repeat that this
Government is only a temporary one. Later on when we have the
general elections, if he is capable, Mr. Thach needn't worry

about not having a seat in the Government. As for the work of

the parties, between you and me, we will meet again.'

"Huynh Van Phuong (Intellectual Group) - "Due to the cir-
cumstances that now face us, the United National Front felt that
there should not be two fronts in the country. For this reason,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-31
