Xy

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ve Back THE KENWEDY COMMITMENTS AND PROGRAMS , 1961
SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS

When Kennedy took office, the prospect of an eventual crisis in
Vietnam had been widely recognized in the government, although nothing
much had yet been done about it. Our Ambassador in Saigon had been
sending worried cables for a year, and twice in recent months (in
September 1960 and again in December) had ended an appraisal of the
situation by cautiously raising the question of whether the U.S. would
not sooner or later have to move to replace Diem. Barely a week after
taking office, Kennedy received and approved a Counter-Insurgency Plan
(CIP) which, at what seems to have been a rather leisurely pace, had been
going through drafting and staffing for the previous eight months.

The CIP was a most modest program by the standard we have become
accustomed to in Vietnam. It offered Diem financial support for a 20,000
man inerease in his army, which then stood at 150,000; plus support for
about half of the counter-guerrilla auxiliary force known as the Civil
Guard. In return, it asked Diem for a number of reforms which appeared
to the American side as merely common sense -- such as straightening out
command arrangements for the army under which 42 different officials
directly responsible to Diem (38 province chiefs, 3 regional commanders,
and a Chief of Staff) shared operational command.

The CIP was superseded in May by an enlarged version of the same
program, and the only longer term significance the original program held
was that it presumably offered the Administration a lesson in dealing with
Diem (and perhaps, although it was not foreseen then, a lesson in dealing
with Vietnamese governments generally.) The negotiations dragged on and
on; the U.S. military and eventually most of the civilians both in Saigon
and Washington grew impatient for getting on with the war; Diem promised
action on some of the American points, and finally even issued some decrees,
none of which were really followed up. For practical purposes, the list of
"essential reforms" proposed as part of the CIP, including those Diem had
given the impression he agreed to, could have been substituted unchanged
for the list of reforms the U.S. requested at the end of the year, with
equal effect, as the quid pro quo demanded for the much enlarged U.S. aid
offer that followed the Taylor Mission.

Negotiations with Diem came to an end in May, not because the issues
had been resolved, but because the U.S. decided to forget trying to pressure
Diem for a while and instead try to coax him into reforming by winning his
confidence. Partly, no doubt, this reflected the view that pressure was

“3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
