Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"So this is a difficult and complex world. I am sure a citizen in
this commmity and in this country must wonder what we are doing. I
think what we are trying to do is comparatively simple, and that is, with
our own power and might -- and the only country which has thet power and
might -- and, I believe, the long-range determination and perseverance,
we are trying to assist the hundred-odd countries which are now inde-
pendent to maintain their independence. We do thet notonly because we
wish them to be free, but because it serves our Own national interest.
As long as there are all of these countries separate, free, and inde-
pendent, and not part of one great monolithic bloc which threatens us,
so long we are free and independent.

"When it appeared at the end of the fifties that there would be
over a billion people organized in the Communist movement, Russia and
China and Eastern Europe working closely together, that represented a
danger to us which could turn the balance of power against us. As there
has been a division within the bloc, as there has been a fragmentation
behind the Iron Curtain, as the long-range interests of geography and
nationalism play a part even behind the Iron Curtain, as it does on this
side of the Iron Curtain, we have made progress, not toward an easier
existence, but, I think, toward a chance for a more secure existence.

"In 1961 the United States and the Soviet Union came face to face
over Berlin. The United States called up more than 150,000 troops.
At the meeting in Vienna, of 1961, Mr. Khrushchev informed me that he
was going to sign a peace treaty in Berlin by the end of the year, and
if the United States continued to supply its forces in Berlin it would
be regarded as a possible act of war. In 1962 we came face to face with
the same great challenge in Cuba, in October. So we have lived, even in
the short space of the last 3 years, on two occasions when we were
threatened with a direct military confrontation. We wish to lessen that
prospect. We know that the struggle between the Communist system and
ourselves will go on. We know it will go on in economics, in produc-
tivity, in ideology, in Latin America and Africa, in the Middle East and
Asia."

x —

kv. President Kennedy's Remarks at the High School Memorial Stadium
Great Falls, Montana, September 20, 193, Public Papers of the
Presidents, Kennedy, 1953, p. Te7:

"T know that there are many of you who sit here and wonder what it.
is that causes the United States to go so far away, that causes you to
wonder why so many of your sons should be stationed so far away from our
own territory, who wonder why it is since 1945 that the United States has
assisted so many countries. You must wonder when it is all going to end
and when we can come back home. Well, it isn't going to end, and this
generation of Americans has to make up its mind for our security and for

c-k3 |
