Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a oe
Hy SE | ila: Mg }
Ya Broo 2 ne

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
WASHINGTON 25, D. C.

emily ete Tair

13 October 1950

MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL MALONY

I have been reading over the draft statement of US policy
on Indochina, in the light of the message which the French
Premier sent Defense Minister Moch, who gave it to Secretary
Marshall. This message, along with other French expressions,
highlights the crux of the Indochina problem - the French
are trying too little, too late, and not very hard, They
have shown no vigorous leadership nor enlightened capacity.
This observation leads to a number of implacable principles
regarding U.S. policy on Indochina,

We must avoid, at all costs; the commitment of U.S. armed
forces, even in a token or small scale fashion, for combat
operations. Such a commitment would lead the French to shake
off responsibilities and show even less initiative in Indochina.
There are too many undone things to even consider such a
commitment et this stage. And, even as a last resort, there
would be serious objections to such a commitment from the U.S.
point of view. U.S. officials mist be on guard against French
attempts to pressure or panic us into some sort of a commitment.
Failing to get a satisfactory statement from the U.S., the
¥French,over the next few months, may try a little psychological
warfare on us. . They may speak hovelessly of a coming Dunkirk.
They may intimate the necessity tn come to an understanding
with the Chinese Communists, They may threaten to throw the
problem into the United Nations, either in a political ora
military way, The best defense against such tactics will be
to make the French pull themselves up by their own efforts.

All the current phases of the Indochina problem seem to
lead to the conclusion that the proposed military staff talks
will provide the most effective leverage for reversing the
present defeatist management of the military aspect of
Indochina, Our talks with the military representatives in

CC; Mr, Dickinson, Jt Secretaries

COP e
