Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Even prior to this article, there had been a great deal of speculation
in the press concerning the need for additional troops in SVN, and the
general conclusion seemed to be that some additions would be required.
Members of Congress had already demanded that Congress be consulted
before any decision was made to increase troop strength in Vietnam
significantly. A number of prominent senators had interrupted debate
on civil rights on 7 March to make this demand because of "disturbing
information that a Presidential Decision was imminent." 80/

The Sheehan article appeared one day before Secretary of State Dean
Rusk appeared to testify before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
His 2-day grilling indicated a considerable growth in open dissent
within the Committee concerning U.S. policy in South Vietnam. Rusk even
came under criticism from one of the few Administration supporters on
the Committee, Senator Karl E. Mundt (R-SD), who warned him, "You are
as aware as we are that the shift of opinion in this country is in
the wrong direction" - meaning away from support of U.S. policy in Viet-
nem. "Something more convincing," said Mundt, "has to come from the
Administration as to what this is all about ‘to match' the sacrifices
.we are making." Rusk sidestepped all attempts by Senators Fulbright,
Gore, and other questioners to pin him down on a possible increase in
troops or Other element of future Vietnam strategy. It would "not be
right for me to speculate about numbers of possibilities," said Rusk,
"while the President is consulting his advisors." 81/

Later, on 12 March, both friends and foes of the President's policy
in Vietnam served notice that the present course must be reassessed
before more troops were sent to Vietnam.

"Senator Fulbright (D-Ark), Foreign Relations Committee chairman,
warned against an escalation that could lead to ‘all-out war,' and
insisted during a televised hearing with Dean Rusk, Secretary of State,
that Congress be consulted before crucial new decisions are made."

But Senator Russell (D-Ga), Armed Services Committee chairman, took
a different tack, contending that air and sea power should be used to
the fullest extent before ground-force levels are increased.

"Tf we are not willing to take this calculated risk," Russell told
a Veterans of Foreign Wars dinner, "we should not still be increasing
the half-million men in Vietnam who are exposed to danger daily from
weapons that might have been kept from the hands of our enemies." 82/

These comments from two powerful committee chairmen demonstrated
the cross-currents of opinion swirling around the President as he con-
templated General Westmoreland's request and the recommendations of his

advisors.

70 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
