Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET s Sensitive

noted adverse political trends stemming from Diem's “authoritarian
role" and predicted that, while no short-term opposition was in
prospect:

"Over a longer period, the accumulation of grievances among
various groups and individuals may lead to development of a
national opposition movement .. .”

There was no NIE published between 1956 and 1959 on South Vietnam:
an NIE of May 1959 took the position that Diem had a serious military
problem on his hands:

"The /GVN/ internal security forces will not be able to
eradicate DRV supported guerrilla or subversive activity in
the foreseeable future. Army units will probably have to be
diverted to special internal security assignments .. .”

The same NIE noted a waning of popular enthusiasm for Diem, the existence
of some disillusionment, "particularly among the educated elite," some
"dissatisfaction among military officers," but detected little "identifi-
able public unrest":

"The growth of dissatisfaction is inhibited by South
Vietnam's continuing high standard of living relative to that
of its neighbors, the paternalistic attitude of Diem's
government towards the people, and the lack of any feasible
alternative to the present regime."

The 1959 NIE again expressed serious reservations about Diem's
leadership and flatly stated that:

"The prospects for continued political stability in
South Vietnam hang heavily upon President Diem and his
ability to maintain firm control of the army and police.
The regime's efforts to assure internal security and its
belief that an authoritarian government is necessary to
handle the country's problems will result in a continued
repression of potential opposition elements. This policy
of repression will inhibit the growth of popularity of the
regime and we believe that dissatisfaction will grow,
particularly among those who are politically conscious ... ."
Despite these reservations, U.S. policy remained staunchly and fairly
uncritically hehind Diem through 1959.

The National Intelligence Estimates reservations re Diem do not
appear to have restrained the National Security Council in its two
major reviews of U.S. policy between 1954 and 1960. In 1956, the NSC
(in policy directive NSC 5612) directed that U.S. agencies would:

ao TOP SECRET - Sensitive
