Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

In recent weeks the rrenech have nebively supported proposals
for a power cooperation in Southeast ‘kein te prevent the svread of
Communism, and there has been much talk sbous the stritogic importence
bastion agrinst the southward spread of Chinese

|
bh,

of Ae Me cal
Commanists.

As far as the amnamites sre concerned, they were encouraged
to believe that after the cefent of Japan we would assist them in ob-
taining indepondencee As it boeame apparent that our sympathies were
tompered by strategic consicorations in Burepe, the popularity of tho
United States has diminished. Hevertheless, ane prostigs of the
United States is still mae and eyen Ho, Chi Minh has been careful to
provent any public anti-American propaganda.

y

2. China - Tho civilization of ths Victnam is essentially Chinasa,
and political and cultural ties have been close throughout the con-
turies. Nevertheless, there is little sympathy or natural liking
betiveen the twe races lnrgely because of the fear of future Chinese
expansion and jealousy of the large Chinese minority which controls

ost of the business and trade of the country. The Chinese occupying
forces in Tonkin and northern Annam left behind ea bitter memery.

2

In the French-ChinesSs Treaty of 1946, France esranted important
concessions in China. These ineluded the return of the French con-
cession in Shanghai and the leased territory of Kwanechow, the saic of

the Chinese portions of the Yunnan Kailrond, a free vort in Haiphong,

and the continuation of free Chinese inmigratic nee? southern Indo-
china. The latter tvo provisions angered Vietnam leaders, and there

have been repeated warnings that since they wer ee corsulted in
drafting the troaty, they did not consider themselves bound to honor
i% when they regainod their independence. Attacks on Chinese imnai-
gration are frequent in the native press. The French nubhor Silas.

‘have boon far from reluctant to heed the voice of public opinion, and
are endcavoring.to check imnigration by strict enforcement of quarantine

and other Ea

.
The problem of Chinese Comnunis

tS will be treated ima sub-
sequent section. . —
am Philippines - Political anc economic reletions tareen Indo-
chins. ana the Philippine 1 Republic are of surprising}>; minor importance.
Thore is not even o Philippine Consylate in Bsigone Vietnam political
Jesters are much interested in Philinpine ingependence and the nature
of the political, military, snd economic agreements with the United

4. Sian - Tha cession of Sombon tas. and Laotian air ety ee to Sian
under Japanese pressure in 1941 lort French-Siamose relations in
dangercus geste wher bho war cndod. After prolonged negotiations,

er

Sian returned the provinces but has never officially accepted the
decision of the conciliation commission.

With the advent of pmver of Marshal PHIBUN the Prench have
Port mporove relations with Siam. Agrceoments

fores i
vero concluded Iast year for Sea ation in prevonting smuggling and

movements

166 .
