Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

satisfying in terms of suggesting that the U.S, entered into its expanded
effort at the beginning of 1962 with its eyes wide open and fully aware
of just what it was doing. The available record indicates that the U.S,
hopefully assumed that material aid and good intentions would be adequate
to the task, that a larger U.S. presence would spur the Vietnamese to
effective action without incurring the stigma of a U.S. "takeover," and
that the increase in assistance would be -~ in and of itself -- accepted
as an adequate quid pro quo for the desired reforms within GV.

GVN organizational reform would be realized, NASM 111 suggested, by
getting Diem to agree to clean up his lines of authority in exchange for
the U.S. commitment to the limited partnership. One section of the docu-
ment is a list of approved U.S, actions; another sets forth the expected
improvements to be accomplished by GVN. 68/ Ambassador Nolting was
instructed to use the substance of these decisions in talks to secure
Diem's approval. He found Diem despondent that the U.S. asked so much in
return for so little, played into the hands of those who claimed undue
American infringement upon Vietnamese sovereignty, and placed him in a
position where he feared even to make known to his own cabinet the Ameri-
can expectations. 69/ Unless the U.S. were to suspend its increased aid,
end at the very time it was just gearing up to provide it, Diem had made
it clear at the beginning that he would govern South Vietnam in his way
and that the U.S. had no choice but to support him wholeheartedly, get out,
or find an acceptable alternative to him. The U.S., in turn, had refused
to consider the last two of these alternatives. It was stuck with sup-
porting him, at least for the time being.

WORKING OUT THE BASTS FOR U.S. ADVICE

But the U.S. approach was only partially framed to secure Diem's
acceptance. There was a parallel suggestion that the existence of U.S,
advisors in the field, working hand-in-hand in a counterpart relationship
with Vietnamese, would reform GVN from the bottom up. This line of policy
was neither spelled out in detail nor thought out in terms of operational
implications, risks, and costs. But it clearly existed:

Through this working association at all levels, the U.S,
must bring about de facto changes in Diem's method of admin-
istration and seek to bring all elements of the Vietnamese
Government closer to the Vietnamese people -- thus helping
break the vicious political circle.

By concurrent actions in the fields of intelligence,
command and control, mobility, and training, the U.S. must
bring about a situation where an effective reserve is
mobilized and brought to bear offensively on clearly estab-
lished and productive offensive targets -- thus helping

27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
