Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP: SECRET - Sensitive

Government, and General Khanh issued a statement that he was resuming
power "to resolve the political situation." Soon after, the Buddhist
leaders issued orders to their followers to halt their demonstrations,
at least until they hed sufficient opportunity to observe the perfor-
mance of the new regime. 21ef

Thus, in late January, the United States Government was faced
with a dilemma. In December, it had spoken out quite clearly to the
effect that its continued assistance along previously determined policy
lines was dependent upon the effective functioning of a duly constituted
South Vietnamese Government, By its actions and statements during the
initial December crisis, it had indicated that what it hed in mind was
a Civilian regime governing without interference from any particular
group. Now, less than a month from the settlement of the former crisis
along lines compatible with the preferred U.S. solution, it was faced
with another militery coup. A time for reassessing former policy
decisions and taking stock of the shifting debits and assets in the U.S,
position had arrived.

c. Joint Reprisals. Meanwhile, an issue of great significance
to the Administration, as well as to future relations with the GVN, was
adding to the growing dissatisfaction with progress achieved in other
Phase One actions. One of the basic elements in Phase One policy was to
have been joint Gvii/US reprisal actions in response to any "wnusual
actions" by the VC. jhen faced with a significent provocation at the
end of December, the Administration failed to authorize such actions.

At the time, the circumstances in South Vietnam provided cogent reasons
for not doing so, but it nevertheless represented a significant departure
from the agreed policy position.

At the height of the first government crisis, on Christmas Eve,
the Brink U.S. officers billet in downtown Saigon was bombed and severely
damaged. Two Americans were killed and 58 injured; 13 Vietnamese also
were injured. 213/ No suspicious person was observed near the building,
so the reponsible party was unknown. In reporting the incident, Am-
bassador Taylor treated it as an occasion for reprisal action. The
immediate Administration assessment was that under current political
circumstances, neither the American public nor international opinion
might believe that the VC had done it. Moreover, with clear evidence
lacking, it felt that a reprisal at this time might appear as though
"we are trying to shoot our way out of an internal political crisis."
Given the political disunity in Saigon, the Administration believed "it
would be hard for [the/ American people to understand action to extend
[the] war." Therefore, so the reasoning went, it would be undesirable
to undertake reprisals at that time. However, in cabling this essessment,
Secretary Rusk added: "but we are prepared to meke quick decision if
deh [taylor] make recommendation with different assessment of above
factors or with other factors not covered above." 21h/

ee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
