Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This equivocation charged directly against the mainstream of current
thought as it related to the question of integrating operations abroad.
The "Country Team" concept of the late 1950's, buttressed by a series of
increasingly comprehensive Executive Orders on the subject, assigned
clear primacy to the Ambassador. The State Department was not long in
asserting its claim to leadership in accordance with this prevailing
concept. On 3 Msy it provided a recommended revision of Gilpatric's
task force proposal in which it proposed en interdepartmental task force
under State Department leadership to coordinate the Washington effort and
a counterpart task force in Saigon under Sterling J. Cottrell, then
POLAD to CINCPAC. 4/ It was this proposal which was incorporated into
NSAM 52 later in May. i5/

In retrospect, the Lansdale-Gilpatric proposal to conduct the U.S,
participation in the Vietnamese war through a supra-departmental agency--
whether by & Presidential Task Force or by some other means--probably
never had much of a chance. The Department of Defense had too large an
operational role to agree to leadership of such an undertaking by anyone
other than one of its own principals. (Thus, Gilpatric was acceptable,
but few others would have been; Lansdale almost surely was not acceptable
as the operating chief in RVN.) ‘The State Department had at stake both
the legacy of theoretic interdepartmental primacy and the oft-expressed
hope of giving this theory more meaning abroad. Indeed, it was during this
same month (May 1961) that President Kennedy sent his oft-quoted letter to
each American Ambassador, reminding the recipient of his coordinating
duties even while reaffirming that these did not extend to supervising
operational military forces. ‘The effect in South Vietnam, as distinct
from some other countries, was to preserve claims for independent authority
for each of the major governmental departments involved. The Presidential
letter to Ambassador Frederick BE. Nolting in Saigon read in part:

In regard to your personal authority and responsibility, I
shall. count on you to oversee and coordinate all the activities
of the United States Government in the Republic of Vietnam.

You are in charge of the entire United States Diplomatic
Mission, and I shall expect you to supervise all of its opera-
tions. The Mission includes not only the personnel of the
Department of State and the Foreign Service, but also the
representatives of all other United States agencies which have
programs or activities in the Republic of Vietnam. I shall give
you full support and backing in carrying out your assignment.

Needless to say, the representatives of other agencies are
expected to communicate directly with their offices here in
Washington, and in the event of a decision by you in which
they do not concur, they may ask to have the decision reviewed
by a higher authority in Washington.

However, it is their responsibility to keep you fully

informed of their views and activities and to abide by your
decisions unless in some particular instance you and they

19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
