Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

JCS paper, agreed that the U.S. could not back the French proposal with
its call for a supervised cease-fire that the communists would never
respect. Eisenhower further concurred with the Chiefs' insistence on
priority to a political settlement, with the stipulation that French
forces continue fighting while negotiations were in progress. He added
that the U.S. would continue aiding the French during that period and
would, in addition, work toward a united action coalition "for the
purpose of preventing further expansion of communist power in Southeast
Asia." 10/

_d. NSC Recommends Continued Study of United Action

These statements of position paved the way for a National
Security Council meeting May 8 which set forth the guidelines of U.S.
policy on negotiations for the delegation at Geneva. The decision taken
at the meeting simply underscored what the President and the Chiefs had
already stated:

"The United States will not associate itself with
any proposal from any source directed toward a cease-
fire in advance of an acceptable armistice agreement,
including international controls. The United States
could coneur in the initiation of negotiations for such
an armistice agreement. During the course of such
negotiations, the French and the Associated States
should continue to oppose the forces of the Viet Minh
with all the means at their disposal. In the meantime,
as a means of strengthening the hands of the French and
the Associated States during the course of such negotia-
tions, the United States will continue its program of
aid and its efforts to organize and promptly activate a
Southeast Asian regional grouping for the purpose of
preventing further expansion of Communist power in South-
east Asia.” 11/ )

e. U.S. to Be an "Interested Nation," Not_a Negotiator

Before receiving detailed instructions from Dulles, Smith
spoke twice at the first round of plenary sessions, once on May 10
(the second plenary) and again on May 12 (at the third). At these
sessions, Smith brought home two major points of U.S. policy: first,
he declined to commit the U.S. in advance to a guarantee of the settle-
ment, despite Bidault's call for all the participants to make such a
guarantee; 12/ second, he proposed that national elections in Vietnam
be supervised by an international commission “under United Nations
auspices." Smith stressed that the UN should have two separate functions --
overseeing not only the cease-fire but the elections as well. Both these
points in Smith's speech were to remain cardinal elements of U.S. policy
throughout the negotiations. 13/ On 12 May Smith received instructions
clearly designed to make the U.S. an influential, but unentangled and

A-10 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
