Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

147.
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

not new Minh seemed particularly discouraged...When analyzed,
most of Minh's comments in military field are occasioned by
lack of overall coordination and cooperation. This re-empha-
sizes absolute necessity for overall plan which would clearly
delineate responsibility and create a teem effort... 42/

Nolting concerned himself, of course, with the civil as well as
military arrangements, but with much the same stress on organizational
and administrative formalities. A striking example was when Nolting
reported that Diem was willing to consider (in response to American urg-
ing of top level administrative reforms) creating a National Executive
Council patterned after the U.S. National Security Council. Nolting was
favorably impressed. His cable notes no concern that under Diem's propo~
sal, Diem's brother Nhu would be chairman of the NEC, although a year
earlier (and of course even more urgently a year or so later) getting Nhu,
and his wife, out of the picture entirely had been seen as the best real
hope of saving the Diem regime.

The report Nolting sent on Taylor's final meeting with Diem also
contains some interesting material. It leaves the impression that Diem
was still not really anxious to get American troops deeply involved in
his country, despite his favorable reaction at the meeting of the elth,
which, in turn, was a reversal of his reaction at the meeting on the
19th. Because of this, the impression left by the whole record is that
Taylor came to the conclusion that some sort of ground troop commitment
was needed mainly because of what he heard from Diem's colleagues and his
military people, rather than from Diem himself.

According to Nolting's cabled account, Diem, although raising
half a dozen issues relating to increased American military aid, did not
mention the flood task force, or anything else that might imply a speciel
interest in getting some sort of ground troops commitment. As seemed the
ease earlier, it was the Americans who pressed the idea of getting American
military people involved in combat. In the only exchange Nolting reported
touching on this issue, he said:

1. Diem stressed importance of reinforcement of aviation:
particularly helicopters. Taylor and I [Nolting/ used this
opportunity to make clear to Diem that we envisaged helicopters
piloted by Americans and constituting American units under
American commanders which would cooperate with Vietnamese mili-
tary commands... 43/

(At a meeting with McGarr November 9. Diem again raised the heli-
copter question, this time taking the initiative in saying he needed
American pilots, but he did not mention the flood task force, or anything
else that might imply a request for ground troops.) 4h/

112
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
