Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

greater risks of civilien casualties in order to achieve
the stated objective. The initial changes in operating
authorities necessary to the initiation of an effective
air campaign are:

a. Delete the 30/10NM Hanoi Restricted/Prohibited
Area and establish a. 3NM Hanoi Control Area (Map, TAB ).

b. Delete the 10/iNM Haiphong Restricted/Pro-
hibited Area and establish a 1.5NM Haiphong Control Area
(Map, TAB ae

e. Delete the Special Northeast Coastal Armed
Reconnaissance Area. 37/

As explanations of how the removal of these restrictions
would achieve the desired results, the Chiefs gave the following arguments:

6. The present Restricted Areas around Hanoi and
Haiphong have existed since 1965. The Prohibited Areas
were created in December 1966. Numerous strikes, however,
have been permitted in these areas over the past two
and one-half years, e.g., dispersed POL, SAM and AAA sites,
SAM support facilities, armed reconnaissance of selected
LOC and attacks of LOC associated targets, and attack of
approved fixed targets. The major political requirements
for having established control areas in the vicinity of
Hanoi and Haiphong are to provide a measure of control of
the intensity of effort applied in consonance with the
national policy of graduated pressures and to assist in
keeping civilian casualties to a minimum consistent with
the importance of the target. These requirements can still
be satisfied in the control areas are reduced to 3INM and
1.5NM around Hanoi and Haiphong, respectively. These new
control areas will contain the population centers, but
permit operational commanders the necessary flexibility
4o attack secondary, as well as primary, lines of com-
munication to preclude NYN from accommodating to the
interdiction of major routes. A reduction ofthe control
areas would expose approximately 140 additional miles of
primary road, rail and waterway lines of communication to
armed reconnaissance, as well as hundreds of miles of
secondary lines of communication, dependent upon NVN reactions
and usage. Additional military targets would automatically
become authorized for-air strikes under armed reconnaissance
operating authorities. This would broaden ‘the target base,
spread the defenses, and thus add to the cumulative effects
of the interdiction program as well as reducing risk of

175 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
