Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

over Indochina. However, it is not the policy of this GoyT
to assist the French to reestablish their control over Indo-
china by force and the willingness of the US to see French
control reestablished assumes that French claim to have the
support of the population of Indochina is borne out by future
events." 25

French statements to the U.S. looked for an early end to the
hostilities, and spoke reassuringly of reforms and liberality. In
November, Jean Chauvel, Secretary-General to the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs, told the U.S. Ambassador that:

"When the trouble with the Annamites broke out de Gaulle
had been urged by the French Mission in India to make some
sort of policy statement announcing France's intention to
adopt a far-reaching progressive policy designed to give the
native population much greater authority, responsibility and
representation in govt. De Gaulle considered the idea but
rejected it because in the state of disorder prevailing in
Indochina he believed that no such policy could be imple-
mented pending restoration of French authority and would
therefore just be considered by everyone as 'merely more fine
words.' Furthermore de Gaulle and the Foreign Minister
believe that the present situation is still so confused and
they have so little information really reliable on the overall
Indochina picture that such plans and thoughts as they held
heretofore may have to be very thoroughly revised in the light
of recent developments.

"Despite the fact that the French do not feel that they
can as yet make any general statements outlining specific
future plans for Indochina, Chauvel says that they hope 'very
soon’ to put into operation in certain areas programs including
local elections which will be designed to grant much greater r
authority and greater voice in affairs to the natives. This
he said would be a much better indication of the sincerity of
French intentions than any policy statement....The French hope
soon to negotiate an agreement with [the King of Cambodia/
which will result in the granting of much greater responsibility
and authority to the Cambodians. He mentioned specifically
that there would be many more natives integrated into the local
administrative services and it was ‘also hoped that local elec-
tions could soon be held. The French he said intend to follow
the same procedure in Laos when the situation. permits and eventu-
ally also in Annam and Tonkin. When order is restored throughout
Indochina and agreements have been reached with the individual
states Chauvel said the French intend to embody the results of
these separate agreements into a general program for all of
Indochina.” 26/

A-23. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
