Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

ing Frence's Aole therein, {s to be continued. Further, they
feel thet, while French Indochina, Thailand, and/or Burma

are being’ defended by other friendly nations, the role of
the United States in support of such defense should be pri-
marily military action against Communist China itself. This
latter ection should, of course, involve military support .
from the British and French as well as from other friendly
nations, but should remain under the control of the United
States, -

20. It will be noted that the foregoing comments ere in
general limited to United States courses of action relative
to Indochina, Thailand, and Burina. The Joint Chiefs of Stair
consider it premature for the National Security Council to
attempt to decide now as to the military courses of ection
which would be teken with respect to Melaya, Indonesia, or

in the Southwest Pacific in the event the integrity of any

| of these is cirectly threatened by foreign aggression which
coulc only follow eggression in Indochina and/or Burma. Ac-
corcingly, in the event that the Chinese Communists threaten
Maleya or Indonesia, the United States should then, in the
light of the world situation generally and the situation in
the Far East specifically at that time, consider the military
. measures it might take as a part of a United Nations collec-
tive action or in conjunction with the United Kingdom and any
“other friendly governments.

21. In the light of all the foregoing, the Joint Chiefs
of Staff recommend that the National Security Council con-
sider

&. Whether the United States, unilaterally, if
necessary, would be willing to extend the war to the
forces and territory of Communist Chine in event of
Communist Chinese military aggression in Southeast Asia;

b. Whether the United States should insist that
French Indochina, Theilend, and/or Burma be defended by
other friendly nations and that the role of the United
States in support of such defense be primarily military
action against Communist China itself; and -

c. Failing freedom of action egainst Communist China
itself, United States policy should “limgt United States
militery onereations to those necessary to cover and
assist possible forced evacuation of the French and/or
the British from their positions.

22, The Joint Chiefs of Staff have a number of suostantive
and specific comments with respect to the statements of policy

TOP SECRET
S2
