Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive LA

f/f P
C. Attitudes West of CONUS

Both CINCPAC and General Westmoreland were very much concerned
during early 1965 with the possible implementation of existing con-
tingency plans, at least two of which as already mentioned, called
. for the input into Southeast Asia of U.S. troop units. The alert
(Phase I) of OPLAN 32-64 was in effect as of 1 January 1965. CINCPAC
clearly indicated that his thinking was geared to contingency plans in
his cabled objections to the proposed deployment of the 173rd Airborne
vice the Marines into Da Nang. 50/ All of his OPLANs had buildup pre-
dicated on the Marines’ use of Da Nang as a base. (CINCPAC is equally
clear in his cable traffic of this period, however, that he is not
immediately thinking in terms of the commitment of U.S. ground forces
in operations against the Viet Cong. In a cable to Chairman Wheeler
on 5 March 1965 he said that "the single most important thing we can
do quickly to improve the security situation in SVN is to make full
use of our air power." He went on in the same cable to say that the
MEB should be deployed to Da Nang as soon as possible for security
and also to give the GVN a boost and the Viet Cong a warning. 51/ 5

General Westmoreland and his staff had been concerned with
planning for the input of U.S. ground troops into South Vietnam in
conjunction with the aforementioned CINCPAC contingency plans since
late 1964. 52/ In view of the enemy's capabilities and the obvious
deficiencies of the ARVN, both of which were all too apparent to ob-
servers in Vietnam (by early 1965), it is hard to see how the military
planners in MACV could have disassociated the deployment of the Marines
from further troop input. In the MACV Command History for 1965 there
are several statements which would tend to confirm sequential thinking
in the MACV staff. On the day the Marines were landing at Da Nang it
is said in the History that "thus step one in the buildup of forces had
been taken and subsequent steps appeared to be assured." 53/ The
History also states that "the Phase II, RVN, portions of OPLAN 32-64
were essentially implemented by the U.S. buildup during 1965, although
on a larger scale than planned." 54/ On 27 March 1965, General
Westmoreland forwarded to CINCPAC his estimate of the situation in
Vietnam and his recommendation for U.S. troop input for offensive
action against the Viet Cong. In that cable COMUSMACV states that his
staff commenced preparation of the estimate and troop recommendations
on 13 March, five days after the Marines went into Da Nang, and the
day after the Army Chief of Staff's departure from Saigon. 55/

Ambassador Taylor was not enthusiastic about any continuation of
troop buildup after the landing of the Marines. He had already stated
his reasons in the lengthy cable of 22 February contained herein. On
3 March, in response to a Department of State query regarding the
possible employment of an international force, Taylor conveyed the text
of a conversation about the MLF between Ambassador Johnson and the
Australian envoy to South Vietnam. The Australian had voiced fears
similar to Taylor's in that he foresaw an increased manifestation of
Vietnamese xenophobia with the input into South Vietnam of foreign
troops, and he feared such a move would cause the GVN "to shuck off

ai TOP SECRET - Sensitive
