Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Target 89, an Armed Route Reconnaissance of Route 7, in the
DRV close to the Laos border. BARREL ROLL missions in Laos’
will be coordinated with air strikes in the DRV near the Laos
border to ensure maximum effectiveness.

a. The targets are attacked in the order of ascending
risk to attacking forces and are attacked at a frequency that
assures that continuous and regular pressure is maintained
against the DRV. Authority should be delegated to CINCPAC to
select alternate weather targets from the list of previously
approved targets for the eight weeks program. Subsequent
weekly operations would be adjusted as appropriate when alter-
nate targets are attacked.

b. Airfields north of the 19th parallel are not
scheduled for attack in the first eight weeks. However, if,
during the scheduled attacks in this program, DRV or CHICOM
aircraft attempt intercept of US/RVN forces, the communist air
threat involved should be eliminated. The program of gradu-
ated pressures would then have reached a higher scale of esca-~
lation and would require reorientation.

The program also provided for naval gunfire bombardment and for con- ©
tinuation of already ongoing activity, including 34A operations, resump-
tion of DESOTO Patrols, and authorization for ground cross border
operations.

To carry out this program, the JCS wished to deploy about 325 more
aircraft to the Western Pacific to deter or cope with any escalation
that might result. This would include dispatch of 30 B-52's to Guam,
deployment of 9 more USAF tactical fighter squadrons and a fourth air-
craft carrier. Some Marine and Army units would go to Thailand, and other
units would be alerted.

As for the risks of escalation, the JCS considered these as manage-
able:

The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the DRV, Communist
China, and the Soviet Union will make every effort through pro-
paganda and diplomatic moves to halt the US attacks. The DRV
also will take all actions to defend itself, and open, overt
aggression in South Vietnam and Laos by the DRV might occur.

In addition, the mere initiation of the new US policy almost
certainly would not lead Hanoi to restrain the Viet Cong;

Hanoi would probably elect to maintain the very intense levels
of activity of the past few days. However, if the United States
persevered in the face of threats and international pressures,
and as the degree of damage inflicted on North Vietnam increased,
the chances of a reduction in Viet Cong activity would rise.

Ls TOP SECRET - Sensitive
