Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

57 a
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Assuming that vital U.S. interests were assessed as being

at stake by an Administration in some unspecified case, the critiquers

went on to outline some additional "conditions for success. First,

an Administration would have to present a solid case to the U.S.

Congress and public and to our allies that the external support pro-

vided by the target nation was instrumental in sustaining the insurgency.

In the interest of making its public case conclusive, the U.S. would

have to be prepared to expose intelligence data. Second, it would have
_ to identify enemy targets "such that limited attacks and the threat of

further attacks would bring great pressure on him to comply. Third,

the U.S. Government would have to be able to communicate its case to

the target nation "including the high degree of U.S. commitment and the

limited nature of our objective." This would involve controlling both

the U.S. and its ally's actions "to convey limited objectives, minimizing

incentives to comply." Finally, it would have to be capable of deter-

mining enemy compliance with our demands. 134/

The critiquers' analysis included an assessment of the ee
and risks to be incurred in applying the thesis and cautioned agains
its adoption as a general declaratory policy:

"Given present attitudes, application of the
Rostow approach risks domestic and international opposi-
tion ranging from anxiety and protest to condemnation,
efforts to disassociate from U.S. policies or alliances,
or even strong countermeasures....

"Currently, then, it is the Rostow approach, rather
than the measures it counters that would be seen generally
as an "unstabilizing" change in the rules of the game, an
escalation of conflict, an increasing of shared, interna-
tional risks, and quite possibly, as an open aggression
demanding condemnation...particularly in general terms or
in abstraction from a specific, immediately challenging
situation.

"On the other hand, the controlled, limited mili-
tary actions implied in the Rostow approach would be far
more acceptable to the extent that they were seen to
follow from Presidential conviction of vital national
necessity in a specific context, and even more to the
extent that this conviction were shared by Congress and the
U.S. public.

' “An attempt to legitimize such actions in general
terms, and in advance of an emergency situation, would
not only be likely to fail, but. might well evoke public :
expressions of domestic and allied Crpede eon eae ~
ations, warnings, counterthreats and binding commitments

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
