Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

include a general staff, a political section and a supply section
and to effect a large-scale reorganization of Ve cadres in ss
southwestern provinces (Fifth Military Region)." (Ibid, p-°7

Behind all this activity were verbal indications of
DRV intent:

"In May 1959, the Central Committee of the Lao Dong Party
passed a resolution or statement stating that the struggle for
reunification would have to be carried out by all ‘appropriate
measures’. British observers have taken this to mean measures
other than peaceful.

"tyou must remember we will be in Saigon tomorrow, WS will be
in Saigon tomorrow', these words were spoken by Premier Fham van
DONG in a conversation with French Consul Georges-Picot on Septem-
ber 12, 1959.

"In November, Pham van Dong twice told Canadian Se oevags Dare)
Erichsen-Brown that ‘we will drive the Americans into the Sea .

(Ibid., pp. 6-7)

b. “ARVN Weaknesses”

",...Numerous high-ranking GVN officials have very recently

stressed the necessity of more anti-guerrilla training for the
security forces. From a military point of view an outstanding
deficiency in the GVN effort has been the government Ss inability,
or lack of desire, to recognize the following factors:

(1) It is actively engaged in an internal war sete
therefore, must take the measures which this situation entails.

(2) There is a great need for a strong central mili-
tary command with wide powers for the conduct of internal
security operations in the unpacified areas.

(3) There is a need for a capable, well-equipped, well-
trained, centrally-controlled Civil Guard to take over from the
Military in pacified areas.

"Tt cannot be emphasized too strongly that the apparent lack
of success in the GVN attempts to reduce the internal threat of
the VC until now has stemmed from the lack of unity of command
in a single operational commander who has the means and the
authority to utilize all of the potential in the area of opera-
tions without regard to province or regional boundaries and
without regard to the existing political subdivision of the
area. Unity of command is the most important basic principle

45 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

