Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET =- Sensitive

culminating in the expansion of the U.S. advisory effort following
General Maxwell D. Taylor's mission to Saigon in October, did not
simply set out to explain this newly-articulated counter insurgency
theory and doctrine to the GVN. They attempted to induce the GVN to
reform itself so that identification with its populace would be possi~
ble. Beyond this, they chose to attempt to help the Vietnamese, in

Taylor's words, “as friends and partners -- not as arms~length advisors ~~
f/and/ show them how the job might be done -~ not tell them or do it for
them,"

The "limited partnership'' which General Taylor proposed ~~ and which

President Kennedy accepted -- was designed to place U.S. advisors at many
levels within the RVNAF and GVN structure rather than merely at the top.
An earlier proposal, to concentrate on advisors at the top with wide dis~
cretionary authority and to count on influence as the product of the
demonstrated commitment of a carefully selected handful of men, was
rejected in favor of many advisors at many levels, each serving normally
only for a twelve month period, and with the advisory manpower furnished
through normal personnel selection and assignment processes within the
military services.

The expectation among U.S. policymakers ~~ recorded in NSAM 111 --
was that the GVN and U.S. would mutually agree upon necessary steps to
end the insurgency. The U.S., for its part, would underwrite an increase
in RVNAF and provide advisors throughout the military structure down to
battalion level and in each provincial capital. The GVN would rationalize
its lines of authority and begin reform measures to bring it closer to the
Vietnamese people. This was, of course, a U.S. expectation, not an agreed
guid pro quo. Diem was unwilling to permit the U.S. to share in his
formulation of plans. He was even afraid to discuss the U.S. expectations
candidly with his own cabinet ministers. It is a matter of record that he
did not reform his government. ("He will not reform because he cannot,"
J. Kenneth Galbraith cabled President Kennedy.) What remains in issue is
whether he could have done so. If he could not, the U.S. plan to end the
insurgency was foredoomed from its inception, for it depended on Viet~
namese initiatives to solve a Vietnamese problem.

COMMITMENT AND EXPECTATION

Thus the U.S. overall plan to end the insurgency was on shaky ground
on the GVN side. Diem needed the U.S. and the U.S. needed a reformed Diem.
As U.S. advisors began deploying to Vietnam for service with tactical
units in the field, the gamble of the mid=50's was transferred into a
broad commitment. President Kennedy and his advisors were determined to
save Vietnam from communism by helping the Vietnamese to save themselves.
One side of the dual U.S. thrust (GVN reform) was already in trouble.

What of the "friends and partners’ who were to share the dangers and tasks
of RVNAF in the field? What was expected of them? What advantages would
accrue from their presence in Vietnam?

The available record is almost totally devoid of any explication

iii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
