Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

there are over-riding military reasons -- which I do not
myself see -- we should not get into such a debate this summer.

"Ground Action Against North Vietnam. I understand this
to be only.a contingency thought in any event. I would be
totally against it, for the simple reason that I believe the
chances are 75-25 that it would bring the Chinese truly into
the war and, almost equally important, stabilize the internal
Chinese situation at least temporarily.

"Iaos. Last Friday we went through General Starbird's
plans for more effective action against the Corridor in Laos.
I think these make sense, although they cannot be expected to
do more than make use of the Corridor somewhat more difficult.
(We should at once get away from linking these with the true
"Obstacle" planned in the eastern area of SVN next to the DMZ.
The two are entirely different, and the words "obstacle" or
"barrier" as related to Laos have very unfortunate political
implications in both Laos and Thailand.) ‘The small ground
force teams Starbird needs in Laos can be handled, in Sullivan's
judgment.

"Beyond this point, Sullivan and I would both be strongly
opposed to any such idea as sending a GVN division into Laos.
It would almost certainly be ineffective, and the ery would
at once go up to send more. Sullivan believes, and I agree,
that Souvanna would object violently and feel that his whole
position had been seriously compromised." 59/

Bundy believed that Cambodia was becoming increasingly important
to the North Vietnamese war effort. Nevertheless, he doubled, at that
stage, if any significant change in our actions in Cambodia could really
affect the supply routes or be worth the La political damage of
appearing to attack Cambodia.

Turning to the bombing in the north he commented:

"E. Additional Action in the North. Of the major tar-
gets still not hit, I would agree to the Hanoi power station,
but then let it go at that, subject only to occasional re-
strikes where absolutely required. In particular, on the air-
fields, I think we have gone far enough to hurt and not far
enough to’ drive the aircraft to Chinese fields, which I think
could be very dangerous.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
86
