oN
xO

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On the judgment that it will not "flash" the Soviet Union
or China -- we should follow Course d (fast escalation).
Failure to resume would serve none of our purposes and

make us appear irresolute. A "flat line" program would
reduce infiltration (but not below PAVN/VC needs) and

would placate GVN and domestic pressures. But this is

not good enough. A fast (as compared with a slow) escala-
tion serves a double purpose -- (1) it promises quickly

4o interdict effectively, i.e., to cut the DRV level of
infiltration to a point below the vc/PAVN requirements,

and (2) it promises to move events fast enough so that

the Chinese "take-over" of North Vietnam resulting from

our program will be a visible phenomenon, one which the

DRV may choose to reject. There is some indication that
China is "smothering North Vietnam with a loving embrace."
North Vietnam probably does not like this but, since it is
being done by "salami slices" in reaction to our "salami-
slice" bombing program, North Vietnam is not inspired to

do anything about it. This condition, if no other, argues
for escalating the war against North Vietnam more rapidly --
so that the issue of Chinese encroachment will have to be
faced by Hanoi in bigger bites, and so that the DRV may
elect for a settlement rather than for greater Chinese.
infringement of North Vietnam's independence. The objec-
tions to the "fast" escalation are (1) that it runs serious
risks of "flashing" the Chinese and Soviets and (2) that

it gets the bombing program against the North “out of phase"
with progress in the South. With respect to the first objec-
tion, there are disagreements as to the likelihood of such
a "flash"; as for the second one, there is no reason why the
two programs should be "in phase" if, as is the case, the
main objective is to interdict infiltration, not to "persuade
the unpersuadable. 3

9. Criticisms of the program. There are a number of

criticisms of the program of bombing North Vietnam:

a. Cost in men and materiel. The program of
bombing tue North through 1965 cost 10C(?) airmen (killed
and missing or prisoner) and 178 US or South Vietnamese
aircraft (costing about $250 (?) million) in addition to
the ammunition and other operating costs. The losses and
costs in 1966 are expected to be 200(?) airmen and 300(?)

aircraft.

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
