Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

formation of national armies in Indochina: (1) French Union Forces
would not be withdrawn from Indochina until such Associated States
armies are fully trained and ready to act effectively in replace-
‘ ment; (2) France would not decrease its outlays for Indochina
below the 1950 rate during the period of the American military
aid requested; (3) the national armies project would have the
approval of the three Associated States governments; (4) the
High Commissioner for Indochina, the French Command, and the
three Associated Stetes would maintain full consultative rela-
tions with the Legation and MAAG during the period of the
formation of the armies."

The Joint Chiefs of Staff reevaluation appeared on October 27:
military aid should be continued on an expedited basis. Again the judgment
was offered that genuine autonomy and self-government had to be extended to
the people of Indochina to ameliorate the basic cause of the deterioration
of security in Indochina: lack of popular support for the authorities. da/
But the most clearly articulated and complete expression of the Joint
Chiefs' over-all position at year end is found in NSC 64/1, 42/ a November
28 paper by the Chief's which takes account of a report from General Brink 43/
and the Southeast Asia Aid Policy Committee's draft of October 11; in fact,
this statement of short- and long-run objectives contained in NSC 64/1 was
to remain the basis of United States policy toward Indochina for the dura-
tion of the French-Indochina war.

"SHORT TERM OBJECTIVES

"a. The United States should take action, as a matter of
urgency, by all means practicable short of the actual employment
of United States military forces, to deny Indochina to Communism.

"b. As long as the present situation exists, the United
States should continue to insure that the primary responsibility
for the restoration of peace and security in Indochina rests
with the French.

"e. The United States should seek to develop its military
assistance program for Indochina based on an over-all military
plan prepared by the French, concurred in by the Associated
States of Indochina, and acceptable to the United States.

"(1) Both the plan and the program should be
developed and implemented as a matter of urgency. It should
be clearly understood, however, that United States acceptance
of the plan is limited to the logistical support which the
United States may agree to furnish. The aid provided under
the program should be furnished to the French in Indochina
and to’ the Associated States. The allocation of United States
military assistance as between the French and the national
armies of Indochina should be approved by the French and
United States authorities in Indochina.

12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
