Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The reference to Manila was less than accidental. Paragraph 28
of the Joint Communique for the conference issued on the 25th of
October 1966 stated:

"The other participating governments reviewed and
endorsed these as essential elements of peace and agreed
they would act on this basis in close consultation among
themselves in regard to settlement of the conflict. In
particular, they declared that Allied forces are in the
Republic of Vietnam because that country is the object of
aggression and its government requested support in the
resistance of its people to aggression. They shall be with-
drawn, after close consultation, as the other side withdraws
its forces to the North, and ceases infiltration, and as the
level of violence thus subsides. Those forces will be with-
drawn as soon as possible and not later than six months after
the above conditions have been fulfilled."

McNaughton noted that President Johnson himself, in private session with
the Heads of State, had negotiated the language of this paragraph. According
to MeNaughton's account, "the President was determined to get the language
in, including the reference to 'six months’ (opposed by State, supported

by me)." 27/

He also qualified statements in the White House draft which seemingly
disregarded considerations of feasibility, for instance, adding that such
increments of the barrier system "as are determined to be militarily and
politically useful and feasible only" should be completed at the early
date specified and that expansion of the scope of offensive operations
should be done only "as made feasible by the increase in FW forces." These
seemingly minor alterations loom significant as indicators of a subtle
shift in approach by both McNamara and McNaughton -- one which was more
skeptical of the familiar projected claims of success and rapid solution
to the South Vietnam problem.

JCS reaction to the draft was three-fold. They wanted to not only
"refine" the bombing offensive, but to "adjust the air and naval offensive
with respect to the extent and quality of targets." 28/ This was pre-
dictable, but the deeper disagreement about national objectives was more
difficult to foretell. This cleavage appeared over two points in the
drart.

The idea of developing any kind of contingency plan on how to handle
ve/NLF in the approaching elections was abhorrent to the JCS. Just as
distasteful was an enlargement of efforts to establish contacts with the
vc/NLF. To them it was

".eInconsistent with the attainment of the US national
objective. It is inconceivable that the VC, instilled with

10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘
