Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"In defense of the Da Nang airbase against surprise
attack by fire, it would be necessary for Marines to be in
place on ground in considerable strength. (MACV has estimated
that about six battalions would be necessary to keep 81mm mor-
tar fire off large airfield.) Even if whole MEB were deployed,
they could not provide complete assurance that surprise mortar
fire by small groups attacking at night would be kept off field.
Protection of field against VC ground attack would be consider-
ably simpler and would require fewer Marines. It is hard to
imagine an attack on field by more than VC regiment and even
an attack in those numbers would be extremely risky in face of
superior friendly air and ground fire. To meet such an attack,
battalion of Marines supported by local ARVN forces should be
sufficient. On other hand, as indicated above, effective
perimeter defense against mortar fire would require at least
whole brigade of Marines.

"Tt has been suggested that an ancillary benefit to
deployment of additional Marines to Da Nang would be freeing
of ARVN units for use elsewhere in mobile operations. While
some ARVN troops of order of battalion might be so relieved,
number would not be sufficient to constitute strong argument
for bringing in Marines. Generally speaking, Marines would
be performing task which has not been done adequately in
past..

"The use of Marines in mobile counter-VC operations has
the attraction of giving them an offensive mission and one of
far greater appeal than that of mere static defense. However,
it would raise many serious problems which in past have appeared
sufficiently formidable to lead to rejection of use of US ground
troops in a counter-guerrilla role. White-faced soldier armed,
equipped and trained as he is not suitable guerrilla fighter for
Asian forests and jungles. French tried to adapt their forces
to this mission and failed; I doubt that US forces could do much
better. Furthermore, we would have vastly complicating factor
of not running war and hence problem of arranging satisfactory
command relationships with our Vietnamese allies., Finally,
there would be ever present question of how foreign soldier
would distinguish between a VC and friendly Vietnamese farmer. _
When I view this array of difficulties, I am convinced that we
should adhere to our past policy of keeping our ground forces
out of direct counterinsurgency role.

"If there were any great likelihood of DRV forces crossing
the Demilitarized Zone in conventional attack, there would be’
no question of need for strong US Ground force to assist ARVN
in defense of coastal plain. However, this situation would not
arise suddenly and we should have ample time to make our
deployments before situation got out of hand. —

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
