62

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

past 9 months, they have demonstrated an ability to
deploy forces into South Vietnam at 4 greater rate than
we are deploying U.S. forces....Considering the course

of the war in South Vietnam and the capability which has
been built up here by the PAVN/VC forces -- the full
impact of which we have not yet felt -- the curtailment
of operations in North Vietnam is unsound from a military
standpoint. Indeed, we should no/a Vi step up our effort
to higher levels. 4o/ ie ;

Ambassador Lodge seconded this recommendation, and Admiral Sharp filed
his own pleas not only that ROLLING THUNDER be resumed "at once" but
that his previous recommendations for enlarging it be adopted. The aim
should be to "drastically reduce the flow of military supplies reaching
the DRV and hence the VC," he argued, adding “the armed forces of the
United States should not be required to fight this war with one arm tied
behind their backs." 41/

One reason for ignorance in Saigon and Honolulu of the
bombing suspension's possible continuation was that the President had
apparently never fully committed himself to the timetable proposed by
McNamara. Replying to Lodge on December 28, Rusk cabled a summary of the
President's thinking. As of that moment, said the Secretary of State,
the President contemplated extending the pause only "for several more
days, possibly into middle of next week," i.e., until January 5 or 6.

His aim in stretching out the pause was only in small part to seek nego-
tiations.

We do not, quite frankly, anticipate that Hanoi will
respond in any significant way.... There is only the slimmest
of chances that suspension of bombing will be occasion for
basic change of objective by other side batcommunist propa-
ganda on this subject should be tested and exposed.

The key reasons for extending the pause, Lodge was told, were diplomatic
and domestic. Some hope existed of using the interval to "drive la7
rift between Communist powers and between Hanoi and NLF." Even more
hopeful were indications that the government's act of self-abnegation
would draw support at home. The latest Harris poll, Lodge was informed,
showed 13% favoring a new effort for a cease-fire, 59% in favor of a
bombing pause, and 61% in favor of stepping up bombing if the pause pro-
duced no result. ;

The prospect of large-scale reinforcement in men and
defense budget increases of some twenty billions for the
next eighteen month period requires solid preparation of
the American public. A crucial element will be clear
demonstration that we have explored fully every alterna-
tive but that aggressor has left us no choice. ho/

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
