Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

be reduced to little more than sporadic incidents

by the end of 1964. ‘The Delta will teke longer but
should be completed by the end-of 1965. But for
these predictions to be valid, certain conditions
must be met. Your government should be prepared to
energize all agencies, military end civil, to a
higher owtput of activity than up to now. Ineffec-
tive commanders and province officials must be
replaced as soon as identified. Finally, there
should be a restoration of domestic tranquility on
the homefront if political tensions are to be allayed
and external criticism is to abate. Conditions are
needed for the creation of an atmosphere conducive to
an effective campaign directed at the objectives, vital
to both of us, of defeating the Viet Cong and of
restoring peace to your country. 9.

This letter was a policy instrument, of course, rather than exclus -
ively an expression of an appraisal. As a matter of tactics it was
softened considerably from the first proposed letter which was to say
that the United States would consider disassociating itself from the
Vietnam Government and discontinue support unless the GVN altered
its repressive policies. It is cited here mainly to indicate the
concern, made explicit by the senior members of the U.S. Mission
in late September, concerning the possible effect upon military effec-
tiveness of the political unrest,

About a week later, in testimony before the House Committee on
Foreign Affairs, Secretary McNamara repeated the theme that the military
situation was good, that the political situation was bad, that the
political situation could have a bad affect on the military situation,
but it had not had such a bad effect yet.

Following an appraisal of the military situation by Gen. Taylor,
Chairman Morgan asked the SecDef ."Mr. Secretary, then you feel
and I am sure the General feels, that the military effort is going
very well?" To this the SecDef's response was:

Secretary Mcllamara. Yes we do. I think Gen. Taylor has
emphasized and 1 would like to emphasize again, that while
we believe the serious political unrest has not to date
seriously and adversely affected the military effort, it
may do so in the future, if it continues.

Chairman Morgan. General, or Mr. Secretary, could we say
that the military situation is moving well, but the political
situation is not - the political situation is bad?

Secretary McNamara. Yes, I think that is a fair summary.
Chairman Morgan. Mr. Secretary, then, from your observations ,

both you and the General, from the 8 days you spent in the

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
