a

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

CIA source, based upon the report of a nationalist southern Vietnamese
with "extensive" political contacts, Diem was greatly troubled in early
July over France's apparent inclination to abandon the North rather than -
seek to retain a foothold there. 24/ Diem was said to be convinced that
partition would be suicidal, since it would put an end to active anti-
Viet Minh resistance. Moreover, Diem was convinced that the French intended
to maintain a hold on the South only through manipulating independent
irregular forces, such as the armed sects to whom the French allegedly
were providing rifles.

d. Note to French Delegation Rejects Partition

GVN anger at hints of a possible French sellout on the parti-
tion issue was reflected in a note handed the French delegation (and, with-
out France's knowledge, to the U.S. delegation also) by Nguyen Huu Chau
of the Vietnamese delegation on 17 July 1954. The note maintained that
not until 16 July did Vietnam learn that at the very time the French High
Command had ordered the evacuation of troops from important areas in the
Tonkin Delta, the French had also "accepted abandoning to the Viet Minh
all of that part situated north of the eighteenth parallel and that the
delegation of the Viet Minh might claim an even more advantageous demarca-
tion line." The Vietnamese delegation protested against having been left
"in complete ignorance" of French proposals, which were said not to "take
any account of the unanimous will for national unity of the Vietnamese
people." Disparaging the regroupment plan and the "precarious" nature
of the cease-fire being considered, the note again urged that a cease-fire
be accompanied by the disarmament of "all the belligerent forces in Viet-
nam." This would be followed by provisional United Nations control of
all Vietnam "pending the complete re-establishment of security, of order
and of peace...which will permit the Vietnamese people to decide their

‘ destiny by free elections." UN control of a unified Vietnam, the note

stated, was preferable to "its maintenance in power in a country dismem-
bered and condemned. to slavery." 25/

e. Vietnamese Register Opposition to Elections

The long-standing GVN hostility to partition, expressed well
in advance of final agreement to that arrangement, was paralleled by a
wariness of a national plebescite on unification. In June, 1954, the
Saigon Mission cabled Washington that a national election:

".;.to which Department quite rightly attaches
importance...is now of less significance in Vietnam
than before owing to general feeling of panic and
anxiety lest entire country be lost through unfortu-
hate armistice terms. Press has announced that de-
erees will presently be signed by Bao Dai providing
for municipal elections and, with exception of Saigon-
Cholon, for direct election of mayors. This should

B-12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
