Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The same statement contained a new "four point manifesto":

"1, The U.S. government must end its armed aggression
against South Vietnam, abolish its military command, withdraw
all its troops and personnel, as well as the troops and personnel
of U.S. satellites and allies, and withdraw all weapons and
other war equipment from South Vietnam.

"2. Concerned parties in South Vietnam must stop the war,
re-establish peace, and establish conditions throughout South
Vietnam to enable the South Vietnamese to solve their own
internal affairs. The South Vietnam authority [that is, govern-
ment/ must end its terror operations.

"3, There must be established a national coalition govern-
ment, to include representatives of all political parties, cliques,
groups, all political tendencies, social strata, members of all
religions. This government must guarantee peace. It must organize
free general elections in South Vietnam to choose a democratic
National Assembly that will carry out the urgently needed policies.
It must promulgate democratic liberties to all political parties,
groups, religions; it must release all political prisoners, abolish
all internment camps and all other forms of concentration [camps/,
and stop the forced draft of soldiers and the military training
of youth, women, public servants, and enterprise, economic inde-
pendence. It must abolish monopolies and improve the living
conditions of all people.

"h. South Vietnam must carry out a foreign policy of peace
and neutrality. It must establish friendly relations with all
nations, especially with her neighbors. It must not enter any
military bloc or agree to let any country establish militar
bases on her soil. It must accept aid from all countries Vera
free of political conditions. A necessary international agree-
ment must be signed in which the big powers of all blocs pledge
to respect the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity,
and neutrality of South Vietnam. South Vietnam, together with
Cambodia and Laos, will form a neutral area, all three countries
retaining full sovereignty." 171/

As the anticipated fall of the Diem government drew near in 1963, NLF
statements of goals increasingly stressed the anti-American, probably

to shift the focus of NLF attack away from a disappearing objective--

the defeat of Diem, and possibly because the NLF could not manipulate

or adapt to the Buddhist struggle movement. Demands issued by the NLF
five days following Diem's fall in November, 1963, were probably intended
to take credit for chanzes in GVN policy then underway, since, except

for halting conscription, the Duong Van Minh government was undertaking
every reform the NLF called for. However, the first extensive official
statement of the NLF Central Committee following Diem's downfall, issued

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive.
