Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This and similar themes were endlessly reiterated in the ensuing
days: :

The key to peace in Southeast Asia is the readiness of
all in that area to live at peace and to leave their neigh-
bors alone....A negotiation aimed at the confirmation of
aggression is nof possible. And a negotiation which simply
ends in bitterness and hostility merely adds to the danger. 78/

South Viet-lNam is being subjected to an aggression from
the North, an aggression which is organized and directed and
supplied with key personnel and equipment by Hanoi. The hard
core of the Viet Cong were trained in the North and have been
reinforced by North Vietnamese from the North Vietnamese army
«+. Our troops would come home tomorrow if the aggressors would
go north - go back home, and stay at home... The missing, piece
is the lack of an indication that Hanoi is prepared to stop
doing whet it is doing, and what it knows thet it is doing, to
its neighbors. 79/

But when asked under what circumstances the U.S. might sit down to
talk to Hanoi, Rusk was clearly as yet unwilling to appear publicly
receptive:

I am not getting into the details of what ere called
preconditions, because we are not at that point - we are
not at that point. Almost every postwar negotiation that
has managed to settle in some fashion some difficult and
dangerous question has been preceded by some private indi-
cation behind the scenes that such a negotiation might be
possible. That is missing here -- that is missing here. 30/

Rusk's disinterest in negotietion -- except on “spsolutist" terms --
was, of course, in concert with the view of virtually all the President's
key advisors, that the path to peace was not open. Hanoi, at about that
time, held sway over more than half of her southern neighbor and could
see the Saigon Government crumbling before her very eyes. The balance
of power in South Vietnam simply did not furnish the United States with.
a reasonable basis for bargaining and the signals from Hanoi and Moscow
-- or lack thereof -- did not encourage éptimism about the sort of hard
settlement the U.S, had in mind. All this pointed directly to military
pressures on North Vietnam and to other. urgent measures to tilt the
balance of forces the other way. Until these measures could have some
visible and tangible effect, talk of negotiation could be little more
than a hollow exercise.

At the same time, while neither Moscow nor Hanoi seemed in the least

‘interested in U.S. style "conciliation," the likelihood of explosive
escalation also seemed remote. So far there was no visible sign of

61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
