Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

friendly audience, was enough to succeed -- at least for the moment.

Attacks against the newly authorized targets began
promptly and continued through the two-week period of the Stennis
hearings. On August 11 the Paul Doumer Rail and Highway Bridge, the
principle river crossing in the direction of Haiphong located very
near the center of Hanoi, was struck for the first time and two of
its spans were dropped. Other important Hanoi targets were also struck
on the llth and 12th. The intensity of the strikes continued to mount,
and on August 20, 209 sorties were launched, the highest number to date
in the war. During that day and the succeeding two, heavy attacks con-
tinued against the Hanoi targets and within the China buffer zone. On
the 21st in connection with these attacks a long feared danger of the
northern air war became reality. Two U.S. planes strayed over the Chinese
porder and were shot down by Chinese MIGs. On August 19, at McNamara's
direction, the JCS instructed CINCPAC to suspend operations within the
ten-mile Hanoi perimeter from August 24 to September 4. 3/ The Stennis
hearings were ending and a particularly delicate set of contacts with
North Vietnam were under way in Paris (see below). The suspension was
designed both to avoid provocation and to manifest restraint.

2. The Stennis Hearings

Meanwhile in Washington, the Stennis hearings opened on
August 9 with Admiral U. S. Grant Sharp, USCINCPAC, as the first witness.
In the following two weeks the subcommittee heard testimony from the entire
senior echelon of U.S. military leaders involved in the air war, including
the Joint Chiefs, CINCPAC, CINCPACFLT, CINCPACAF, and the commander and
former deputy commander of the 7th Air Force in Saigon. The final witness
on August 25 was Secretary McNamara who found himself pitted against the
military men who had preceded him by the hostile members of the subcom-
mittee as he sought to deflate the claims for U.S. air power. The
hearings, released by the subcommittee only days after the testimony
was completed, and given extensive treatment by the media, exposed to
public view the serious divergence of views between McNamara and the
country's professional military leaders. ‘The. subcommittee's summary
‘report, which sided with the military and sharply criticized McNamara's
reasoning, forced the Administration into an awkward position. 4] Ulti-
mately, the President felt compelled to overrule MeNamara's logic in his
own version of ‘the matter. Once again the President was caught unhappily
in the middle satisfying neither his critics of the right nor the left.

The subcommittee heard first from the military leaders
anvolved in the air war. It was told that the air war in the North
was an important and indispensable part of the U.S. strategy for fighting
the war in the South. It was told that the bombing had inflicted exten-
sive destruction and disruption on NVN, holding down the infiltration of
men and supplies, restricting the level of forces that could be sustained
in the South and reducing the ability of those forces to mount major

92 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
