DT.

58.

29.

60.

él.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of Ho's communist contacts at this time is peculiar

when they are forcing collaboration or preparing

a puppet government; this ploy is a possible diversion

from French policy in Indochina. O'Sullivan 131 to

Byrnes, 3 December 1946. ..cssseceescuss eh, oy ere ee «a 08

Acheson instructs Moffat on Ho Chi, Minh's communist

record and offers guidelines of U.S. policy in dis-

cussion with Ho. Essentially, the U.S. is concerned

over Tonkin events, the American people have welcomed
Indochinese attainments but violence imperils this

sympathy, and U.S, is informing France similarly.

The U.S. is not making formal intervention at this

time. Acheson 305 to Saigon, 5 December 1946....... das hs os

U.S. feels France would engage in full seale military
operations in Vietnam only if forced, since they

realize it is no longer possible to maintain a closed

deor. Howevir, Cochin-China political question must

be settled and French cannot resolve it without a

fight. The Cochin-Chinese prefer Tonkin to France.

Reed 472 to Byrnes, 6 December 1946. ....cececseceses serene 87

secretary Byrnes reviews basic French-Vietnamese
difficulties for Missions at London, Moscow, and
Nanking. Essentially, the difficulties revolve
around deep nationalist sentiment and cpposition
to the French, guided by a few communist trained
leaders in the government with apparent contacts
with Moscow and Yenan. However, "French influence
is important not only as en antidote to Soviet
influence, but to protect Vietnam and SEA from
future Chinese imperialism." Three basic troubles
are mutual distrust, French irresolution of the
term "free state," and Vietnamese intransigence.
Byrnes message to certain Missions, 17 December

FQHG the lle Salen a ran Ota » No icky kore or se Sevgonie stone: OC

Byrnes reyiews recent French political crisis and

influence of Indochina policy as an important

factor. Outbreak cf hostilities in Hanoi seen as

serious and not likely to be resolved by Montet

and d'Argenlienu. Byrnes message to Moscow, Nanking

and Baigon, 20 December LOGGs oi cacy ca case Fale oe oe helnew os 90

Vincent informs Acheson thet with inadequate forces
and divided public opinion, the French have tried
to. accomplish in Indochina what a strong, united
Britain found unwise to attempt in Burma. In short,
“euerrilla warfare may continue indefinitely." The

x TOP SECRET -— Sensitive
