Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

announced the troop withdrawal, and dissociated the U.S. from the GVN's
repressive policies. It avoided, however, any reference to economic
aid suspensions or other sanctions against the regime, thereby giving

- Diem a chance to come around without a public loss of face.

On October 5, the President approved the specific military recom-
mendations of the McNamara-Taylor report, "but directed,that no formal
announcement be made of the implementation of plans to withdraw 1,000
U.S. military personnel by the end of 1953." 129/ ‘The details of how
the new policy would be applied were spelled out in a long cable to
lodge following this meeting. The purpose of the new course of action
was described at the beginning of the message:

Actions are designed to indicate to Diem Government our
displeasure at its political policies and activities and to
create significent uncertainty in that government and in key
Vietnamese groups as to future intentions of United States.
At same time, actions are designed to have at most slight
impact on military or counterinsurgency effort against Viet
Cong, at least in short term.

The recommendations on negotiations are concerned with
what U.S. is after, i.e., GVN action to increase effective-
ness of its military effort; to ensure popular support to
win war; and to eliminate strains on U.S. Government and
public confidence. The negotiating posture is designed not
to lay down specific hard and fast demands or to set a dead-
line, but to produce movement in Vietnamese Government along
these lines. In this way we can test and probe effectiveness
of any actions the GVN actually takes and, at the same time,
maintain sufficient flexibility to permit U.S. to resume full
support of Diem regime at any time U.S. Government deems it
appropriate. 130/

The cable goes on to acknowledge that the proposed sanctions can only be
applied for 2-l months before they begin to adversely affect the military
effort, and therefore when that begins to happen recognizes that,
"..-further major decisions will be required.” 131/

The specific actions to be taken included: (1) suspension of the
commodity import program without public announcement; (2) selective
suspension of PL 480, on an item-by-item, sometimes monthly, basis, after
referral to Washington for review; (3) suspension of the loans for the
Saigon-Cholon Waterworks and the Saigon Electric Power Project; (4) noti-
fication to the GVN that financial support of Colonel Tung's forces would
be contingent on their commitment to field operations under JGS control,
again without public announcement. TIodge was instructed to maintein his
policy of "cool correctness in order to make Diem come to you," but to be

“35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
