Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date; 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"B. The VC/NVA have been able to select the weakest point
in any embryonic GV pacification effort and destroy it with a
lightening attack...

"C, There are inherent difficulties in the pacification
process itself...

"D. Lack of high quality assets. Pacification has also had
to take a back seat in the sense that it generally gets only the

lowest grade GVN assets -- and not enough of these...

"KE. Last but not least, neither the U.S. nor the GVN have

as yet developed an sdequate plan, program, or management
structure for dealing with pacification...

"1. The JCS and MACY are so preoccupied, however justi-
fisbly, with operations against the major VC/NVA units that they
are not able to pay enough attention to the local security aspects
of pacification...

"2, There is no unified civil/military direction within
the GVN...

"3. A similar divided responsibility prevails on the
U.S. side...

"h. Nor does there yet appear to be a well-understood
chain of command from Porter even to the civilians operating in
the field...

"5, There is no integrated civil/military plan for
pacification on either the U.S. or GVN side...

"Ivy. How do we step up Pacification? ...It demands a multi-

faceted civil-military response...

"A. Provide more adequate, continuous security for the
locales in which pacification is taking place, This is the

essential prerequisite. None of our civil programs in the
countryside can be expected to be effective unless the area
is reasonably secure. Nor, unless the people are protected,
and their attitudes likely to change in favor of the GVN...
To provide security requires the assignment on a long term
basis of enough assets to defeat these resident VC companies
and battalions, in addition to providing 24-hour security to
the people until they are able to assist in providing their
own protection. This is primarily the task of RF and PF,
‘supported by the RD cadres and police...Some knowledgeable

. 68 =. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
