Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

advocated increased aid to the Chinese Nationalists, who were regarded by
many, even at this late date, as the bulwark containing communism in
Asia. 10/ Although no major emphasis was given Indochina in 1949, NSC
papers did discuss the importance of the Franco-Viet Minh struggle, and
link the future of Indochina with that of the rest of the world:

"In any event, colonial-nationalist conflict provides a
fertile field for subversive communist activities, and it is
now clear that Southeast Asia is the target of a coordinated
offensive directed by the Kremlin. In seeking to gain control
of Southeast Asia, the Kremlin is motivated in part by a desire
to acquire Southeast Asia's resources and communication lines,
and to deny them to us. But the political gains which would
accrue to the USSR from communist capture of Southeast Asia
are equally significant. The extension of communist authority
in China represents a grievous political defeat for us: if
Southeast Asia also is swept by communism we shall have suffered
a major political rout the repercussions of which will be felt
throughout the rest of the world, especially in the Middle East
and in a then critically exposed Australia." 11/

It was precisely the extension of communist authority over China referred to
above that led to increased emphasis in U.S. policy on Indochina in late
1949 and 1950.

Following the Chinese Communist victories of 1949 and the movement
of Chinese Communist troops to the border of Indochina in November of that
year, NSC 64 (February 7, 1950) concluded that "the Departments of State
and Defense should prepare, as a matter of priority, a program of all
practicable measures designed to protect U.S. security interests in Indo-
china." 12/ On the same day, 13/ following the Communist Chinese
(January 18) and the Soviet (January 30) recognition of the Ho Chi Minh
regime, 14/ the United States announced its recognition of the Bao Dai
Government. Theretofore, the U.S. had remained neutral, hesitating to
choose between supporting France, a friendly colonial power engaged in
re-establishing its authority, or supporting the Viet Minh, @ communist-
dominated independence movement in opposition to that European ally.

This dilemma had been resolved by the victory of the Chinese Communists
over the Nationalists, and by the threat posed to Indochina. The United
States policy of support for the French and the Associated States was
adjudged one befitting an anti-colonial democracy: support of nationalism
and independence; opposition to attempted encroachments thereon by inter-
national communism.

3. "The Line of Containment" and "The Domino Theory"
The logic of this shift in U.S. policy is found not only in the
direct threat to Southeast Asia posed by Communist China (and the Soviet

Union), but also in the broader strategic concept of a line of contain-
ment, and in the early articulation of what later became known as the

3 JOP SECRET - Sensitive
