Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnamese through the ROLLING THUNDER program and, finally, creating
conditions favorable for settlement on U.S. terms. Westmoreland's main
conclusions revolved around a new assessment that the enemy was weak-
ening, that ROLLING THUNDER did help, and that the enemy's losses would
soon exceed his gains. To buttress these views he quoted a number of
"indicators": that intensity of allied operations was up versus those

of last year; that the enemy's losses had doubled; that we were taking
four times the number of prisoners we had; that the number of defectors
had doubled; that the enemy was losing 23 times the weapons that he had
in the past year; and that 18% more major roads in South Vietnam had been
opened in the past three months. Enemy weakness was evident from the fact
that 54 of his maneuver battalions were rated only 50% combat effective
compared to ARVN's performance in having all but 7 of its 154 battalions
combat effective. ARVN leadership was also cited as being "better." of

COMUSMACV's analysis of RVNAF effectiveness was based upon a MACV
study completed early in 1967, one devoted to determining the shortfalls,
weaknesses and limitations of that organization. The analysis indicated
that the ARVN kill ratio had risen from 3.6 in 1965 to 3.7 in 1966 and that
there was @ noticeable decline (27%) in personnel missing in action. The
MACV study had concluded "that it was apparent that both the Vietnamese
Army “e/ Vietnamese Air Force had made significant improvements during the
year. 6

A Systems Analysis study completed in DoD just prior to the Guam
Conference concluded that U.S. and ARVN forces had surprisingly equal
effectiveness per battalion day on search and destroy operations when
the relative strengths of the battalions were taken into account. 7/

At a time when American decision-makers were casting about for any favorable
reports on Vietnamese performance, these descriptions of ARVN progress

were surely welcome. Unfortunately, they only contributed to the unreal-
istic military euphoria which pervaded the Guam discussions.

The second major impression one takes from reviewing the military
briefings at Guam was that some increases in the Program 4 levels would
be necessary, but these would not be major. The enemy strategy was”
reiterated; nothing found on CEDAR FALLS or other recent operations did
anything but confirm the MACV year-end assessment of ve/NVA strategy.
Recent American successes reinforced the belief that we had hit upon the
key to winning -- despite continued large scale infiltration, Westmoreland
and others on his staff believed we were again flirting with the illusive
"crossover point" when enemy total strength would begin to decline,
battle, diseane and desertion losses would exceed gains. 8/ Yet,
despite the indicators, infiltration remained an uncertainty, as did the
continued good performance of ARVN. Without a relatively efficient RVNAF
performance, pacification (especially as its roles and missions were -
allocated) was doomed to failure. The hope generated by the encouraging
report on ARVN (from both MACV and OASD/SA) and the favorable outcomes of
US current operations, seemed to confirm what most were led to believe:
any forthcoming Program 4 requests would be small. 9/

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive :
