Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Embassy's Lack of Political Contact

The shifts of political loyalties, coups, rebellions, and major
changes of public figures often caught the Rmbassy by surprise. It had
no effective system, either through overt or covert contacts, for finding
out what was going on. CAS people talked to a few official contacts, who
told them things the Vietnamese wanted the U.S, to believe; but CAS had
and has no mandate or mission to perform systematic intelligence and
espionage in friendly countries, and so lacks the resources to gather and
evaluate the large amounts of information required on political forces,
corruption, connections, and sc on. Moreover, there is no sign that the
Embassy understood events after the fact, or saw the connection between
what we did and what the Vietnamese did next. It appears that the U.S.
had few people experienced at maneuvering and manipulating among oriental
politicians.

In the following cases the Embassy was in the dark. (1) We had no
information on the degree of truth of Khanh's charges against the four
"pro-neutralist" generals plus Minh, and we knew about his coup a day in
advance only because he sounded us ovt on it. (2) During the months of
maneuvering between Khanh and Minh after the cowp, we had no way to evalu-
ate the coup rumors that always went around, and that peaked around moments
of crisis like the trial of the four generals in May. (3) Khanh's complaints
of Vietnamese war-weariness starting in late May, in retrospect a transparent
tactic to pressure the U.S. to bomb North, took in the USG completely; we
eagerly went ahead and planned to bomb "to improve their unity and resolve."
(4) Khanh's defiant leaks on cross-border operations in Jwly surprised and
perplexed the Embassy; Taylor described them as an attempt to improve his
own people's morale, not as an attempt to stampede us. . (5) When Khanh asked
for our public endorsement and then talked about "reorganization," we failed
to see the connection. When he tried to reorganize Minh out of the govern~ _
ment, Taylor made no move to save Minh until after street rioting had broken
up the whole plan. (6) The September 13 coup attempt surprised everybody.
(7) The HNC decision to make Suu President and Huong Prime Minister surprised
and angered us. (8) Taylor's December plan to strengthen GVN by lecturing to
it about its failures provoked a completely unexpected reaction; both Buddhists
and the military turned against the GVN. ‘Taylor's subsequent stern lecture
to the Young Turks likewise produced the opposite of the desired result.

(9) The generals’ January, 1965, moves to renege on the agreed crisis settle-
ment end to dismiss Huong surprised us. (10) The February 19 coup attempt
surprised everybody. (11) We did not know what to think of the alleged coup
attempt in May, 1965.

In some noteworthy cases we did better. (1) Taylor correctly foresaw
that Khanh's August constitution would cause trouble. (2) Westmoreland
detected Ky's budding coup attempt in November and, with Embassy authority,
squelched it. (3) Taylor foresaw (and tacitly accepted) the Ky coup.

v TOP SECRET - Sensitive
