Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Yesterday we met, twenty of us, from 1430 to 2030.
We reached agreement that we must take some action. We de-
cided to arrest the bad menbers of the HNC, bad politicians,
bad student Leaders, and the leaders of the Committee of
National Salvation, which is a Commnist organization.
We must put the trouble-making organizations out of action

‘ and ask the Prime Minister and the Chief of State to stay

in office.

"After we explain to the people why we did this at a
press conference, we would like to return to our fighting
units. We have no political ambitions. We seek strong,
unified, and stable Armed Forces to support the struggle and
a stable government. Chief of State Sun agrees with us.
General Khanh saw Huong who also agreed.

"We did what we thought was good for this country;
we tried to have a civilian government clean house. If we
have achieved it, fine. We are now ready to go back to
our units.

"AMPASSADOR TAYLOR: I respect the sincerity of you
gentlemen. Now I would like to talk to you about the conse-
quences of what you have done. But first, would any of the
other officers wish to speak?

_ "ADMIRAL CANG: It seems that we are being treated as
though we were guilty. What we did was good and we did it
only for the good of the country.

"AMBASSADOR TAYLOR: Now let me tell you how I feel
about it, what I think the consequences are: first of all,
this is a military coup thet has destroyed the government-
making process that, to the admiration of the whole world,
was set up last fall largely through the statesman-like
acts of the Armed Forces.

"You cannot go back to your units, General Ky. You
military are now back in power. You are up to your necks
in politics.

"Your statement makes it clear that you have consti-

tuted yourselves again substantially as a Military Revolutionary

Committee. The dissolution of the HNC was totally illegal.
Your decree recognized the Chief of State and the Huong
Government but this recognition is something that you could
withdraw. This will be interpreted as a return of the mili-
tary to power...

"AMBASSADOR TAYLOR: Who commands the Armed Forces?
General Khanh?

"GENERAL KY: Yes, sir...

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
