Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(

be no “irresistible” drive from any quarter for unneces-
sary escalation of the conflict. (See Part IV, Appendix A,
for additional comments.)

International Attitude and Predicted Reaction. There
are several inconsistencies between the DPM and the published
intelligence estimates. For example, from these intelligence
estimates, there is no evidence that Hanoi is prepared to
shun negotiation, regardless of the pressure brought to
bear, until after the US elections. Also, it is estimated
that US prestige will not decline appreciably if prompt
military action is taken to bring the conflict to an early
close. In the long term, US prestige would probably rise.
The effect of signs of US irresolution on allies in Southeast
Asia and other friendly countries threatened by communist
insurgency could be most damaging to the credibility of US
commitments. The DPM contains the view that there is strong
likelihood of a confrontation between the United States and
the CHICOMs or the USSR, as a result of intensification of
air and naval operations against North Vietnam and/or a
major increase in US forces in South Vietnam. Intelligence
estimates do not support this contention. (See Part V,
Appendix A, for additional comments.) 2/

Summarizing, the Chiefs explained that the divergencies between
the DPM and the stated policies, objectives and concepts were individu-
ally important and in their eyes, reasons for concern. However, as they
viewed them collectively, an "alarming pattern” emerged which suggested
a major realignment of U.S. objectives and intentions in Southeast Asia.
The Joint Chiefs stated that they were not aware of any decision to
retract the policies and objectives which had been affirmed by responsible
officials many times in recent years (apparently stemming back to NSAM
288). In their view the DPM lacked adequate foundation for further con-
sideration. Their conclusions were strong, namely that the DPM "did not
support current U.S. national policy objectives in Vietnam and should
not be considered further" and "there is no basis for change in their
views in the major issues in the DPM," and that "these views were
adequately stated in recent memorandums and reinforced herein." Imple-
mentation of Course B in the estimation of the joint body would serve
to prolong the conflict, reinforce Hanoi's belief in ultimate victory,
and probably add greatly to the ultimate cost in US lives and treasure.

The Joint Chiefs recommended that:
a. The DPM NOT be forwarded to the President.

b. The US national objective as expressed in NSAM
288 be maintained, and the national policy and objectives

.

seit, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
