Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

actual net shortfall reflected in the Appendices hereto amounts
to 47,731...

4. (S) The basic difference in the two capability plans,
as viewed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is that Case I was based
upon the call up of Reserve forces, extension of terms of ser-
vice, and a firm decision by 1 February 1966. The JCSM-218-66
plan represented a changed set of assumptions in that it did not
have access to the skilled resources available from the Reserves
and from extended terms of service. Furthermore, JCSM-218-66
represented a two-month delay in certain basic decisions. De-
spite extraordinary actions being taken to improve the availa-
bility of combat support and combat service support units, no
means have been found to eliminate certain skill shortages and
to create these skills in the time available. Another funda-
mental difference is that Case I would have deployed largely
units in being, whereas the current deployment plan will depend
primarily on activation of new units.

5. (S) Despite the shortcomings apparent in the 10 April
1966 plan, the Services are taking positive actions to bring
this plan, which is based essentially upon Case II rules, in
line with the Case I deployment capabilities insofar as possible.
Such extraordinary actions have resulted in significant improve-
ments.

6. (S) In consideration of the above, the current approved
deployment program in JCSM-218-66 meets as closely as feasible
the program for South Vietnam prescribed in your directive to
plan, for an interim period, to deploy forces in accordance with
Case I. However, this program as well as the Case I capability
plan falls short of the total calendar year 1966 CINCPAC force
requirements submitted by CINCPAC to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Although there will be a delay in meeting the total requirement,
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Services will continue their
efforts to fulfill the total requirements as close to CINCPAC's
schedule as practicable. 60/

The question of where the numbers for Phases II, ITA, and IJA(R)
came from provokes much speculation. It can be hypothesized that from
the outset of the American build-up, some military men felt that winning
a meaningful military victory in Vietnam would require something on the
order of one million men. Knowing that this would be unacceptable
politically, it may have seemed a better bargaining strategy to ask for
increased deployments incrementally. At the outset, the limiting factor
on the build-up was the speed with which units could be readied for
deployment, and the speed with which logistical support facilities could
be provided in Vietnam. (the later constraint being heavily influenced by

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
