Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to reconsider her entire policy with the possible view to
cutting her losses and withdrawing from Indochina...looking
into the future it was obvious...that France could not con-
tinue indefinitely to bear this burden alone if the expected
developments in regard to increased assistance to Ho Chi Minh
came about....” 1/

Although the decision to extend aid to the French military
effort in Indochina was taken before the outbreak of the Korean War, it
clearly was heavily influenced by the fall of Nationalist China ,and the
arrival of Communist Chinese troops on the Indochina border in December,
1949. The Ho Chi Minh regime was recognized as the legal government of
Vietnam by the Chinese Communists on January 18, 1950, and twelve days
later the Soviet Government similarly announced its recognition. The
NSC was thereupon asked "to undertake a determination of all practicable
United States measures to protect its security in Indochina and to
prevent the expansion of communist aggression in that area." In NSC 64
(February 27, 1950) it concluded that:

"It is important to United States security interests that
all practicable measures be taken to prevent further communist
expansion in Southeast Asia. Indochina is a key area of South-
east Asia and is under immediate threat.

"The neighboring countries of Thailand and Burma could be
expected to fall under Communist domination if Indochina were
controlled by a Communist-dominated government. The balance
of Southeast Asia would then be in grave hazard." 2/

The Joint Chiefs of Staff, referring on April 5, 1950, to
intelligence estimates indicating that the situation in Southeast Asia
had deteriorated, noted that "without United States assistance, this
deterioration will be accelerated." 3/ Therefore, the rationale for
the decision to aid the French was to avert Indochina's sliding into
the communist camp, rather than aid for France as a colonial power or a

fellow NATO ally.

U.S. assistance, which began modestly with $10 million in
1950, reached $1,063 million in fiscal year 1954, at which time it
accounted for 78% of the cost of the French war burden. The major por-
tion of the increase came in the last year of the war, following the
presentation in 1953 of the Navarre Plan, which called for the enlarge-
ment of Franco-Vietnamese forces and a dynamic strategy to recapture
the initiative and pave the way for victory by 1955. The optimistic
endorsement of the Navarre Plan by It. General John W. O'Daniel, head
of the MAAG in Indochina, as being capable of turning the tide and
leading to.a decisive victory over the Viet Minh contributed to Washing-
ton's agreement to substantially raise the level of assistance. But
equally important, the Navarre Plan, by being a concrete proposal which

A-36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
