Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

radios in the strategic hamlets so that each would have the capability
to sound the alarm and request the employment of mobile reserves when
attacked,

¥F, Differences Begin to Emerge

All of these "program management" activities were based on the
unstated assumption that the strategic hamlet program would lead to effec-
tive pacification if only Diem would make it work. As it turned out,
there was some disagreement between what the U.S. considered needed to be
done and what President Diem knew very welll he was doing. He was using
the Strategic Hamlet Program to carry forward his "personalist philosophy." 99/
As brother Nhu visibly took the reins controlling the program and began to
solidify control over the Youth Corps it became increasingly clear that
Diem was emphasizing government control of the peasantry et the expense (at
least in U.S. eyes) of pacification. 100/

_ As awareness in Washington increased that strategic hamlets could
serve several purposes, there developed also a divergent interpretation of
whether or not the GVN was "winning the war." When General Krulak, SACSA,
and Joseph Mendenhall, an ex-counselor in Saigon then at State, visited
RVN in September 1963, President Kennedy wryly asked upon receiving their
conflicting reports, "You two did visit the same country, didn't you?" 1o1/
The answer is that they had, but the general stressed that the military war
was going well while the diplomat asserted that the political war was being
lost. The argument was not, it should be stressed, one between the generals
and the diplomats; experienced diplomats disagreed fundamentally with
Mendenhall. ‘The disagreement was between those who pointed to signs of
progress and those who heldup examples of poor planning, corruption, and
alienation of the peasants whose loyalty was the object of the exercise.
Criticisms -- frequently accompanied by counterbalancing assertions that
"limited progress" was being achieved -~ mentioned corvee labor, GVN fail-
ures to reimburse the farmers for losses due to resettlement, the dishonesty
of some officials, and Diem's stress on exhortations rather than on the
provision of desirable social services. 102/

Those who emphasized that the program was showing real progress --
usually with a caveat or two that there was considerable room for improve-
ment -- stressed statistical evidence to portray the exponential increase
in strategic hamlet construction (Table 2), the declining trend in Viet
Cong-initiated incidents (Table 3), thexise in VC defections (Table 4), ana
the slow but steady increase in GVN control of rural areas (Table 5).

The JCS observation with respect to the establishment of strategic
hamlets, for instance, was that since fewer than two tenths of one percent
(0.2%) of them had been overrun by the VC, "The Vietnamese people must
surely be finding in them a measure of the tranquility which they seek. 103/

RGK Thompson later claimed that the very absence of attacks was
an indicator that the VC had succeeded in infiltrating the hamlets. 10h. /
The point is not Thompson's prescience but the difficulty of reasoned ~
assessment to which this analysis has already pointed. The U.S. course,

“39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
