Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

provide a complete rationale for our presence in
South Vietnam or much of our effort over the past
two years.

c. The positions of the more than 35 nations
supporting the Government of Vietnam might be
rendered untenable by such drastic changes in US
policy. 22/

The strategy proposed in the Draft Presidential memorandum which
the Chiefs characterized as "making do" was not acceptable either:

Military Strategy and Operations (Other than Air/
Naval Operations in the North). The DPM favors Course B
with inadequate analysis of its implications for conduct
of the war in Vietnam. The strategy embodied in this
alternative - largely designed to "make do" with military
resources currently approved for Southeast Asia - would
not permit early termination of hostilities on terms
acceptable to the United States, supporting Free World
nations, and the Government of Vietnam. The force struc-~
ture envisaged provides little capability for initiative
action and insufficient resources to maintain momentum
required for expeditious prosecution of the war. Further,

_this approach would result in a significant downgrading
of the Revolutionary Development Program considered so
essential to the realization of our goals in Vietnam. It
would also result in the abandonment of the important delta
region on the basis of its being primarily a problem for the
Republic of Vietnam to solve without additional external
assistance. 23/

There was little more agreement. expressed about the bombing, about
the domestic attitude or the international attitude:

Military Strategy for Air/Navel War in the North.
The DPM stresses a policy which would concentrate air
operations in the North Vietnamese "funnel" south of 20°,
The concept of a "funnel" is misleading, since in fact
the communists are supplying their forces in South Viet-
nam from all sides, through the demilitarized zone, Laos,
the coast, Cambodia, and the rivers in the Delta. Accord-
ing to the DPM, limiting the bombing to south of 20°
might result in increased negotiation opportunities with
Hanoi. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that such a
new self-imposed restraint resulting from this major change
in strategy would most likely have the opposite effect.
The relative immunity granted to the LOCs and distribution
system outside the Panhandle would permit: (a) a rapid

175 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
