Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

No information is available on McNamara's reaction to the proposed JCS
truce limitations, but on the basis of his general position on the
bombing at that time he can be presumed to have opposed them. In any
case, they wer: not adopted. The execute order for the suspension of
hostilities authorized CINCPAC strikes only in the case of an immediate
and direct threat to U.S. forces, and stipulated that, "In the event
reconnaissance disclosed major military resupply activity in North Vietnam
south of 19 degrees north latitude, report immediately to the JCS." 21/
Decisions on how and when to respond to such resupply efforts would be made
in Washington not Honolulu. This, then, was the issue whose merits would
be the focus of debate at the end of the pause when furious diplomatic
efforts to get talks started would generate pressure for an extension.

Even before the holiday arrived pressure to extend the
pause had begun to mount. On February 2, Leonard Marks, Director of
USIA proposed to Rusk that the truce be extended, "in 12 or 24 hour
periods contingent upon DRV and VC continued abservance of the truce
conditions." 22/ The latter included in his definition, "...suspension
of all infiltration and movement toward infiltration...." 23/ At the
Pentagon, at least within civilian circles, there was sentiment for
extending the pause too. In the materials that John McNaughton left
behind is a handwritten scenario for the pause with his pencilled changes.
The authorship is uncertain since the handwriting is neither McNaughton's
nor McNamara's (nor apparently that of any of the other key Pentagon
advisors), but a note in the margin indicates it had been seen and approved
by the Secretary. Therefore it is reproduced below. Underlined words
or phrases are McNaughton's modifications.

SCENARTO

1. President tell DRV before Tet, "We are stopping
bombing at start of Tet and at the end of Tet we will not
resume."

2. During Tet and in days thereafter:

a. Observe DRV/VC conduct for ‘signs’

b. Try to get talks started.

: 3. Meantime, avoid changes in 'noise level’ in other
areas of conduct -- e.g., no large US troop deployments for
couple weeks, no dramatic changes in rules of engagement in
South, ete.

h, As for public handling: .
a. At end of ¥ days of Tet merely extend to 7 days.

b. At end of 7 days just keep pausing, making make no
expansion.

ec. Later say "We are seeing what happens."

ad. Even later, say (if true) infiltration down, etc.

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
