Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Other evidence supports the foregoing hypothesis. The DRV was,
in 1960, an orthodoxically constituted communist state. Both the
government and the society were dominated by the Lao Dong (Communist)
Party, and power within the party concentrated in a small elite --
Ho Chi Minh and his lieutenants from the old-time Indochinese Communist
Party. This group of leaders were unique in the communist world for
their homogeneity and for their harmony -- there has been little evidence
of the kind of turbulence which has splintered the leadership of most
communist parties. While experts have detected disputes within the Lao
Dong hierarchy --1957 appears to be a critical year in that regard --
the facts are that there has been no blood-purge of the Lao Dong
leadership, and except for changes occasioned by apparently natural
deaths, the leadership in 1960 was virtually identical to what it had
been in 1954 or 1946. This remarkably dedicated and purposeful group
of men apparently agreed among themselves as to what the national
interests of the DRV required, what goals should be set for the nation,
and what strategy they should pursue in attaining them.

These leaders have been explicit in setting forth DRV national goals
in their public statements and official documents. For example, Ho Chi
Minh and his colleagues placed a premium on “land reform" -- by which
they meant a communization of rural society along Maoist lines. Moreover,
they clearly considered a disciplined society essential for victory in
war and success in peace. It was also evident that they were committed
to bring about an independent, reunified Vietnam capable of exerting
significant influence throughout Southeast Asia, and particularly
over the neighboring states of Laos and Cambodia. What is not known
with certainty is how they determined the relative priority among these
objectives. :

In the immediate aftermath of Geneva, the DRV deferred to the
Geneva Accords for the achievement of reunification, and turned inward,
concentrating its energies on land reform and rehabilitation of the war-
torn economy. By the summer of 1956, this strategy was bankrupt: the
Geneva Settlement manifestly would not eventuate in reunification, and
the land reform campaign foundered from such serious abuses by Lao Dong
cadre that popular disaffection imperiled DRV internal security. In
August 1956, the lao Dong leadership was compelled to "rectify" its
programs, to postpone land reform, and to purge low echelon cadre to
mollify popular resentment. Even these measures, however, proved
insufficient to forestall insurrection; in November 1956, the peasant
rebellions broke out, followed by urban unrest. Nonetheless, the DRV
leadership survived these internal crises intact, and by 1958 appears
to have solved most of the problems of economic efficiency and political
organization which occasioned the 1956-1957 outbursts.

But domestic difficulty was not the only crisis to confront the Lao
Dong leaders in early 1957. In January, when the Soviet Union proposed

27 TOP SECRET .- Sensitive
