71.

72.

73+

7h.

75.

76.

TT-

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

but were vitel in the wider context of the fate of the free
nations of Asia." He further cites self-determination,
commitments of four U.S. Presidents and SEATO and the “wars~*
of liberation" threat as justifying our presence...ecccceseces

Secretary Rusk states, "We are entitled under SEATO treaty as
well as under the individual and collective security -- self-
defense arrangements of the UN Charter -- to come to the
assistance of SVN upon their request when...subjected...to
aggression.” He further predicts, "If we get this problem of
these "wars of liberation" under reasonable control, we can
look forward to a period of relative peace,....".scesecccccces

Secretary Rusk describes aggressive acts of NVN which led to
U.S. decision to meet its obligation under SEATO treaty, a
decision necessary if other treaty commitments were to remain
MESNINGPUL. wo cesneccecesesveseraseesessessesseesessscesnsceaes

William Bundy provides the most comprehensive explanation of
U.S. involvement from its inception. He summarized his views
thusly, "...a strong Chinese Communist and North Vietnamese
threat to Southeast Asia, a crucial link between the defense
of South Vietnam and the realization of that threat, and the
validity of non-Communist nationalism....in Southeast Asia.”
"Moreover...implications for our commitments elsewhere....
Vietnam still constituted major, perhaps even a decisive,
test case Of..." wars of liberation?) Ve esecteseecesecvwacens

President Johnson emphasizes "the key to all we have done is

our own security.” This, he states reflected the judgment of
his two predecessors as well as the U.S. Senate (by virtue of
its ratification of SEATO treaty) .< cee siccccscsccccevencecssecs

Secretary Rusk emphasizes SEATO obligation and its relation
to credibility of other such commitments as the basis for U.S.
presence; cites the domino theory as "esoteric" and unneces-
sary in view of recent events in Southeast Asia; suggests that
a militant China represents a threat to the security of the
world. (This conference produced the "yellow peril" reaction
Pree be PRESS.) se ese wcua< sponse see cb ees tase beuncuereuncecsne

Secretary Rusk clarifies interpretations of earlier remarks
(75.) regarding China; he emphasizes again our alliances and
their interrelationship arising from the credibility of U.S.
GCM LbMETTG s se ee s/c'a e/u'e's + e.6's a) s\4cnle' baths \s/einldivin wdiele ev sleleve u's agin alae e/a a

Under Secretary of State Katzenbach emphasizes the legal and
moral soundness of our commitment to deter aggression in SVN..

° D-96

D-109

D-112

D-120

D-123

D-126

D-129
