Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRSS - Sensitive

to their authority. While the exect reasons for not including any politi-:
cians in the cabinet are not known, it is reasonable to assume that neither
Tho nor the military were anxious to see potential political rivals, with
power deriving from popular support. in positions to challenge the
authority of the new leaders. Whatever the case, it was the irresolution
of the power relationship within the nev goverment that was one of the
factors contributing to the next round of coup-making in January 196).

The second urgent problem of these first weeks in November was the
rapidly deteriorating economic situetion in Vietnem. The situation had
been serious in September, and a lerge deficit for the 1964 budget had
already been forecast. The suspension of the commercial import payments
and selected Pi 480 had aggravated the situation during September and
October. Furthermore, all negotiations on the 1964 budget levels and U.S
support: had been suspended and were now seriously behind schedule. Aware
of the urgency of the problem, State, on November 2, had asked for Lodge's
recommendations on the resumption of aid and had urged him to identify the
people responsible for economic planning in the new goverrment so that
negotiations could begin immediately. 36/ Concern was also expressed
at the lack of expertise in this area emong the generals and Lodge was
advised to encourage them to make meximum use of economists in the
previous government who were familicr with the problems. lodge proposed
in response that the government be asked to name a high level commission
of economic experts to work with a similar group from the U.S. Mission. 37/
This suggestion had been agreed to in principle the previous day by Tho,
through whose office al] economic aid matters were to be chenneled. 38/
Lodge also believed that our aid should be increased as an indication of
our support for the new government. 39/ But beyond these preliminary
discussions, no real progress was weie on the economic problems before
the Honolulu-Conference on November 20,

The third problen that worried Americans was the heightened level of
Viet Cong activity in the wake of the coup and the militery dislocations
caused by it. Related, but of even more importance, was the new infor-
mation that came to light after the coun and in the atmosphere of free
discussion that it generated showings that the military situation was
far worse than we had believed. The overall statistical indicators had
now begun to show deterioration dating back to the summer. The incidence
of VC attacks was up over the first six months of 1963, the weapons loss
ratio had worsened and the rate of VG defections was ‘way down. ho/
In the immediate wake of the coup, VC activity had jumped dramatically
as MACV had feared it would and there wes great concern to return units
participating in the coup to the field cuickly to forestall any major
Communist offensive. 41 / Cause for more fundamental concern, however,
were the first rumors and indications that under Diem there had been
regular and substantial falsification in the military reporting system
and in reporting on the strategic hemlets that had bedly distorted the
real military situation in Vietnam to make it eppear less serious than it was.

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
