Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

17.
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

If the SEATO action appeared to be proving effective in
reducing the present scale of infiltration the Communist prob-
ably would increase their use of the mountain trail system _
through Cambodia. This is a longer and more difficult route
but its use could keep at least minimum support flowing to the
Viet Cong. At the same time, in order to reduce the apparent
success of the SEATO action, they could intensify small unit
attacks, assassinations, and local terrorism in South Vietnam;
they could also commit more DRV irregular personnel for the
harassment of the SHEATO forces. In any event, the SEATO com-
mitment in South Vietnam would probably have to be continued
over @ prolonged period. It might be part of Communist tactics
to play upon possible SEATO weariness over maintaining substean-
tial forces and accepting losses, in South Vietnam over a long
period of time...

The reaction to the assumed SEATO action among concerned
non-Communist governments would vary widely. The Asian members
of SEATO would find renewed confidence in the organization and
the US, if the plan were to go well. If, on the other hand, the
SEATO action were to become costly, prolonged, or to involve
heavy casualties, the Asian members would soon become disenchanted
and look to the US to 'do something’ to lessen the burden and to
solve the problem. The UK and France would be likely to oppose
the assumed SEATO action, and their reluctance to participate
could be overcome only with great difficulty, if at all.

In this instance, and as we will see, later, the Intelligence
Community's estimates of the likely results of U.S. moves are conspicu-
ously more pessimistic (and more realistic) than the other staff papers
presented to the President. This SNIE was based on an assumption that
the SEATO foree would total about 25,000 men. It is hard to imagine a
more sharp contrast than between this paper, which foresees no serious
impact on the insurgency from proposed intervention, and Supplemental
Note 2, to be quoted next.

82 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
