Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The initiative to come to the conference table and thus end the fighting
was left strictly to the enemy and depended on his appreciation of his
own impotence. It looked as though the communists were to have all the
options. j

The JCS expected any strategy to fail if it did not include
among its courses of action some provision for the seizure of the initia-
tive. They said as much in each of their recommendations. General
Westmoreland was of a similar bent, and he stated explicitly that the
enclave strategy was "too negative." 178/ Nevertheless, both Westmore-
land and the JCS are on record stating that 44 battalions would not be
enough to seize the initiative from the enemy either. Westmoreland told-
the JCS on 2 June that he felt substantial increases of forces would be
required over and above the 4) battalions in 1966. The U.S. would be
too busy building up its forces in 1965 to seize the initiative from the
enemy during that year. 179/ JCSM-515-65 of 2 July, which contained the
JCS recommendation for the full 44 battalions, included the following
paragraph: é

"Pursuant to your discussions with the JCS on 28 June 1965,
there is furnished in the Annex hereto a progrem for the deploy-
ment of such additional forces to South Vietnam at this time as
are required to insure that the VC/DRV cannot win in South Viet-
nam at their present level of commitment." /Empnasis added

The JCS went on to recommend the concurrent implementation of stepped-up
air action against the DRV as "an indispensable component of this over-
all program." Thus, the JCS, who in March 1965 were recommending 27
battalions to "stem the tide and assume the offensive,” 180/ were ready -
to admit in July of that year that 4 battalions wowld only be enough to
hold the fort and that even greater effort would be required to seize

the initiative.

When the Secretary of Defense came to Saigon during the third
week of July 1965, he was introduced to General Westmoreland's latest
ideas concerning the employment of U.S. and Free World Military Assistance
Force (FWMAF) forces. Westmoreland laid out for the Secretary the force
requirements projected into 1966. Force ratios based on estimates of
enemy build-up capability and projections of the RVNAF rate of build-up
called for the 4) US-FWMAF battalions through the end of 1965. In con-
cert with Westmoreland's Concept of Operations, later formalized end
published on 30 August, the 44 battalions were labeled Phase I forces.
Secretary McNamara left Saigon with the first estimate by Westmoreland
of the requirements for assuming the offensive in 1966. Phase II was
mye by Westmoreland to require 24 additionel maneuver battalions.
161 :

As an indication of Westmoreland's expectations for the 44 Phase I
maneuver battalions which are the subject of this paper, there is no better

Ly TOP SECRET - Sensitive
