Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

_ 37. A Chinese Communist force of 150,000,

added to Viet Minh forces, would probably be
able to overrun the Tonkin delta area before
effective assistance could be brought to bear.
The Chinese Communists now have, and will
probably continue to have during the period
of this estimate, sufficient jet and piston air-
craft, independent of operations in Korea, for
small-scale but damaging attacks against
French Union installations in Tonkin. With
surprise, they probably could neutralize the
‘French Air Forces in Tonkin. The Chinese
Communist air forces do not appear, however,
‘to possess the capability at present of conduct-
ing sustained air operations in Indochina be-
cause of a lack of improved airfields in south
China and stockpiles of supplies. Such prep-
arations would take several months.

38. We believe that whether or not hostilities
are concluded in Korea, the Chinese Commu-
nists will not invade Indochina during the
period of this estimate.* Although they pos-
sess the capability, the following considera-
tions militate against intervention by regular
Chinese Communist forces or by large num-
bers of Chinese Communist “volunteers”:

‘The Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint
Staff, believes that the intelligence available is
insufficient to permit a conclusion at this time
that the Chinese Communists will or will not
invade Indochina prior to mid-1954.

a. The Communists probably consider that
their present strategy in Indochina promises
success in a prolonged struggle and produces
certain immediate advantages. It diverts
badly needed French and US resources from
Europe et relatively small cost to the Commu-
nists. It provides opportunities to advance
international Communist interests while pre-
serving the fiction of “autonomous” national
liberation movements, and it provides an in-
strument, the Viet Minh, with which Commu-
nist China and the USSR can indirectly exert
military and psychological pressures on the
peoples and governments of Laos, Cambodia,
and Thailand.

b. Communist leadership is aware that the
West, and in particular the US, would prob-
ably retaliate against Communist China if
Chinese Communist forces should invade
Indochina. We believe that fear of such re-
taliation and of the major war which might
result are important deterrents to open Chi-
nese Communist intervention in Indochina.

39. We believe that the Communist objective
to secure control of all Indochina will not be
altered by an armistice in Korea or by Com-
munist “peace” tactics. However, the Com-
munists may decide that “peace” maneuvers
in Indochina would contribute to the attain-
ment of Communist global objectives, and to
the objective of the Viet Minh.

SECRET

93
