Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The object, as the U.S. advisors saw it, was to have a workable
national plan upon which to base the entire US-GVN effort.

The Strategic Hamlet Program soon became the unifying vehicle
to express the pacification process. The theory was that of physical
security first, then government programs to develop popular allegiance.
The fact was over~expansion, counter=productive coercion in some areas,
widespread mismanagement, and dishonesty. U.S, policymakers were not,
however, aware of how badly things were going until they became much
worse. Optimism dominated official thinking. No need was perceived
for new departures. Throughout the period of the Strategic Hamlet
Program ~~ that is, until Diem's regime was toppled in late 1963 --
the number of U.S. advisors remained relatively stable at its new
(1962) plateau.

The expectation that more U.S. advisors would mean better informa~
tion. for U.S. policymakers was not realized. One cannot judge accurately
the reasons why U.S. leaders in Vietnam and Washington thought the counter-
insurgent effort was making headway, but the fact that it was not is
crystal clear in retrospect. The expectation that GVN and U.S. interests
were sufficiently parallel to permit greater U.S. influence solely as a
result of a larger U.S. presence foundered on the personalities and the
felt necessities of the Ngo brothers. The extent to which RVNAF techni-
cal~tactical competence was increased during this period remains a subject
of disagreement but it was not increased sufficiently to "turn the tide!!
of the war. That much is indisputable.

ANOTHER ROUND OF INCREASES

—————

After Diem's fall there was a brief period of optimism based on the
expectation that the new military regime in Saigon would be more recep~
tive to U.S. advice than its predecessor had been. By the summer of 1964,
when the decision was made to expand the advisory effort again, this
optimistic hope had foundered on the fact of continued VC victories and
instability within the GVN.

NSAM 288 had, in March 1964, stated U.S. objectives in Vietnam in
the most unambiguous and sweeping terms. If there had been doubt that
the limited risk gamble undertaken by Eisenhower had been transformed
into an unlimited commitment under Kennedy, that doubt should have been
dispelled internally by NSAM 288's statement of objectives:

We seek an independent non-Communist South Vietnam.

We do not require that it serve as a Western base or
as a member of a Western Alliance. South Vietnam
must be free, however, to accept outside assistance

as required to maintain its security. This assistance
should be able to take the form not only of economic
and social measures but also police and military help
to root out and control insurgent elements.

Vv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
