Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

particular outrage in the South. It should be possible, for example,

to publish weekly lists of outrages in the South and to have it clearly
understood that these outrages are the cause of such action against the
North as may be occurring in the current period. Such a more generalized
pattern of reprisal would remove much of the difficulty involved in find-
ing precisely matching targets in response to specific atrocities. Even
in such a more general pattern, however, it would be important to insure
that the general level of reprisal action remained in close correspondence
with the level of outrages in the South. We must keep it clear at every
stage both to Hanoi and to the world, that our reprisals will be reduced
or stopped when outrages in the South are reduced or stopped -- and that
we are not attempting to destroy or conquer North Vietnam.

"h, In the early stages of such a course, we should take the appro-
priate occasion to make clear our firm intent to undertake reprisals on
any further acts, major or minor, that appear to us and the GVN as
indicating Hanoi's support. We would announce that our two governments
have been patient and forebearing in the hope that Hanoi would come to
its senses without the necessity of our having to take further action;
but the outrages continue and now we must react against those who are
responsible; we will not provoke; we will not use our force indiscrimi-
nately; but we can no longer sit by in the face of repeated acts of terror
and violence for which the DRV is responsible.

"5. Having once made this announcement, we should execute our re-

_ prisal policy with as low a level of public noise as possible. It is to
our interest that our acts should be seen -- but we do not wish to boast
about them in ways that make it hard for Hanoi to shift its ground. We
should instead direct maximum attention to the continuing acts of violence
which are the cause of our continuing reprisals.

"6, This reprisal policy should begin at a low level. Its level of
force and pressure should be increased only gradually -- and as indicated
above it should be decreased if VC terror visibly decreases. The object
would not be to "win" an air war against Hanoi, but rather to influence
the course of the struggle in the South.

"7, At the same time it should be recognized that in order to main-
tain the power of reprisal without risk of excessive loss, an. "air war"
may in fact be necessary. We should therefore be ready to develop a
separate justification for energetic flak suppression and if necessary
for the destruction of Communist air power. The essence of such an
explanation should be that these actions are intended solely to insure
the effectiveness of a policy of reprisal, and in no sense represent
any intent to wage offensive war against the North. These distinctions
should not be difficult to develop.

"8. It remains quite possible, however, that this reprisal policy
would get us quickly into the level of military activity contemplated in
the so-called Phase II of our December planning. It may even get us

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
