Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Laos annex to the Gilpatric Report was issued on the 28th, in an
atmosphere wholly dominated by the crisis in Laos. On the 29th, Kennedy's
go-ahead on the Task Force's original military recommendations was squeezed
into a day overwhelmingly devoted to Laos. This was the day of the cable,
Just cited, alerting CINCPAC for troop movements to Thailand and possibly
Vietnam. The "SEATO Plan 5/60" referred to in the closing paragraph of
the cable was the plan for moving major units into Laos.

On May 1 (the Monday meeting referred to in the cable), Kennedy again
deferred any decision on putting troops into Laos. According to available
accounts, there is a strong sense by now (although no formal decision)
that the U.S. would not go into Laos: that if the cease-fire failed, we
would make a strong stand, instead, in Thailand and Vietnam. (On the 28th,
in a speech to a Democratic dinner in Chicago, the President had hinted
at this:

We are prepared to meet our obligations, but we can only defend
the freedom of those who are determined to be free themselves.
We can assist them -- we will bear more than our share of the
burden, but we can only help those who are ready to bear their
share of the burden themselves.) 13/

Reasonable qualifications, undoubtedly, but ones that seemed to suggest
that intervention in Laos would be futile. On Sunday (the 30th), another
hint came in remarks by Senator Fulbright on a TV interview show: he opposed
intervention in Laos, and said he was confident the government was seeking
“another solution."

So the decision anticipated Monday, May 1, in the JCS cable to CINCPAC
was not made that day after all. But that day a new draft of the Task
Force Report was issued. It contained only one significant change (other
than blending the April 28 annex into the basic paper). The original draft
contained a paragraph (under "political objectives") recommending we
"obtain the political agreement /presumably from the SEATO membership/
needed to permit the prompt implementation of SEATO contingency plans pro-
viding for military intervention in South Vietnam should this become neces-
sary to prevent the loss of the country to Communism."

In the May 1 revision, the following sentence was added to the para-
graph: "The United States should be prepared to intervene unilaterally
in fulfillment of its commitment under Article IV, 2.of Manila Pact, and
should make its determination to do so clear through appropriate public
statements, diplomatic discussions, troop deployments, or other means." 1}/
(The cited clause in the Manila (SEATO) Pact, which the paper did not quote,

If, in the opinion of any of the Parties, the inviolability
or the integrity of the territory or the sovereignty or political
independence of any Party in the treaty area or of any other State
or territory to which the provisions of paragraph 1 of this
Article from time to time apply is threatened in any way other

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
