Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(3) Defense of the borders, the DMZ and the northern
provinces. MACY considers that it must meet the enemy
threat in I Corps Tactical Zone and has already deployed
there slightly over 50% of all US maneuver battalions.

US forces have been thinned out in the highlands, notwith-
standing an expected enemy offensive in the early future.

(4) Offensive Operations. Coupling the increased
requirement for the defense of the cities and subsequent

reentry into the rural areas, and the heavy requirement

for defense of the I Corps Zone, MACV does not have adequate
forces at this time to resume the offensive in the remainder
of the country, nor does it have adequate reserves against
the contingency of simultaneous large-scale enemy offensive
action throughout the country. 15/

The conclusion was obvious:

Forces currently assigned to MACY, plus the residual
Program Five forces yet to be delivered, are inadequate
in numbers and balance to carry out the strategy and to
accomplish the tasks described above in the proper priority.

However, it was the extent and magnitude of General Wheeler's request
that stimulated the initiation of a thorough review of the direction of
U.S. policy in SVN. To contend with, and defeat, the new enemy threat,
MACV indicated a total requirement of 206,756 spaces over the 525,000
ceiling imposed by Program Five, or a new proposed ceiling of 731,756.

All of these forces, which included three Division equivalents, 15 tactical
fighter squadrons, and augmentation for current Navy programs, were to be
deployed into country by the end of CY 68. These additional forces were

+o be delivered in three packages as follows:

(1) Immediate Increment, Priority One: To be deployed
by 1 May 68. Major elements include one brigade of the 5th
Mechanized Division with a mix of one infantry, one armored
and one mechanized battalion; the Fifth Marine Division (less
RLT-26); one armored cavalry regiment; eight tactical fighter
squadrons; and a groupment of Navy units to augment on going
programs.

(2) Immediate Increment, Priority Two: To be deployed
as soon as possible but prior to 1 Sep 68. Major elements
include the remainder of the 5th Mechanized Division, and four
tactical fighter squadrons. It is desirable that the ROK
Light Division be deployed within this time frame.

(3) Follow-On Increment: To be deployed by the end of
cy 68. Major elements include one infantry division, three
tactical fighter sauadrons, and units to further .augment

Navy Programs. 16/

15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
