Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

as well as to the threat of direct attack. Unless substantial
outside aid were forthcoming, it is possible that in such a
case, political pressure alone would be sufficient to bring
about the accommodation of Thailand to international communism-
within &@ year. However, substential aid, together with as-
surance of support by the United States and the UN might be
sufficient to preserve a non-communist government in Thailand
in spite of any form of pressure short of overt attack.

13. Thailand would be difficult to defend against an
overt attack from the east by way of the traditional invasion
route through Cambodia, Thailand is more defensible against
attack from Burma owing to the mountainous terrain and poor
communications of the Thai-Burmese border. In either case it
might be possible to defend an area in southern Thailand
centering on Bangkok. Since any attack on Thailand would
necessarily be preceded by communist encroachment on Indochina
or Burma, the defense of Thailand would probably be part of
a@ broader pattern of hostilities.

14, If the loss of Thailand followed the loss of Burma,
the defense of Indochina would be out-flanked; and any sub-
stantial communist forces based on Thailand would render the
position of the French Union Forces in Indochina untenable in
the long run. If the collapss of Thailand followed the loss
of Indochina, the psychological and political consequences
would accelerate the deterioration of Burma. However, the
military consequences in such @ case would be less immediate,
owing to the difficult terrain of the Thai-Burmese border
country.

"15. Communist control of Thailand would aggravate the
already serious security problem presented by the Thai-Malayan
border and greatly increase the difficulties of the British
security forces in Malaya. However, assuming control of the
sea by the Western Powers, Malaya offers a defensible position
against even a full-scale land attack. The Kra Isthmus of the
Malayan Peninsula would afford the best secondary line of
defense egainst total communist domination of Southeast Asia
and the East Indies. Such a defense would effectively protect
Indonesia against external communist pressure. By thus de-
fending Malaya and Indonesia, the anti-communist forces would
continue to hold the most important strategic material re-
sources of the area, as well as strategic air and naval bases.
and lines of communication.

16. The strategic interdevendence -of the countries in
Southeast Asia, and the cumulative effect of a successful

ue)

cp

t=
=

ANNEX

C 12h = TOP SECRET

71
