Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

the ageression of both f
hes a literal monnings
Vivendi was signed in 1946 wivh

ast year Cambodia ant Laos became

Fyonch Union, and recently og

Union was proclaimed. The

dotermine the meaning of nese Nee has been dolayed un
settlec, with the French premising the

st the same concessions.

penton + is
ceive at loa

ee has a new liberal constitution and has mide soma pro=
gress in adcptir 5 Me forms of democratye French officials ar

enlled acvisors oat heir Cambodian coutterparts and exers trcir. ay~
thority largely beh ind tho scengs. i

There has been increasing evidence of Carbodian impatior
over the delay in fixing their final status, and a determination ee win
wider auvonomy and sovereignty. M. Pisnon as formar Governor of
Cambodian ean be cxpected to He sympathetic te these demands.

ien, thinly scattercd
al ae eas After the
ig as King of Laos

Laos with a pcpulation of only cne mill
olong the upper Mekong, is evon less a politic
wer tho French set up the Prince of Luong Fra

208

under a temporary agreement similar to that with Cambodia. Tke French
administration in ee is, howerer, mach more direes and open The

répion = been gen norally “perceful, but there have recently ee rumors
of concentration of "Free Laotians" in the Siamese provinces aleng
Mekong which may forecast reids inte Inéochinese territory. ~The ob-
jective of the Free Laotians is apparently an indepondent greater Laos
including both tno French provines and territories inhabited by Laotians
in Sian. :

G. Internatiens? Relations,

le United States -' Post war relations between the Unitod States
and Indochina fot off to a bad startswith President Roosoveltts views
on internationel] trustecship for strategic areas in the hands of
powers unable to defend them, followed by the overenthusiastie activi-
tics of cortain OSS agents im the period just before and after the
Japaness surrendcrs The belicf that the policy of the United States
is to throw the French out of Indochina still persists in many circles
both jin Indochina ind in Franco. We are also blamed for permitting the
Chincse and English to cecupy the northeri and southern halves of t
so troops. Our persistent refusal to supply
8

+
he
fn

4

u

country toe disarm Japan Pr

equipment and arms tor French military operations in Indechina. is
sore subject sith most Pronen arny ee: dnovher souree of irri-

tation has been the alnost universal tendency of american correspondents
visiting Indochina to write articles sj eritical of the French.
As conditions have deteriorated in Indochina (and in Europe)
there nes been more understanding cf our policy and rors “aacies to
ee our i and assistance in implementing French plans, and
¥%

ions are relatively cordial.

SEGRET
165
