173.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

III. AFTERMATH

The President's decisions were apparently sent to Nolting on the lth,
in a cable that is taken essentially verbatim from the description of the
Rusk/McNamara memorandum (paragraphs 3 and 4) of the program the U.S. was
offering and the response expected from Diem. But the cable added some
new language, putting still more emphasis on pressuring Diem:

-ee-1t is most important that Diem come forth with changes which
will be recognized as having real substance and meaning. Rightly
or wrongly, his regime is widely criticized abroad end in the U.S.,
and if we are to give our substantial support we must be able to
point to real administrative political and social reforms and a
real effort to widen its base that will give maximum confidence to
the American people, as well as to world opinion that our efforts
are not directed towards the support of an unpopular or ineffective
regime, but rather towards supporting the combined efforts of all
the non-Communist people of the GVN against a Communist take-over.
You should make this quite clear, and indicate that the U.S. con-
tribution to the proposed joint effort depends heavily upon his
response to this point,

' You should inform Diem that, in our minds, the concept of the
joint undertaking envisages a much closer relationship than the
present one of acting in an advisory capacity only. We would
expect to share in the decision-making process in the political,
economic and military fields as they affect the security situa-

tion. 21/

Overall, then, what Kennedy ended up doing was to offer Diem a good
deal less than he was expecting, and nevertheless to couple this offer with
demands on Diem for which, on the basis of the available record, we can
only assume he was totally unprepared. Nolting's first cable, though,
reported Diem listened quietly and "took our proposals rather better than
I expected."

Here are some extracts:

..-As anticipated [ey Washington/, his first question was re intro-
duction US combat troops. I replied along line para . reftel....

Diem said that he presumed I realized that our proposals in-
volved the question of the responsibility of the Government of
Viet Nam. Viet Nam, he said, did not want to be a protectorate.

I said thet this was well understood; we for our part did not
wish to make it one. Diem also pointed out that GVN was constantly
in process of making reforms but major action could not be taken
without thorough consideration and without having always in mind

138 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
