Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of riots which:

"Broke out when a gang of reactionaries, taking advantage
of the mistakes committed during the political implementation
of land reform, molested soldiers and cadres of the people's
regime, seized quantities of arms and blocked traffic. Many
dead and wounded are reported among the soldiers and cadre....
Drastic measures have been taken to maintain security....Regional
administrative committees have intensified efforts to correct
mistakes committed in the agrarian reform program, and are now
satisfying the legitimate aspirations of all compatriots, including
the Catholics...." 33/

On 17 November, however, Hanoi disclosed that "troops and cadres....tried

to reason with the people but were man-handled. This ended in a clash

in which a few persons were killed and wounded, including some army
men....Security services are now taking the necessary steps to maintain

order and security and to protect the compatriots' lives and property...." 3h/
On 21 November, Nhan Dan, the government newspaper, noted that: "Nghe An

is the province in which party organizations existed as early as 1930. But
it is in the same province that the most serious mistakes have been made...,'
and went on to deplore the execution and beatings of party members. 35/

What happened indicates that the populace of North Vietnam
must have been living at the time under severe tension. The People's Army
of Vietnam (PAVN) had been deployed in strength into the rural areas to
support the Land Reform Campaign, and it was reportedly through PAVN chan-
nels that the DRV first learned of impending revolt. Local garrisons had
been reinforced as citizens grew more restive, and units composed of
regrouped southerners were sent into exceptionally tense areas.

On November 9, 1956, several hundred aggrieved peasants
assembled in a market place near Vinh--a predominantly Catholic area--to
petition an ICC team to arrange for some of them to migrate to South Vietnam,
and for return of confiscated land to others. The following morning a
special DRV propaganda team and a contingent of NVA troops arrived, and
several arrests were attempted. A riot ensued, which spread into insur-
rection. On the night of 13 November PAVN troops stormed into the town,
scattering the rebels and inflicting heavy casualties. Thousands of
peasants then swarmed over their local government offices, destroying
land records, and blocking roads. Some militia deserted and joined the
rebels, and attacks on nearby DRV troops were attempted. Bernard Fall,
in a 1957 article, described four columns of some 10,000 peasants marching
in the province capital, seizing arms from troops, and forcing party cadres
to sign confessions of crimes. 36/ Two reinforced army divisions, some
20,000 strong, were committed to put down the uprising. 37

The casualties resulting from the revolt are not known.

Fall states that "close to 6000 farmers were deported or executed." 38/
Ngo Dinh Diem in Saigon cited "massacres" in the North, claimed to have

13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
