Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

iw TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The overall evaluation is that the course of action
recommended in this memorandum -- if the military and
political moves are properly integrated and executed with
continuing vigor and visible determination -- stands a
good chance of achieving an acceptable outcome within a
reasonable time in Vietnam.

Never again while he was Secretary of Defense would McNamara make so
optimistic a statement about Vietnam -- except in public.

This concluding paragraph of McNamara's memorandum spoke of
political, as well as military, "vigor" and "determination." Earlier
in the paper, under the heading "Expanded political moves," he had
elaborated on this point, writing:

Together with the above military moves, we should
take political initiatives in order to lay a groundwork
for a favorable political settlement by clarifying our
objectives and establishing channels of communications.
At the same time as we 4re taking steps to turn the tide
in South Vietnam, we would make quiet moves through diplo-
matic channels (a) to open a dialogue with Moscow and
Hanoi, and perhaps the VC, looking first toward disabusing
them of any misconceptions as to our goals and second toward
laying the groundwork for a settlement when the time is ripe;
(b) to keep the Soviet Union from deepening its military in
the world until the time when settlement can be achieved;
and (c) to cement support for US policy by the US public,
allies and friends, and to keep international opposition
at a manageable level. Our efforts may be unproductive
until the tide begins to turn, but nevertheless they should
be made.

Here was scarcely a program for drastic political action.
McNamara.'s essentially procedural (as opposed to substantive) recom-
mendations amounted to little more than saying that the United States

should provide channels for the enemy's discrete and relatively face-
saving surrender when he decided that the game had grown too costly.
This was, in fact, what official Washington (again with the exception
of Ball) meant’ in mid-1965 when it spoke of a "nolitical settlement."
(As Melamara noted in a footnote, even this went too far for Ambassador-
designate Lodge, whose view was that "tany further initiative by us
now [oefore we are. strong/ would simply harden the Communist resolve not
to stop fighting. '" In this view Ambassadors Taylor and Johnson con-
curred, except that they would maintain “discreet contacts with the

Soviets.") 13/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
et
