Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

firmness in the event negotiating pressure should become compelling. 61/

Reactions to this tentative policy change were unfavorable. It
was seen as likely to have a demoralizing impact on the GVN. It was
also seen as possibly eroding the impression of strong U.S. resolve,
which the reprisal air strikes were believed to have created. For
example, Ambassador Taylor cabled:

",..rush to conference table would serve to confirm to
CHICOMS that U.S. retaliation for destroyer attacks was
transient phenomenon and that firm CHICOM response in form of
commitment to defend NVN has given U.S. "Paper tiger" second
thoughts....

"In Vietnam sudden backdown from previously strongly held
U.S. position on /Plaine des Jarres/ withdrawal prior to con-
ference on laos would have potentially disastrous effect.
Morale and will to fight and particular willingness to push
ahead with arduous pacification task...would be undermined by
what would look like evidence that U.S. seeking to take advantage of
any slight improvement in non-Communist position as excuse for
extricating itself from Indo-China via Fee een? route....

"Under circumstances, we see very little hope that results
of such a conference would be advantageous to us. Moreover,
prospects of limiting it to consideration of only Laotian
problem appear at this time juncture to be dimmer than ever...." 62/

CONCERN OVER TONKIN REPRISAL SIGNALS

Contained in Ambassador Taylor's views was yet another of the
Administration's reflections on the impact of the Tonkin Gulf incidents.
Officials developed mixed feelings regarding the effect of the Tonkin
reprisals for signaling firm U.S. commitments in Southeast Asia. On
one hand, it was conceded that the reprisals and the actions which accom-
panied them represented the most forceful expression of U.S. resolve to
date. Improvements were perceived in South Vietnamese morale, and the
combination of force and restraint demonstrated was believed effective
in interrupting communist momentum and forcing a reassessment of U.S.
intentions. 63/ On the other hand, they reflected concern that these
effects might not last and that the larger aspects of U.S. determination
might still be unclear.

Several officials and agencies indicated that our actions in the
.fonkin Gulf represented only one step along a continually demanding
route for the United States. They expressed relief that if a persuasive
impression of firmness were to be created relative to the general security
of Southeast Asia, we could not rest on our laurels. Ambassador Taylor
expressed the limited impact of the Tonkin Gulf action as follows:

. 19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
