Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Diem's preoccupation with security paradoxically interfered with his
ability to compete with the communists in the countryside. In effect,
he decided on a strategy of postponing the politicizing of the peasants
until he had expunged his arch-foes. Diem"s official biography under-
scores this point:

"The main concern of President Ngo Dinh Diem is therefore
to destroy the sources of demoralization, however powerful,
before getting down to the problem of endowing Vietnam with
a democratic apparatus in the Western sense of the word." 118/

Madame Nhu, his sister-in-law, was vehement that any political liberalization
would have operated to Viet Cong advantage: “If we open the window, not

only sunlight, but many bad things will fly in, also." 119/ To hold a
contrary view does not necessarily argue that democratization was the only
way Diem could have met his political opposition in the villages; it does
seem, however, that in failing to meet aspirations there by some departure
from the inefficiently repressive course he adopted, Diem erred. In con-
cluding that he did not have to reckon with peasant attitudes, Diem

evidently operated from two related misapprehensions: that somehow the
peasants would remain politically neutral while he eliminated the com-
munists, and that the Viet Cong were essentially a destructive force. 120/ Tt
was not that Diem could not vyocalize a sound estimate of the communist
political threat; his own description of communist operations to an
Australian journalist was quite accurate;

"In China, during the Indo-China war and now here, the
Communists have always sheltered in open base areas of diffi-
cult access, in areas where there are no roads. They have
made their headquarters in the jungle. Cautiously, sometimes
only one man at a time, they move into a village and establish
a contact, then a cell until the village is theirs to command.
Having got one village, they move to a second village and from
a second to third, until eventually they need not live in any
of these villages, but merely visit them periodically. When this
stage is reached, they are in a position to build training camps
and even start crude factories and produce home-made guns,
grenades, mines, and booby traps.

"This is all part of the first phase. The second phase is
to expand control and link up with Communist groups in other bases.
To begin with, they start acts of violence through their under-
ground ‘organizations. They kill village chiefs, headmen, and
others working for the government and, by so doing, terrorize
the population, not necessarily by acts of violence against the
people but by demonstrating that there is no security for them
in accepting leadership from those acknowledging the leadership of
the government. Even with much smaller numbers of troops than
the constituted authority, it is not’difficult now for the Com-
munists to seize the initiative. A government has responsibility
for maintaining supply to the civil population, of keeping roads,

48 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
