Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Annamese reaction to French moves has been sharp, and following
the suspension of the Fontainebleau negotiations, there were pro-Viet
Nam manifestations in Saigon. The ambush of a French supply
column near Hanoi by Annamese soldiers, during which the French
suffered 52 casualties (one of the worst of many incidents during the
past several months), may have been related to the opening of the
Dalat Conference.

While it is to he doubied that the French will allow the Fontaine-.
bleau Conference to break down completely, Embassy Paris quotes
Baudet as having stated that French officials are in no hurry to speed
up negotiations until the pacification of Indochina, and particularly of
Cochinchina, has been completed. In this connection, Consul Saigon
reports that more troops are arriving in Indochina and that the French
military position has grown much stronger. Meanwhile, the Saigon
press has been carrying vitriolic attacks against Viet Nam. Since
this press is conipletely controled by the French, there would appear
to be no official objection to this Tine. :

In his latest report, Consul Hanoi states that there now exists an
imminent danger of an open break between the French and Viet Nam,
He adds that a rupture of relations would probably be followed by s
period of anarchy and that, although the French could quickly over-
run the country, they could not—as they themselves adinit—pacify it
except through a long and bitter military operation.

In conclusion, it is SE.\‘s view that the \umumese are faced with
the choice of a costly submission to the French or of open resistance,
and that the French may be preparing to resort to force in order to
secure their position throughout Indochina. It may not be advisable
for this Government to take official notice of this situation during the
Peace Conference, but the Department should be prepared, SEA

“For docunientation on the conference, held between July 25 and October 15,
see vol. —, pp. — i. : i
believes, to express to the French, in view of our interest in peace and
orderly development of dependent peoples, our hope that they will
abide by the spirit of the March 6 convention, ty ;
A[snor] L[ow] M[orrar]

rey
