Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

response to these "further direct provocations by the Hanoi regime,” and

to these "continued acts of aggression." The words "retaliation" and
"reprisal" were carefully avoided and the joint US/GYN statement released
in Saigon the same day actually characterized the air attack action for
the first time as "air operations.”
The change in terminology from "retaliation" or "reprisal" to
"response," from a specific set of incidents to "continued aggression,”
and from a single attack to "air operations” was clearly deliberate.
A strict reprisal policy, although permitting. the US to strike the North,
would heve left the initiative in the enemy's hands and would have re-
stricted the US to the kinds of responses that could be represented as
equivalent or "fitting." But, more important, the new terminology re-
flected a conscious U.S. decision to broaden the reprisal concept as
gradually and as imperceptibly as possible to accommodate a much wider
policy of sustained, steadily intensifying air attacks against North
Vietnam, at a rate and on a scale to be determined by the U.S As will
be discussed further in the next section, that decision was being force-
fully pressed upon the President by his principal advisers immediately
after FLAMING DART I (February 7). Whether the President had tacitly or
explicitly accepted this course before FLAMING DART II (February 11), is
not recorded. But it would have been important to him politically in
any event to play it with a minimm of drama and to preserve maximum
flexibility. It seemed sensible to make it all appear as a logical
sequence of almost unavoidable steps, to avoid portraying any single
move as a watershed or any single decision as irreversible. The
February 11 strikes did constitute a much sharper break with past policy
than any previous US action in Vietnam; they set the stage for the con-
tinuing bombing prosram that was now to be launched in earnest; but they
were presented end discussed publicly in very muted tones.

Some of the President's private comments on the attacks are
reported by one of his more perceptive biographers, Philip Geyelin,
in the following terms: .

His discussion of the first two retaliatory attacks, follow-
ing Pleiku and Qui Nhon, was almost offhand. To one visitor, he
lampooned the ‘crisis' tones of the television broadcasters, the
long faces, end the grim talk of big, black limousines assembled
for weightly policy-making.

They woke us up in the middle of the night, and we woke
them up in the middle’of the night. Then they did it again,
and we did it again, was the way he described it. If he sus-
pected he was on the front edge of a major plunge into a fair-
sized ground war in Asia, he hid his concern masterfully, dis-
missing all the excitement as the sort of thing that happens
periodically.

28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
