Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

4. (S) Military operations in Southeast Asia have been con-
ducted within a framework of policy guidelines established to
achieve US objectives without expanding the conflict. Principal
among these policy guidelines are: :

a. We seek to avoid widening the war into a conflict with
Communist China or the USSR.

b. We have no present intention of invading NVN.
c. We do not seek the overthrow of the Government of NVN.

a. We are guided by the principles set forth in the Geneva
Accords of 1954 and 1962.

5. (TS) Although some progress is being made within this
framework, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the rate of
progress has been and continues to be slow, largely because US
military power has been restrained in a manner which has reduced
significantly its impact and effectiveness. Limitations have
been imposed on military operations in four ways:

a. The attacks on the enemy military targets have been
on such a prolonged, graduated basis that the enemy has adjusted
psychologically, economically, and militarily; e.g., inured
themselves to the difficulties and hardships accompanying the
war, dispersed their logistic support system, and developed
alternate transport routes and a significant air defense
system.

b. Areas of sanctuary, containing important military
targets, have been afforded the enemy.

c¢. Covert Operations: in Cambodia and Laos have been
restricted.

d. Major importation of supplies into NVN by sea has been

permitted.

6. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that US objectives
jn Southeast Asia can be achieved within the policy framework
set forth in paragraph 4, above, providing the level of assistance
the enemy receives from his communist allies is not significantly
jnereased and there is no diminution of US efforts. However,
progress will continue to be slow so long as present limitations
on oe ary operations continues in effect. Further, at our

: 1ce, termination of NVN's military effort is not expected
