Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

strong logistical effort and their ability to organize and
exploit the people under their control in the South enable them
+o counter US increases by smaller increases of their own.

Over a ten-month period the Communists would probably be able
to introduce sufficient new units into the South to offset

the US maneuver battalion increments of the various force
levels given above. 23/

These CIA assessments, then, painted very bleak alternatives for
U.S. policymakers. If U.S. policy and force levels did not change, there
was a high risk that ARVN and the GVN would be seriously weakened, perhaps
decisively so. The US would assume the major burden of the war, and the
situation would be no better than a standoff. If U.S. forces were increased
by as much as 100,000, the Communists would probably be able to introduce
sufficient new units in the South to offset this increase. If the U.S.
changed its strategy toward greater control over population centers, with
or without increased forces, the Communists would adjust their strategy
so as to preclude the achievement of U.S. aims.

In his various papers for the Working Group, Assistant Secretary of
State William Bundy attempted a deliberate approach. He furnished one
paper which outlined alternative courses of action which he considered
deserved serious consideration. ah/ Another paper outlined a checklist
"to serve as a rough guide t the papers that need preparation under a
systematic code." 2

The alternative courses listed by Mr. Bundy were:

a. Accept the Wheeler/Westmoreland recommendation aimed
at sending roughly 100,000 men by 1 May and another 100,000
men by the end of 1968.

b. Change our military strategy, reducing the areas and
places we seek to control and concentrating far more heavily
on the protection of populated areas.

ec. Adopt option b above in the south, but extend our
bombing and other military actions against the North to try
to strangle the war there and put greater pressure on Hanoi
in this area.

d. Accept immediately those elements of the Wheeler/
Westmoreland proposals that could hope to affect the situ-
ation fayorably over the next four months or so, but do not
go beyond that in terms of force plans and related actions.

e. "Cut and shave" the Wheeler/Westmoreland proposals
and their action implications, but carry on basically in
accordance with present strategy.

f, "“Ali-out option.” “Announce that we were prepared
to hold in Vietnam no matter what developed." 26

(eal TOP SECRET - Sensitive
