Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

behind upon the French withdrawal. Despite an ICC request to delay
deployment while the matter was under advisement, TERM personnel

arrived on schedule, and without ICC sanction. In 1957 the ICC pro-
tested the circumstances of TERM's introduction, but was content with
requesting a periodic report of its activities. 115/ The same 1957
report delivered an ICC opinion that SEATO was not a U.S.-GVN alliance
prescribed by the Geneva Settlement, and a 1958 report put the ICC on
record (the Polish member dissenting) that the GVN might be given "credit"
for the war material withdrawn by the French prior to 30 June 1956 in
accepting like equipment from the U.S. 116/ A 1959 report ruled that
Bien Hoa was not a new military base, and authorized TERM to remain until
31 December 1960. In 1960 the ICC acceded to an increase in the MAAG
from 342 to 685 personnel. 117/

Nonetheless, it is clear on the record that U.S. and GVN
cooperation with the ICC was little more than pro forma. Convinced that
the ICC was impotent in inhibiting the behavior or restricting the
arming of the DRV, both the U.S. and the GVN pursued their goals without
serious regard for the fixed levels of arms envisaged at Geneva, or for
attempts by the ICC to regulate arms. Both governments appreciated that
the inability of the other Geneva Conference powers to concert action,
well demonstrated in the spring of 1956, constituted international con-~-
donenent of status quo in Vietnam, and while both apparently preferred
to avoid controversy with the ICC, neither was disposed to consider the
Icc or the Settlement it guarded as other than a secondary consideration
to GVN security.

E. The Situation in 1956

On June 1, 1956, a prestigious group of citizens assembled in
Washington as the "American Friends of Vietnam." They heard Senator
John F. Kennedy characterize Vietnam as: 118

"(1)...the cornerstone of the Free World in Southeast
Asia, the keystone in the arch, the finger in the dike...The
fundamental tenets of this nation's foreign policy, in short,
depend in considerable measure upon a strong and free Viet-
namese nation. :

"(2)...Vietnam represents a proving ground of democracy in
Asia...the alternative to Communist dictatorship. If this
democratic experiment fails, if some one million refugees have
fled the totalitarianism of the North only to find neither
freedom nor security in the South, then weakness, not strength,
will characterize the meaning of democracy in the minds of
still more Asians....

"(3)...Vietnam represents a test of American responsibility
and determination in Asia. If we are not the parents of little

31 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
