Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

1O.. Lhe Roles and Missions Study

In response to a May 27 directive from Deputy Ambassador Porter,
the Director JUSPAO had named Colonel George Jacobson chairman of a
study group to define RD strategy and the roles and missions of the
various elements. The group submitted its report on August 24, 1966.

The major recommendations of Roles and Missions Study were:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(12)

(12)

(13)

The many elements and echelons charged with destroying
vC infrastructure are confusing. The National Police

should have the primary mission and responsibility for
this goal.

Reforms in basic GVN attitudes are necessary. Many rural
residents believe that the US condones corrupt practices.
This must be changed.

ARVN forces should be encouraged to increase participation
in pacification activities.

PF/RF should be developed into a constabulary-type organization.

PF/RF should be transferred from the Ministry of Security
to the Ministry of Revolutionary Development.

CIDG should be stationed only in remote areas.

The Vietnamese Information Service is not effective at local
level. It should assume supporting role to propaganda
activities of other agencies.

A Directorate of Intelligence should be established to
coordinate all intelligence activities.

Reinstitution of the MACV Subsector Advisor Fund is urged.

ARVN Divisions (eventually Corps as well) should be removed
from the chain of command in RD affairs. For instance, there
were no USAID, JUSPAO, or CAS representatives at ARVN divi-
sion headquarters.

Because of generally bad behavior of ARVN Ranger units, they
should be disbanded with Rangers reassigned as individuals
throughout the Army.

The physical and attitudinal consequences of present air and
artillery employment policies should be studied.

A logistic system which provides for US government control un-

til delivery of material to end users should be substituted
for the present MAP procedures.

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
