/06

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

36. Deputy Director of Viet-Nam Working Group, Theodore J.C. Heavner,

Address Mede Before Nationel Sec & Leg Committee et the National
Convention of Veterans of Foreign Wars, in Seattle, Weshington,
August 25, 1963, "The Viet-Nam Situation,” Department of State
Bulletin, September 9, 1963; D. 392:

< Se ar
"In the light of long-term trends in Communist and free Asia let me
now review the elements of U.S. strategy and policy. Our policy in the
Far East can be summed up in these four points:

"]. To stand firmly behind our commitments to the defense of inde-
pendent nations and to turn back any aggressive thrust from
communism ;

"2, To contribute as we are able to the prosperity and development
of nations which request our assistance as the surest way of
helping to build a system of free, viable, and strong nations
in Asia;

"3. To recognize the value of initiatives by the Pacific nations
themselves to develop their own modes of cooperation and com-
munication, and to stand ready to assist when called upon to
do so;

"h, .To work patiently for the realization of a Pacific commmity
of nations so prosperous and progressive that its attraction
will prove, in the long run, irresistible to those peoples
now kept by their rulers from participation in it."

x + &

"The Guerrilla War in Viet-Nam

"To understand why President Kennedy said in his state of the Union
message that ‘The spearpoint of aggression has been blunted in South Viet-
Nem,’ we need to consider the situation in the fall of 1961 and early
1962. The Vietnamese were quite plainly losing their fight against the
Communist guerrillas then.

"The Communist guerrillas, 1,500 strong, took and held overnight a
provincial capital in September of 1961, and, to underline the fact,
they publicly beheaded the Chief of Province there. The flow of rice into
Saigon, normally a rice export center, was choked off by the guerrillas
to, the point where the United States sent P.L. 480 rice to Saigon in early
1962. Enemy attacks in January of last year were running at the rate of
more than 120 per week. We even feared that the Communist Viet Cong might
soon be able to declare ‘a liberated area’ somewhere in the highlands.

C-38
