Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

was recognized that these recommendations were not palatable to President
Diem, but reorganization along the lines specified was regarded as essential
to successful accomplishment of the counterinsurgent effort. 26/

The CIP was an indictment of GVN failure to organize effectively
and to produce coordinated national plans. 27/ It advanced no operational
concepts for adoption by GVN. This obvious omission was corrected in the
“Geographically Phased Netional Level Operation Plan for Counterinsurgency"
which MAAG Vietnam published on 15 September 1961. 28/ Not only did this
plan specify the areas of primary interest for pacification operations --
as its title indicates -- it also set forth a conceptual outline of the
three sequential phases of actions which must be undertaken. In the first,
"preparatory phase,” the intelligence effort was to be concentrated in the
priority target areas, surveys were to be made to pinpoint needed economic
and political reforms, plans were to be drawn up, and military and politi-
cal cadres were to be trained for the specific objective area. 29/ The
second, or "military phase," would be devoted to clearing the objective area
with regular forces, then handing local security responsibility over to the
Civil Guard (CG) and to establishing GVN presence. 30/ In the final,
"security phase," the Self Defense Corps (SDC) would assume the civil
action-local security mission, the populace was to be "reoriented," politi-
eal control was to pass to civilian hands, and economic and social pro-
grams were to be initiated to consolidate government control. Military
units would be withdrawn as security was achieved and the target area
would be "secured" by the loyalty of its inhabitants -- a loyalty attribu-
table to GVN's successful responses to the felt needs of the inhabitants. 31/

First priority in this plan (1962 operations) was to go to six
provinces around Saigon and to the Kontwn area. Second priority (1963)
would be given to expansion southward into the Delta and southward in the
Central Highlands from Kontum. Third priority (1964) would continue the
spread of GVN control in the highlands and shift the emphasis in the south
to the provinces north and east of Saigon. Before any of these priority
actions were undertaken, however, it was proposed to conduct an ARVN sweep
in War Zone D, in the jungles northeast of Saigon, to reduce the danger

to the capital and to increase ARVN's self-confidence. 32/ (See Map 1.)

The geographically phased plan compleménted the earlier CIP.
Together, these two U.S. efforts constituted an outline blueprint for
action. It is, of course, arguable that this was the best conceivable
blueprint, but it was at least a comprehensive basis for refinement --
for arguments for different priorities or a changed "series of events"
in the process of pacification.

D. Initial Vietnamese Reactions

This is not how matters proceeded, in the event. Ambassador
Durbrow, General McGarr, and others urged acceptance of the CIP upon
President Diem, but with only partial success. 33/ Diem stoutly resisted
the adoption of a single, integrated chain of operational command, showed
no enthusiasm for detailed prior planning, continued his practice of cen-
tralized decision-making (sometimes tantamount to decision piegonholing),

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
