Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"B. Preservation of the stability and effectiveness of
the GVN and of. its armed forces.

"C. Improvement of force ratios as they changed with time.

"D. Remaining within the restrictions imposed by logistical
limitations."

In order to achieve its objectives, the U.S. was presented, as Westmore-
land saw it, essentially with three possible courses of action, there
being several variations on one of the choices. The choices were:

"1. Accelerate the build-up of RVNAF, commit the 7th Fleet
to quarantine the coast against infiltration of men ani arms,
and continue U.S. logistical support as required. No outside
combat power other than Naval and Air support would be provided
the GVN under this option.

"2. The above plus the commitment of up to two U.S. divi-
sions with their support, either

"a. to secure vital U.S. installations and defeat
ve efforts to control the Kontum, Pleiku, Binh Dinh region, or

"b. to secure critical enclaves in coastal regions, or

"ce. to do a combination of both of the above.

"3. Both of the major choices above plus a cordon across
SVN and the Laotian panhandle manned by up to three U.S. di-
visions coupled with ARVN, Thai and Laos forces.” ;

In his subsequent analysis and comparison of courses of action,
General Westmoreland gave each thorough coverage in light of all the
considerations already enumerated. Course of Action 1, RVNAF build-up
without outside ground force reinforcement, was certainly logistically
feasible, but it failed to promise improvement in any of the other areas
of consideration. Course of Action 3, the cordon plus the other courses,
promised to attain all the military objectives, to provide a basis for
improving GVN stability, and to improve force ratios in critical areas.
Because of port and inland communications difficulties, however, the
cordon force probably could not have been fully deployed before the end
of Calendar Year: 1965, which would have been too late to take up the
slack during the critical phase of the RVNAF build-up. Also, if the
basic strategy of punitive bombing had been successful, then the provi-
sion of a force of 165,000 men -- 132,000 of them from the U.S. -- would
have been out of proportion to the results expected. Should the bombing
strategy fail or take effect only very slowly, then Westmoreland felt
the cordon should be reconsidered.

87 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
