Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to await the results of the Geneva Conference and that they could not
give the impression in advance that they believed Geneva would fail. 32/

g. Aborted Working Group on Collective Defense in Southeast
Asia (April 30)

Immediately upon returning to Washington on April 15 Secretary
Dulles invited representatives of the United Kingdom, France, the Associated
States, Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, and Thailand to attend a
meeting on the 20th to set up an ad hoc defense group for the Southeast
Asia region. The delegates were to work on a draft for a future organiza-
tion. The Secretary had been under the impression from his talk in London
with Eden that the U.K., while rejecting immediate "united action" in
Indochina, would have no objection to such a preliminary meeting.

On April 18, just two days before the scheduled meeting, the
British Ambassador informed Dulles that there would be no British partici-
pation. The reasons: no understanding on the part of the British Foreign
Secretary that the working group would go forward at once, and no agree-
ment concerning membership. The Department expressed amazement, but in
view of the British attitude the April 20 meeting was transformed into a
general briefing for the nations comprising the allied side at the Geneva
Conference. In a later explanation of the shift in British attitude,
Foreign Secretary Eden said that in agreeing to informal working group
talks he had overlooked the pending Colombo Conference and that he felt
that it would have been most undesirable to give any public indication of
membership in a program for united action before the end of the Colombo
discussions. 33/ It is now clear that the British were restrained by
India and by a fear that British attendance at the meeting would be
construed as assent to "united action." 34/ Moreover, London could not
have been reassured by a "trial balloon" speech of Vice President Nixon
on April 17 in which he suggested that the U.S. might have to "take the
risk now by putting our boys in" in order to avoid "further Communist
expansion in Asia and Indochina." 35/

h. Continued French Prodding for U.S. Intervention (April 21-25)

In preparation for the Indochina phase of the Geneva Conference,
tripartite discussions (U.S., U.K., France) took place in Paris in mid-
April. Im these discussions, the French contended that a successful Geneva
settlement was dependent on a favorable outcome of the battle at Dien Bien
Phu and that their participation in a Southeast Asian coalition might not
be possible if Dien Bien Phu fell. There could be no guarantee what
position France would take in the event of a collapse at Dien Bien Phu.
The French argued that only large-scale United States air and naval inter-
vention could retrieve the situation in Indochina. They made no formal
request for intervention in the tripartite discussions, but on several
occasions suggested or implied to the Americans that such action was
necessary.

B-27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
