=

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

phases could be variously interpreted. This is not the problem of the
three blind men describing the elephant; it is the problem of men with
different perspectives each moulding his own conception of a proper
body to the same skeleton, If the final product were to have some sem~
blance of coherence and mutual satisfaction it was necessary that the
shapers came to agreement on substence and operational procedure, not
just thet they agree on the proper skeleton upon which to work.

The problem with the apparent consensus which emerged early in 1962
was that the principal participants did view it with different perspec-
tives and expectations. On the U.S. side, military advisors had a set
of preferences which affected their approach to the Strategic Hamlet
Program. They wanted to make RVNAF more mobile, more aggressive, and
better crgenized to take the offensive against the Viet Cong. They were,
consequently, extremely leery of proposals which might lead it to be tied
down in strategic defenses ("holding" after "clearing" had been completed)
or diverted too much to military civie action undertakings.

The American political leadership, insofar as a generalization may
be attempted, may be said to have been most concerned with the later
pheses of the program -- those in which GVil services were provided,
local governments established, and the economy bolstered. Military
clearing operations were, to them, a distasteful, expensive, but neces~
sary precondition to the really critical and important phases of the
effort.

Both of these U.S.. groups had perspectives different from those of
the Diem administration. In the U.S. view the insurgents were only one
of Diem's enemies; he himself was the other. In this view the process of
pacification could proceed successfully only if Diem reformed his own
government. It was precisely to achieve these goals simultaneously that
the U.S. agreed to enter a "limited partnership" with GVN in the counter-
insurgent effort. The Strategic Hamlet Program became the operational
symbol of this effort.

President Diem -- unsurprisingly -~- had a very different view. His
need, as he saw it, was to get the U.S. committed to South Vietnam (and
to his administration) without surrendering his independence. He knew
that his nation would fall without U.S. support; he feared that his
government would fall if he either appeared to toady to U.S. wishes or
allowed any single group too much potential power -~ particularly coer-
cive power. The Strategic Hamlet Program offered a vehicle by which he
could direct the counterinsurgent effort as he thought it should be
directed and without giving up either his prerogatives to the U.S or his
mantle to his restless generals.

The program, in the form of a plan for pacification of the Delta,

was formally proposed to Diem in November 1961 by R. G. K. Thompson,
head of the newly arrived British Advisory Mission. U.S. military

ek TOP SECRET - Sensitive
