Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

60. Address by Secretary Rusk before the George C. Marshall Memorial
Dinner of the Association of the United States Army at Washington,
D.C. on October 12, 1966, “Requirements for Organizing the Peace’;
Department of State Bulletin, October 31, 1966, p. 655.

* * *
"And early in 1950, after extended consultations with his principal
foreign policy and military advisers, President Truman determined that
we had an important national security interest in keeping Southeast Asia,
including Viet-Nam, within the free world. That finding was repeatedly
reviewed--by him, and then by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson--
always with the same conclusion.

"T have heard it said or implied that President Kennedy did not
regard the security of Southeast Asia generally, and of South Viet-Nam
in particular, as important to the free world and the United States.

If he ever had such views--or even any doubts about the importance of
our stake in that area--he never revealed them to his Secretary of State.

"In his news conference of September 12, 1963, President Kennedy
summed up our objective in Viet-Neam in these-words: .

‘,.--we want the war to be won, the Communists to be contained,
and the Americans to go home....But we are not there to see a war lost,
and we will follow the policy which I have indicated today of advancing
those causes and issues which help win the war.'

"The great decisions of President Truman in both Europe and Asia
remind us that the community of nations must have the courage to resist
aggression no matter what form it takes."

Fj *¥ x ¥

"There is an indigenous element in the war in South Viet-Nam, but
relatively it is even smaller than was the indigenous element in the
case of Greece. We consider it well within the capacity of the South
Vietnamese to handle. We and others are there because of aggression from
the North--an aggression which the other side has repeatedly escalated
and now includes many regiments of the regular army of North Viet-Nam.
And we shall leave when these invaders and arms from the North go home."

rie ey ks

"and, let me emphasize, we had better not forget the ghastly mis-
takes which led to the Second World War. For, there won't be any oppor-
tunity to apply any lessons after a third world war. We had better remem-
ber what we know and see to it that a third world war does not occur.”

R D-91
