Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

continuing Task Force on Vietnam, of the size and com-
positicn of forces which would be desirable in the case
of a possible commitment of U.S. forces to Vietnam." 28/
(The Task Force Director at this point referred to
Sterling Cottrell, a Foreign Service Officer, rather

than to Giipacric

So the President went no further, really, than to take note of a
study that was already well underway. The record does not help us judge
what significance to attach to the qualification that the study be done
under the guidance of the State Department officer now heading the Task
Force. :

On other issues relating to our military commitments the President
again, with minor alterations, endorsed the proposals of the May 6 draft.
On the question of a formal alliance with South Vietnam NSAI 5e reports

that:

The Ambassador is authorized to begin negotiations
looking toward a new bilateral arrangement with Vietnam,
but no firm commitment will be made to such an arrange-
ment without further review by the President.

The President also "confirmed" the decisions quoted earlier accepting
the April 27 military recommendations, and accepted the following further
recommendations (all from the May 6 report) “with the objective of meeting
the increased security threat resulting from the new situation along the
frontier between Laos and Vietnam.”

1. Assist the G.V.N. armed forces to increase their border
patrol and insurgency suppression capabilities by establishing
an effective border intelligence and patrol system, by insti-
tuting regular aerial surveillance over the entire frontier
area, and by applying modern technological area-denial tech-
niques to control the roads and trails along Vietnam's borders.
A special staff element (approximately 6 U.S. personnel), to
concentrate upon solutions to the unique problems of Vietnam's
borders, will be activated in MAAG, Vietnam, to assist a
similar special unit in the RVNAF which the G.V.N. will be en-
couraged to establish; these two elements working as an inte-

- grated team will help the G.V.N. gain the support of nomadic
tribes and other border inhabitants, as well as introduce
advanced techniques and equipment to strengthen the security
of South Vietnam's frontiers.

2. Assist the G.V.N. to establish a Combat Development and
Test Center in South Vietnam to develop, with the help of

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
