Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

C. Foreign ‘rade

Wey Ex ox orts

Before tho war rice, rubber, snd corn represented 757 of tne
total valine of exports. Of ther items, only coal, ied fisn, tin and
cement were over 1% of the baka ;

T Today rubber

is the lezding export by value. - Shipments totaled
about 62,000 tons in 1948. This
S

2
combares favoratly with prowar but is
less than hiif of pre « Rice exports at 220,000 tons im-
proved over 1947 but wer Pracsion of the prewar avernge of over
1,500,600 tons. In 19383 over S03 9, C00 tons of corn were exported,
almost nll to France. During the Re proecuction practically ceased and

has made little recovery since. With the decline in the export of rice
end corn, serbain other prodouts such as hices and skins, soya and
Bi

skins
other beans, pepper, and kapek have assumed reintive importance.

The recovery of indochinese exports to prewar levels depends
primarily on political factors and the return of security. However,
such recovery would net cccur immedintely on the return of vence
since mich destruction and cote parse ion hes occurred which would
take time to repair. Thus rice exports will be hindered fer some
timo by failure to keep up “dikes 2 De €rainage or irrigation canals,
lack of junks to Hove the paddy, and destruction and deterioration of
rico mills, Rubber could recover more cuictkly but many trees have
peon slashed or burnec and factories and houses destroyed. Annual now
or replanting schecules have beon largely chandonscd since 1945. All
export industrics sre affected by the genoral deterioration of water,
rosa, and reil transpor’.

Qver 60%, by value, of Indochina'ts exports go to France and
the Empire, abouts tho same as before the ware Most of the balance
goes to Singapors, Yong Kong, and China. Exports to the United States
amounted to only about 3 of the total value in the first ten months
of 1948. The percentage was somewhat nigher before the war but has
novex boon large end probably never Will be unless the ecenomy cf the
courttry changes sharply. lie do not import rice, corn, conl, or cement,

3
while Indoc ninese rubbsr will normaily go to France.

Imports aré rads up of the usual selection of manufactured
products which are needcd by a non-industrial country of low per
capita purchasing powers Due to the great need for both consumption
and capital goods following six years of block=de, imports since the
war have been rels saveky high comoared with exports and have rocontly

exceaded prevar volume

Under the
supplisda the
change
has 7

from tne eatae
emounted to 19:55 in 1947. ‘This
of 1948, Most of the balance came
