Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

imported subversion, armed terror, guerrilla action, and ultimately
conventional military action--can be defeated even in a situation

where the Communist side had the greatest possible advantages through

an unfortunate colonial heritage, political difficulty, and the inherent
weaknesses to which so many of the new nations of the world are subject."

SX F

"Our policies have been guided essentially by two propositions
rooted deeply in our own national interest:

“First, that the extension of hostile control over other nations
or wide areas of Asie, specifically by Communist China, North Korea, and
North Viet-Nem, would in a very short time create a situation that would
menace all the countries of the area and present a direct and major threat
to the most concrete national interests of this country.

"Second, and directly related to the first proposition, is the belief
that an East Asian and Pacific region comprised of free and independent
states working effectively for the welfare of their people is in the long
run essential to preventing the extension of hostile power and also essen-
tial to the regional and world peace in which the United States as we
know it can survive and prosper."

ee

"But, of course, the situation in Viet-Nam in 1965 stood, alongside
the trend in Indonesia, as the major dark spot in the area. And in :
early 1965 it became clear that unless the United States and other
nations introduced major combat forces and took military action against
the North, South Viet-Nam would be taken over by Communist foree. If
that had happened, there can be no doubt whatever that, by the sheer
dynamics of aggression, Communist Chinese and North Vietnamese subversive
efforts against the rest of Southeast Asia would have been increased and
encouraged, and the will and capacity of the remaining nations of South-
east Asia to resist these pressures would have been drastically and prob-
ably fatally reduced.

"So our actions in Viet-Nam were not only important in themselves
or in fulfillment of our commitment but were vital in the wider context
of the fate of the free nations of Asia. The leaders of free Asia are
fully aware of the relationship between our stand in Viet-Nam and the
continued independence of their nations. The Prime Minister of Malaysia
has emphasized that if South Viet-Nam were to fall before the Communists,
his nation could not survive. The Prime Minister of Singapore has stated
that our presence in Viet-Neam has bought time for the rest of the area.
The Japanese Government has made known its conviction that we are con-
tributing to the security of the area.

"Korea, New Zealand, the Philippines, Australia, and Thailand have

= D-108
