Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Five days later on 15 July, Ambassador Taylor transmitted esti-
mates (not the monthly report) of VC strength which raised the previous
- estimate from 28,000 to 34,000. In so doing he explained thatthis was
not a sudden and dramatic increase, but rather amounted to acceptance
of the existence of units that had been suspected for two or three
years but for which confirming evidence had only recently been received.

This increased estimate of enemy strength and recent
upward trend in VC activity in the North should not
occasion over-concern. We have been coping with this
strength for some time without being accurately aware of
its dimensions.

The figures were interpretable as a reminder, however, of the growing
magnitude of the problem, and of the need to raise the level of cvn/us
effort. As a result the Ambassador commented that he was expediting
formulation of additional requirements to support the plans in the
ensuing months. 107/

For a while, there was a serious effort to coordinate USOM-GVN
planning, and on 17 July 196}, USOM met with Khanh, Hoan, Oanh and
others -~ a group Khanh called the National Security Council. This
cooperation was approved, as well as cooperation between USIS and the
GVN information office -- a more sensitive problem. On 23 July 1964,
Taylor and Khanh discussed this cooperation in another NSC meeting and
it was agreed that, to facilitate things, mutual bureaucratic adjust-
ments would be made. In this same meeting of 23 July, Khanh revived
his pressure for offensive operations against North Vietnam and ex-
pressed again his impatience with the long pull of counterinsurgency
and pacification programs.

This reopening of the “march to the north" theme on 23 July was
not the first revival. On 19 July, General Ky had talked to reporters
about plans for operations in Laos, and on the same day Khanh himself
had made indiscreet remarks about "march to the north” at a unifica-
tion rally in Saigon. This led to stories and editorials in the Saigon
press. The Ambassador protested the campaign as looking like an effort
to force the hand of the U.S. This became a central pre-occupation of
Ambassador Taylor thereafter. He firmly opposed Khanh's pressure on
the one hand, and on the other had argued for patience with the GVN
even though the GVN defense ministry put out an embarrassing press
release immediately after the long Taylor-Khanh talk which followed
on 24 July 1964.. 108/

The political pressures in Saigori were at that time increasing
vastly. Both Khanh and other top Vietnamese politicians and political
generals were reacting in increasingly strong ways. The very evident
instability of the current regime increased rapidly and at the same
time. there was a tendency to try to escape from the dilemmas posed

87 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
