Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. A. Sic

THE U.S. AND FRANCE'S WITHDRAWAL FROM VIETNAM
1951-1956

SUMMARY

Vietnam was the crucible of contemporary France. Military defeat
.by the Viet Minh -- unprecedented victory of Asian over European --
was but one political reagent: there was also intense frustration and
disappointment among French of Rightist-colon convictions that sneaker-
shod Asian peasants could undo a century of costly labor at France's
"civilizing mission," and jeopardize the largest investment of French
capital in the Far East. The Tonkin Delta region represented in a
special way all that Vietnam meant to France. Tonkin, of all Vietnam,
was where French economic stakes were highest, where the culture of |
France most completely overglossed indigenous ways, where stood educa-
tional focus of Vietnam -- the University of Hanoi, with its French
faculty -- and where Catholicism flourished among the rural folk.
Thus, evacuation of Tonkin per the dictates of the Geneva Settlement
stung less from a sense of humiliation over Dien Bien Phu than from a
sense of abandonment: an epoch had closed, France was demeaned.

Had the Geneva Settlement been fulfilled, France might have retained
a presence and influence in Vietnam that would have mollified both the
Right and Left. After all, no significant body of opinion in France
held the French should continue to mold Vietnamese politics or that the
French Expeditionary Corps should remain there undiminished -- the
reality of the DRV and the exigencies of North Africa rendered
such'a position untenable. The Left and the Center were quite willing for
France to withdraw under the Geneva formula; even the "Indochina"
clique within the army recognized the priority of Algeria. But France
in the end, at American instance, had to accept withdrawal without the
cover of general elections, and to accede to a second, further, more
final abandonment.

The supplanting of France by the U.S. in South Vietnam, and the
failure of the Geneva Settlement, both well advanced by mid-1956, denied
the French Left its prospects for cooperation with Ho Chi Minh in a
precedent-setting experiment in coexistence. It disappointed moderates
who had hoped to preserve French cultural influence and salvage French
capital. It enraged Rightists who interpreted American policies in
Vietnam invidiously. None of these factions was prepared to take a
stand for France's staying, but all attempted to draw political
sustenance from acerbic treatment of the U.S.

fete

TOP SECRET = Sensitive
