Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

VF
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

economy, 75 percent of the nation's population and the

most lucrative military supply and LOC targets have been
effectively insulated from air attack. Moreover, the
authorizations for each of the ROLLING THUNDER programs
often have imposed additional restrictions, such as limiting
the number of strikes against approved fixed targets. The
policy decision to avoid suburban casualties to the extent
possible has proved to be a major constraint.

The overall effect of those area and operational
restrictions has been to grant a large measure of
immunity to the military, political, and economic assets
used in Hanoi's support of the war in the South and to
insure an ample flow of military supplies from North
Vietnam's allies. Among North Vietnam's target systems,
not one has been attacked either intensively or extensively
enough to provide a critical reduction in national capacity.
No target system can be reduced to its critical point under
existing rules. 55/

Moreover, the bombing had been too light, fragmented, and slowly paced:

The ROLLING THUNDER program has spread bomb tonnage
over a great variety of military and economic targets
systems, but the unattacked targets of any one system have
consistently left more than adequate capacity to meet all
essential requirements. Furthermore, the attacks on major
targets have often been phased over such long periods of
time that adequate readjustment to meet the disruption could
be accomplished. 56/

What was required was a basic reorientation of the
program;

Fundamental changes must be made if the effective-
ness of the campaign is to be raised significantly.
First, the constraints upon the air attack must be
reduced. Secondly, target selection must be placed on
a more rational basis militarily. 57/

Putting the program on a "more rational" military basis
apparently involved abandoning interdiction as a primary goal. The
report held out little promise that any acceptable bombing program

‘ could physically interfere with the flow of supplies to the South.
The NVN economy, it stated, was not "an indigenous economic base heavily
committed to the support of military operations in the South,” but rather

81 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
