Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

but his promises were moderate, his delivery on them both slow and
incomplete. The anarchy prevalent in the countryside during the First
Indochina War had benefited the peasant by driving-off the French and
Vietnamese large landlords. When the Viet Minh "liberated" an area,
they distributed these lands free to the farmers, and generally won
their allegiance thereby. Columnist Joseph Alsop visited one such Viet
Minh controlled region in December, 1954, just before they withdrew
their military forces, and reported that: 63/

"Tt was difficult for me, as it is for any Westerner, to
conceive of a Communist government's genuinely ‘serving the
people.' I could hardly imagine a Communist government that
was also a popular government and almost a democratic govern-
ment. But this was just the sort of government the palm-hut
state actually was while the struggle with the French continued.
The Viet Minh could not possibly have carried on the resistance

“for one year, let alone nine years, without the people's strong,
untied support."

One of Diem's primary failures lay in his inability similarly
to capture loyalties among his 90 percent agricultural people. The core
of rural discontent was the large land holdings: in 1954 one quarter of
one percent of the population owned forty percent of the rice growing
land. 6h/ The Diem program to ameliorate this situation for the land-
hungry peasants took the form of: (1) resettlement of refugees and others
on uncultivated land, begun in 1955; (2) expropriation of all rice land
holdings above 247 acres, and redistribution of these to tenant farmers,
a program announced in 1956, but delayed in starting until 1958; and (3)
regulation of landlord-tenant relations, effected in 1957, which fixed
rents within the range 15-25 percent of crop yield, and guaranteed tenant
tenure for 3 to 5 years. 65/ Both the resettlement and redistribution
programs guaranteed payments to former owners of the appropriated dand;
although the land was reasonably priced, and payment allowed over an extended
period, the farmers faced payments, and these immediately aroused opposition.
Settlers moved into a wilderness, required to clear and irrigate theretofore
unused land, could not see why they should pay for their holdings. Tenant
farmers were also disaffected, for though rents of 40 percent of crop had
been common before the way, many farmers, after eight or so rent-free years,
could see no justice in resuming payments to a long absent owner, particu-
larly since the Viet Minh had assured them the land was theirs by right.
Nor were many mollified by redistributed land. Iand redistribution suffered
according to one American expert, from a "lack of serious, interested admin-
istrators and topside command. Government officials, beginning with the
Minister for Agrarian Reform, had divided loyalties, being themselves
landholders." But even if the goals of the program had been honestly ful-
filled -- which they were not ~-- only 20% of rice land would have passed
from large to small farmers. Ultimately only 10% of all tenant farmers
benefited. A bolder program, with a maximum holding of 124 acres, could
have put 33 percent of rice land up for transfer. As it happened, however,
the redistribution program was not only of limited scope, but slow; by 1958

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
