Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

we were able to plan and initiate a general offensive.

We now have gained the tactical initiative, and are con-
ducting continuous small and occasional large-scale
offensive operations to decimate the enemy forces; to
destroy enemy base areas and disrupt his infrastructure;
to interdict his land and water LOC's and to convince hin,
through the vigor of our offensive and accompanying psych-
Ological operations, that he faces inevitable defeat.

"Military success alone will not achieve the US objec-
tives in Vietnam. Political, economic, and psychological
victory is equally important, and support of Revolutionary
Development program is mandatory. The basic precept for
the role of the military in support of Revolutionary Develop-
ment is to provide a secure environment for the population
so that the civil aspects of RD can progress." 20/

He then detailed corps by corps the two troop request requirements
labeling them the “optimum force" (4-2/3 Divs) and the "minimum essential
force" (2-1/3 Divs):

"B. Force requirements FY 68

(1) The MACV objectives for 1967 were based on the
assumption that the CY 67 force requirements would be approved
and provided expeditiously within the capabilities of the
services. However, with the implementation of Program Four,
it was recognized that our accomplishments might fall short
of our objectives. With the additional forces cited above,
we would have had the capability to extend offensive opera-
tions into an exploitation phase designed to take advantage
of our successes,

(2) With requisite forces, we shall be able to
complete more quickly the destruction or neutralization of
the enemy main forces and bases and, by continued presence,
deny to him those areas in RVN long considered safe havens.
As the enemy main forces are destroyed or broken up, increas-
ingly greater efforts can be devoted to rooting out and
destroying the VC guerrilla and communist infrastructure.
Moreover, increased assistance can be provided the RVNAF in
support of its effort to provide the required level of sec-
urity for the expanding areas undergoing Revolutionary
Developnent.

(3) Optimum Force. The optimum force required
implement the concept of operations and to exploit success
is considered 4-2/3 divisions or the equivalent; 10 tactical

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
