Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

supported analysis in depth of insurgent organization and intentions.

The U.S. was particularly deprived of dependable information concerning
events in South Vietnam's countryside in the years 1954 through 1959.
Nonetheless, U.S. intelligence estimates through 1960 correctly and
consistently estimated that the threat to GVN internal security was
greater than the danger from overt invasion. The intelligence estimates
provided to policy makers in Washington pegged the Viet Cong military
offensive as beginning in late 1959, with preparations noted as early

as 1957, and a definite campaign perceived as of early 1959. Throughout
the years, they were critical of Diem, consistently expressing skepticism
that he could deal successfully with his internal political problems.
These same estimates miscalculated the numerical and political strength
of the Viet Cong, misjudged the extent of rural disaffection, and over-
rated the military capabilities of the GVN. But as strategic intelligence
they were remarkably sound.

Indeed, given the generally bleak appraisals of Diem’s prospects,
they who made U.S. policy could only have done so by assuming a signifi-
cant measure of risk. For example, on 3 August 1954, an NI® took the
position that:

"Although it is possible that the French and Vietnamese,
even with firm support from the U.S. and other powers, may
be able to establish a strong regime in South Vietnam, we
believe that the chances for this development are poor and,
moreover, that the situation is more likely to continue to
deteriorate progressively over the next year .. ."

This estimate notwithstanding, the U.S. moved promptly to convene the
Manila Conference, bring SHATO into being with its protocol aegis over
Vietnam, and eliminate France as the recipient of U.S. aid for Vietnam.
Again on 26 April 1955, an NIE charged that:

"Even if the present empasse [with the sects/ were
resolved, we believe that it would be extremely difficult,
at best, for a Vietnamese government, regardless of its com-
position, to make progress towards developing a strong,
stable, anti-Communist government capable of resolving
the basic social, economic, and political problems of
Vietnam, the special problems arising from the Geneva
Agreement and capable of meeting the long-range challenge
of the Communists..."

Within a matter of weeks, however, the U.S. firmly and finally com-
mitted itself to unstinting support of Ngo Dinh Diem, accepted his
refusal to comply with the political settlement of Geneva, and acceded

to withdrawal of French military power and political influence from

South Vietnam. Even at the zenith of Diem's success, an NIE of July 1956

32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
