Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

His summation must have been even more gratifying for the beleaguered
President. It was both a paean to the President's achievements in
Vietnam and an appeal to the prejudices that 4ad sustained his policy
from the beginning:

--.if we can avoid escalation-that-does-not-seem-
to-work, we can focus attention on the great and central
achievement of these last two years: on the defeat we
have prevented. The fact that South Vietnam has not been
lost and is not going to be lost is a fact of truly massive
importance in the history of Asia, the Pacific, and the U.S.
An articulate minority of "Eastern intellectuals" (like Bill
Fulbright) may not believe in what they call the domino
theory, but most Americans (along with nearly all Asians)
know better. Under this Administration the United States
has already saved the hope of freedom for hundreds of
millions -- in this sense, the largest part of the job is
done. This critically important achievement is obscured
by seeming to act as if we have to do much more lest we
fail. 78/

; Whatever his own reactions, the President was anxious to
have the reactions of others to Bundy's reasoning. He asked McNamara
to pass’ the main portion of the memo to the Chiefs for their comment
without identifying its author. Chairman Wheeler promptly replied.
His memo to the President on May 5 rejected the Bundy analysis in a
detailed listing of the military benefits of attacking the DRV power
grid and in a criticism of Bundy's list of bombing objectives for
failing to include punitive pressure as a prime motive. With respect
to Bundy's recommendation against interdicting Haiphong Harbor, the
General was terse and pointed:

As a matter of cold fact, the Haiphong port is the
single most vulnerable and important point in the lines of
communications system of North Vietnam. During the first
quarter of 1967 general cargo deliveries through Haiphong
have set new records. In March 142,700 metric tons of cargo
passed through the port; during the month of April there
was a slight decline to 132,000 metric tons. - Nevertheless,
it is noteworthy that in April 31,900 metric tons of bulk
foodstuffs passed through the port bringing the total of
foodstuffs delivered in the first four months of 1967 to
100,680 metric tons as compared to 77,100 metric tons of
food received during all of calendar 1966. ‘These tonnages
underscore the importance of the port of Haiphong to the
war effort of North Vietnam and support my statement that
Haiphong is the most important point in the entire North
Vietnamese lines of communications system. Unless and
until we find some means of obstructing and reducing the

‘flow of war supporting material through Haiphong, the North

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
