Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. Franco-Vietnamese Differences, Autumn 1955

France was anxious to get the FEC out of Vietnam (and into North
Africa); the matter of turning the High Command over to the VNA was not a
problem. Placing French units under Vietnamese command was a definite prob-
lem, however and domestic politics would not allow any immediate change of
Vietnam's status within the French Union. 153/ Talks stalled until July.
Diem accepted Ambassador Hoppenot (whose duties, if not title, were’ that of
High Commissioner) and things moved a bit, then stopped when Diem arrested
two French officers suspected of bombing electric power stations in Saigon
and said they would be tried by Vietnamese courts. In October, France re-
fused to talk unless the officers were released. 154/ The deadlock was
finally broken by the French in December. Paris agreed the Quai d'Orsay
would handle Vietnamese affairs, refused to accept the assignment of a dip-
lomatic representative from the DRV to France and made it clear the Sainteny
mission was in Hanoi solely for economic and cultural reasons. France had
already recognized Vietnam as a Republic after Diem's resounding -- too
resounding -- victory of 98 percent of the yote in an October popular refer-
endum. Diem finally released the officers into French custody. 155/

But these concessions produced no improvement in French-
Vietnam relations. In December, Diem suddenly terminated the economic
and financial accords worked out at the Paris conference of 1954; mounting
US activity fast drove the former colony from franc to dollar area and
stringent commercial regulations applied to French businesses in South
Vietnam forced already outraged entrepreneurs out of the country in increas-
ing numbers. Diem laid down these conditions on which he would consider
renewed relations with France. France had to

denounce the Geneva Agreements, to renounce to speak
about the general elections in 1956, to approve openly
and without reservation the policy of Mr. Diem, to
break a1] relations with the Vietminh and of course

to call home the Sainteny Mission.

Soon after this, Diem withdrew South Vietnamese representatives from the
French Union Assembly. 156/

There was little France could do. Diem spoke for a government
no longer dependent on French support, no longer near collapse. By Feb-
ruary 1956, only 15,000 French troops remained in Vietnam and 10,000 of
these were to be evacuated by the end of March. The High Command was abol-
ished on April 26, 1956. The next month, the US Temporary Equipment Recovery
Mission (TERM) entered Vietnam and another 350 military personnel were
added to the US advisory effort. Few French instructors remained at the
TRIM.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

39
