Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of the talking, seying that civilian politicians like himself wanted
the Army to be supported by the people, but that Khanh and the MRC
were difficult to work with: The ruling generals control everything.
He said the II Corps Commander lived like a playboy, and that the
people were outraged; "ever since we came to power we have been telling
population we are soon going to have change, but it never comes. The
people are becoming impatient.” Moreover, he said, something must be
done to raise the standard of behavior of the armed forces toward the
populetion. Taylor received these views diplomatically.

For a while there was a serious effort to go through with
close meshing of USOM and GVN planning. On July 17 USOM met with Khanh,
Hoan, Oanh and others as a group, which Khanh designated the National
Security Council. They discussed joint planning and further meshing
of US/GVN organizations, putting the stamp of approval on the arrange-
ment in the Ministry of Information. On July 23 Taylor met Khanh and
discussed a second meeting of the NSC. Khanh said the Vietnamese had-
some difficulty in edjusting their ministerial organization to the
requirements of meshing with the U.S. mission subdivisions. ‘Taylor
responded that reciprocal adjustments were possible. 5/ Planning
and discussion of cross-border operations continued actively. Offensive
guerrilla operations in Laos were a major idea; small operations had
already begun into North Vietnam, under OPLAN 34A. In the meeting on
July 23, Khanh told Taylor he wanted to intensify the operations under
34A and to start air strikes against North Vietnam. ‘He said again,

; ‘ as he had to Rusk on June 1, that he didn't like to look forward to
| the long, indecisive pull of the in-country pacification program, and
doubted that the Army and the people would carry on indefinitely. 6/

The events of duly 19-23 made it clear that GVN was straining
at the leash; it started public lobbying for cross-border operations.
On July 19 Air Marshal Ky spilled the beans to reporters on plens for
operations into Iaos. Khanh committed a stimilar indiscretion at a
"Unification Rally" on the 19th, and these were followed by GVN press
releases and editorials in the Saigon press urging a "march to the
North." All these leaks directly violated Khanh's promises to Rusk
on June 1 (above, p. 24). ‘Taylor spoke to Khenh sharply about then,
and pointed out that they could be interpreted as a campaign to force
the USG's hand. Khanh insisted that such a campaign was the furthest
thing from his mind; and then confirmed that it was exactly what he hed in
mind. Following a long, eloquent repetition of his remarks of other
occasions on Vietnamese war-weariness, he asked: Why does not the USG
recognize that the appearance of North Vietnamese draftees among the
prisoners taken in the I Corps meant that the war had entered a new phase -
and the USG and GVN must respond with new measures? He said Vietnamese
spirits had been raised by President Johnson's firm statements earlier
in the year (specifically, Los Angeles, Janusry 21), but that following
them nothing had happened. ‘lhe effect was wearing off, and the com-
munists would conclude they were only words. Then Khanh took the offen-
sive and complained to Taylor that U.S. officials were contradicting him

#

‘ 32 TOP SUCRET - Sensitive
