Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The fourth option, denial of the Westmoreland request and continue
the war "as is," would please no one, according to Mr. Goulding. The
hawks (and the military) would protest vehemently. They would be less
satisfied, and the doves would be no more satisfied by this failure to
take new initiatives toward peace. However, Mr. Goulding concluded,
since fewer people would be affected by this course than by Option One,
and therefore it would be preferable to that Option.

The advantages of Option Five - denial of General Westmoreland's
requests and a change in strategy in South Vietnam -- from a public affairs
standpoint were overwhelming, the paper concluded.

«+.-The pain of additional deployments, Reserve callups,
increased draft calls, increased casualties, extended tours
would be eliminated. The hazards of bombing escalation
would be eliminated. The dangers of a bombing pause would
be eliminated. The frustration of more-and-more-and-more
into the endless pit would be eliminated. What the people
want most of all is some sign that we are making progress,
that there is, somewhere, an end. While this does not
necessarily show progress, it does show change. It does
show the search for new approaches....It would prevent the
middle-of-the-readers from joining the doves. While the
doves want a pause, I would think they would prefer this
to deployment-mobilization plus pause. While the hawks
want to escalate in the North, most of them (not a11) also
want an end to increased ground strength in the South.

I believe that we would be successful in getting members
of Congress to make speeches in support of this.

In summary, then, and strictly from a public reaction standpoint,
Mr. Goulding noted the options as follows:

Acceptable: Only #5 -- Denial of requests and a
change in policy in the South.

Most acceptable of the others: #3 -- Deploy and
pause.

Next most acceptable: #2 -- Deploy and expand Air
War North. ;

Next most acceptable: # -- Deny Westmoreland and
continue as is.

Most objectionable: #1 -- Deploy and continue as is,
north and south. 43

32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
