tien
¢ hs
\

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

aim at an essentially political denouement rather than the
total military capture of the country, as in the case of
Mao's campaign in China....The enemy objective seems to be

to produce & political crisis by a combination of military and
non-military means out of which would come a South Vietnamese
Souvenna Phouma, willing to contemplate unification on terms
acceptable to Hanoi, including disengagement from the U.S, 62/

In order for the Diem government to defeat this insurgency, General
Taylor reasoned, the Saigon regime must reform itself. It had allowed
two vicious circles to develop which vitiated its effectiveness. In the
first, poor military intelligence resulted in a defensive military posture
which put most of the forces under provincial control. This, in turn,
meant that reserves could not be expeditiously employed. The resultant
high losses in unsuccessful defensive battles further dried up the sources
of intelligence and completed the circle. The second vicious circle was
attributable to Diem's instinctive attempts to centralize power in his
own hands while fragmenting it beneath him. His excessive mistrust of
criticism and fears of a coup caused large elements of society to stand
aside from the struggle while the province chiefs and generals were forced
into frustrating struggles, further increasing Diem's fears and his
inclination to fractionalize authority. The task, then, was to strengthen
Diem while, at the same time, inducing him to reform so as to break both
of these vicious circles.

In order to strengthen Diem with a U.S. military presence--very much
along the lines of the smaller US deployment discussed at the NSC meeting
prior to his trip-~-Taylor recommended the deployment to South Vietnam of
a task force of 6-8,000 troops under the guise of flood relief work. This
task force, primarily logistical, would necessarily become involved in
some defensive operation and sustain some casualties, but its deployment
need not commit the U.S. to a land war on the Asian mainland:

As the task is a specific one, we can extricate our
troops when it is done if we so desire. Alternatively, we
can phase them into other activities if we wish to remain
longer....

Needless to say, this kind of task force will exercise
little direct influence on the campaign against the VC. It
will, however, give a much needed shot in the arm to national

morale, particularly if combined with other actions showing

that a more effective working relationship in the common
cause has been established between the GVN and the U.S, 6)/

Taylor had already received President Diem's assurances that he favored
the deployment of U.S. forces for this purpose. 65/

In conjunction with this U.S, troop deployment, Taylor argued that
the U.S. should initiate increased assistance to GVN in @ new relationship:

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
