Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

United States has lost the battlefield initiative not only through
the enemy's bold tactics but by what he calls its own defensive,
gradualist psychology....

General Westmoreland's request for another 206,000 troops,
beyond the present authorized 525,000-man level to be reached by
next fall, was brought from Saigon last month by Gen. Earle G.
Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff....

General Wheeler presented the request to President Johnson at
the White House on Feb. 28, when he delivered a report on his three-
day survey of the war situation in South Vietnam. The request was
also forwarded to the President by the Joint Chiefs as a body
‘with our approval'....

Military leaders also contend that only a massive infusion of
troops will restore the allied initiative. They say it would also
permit the allied forces to resume the pacification of the country-
side and the war of attrition against the Vietcong that they contend
was being successfully waged before the Tet offensive.

The main lines of the case against General Westmoreland's
request are contained in a position paper prepared over the last
weekend by senior civilian officials in the Defense Department,
including assistant secretaries. Most of these officials were
brought into the Government by former Secretary of Defense Robert S.
McNamara.

The argument goes like this:

Since the United States military build-up began in 1965, Hanoi
has gradually increased its forces in South Vietnam and maintained
a reasonable ratio to the fighting strength of the American Forces.
There is every reason to believe, these officials contend, that
Hanoi is able and willing to continue to do so if more American
troops are sent to Vietnam within the next year.

_ The reinforcements that General Westmoreland wants would thus
not restore the initiative. They would simply raise the level of
violence. The United States would spend billions more on the war
effort and would suffer appreciably higher casualties.

North Vietnam would likewise endure substantially greater losses.
But the experience of the Tet offensive shows, according to this
line of reasoning, that American Military commanders have gravely
underestimated the capacity of the enemy to absorb such punishment
and to be still able to launch bold offensive operations.

‘So there would just be a lot more killing,’ one analyst said.

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
