Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in public statements. For example, MACV had denied that there was

an invasion of I Corps by DRV units, as Khanh had claimed in a speech -
at Danang. Zorthian scothed him by saying that MACY merely corrected
a misquotation of one of MACV's own officials; Taylor said no U.S.
official would knowingly contradict Khanh. 1/

Taylor took all this patiently, as he did an intelligence report
that said Khanh was trying to incite the USG to action against North
Vietnam. (The report also said that Ky was saying privately that the
GVN should go it alone, because the USG was stalling on account of the
U.S. election.) USOM conjectured that Goldwater's nomination had preci-
pitated the "go North" movemient. Moreover, within two hours after Khanh's
long meeting with Taylor, the Ministry of Defense let fly another press
release in the teeth of USOM disapproval, when Khanh ordered the Ministry to
reject Zorthian's suggested changes. The only explanation offered was that
GVN was extremely sensitive about appearing to be a U.S. puppet. 8/

In an analysis of these events, Taylor argued for tolerance and
patience with GVN, and showed no hint of a desire to get tough. He noted
that political sniping and maneuvering pressed Khanh to do something J
dramatic to bolster his support. Taylor feared the GVN might get tired
and want to negotiate if they could not get the U.S. more involved. He
proposed joint contingency planning for bombing North Vietnam as a4 means
to cool GVN off and to reopen communications with them. 9/

In a long conversation on July 2 Khanh discussed his political
problems with Taylor and asked him point blank if he should resign.
Taylor flatly said no, that the USG still supported him and definitely
wanted no further change in GVN. Khanh then asked for a declaration of
support and for pressure on the generals to cortinue to support him;
Yaylor agreed. (Comment: Much of Khanh's political problem still revolved
around Minh, who had long had good relations with Taylor. This relation-
ship may have worried Khanh, and led him to approach Taylor in this way.
However, it may have merely been a way to keep up the pressure on USG
on the matter of bombing North. A couple of days later Khanh was again
grumbling publicly about being a U.S. puppet.) 10/

In response to Taylor's discussion of GVN motives and of ways to
make them happy, State authorized him to tell Khanh the USG had considered
attacks on North Vietnam that might begin, for example, if the pressure
from dissident South Vietnamese factions became too great. He must keep
this confidential. It said to tell him that the USG position had not
changed, and that it never excluded the possibility of wider action. When
Taylor brought this matter to Khanh for discussion, they first agreed on
a GVN announcement of an increase in U.S. personnel and discussed the press
leaks on going North. Khanh then took the offensive, complaining to
Taylor about press stories, suggesting the USG was negotiating with the
Chinese through the Pakistani Government, behind the back of GVN. Taylor
soothed him by saying that the USG was merely letting China know how firm
our policy was. When Taylor asked Khanh his views of U.S. policy, Khanh

33 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive.
