Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of drawing down Army forces all over the world to supply Vietnam,
he believed DOD should not attempt to answer Sheehan in the public
press, and the matter rested there. 48/

To prepare the SecDef for his trip and to help him get at what
were considered to be the "gut" questions to be asked on his field
trips, especially reference pacification, Assistant Secretary of Defense
Enthoven sent him a study entitled "Holbrooke/Burnham Study on Vietnam."
Enthoven cited this study as a perfect example of why the U.S. involve-
ment in Vietnam was so costly. In the Binh Chan district of Gia Dinh
Province there were 6,000 U.S. and GVN troops that were tied down by the
vC who really had more than a company stationed there. According to
Enthoven and to the Holbrooke/Burnham Study, there was no prospect now
that things would change or that anything resembling permanent pacifica-
tion would take place. Holbrooke and Burnham attempted to tell why.
According to them there had been a total failure in rooting out the VC
infrastructure; that is, the VC officials and organizers, and unless
such infrastructure was destroyed, US-GVN military and pacification
forces soon degenerated into nothing more than an occupation Army.
Holbrooke cited Operation FAIRFAX which began as a sweep of Binh Chan
but bogged down rapidly into a static defense. He concluded that if
U.S. forces were withdrawn after FAIRFAX, the VC would be in control of
the area almost immediately. Enthoven was pleading for the Secretary
of Defense to reorient his questioning as he toured the pacification
and rural areas. He wanted the SecDef to specifically focus on the
infrastructure questions. He recounted what he had seen as the typical
briefing on pacification, the one which first covered the demoralization
of the VC in area, the reduced number of incidents, but then skipped
over the infrastructure question and went on to the pig program, the
number of wells dug, hog cholera innoculations and so forth. Aceordingly,
he suggested that Mr. McNamara might pursue the following questions
when talking to briefing officers on the field trip:

1. Is there an intelligence collection center in
this district? Is there a U.S. adviser responsible
for the center?

2. Who in this district has specific responsibility
for rooting out the infrastructure? on the U.S.
side? on the GVN side? What unit of command exists
in intelligence gathering? in anti-infrastructure
operations?

3. In this district what are the assets available for
rooting out the infrastructure? Which are avail-
able full-time and which are available part-time?
Are these assets sufficient given the population of
the district, its area, etc?

194 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
