Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

XII. PROJECT MAYFLOWER -- THE FIRST BOMBDIG PAUSE
A. The Backsround

Pressure for some form of bombing hat had mounted steadily
throughout April and early May. As early as April 2, Canada's Prime
Minister Lester Peerson, on his way to meet with President Johnson,
had stopped off to make a speech in Philadelphia in which he suggested
that the President should order a "pause" in the bombing of North
Vietnam.

Pearson's gratuitous advice was particularly galling to the
President because the pause had become the battle slogan of the anti-
Vietnam movement. Students had picketed the IBJ Ranch in Texas,
demanding a cessation of bombing. A massive teach-in had been scheduled
for Mey 15 in Washington, with academicians who wanted withdrawal of
American influence from the Asian mainland, ready to demand as a first
step an immediate end of the bombing. Pressure for a pause was building
up, too, in Congress among liberal Democrats. 117/ The U.N. Secretary
General was on a continual bombing pause kick, with a proposal for a
three month suspension of bombing in return for Hanoi's agreement to
cease infiltration in South Vietnam. U Thent hed told Ambassedor
Stevenson on April 24 thet he believed such a gesture would facilitate
renewed non-aligned pressure upon Hanoi to negotiate.

Evidently, however, the President was not impressed with the wide-
spread clamor that such a gesture would evoke any response from Hénoi.
He had responded favorably to the 17-Nation appeal in his April 7th
speech, only to be answered with blunt rejection by Hanoi and Peking.
The U.S. had responded favorably to the idea of a Cambodian Conference
that would provide opportunities for "corridor contacts” with Communist
powers on the Vietnam problem, but Peking had apparently blocked that
initiative. Encouragement had been given to a UK approach to the Soviets
in February looking toward consultations under Article 19 of the 1962
Geneva Accords, but no response from the USSR had been received. The
Radhekrishnan pronosal for a cease-fire alone the 17th parallel, super-
vised by an "Afro-Asian Force" wes being favorebly considered by the
U.S. only to be denounced as a "plot" by Peking and as an "offense" by
Hanoi. Publicly, the President was plaintive:

There are those who frequently talk of negotiations and
political settlement and that they believe this is the course
we should pursue, and so do I. When they talk that way I say,
welcome to the club. I want to negotiate. I would much
rether talk then fight, and I think everyone would. Bring
in who you want us to negotiate with. I have seerched high
and wide, and I am a reasonably good cowboy, and I can't even
rope enybody and bring them in who is willing to talk and

106 — TOP SECRET - Sensitive
