Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

kind of Southeast Asian coalition. On 6 April 1954, the NSC, asked to
consider "appropriate action regarding Indochina and the need for U.S.
military intervention," replied that the best alternative was a regional
grouping with maximum Asian participation. 17/ On 13 May, the NSC looked
to “avoid the loss of Indochina and to resolve the colonial problem by

the creation of a regional grouping.’ * 18/ Crisis transformed the U.5.
position on a wide regional alliance from that of a potential joiner to
that of an anxious organizer.

When the U.S. position changed, the pendulum swung far, pro-
ducing not only the general concept of "united action," but also several
specific plans for U.S.-allied intervention in Indochina in a variety of
circumstances. Secretary Dulles approached the British and French directly
with a plan in which a ten-nation coalition would confront communist ex-
pansion in Southeast Asia. On 12-14 April, Dulles visited London to get
Eden's support for this plan, but was turned down. Eden thought it best
to wait and see what could be accomplished at the Geneva Conference, then
in preparation. Dulles did get what he thought was Eden's agreement to
@ plan for an ad hoe group of the same nations to meet and discuss plans
for collective action in case it became necessary, and a public statement
in favor of a broad Asian alliance.

Congressional reaction to the latter was immediate. The
House Foreign Affairs Committee was at the time holding hearings, and promptly
issued a statement endorsing the Dulles and Eden action, and citing the
MDAP legislation. The following is from the Hearings:

"MR. VORYS. Now, could I read a paragraph from the text
of the recent statement issued by Messrs. Dulles and Eden...
this paragraph was what caught my attention this morning.
[/Reading:

"Accordingly we are ready to take part with the other coun-
tries principally concerned in the examination of the possibility
of establishing a collective defense within the framework of
the charter of the United Nations Organization, to assure the

. peace, security, and freedom of Southeast Asia, in the western
Pacific.'

"I have changed our proposed statement slightly.

"The Committee on Foreign Affairs notes with approval the
statement issued in London on April 13, 1954, by the Secretary
of State and the British Foreign Secretary which is in line with
recommendations previously expressed by the Committee and Con-
gress in 199.'

"The second paragraph reads as follows:

‘This paragraph was drafted by the Committee on Foreign
Affairs and incorporated in the original Mutual Defense Assistance

A-11 ' TOP SECRET - Sensitive
