Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

:

III. The Strategy of Experimentation -- Enclave Strategy
A. Geography

The geography of Vietnam. lends itself to enclave thinking --
that is, to operations based on coastal cities and with restricted
extension of lines of communication inland. The central portion of
Vietnam, encompassing the I and II Corps Tactical Zones and a portion
of the III Corps, is long and narrow. The area near the coast is for
the most part fairly flat and hospitable and contains the bulk of the
population. The interior is mountainous and is sparsely populated
throughout. In some places the mountains come right down to the coast,
but the coastal plain is well defined for most of the length of Central
Vietnam. Scattered along this coast are the mouths of numerous streams,
each with a small delta which serves as an area for rice production and
concentration of population, and as a focus for commercial activity.

Several cities, such as Da Nang, Qui Nhon, and Nha Trang, are
located contiguous with the coastal population and have good deep water
anchorages for ocean-going maritime activity. All three of these cities
were, in early 1965, likely candidates for bases in an enclave strategy.
There were other areas along the coast which did not have deep water
anchorages but which were, nevertheless, readily accessible for amphib-
ious resupply from the sea. Chu Lai, little more than a sandy hamlet,
and Phu Bai fell into this category and were very much a part of enclave
thinking.

In between the central coast and the Mekong Delta -- which
itself offered no good coastal access and egress and hence was never a
part of any enclave strategy -- was the port of Vung Tau. Located at
the end of the Cap St. Jacques peninsula and easily defended, Vung Tau
was the logical alternative to the port of Saigon, access to which
required a risky trip wp the Saigon River from a point not far from
Vung Tau. Vung Tau could be called the southern limit of a chain of
coastal enclaves beginning with Hue/Phu Bai in I Corps.

B. Development of the Strategy

General Johnson, Chief of Staff of the Army, brought back from
his March 1965 inspection trip to Vietnam the germ 6f an idea to estab-
lish U.S. ground forces in coastal enclaves. The idea is included in
one of two alternatives proposed by Johnson for the deployment of a
U.S. division tc Vietnam to supplant ARVN uni’s in security missions and
free them for offensive operations against the Viet Cong. One alterna-
tive proposed sending the division to secure bases at Bien Hoa/Ton son
Nhut (near Saigon), Qui Nhon and Nha Trang (both coastal cities), and

66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
