Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Senate documents prove conclusively that there was full understanding of
the grave implications of the SEATO obligations, particularly as they
related to aggression by means of armed attack.

"The importrent point about these decisions--and a point fervently
debated within the administration at the time, according to many
participants--is that.they reflected a policy not merely toward Viet-
Nam but toward the whole of Southeast Asia. In essence, the underlying
basic issue was felt, and I think rightly, to be whether the United .
States should involve itself much more directly in the security of South-
east Asia and the preservation of the largely new nations that had come
into being there since World War II.

"There could not be the kind of clear-cut policy for Southeast Asia
that had by then evolved in Northeast Asia, where we had entered into
mutual security treaties individually with Japan, Korea, and the Repub-
lic of China. Some of the Southeast Asian countries wished no associ-
ation with an outside power; others--Malaya, Singapore, and the northern
areas Of Borneo, which were not then independent--continued to rely on
the British and the Commonwealth. So the directly affected area in
which policy could operate comprised only Thailand, the Philippines, and
the non-Communist successor states of Indochina--South Viet-Nam, Laos,
and Cambodia.

"Yet it was felt at the time that unless the United States partici-
pated in a major way in preserving the independence and security of these
nations, they would be subject to progressive pressures by the parallel
efforts of North Viet-Nam and Communist China.

"The judgement that this threat of aggression was real and valid
was the first basis of the policy adopted. Two other judgments that lay
behind the policy were:

"(a) That a successful takeover by North Viet-Nam or Communist
China of any of the directly affected nations would not only be serious
in itself but would drastically weaken and in a short time destroy the
capacity of the other nations of Southeast Asia, whatever their inter-
’ national postures, to maintain their own independence.

"(b) That while we ourselves had no wish for a special position
in Southeast Asia, the transfer of the area, or large parts of it, to
Communist control achieved by subversion and aggression would mean a
major addition to the power status of hostile and aggressive Communist
Chinese and North Vietnamese regimes. It was believed that such a situ-
ation would not only doom the peoples of the area to conditions of domin-
ation and virtual servitude over an indefinite period but would create
the very kind of aggressive domination of much of Asia that we had already
fought the militarist leaders of Japan to prevent. It was widely and
deeply believed that such a situation was profoundly contrary to our
national interests.

D-113
