Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Moscow. Presumably, in such an event, they would seek to ~
inerease shipments via China, if China lets them. (Purely
in terms of the military impact on the DRV, it should be
understood that the bulk of Soviet military hardware goes
to the DRV by rail and a blockade would therefore not in
and of itself impede the flow of Soviet arms).

4, All-out US Bombing of the DRV. This one poses
tougher problems for the Soviets and hence for any assess-

ment of what they would do. Moscow has in the past shown
some sensitivity to the consequences of such a US course.

If the US program resulted in substantial damage to the

DRV air defense system (SAMs, MIGs, AAA, radars, etc.) the
Soviets will seek to replenish it as rapidly as possible

via China and, assuming the Chinese will let them, i.e.

permit trains to pass and planes to overfly and land en route.
Soviet personnel can be.expected to participate in the DRV
air defense in an advisory capacity and in ground operations
and the Soviets will presumably keep quiet about any casual-
ties they might suffer in the process. It is likely, however,
that this kind of Soviet involvement would increase up to

and including, in the extreme, the overt dispatch, upon

DRV request, of volunteers. (Moscow has long said it would
do so and it is difficult to see how it could avoid delivering
on its promise.) Such volunteers might actually fly DRV
aircraft if enough DRV pilots had meanwhile been lost.
Needless to say, once this stage is reached assessments
become less confident, if only because the US Administration
itself will have to consider just how far it wants to go in
engaging the Soviets in an air battle in Vietnam. The

Soviets for their part are not well situated to conduct a
major air defense battle in Vietnam and there is the further
question whether the Chinese would be prepared to grant

them bases for staging equipment and personnel or for
sanctuary. (On past form this seems unlikely, but this

might change if the US air offensive produced decisive

effects on the DRV's capacity to continue the war, in itself
a dubious result.)

5. Invasion of the Southern DRV. In this case, the
Soviets would continue and, if needed, step up their hard-
ware assistance to the DRV. If the fighting remained con-
fined to the Southern part of the DRV and did not threaten
the viability of the DRV regime, there would probably not
be additional Soviet action, though conceivably some Soviet
personnel might show up. in advisory capacities, especially

Loy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
