£254 ose oe nillion, a con

4

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

: sie =. pecurity Tnfonecton pegs Sree wench

(2c) The Exooutive Branch has requ estes the Sonsress for apcroval
of end Lien silitery aid for Indochi ne for FY 1954 in thé enount of -
MECN use prosson a REL lion eral econo: ia sid

n th: eins of 425 million, These " prososat 3 Smounts have not yot
beans a ae by the Consress, In F¥ 1953 niliter; er es assistanes
at n the enount. of 1263.8 million end economic and teche
fical assistance in tho ancunt of $25 million, with a etter sun of
$39.5 million for comon-use itens.

cr
o

3 fy
Ee

(83) The United States continuss ‘to evhiivate friendly and
cooperative relations with the “overmicnts of tha Associated states
and Peines and fas received in k Cle es the fires Arbascacor z
Viet-tom. A Iaotisn Legation is to be opened shortly.

has besn represented in vashington sinc 2 19,

cl
be

(82) Tris Bochion of ti5¢ 1224/2 lists sicht elensnts of vositive

politics], nilitsr;, sconoaie and social policies considered especially

isportant OOM sositive policies to promote whieh the Units? States

- should vse its invlusnee with Franee and the Associated States, The
"use of intlvence™ in terns of action may ba as to Tall short of
;pressuro of any type where sech pressure sicht f-defeatings dr
addition to the opcortunities eich the Acerics scacors in Paris
and Gaizon hive had to set forth the views of t ted States.

tasre hove boon a muttor of spacial occasions =} ave pernitted the
fullest ord frankest exchinzes with the Frenet ing militory,
politicsi, and economic aspects of the indochina tion. =nten
ocezsions wore the nilitery talxs in Washinston toser Wyse, ALO’ -
Council Sessions in Beesnber 1952, the visit of acratary ef Stat
ari the Director of Kutual Socurity to Paris in puary 1953, the
Visit of Provicr iayer and Cabinet collessucs +t inston in herch
19 aaa ne ese session of HATO in Avril 19 sits of Ceneral
Clark x ' Sy »finsliy, the
chuiy us une sertalen in ee fored 2 Frenca Sy the

A paview of cavelepionts anid c r
elesents of policy outlined in Section Se)

(3) Im the foes of ¢
Socialist opponsnts in th
Fronch Covernmuent reststa:

A Se = ee rte pee a <3 ms
eccepctnce Of PELacy resn te =
aa + = rs a.
china, fhe rilitnry rortion of the freach bu det pla

mm, aes Puryn ert

TO? SSCRAT

s sys ae a are
Security Tnformetion

ee ee
