Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. A. I. NATO AND SEATO: A COMPARTSON
SUMMARY

Because the SEATO Treaty has been used by the Eisenhower, Kennedy,
and Johnson Administrations to justify U.S. policy, aid, and presence
in Vietnam, and because many have questioned this justification, the
treaty has become a center of controversy. The issue is whether by
intent of the parties and by treaty terminology the U.S. was obligated
to use force to help defend the territorial independence and integrity
of South Vietnam. No one seriously challenges U.S. military and eco-
nomic aid provisions under the SEATO Treaty; the thrust of the criticism
is the use of U.S. ground combat forces.

There are plentiful statements over time by the U.S. Government
on the importance of SEATO.

President Eisenhower stated: "We gave military and economic
assistance to the Republic of Vietnam. We entered into a treaty -- the
Southeast Asia Security Treaty -- which plainly warned that an armed .
attack against this area would endanger our own peace and safety and
that we would act accordingly."

President Kennedy stated: "...The SEATO Pact...approved by
the Senate with only, I think, two against it, under Article 4, stated
that the United States recognized that aggression by means of armed
attack against Vietnam would threaten our own peace and security. So
since that time the United States has been assisting the government
of Vietnam to maintain its independence...The attack on the government
by communist forces, with assistance from the north, became of greater
and greater concern to the Government of Vietnam and the Government of
the United States."

Secretary Rusk, speaking for the Johnson Administration, made
the strongest statement of all: "We have sent American forces to fight
in the jungles...because South Viet-Nam has, under the language of the
SEATO Treaty, been the victim of ‘aggression by means of armed attack.'
Those who challenge this rationale contend that unlike the NATO Treaty
which specifically included the ‘use of armed force’ and unambiguously
intended such action, the SEATO Treaty was not meant by its U.S. framers
as an umbrella for American military intervention."

This is the kind of issue that can readily be argued either way.
It is obvious the language of the SEATO Treaty allows the signatories
the choice of military means. And, a respectable argument can be made
for the further step of obligation. For example, the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee Report on the treaty in 1954 stated:

"The committee is not impervious to the risks which this
treaty entails. It fully appreciates that acceptance of these
additional obligations commits the United States to a cause of
action over a vast expanse of the Pacific. Yet these risks

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
