76

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

for any limited aggression by making clear what our response will accom-
plish. In most areas of the world, the main burden of local defense
against overt attack, subversion and guerrille warfare must rest on local
populations and forces. But given the great likelihood and seriousness
of this threat, we must be prepared to make a substantial contribution in
the form of strong, highly mobile forces trained in this type of warfare,
some of which must be deployed in forwerd areas, with a substantial air-
lift and sealift capacity and prestocked overseas bases. .

"Tn this area of local wars, we must inevitably count on the coopera-
tive efforts of other peoples and nations who share our concern. Indeed,
their interests are more often directly engaged in such conflicts. The
self-reliant are also those whom it is easiest to help -- and for these
reasons we must continue and reshape the Military Assistance Program which
T have discussed earlier in my special message on foreign aid.

"Strengthened capacity to meet limited and guerrilla warfare -- limited
military adventures and threats to the security of the Free World that are
not large enough to justify the label of ‘limited war.' We need a greater
ability to deal with guerrilla forces, insurrections, and subversion. Much
of our effort to create guerrilla and anti-guerrilla capabilities has in
the past been aimed at general war. We must be ready now to deal with any
size of force, including small externally supported bands of men; and we
must help train local forces to be equally effective.”

7. President Kennedy's Address to American Society of Newspaper Editors;
April 20, 1961, Public Papers of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1961, p. 306:
% *& *

"ewe face a relentless struggle in every corner of the globe that
goes far beyond the clash of armies or even nuclear armaments. The armies
ere there, and in large number. The nuclear armaments are there. But’
they serve primarily as the shield behind which subversion, infiltration,
and a host of other tactics steadily advance, picking off vulnerable areas
one by one in situations which do not permit our own armed intervention.

"Power is the hallmark of this offensive -- power and discipline and
deceit. The legitimate discontent of yearning people is exploited. The
legitimate trappings of self-determination are employed. But once in
power, all talk of discontent is repressed, all self-determination disappears,
and the promise of a revolution of hope is betrayed, as in Cuba, into a
reign of terror. ‘Those who on instruction staged automatic 'riots' in the
streets of free nations over the efforts of a small group of young Cubans
to regain their freedom should recall the long roll call of refugees who
cennot now go back -- to Hungary, to North Korea, to North Viet-Nam, to
East Germany, or to Poland, or to any of the other lands from which a steady
stream of refugees pours forth, in eloquent testimony to the cruel oppres-
sion now holding sway in their homeland.

c-8
