rae J
wf

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

[tof defer_decision on Route 7 strikes until we have strong
evidence [ot] Hanoi's preparation for new attack in [the
Plaine des Jarres/, some of which might come from RTAF opera-
tions over the Route." 109/ :

On 13 October, one day before the initial RLAF attacks, U.S.
strikes were again requested on four defended targets near Nape and
Tehepone. They were to accompany 1-28 strikes on communist military
installations and supply points in the northern part of the Panhandle. 110/
The significance of these operations, and U.S. participation in them, was
indicated a few days earlier in another meeting among representatives of
the three missions. It was reported at this time that it was probable
“that ARVN will be unable /to/ afford detachment off any significant
ground capability for /the Laotian/ Corridor in /the/ foreseeable future."
Therefore, air operations would offer the only dependable means of com-
batting VC infiltration through Laos. The participants recorded "unanimous
agreement that U.S. participation in air operations in [the/ corridor is
essential if such operations are to have desired military and psychological
impact.” Emphasizing that the initiative for these operations came from
the United States Government, they pointed out that failure to participate
could result in loss of control over them and could even jeopardize their
continuation. At minimum the group recommended that U.S. aircraft fly
CAP (combat air patrol) over the RLAF aircraft, as requested by the
Iaotian Government and as permitted by a "relatively minor extension"
of existing U.S. rules of engagement. 111/

CAP missions were approved, but U.S. air strikes against com-
munist LOCs in the Iaotian Panhandle were not authorized until much later
in the year. 112/ Cross-border ground operations did not receive auth-
orization at any time during the period covered in this study.

NEGOTIATING POSTURE RE LAOS

One reason for the delay in requesting Iaotian air strikes in the
Panhandle was the need to await the uncertain outcome of discussions in
Paris among leaders of the three Laotian political factions. Since 27 August,
when they first met, the three Princes (Souvanna Phouma, Souphanouvang,
and Boun Oum) had reached an impasse on conditions to accompany a cease-
fire. Souvanna Phouma insisted on communist withdrawal from positions
won in the May offensive and had proposed neutralization of the Plaine des
Jarres under I.C.C. supervision. 113/ On 15 September, when it seemed
that further negotiations had become fruitless, Prince Souphanouvang
offered to withdraw communist forces fron the Plaine in return for dis-
cussions leading to a new lh-Nation Conference. The following day, Souvanna
countered with a proposal that a cease-fire cegin on 1 October and attempted

, to verify and make more explicit the mutual concessions. The pro-communist

leader balked over stipulated guarantees, such as I.C.C. supervision, that
pro-conmunist forces would in fact withdraw and be replaced by neutralists.
However, on the 21st, the leaders arrived at agreement for continued meetings
at the ministerial level, based on an agenda which included a cease-fire

30
co TOP SECRET = Sensitive
