Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET — Sensitive

4. The Use of United States Forces in South Viet-Nam.

The commitment of United States forces to South Viet-Nam in-
volves two different categories: (A) Units of modest size required
for the direct support of South Viet-Namese military effort, such
as communications, helicopter and other forms of airlift, reconnais-
sance aircraft, naval patrols, intelligence units, etc., and (B)
larger organized units with actual or potential direct military mis-
sions. Category (A) should be introduced as speedily as possible.
Category (B) units pose a more serious problem in that they are much
more significant from the point of view of domestic and international
political factors and greatly increase the probabilities of Communist
bloc escalation. Further, the employment of United States combat
forces (in the absence of Communist bloc escalation) involves a cer-
tain dilemma: if there is a strong South-Vietnamese effort, they may
not be needed; if there is not such an effort, United States forces
could not accomplish their mission in the midst of an apathetic or
hostile population. Under present circumstances, therefore, the ques-
tion of injecting United States and SEATO combat forces should in
large part be considered as a contribution to the morale of the South
Viet-Namese in their own effort to do the principal job themselves.

5. Probable Extent of the Commitment of United States Forces,

If we commit Category (B) forces to South Viet-Nam, the ultimate
possible extent of our military commitment in Southeast Asia must be
faced. The struggle may be prolonged, and Hanoi and Peiping may
overtly intervene. It is the view of the Secretary of Defense and
the Joint Chiefs of Staff that, in the light of the logistic diffi-
culties faced by the othe side, we can assume that the maximum United
States forces required on the ground in Southeast Asia would not ex-
ceed six divisions, or about 205,000 men (CINCPAC Plan 32/59 PHASE
Iv). This would be in addition to local forces and such SEATO forces
as may be engaged. It is also the view of the Secretary of Defense
and the Joint Chiefs of Staff that our military posture is, or, with
the addition of more National Guard or regular Army divisions, can be
made, adequate to furnish these forces and support them in action with-
out serious interference with our present Berlin plans.

6. Relation to Laos.

It must be understood that the introduction of American combat
forces into Viet-Nam prior to a Laotian settlement would run a con-
siderable risk of stimulating a Communist breach of the cease fire

127

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
