Sf

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

CASE 3: Meeting these requirements by providing forces
from CONUS current force structure including
activations.

A fourth case was considered by the JCS. It assumed:

-» provision of forces from CONUS current force
structure including activations, call-up of
select reserve units and individuals, and ex-
tension in terms of service, but no draw-down
from overseas areas.

Assistant Secretary Enthoven added that:

The JCS deleted Case 4 from the agenda largely because
they estimate that the President is more reluctant to call
up reserve units and extend terms of service than he is to
take forces out of Europe. If they are correct, I think
that the agenda as they have laid it out makes a great deal
of sense and will provide us with much useful information.
If, on the other hand, willingness to activate reserves and
extend terms of service has been underestimated, I think we
should recommend to the JCS that they restore Case 4 to the
agenda.

Significantly, the guidance the JCS received was to study only the
first three cases, indicating that the JCS had not underestimated the
"willingness to activate reserves and extend terms of service."

Meanwhile, Secretary McNamara, in a Memorandum for the President,
dated 2: January 1966, gave, as his best estimate of force levels for
the next twelve months, the following:

1. By December 1966, the U.S. would have 75 battalions
and 367,800 men in Vietnam.

2. Allied nations would have 23 battalions and 44,600. 43/

He noted, however, that the JCS believed that "it would be necessary to
have a selective call-up of reserves and a selective extension of terms
of service to achieve the personnel strengths shown at the times indi-
cated." He noted that the U.S. figures would rise substantially above
those shown if CINCPAC estimates were accepted.

He also included General Westmoreland's 2stimate that such a deploy-
ment would:

"a. Result in destruction of one-third of the enemy's base -
areas, i.e., in-country resources.

27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
