Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

mutual security arrangements we have established. Under these arrange-
ments each nation has responsibilties, commensurete with its capabili-
ties, to participate in the development and maintenance of defensive
strength. There is also increasing ability of other free world nations
to share the burden of this common defense.

"Obviously, no one nation alone could bear the cost of defending all
the free world. Likewise, it would be impossible for many free nations
long to survive if forced to act separately and alone. The crumbling of
the weaker ones would obviously and increasingly multiply the threats to
those remaining free, even the very strongest.

"Collective security is not only sensible--it is essential."

ent

27. U.S. Sends Greetings to Viet-Nam on Anniversa of Inde endence
White House Press Release dated October 25, 1960, Department ‘of
State Bulletin

"The White House on October 25 made public the following message
from President Eisenhower to Ngo Dinh Diem, President of the Republic
of Viet-Nam.

"OCTOBER 22, 1960

"DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: My countrymen end I are proud to convey our
good wishes to you and to the citizens of Viet-Nem on the fifth anni-
versary of the birth of the Republic of Viet-Nam.

"We have watched the courage and daring with which you and the
Vietnamese people attained independence in a situation so perilous that
many thought it hopeless. We have admired the rapidity with which
chaos yielded to order and progress replaced despair.

"During the years of your independence it has been refreshing for
us to observe how clearly the Government and the citizens of Viet-Nem
have faced the fact thet the greatest danger .to their independence was
Communism. You and your countrymen have used your strength well in
accepting the double challenge of building your country and resisting
Communist imperialism. In five short years since the founding of the
Republic, the Vietnamese people have developed their country in almost
every sector. I was particularly impressed by one example. I am informed
that last year over 1,200,000 Vietnamese children were able to go ta
elementary school; three times es many as were enrolled five years earlier.
This is certainly a heartening development for Viet-Nam's future. At the
same time Viet-Nam's ability to defend itself from the Communists has
grown immeasurably since its successful struggle to become an independent
Republic. ;

B-52
