Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"(2) Popular support of the Government by the
Tmacchineds people is essential to a favorable settlement of
the security problem of Indochina. Therefore, as a condition
to the provision of those further increases in military
assistance to Indochina necessary for the implementation of
an egreed over-all military plan, the United States Govern-
ment should obtain assurances from the French Government that:

"(a) A program providing for the eventual
‘self-government of Indochina either within or outside of the
French Union will be developed, made public, and implementa-
tion initiated at once in order to strengthen the national
spirit of the Indochinese in opposition to Communism.

"(b) National armies of the Associated
States of Indochina will be organized as a matter of urgency.
' While it is doubtful that the buildup of these armies can be
accomplished in time to contribute significantly to the
present military situation, the direct political and psycho-
logical benefits to be derived from this course would be great and
would thus result in immediate, although indirect, military
benefits.

"(ce) Pending the formation and training of
Indochinese national armies as effective units, and as an
interim emergency measure, France will dispatch sufficient
additional armed forces to Indochina to insure that the
restoration of peace and internal security in that country
will be accomplished in accordance with the timetable of
the over-all military plan for Indochina.

"(a) France will change its political and
military concepts in Indochina to;

i. Eliminate its policy of
‘colonialism. '*

ii. Provide proper tutelage to
the Associated States.

iii. Insure that a suitable military
command structure, unhempered by political interference, is
established to conduct effective and appropriate military
operations...

"(3) At an appropriate time the United States
should institute checks to satisfy itself that the condi-
tions set forth in subparagraph @s(2) above are being ful-
filled.

"a. The United States should exert all practicable
political and diplomatic measures required to obtain the

13° TOP SECRET - Sensitive
