Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

indirectly, because security will remain outside civilian
purview... :

"To meet this need we must meke more U.S. troops available
to help out in pacification operations as we move to concen-
trete ARVN effort in this work. U.S. forces would be the
catalyst; would lead by example; and would work with the
Vietnamese on the ‘buddy' system. They would be the 10 per-

‘ eent of the totel force of men under arms (90 percent of whom

would be Vietnamese) which would get the whole thing moving
faster.

"This has been done on a small scale already by elements
of the U.S, Marines, lst and 25th U.S. Infantry Divisions,
and the Koreans. We think it can be made to work and the
gains under such 4 program, while not flashy, would hopefully
be solid. Everything depends on whether we can change ARVIN
habits. Experiments already made indicate that U.S. casual-
ties would be few. While it would take time, it would be
cleay to everyone at home that time was working for us and it
might create a ‘smell of victory.' It would eventually get
at Viet Cong recruiting -- surely en achievement which would
fundamentally affect the course of the war.

"I wonder whether the above result conld not be achieved.
if the phrase ‘offensive operations’ were to be redefined so
that instead of defining it as meaning ‘seek out and destroy,'
which I understand is now the case, it would be defined as
‘split up the Viet Cong and keep him off balance.'

"This new definition of the phrase ‘offensive operations'
would mean fewer men for the purely ‘military war, fewer U.S.
casualties and more pacification.

"Tt would also hasten the revamping of the ARVN, which
Ky says is now due to have been completed by normal Vietnamese
bureaucratic methods by July 1967 (which seems optimistic to
me). What I propose in this telegram would in effect revamp
the ARVN by ‘on-the-job-training.' It is the only way that
I can think of drastically to accelerate the present pace.

”

* oF * * *

“The question of transferring Revolutionary Development
civilian functions to COMUSMACY raises questions and I under-
stand you recognize certain objections. I doubt whether it
would solve any existing problems, and it would certainly
create many mew ones. I agree with your second paragraph
in which you sey civilien functions should be left under
Civilian management.

* 109

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
