Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

It was--he would be the first to admit-~the kind of. unstructured, unpro-
grammed, "non-organization" which was antithetical to that which the
professional military might be expected to propose and so foreign to the
typical views of the Stete Department, with its traditional anti-operationsal
bias, that diplomats would inevitably regard it as a proposal for power
without responsibility. Thus, one contemporary account suggests that
lansdale's approach was eventually rejected because of governmental inertia
and bureaucratic in-fighting:

When Lansdale returned to Washington -- after he had submitted
his report to his own superiors - he was suddenly swamoned one
afternoon to the White House and, much to his surprise, ushered
into a conference room where the President was presiding over a
mixed group of high Pentagon, State Department, and National
Security Council officials. ‘To his further surprise, President
Kennedy, after commending his report, indicated that Lansdale
would be sent back to Vietnam in a high capacity. Kennedy's
declaration at the meeting obviously raised the hackles of many
officials whose agencies had been criticized by Lansdale. The
upshot was that nothing further happened about Lansdale's appoint-
ment. It is now known thet objections to it were raised in the
highest levels of the Kennedy administration; in fact, there
were threats of resignation. In the sense that some drastic action
in Vietnam should have been taken at this time, whether it involved
lansdale or not, this was another vital turning point in the long
and tortuous history of America's Vietnamese involvement. There
was still a chance to do something to save the Diem regime, depending
largely on getting Nhu out of the country. Difficult as it would
have been to achieve at this late date, Lansdale might have been
able to persuade Diem to do it, because he had remained one of the
few Americans Diem had ever trusted. More important, some feasible
ideas about how to fight a guerrilla war might have been set in

‘motion, and the miscalculation of what had always been essentially
& revolutionary situation might thereupon have been altered. 38/

This account simply does not square with the existence of several
cogent objections to lansdale's proposals for "unfettered quality"--though
there most certainly was a fair share of bureaucratic in-fighting as the
proposals were studied, expanded, and reshaped. Moreover, it compresses
the time frame within which Lansdale's two major theses were struck down.
His first proposal, for selected individuals to act as advisors, implied
--at the very minimum-~continuity of personnel selected by an extra-
bureaucratic process. Extra-bureaucratic selection was dead by mid-1961;
the issue of continuity was finally settled in favor of year-long tours
in December 1962 (and has remained in effect since that time). The issue
of a supra-departmental organization was fought out in mid-1961. It
succumbed to an organizational principle with very deep roots.

LY TOP SECRET - Sensitive
