Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

"5. We think it plausible that effective and sustained reprisals,
even in a low key, would have a substantial depressing effect upon the
morale of Viet Cong cadres in South Vietnam. This is the strong
opinion of CIA Saigon. It is based upon reliable reports of the initial
' Viet Cong reaction to the Gulf of Tonkin episode, and also upon the
solid general assessment that the determinaticn of Hanoi and the apparent
timidity of the mighty United States are both major items in Viet Cong
confidence. .

"6. The long-run effect of reprisals in the South is far less clear.
It may be that like other stimulants, the value of this one would decline
over time. Indeed the risk of this result is large enough so that we
ourselves believe that a very major effort all along the line should be
made in South Vietnam to take full advantage of the immediate stimulus of
reprisal policy in its early stages. Our object should be to use this
new policy to effect a visible upward turn in pacification, in govern-
mental effectiveness, in operations against the Viet Cong, and in the
whole US/GVN relationship. It is changes in these areas that can have
enduring long-term effects. wi

"7- While emphasizing the importance of reprisals in the South, we
do not exclude the impact on Hanoi. We believe, indeed, that it is of
great importance that the level of reprisal be adjusted rapidly and
visibly to both upward and downward shifts in the level of Viet Cong
offenses. We want to keep before Hanoi the carrot of our desisting as
well as the stick of continued pressure. We also need to conduct the
application of the force so that there is always a prospect of worse to
come.

"8. We cannot assert that a policy of sustained reprisal will succeed
in changing the course of the contest in Vietnam. It may fail, and we
cannot estimate the odds of success with any accuracy -- they may be
somewhere between 25% and 75%. What we can say is that even if it fails,
the policy will be worth it. At a minimum it will damp down the charge
that we did not do all that we could have done, and this charge will be
important in many countries, including our own. Beyond that, a reprisal
policy -- to the extent that it demonstrates U.S. willingness to employ
this new norm in counter-insurgency -- will set a higher price for the
future upon all adventures of guerrilla warfare, and it should therefore
somewhat increase our ability to deter such adventures. We must recognize,
however, that that ability will be gravely weakened if there is failure
for any reason in Vietnam.

"IV. Present Action Recommendations
"l, This general recommendation was developed in intensive discus-
sions in the days just before the attacks on Pleiku. These attacks and

our reaction to them have created an ideal opportunity for the prompt
development end execution of sustained reprisals. Conversely, if no such

38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
