Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
Security Information

It is not easy, but before the U.S., can give any

' commitment even as far as the Executive is concerned,

-we would like to feel that we have answers, or at least
observations a) allowing us to picture our help honorably
and fairly as not merely economic aid but as aid which
has a particular purpose, and b) constituting a program
which we could say from the political standpoint is one
which has a fair chance of success in changing the rather
gloomy aspect of the affair at the present time. With

a program for Indochina on a joint political-military
basis it is possible to get our Congress to make a sub-
stantial contribution. Our own Congress is desperately
anxious to reduce taxes. Taxes are being cut in Britain
and in Canada and everybody says we should do the same.
Cutting down governmental income means a still larger
deficit. Any further aid must therefore be presented in
an extremely effective and-appealing way to get it
through. There is a realization of the critically important
role that the French play. "You help us to help you."

We have explained ways in which that could be done,

MR. WILSON said that we notice in Korea that by
training the Koreans we give them confidence and faith,
a feeling of unity and competence that they can go on
their own, that really gets the people together. Also,
he was sure the French look forward to the day when it
will not be necessary to have so many troops from France
over there. He thought the French wanted them to be
strong enough to keep the country free and be part of
the spirit of French influence pyt did not want to have
French ‘troops there forever in large numbers. If those
people can strengthen themselves they cannot only meet
emergency but also take care of themselves.

M, LETOURNEAU recalled the time he had spent at
the Pentagon to explain the program and the conditions
for its realization. He had said at that time that
one cannot seriously doubt -- even though it is being
done -- the will of France as regards the freedom of
Vietnam and the constitution of national armies since
they had been doing it for three years. The plan has

SECRET

Security Information

28
