Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

From the autumn of 1945 through the autumn of 1946, the United
States received a series of communications from Ho Chi Minh depicting
calamitous conditions in Vietnam, invoking the principles proclaimed
in the Atlantic Charter and in the Charter of the United Nations,
and pleading for U.S. recognition of the independence of the DRV, or --
as a last resort -- trusteeship for Vietnam under the United Nations.
But while the U.S. took no action on Ho's requests, it was also unwilling
to aid the French. On January 15, 1946, the Secretary of War was
advised by the Department of State that it was contrary to U.S. policy
to "employ American flag vessels or aircraft to transport troops of
any nationality to or from the Netherlands Kast Indies or French Indo-
china, nor to permit use of such craft to carry arms, ammunition or
military equipment to these areas." 27/ However, the British arranged
for the transport of additional French troops to Indochina, bilaterally
agreed with the French for the latter to assume British occupation
responsibilities, and signed a pact on 9 October, 1945, giving "full
recognition to French rights" in Indochina. 28/ French troops began
arriving in Saigon that month, and subsequently the British turned
over to them some 800 U.S. Lend-Lease jeeps and trucks. President
Truman approved the latter transaction on the grounds that removing the
equipment would be impracticable. 29/

The fighting between the French and the Vietnamese which began in
South Vietnam with the 23 September, 1945, French coup d'etat, spread
from Saigon throughout Cochinchina, and to southern Annam. By the end
of January, 1946, it was wholly a French affair, for by that time the
British withdrawal was complete; on 4 March, 1946, Admiral Lord Mountbatten
deactivated Indochina as territory under the Allied Southeast Asia Com-
mand, thereby transferring all control to French authorities. 30/ From
French headquarters, via Radio Saigon, came announcements that a military
"mopping-up" campaign was in progress, but pacification was virtually
complete; but these reports of success were typically interspersed with
such items as the following:

"20 March. 1946:

"Rebel bands are still (wreaking destruction) in the areas
south of Saigon. These bands are quite large, some numbering
as many as 1,000 men. Concentrations of these bands are to be
found...in the villages. Some have turned north in an attempt
to disrupt (communications) in the Camau Peninsula, northeast
of Batri and in the general area south of (Nha Trang). In the
area south of Cholon and in the north of the Plaine des Jones
region, several bands have taken refuge...."

"571 March 1946:

"The following communique was issued by the High Commissioner
for Indochina this morning: ‘Rebel activities have increased in

A~-2) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
