_—+ ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Operation CEDAR FALLS in the Iron Triangle, which began on 8 Janu-
ary, was the most significant operation of the month and the largest
operation of the war in terms of forces employed. The operation was
aimed at clearing the Triangle, an area denied to the GVN for over 20
years. In the estimation of the MACV staff it gained outstanding
results, capturing large numbers of weapons, ammunition and other war
materials, plus nearly a half-million pages of enemy documents. 25/ MACV
concluded that CEDAR FALLS had destroyed the Iron Triangle as a secure
VC base area (although the operation which superseded CEDAR FALLS,
JUNCTION CITY, was in basically the same area).

Operation THAYER II conducted by the 1st Cavalry Division in Binh
Dinh Province reported killing over 500 enemy, the second consecutive
month such a figure was reached in that province. FAIRFAX, an open-ended
operation which was to continue in one form or another for months, aimed
at destroying enemy forces and eliminating the VC infrastructure in Gia
Dinh Province southeast of Saigon was "meeting significant results."
Operation ADAMS in Phu Yen Province, a "search and destroy rice harvest
security and road clearing operation" was specifically designed "to pro-
vide a shield behind which Revolutionary Development [was] progressing." 26/
This was the precursor of the USMC Operation DESOTO in the Quang Ngai salt
flats later that month. In preparation for DESOTO, ROK Marines conducted
Operation SEINE in Quang Ngai, a ten-day search and destroy operation,
which killed over 110 enemy in the period. The most significant RVNAF
operations were conducted in the Capital Military District and in IV

CTZ..27/ Threeeareas weredbeing closely watched:for increased enemy

activities, possibly large unit operations. In I CTZ the enemy troop
build-up, resupply harassment, and reconnaissance increased in the DMZ
area. Elements of the NVA 324th and 341st Divisions were confirmed as
infiltrated south into Quang Tri Province. From every indication there
would be future widespread enemy activity in that area. Enemy forces

in II CTZ continued to evade friendly forces thronghout the month, although
the NVA NT 1 and Nr 10 divisions located near the Kontum/Pleika border

- were believed preparing to move, or actually moving, into those provinces.

In III CTZ, despite the disruptive effects of CEDAR FALLS in the Iron
Triangle, there were strong indications that elements of six VC/NVA div-
isions were preparing for future offensive operations in the Tay Ninh-

. Binh Long-Binh Tuong Province areas. 28/

January was characterized by the insertion of more ARVN battalions
into the role of direct support of revolutionary development for 1947.
In-country, there were 120 ARVN infantry battalions assigned to 10 divi-
sional tactical areas and two special zones. Of these, 50 were to have
been assigned missions of direct support of revolutionary development
for 1967. Operational control of these RD battalians varied throughout
the country and included command under the province chief, the regi-
mental commander, special zone commander or the division commander. In

e

3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
