Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

We warned them that time was extremely short, that the sects
were about to take action by arms and that a peaceful solution
would have to be introduced immediately or the opportunity
would be lost. The opportunity was lost. 102/

2. The United Front Challenges Diem

Lost because Cao Dai and Hoa Hao sect leaders joined with
Bay Vien in February, put down hostilities among themselves and joined in
a United Front of Nationalist Forces. In March, the United Front demanded
Diem form a government of large national union. The eight sect cabinet
members resigned (although Cao Dai Generals The and Phuong soon changed
their minds). A United Front delegate tried to convince Bao Dai to with-
draw Diem's powers as premier but the timely arrival of a personal letter
from President Eisenhower outlining US objectives and progress in Vietnam
proved more persuasive. The letter either reassured Bao Dai that the US
had not written him out of the political picture or made him think twice
about joining with the sects and thereby incurring US wrath. Whatever the
reason, he refused to intervene on behalf of the Front. 103/ Diem called
the Front Program an ultimatum and would not budge.

France wanted Bao Dai to mediate between Diem and the United
Front. The US wanted to issue a joint declaration telling the sects both
America and France opposed violence and warning them that the French Ex-
peditionary Corps would block any movement of Hoa Hao troops into Saigon
to reinforce the Binh Xuyen. Ely and Paris refused the warning clause:
French troops would act only in protection oF the aver and property of
French and, foreign nationals. 10)/

3- Diem Challenges the Binh Xuyen

During this time, Lansdale was meeting almost nightly with Diem.
He reports Diem

was desparately trying to get French and US help to remove the
Surete from the control of the Binh Xuyen. French and US
reactions to the problem were in the form of advice to proceed
slowly, to act with caution. Events would not permit this. 105/

Before dawn on the 23th of March, a paratrooper company loyal
to Diem attacked and overcame the Binh Xuyen-controlled central police
headquarters. The next day, Diem told Defense Minister Minh he planned to
oust Binh Xuyen Police Commissioner Lai Van Sang that afternoon --

March 29 -- and replace him with someone loyal to his regime. Minh in-
sisted Diem at least consult the cabinet before taking action. Diem re-
fused and Minh resigned. Representatives of General Ely were able to
persuade Diem to defer any move against the Surete , however. 106/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
