Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Political and Security Problems of the Diem Government.
President Ngo Dinh Diem's policy of strict control in the polit-
ical and economic fields has caused a certain amount of internal
dissatisfaction. Should the President's exercise of personal
authority develop too far there may be danger that the resultant
frustration of government officials might preclude the united
support for his regime which the situation requires. Otherwise,
the President's stern police measures and his emphasis on
internal security have led to some criticism of the government.
This emphasis on internal security stems from the recent emer-
gence of the country, the continuation of communist-inspired
violence and subversion, and such phenomena as the assassination
of local officials in rural areas of southern Viet-Nam."

Half a year later, on January 7, 1959, a similar OCB
Progress Report asserted:

"Internal Security. It has become increasingly clear that the
communists, no longer expectant that Free Viet-Nam will fall to
their control through peaceful methods, are executing a carefully
planned campaign of violence aimed at undermining the stability
of the Diem Government. Their concentration of activities in
rural areas where communications and terrain make it difficult
for the government to cope with them recalls the tactics used
against the French during the Indochina War. Assassinations,
particularly of officials in rural areas, continue at an alarming
rate of about fifteen to thirty-five a month. Attacks on rubber
plantations and reported communist plans to break up the land
development, land reform and agricultural credit programs indicate
deliberate efforts to interfere with Viet-Nam's economic programs."

The first National Intelligence Estimate to assess the new
situation--and the first NIE or SNIE on South Vietnam since 1956--was
issued in May, 1959 (NIE 63-59, "Prospects for North and South Vietnam,"
26 May 1959):

"The prospect of reunification of Communist North Vietnam
(DRV) and western-oriented South Vietnam (GVN) remains remote.
In the DRV the full range of Communist techniques is used to
control the population, socialize the economy, impose austerity
and direct investment to economic rehabilitation and develop-
ment. The DRV maintains large armed forces. In South Vietnan,
despite the authoritarian nature of the regime, there is far
more freedom. Local resources and US aid are devoted to developing
the armed forces, maintaining internal security, and supporting
a relatively high standard of living, with lesser emphasis on
economic development....

"In South Vietnam political stability depends heavily upon
President Diem and his continued control of the instruments of

Be TOP SECRET - Sensitive
