Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

12 villagers were killed; in another locality, Ba Lang, other incidents
of violence were reported which led to 200 arrests. 56/ It was the
view of the Indian and Polish members of the ICC, however, that despite
these incidents “by the 18th of May (1955) the bulk of the persons who
wanted to change the zone of their residence had succeeded in doing so."
The Canadian member dissented and submitted a minority report detailing
other examples of forceful obstruction of refugees by DRV authorities or
crowds, and concluded these were "deliberately planned." Moreover, the
Canadians were convinced that the DRV had so effectively restricted ICC
inspections that: "it's still not possible to say whether all persons
wishing to move from one zone to the other have been able to do so." 51/
Estimates of the numbers of persons prevented from migrating from North
Vietnam range from Asian scholar Ellen Hammer's "several fold" those who
left, and Diem's estimate of twice the number who reached the South, to
Robert Shaplen's "no more than 400,000," and B.S.N. Murti of the ICC, who
thinks a number approaching 2,000 likely. 58/

5. Impact of the Exodus: North

Whatever the DRV's intentions concerning the exodus, the
numbers of refugees who were permitted to depart speaks for itself: if
the estimate of 900,000 is correct, the DRV witnessed the flight of 1 out
of every 13 of its citizens at a time when, ostensibly, votes and labor
were important to its future. It should be noted that the DRV capitalized
upon the abandoned land and other property of the refugees in its initial
wealth redistribution schemes, and thus had motive to encourage, rather
than impede, departures. 59 The timing of the uproar with the ICC over
violations of Article li(d) suggests an answer: the incidents observed
by the ICC in the North, as well as manifestations in the South of dis-
content with Saigon's observance of the agreement, multiplied after
October, 1954, and peaked toward May, 1955, indicating that the DRV pur-
sued a progressively more ruthless policy on departures. 60/ In seeking
to attenuate the outflow, the DRV undoubtedly resorted to stringent
measures, at least in certain localities. Whether these measures ap~
proached the depravities depicted by Trager and others cannot be adjudi-
cated with present evidence, but it is clear that refugees provided an
early and severe test of the DRV's capability for humane and democratic
action consistent with the Geneva Settlement -~ and in the eyes of many
observers in South Vietnam and the West, the DRV failed abjectly, seri-
ously damaging its position vis-a-vis the plebescite. 61/ Within North
Vietnam, the refugee experience developed deep divisions between the DRV
and rural Catholics which were to persist more than a year after the
Geneva movement arrangement expired.

6. Impact of the Exodus: South

For the GVN, the influx of 900,000 people presented prob-
lems of paralyzing proportions. Within a few months of Ngo Dinh Diem's
taking office, Saigon was ringed with shabby encampments whose inhabi-
tants were wholly dependent on the already overburdened government. Had

14 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
