Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a. Is the security of Southeast Asia vital to the U.S.
and of the free world?

b. Are additional steps necessary?

ec. Will the additional steps accomplish their mission of
stopping the intrusions of Hanoi and Peiping into the south?

Whether approached from b or c above, it seems obvious that

we must do everything within our power to stiffen and strengthen
the situation in South Vietnam. We recognize that...the time
Sequence of Communist actions may force the critical decisions
before any such preparatory measures could achieve tangible
success.

ii. Nevertheless, in Honolulu, we would like you...to be pre-
pared to discuss with us several proposals...perhaps the most
radical...is the one which...would involve a major infusion of
U.S. efforts into a group of selected provinces where Vietnamese
seem currently unable to execute their pacification programs...

We would therefore propose that U.S. personnel, both
civilian and military, drawn from the U.S. establishment currently
in Vietnam, be 'encadred' into current Vietnamese political and
military structure...

Specifically, this would involve the assignment of civilian
personnel, alternatively military personnel with a civilian function,
to work in the provincial administration, and insofar as it is feas-
ible, down to the logistic level of administration. On the military
side it would mean the introduction of mobile training teams to
train, stiffen and improve the state of the Vietnamese paramilitary
forces and district operation planning...

In order to test the utility of such a proposal, we would
Suggest that seven provinces be chosen for this purpose. We would
offer the provinces of Long An, Dinh Tuong, Kien Hoa, Tay Ninh,
Hau Ngiah, which are five critical provinces in the immediate vicinity
of Saigon, Additionally, we would propose Quang Ngia.... and finally
Pou Yenese.

eo-U.5s personnel assigned to these functions would not
appear directly in the chain of command... They would instead
be listed as “assistants" to the Vietnamese officials. In prac-
tice, however, we would expect them to carry a Me deR share of the
burden of decision and actionec.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ME
