Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

- US/FW Force Requirement

Required us/FW Total
Mobile US/FW Force for Required
Enemy Force Force TAOR Patrols U.S, Force
151 L6 34 80
255 74 34 108

The 3 to 1 ratio is supported by results in battle.
Our forces routinely defeat enemy forces outnumbering them
two or three to one. In no instance has a dug-in U.S.
company been overrun, regardless of the size of the
attacking enemy force, and nothing larger than a company
has come close to annihilation when caught moving. Seven
battalions of Marines defeated two NVA divisions in
HASTINGS, and single battalions of lst Air Cavalry defeated
regimental-sized forces in pitched battles in the Ia Drang
Valley in the Fall of 1965.

These factors need confirmation, in actual practice,
by how well the forces are doing in the field and by progress
in RD. vc/IVA military victories and large areas succumbing
to VC require a reaction regardless of calculated force
requirements. But there is no sign of anything like that in
the foreseeable future. Moreover, a sharp improvement in
our effectiveness should result from improvements in the
flow of intelligence and in the tactical employment of our
forces. Achieving such improvements should be the main
objective at this time. 18/

So armed, on May Day Enthoven carried the finished memorandum to
McNamara's office and proceeded to discuss its contents. However,
probably not to his surprise, he found that McNamara was thinking along
the same lines -- in fact, he had already set John McNaughton to preparing
a Draft Presidential Memorandum setting forth the same basic political
arguments that Systems Analysis was making. The "hard" data in the
Enthoven memorandum was the kind of back-up McNamara understood and
appreciated and it buttressed most of the beliefs he already held. He
asked Enthoven for some detailed follow-up related to VC/NVA control of
engagements and casualties. There is no record that the Assistant
Secretary left the signed memorandum with the Secretary of Defense, but
there seemed little requirement for that. The ideas and position in it
had been escalated to the DPM level where such ideas would receive the
highest level attention and consideration. 19/

ae =

128 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
