Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive he Fe

General Don indicated to a CAS officer that there was support among

all but a couple of generals for a coup. 33/ Nhu's July 11 meeting with
the generals, however, seemed to disorient their efforts temporarily.

In an Avgust 1} memorandum, the CIA acknowledged some military support
for a coup, but doubted that anyone would risk it unless a deterioration
of the political situation threatened s Viet Cong victory. 34/ The
pagoda attack was just such a deterioration and it precipitated the
generals' first approach to the U.S. on August 23 about a coup.

With State's instructions of 24 August as guidance, Lodge met with
Harkins, Truehart, Mecklin, and Richardson on the morning of August 26
before presenting his credentials to Diem. They decided that the
officiel U.S. hand should not show -- i.e., Harkins should not talk to
the generals. It was agreed that It. Colonel Conein of the CIA would con-
tact General Khiem, and Mr. Spera (also of CIA) would contact General
Khanh, II Corps commander in Pleiku, conveying the following points to
each: :

a. Solidification of further elaboration of action
aspects of present thinking and planning. What should
be done?

b. We in agreement Nhus must go..

¢. Question of retaining Diem or not up to them.

d. Bonzes and other arrestees must be released
immediately and five-point agreement of 16 June be fully
carried out.

e, We will provide direct support during any interim
period of breakdown of central government mechanism.

f. We cannot be of any help during initial action of
assuming power of the state. Entirely their own action,
win or lose. Don't expect to be bailed out.

g If Nhus do not go and if Buddhists’ situation is
not redressed as indicated, we would find it impossible
continue military and economic support.

h, It is hoped bloodshed can be avoided or reduced to
absolute minimum.

i. It is hoped that during process and after, develop-
ments conducted in such manner as to retain and increase the
necessary relations between Vietnamese and Americans which
will allow for progress of country and successful prosecution
of the war. 35/

Conein met with Khiem on August 27, and after conveying his message
learned that Minh was the leader of the cabal, which included also
Generals Kim, Khanh, Thieu, and Le. Don was aware of the plot and
approved, but was too exposed to participate. General Minh was under
surveillance, and had asked not to be contacted by the U.S, Khiem
recognized the need to neutralize General Cao, the IV Corps commander,
General Dinh, the III Corps and Saigon Area commander, and Colonel
Tung. 36/ A separate CAS report indicated that General Kim had charge
of plans for the provisional successor government which would include
both civilians and military, with Minh as President. 37/

18 TOP SECRET - Jensitive
