Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

money from the country, engaged in financial or commerical speculation,

or accepted bribes. But the impression remained, fed by numerous credible
reports of official graft at lower levels, that whether or not the Diem
family took for personal gain, they took.

Another disadvantage proceeded from the Diem's familial concentra-
tion of power: bureaucratic overcentralization; Diem himself seems to
have been peculiarly at fault in this instance, reserving for himself
the power of decision in minute matters, and refusing to delegate authority
to subordinates who might have relieved him of a crushing administrative
burden. 34/ In part, this may have been simply inexperience in handling
a large enterprise, but there seems to have been deeper, philosophical
reasons -- a passion for perfection, a distrust of other men, a conviction
that all subordinates required his paternalistic guidance. The result
was an impairment of an administrative system already crippled by the
absence of French civil servants. Subordinate officials, incapable of
making decisions, fearful of making them, or forbidden to make them, passed
upward even minute matters on paper to the brothers Ngo, glutting the
communications of government, and imposing long delays on all, even im-
portant actions.

Personalism, as Diem called his personal political philosophy, was
a melange of Asian and European notions which resembled the French Catholic
personnalisme of Emmanuel Mounier, or the Encyclicals of Popes Leo XIII
and Pius XI. 35/ More accurately, it was a blend of Christianity, Marxism,
and Confucianism which stressed the development of each individual's moral
character as the basis for community progress toward democracy. Diem saw
himself as a reformer, even a revolutionary, in the moral realm. His
central social message was that each citizen achieved moral fulfillment or
harmony only if he applied himself energetically to his civic duties,
avoiding on the one hand the selfishness of capitalism, and on the other, the
selflessness of Marxist collectivism. “The basis for democracy can only be a
spiritual one," 36/ said Diem in his Message to the National Assembly
on the Constitution of 1956, and in New Delhi in 1957, he took Asians to
task for losing sight of the spiritual essence of their political tradi-
tions: 37/

",...Does not our spirituality of which we are so proud,
simply conceal a narrow conservatism and a form of escapism
from concrete responsibility?...Has not Buddhist compassion
become @ pretext for not practicing justice..-And is not
tolerance, which so many can mistake for freedom, the result
of paternalistic indulgence?”

And the same year, in Korea, he spoke of his hopes for restoring the spiritual
strength of Vietnam after "the tremendous material and political difficulties
which assailed Vietnam after Geneva had plunged even the best of her sons

into a state of apprehension colored with despair..." 38/

"We pursue two aims.

"First we want to rearm the Vietnamese citizen morally and
to make him impervious to all tyranny, whatever its origin.

15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
