Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

evident without making any mention of it, and, by maintaining his aloof-
ness from official contact, force the regime to come to him. Si On
October 7, however, Lodge expressed some doubts about the real value of
the political concessions itemized in State's instructions if our real
goal was removal of Nhu, an objective of questionable feasibility under
the current cirewmstances. 6/ In view of Whu's increasing hostility
to the U.S. presence and influence, Lodge felt a request from the regime
for a U.S. withdrawal was a distinct possibility.

That same day, the regime's reaction to the aid cut-off hit the
streets with banner headlines in its mouthpiece, the Times of Vietnam;
"USOM Freezes Economic Aid Program." t/ The article accused the U.S,
of subverting the war effort, and asserted that the cut-off had been
decided in mid-September. Such fantastic pressure for petty reforms
would jeopardize the entire revolutionary program of the government, it

concluded. Lodge made no comment on the story.

In mid-October, Lodge was requested to provide Washington with a
weekly evaluation of the effects, both positive and negative, of the
new policy. 8/ lodge's October 16 reply summarized the situation as
follows: "So far we appear to be getting virtually no effect from our
actions under DEPIEL 534, but we would not have expected effects this
early." 9/ Other reports indicated that the regime was preparing to
take a number of belt-tightening measures, including reductions in
civil service salaries; that Chinese businessmen and bankers had begun
to get jittery about currency stability; and that the government was
planning to draw down its foreign exchange reserves to sustain import
levels in the face of the U.S. cut-off of CIP funds. 10/ A CIA memo-
randum concluded that the GV reaction to the new U.S. policy, parti-
cularly the violent anti-U.Ss. eampaign in the Times of Vietnem and the
surveillance and harassment of Americans and their employees, indicated
that Diem and Nhu were preparing for a long fight and were unmoved by
the new policy. 11/

Under Lodge's instructions, General Stillwell (MACV - J-3) met with
Secretary Thuan on October 17 and informed him of the impending cut-off
of funds for the Special Forces, both MAP and CIA, unless the three CIA-
funded companies under Colonel Tung's command were placed under JGS
control and transferred to the field. 12/ Thuan said he would take
the matter up with Diem immediately. Harkins informed Diem directly of
this action in a letter on October 18. 13/ General Don and Colonel
Tung were also personally advised of the action, but again no public
announcement was made. On October 26 it was learned that Tung and JCS
were working on plans to transfer his Special Forces to the Central
Highlands. 14/ By then, however, coup plans were well advanced and
the significance of this transfer must be understood therein.

Militarily, in October while the GVii had taken some minor steps in
line with the McNamara-Taylor recommendations (such as agreeing to

38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
