Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

The recent upsurge of enemy infiltration. thru the DMZ is
causing a complete re-evaluation of Allied military posture
in Quang Tri Province. If, as is strongly indicated, the
enemy has made the decision to increase the tempo of his
Operations thru the DMZ, additional steps must be taken to
block that approach effectively. 25/

Ambassador Lodge quoted General Westmoreland as advancing the sug-
gestion, with which he agreed, that there might be merit in giving these
measures the greatest possible international flavor by. constituting a
multi-national organization to help block enemy's infiltration through
the DMZ.

The organization would be known as the KANZUS Force from
its national components: Korean, Australian, New Zealand, and
US. As presently visualized, the organization would be
brigade size, with 2 US Marine and 1 ROK battalion as the
combat elements. Individual battalions would retain their
national identity. Formation of the command headquarters sup-
porting structure would provide a place for incorporating token
remaining national contributions from Australia and New Zealand
and others such as the Philippines, should this become suitable
+--The organization, commanded by a USMC officer, possibly a
brigadier general, would operate in the US tactical chain of
command in close coordination with and in support of the ARVN. 26/

Ambassador Lodge foresaw that:

The establishment of such a force might eventually provide
us with a basis for suggesting the presence of an international
force of different composition under UN or Asian regional
sponsorship which could inherit the anti-infiltration role of
KANZUS. An eventual successor would function obviously as a
political and psychological cordon sanitaire and not, of course,
as a military Maginot Iine. However, a physical barrier is a
possible future development. 27

On 10 August, General Westmoreland, in a message for Admiral Sharp
and General Wheeler, 28/ pointed out that the enemy “has increased his
rate of infiltration, formed division-size units, introduced new weapons
into his ranks, maintained lines of communication into South Vietnam,
increased his use of Cambodia as a safe haven, and recently moved a
combat division through the DMZ."

The KANZUS suggestion was only the first of a series of ideas pro-
posed by various people and agencies to limit infiltration through the
PZ. On 16 August, Lodge forwarded to the Secretary of State
General Westmoreland's proposal that;

ae an TOP SECRET - Sensitive
