Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

challenge - because we fight for values and we fight for prin-
ciple, rather than territory or colonies, our patience and our
determination are unending.

But neither pressures nor blandishments succeeded in moving Hanoi.
On the day following the President's speech, North Vietnamese Premier
Pham Van Dong published his famour "Four Points," recognition of which
he made clear, was the sole way in which "favorable conditions" could
‘be created for peaceful settlement of the war. Two days later, in 4
telling denunciation of the President's Johns Hopkins speech, North
Vietnam said that the United States was using the "peace" label to
conceal its aggression and that the Southeast Asia development proposal
was simply a "carrot" offered to offset the "stick" of aggression and
to seek to allay domestic and international criticism of U.S. policy in
Vietnam. The following day, an article in a Chinese Communist newspaper
denounced President Johnson's proposal for unconditional discussions as
_"a swindle pure and simple." To complete the rejection of Western
initiatives, Hanoi turned down the appeal of the seventeen non-aligned
nations on April 19, reiterating that Pham Van Dong's "Four Points" were
the "only correct way" to resolve the Vietnam problem; and three days
later Peking's Peoples' Daily gave the coup-de-grace to the 17-nation
appeal, saying that it amounted to “legalizing the United States im-
perialist aggression" and that "the Viet-Namese people will never agree
to negotiations 'without any preconditions. '"

D. President's Reprise: Tragedy, Disappointment -- But
No Bombing Pause :

The rejection of the President's initiative had been total.
And other Western peace feelers were equally bluntly turned away.
British former Foreign Secretary Patrick Gordon Walker who sought to
visit Peking and Hanoi on a self-appointed peace mission to sound out
both governments on the possibilities of negotiations was unceremoniously
denied entry to both Mainland China and North Vietnam.

In the light of these developments, the President made another
public statement, 113/ opening with the words, "This has been a week of
tragedy, disappointment, and progress."

We tried to open a window to peace,” the President said, "only
to be met with tired names and slogans and a refusal to talk.” But he
tried once more:

They want no talk with us, no talk sith a distinguished
Briton, no talk with the United Nations. They want no talk
at all so far. But our offer stands. We mean every word of
S agen ee d ,

The window to peace is still open. We are’ still ready
for unconditional discussion. We will impose no conditions

97 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
