Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

"Tet us suppose that the Chinese Camnunists conquer Quemoy. Would
that be the end of the story? We know that it would not be the end of
the story. History teaches that when powerful despots can gain some~
’ thing through aggression, they try, by the same methods, to gain more
and more and more. ;

"Also, we have modre to guide us than the teachings of history.
We have the statements, the boastings, of the Chinese Communists them-
selves. They frankly say that their present military effort is part of
@ program to conquer Formosa.

"Tt is as certain as can be that the shooting which the Chinese
Communists started on August 23rd had as its purpose not just the taking
of the island of Quemoy. It is pert of what is indeed an ambitious plan
of armed conquest.

"Mis plan would liquidate all of the free world positions in the
Western Pacific area and bring them under captive governments which would
be hostile to the United States and the free world. Thus the Chinese
and Russian Communists would come to dominate at least the Western half
of the now friendly Pacific Ocean.

"So, aggression by ruthless despots again imposes a clear danger
to the United States and to the free world.

"In this effort the Chinese Communists and the Soviet Union appear
to be working hand in hand. Iast Monday I received a long letter on
this subject from Prime Minister Khrushchey. He warned the United States
against helping its allies in the Western Pacific. He said that we should
not support the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea. He con-
tended that we should desert them, return ali of our naval forces to our
home bases, and leave our friends in the Fer East to face, alone, the
combined military power of the Soviet Union and Communist China.

"Does Mr. Khrushchev think that we have so soon forgotten Korea?

"T must say to you very frankly and soberly, my friends, the' United
States cannot accept the result that the Communists seek. Neither can
we show, now,a weakness of purpose--a tinidity--which would surely lead
them to move more aggressively against us and our friends in the Western
Pacific area.

"TP the Chinese Communists have decided to risk a war, it is not
because Quemoy icself is so valusble to them. They have been getting
along without Quemoy ever since they seized the China mainland nine years

ago.

"Tr they have now decided to risk a war, it can only be because
they, and their Soviet allies, have decided to find:out whether threat-
ening war is a policy from. which they can make big gains.

*

B-38
