Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ae ot HORE AMERICAN CONSULATE GENERAL J Md,
sais SF es Kunming, China, October 24, 1945...) Ge

A subject: Letters from Annamite Leaders: : ZES

\_ : Situation in Indochina, Veet eer ae

) Bes ISEQ iG 670:

| oe eg “Y — i
an oie IME. YI1% 5

AL ‘ — wie FY Sa Pei Hy
[) ce <> FUE Honorable “A q) O Y\ AGTAT (orrans : Ve Me
Sic The Secretsry of state, we HOV fe Mg 4 i .)
Le ro Aa Washington, D. C, (' barcavele rae
: . PASTOR AtrATS Ut bid
Sir: oS
/. LJ ft Lh)

: )
Referrin; to the Consulate General's despatch No. | XK
el of September 27, 1945, in regard to the situation in
Indochina, { have the honor to enclose; (a) copy of a
letter addressed by HO Chi Minh, President of the "pro-
visional Government of the Democratic Republic of yiet-
Wan", to tne Seeretary of Gtate under date of Octobe
2a, (b) translation of 4 letter dated oo bobes 22,
945, addressed by HGIAO Vien, Division of Overseas
Affairs official serving with the Chinese Occupation
Forces in Indochina, to Gcneral CHR cheng, Chinese Min-

a ee

i ister of var; and (c) translation of a letter dated
ml October 22, 1945, addressed by Ho Chi Minh (Wade romani-
a ae Zavion written WU Chih-ming) and WAN Yung-jui (Annamite
Fata ‘|| ex-.miperor Pao Tai) to Generalissimo Chiang Koei-snek,.
‘ Lp Se aA ‘ ,
(Rep es Tt Tne originals of these messages were brought to

fa 3 ta =]
om au, ~:; Kunming on uctober a4 by two United States army officers
lat 6s 52“) who have been serving in the Hanoi area sinee the latter
jrt4 ban
ey KT TY part of August as menbers of a G-5 Team for prisoner of
id ee}

v4, wor rescue work. CGolonel stephen Jjordlinger, Commanding

“officer of the Team, informs me that he is carrying with

henteemeererme! him to Jasiington tue original of the letter to the oec-
retary of State for apvropriate delivery upon his arrival
there. The originals of the letters to General Uhen Cheng
and to Generalissino Chiang Kai-snek in a sealed envelope
addressed by the senders to General Cneng are being for-

warded by this office to the imbassy st Chunsking for

) delivery through United States Army chinnels. The officers

‘% who brougit tiese messages to Kuniing were not told by

‘.. Ho Chi iuinh of -the contents thereof and the information

aac contained in the letters to General Cheng and the General-
he aN issimo will ostensibly be known only to the Chinese
\ att autuorities.- The Consulate General was reyuested to make
Ki a travslation of the letters in as much 98 it was believed

that they mitht conisin information of a military nature
of concern to the United Gtates Apmy authorities.

summary of sznelosures: In his letter to tie occretary
of Stace, lio Uni winh staves tint he is forwarding verious
' Goounents recardin: tue present situation in Indochina.

These docurents are being forware-2~98 accompaniments to

ee: : Senn war Te
a sonarsbe despaten.) de rerers vw svench oppression of
bE CeSpavelis

the Annamites and blie desire or tne “nnamites for realiza-

