Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Now, let me call your attention to this independence theory.
Senator Lodge, on my instructions, stood up in the United Nations and
offered one country independence if they would just simply pass a
resolution saying they wanted it, or at least said, 'I would work for
it.' They didn't accept it. So I can't say that the associated states
want independence in the sense that the United States is independent.

I do not know what they want.

"T do say this: the aspirations of those people must be met,

otherwise there is in the long run no final answer to the problem.

"Q. Joseph Dear, Capital Times: Do you favor bringing this
Indochina situation before the United Nations?

"THE PRESIDENT. I really can't say. I wouldn't want to comment
at too great a length at this moment, but I do believe this: this is
the kind of thing that must not be handled by one nation trying to act
alone."

ee.

ide Remarks Made by Under Secretary Smith in Answer to Questions
Prepared for Use on "The American Week" over the CBS Television
Network, April 11 1954 on the Importance of Indochina, Department
of State Bulletin, April 19, 1954, D- 559:

"Q. Why is Indochina important to Americans?

"MR. SMITH: For one vital basic and two special additional
reasons. In the first place, the vital basic question is: Shall we
or can the free world allow its position anywhere and particularly in
Asia to be eroded piece by piece? Can we allow, dare we permit, expansion
of Communist Chinese control further into Asia? Propagandists of the
Soviet Union and of Communist China have made it clear that their purpose
is to dominate all of Southeast Asia. Remember that this region helps
to feed an immense population. It stretches all the way from India to
Japan. It's a region that is rich in raw materials, full of tin, oil,
rubber, iron ore.

"Now, from the strategic point of view, it lies across the most
direct sea and air route between the Pacific and South Asia. There are
major naval and air bases located in the area. Communist control of
Southeast Asia would threaten the Philippines, Australia, and New Zea-
land directly, would threaten Malaya; it would have a very profound
effect upon the economy of other countries in the area, even as far as
Japan.

"Q. The President, at his news conference on April 7, described
the process of Communist conquest as the ‘falling domino’ principle. Is
that a good description of the threat in Southeast Asia?
