Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In our view the intensity of the Tet offensive and
the exertions being made to sustain pressures confirms
that Hanoi is now engaged in a major effort to achieve
early and decisive results. Yet the Communists probably
have no rigid timetable. They apparently have high hopes
of achieving their objectives this year, but they will
preserve considerable tactical flexibility. 23/

Again in more detail, they responded to a question about negotiations, a
bombing suspension and terms of settlement:

What is the Communist attitude toward negotiations:
in particular how would Hanoi deal with an. unconditional
cessation of US bombing of NVN and what would be its
terms for a settlement?

8. The Communists. probably still expect the war to
end eventually in some form of negotiations. Since they
hope the present military effort will be decisive in
destroying the GVN and ARVN, they are not likely to give
any serious consideration to negotiations until this
campaign has progressed far enough for its results to
be fairly clear.

9. If, however, the US ceased the bombing of North
Vietnam in the near future, Hanoi would probably respond
more or less as indicated in its most recent statements.
It would begin talks fairly soon, would accept a fairly
wide ranging exploration of issues, but would not moderate
its terms for a final settlement or stop fighting in the
South.

10. In any talks, Communist terms would involve the
establishment of a new "coalition" government, which
would in fact if not in appearance be under the domination
of the Communists. Secondly, they would insist on a guaran-
teed withdrawal of US forces within some precisely defined
period. Their attitude toward other issues would be dic-
tated by the degree of progress in achieving these two
primary objectives, and the military-political situation
then obtaining in South Vietnam.

11. Cessation of bombing and opening of negotiations
without significant Communist concessions would be deeply
disturbing to the Saigon government. There would be a
real risk that the Thieu-Ky regime would collapse, and
this would in fact be part of Hanoi's calculation in accept-
ing negotiations. 2k/

153 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
