Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in that area to continue their harassing and guerrilla activities for an
unspecified period "pending commitment of the battle corps." 8/

b. A Weak Laniel Position Delays DRV Concessions

The Viet Minh were considering further concessions in late
Mey and early June when it became evident that the Laniel government was
cracking at the seams, and that a harder communist line might force either
the fall of Laniel or some significant concessions from France. Either of
these results would be profitable, since any government replacing Ianiel's
would certainly be more willing to end the Indochina war. For this reason,
the DRV hard line once more came to the fore, to the point that Pham Van
Dong was able to reverse himself on some points he had been ready to con-
cede. On 8 June, he insisted once again on the necessity for a political
solution prior to discussions of the cease-fire. As a psychological
inducement, he added the hint that, whatever the outcome, France would
remain influential in cultural and economic fields, and even suggested
that some vestige of the French Union concept would continue to exist:

"To this effect, finally, the Delegation of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam invites the conference to embark without
delay upon the consideration of political questions such as the
recognition by France of the sovereignty and of the real inde-
pendence of Viet-Nam and of the other countries of Indochina,
the organization of general elections in Viet-Nam, the relations
of Viet-Nam and of France; that is, the question of the economic.
and cultural interests, as well as the question pertaining to
the association of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam to the
French Union, and the conditions under which such associations
should be effected, and so on and so forth." 9/

Possibly the words “and so on and so forth" give a truer indication of

the environment in which this projection of future ties was made. The

main point was a demand for immediate general elections in exchange for
a cease-fire.

ec. The DRV Presents a New Series of Proposals

The USSR backed the DRV at this time, insisting on inde-
pendence for Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, free elections in these states,
and withdrawal of all foreign troops. 10/ With the continued demand by
the DRV for even more territory than its units held on the ground, and with
General Ely stating privately in the field that the French Union troops
were "very, very tired," 11/ the Laniel government staggered, lost a vote
of confidence, and fell on 12 June. It was replaced, on 18 June, by the
government of Mendes-France, pledged to end the war in Indochina by 20 July
or step down. While the new French government was being formed, the DRV
brought forth a new position, embodied in six points to be agreed on prior
to a cease-fire:

1. Complete and real sovereignty and national independence
of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

C-9 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
