Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

face prospect of progressively severe punishment. I fear that
to date ROLLING THUNDER in their eyes has been merely a few
isolated thunder claps.

The sam? general considerations apply re our urging British
to undertake further early soundings re Article 19 Laos Accords
as Ambassador Martin so cogently states in his EIS 1278 to
Dept. fin which Martin expresses concern over the risks of
moving to the conference table too soon/. Meny of the problems
which worry him are also applicable to Vietnamese here and I
share his reasoning and concern.

It seems to me that we may be in for a tough period ahead
but I would hope we will continue to do whatever is required
and that we try to keep fundamental objectives vis-a-vis Hanoi
clear and simple. 89/

In a separate cable of the same date, 90/ Taylor, with General
Westmoreland's explicit concurrence, offered his specific recommenda-
tions for increasing the tempo and intensity of the air strikes. In
effect, he called for a more dynamic schedule of strikes, a several
week program relentlessly marching North to break the will of the DRV:

We have a sense of urgent need for an agreed program for
the measured and limited air action against military targets
in DRV /oreviously/ announced. The rate of once or twice a
week for attacks involving two or three targets on each day
appears to us reasonable as to frequency,and leaves open the
possibility of increasing the effect on Hanoi by adding to
the weight of the strikes (in types of ordnance and sorties
per target) and by moving northward up the target system.
What seems to be lacking is an agreed program covering
several weeks which will combine the factors, frequency,
weight and location of attack into a rational pattern which
will convince the leaders in Hanoi that we are on a dynamic
schedule which will not remain static in a narrow zone far
removed from them and the sources of their power but which
is a moving growing threat which cannot be ignored.

I have seen the JCS proposed eight-week program which
has much to recommend it but, I believe, remains too long
South of the 19th parallel. /Tt is/ Seaborn's opinion that
Hanoi has the impression that our air strikes are a limited
attempt to improve our bargaining position and hence are no
great cause for immediate concern. Our objective should be
to induce in DRV leadership an attitude favorable to US
objectives in as short a time as possible in order to avoid”
a build-up of international pressures to negotiate. But our
efforts to date are falling far short of achieving the

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
