Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"me first essential reform is in the attitude of GVN
officials. ‘They are generally apathetic, and there is
corruption high and low. Often appointments, promotions,
and draft deferments must be bought; and kickbacks on sale-
ries are common. Cadre at the bottom can be no better than
the system above then.

"The second needed. reform is in the attitude and con-
duct -of the ARVN. The image of the government cannot im-
prove unless and until the ARVN improves markedly. They
do not understand the importance (or respectability) of
pacification nor the importance to pacification of proper,
disciplined condnct. Promotions, assignments and awards
are often not made on merit, but rather on the basis of
having a diploma, friends, or relatives, or because of
bribery. The ARVN is weak in dedication, direction and
discipline.

"Not enough ARVN are devoted to area and population
security, and when the ARVI does attempt to support paci-
fication, their actions do not last long enough; their tac-
tics are bed despite U.S, prodding (no aggressive small-unit
saturation patrolling, hemlet searches, quick-reaction contact,
or offensive night ambushes); they do not make good use of aM
intelligence; and their leadership and discipline are bad.

"Furthermore, it is my conviction that a part of the
problem undoubtedly lies in bad management on the American
as well as the GVN side. Here split responsibility -- or
‘no responsibility’ -- has resulted in too little hard press-
ure on the GVN to do its job and no really solid cr realis-
tic planning with respect to the whole effort. We must
deal with this management problem now and deal with it
effectively.

"One solution would be to consolidate all U.S. activi-
ties which ere primarily part of the civilian pacification
program and all persons engaged in such activities, provid-
ing a clear assignment of responsibility and a unified com-
mand under 2 civilian relieved of all other duties. (If
this task is assigned to Ambassador Porter, another indi-
vidual must be sent immediately to Saigon to serve as Am-
bassador Lodge's deputy.) Under this approach, there woulda
be a carefully delineated division of responsibility between
the civilian-in-charge and an element of COMUSMACYV under
a senior officer, who would give the subject of planning
for and providing hamlet security the highest priority in
attention and resources. Success will depend on the'men
selected for the jobs on both sides (they must be among
the highest rank and most competent administrators in the
U.S. Government), on complete cooperation among the U.S.

101
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

am
