Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the first Principals meeting. Essentially, these involved an adamant
resistance to "any formal Geneva Conference on Vietnam." Formerly,
such a conference was regarded as the "best forum" -- after conducting
a number of military actions against the DRY. Under the revised
approach, the U.S. Government would merely "watch and listen closely"
for signs of weakening from Hanoi and Peking. If the DRV held firm in
response to initial military actions against North Vietnam and if along
with these actions an improvement had occurred in the GV, the Adminis-
tration would press harder for acceptance of the initial negotiating
position. 149/ Thus, it is fairly clear that the policy position
formulated by the Principals before presentation to the President in-
eluded no provision for early bargaining at the conference table.

“- Sourses of Action Approved in the White House

On 1 December, the Principals met with President Johnson and
Vice President-elect Humphrey in the White House. During a meeting
that lasted two-and-a-half hours, Ambassador Taylor briefed the Presi-
dent on the situation in South Vietnam, and the group reviewed the
evidence of increasing DRV support for the conflicts in South Vietnam
and Laos. Ways of countering the impact of infiltration and of in-
proving the situation were discussed. At the conclusion of the meeting
Secretary McNamara was reported to have been overheard saying to the
President, "It would be impossible for Max to talk to these people
[waiting reporters] without leaving the impression that the situation
is going to hell.” Accordingly, Ambassador Taylor slipped out the
White House rear entrance, and only a brief, formal statement was given

to the press. 150/

The source documents available at the time of this writing do
not indicate the precise nature of the President's decisions. Since a
NSAM was not issued following the meeting, one would have to have access
to White House case files and National Security Council meeting notes
to be certain of what was decided. Even then, one might not find a
clear-cut decision recorded. However, from handwritten notes of the
meeting, from instructions issued to action agencies, and from later
reports of diplomatic and military actions taken, it is possible to
reconstruct the approximate nature of the discussion and the decisions
reached.

The revised "Draft Position Paper on Southeast Asia," contain-
ing the two-phase corcept for future U.S. policy and the proposed 30-day
action program, provided the basis for the White House discussions.
Handwritten notes of the proceedings refer to various topics in approxi-
mately the same order as they are listed in that portion of the position
paper dealing with the 30-day action program. There is no indication
that the over-all concept was discussed. However, it is evident from
the notes that the various actions under discussion were considered in
terms of the details of their implementation. 151/ This fact --
together with the content of the formal instructions later issued to

5h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
