“aye ee Reg ed

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Paw nAmad

can influence AsSans through understanding them sympathetically, and

who is alert to the power of the Mao Tse Tung tactics now being em-
ployed to capture Vietnam and who is dedicated to feasible and practical”
democratic means to defeat these Communist tactics. ‘

g. Serious consideration should be given to replacing USOM
Chief Gardiner. A number of Vietnamese pointedly answered my ques-
tions about Gardiner by talking about his deputy, Coster, while admitting
that "Gardiner seems to be a nice man who has fallen asleep in our
climate."

, h. U.S. military men in Vietnam should be freed to work in the ©
combat areas. Our MAAG has a far greater potential than is now beirg
utilized, U,S, military men are hardly in a position to be listened to
when they are snug in rear areas and give advice to Vietnamese officers
who have attended the same U,S. military schools and who are now in

a combat in which few Americans are experienced. MAAG personnel
from General McGarr on down expressed desire to get more into real .
field work; let's give them what they want as far as U.S, permission

is concerned and let them earn their way into positions of greater
influence with the Vietnamese military in the field. ;

i. A mature American, with much the same qualifications as
those given above for the selection of the next Ambassador, should be
assigned to Vietnam for political operations which will start creating
a Vietnamese-style foundation for more democratic government with-

yout weakening the strong leadership required to bring about the defeat of

ithe Communists. This must not be a "clever! type who is out to gaina
reputaticn as a "manipulator" or a word-smith who is more concerned
about the way his reports will look in Washington than in implementing
U.S, policy in Vietnam, .

. -j. We must support Ngo Dinh Diem until another strong execu-.
| tive can replace him legally. President Diem feels that Anericans
“have attacked him almost as viciously as the Communists, and he has

, withdrawn into a shell for self-protection, We have to show him by

deeds, not words alone, that we are his friend. This will make our
‘influence effective again. :

K. We must do much, much more constructive work with the
oppositionists, I suspect that the U.S. has taught them to be carping
“eritics and disloyal citizens by our encouragement of these traits.

ik = . .
i They need to put together a constructive program which can save.

, _ SECRET ye? . ;
emia coe SOMO i erat Se. A oF fe ah, sale Mea

