8/

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

correction of a spirit of insubordination and irresponsibility was not
complete, as revealed at low as well as high (or "coup") levels; 103/
French cadre had been replaced, but with Vietnamese cadre generally
less well-adapted to their role; a self-reliant officer corps was still
@ vision of the future, as were an independent logistics capability end
adequate technical services; and although something had been learned
about the problems of semi-military and police forces, not enough had
been done to cope with them to provide genuine internal security.

There were, in fact, several views of the roles and missions of
the paramilitary forces. The Michigan Stete University Advisory Group,
under contract to USOM, Vietnam to provide coumsel and guidence on the
development of the Civil Guard (CG), viewed this orgenination as a national
police, civilian in character and function, lightly but adequately equipped,
with sufficient delegated authority and training to enforce all laws, con-
trol subversion, and collect’ intelligence data in areas not covered by
municipal police, as well as establishing close ties with the population
of the rural areas by. fixed basing in the villeges within pacified areas.
104/ Diem envisaged the CG as a large and powerful military orgenization
accountable to him through his appointed province chiefs -- a counter to
the army in the struggle for power which would also provide provincial
security through mobility from posts outside the villages; in line with
this view, he transferred the CG from the Ministry of the Interior to the

. Presidency in 1956. The USMAAG came to view the CG much as Diem did --

not, of course, as an anti-coup safeguard, but as a mobile countersubver-_
Sion force, an adjunct to the arny that would relieve it of internal
security duty and free it to learn how to counter the threat from the
North. 105/ As of the end of 1956 the CG were being trained at the
Quang Trung School to assist the army in case of crisis or of overt
attack; 106/ by late 1957, they were conducting operations with ARVN

in unpacified areas. 207/

The MSU Advisory Group, in a 1956 report, 2108/ outlined the problems
that existed with respect to the problems of the severel Vietnamese law
enforcement agencies, including the CG, and made far-reaching recommenda-
tions, some of which were reiterated in the Counterinsurgency Plen of
1960. 109/ - This reiteration supports the hypothesis that few of the MSU
recommendations were acted upon effectively in the intervening years.

In July 1957, the GVN requested $60 million worth of heavy equipment
for the CG, which had been equipped only with non-U.S. weapons surplus
to the army's requirements. MAAG and MSU proposed $14 - 18 million in
lighter equipment; in 1958, a compromise was reached, providing for only
$1; million but including some of the heavy equizment to be issued over
a 4-year period with the understanding that the CG be reorganized into a
civilian operation under the Ministry of Interior and along lines proposed
by U.S. advisors. 210 Little progress was made in changing the Civil
Guerd, however, in spite of this U.S. leverage; the $1) million in

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

322
