Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

re-establish themselves. The regular military establishment
of South Vietnam has the capability to fight either guerrillas
or external aggressors. Militia type home guards and civil
guards should be trained and equipped. Accelerated efforts
should be undertaken to develop the para-military and police
forces. For the duration of the emergency campaign,
operational control of all security activities should be under
centralized direction. Border and Coastal Patrol operations,
being fundamental to the campaign to prevent insurgents
receiving support from areas outside of South Vietnam, should be
closely coordinated with Vietnamese ground, air, and naval
operations in the counter-insurgency campaign. These opera-
tions should also be coordinated with Cambodia and Laos, as
feasible." (Defense 98299} to CINCPAC, 162156Z Sep 60)

The State Department, accepting the recommendations of

the Department of Defense, sent a State-Defense message instructing the
Ambassador of the country team to develop an overall plan

" , . . for encouraging and supporting GVN in national
emergency effort defeat insurgents and bring about order
and stability in that country. Such action determined necessary
in order check disruptive influences which could cause dis-
integration of the Government and the possible loss of South
Viet-Nam to Communist Bloc." (Deptel 658 to AmEmbassy Saigon,
19 October 1960) :

Before making known such a plan to the GVN it would be reviewed in
Washington and a U.S. position established.

After these somewhat differing analyses of the problem
had been recorded, an abortive coup by troops which had been regarded
as among the most loyal in ARVN, the airborne brigade, appeared to
validate concerns (expressed by the State Department and the August 30
SNIE) over non-communist dissatisfactions with the Diem regime. Yet
Washington interpretations of the coup and its aftermath were that
it confirmed not only the Ambassador, but his critics within the DOD
in their respective convictions.

Ambassador Durbrow described certain measures of reform
promised by Diem after the coup but commented:

", . . It is hoped that these reforms are not just reforms
on surface with little or no substance. Despite these signs,
there is basically quite serious under-current malaise and
skepticism whether effective reforms will be taken soon enough.
This uneasy Teeling not confined to intellectuals or opposition
groups; but to sizeable number of others, i.e., cabinet

62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
