Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

“The second fact is that our country is today spending an aggre~
gate of about 7 billion dollars annually for the single purpose of
preserving the nation’s position and security in the world. This
includes the costs of the Defense Department, the production of nuclear
weapons, and mutual security. All three are mutuelly supporting and
are blended into one program for our safety. The size of this cost
conveys something of the entire program's importance--to the world and,
indeed, to each of us. :

"and when I think of this importance to us, think of it in this
one material figure, this cost annually for every single man, woman,
and child of the entire nation is about 275 dollars a year.

"the next fact we note is that since the Communist target is the
world, every nation is comprehended in their campaign for domination.
The weak and the most exposed stand in the most immediate danger.

"Another fact, that we ignore to our peril, is that if aggression
or subversion against the weaker of the free nations should achieve
successive victories, communism would step-by~step overcome once free
areas. The danger, even to the strongest, would become increasingly
menacing.

"Clearly, the self-interest of each free nation impels it to
yesist the loss to imperialistic communism of the freedom and inde-
pendence of any other nation.

"Freedom-is truly indivisible.

"To apply some of these truths to a particuler case, let us con- »
sider, briefly, the country of Viet-Neam, and the importance to us of
the security and progress of that country.

"Jt is loceted, as you know, in the southeastern corner of Asia,
exactly halfway round the world from Gettysburg College.

"“Viet-Nam is a country divided into two .psrts--like Korea and -
Germany. The southern half, with its twelve million people, is free,
but poor. It is an under-developed country--its economy is weak--
average individual income being less than $200 a year. The northern
helf has been turned over to communism. A line of demarcation running
along the 17th perellel separates the two. To the north of this line
stand several Communist divisions. These facts pose to South Viet-Nam
two great tasks: self-defense and economic growth.

“tinderstandably, the people of Viet-lNem want to make their country

a thriving, self-sufficient member of the family of nations. This means
economic expansion. c :

B-48
