Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

D. March 31 -- "I Shall Not Seek...Another Term as Your President.
Hd The Decision.

No exact date on which the President made the decision to
curtail the bombing can be identified with certainty. It is reasonably
clear thet the decisions on the ground war were made on or before March 22.
On that date, the President announced that General William Westmoreland
would be replaced as COMUSMACV during the coming summer. He was to return
to Washington to become Chief of Staff of the Army. The decision was clearly
related to the force deployment decisions explicitly taken and the new strategy
they implied. Three days after this announcement, that had been greeted in
the press as a harbinger, General Creighton Abrams, Deputy COMUSMACV, arrived
in Washington without prior announcement for conferences with the President.
Speculation was rife that he was to be named Westmoreland's successor. On
the 26th he and the President huddled and Mr. Johnson probably informed him
of his intentions, both with respect to force augmentations and the bombing
restraint, and his intention to designate Abrams the new COMUSMACV. In the
days that followed, the speech drafters took over, writing and rewriting the
President's momentous address. Finally, it was decided that the announcement
speech would be made on nation-wide television from the White House on the
evening of March 31.

The night before the speech a cable under Katzenbach's signature,
drafted by William Bundy, went out to US Embassies in Australia, New Zealand,
Thailand, Laos, the: Philippines and South Korea slugged "Literally Eyes Only
for Ambassador or Charge." It instructed the addressees that they were to see
their heads of government and inform them that:

After full consultation with GVN and with complete concur-
rence of Thieu and Ky, President plans policy announcement
Sunday night that would have following major elements:

a. Major stress on importance of GVN and ARVN
increased effectiveness, with our equipment and other support
as first priority in our own actions.

b. 13,500 support forces to be called up at once
in order to round out the 10,500 combat units sent in February.

ec. Replenishment of strategic reserve by calling up
48,500 additional reserves, stating that these would be fe ee
for strategic reserve.

d. Related tax increases and budget cuts already
largely needed for non-Vietnam reasons.

In addition, after similar-consultation and concurrence,

President proposes to announce that bombing will be restricted

194 ' OP SECRET - Sensitive
