Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

environment where the ensuing discussions would likely consume considerable
time. Moreover, taking such initiatives would avoid the defensive posture
that the United States would be placed in if our military actions were
introduced for condemnatory purposes by another government. The Working
Group stressed tuat under Option B, the United States should firmly resist
&@ Geneva-type conference until it had obtained assurances of DRV compli-
ance with its demands. Should the pressures for negotiation become too
formidable to resist and discussions begin before a Communist agreement to
comply, it was stressed that the United States should define its negotia-
ting position "in a way which makes Commmist acceptance unlikely.” In
this manner it would be made "very likely that the conference would break
up rather rapidly," thus enabling our military pressures to be resumed. 81/

The only option that provided for bargaining in the usual sense
of the word was Option C. The Working Group intended that with the initie~-
tion of this option and the U.S. declaration of willingness to negotiate,
the Administration would have embarked on a bargaining course. In the
group's view, we would stick to our full objectives et the outset "but
we would have to accept the possibility that, as the whole situation
developed, we might not achieve those full objectives unless we were pre-
pared to take the greater risks envisaged under Option B." In such cir-
cumstances, it acknowledged, “it might become desirable to settle for less
than complete assurances on our key objectives." 82

Accepting in principle the possible need to compromise the initial
U.S. position under Option C, the Working Group specified a somewhat
hardened definition of that position. The initial negotiating objective
("the complete termination of DRV support to the insurgency...") was
refined to specify that it incorporated three fundamentals: (a) that the
DRV cease its assistance to and direction of the VC; (») that an indepen-
dent and secure GVN be reestablished; and (c) that there be adequate
international supervising machinery." Specific areas of "sive" for the
bargaining process were identified as the question of free elections and
the degree of verification we would require. The group further provided
thet during negotiations the intensity with which the United States would
pursue its initial objectives would very with the extent of improvement
within the GVN. If the situation in South Vietnam got better the United
States would press harder for acceptance of its initial position. If the
situation grew worse, "we would have to decide whether to intensify our
military actions, modify our negotiating positions, or both." 83/

Because of a declared willingness to negotiate from the outset,
the approach to a negotiating situation under Option C was viewed by the
Working Group as considerably different from that under Option B. Whereas,
in the latter case it was believed that the UN would provide the most
useful medium for discussions, the preferred approach under Option C was
through @ Geneva-type meeting. The channels, both direct and indirect,
to Hanoi were not believed useful for negotiating purposes. Although po-
tentially helpful in releying impressions of current attitudes and
negotiating positions in Hanoi and Peking, the Soviet government was not

26 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
