Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

To support this build-up the Laos corridor becomes
increasingly important to the enemy....You know of the
location of base areas in the Laos Panhandle which serve
as logistical, rest, and training bases and permit the
orderly movement of both men and material to SVN. There
has been heavy truck movement through the Laos Panhandle
which began in November and December and continued through-
out the dry season. To improve his capability of sup-
porting the war in SVN, he has constructed numerous by-
passes at critical points along roads throughout the
Panhandle, extended Route 922 east into the Ashau Valley,
and improved and extended Route 96 south to Route 110 and
Base Area 609....Prior to the onset of the Monsoon Season,
Route 110 was a heavily used, main supply route leading
from Cambodia, through Laos into SVN.

Use of Cambodia will also be increased....The enemy has
established a Military Region 10 in SVN which extends into
Cambodia. He has stated that MR 10 is to become the biggest
base area of the war. He has formed a replacement and
refitting center reported to be 8,000 strong, in the Fishhook
Area for units badly mauled in SVN. An agent recently reported
a VC arsenal in the Parrot's Beak which produces assorted
mines, and repairs weapons. We do know that the Parrot's Beak
area iS often used by the VC in moving men and supplies between
Tay Ninh Province and the Delta. 62/

Such an analysis held little prospect for the fading away which had
been predicted for this time of year in 1967. Furthermore, these trends
carried with them significant developments in terms of future enemy opera-
tions and these operations tended to shape the strategy which COMUSMACV
was planning to pursue for the remainder of the year. The J2 summarized
by noting, first, the advantages and disadvantages of the so-called
enemy "peripheral strategy," an exercise which emphasized that the Laos
and Cambodia sanctuaries were becoming increasingly important to the
enemy:

What does this mean in terms of future enemy operations?
From peripheral base areas in NVN, Laos, and Cambodia, he can
launch attacks designed to draw us into the border areas....
These operations can be mounted from terrain which is most
difficult for our intelligence effort to penetrate. When
forced to withdraw, the enemy will have sanctuaries into
which he can move to break contact, rest, refit and train.
This arrangement gives him flexibility in choice of opera-
tional objectives. For example, he can launch offensive
operations through the DMZ, he can attempt to seize the two

203 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
