Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET —- Sensitive

an interview with Marguerite Higgins of the New York Herald Tribune,

Diem asserted that conciliation had been his policy all along and that it
was "irreversible." He further said, in direct contradiction of a
previous remark by Mme. Nhu, that the femily was pleased with Lodge's
appointment. 18/ Washington was apparently satisfied by this statement,
which Diem viewed merely as a going~away present for Nolting. 19/ Less’
than a week later, Nolting's two years of careful work and an American
policy would be in a shambles, betrayed by Nhu's midnight raid on the

pagodas.

Underlying the prevailing U.S. view that there was no alternative
to Diem was the belief that the disruptive effect of a cowp on the war
effort, and the disorganization that. would follow such a coup, could
only benefit the VC, perhaps decisively. 20/ Military estimates and
reports emanating from MACV through the summer of 1963 continued to
reflect an optimistic outlook, indicating good reason to continue our
support of Diem even in the Face of his inept handling of the Buddhist
erisis, 21/ ‘In retrospect, it can be seen that by July the GVN position
in the war had begun to seriously deteriorate, At the time, however,
this weakening was not yet apparent, The then prevailing view also held
that the Buddhist crisis had not yet detracted from the war effort,
although its potential to do so was recognized. Secretary McNamara on
July 19 told a press conference that the war was progressing well and
that the Buddhist crisis had thus far not effected it. 22/ The intel-
ligence community, however, had already begun to note depressing effects
of the crisis on military and civilian morale. 23/

Meanwhile, the U.S. press corps was reporting a far different view
of both the war and the Buddhist crisis, one which was, in retrospect,
nearer the reality. In particular, they were reporting serious failures
in the Delta in both military operations and the Strategic Hamlet
Program. 2h/ Typical of this reporting was an August 15 story in the
New York Times by David Halberstam presenting a very negative appraisal
of the war in the Delta. 25/ Such reports were vehemently refuted within
the Administration, most notably by General Krulak, the JCS Special
Assistant for Counterinsurgency. 26/ At the Tower: echelons in the field,
however, there were stl U.S, advisors who did not share Krulak's
sanguine view of the war's progress.

Within the Administration, no real low-risk alternative to Diem had
ever been identified, and we had continued our support for his trouble-
some regime because Diem was regarded as the only Vietnamese figure
capable of rallying national support in the struggle against the Viet
Cong. The Buddhist crisis shattered our illusions about him, and increased
the domestic U.S. political price to Kennedy of supporting Diem. But
the only other option for us seemed a coup, with highly uncertain pros-
pects for post-coup political stability. At a briefing for the President
on July h, the possibilities and prospects for a coup were discussed. 27/
It was the consensus that the Nhus could not be removed, but that there
would surely be coup attempts in the next four months. Nolting's
reported yiew, with which then Assistant Secretary of State, Roger Hilsman,

LO TOP SECRET - Sensitive
