Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive :
of Ambassador to identify and build contacts with possible Shee

alternative leadership as and when it appears. Essential

that this effort be totally secure and fully deniable and
separated entirely from normal political analysis and report-
ing and other activities of countery teem. We repeat that
this effort is not repeat not to be aimed et active promotion
of coup but only at surveillance and readiness. In order to
provide plausibility to denial suggest you and no one else in
Embassy issue these instruction orally to Acting Station Chief
and hold him responsible to you alone for making appropriate
contacts and reporting to you alone. 32/

Responding the next day, October 6, to the report of the Conein-Minh
meeting, Washington referred to the preceding day's cable, but, prompted
by Lodge's suggestion, added:

While we do not wish to stimulate coup, we also do not
wish to leave impression that U.S, would thwart a change of
government or deny economic and military assistance to a
new regime if it appeared capable of increasing effectiveness
of military effort, ensuring popular support to win war and
improving working relations with U.S. We would like to be
informed on what is being contemplated but we should avoid
being drawn into reviewing or advising on operational plans
or any other act which might tend to identify U.S. too
closely with change in government. 33/

Washington was, further, greatly concerned about the security and denia-
bility of any further contacts and suggested to Lodge that someone could
be brought in from outside Vietnam for follow-up contacts if he thought

it necessary. Lodge apparently did not.

An important apparent lacuna in the available message traffic occurs
at this point. By Shaplen's account, a CAS officer met with Minh on
October 10 and conveyed the substance of the U.S. position as defined in
CAP 14228. 34/ Whether or not the date is accurate, it is probable that
some such contact took place by mid-October. On October 20 a Colonel
Khuong at JGS contacted an American counterpart and reported a coup plot
involving Minh, Khiem, Kim, and a fourth unidentified general, plus a
number of colonels. 35/ He was seeking assurances of U.S, support
following a coup.

There were no further reported contacts with the generals until
October 23 when Conein again met with Don at the latter's initiative. 36/
In a state of agitation, Don stated that the coup had been scheduled to
take advantage of the October 26 National Holiday, but that on October 22
Harkins had called on him to report the Khuong contact and to discourage
a coup. Don further indicated that the palace had learned of Khuong's
overtures, implying that Harkins was responsible, and had taken action

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
