Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

LEVERAGE AND SOVEREIGNTY

The decision to effect a division of effort between RVNAF and
US/FWMAF suggests how far U.S. policymakers were willing to go (perhaps
determined" would be more accurate) to carve out an area, for independent
GVN conduct of at least some major phase of the war. It suggests, too,
their relative dissatisfaction with RVNAF improvement during the years
in which the U.S, advisory effort had been directed toward such improve~
ment. The question remained whether U.S. influence could be brought
effectively to bear through example and persuasion or should be back-
stopped by more direct measures -- by the use of a range of negative

measures gathered under the rubric of “leverage.”

_ General Taylor's recommendations at the beginning of the U.S.
advisory build-up in 1961, it will be remembered, emphasized a "limited
partnership" in which U.S. advisors would actually work alongside their
Vietnamese counterparts instead of merely "advising them at arm's length.”
By means of this closer working relationship in the field rather than
just in various headquarters, Taylor had suggested, RVNAF effectiveness
would become the product of mutually shared goals pursued through mutually
shared experiences. Conscious adoption of an alternative course, the
Wee Of leverage, would have changed the relationship from one of nominal
partnership" to one of de facto U.S. leadership -- bordering in some
instances on U.S. command. This, in turn, would have been & very real
infringement of Vietnamese sovereignty end an admission that the GVN
could not manage adequately its own affairs. It would have undercut
Vietnamese independence in both a legal sense and in terms of GVN com-
petence.

When the Diem regime did not respond as it had been expected (or
hoped ) it would, and after Diem's government was overturned, the U.S.
again refused consciously to adopt leverage procedures to compel improved
performance. First with General Minh, then with General Khanh, the hope
was that improved receptivity (as compared to the most recent past exper-
ience) on the part of the GVN would permit the carrot to work effectively
without the stick. The period just ended in mid-1965 when U.S. troops
were committed to South Vietnam marked another occasion to examine the
putative advantages and disadvantages of the use of leverage.

Generally speaking, Washington policymakers (less so in the State
Department), were prone to suggest the use of leverage in the abstract.
The U.S, Mission and MACV tended to oppose such proposals. Field
advisors were, as a group, most favorably disposed toward the use of
leverage. Those whose dealings included establishing a close working
relationship with GVN (to include RVNAF) officials found that the threat
of leverage was a stumbling block to such a relationship. Some also

92 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
