Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Kornienko chimed in that he had recalled statement by both
the President and Secretary of State on several occasions that
the U.S. Government has channels for transmitting messages
direct to Hanoi. On this the conversation ended but it should be
noted that Firyubin made no effort to return to me the text of
the oral communication which I had handed him et the outset of the
conversation. .

After further reflection on his meeting with Firyubin, Kohler sent
a follow-on message to Washington that afternoon, 13)/ in which he
sought to present the Soviet position with some sympathy and to promote
an understanding of the Soviet rebuff in the light of the “rather
strenuous nature" of the document we were asking them to transmit.
Kohler's comments were as follows:

I came away from my meeting with Firyubin last night with
mixed feelings. On the one hand, I was annoyed at the apparent
Soviet rebuff of an effort to take heat out of admittedly dan-
gerous situation in SEA and impatient with flimsy rationale for
Soviet refusal offered by Firyubin. On the other hand, I could
understand, if not sympathize with, Soviet sensitivity, given
Chicom eagerness to adduce proof of their charges of collusion
against Soviets and, frankly, given rather strenuous nature of
document they were being asked to transmit to DRV.

Implicit in latter view, of course, is assumption that
Soviets in fact want bombing to stop, are genuinely concerned
at possibilities escalation, and are interested in working
out some sort of modus vivendi which would teke heat out of
situation while not wmdercutting their own position in Commie
world as loyal socialist ally. We cannot be sure that this is
way Soviets view situation, and it entirely possible they so
confident our ultimate defeat in Vietnam that no gesture on our
part would meet with encoureging response. Believe at this
point, however, we lose nothing assuming Soviets have not com-
pletely forgotten lesson Cuba and there is some flexibility in
Soviet position which we should seek to exploit.

I would hope, therefore, we would not regard Firyubin's
reaction last night as evidence conscious hardening of Soviet
attitude. It may simply be reflection of bind Soviets Pind
themselves in at moment. Meanwhile, we can feel sure message
is alreedy in DRV hends -- copies now available thru Dobrynin,
Firyiibin, and DRV embassy here -- and I would suggest we go
through with original plan and be on alert, both here and on
the scene for any signs reaction from other side. Seen from
here, we would lose nothing by doing so; and we gain at least
with our friends and the unaligned.

120 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
