Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In his response to Rusk's cable, Lodge stoutly opposed any further
contact with Diem, even to present an ultimatum. Agreeing that removal
of the Nhus was the prime objective, Lodge argued, "This surely cannot
be done by working through Diem, In fact, Diem will oppose it. He
wishes he had more Nhus, not less. The best chance of doing it is by the
generals taking over the government lock, stock and barrel, After this
has been done, it can then be decided whether to put Diem back in again
or go on without him." 56/ What genuinely concerned Lodge at that point
was the lack of action by the generals, but he was reluctant to use the
aid suspension as a lever.

Throughout this period, another CAS officer had been in contact
with a Colonel Thao, an inspector of strategic hamlets, who was the
leader of an independent junior officer-civilian plot. On August 30,
he told the CAS officer that he was in touch with the generals, and would
support any move they might make, but that for the moment the plans of
his group had stopped because the risk of failure was too great. 5t/

With Lodge's anxiety at the generals' failure to act increasing
daily, General Harkins met with General Khiem on August 31. He was told
that Minh had called off the coup for the time being because of the
inability to achieve a favorable balance of forces in the Saigon area,
and because of continuing anxiety among the generals about Richardson's
close identification with the Whus. 58/ Both Richardson and Lodge con-
firmed the end of this coup attempt on the same day. 59/ Apparently
unable to win over General Dinh, the Saigon III Corps area commander,
Minh had decided not to risk an indecisive, protracted blood bath with
only a slim likelihood.of success. Three factors appear to have been
important in Minh's decision to abort the coup: (1) the failure to win
over Dinh, leaving the coup forces at a tactical disadvantage in the
Seigon area; (2) continuing doubts about the firmness of the U.S. com-
mitment to Diem's overthrow and the related concern that the U.S. had
wittingly or unwittingly tipped off Whu to the plot; and (3) uncertainty
about the cohesion of the coup group and the firmness of plans. Lodge
concluded somewhat bitterly, ".. . there is neither the will nor the
organization among the generals to accomplish anything." 60/ He did not,
however, rule out a future attempt.

3. Toward a New Policy

Having at long last decided to seek an alternative to the Diem
regime by sanctioning a coup, only to have the attempt fail, the U.S.
found itself at the end of Avgust 1963 without a policy and with most
of its bridges burned. In both Saigon and Washington, the reappraisal
and the search for alternatives began anew. In the cable acknowledging
the demise of the coup plot on August 31, Lodge suggested that:

Perhaps an arrangement could be worked out whereby

the following could be made to happen: Madame Nhu to
leave the country, Mr. Nhu's functions to be limited

21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
