Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

Aracliealesl a
TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive > ,
: en ee OB at dar ‘7

3. The Rise and Fall of Khanh's Constitution

In a state of euphoria after the U.S. reprisals, Khanh broached
the subject of a new constitution with Taylor on August 12; presumably
this was what he had in mind on July 27 when he mentioned reorgeni zation
(above, p. 34). He proposed three branches of government benesth the
MRC. The Assembly would have 90 appointed members and 60 elected; Khanh
would be the President (and Minh wouldn't). Yaylor urged Khanh to go slowly,
and to handle the matter gently. Taylor feared renewed political insta-
bility if sweeping government changes were announced; but Khanh said that
the country could not progress under the existing govermment. Taylor ex-
pressed his scepticism, but objected no further than to caution Khanh on
the need to explain these changes adequately in advance. 16/

On August 14, after an NSC joint planning session, Khanh showed
Taylor @ rough English translation of his proposed new constitution. Taylor
expressed reservations:

"We found it brusque in language and suggested to Khanh
that in present form it could raise criticism in U.S. and
world press. We stressed to him that internal problems of
acceptance in Vietnam were his own affair, and we could
only offer observations on the objective issue of interna-
tional reactions."

Khanh allowed Sullivan and Manfull to work briefly with his drafting committee,
the same day, but they worked jin such haste that they had little influence.
Taylor commented: .

"We conclude that Khanh and his military colleagues have
decided that this sort of change is indispensable. It is of
course still not determined what General Minh's view will
be. We have considered possibility of seeking legal aid
from Washington to review this charter, but feel this would
not repeat not be useful because this document departs so
widely from U.S. experience and because time is so short,
we have decided that our best efforts would be devoted to
(1) making wording of document less brusgue and more palat-
able both in VN and abroad, and (2) assisting in proclamation
and other sources of public relations nature explaining neces-
sity for this sort of change. Whether we like it or not,
this is the constitutional form which the MRC repeat MRC
fully intends to impose, and we see no repeat no alternative a
but to make the best of it." 17/

When Khanh secured MRC approval of the final draft on August 16, they also
elected him President, displacing Minh. Khanh had earlier complained to
Taylor that he had kept Minh, a big source of trouble to him, only at Lodge's
urging, as indeed he hed. 18/ Inasmch as Khanh had seized power using
charges against four generals and using unproved allegations against Minh,
