Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

However, far from looking to the "resistance," Bao Dai chose his leaders
from among men with strong identification with France, often men of
great and dubious wealth, or with ties with the sub-worlds of French
neo-mercantilism and Viet vice. None commanded a popular following.
General Georges Revers, Chief of Staff of the French Army, who was sent
to Vietnam to appraise the situation in May and June, 1949, wrote that:

"If Ho Chi Minh has been able to hold off French
intervention for so long, it is because the Viet Minh
leader has surrounded himself with a group of men_of
incontestable worth... /Bao Dai, by contrast, had/ a
govermment composed of twenty representatives of phan-
tom parties, the best organized of which would have
difficulty in rallying twenty-five adherents..." 8/

Bao Dai himself did next to nothing to make his government either more
representative or more efficient. He divided his time among the pleasures
of the resort towns of Dalat, Nha Trang, and Banmethuout, and for all
practical purposes, remained outside the process of government.

An American diplomat serving in Vietnam at the time who knew
Bao Dai well, characterized him in these terms:

"Bao Dai, above all, was an intelligent man. Intel-
lectually, he covld discuss the complex details of the
various agreements and of the whole involved relation-
ship with France as well as or better than anyone I knew.
But he was a man who was crippled by his French upbringing.
‘His manner was too impassive. He allowed himself to be
sold by the French on an erroneous instead of a valid
evolutionary concept, and this suited his own temperament.
He was too congenial, and he was almost pathologically shy,
which was one reason he always liked to wear dark glasses.
He would go through depressive cycles, and when he was
depressed, he would dress himself in Vietnamese clothes
instead of European ones, and would mince no words about
the French. His policy, he said to me on one of these
dour occasions, was one of 'grignotage,' or ‘nibbling,’
and he was painfully aware of it. The French, of course,
were never happy that we Americans had good relations
with Bao Dai, and they told him so. Unfortunately, they
also had some blackmail on him, about his relationship
with gambling enterprises in Saigon and his love of the
fleshpots." 9/

Whatever his virtues, Bao Dai was not a man who could earn the fealty of
the Vietnamese peasants. He could not even hold the loyalty of honest
nationalists, one of whom, for example, was Dr. Phan Quang Dan -- a promi-
nent and able non-Comnunist leader and early supporter of the "solution,"

A-8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
