Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV.B.2.

THE STRATEGIC HAMLET PROGRAM, 1961-1963: (
AN APPRATSAL

I. INTRODUCTION

A. Scope and Terminology

The Strategic Hamlet Program in the Republic of Vietnam (RVN) --
articulated and carried forward from late 1961 until late 1963 -- has cre~-
ated some confusion because of terminology. One source of confusion stems
from the similarity between the physical aspects of the program and earlier
fortified communities of one kind or another. Another source of confusion
rises because of the loose usage of "hamlet" as compared to "village" and
because of the practice of referring to these communities as "defended,"
"secure, and fortified" as well as "strategic." But the greatest source
of confusion lies in the distinction between a strategic hamlet per se
and the strategic hamlet program,

The hamlet is the smallest organized community in rural South Viet-
nam. Several hamlets (typically 3-5) comprise a village. During the stra-
tegic hamlet program both hamlets and villages were fortified. The distinc-
tion is unimportant for the present analysis, except as it bears on the
defensibility of the community protected. The several adjectives coupled
with hamlet or village were occasionally used to differentiate communities
according to the extent of their defenses or the initial presumed loyalty
of their inhabitants. More often no such distinction was made; the terms
were used interchangeably. Where a distinction exists, the following ac-
count explains it.

The phrase Strategic Hamlet Program when used to represent the pro-
gram is much broader than the phrase applied to the hamlets themselves.
The program, as explained below, envisioned a process of pacification of
which the construction of strategic hamlets was but part of one phase, al-
beit a very important part. This paper examines the program, not just
the hamlets.

B. Antecedents ,
Population relocation into defended villages was by no means a

recent development in Southeast Asia. Parts of South Vietnam had experi-
ence with the physical aspects of fortified communities going back many

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
