Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

both about the present prospects for success against the Viet
Cong and still more about the future effectiveness of this
effort unless there can be important political improvement in
the country. It is in this context that I now need your
appraisal of the situation. If the prognosis in your judgment
is not hopeful, I would like your views on what action must be
taken by the South Vietnamese Government and what steps our
Government should take to lead the Vietnamese to that action.

-+-1 will also expect you to examine with Ambassador Lodge
ways and means of fashioning all forms of our assistance to
south Vietnam so that it will support ow foreign policy ob-
jectives more precisely. 110/

The purpose, thus, was fourfold: (1) appraise the war effort; (2) assess
the impact on that effort of recent political developments; (3) recommend
a course of action for the GV and for the U.S.; and (4) exemine with
Lodge ways of tailoring our aid to achieve our foreign policy objectives.
In a statement to the press at Andrews Air Force Base just before leaving
for Vietnam on September 23, Secretary McNamara said that the purpose

of the trip was, "...to determine whether that military effort has been
adversely affected by the unrest of the past several weeks." 111/

Both Schlesinger and Hilsman, however, contend that Kennedy sent
MeNemara and Taylor to Vietnam to convince them of the negative effect
on the war effort that the protracted political crisis was having, and
of the necessity of applying sanctions to the Diem regime to bring about
change. According to this argument, the President felt he could not
afford a major policy rift in the Administration over applying sanctions,
especially the opposition of the powerful JCS, and concluded that only
McNamara, if convinced, could bring the military along. 112/

Whatever the exact purpose of the trip, the party left Washington
on September 23 and returned ten days later, on October 2, after an
exhausting trip and a comprehensive review of the situation.

The divergent views of the members of the U.S. mission about the
relative progress of the war, and the effect on it of the political
erisis, were exposed immediately in the opening session that McNamara
and Taylor held in Saigon with the country team on September 25. General
Harkins and the MACV staff generally presented a favorable picture of
the war, emphesizine the progress of the strategic hamlet program, and
the generally improved ARVN position, in spite of recent rises in VC
initiated incidents and declines in ARVN operations related to the po-
litical turmoil. 113/ Mellamara and Taylor prodded the briefers with
questions trying to get comparative indicators of the situation over the
previous two years. Mcijamara in particular pressed for details about
the Delta. Todge's and Mecklin's reading of recent events, and their
estimate of war progress, differed sharply from that of General Harkins.

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
