Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Support of all operations with a corresponding decrease on
the dependence on airlift support. Riverine operations,
amphibious operations along the RVN coast, and rapid spoiling
attacks will be conducted against enemy units confirmed by
hard intelligence. Emphasis will be placed on all types of
reconnaissance, especially long range patrols, to acquire the
necessary hard intelligence.

The systematic neutralization of the enemy's base
areas will be pursued aggressively during this campaign.
By directing priority of effect to the neutralization of
those base areas which directly affect the Netional Priority
Areas, key population and economic centers, and vital com-
munications arteries, the accomplishment of both objectives
for this campaign will be facilitated.

Although RVNAF is assigned the primary responsibility
of supporting Revolutionary Development and US/FWMAF are
assigned the primary mission of destroying the main VC/NVA
forces and bases, there will be no clear cut division of
responsibility. RVNAF General Reserve and ARVN Corps Reserve
units will conduct unilateral and participste in coordinated
and combined search and destroy operations. US/FWMAF will
continue to provide direct support and implicit aid to
Revolutionary Development activities.

The people are the greatest asset to the enemy and
control of the people is the enemy's goal. With them, the
enemy has most of the ingredients needed for success: food,
supplies, money, manpower, concealment and intelligence.
During this campaign every effort will be made to deny these
assets to the enemy. Map 1 reflects the National Priority
area for each corps tactical zone, and the area for priority
of military offensive operations. These priority areas
together cover a large majority of the population, food pro-
ducing lands, and critical lines of communications within
SVN. The National Priority Areas are areas of major signifi-
cance at the national level where critical civil and military
wesources are figured on a priority basis for revolutionary
development. The purpose of designating the area for priority
of military offensive operations in conjunction with the
national priority areas is to focus the attention and effort
of RVNAF and US/PWMAF in those areas where operations will
destroy or drive the enemy into sparsely populated and food-
Scarce areas; insure the protection of the population,
control of resources and provide unrestricted use of major
lines of communications, all of which will facilitate follow-
on Revolutionary Development. Spoiling attacks to frustrate
the VC stratesy will continue to be conducted in other areas
as directed. 76/

121 - TOP SECRET - Sensitive
