Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201!

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Task Force appears to have shifted out of Gilpatric's (and Defense's)

hands to State (and, apparently, George Ball.) A State redraft of the
report came out May 3, which eliminated the special role laid out for
lansdale, shifted the chairmanship of the continuing Task Force to State,
and blurred, without wholly eliminating, the Defense-drafted recommendations
for sending U.S. combat units to Vietnam and for public U.S. commitments

to save South Vietnam from Communism. But even the State re-draft recom-
mended consideration of stationing American troops in Vietnam, for missions
not involving combat with the Viet Cong, and a bilateral U.S.-SVN security
treaty. On May 4 and 5, still acting under the pressures of the Laos
erisis, the Administration implied (through a statement by Senator Fulbright
at the White House following a meeting with Kennedy, and at Kennedy's press
conference the next day) that it was considering stationing American forces
in Vietnam. On May 6, a final draft of the Task Force report came out,
essentially following the State draft of May 3. On May 8, Kennedy signed

a letter to Diem, to be delivered by Vice President Johnson the next week,
which promised Diem strong U.S. support, but did hot go beyond the program
outlined in the original Task Force report; it offered neither to finance
expanded South Vietnamese forces, nor to station American troops in Vietnam.
On May 11, the recommendations of the final, essentially State-drafted, report
were formalized. But by now, the hoped for cease-fire in Laos had come off.
Vice President Johnson in Saigon on the 12th of May followed through on his
instructions to proclaim strong U.S. support for and confidence in Diem.
When Diem talked of his worries about U.S. policy in Laos, Johnson, obviously
acting on instructions, raised the possibility of stationing American troops
in Vietnam or of a bilateral treaty. But Diem wanted neither at that time.
Johnson's instructions were not available to this study, so we do not know
how he would have responded if Diem had asked for either troops or a treaty,
although the language of the Task Force report implies he would only have
indicated a U.S. willingness to talk about these things. With Johnson,

eame the new Ambassador, Fritz Nolting, whose principal instruction was to
"cet on Diem's wavelength" in contrast to the pressure tactics of his
predecessor.

A few weeks later, in June, Diem, responding to an invitation Kennedy
had sent through Johnson, dispatched an aide to Washington with a letter
outlining Saigon's "essential military needs." It asked for a large increase
in U.S. support for Vietnamese forces (sufficient to raise ARVN strength
from 170,000 to 270,000 men), and also for the dispatch of "selected
elements of the American Armed Forces", both to establish training centers
for the Vietnamese and as a symbol of American commitment to Vietnam. The
proposal, Diem said, had been worked out with the advice of MAAG Saigon,
whose chief, along with the JCS and at least some civilian officials,
strongly favored getting American troops into Vietnam.

The question of increased support for Vietnamese forces was resolved
through the use of the Staley Mission. This was normally a group of economic
experts intended to work with a Vietnamese group on questions of economic
policy. Particularly at issue was whether the Vietnamese could not be
financing a larger share of their own defenses. But the.economic proposals

a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
