Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

es TOP SECRET - Sensitive

SEAsia,” the ultimate purpose was to apply pressure against Hanoi's
will:

The strategy of this plan requires initial application
of air attacks over a widespread area against the NVN mili-
tary base structure and war supporting resources. The
intensity of air operations and the number of targets to
be attacked gradually increase. Under such pressure of
attack, NVN must further disperse or face destruction in
depth of its military base and resources. The dispersal
will inerease the stresses on command, control, and logistic
support and should cause some concern in the Military Com-
mand of the wisdom of further aggression....The combined
effects of reducing and restricting external assistance to
NVN, the progressive attacks against NVN military and war
supporting resources, the interdiction of infiltration
routes in NVN end Laos, and the destruction of nvn/ve forces
and bases in SVN and Laos should cause a reappraisal in
Hanoi as to NVN's military capability to continue aggression. 50/

The plan, which was merely "noted" and not red-striped
by the JCS, called for the “controlled and phased intensification of
air strikes" and a "modest adjustment” in the sanctuaries (to 10 miles
around Hanoi, 4 around Haiphong, and 20 from the Chinese border, as
previously recommended by the JCS). A first phase extended armed recon-
naissance to the northeast, and struck 11 more JCS-listed bridges, the
Thai Newyen railroad yards and shops, 14 headquarters/barracks, h ammuni-
tion and 2 supply depots, 5 POL storage areas, 1 airfield, 2 naval bases,
and 1 radar site, all outside the (reduced) sanctuaries. The second
phase attacked 12 "militany and war supporting installations" within
the Hanoi and Haiphong sanctuaries: 2 bridges, 3 POL storage areas, 2
railroad shops and yards, 3 supply depots, 1 machine tool plant, and
l airfield. The third phase attacked the 43 remaining JCS targets,
jneluding 6 bridges, 7 ports and naval bases, 6 industrial plants, 7 locks,
10 power plants, the NVN ministries of national and air defense, and
assorted railroad, supply, radio, and transformer stations.

The plan also provided for three special attack options
for execution during any of the phases "as a counter to enemy moves or
when strong political and military action is desired." The options were:
attack on the POL center at Haiphong; aerial mining of the channel
approaches to Haiphong, Hon Gai, and Cam Pha, the three principal mari-
time ports; and strikes against the major jet airfields at Hanoi, Haiphong,

and Phuc Yen. 51/

79 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
