Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

involvement led to increasing commitment of U.S. prestige is probably
beyond argument. And it is probably also true that, in the .extent

to which we defined the issues simply and centrally as a symbolic
confrontation with Communism, wherein far more is at stake than the
immediate battlefield (in South Vietnam) on which we fought -- and
acted upon this definition and proclaimed it as the issue -~ we tended
more and more to endow the issue with that significance whether or not”
it had in fact been the issue in the first place. And this point, if
closely examined, might logically have raised the question of whether
it is absolutely necessary to accept any challenge put to us, and if
so what advantage this confers upon our enemies in granting them the
choice of issue and of battleground. Finally, a struggle so defined
came close to calling for war a outrance -- not the centrally political
war, with severe restriction upon violent means, following counter-
guerrilla warfare theory.

Despite the encompassing nature of the definition of objectives,
and although NSAM 288 proposed a marked increase in U.S. involvement,
our implementing programs remained comparatively limited as if we did
not fully believe these strong words. We even expressed agreement with
the older idea of helping the Vietnamese help themselves.

We are now trying to help South Vietnam
defeat the Viet Cong, supported from the North,
by means short of the unqualified use of U.S.
combat forces. We are not acting against North
Vietnam except by a modest "covert" program
operated by South Vietnamese (and a few Chinese
Nationalists) -- a program so limited that it
is unlikely to have any significant effect...61/

There was a further statement of this older policy theme:

There were and are some sound reasons for the
limits imposed by the present policy -- the South
Vietnamese must win their own fight; U. 8. inter-
vention on a larger scale, and/or GVN actions
against the North, would disturb key allies and
other nations; etc. In any case, it is vital that
we continue to take every reasonable measure to
assure success in South Vietnam. The policy
choice is not an "either/or" between this course
of action and possible pressures against the
North; the former is essential and without regard
to our decision with respect to the latter. The
latter can, at best, only reinforce the former. €2/

At the end of this section, which described measures that we would

take to assist the Khanh government in administering internal programs,
there was a final admonition:

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
