Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In July, 1964, Khanh created a National Security Council similar
to ours, and it met regularly with the top group of Embassy people to
talk agreeably about pacification and manpower problems. MACV set up
joint inspection teams and joint studies with JGS people several times
a year. The only thing of this class that had any visible follow-through
was the joint planning group on bombing North and on other cross-border
operations. Two battalions specifically declared ineffective by MACV
suffered no penalty or improvement.

The militants’ predilection for external adventures began to show
in May, 1964, after the Embassy started pressing Khanh about his March
agreements with McNamara. Khanh responded within a few days by saying he
wanted to declare war, bomb the North with U.S. participation, bring 10,000
U.S. Army Special Forces troops into South Vietnam, "get rid of the poli-
ticians,” and put Saigon strictly on a war footing. Lodge tried to cool
him off, but Khanh brought up a less extreme version again with Rusk at the
end of the month, saying that his goverrment could not win without action
outside South Vietnam. When Lodge returned from the Honolulu Conference
in early June, Khanh responded to discussions of ARVN strength by trying
to draw Lodge out on actions against the North. ‘Then, when we did not move
fast enough to suit him and Ky, they started a press campaign on the subject,
and pressed Taylor more insistently. Finally, in December, when Taylor told
GVN all the many ways they should improve to justify further U.S. involve-
ment, their immediate reply included the comment that the U.S. program said
nothing about Viet Cong use of Cambodia.

The press leaks about going North were the first major instance of their
defiantly going ahead as they pleased against cur wishes. Khanh's August
constitution was a less flagrant case, because Taylor's words of caution
were comparatively diffident. (Moreover, in the following August-September
turbulence, Khanh let himself become clearly dependent on the Embassy when
he talked to the Buddhist leaders.) In the December crisis the Young Turks
defied Taylor at every turn following their dissolution of the HNC; and after
a temporary agreement in January double-crossed Taylor, dismissed Huong, and
took control of the formation of a new government. They guessed correctly
that we saw no choice but to go along.

ix TOP SECRET - Sensitive
