Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"2. ...a statement as to the readiness capability of U.S.
armed forces, in the next few years, to conduct operations in
implementation of Article IV, 1, of the Manila Pact." 43/

The U.S. forces vould constitute a "mobile reserve" ready for commit-
ment to the treaty area, but the U.S. would enter no fixed agreement

as to what those forces might be, or under what circumstances they
would be used. Despite this unilateral planning, however, instructions
for the delegates to the Bangkok conference indicated that planning for
or creation of combined commands were not to be considered within the

»,-Scope of the SEATO Pact. Suppression of guerrillas was to be handled
* by “indigenous forces only" unless these proved incapable of coping

with the problem.

At the 1955 Bangkok Conference the Australians and New
Zealanders repeated their willingness to make troop commitments to a
SEATO force, but the U.S. representatives, following instructions,
evaded discussion of the subject. 4/ he pressures on the U.S. team
were strong, and the members came away with the conviction that the
major factor “to contend with" in future meetings was bound to be

" ..the obvious desire of the Asian nations to establish
a NATO-type SEATO organization with everything that it implies
in the nature of force commitments." }5,

later in 1955, U.S. planners once more were approached by
counterparts of several other countries with the proposal that, as a
step toward some kind of SEATO standing group, a small secretariat be
set up to study methods of creating a “possible future organizational
structure." The report of the U.S. representatives stated, "The
establishment of such an ad hoc arrangement should not prejudice the
eventual creation or evolution of a standing group...should the need
become necessary because of inadequacies revealed by experience." 46/
The JCS commented:

"The Joint Chiefs of Staff have no objection to the
establishment of a small permanent secretariat, which would
be an instrument of the Military Advisers and subordinate
planning committees. However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
would not agree to the possible evolution of such a secre-
tariat into an organization of a standing nature...." ut /

This was the same point of view expressed by CINCPAC, who noted with
apparent relief that:

"The recognition of the requirement for a small permanent
secretariat has definitely forestalled for the foreseeable
future any determined insistence for either a permanent staff
planners organization, a standing group, or a combined staff." 48/

A-25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
