Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. We should consider changing the objective
which we have been pursuing consistently since 1954
only for the most cogent reasons. There is clearly
nothing to recommend trying to do more than what we are
now doing at such great cost. To undertake to do less
is to accept needlessly a serious defeat for which we
would pay dearly in terms of our world-wide position of
leadership, of the political stability of Southeast Asia,
and of the credibility of our pledges to friends and
allies.

6. In summary, our alternatives are to stay with
our present objective (stick it out), to raise our
objective (all out), to scale down our objective (pull
back), or to abandon our objective (pull out). Since
there is no serious consideration being given at the
moment to adding to or subtracting from the present
objective, the discussion in this paper is limited to
considerations of alternative strategies and programs
to attain the present objective. 29/

With this review of the possible objectives and his own
statement of preference, Taylor turned to the possible responses to
General Westmoreland's troop request and the ramifications of each.
Here he devoted himself more to trying to develop the multiplicity
of considerations that needed to be weighed in each instance than to
passionate advocacy of one or another course. At the end of his
memo he considered the political implications of various options
with special attention to the problem of negotiations with Hanoi --

a subject with which he had long been preoccupied. He concluded
by packaging the various military, political and diplomatic courses of
action into three alternative programs. Here is how he reasoned:

b. As the purpose of our military operations is
to bring security to South Viet-Nam behind which the GVN
can restore order and normalcy of life and,at the same
time, to convince Hanoi of the impossibility of realizing
its goal of a Communist-controlled government imposed
upon South Viet-Nam, we have to consider the political
effect of our military actions both on Saigon and on
Hanoi. With regard to Saigon, a refusal. to reinforce
at this time will bring discouragement and renewed sus-
picion of U.S. intentions; in Hanoi, an opposite effect,
On the other hand, a large reinforcement may lessen the
sense of urgency animating the Vietnamese Government and
result in a decrease of effort; in Hanoi, it may cause them
to undertake further escalation.

165 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
