Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

Sie a]

tea ea BS ant

a ee |
TOD SF
we

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARIES OF STATE AND DEFENSE
FROM: Southeast Asia Aid Policy Committee

The Committee is, submitting for approval by higher authority,
the attached draft joint memorandum to the National Security Council
on Indochina. This draft joint memorandum contains a statement of
U.S. policy with respect to Indochina. It is the Committee's view
that the U.S. Government should decide, in principle, to contribute, .
in whatever ways are feasible and desirable,to the formation of
national armies in Indochina. Such a contribution appears to the
Committee as the most effective method by which the U.S. can, at
present, strengthen the encutny: < of Indochina and add to its stabi-
lization.

The Committee would like to point out that the extent end char-
acter of the contribution which the U.S. might consider furnishing
for the formation of national armies in Indochina can only be deter-
mined by negotiations between officials of the French and U.S. Govern-
ments, on a ministerial level. During the course of those negotiations
French officials may be expected to present, for the first time, de-
tailed information on their plans for the formation of these armies.
Approval of the draft joint memorandum would provide the authoriza-
tion from the President for U.S. representatives to consider and act
with full knowledge of the plans of the French.

It is recommended that, if negotiations are conducted with
representatives of the French Government, U.S. representatives secure
French acceptance of the following conditions which shall attach to
the extension of U.S. assistance in the formation of national armies
in Indochina: (1) French Union forces would not be withdraw from
_ Indochina until such Associated States armies were fully trained and
ready to act effectively in replacement; (2) France would not decrease
its outlays for Indochina below the 1950 rate during the period of the
American military aid requested; (3) the national armies projects would
have the approval of the three Associated States governments; (4) the
High Commissioner for Indochina, the French Command, and the three
Associated States would maintain full consultative relations with the
Legation and MAAG during the period of the formation of the armies.

If approved, this joint memorandum would provide the measures
called for by NSC 64 - "Position of the U.S. with Respect to Indo-
china", approved by the President on 23 April 1950. It is under-
stood that the draft of this joint memo will be reviewed by the
JCS before it is finally approved by the Secretary of Defense.

, PRA Fay “el

)
i

C0 Puy

y SiS = ¥ = A
egise dl

350

ant
eer

=
he
