Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

There can be no assurance that this very substantial
additional deployment would leave us a year from today in
any more favorable military position. All that can be said
is that the additional troops would enable us to kill more
of the enemy and would provide more security if the enemy does
not offset them by lesser reinforcements of his own. There
is no indication that they would bring about a quick solution
in Vietnam and, in the absence of better performance by the
GVN and the ARVN, the increased destruction and increased
Americanization of the war could, in fact, be counter-
productive. 70/

There were many other reasons for conducting a study of our Vietnamese
policy in the context of the U.S. worldwide political/military strategy.
No matter what the result in Vietnam itself, we will have failed in our
purpose, the memorandum stated, if:

a. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where it is
a major conflict leading to direct military confrontation
with the USSR and/or China;

b. The war in Vietnam spreads to the point where we
are so committed in resources that our other world-wide
commitments -~ especially NATO -- are no longer credible;

ec. The attitudes of the American people towards "more
Vietnams" are such that our other commitments are brought
into question as a matter of US will;

d. Other countries no longer wish the US commitment for
fear of the consequences to themselves as a battlefield between
the Hast and the West. 71/

In addition, any intensive review should focus on the ability of the
GVN and the ARVN to demonstrate significant improvement, both in their
ability to win popular support and their willingness to fight aggressively
for their own security.

Finally, the memorandum stated:

..-the striking change in the enemy's tactics, his
willingness to commit at least two additional divisions
to the fighting in the South over the pist few weeks
and the obvious and not wholly anticipated strength of
the Viet Cong infrastructure, shows that there can be
no prospect of a quick military solution to the aggression
in South Vietnam. Under these circumstances, we should give
antensive study to the development of new strategic guidance
+o General Westmoreland. This study may show that he should
not be expected either to destroy the enemy forces or to
rout them completely from South Vietnam. The kind of American
commitment that might be required to achieve these military

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
