Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

GVN and FW shipping transiting the Rung Sat Special Zone
with a Sapper Battalion; harass installations and LOC's
in Gia Ding Province with elements of the 165A VC Regi-
ment. He has the capability of continuing his terror
campaign in Saigon/Cholon.

(4) In IV CTZ, he can attack in up to regi-
mental strength in Chuong Thien and Dinh Tuong Provinces,
and in up to reinforced battalion strength throughout
the rest of the CTZ. Militia and guerrilla forces pre-
dominate, and emphasis is on harassing attacks and local
actions to consolidate and extend his control...." 13/

Westmoreland also expected what he labeled "political attack" and
"economic attack" to continue. These he described as efforts to...

",..Destroy the effectiveness of hamlet, village,
district, provincial, and national governments by
elimination, intimidation, and subversion of GVN offi-~
cials; discredit and erode GVN political authority at
all levels by conducting propaganda attacks against
elected and appointed GVN officials and against GVN
programs.

_",..Enemy to intensify efforts to impose an econ-

omic blockade against the GVN by denying the latter access
to its own resources; conduct overt and covert operations
throughout SVN against targets of vital economic signifi-
-eance to the maintenance and growth of the GVN economy;
stimulate inflation by diverting commodities destined for
SVN markets and by denying commodities from markets through
interdiction and harassment of LOC's; and undermine the
people's confidence in SVN currency by propaganda and
possible counterfeiting.” 1)/

COMUSMACV then addressed the crucial question of enemy reinforce-~
ment capability:

"...The enemy has the demonstrated capability to
reinforce in SVN by infiltrating personnel and units
from NVN at a rate of about 8,400 men per month and by
in-country recruitment of about 3,500 per month in VC
Main and Local Forces. In the tactical sense, his depen-
dence on foot movement normally precludes major reinforcement
on the battlefield beyond attack forces initially committed.
Defensively, he normally conducts holding actions to enable
extrication of the main body rather than reinforcing.

(1) InI CPZ, he can reinforce his attack or
defense through the DMZ and from Laos within three to ten

27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
