Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

States militarily is an ambiguous response in which the

DRV would appear to engage in productive talks in order

to gain time to concurrently regenerate support facilities

in NVN and gradually build up personnel strength and support
bases in Laos, Cambodia and SVN, without overt and visible
provocation. Once discussions were initiated and extended

for 2-6 months, the DRV would expect world pressure to exer-
cise a heavy restraint on resumption of bombardment -- in fact,
to prevent it in the absence of a demonstrable provocation

of considerable consequence,

22. US intelligence evaluations of the impact of
bombardment on NVN are sufficiently uncertain as to cast
doubt on any judgment that aerial and naval bombardment
is or is not establishing some upper limit on the DRV's
ability to support the war in SVN. The effect on NVN itself
is equally uncertain. If NVN is being seriously hurt by
pombardment, the price for cessation should be high. How-
ever, if NVN can continue indefinitely to accommodate to
pombardment, negotiation leverage from cessation -- or a
eredible threat of resumption -- is likely to be substantially
less. A penalty to the United States of underevaluating the
impact of bombardment of NVN would be an unnecessarily weak
negotiating stance. 53/

In their final paragraphs, the Study Group turned to the question of DRV
good faith. The President's statement that bombing could halt and
negotiations begin if we had assurances that the DRV would "not take
advantage" of our restraint obliged us to look at which we would regard
as a violation of that principle.

27. It has not been possible to detect and measure
increased infiltration into SVN until 4-6 months have
elapsed. If discussions following a cessation of bombard-
ment are protracted, the enemy could take advantage of the
opportunity for increased infiltration with confidence that
detection would be so slow and uncertain that insufficient
provocation could be demonstrated to justify termination of
talks or resumption of bombardment. The following are mini-
mum acceptable actions which operationally define "not take
advantage.”

a, Stop artillery fire from and over the DMZ
' into SVN prior to or immediately upon cessation.

b. Agree that for the DRV to increase over the
eurrent level the flow of personnel and materiel south of

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
121
