Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

184#
= TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The report evaluating the results of the U.S. air campaign
against North Vietnam began with a forceful statement of conclusions:

SUMMARY AND CONCIUSIONS

1. As of July 1966 the U.S. bombing of North Vietnam (NVN)
had had no measurable direct effect on Hanoi's ability to mount
and support military operations in the South at the current
level.

Although the political constraints seem clearly to have
reduced the effectiveness of the bombing program, its limited
effect on Hanoi's ability to provide such support cannot be
explained solely on that basis. The countermeasures intro-
duced by Hanoi effectively reduced the impact of U.S. bombing.
More fundamentally, however, North Vietnam has basically a
subsistence agricultural economy that presents a difficult and
unrewarding target system for air attack.

The economy supports operations in the South mainly by
functioning as a logistic funnel and by providing a source of
manpower. The industrial sector produces little of military
value.. Most of the essential military supplies that the vc/

NVN forces in the South require from external sources are provided
by the USSR and Communist China. Furthermore, the volume of

such supplies is so low that only a small fraction of the capacity
of North Vietnam's rather flexible transportation network is
required to maintain the flow. The economy's relatively under-
employed labor force also appears to provide an ample manpower
reserve for internal military and economic needs including

repair and reconstruction and for continued support of military
operations in the South.

2. Since the initiation of the ROLLING THUNDER program
the damage to facilities and equipment in North Vietnam has been
more than offset by the increased flow of military and economic
aid, largely from the USSR and Communist China.

The measurable costs of the damage sustained by North
Vietnam are estimated by intelligence analysts to have reached
approximately $86 million by 15 July 1966. In 1965 alone,
the value of the military and economic aid that Hanoi received
from the USSR and Communist China is estimated to have been on
the order of $250-400 million, of which about $100-150 million
was economic, and they have continued to provide aid, evidently
at an increasing rate, during the current year. Most of it
has been from the USSR, which had virtually cut off aid during
the 1962-64. period. There can be little doubt, therefore, that

150 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
