Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

= |
|

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The latter question was settled by default. MACV's proposed
Joint Table of Distribution (JTD) of 15 May.1964, replete with errors
and omissions and antedating the decision to expand the advisory
effort, became the base line for authorizations to expand. Nobody in
the game seemed quite able to keep the detailed numbers straight. OSD
came Quickly to focus on the total authorization for U.S. personnel in
Vietnam and, as the papers in the Secretary's files demonstrate, found
itself penciling new*numbers in even final draft copies which had
undergone several checks and redrafis. 121/ The product of this con-
centration on minutiae at high Washington levels was almost complete
freedom of employment in the field. The Washington policymakers asked
how many men were authorized in various activities and how many were
assigned. There is no evidence that, once the decision was made to
i establish district advisory teams, these same policymakers probed into
| priorities of employment or the roles of these advisors.

The rate of the build-up was a much more complicated matter, not

* because of the additional battalion advisors and the new district

advisors but because the numbers represented solely by the additional
advisors quickly became a relatively small percentage of the total U.S.
build-up -~ all of which was justified as contributing to the GVN pacifi-

cation plan and a sizeable portion of which was specifically earmarked to

provide administrative and logistical support to the newly arriving

advisors. By mid-July COMUSMACV was recommending 4200 personnel in

addition to the 926 battalion and district advisors, at least two more

helicopter companies, one Caribou company, and numerous major items of

| — equipment as part of the required build-up. 122/ The inereased advisory
effort was identified as the cause of this large increase:

The increases envisaged...will provide for the extension
and reinforcement of the advisory effort at the combat unit
level and, concurrently, a major extension and reinforcement
of the advisory effort at the district level in order to improve
and accelerate pacification operations. That extension and
augmentation of effort has an immediate impact wpon the adminis-
trative and logistical support base. In a sense the addition of
advisors in this quantity becomes the "straw that broke the
camel's back" to an already overburdened support base. 123/

SECRETARTAL PRESSURE FOR A SPEED-UP

| The Secretary of Defense and JCS met on 20 July to discuss these
requirements. The JCS supported COMUSMACV. Secretary McNamara had no

. argument with the levels of men and equipment requested; his question

i was why they could not be provided more quickly than indicated by the

| time-phasing in General Westmoreland's detailed breakdown. 124/ COMUSMACV

ys lnneae 52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
