Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

during the period 1924-26, when the communists and Chang Kai-shek
collaborated in China's nationalist movement.

"The Viet Minh Executive Committee, or Tongbo, is the real
repository of power in Vietnam territory. The influential govern-
ment paper, National Salvation (Cun Quoc), is the organ of the
Tongbo and reflects the line of the government. A majority of
the Tongbo members are believed to be former members of the
dissolved Indochinese Communist Party. Within the mass national-
ist movement, the communists are undoubtedly the most cohesive
political factor. President Ho Chi Minh is a communist but
has great prestige as a nationalist leader among the mass of
Vietnamese. He is the outstanding political personality in
Indochina. He plays down his past communist connections, empha-
sizes the nationalistic aspects of his program, and is popularly
considered a man above parties.

"The Viet Minh exercises its control over the mass national-
ist movement through a variety of ‘national welfare! organizations
of women, youth, peasants, soldiers, etc., which in their totality
embrace most of the population of Vietnam. Hoang Quoc Viet, the
General Secretary of the Viet Minh, claims that the organization
has a total membership of nine million..."

The collapse of the Chinese nationalists in 1949 reverberated within
the Vietnamese nationalist movements. The Kuomintang-oriented parties --
principally the VNQDD -- were severely discredited, and the exile movements
in China dispersed. The DRV began to shift into the communist bloc in search
of material support, and there was a concomitant further leftward movement
within the Viet Minh. By 1951, the Communist Party was “legalized.” ‘The
Iao Dong Party (Dang Lao Dong Viet Nam, or Vietnamese Workers' Party) there-
after became the dominant political power within the DRY. The Lao Dong
Party was expressly Marxist-Leninist, and proudly claimed an unbroken lingage
to the Indochinese Communist Party founded by Ho Chi Minh, including leader-
ship of all the major nationalist "front" movements through 1951. Vo Nguyen
Giap explained in 1961 that:

"The Vietnamese people's war of liberation was victorious
because we had a wide and firm National United Front...organized
and led by the Party of the working class: the Indochinese
Communist Party, now the Viet Nam Workers' /Tao Dong/ Party.

In the light of the principles of Marxism-Leninism. ..the Party
found a correct solution to the problems..." 60/

The Lao Dong Party official history has credited communist machination
for the key developments in Vietnamese history through 1951:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-66
