Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

undoubtedly contributes greatly to the high desertion rates
which have been experienced. It appears appropriate, there-
fore, to bring the trainers and training facilities to the
areas where the paramilitary forces live and operate.

(3) According to US standards, the military training
needs of the Vietnamese paramilitary are extremely modest.
There is no requirement for elsborated technical schools or
complex instructional courses. Instead, the Vietnamese para-~
militery require military schooling at the most basic levels,
with emphasis on basic infantxy weapons and small unit tactics.
Such instruction would be provided by the additional numbers of

US military personnel.
b. Organization for Advisory Effort. The training defi-

ciencies and problems of the peramilitary are as many and varied
as the nunber of provinces and districts in which those forces
operate. Needs in Quang Ngai, for example, may be extremely
different from those in Dinh Tuong. Within the provinces, each
district also may have different training needs. The reasonable
method of approaching this problem, then, appears to be establish-
ment of highly flexible training detachments operating under
supervision at province level, which can provide local mobile
training teams, small training centers, and temporary encadre-
ment for the smaller paramilitary units when dictated by a
specific situation. 108/ .

MACV FOCUSES ON OPERATIONS RATHER THAN TRAINING

COMUSMACV and CINCPAC were asked to comment within two days on this
study which had been "...considered at the highest levels, where initial
reaction has been favorable." 109/ Their replies, in which the theater
commander supported his nominal subordinate in Saigon, contested the value
of U.S.-conducted training for RVNAF peramilitary forces, proposed that
advisors be used at the district level to assist in operations, accepted
the 1,000-man magnitude, but stretched out the target date 18 months --
thereby proposing a gradualistic aporoach without candidly saying so.
General Harkins devoted most of his reply to the question of training
teams:

A. A basic premise of the study is that training at the
established centers is at the root of many morale and desertion
problems. This premise is incorrect as regards the Civil Guard
(Regional Forces). It is in part true with respect to SDC
(Popular Forces); but the underlying cause thereof - lack of
per diem - is in the process of being removed by the new allow-
ances that are about to be promulgated. This is not to say there

L6G TOP SECRET - Sensitive
