Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

sustained analytical thought which he, with his colleagues, had
given to how to organize the government for the great new job
of pacification which confronts them -- and which is clearly

their government's most important single responsibility.” 26/

COMMENT: Lodge had by this time let the GVN know clearly what tune he
wanted to hear, and with their usual skill the Vietnamese -- even
General Co, who turned out to be worthless on pacification -- were
playing the right song back.

7. "When the chance to win over the people was missed some

years ago, a situation came into being in which it was in-
dispensable for the VC large units to be defeated before true
community building, with its mixture of political and security
measures, would be possible. Otherwise, the VC battalions,

emerging from untouchable sanctuaries, would destroy whatever
community building had painstakingly been achieved. Now it

looks as though the VC know this and has already begun to act

on the knowledge, transforming themselves into small units and
individual terrorists, and into subversive political operators." 27/

COMMENT: Lodge's sequence of events -- destroy the main force enemy
first, pacify second -- is hard to argue with, but his assessment of
VC capabilities end intentions falls short of accuracy.

As a final note to the examination of Lodge's emphasis on
pacification, it is worthwhile asking why he has so consistently put
such a high priority on the effort -- regardless of methodology -- to
gain control of the villages. The answer may lie in his strong views
on the way the war will end in Vietnam. Lodge doubted that there
would ever be meaningful negotiations with the Viet Cong. An old hand
at negotiating with the communists, Lodge felt that the most likely
end to the war was for the enemy to "fadeaway” after a prolonged
period of conflict. In his view, therefore, control of the population
pecame the best way to force the fadeaway. Furthermore, in the event
that there was some sort of pro forma discussions with the communists
at some future date, Lodge felt that there were certain minimum
conditions of a "satisfactory outcome” which must be met. An examina-
tion of his definition of a satisfactory outcome shows the overriding
importance of the pacification effort in his mind. The following is
from a telegram sent "For the President and the Secretary from Lodge"
on October 21, 1965, which Lodge considered one of his most important
cables:

"What we consider a satisfactory outcome to be would,
of course, be a very closely kept secret. It would include
the following, not necessarily in this order:

itive TOP SECRET - Sensitive
