Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

operations and thereby enable their scope and effectiveness to be
increased. However, he was not supported by the service chiefs. They
opposed surfacing the GVN operations until they could become associated
with the DE SOTO Patrols "or until the United States is prepared openly
to support MAROPS militarily." 137/ All of these officials agreed that
it was necessary to undertake reprisals for a variety of hostile VC or
DRV actions. In particular they wanted U.S. responses to be greater

in degree, not necessarily matching in kind, than the provocations.
Where they came to differ was on the desirability of deliberately pro-
voking DRV actions to which we could then respond. After the September
White House meeting only the Air Force Chief of Staff and the Marine
Commandant favored this approach. 138/

Differences with respect to preparation for coping with enemy
reactions to harsher pressures centered around the issue of committing
greater numbers of U.S. ground forces to South Vietnam. CINCPAC, sup-
porting General Westmoreland's request, urged provision for deployment
of Marine and Army units to provide security for U.S./GVN operating
bases. The JCS disagreed and disapproved a request to make such adjust-
ments in OPLAN 37-64, on grounds that since VC capabilities were still
questionable it was preferable not to precommit U.S. forces in the manner
urged. At issue concurrently was an Air Force proposal to reduce the
number of ground forces provided for in the event of a large scale DRV/
CHICOM intervention in Southeast Asia and to rely more heavily on tactical
air capabilities. The other chiefs disagreed, but the controversy con-
cerning the relative emphasis on ground and air forces for the defense of
southeast Asia was to occupy JCS attention for several months to come. 139/

Regarding the issue of readiness to increase pressures on North
Vietnam and the role of negotiations, the military chiefs were in agree-
ment throughout the period. Soon after the Tonkin Gulf incidents they
urged prompt implementation of more serious pressures using U.S. air
capabilities. They opposed B-57 training for the VNAF, citing its limited
pilot and Supporting technical resources which would be needed for counter-
insurgency missions. In response to warnings that we should not get
deeply involved in a conflict in Southeast Asia until we were surer of
the GVN's commitment, they replied that "the United States is already
deeply involved." They went on to recommend preparations for deploying
the remaining OPLAN 37-G+ forces needed for mounting a U.S. air strike
program against North Vietnam. 140/ While the JCS did not address the
subject of negotiations explicitly during this period, their statements —
implied a lack of interest in a negotiated solution to the Vietnam prob-
dem. At every Opportunity: they reiterated their recommendation that we
should attack North Vietnamese will and capabilities as necessary to
force a DRV decision to halt its support and direction of the insurgency.

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
