Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

69. Address by President Johnson before a Joint Session of the
Tennessee State Legislature at Nashville, Tennessee on March 15,

1967; "The Defense of Viet-Nam: Key to the Future of Free Asia,"
Department of State Bulletin, April 3, 1967, p. 534.

' *¥ * &

"As our commitment in Viet-Nam required more men and more equip-
ment, some voices were raised in opposition. The administration was
urged to disengage, to find an excuse to abandon the effort.

"These cries came despite growing evidence that the defense of
Viet-Nam held the key to the political and economic future of free Asia.
The stakes of the struggle grew correspondingly.

"It became clear that if we were prepared to stay the course in
Viet-lNam, we could help to lay the cornerstone for a diverse and inde-
pendent Asia, full of promise and resolute in the cause of peaceful
economic development for her long-suffering peoples.

"But if we faltered, the forces of chaos would scent victory and
decades of strife and aggression would stretch endlessly before us."

ee Fe: ot

"The first answer is that Viet-Nam is aggression in a new guise,
as far removed from trench warfare as the rifle from the longbow. ‘This
is a war of infiltration, of subversion, of ambush. Pitched battles
are very rare, and even more rarely are they decisive."

x FE

70. Address by William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for East
Asian and Pacific Affairs, before the National Executive Committee
of the American Legion at Indianapolis, Indiana on May 3, 1967;
‘Seventeen Years in East Asia," Department of State Bulletin, May 22,
1967, p- 190. FE ———E

7 oe

"This group hardly needs to be told why we are acting as we are
in South Viet-Nam. We are acting to preserve South Viet-Nem's right
+o work out its own future without external interference, including its
right to make a free choice on unification with the North. We are
acting to fulfill a commitment that evolved through the actions of
Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson and that was originally
stated in the SEATO treaty, overwhelmingly ratified by the Senate in
1954. And we are acting to demonstrate to the world that the Communist
technique of ‘people's wars’ or ‘wars of national liberation'--in essence,

.

D-107
