Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-- except those who are determined not to be convinced, can
doubt the sincerity, the generosity, the altruism of US
actions and objectives. In the opinion of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff the time has come when further overt actions and
offers on our part are not only nonproductive, they are
counterproductive. A logical case can be made that the
American people, our Allies, and our enemies alike are
increasingly uncertain as to our resolution to pursue the
war to a successful conclusion.

They recommended a "sharp knock" on NVN military assets and war sup-
porting facilities rather than the campaign of slowly increasing pressures
which was adopted.

Whatever the political merits of the latter course, we
deprived ourselves of the military effects of early weight
of effort and shock, and gave to the enemy time to adjust to
our slow quantitative and qualitative increase of pressure.
This is not to say that it is now too late to derive military
benefits from more effective and extensive use of our air and
naval superiority,

Accordingly, they recommended:

(1) Approval of their ROLLING THUNDER 52 program, which
is a step toward meeting the requirement for improved target
systems. This program would decrease the Hanoi and Haiphong
sanctuary areas, authorize attacks against the steel plant,
the Hanoi rail yards, the thermal power plants, selected areas
within Haiphong port and other ports, selected locks and dams
controlling water LOCs, SAM support facilities within the
residual Hanoi and Haiphong sanctuaries, and POL at Haiphong,
Ha Gia (Phuc Yen) and Can Thon (Kep).

(2) Use of naval surface forces to interdict North
Vietnamese coastal waterborne traffic and appropriate land
LOCs and to attack other coastal military targets such as
radar and AAA sites.

6. The Joint Chiefs of Steff request that their views
as set forth above be provided to the President.

All of these developments persuaded the JCS that they needed a
reply with powerful arguments for a program force level far above the
470,000 proposed by the Secretary.

The JCS hesitation in discussing the new 470,000 force level was

rooted in an educated estimate of what was coming out of MACV-CINCPAC
in the next two weeks. 56/

95 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

