Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Communist Party, and in 1954 it appeared that France, by rejecting the
European Defense Community bought Soviet cooperation in settling the
Indochina War-~-at the DRV's expense. 81/ Post Geneva, Soviet support

of the DRV came into tension with its strivings toward detente with

the U.S. Generally, the Soviets seemed willing to accept the Cold War
line SEATO drew at the 17th parallel, and were quite cool to DRV "reunifi-
cation" talk. But the most disruptive factor in Moscow-Hanoi relations
after Geneva was not Washington, but Peking. The CPR, like the USSR,
seems to have regarded the DRV as a pawn in a world-wide test of power.
The Chinese would probably have been disinterested in having on its
southern border a unified, strong Vietnam, even though it were communist.
They seem to have always regarded support of the DRV as a way to embarass
the Soviets, to attack the U.S. position in Southeast Asia, and to frus-
trate the US-USSR detente. Nonetheless, the Chinese had earned high
regard in the DRV because they were willing, as the Soviets were not,

to succor Ho with military aid in his hour of need. Moreover, Mao's form
of revolution seemed far more relevant to the Lao Dong leaders than the
Russian version. Propinquity thus reinforced the attraction of China both
as a source of aid and as a socialist model, and offset much traditional
Viet-Chinese antipathy. However, like the Soviets, the Chinese maneuvered
in Vietnam for broader goals than DRV success. In 1954 and 1955, possibly
seeking to encourage an American withdrawal from the Taiwan Straits, the
CPR adopted a soft line which blurred their stance on Vietnam just as

the Geneva elections came into view. 82/ In 1956, Khruschev's depiction
of Stalin's monstrous leadership at the 20th Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union called into doubt the validity of Soviet pre-
eminence within the Bloc. Mao's bids for Stalin's former position then
split the Bloc. 2

Ho's isolation was borne home to him within the year
after Geneva, as the deadline approached for consultations preliminary
to the elections. Although the Soviet Ambassador to Hanoi had joined a
chorus of dark threats from DRV representatives that "violent action"
would follow if the consultations were delayed, the 20 July 1955 deadline
passed while the parties to the Agreement were in the Summit Conference
at Geneva on ways to decrease world tensions, and the Bloc did not press
the point. Ho took the extraordinary step of a formal appeal to Diem,
but the GVN on 7 August 1955 strongly rejected Hanoi's overtures for
talks. 83/ A subsequent DRV appeal to the UK and USSR co-presidents
of the Geneva Conference was also of no avail. In January, 1956, China,
and then the USSR, did request another Geneva conference; but the USSR and the
UK responded only by extending sine die the functions of the International
Control Commission beyond the expiration date. 84/

All indications are that Ho preferred to follow the
Soviet lead, probably from both repugnance at the prospect of further
dependency on China, and realization that the Soviet was in a better posi-
tion to provide the kinds and amount of foreign aid and trade the DRV

at TOP SECRET - Sensitive
