Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP BECRET - Sensitive

The MACV Role

The MACV organization played an important, mostly hidden, role in
us/GVN relations. At every level from Saigon to the districts, the
advisory structure was the most pervasive instrument of intergovern-
mental contact. ARVN officers were accustomed to being spoon-fed military
advice; so when military dominance of GVN brought these same officers to
high positions in government, the advisor reletionship conferred a latent
diplomatic role upon MACY. Advisers were used as channels of communications
on political matbers and became the most reliable sources of information on
impending coups. (Qn occasions such as the Rhade uprising and Ky's first
attempt at a coup, senior MACV officers openly became diplomatic emissaries.)

We have less record than we would like of COMUSMACV's influence. He -
reported regularly to his military seniors only on strictly military matters:
Detailed reports of his routine, daily dealings with counterparts were not
required of MACV as they were of the Embassy.

From time to time COMUSMACV revealed his own independent objectives.
He sought protection of the ARVN officer corps from political machinations
and from unfavorable press stories in order to preserve their solidarity
and morale; he pressed zealously for early introduction of U.S. ground
forces and for their rapid build-up; he opposed encadrement and combined
conmand with ARVN; he resisted exclusion of the military from pacification;
he rejected sanctions against ARVN; he objected to the initial constraints
on the use of American forces and wanted to be free to operate independently
of ARVIN.

General Westmoreland's strong position usually assured that his view
prevailed. Extension of advisors, increased MAP resources, and the intro-
duction of U.S. ground forces enhanced his relative position. His freedom _
from detailed reporting of daily contacts was itself an element of strength.
When he received unwanted advice and directives, he set up studies (as in
the Civic Action Program) to stall for time; when he lacked authority to
operate freely, he planned shead with the Vietnamese (as in the use of U.S.
forces for independent offensive operations) and then presented the matter
to Washington as a virtual fait accompli.

Vietnamese Non-Performance and Sensitivity

Throughout this period the GVN failed to perform in almost every
constructive respect. Pacification lagged, when not visibly retreating,
even though the GVN was always willing to issue decrees, set up organiza-
tions we suggested, and so on. Khenh's promise to mobilize came to nothing.
The VC defeated ARVN in bigger and bigger battles, until the military
assessment of the situation permitted Westmoreland to call for over 200,000
U.S, troops.

vi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
