Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

we think we're winning -- and will continue to win unless helped
to death.” /Emphasis added

The conferees who met in Honolulu three days later reached a joint
agreement which was somewhat less optimistic than the Ambassador's pro-
nouncement. Present in Honolulu were Secretary McNamara, Assistant
Secretaries William Bundy of State and John McNaughton of Defense,
Ambassador Taylor, Generals Wheeler and Westmoreland, and Admiral Sharp.
Some of these men had helped produce the current optimism in situation
reports and cables, and yet the concensus of their meeting was that the

then present level of Viet Cong activity was nothing but the lull before
the storm.

The situation which presented itself to the Honolulu conferees was in
many ways the whole Vietnam problem in microcosm. What was needed to gal-
vanize everyone into action was some sort of dramatic event within South
Vietnam itself. Unfortunately, the very nature of the war precluded the
abrupt collapse of a front or the loss of large chunks of territory in
lightning strokes by the enemy. The enemy in this war was spreading his
control and influence slowly and inexorably but without drama. The
political infrastructure from which he derived his strength took years
to create, and in most areas the expansion of control was hardly felt
until it was a fait accompli. Only when he organized into units of bat-
talion and regiment size, did the enemy voluntarily lend some dramatic
elements to the war. Whenever these units appeared and engaged the RVNAF,
the government and its U.S. helpers had something they could handle.
Unfortunately at the time of the April 1965 Honolulu Conference the Viet
Cong Main Force units were underground and the conferees had little or
no tangible threat to which to react.

i

There were, however, plenty of indications in the early spring of 1965
of what was to come. There had been no major degradations in the Viet
Cong strength nor in their order of battle. On the contrary, the enemy
was recruiting apace and more than offsetting his losses. 1o/ From
throughout the country came reports that Viet Cong troops and cadre were
moving into Central Vietnem and into areas adjacent to the ring of pro-
vinces comprising the "Hop Tac" area around Saigon. 11/

Constant political turmoil involving many of the senior RVNAF officers
and few significant victories combined to have a deleterious effect on the
effectiveness of the GVN armed forces. The JCS on 20 March identified the
degradation of RVNAF as a new phenomenon after months of political insta-
pility. They used the decline as justification to argue for the deploy-
ment of three divisions of reinforcements from the U.S. and Korea, 12/

Finally and most ominous of all, a CIA-DIA memorandum dated 21 April

1965 reflected the acceptance into the enemy order of battle of one regi-
ment of the 325th PAVN Division said to be located in Kontum Province. 13/ .
