Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The memorandum closed with a comment on the thoughts of Thien and

"They told. me that they do not expect the enemy to nego-
tiate or to modify his program in less than two years. Rather,
they expect the enemy to continue to expand and to increase
his activity. They expressed @greement with us that the key
to success is pacification and that so far pacification has

‘ failed. They agree that we need clarification of GVN and
U.S. roles and that the bulk of the ARVN should be shifted
to pacification. Ky will, between Jamary and July 1967,
shift ali. ARVN infantry divisions to that role, And he is
giving Thang, a good Revolutionary Development director,
added powers. Thien and Ky see this as part of @ two-year
(1967-1968) schedule, in which offensive operations against
enemy main force units are continued, carried on primarily
by the U.S. and other Free World forces. At the end of the
two-year period, they believe the enemy may be willing to
negotiate or to retreat from his current course of action." h7/

McNamara's memorandum marked a strong new emphasis on pacification
by him, and the ripples thet this new emphasis set off were inevitably
to spread throughout the USG, changing emphasis and official rhetoric up
and dawm the line. His first reactions were official: comments on his
memorendim from George Carver, Helms' Special Assistant for Vietnamese
Affairs at the CIA; and from the JCS, Carver agreed with the evaluation
of the situation, but chjected to some of the recommended actions, particu-
lerly the "press for negotiations” items which he felt would be "counter-
productive." Carver wade the provocative statement that he considered
the prognosis "too gloomy." If the odds for enlivening the pacification
progrem are indeed "less than even, present U.S. objectives in Vietnam
are not likely to be achieved."

In his memorandum, Carver took issue with McNamara on pacification.
Carver felt that "despite the errors end administrative weaknesses of present
programs, in the concept of RD we have found the right formula, a catalyst
that is potentially capable of inspiring the Vietnamese into effective
action...Serious and systematic effort in this field is really a post-
Honolulu Conference development and it would be unrealistic to expect
dramatic, readily quantifiable progress in the short span of eight months."

Carver supported the new stress on pacification, adding that he would
support "wholeheartedly" a "real reorganizetional change under which the
civilian director would have a joint staff of sufficient scope to enable
him to plen, control, and direct the U.S, effort and have operational con-
+rol over ell -- not just civilian -- elements engaged in RD..." He opposed.
a “carefully delineated division between the civilian in charge and an ele-
ment of COMUSMACV under a senior officer."

"A civilian pacification structure cannot be given a 'fair trial' unless
the civilian director has the necessary authority," Carver said. "Also, the

103
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
