Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of state with the extravagant expectations of a Rousseau, and he acted
with the zeal of a Spanish Inquisitor. Despite extensive travel and
education in the West, and despite his revolutionary mien, he remained
what he had been raised: a mandarin of Imperial Hue, steeped in filial
piety, devoted to Vietnam's past, modern only to the extent of an
intense, conservative Catholicism. The political apparatus he created
to extend his power and implement his programs reflected his background,
personality, and experience: a rigidly organized, over-centralized
familial oligarchy. Though his brothers, Ngo Dinh Nhu and Ngo Dinh Can,
ereated extensive personal political organizations of considerable power —
Nhu's semi-covert Can Iao party borrowed heavily from communist doctrine
and technique -- and though a third brother, Ngo Dinh Thuc, was the
ranking Catholic bishop, in no sense did they or Diem ever acquire a
broad popular base for his government. Diem's personality and his
political methods practically assured that he would remain distant,
virtually isolated from the peasantry. They also seem to have pre-
determined that Diem's political history over the long-run would be

a chronicle of disaffection: Diem alienated one after another of the key
groups within South Vietnam's society until, by late 1960, his regime
rested on the narrow and disintegrating base of its own bureaucracy

and the northern refugees.

Such need not have been the case. At least through 1957, Diem and
his government enjoyed marked success with fairly sophisticated pacifica-
tion programs in the countryside. In fact, Diem at first was warmly
welcomed in some former Viet Minh domains, and it is probable that a
more sensitive and adroit leader could have capmredand held a signifi-
cant rural following. Even the failure of the Geneva Accords to eventuate
in general elections in 1956 at first had little impact upon GVN pacifica-
tion. The strident declamations of the DRV notwithstanding, reunifica-
tion of partitioned Vietnam was not at first a vital political issue for
South Vietnam's peasants. By and large, as late as 1961 as Devillers
pointed out:

"For the people of the South reunification is not an
essential problem. Peace, security, freedom, their standard
of living, the agrarian question -~ these are far more
important questions to them. The stronghold of the sects
over certain regions remains one of the factors of the
situation, as is also, in a general fashion, the distrustful
attitude of the Southerner towards the Northerner, who is sus-
pected of a tendency to want to take charge of affairs." *

The initial GVN pacification effort combined promises of govern-
mental level reforms with "civic action" in the hamlets and villages.
The latter was carried out by "cadre" clad in black pajamas, implementing
the Maoist "three-withs" doctrine (eat with, sleep with, work with the
people) to initiate rudimentary improvements in public health, education,

* Devillers, p. 19.

16 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
