Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Unity is our invincible force. In order to consolidate
the North into a solid base for the struggle to reunify our
country, our entire people should be closely and widely united
on the basis of the worker-peasant alliance in the Viet-Neam
Fatherland Front. It is all the more necessary for veteran
and new cadres of the Party and Government to assume identity
of ideas, to be united and single-minded, and to compete to
serve the people." 159/

All through the fall of 1956, with the Party and the
government under patent stress, the public statements of the Iao
Dong leaders reiterated the theme. At the Tenth Plenum of the Central
Committee of the Party, in late October, 1956, Truong Chinh, as the
proponent of Land Reform, was publicly sacrificed to "rectification of
errors" and to national unity. Vo Nguyen Giap's confessional at the
Tenth Plenum took place on 27 October 1956, the day after Diem promul-
gated the new Constitution of the Republic of South Vietnam and took
office as its first president. North Vietnam's peasant uprisings in
November further deepened the contrast between North and South, much
to the DRV's disadvantage internationally. After a fence-mending
December, the DRV summoned its National Assembly for one of its rare
sessions. The Assembly took cognizance that "the struggle for unity
would be long and difficult," and that "consolidation" of the North
would have to take priority; on 22 January 1957 it passed a resolution
stating that:

"The National Assembly confirms that in 1956, the work of
strengthening the North and struggling for national reunifica-
tion was crowned with great successes, though errors and short-
comings still existed in some work. Our successes are funda-
mental, and will certainly be developed. Our errors and short-
comings are few and temporary, and will certainly be removed,
and are now in the process of being overcome." 160,

The National Assembly adjourned on 25 January 1957, the
day after the Soviets proposed admitting North and South Vietnam to
the United Nations as separate, sovereign states ---a move concerning
which the DRV evidently had no warning, and which probably dates the
nadir of DRV fortunes post-Geneva. 161/ Ho Chi Minh promptly denounced
the Soviet action in a message to the UN, but at no time was the DRV
more isolated,

It was about this period that mounting dissatisfaction
with the Party leaders in South Vietnam began to be felt in Hanoi.
Prisoners and documents attest that Le Duan, the lao Dong chieftain
in South Vietnam, had lost faith in "political struggle" as early as
1955; one source reported that it was Le Duan’s view that Hanoi was
“Wasting time," and that the Dien government should be "forcibly

TF} TOP SECRET - Sensitive
