Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

talk to a press group in Los Angeles, and Ky tentatively accepted. Both
Lodge and State panicked, especially when the group started to set up a
debate between Ky and Senator Fulbright; and in the upshot they talked
Ky out of going. 57/

GVN launched its transition to legitimate government on September 11,
electing the long-promised Constituent Assembly. Although GVN systematically
excluded from the elections all persons connected with the Struggle Move-
ment, and although the Buddhists declared a boycott, the electorate turned
out in large numbers and the results gratified the Embassy. State had
reservations about the exclusion of Struggle Movement people, but Lodge
unreservedly backed this exclusion, on the ground that GVN “should not be
discouraged from taking moderate measures to prevent elections from being
used as a vehicle for a Communist takeover of the country." 58/ As the
election approached, Washington and the Embassy began to think about what
they wanted to see in the new constitution. Lodge's view listed the
following minimum essentials for the US best interests:

A. A strong, stable executive.
B. Executive control of the military.

C. Emergency powers, so that the legislature can't
hamstring the executive during the war emergency.

D. Appropriate provision for the people's aspirations and rights.
E. Minority group representation.

Lodge also listed lower priority requirements for the new constitution:
A. Relative ease of amendment of the constitution.

B. Removal of either the President or the Legislature should
be very difficult.

C. A limited term for the President.

D. Appropriate provision for establishment and improvement
of the judiciary. }

E. A superior court for constitutional review of laws and decrees.

¥. Expansion of the powers of provincial councils and other
forms of local government.

State expressed broad agreement with Lodge's views, with reservations about
emergency powers and about constitutional provisions to forbid communism and

neuvtralism. 59/

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
