Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - .Sensitive

protection necessary for the area north of My Tho. Besides the
requirement for an additional division and two brigades, opera-
tions by the lst Air Cavalry Division have shown that this unit
needs one more infantry battalion (airmobile) and an additional
air cavalry squadron so that it can sustain operations over a
long period of time. Because of the tactical problems involved
in conducting combat reconnaissance over vast areas to find and
fix PAVN/VC it would be highly desirable to have one of the
brigades of the 4th Infantry Division composed of three Airmo-
bile Infantry Battalions and provide for the division one Air
Cavalry Squadron. A ROK RCT to fill out the capital division
would permit ‘deployment of the ROK Marine Brigade to I Corps for
operations with III MAP.

5.» The additional units described above are essential to
meet the immediate threat and certain immediate problems. How-
ever, even these additional forces will not match the enemy
buildup. To reach the level of force required to make signifi-«
cant progress toward accomplishment of Phase II tasks will
ultimately require much larger deployments.

6. Unfortunately certain physical restrictions and the time
required to establish a suitable logistics base limit the rate
of buildup in RVN CY 66. If the deployment of logistics forces
can be further accelerated and if construction programs meet the
increased requirenents we might be able to squeeze two additional
brigades into SVN in CY 66 over and above Phase II forces AFD the
minimum add-ons which we have described in paragraph 4 above.
We should program these additional logistics and combat forces
against the maximum build-up rate because we need them to match
the PAvi/VC buildup. With two more brigades we would have three ™
US divisions in the area around Saigon and the 4th Division in
the II Corps area would have three infantry brigades plus an air-
mobile brigade and an air cavalry squadron.

{- Because of current problems regarding port and support
facilities, no major deployments other than currently requested
Phase II deployments can be accepted in the Ist Qtr of CY 66.
Thereafter, the buildup should be incremental. If ROK units
were made available (with both the RVN and the ROK providing a
portion of the support, reinforced by additional US support) a
division could be handled in the second quarter, and an additional
division equivalent in each quarter thereafter, provided appropri-
ate US logistics forces are available.

6. Tactical air support would amount to three tactical fighter
squadrons for the first deployment alternative and four squadrons
for the second. Eventually, this might require construction of
another airfield, in addition to Tuy Hoa.

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
