Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"T would like to begin by asking both Secretaries two basic ques-
tions: First, how is our honor involved in Viet-Nam? And second, how
- is our security involved in those rice paddies and remote villages? .
And since sometimes in international relations security comes before
honor, I will ask Mr. McNamara to answer first.

"Why U.S. National Security is Involved

"Secretary McNamara: First, let me make clear, Mr. Reasoner, that
this is not primarily a military problem. Above all else, I want to
emphasize thet. It is a battle for the hearts and the minds of the people
of South Viet-Nam, and it will only be won if we make clear to those.
people that their longrun security depends on the development of a stable
political institution and an expanding economy. That is our objective.

"As a prerequisite to that, we must be able to guarantee their
physical security. How does our physical security, our national interest,
become involved in this? That is your question. Secretary Rusk will
elaborate on it, but let me say to start with that it is apparent that
underlying the terror, the harassment, of the South Vietnamese by the Viet
Cong is the purpose and the objective of North Viet-Nam, backed by Communist
China, to expand Communist control over the peoples of the independent
nations of Southeast Asia and to use this as 4 test of their method of
expanding control over independent peoples throughout the world in the
undeveloped areas of Asia, Africa, and Latin America. The leaders of
those two nations have on numerous instances stated this as their purpose.
For example, General /Vo Nguyen/ Giap, who is the head of the North Viet-
nsmese military forces, said not long ago that South Viet-Nam is the model
of the national liberation movement of our time. If the. special warfare
that the United States is testing in South Viet-Nem is overcome, then it
ean be defeated anywhere in the world.

“And perhaps more pertinently in relation to Latin America is the
comment of Pham Van Dong, who is the Prime Minister of North Viet-Nam,
who said recently: ‘The experience of our compatriots in South Viet-Nam
attracts the attention of the world, especially the peoples of Latin
America,’ and the interests of the Chinese Communists in edvancing Asian
communism by force are well known.

"But I want to call your attention to two important statements
emphasizing that. The Peiping People's Daily said about 12 months ago
from Peiping, China: 'It is advantageous from the point of view of
tactics to refer to the desire for peaceful transition from capitalism
to communism, but it would be inappropriate to emphasize that possibility.
The Communist Party must never entertain the illusion that the transition
to communism can be achieved. through the parliamentary road....Violent
revolution is a universal law of proletarian revolution. To realize the
transition to communism the proletariat must wage armed struggle....'
And, put even more succinctly, Mao Tse-tung said recently, 'Political
power grows out of the berrel of a gun.'

D-54
