Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The assessments of North Vietnamese intention, moreover,
were not reassuring. The CIA, evaluating a captured document, circu-
lated a report on the same day as General Wheeler's report that stated:

Hanoi's confident assessment of the strength of its
position clearly is central to its strategic thinking.
Just as it provided the rationale for the Communists'
‘winter-spring campaign,’ it probably will also govern
the North Vietnamese response to the present tactical
situation, If Hanoi believes it is operating from a
position of strength, as this analysis suggests, it can
be expected to press its military offensive--even at
the cost of serious setbacks. Given their view of the
strategic balance, it seems doubtful that the Communists
would be inclined to settle for limited military gains
intended merely to improve their bargaining position in
negotiations. 18/

The alternatives for the President, therefore, did not seem very attractive.
With such a major decision to make he asked his incoming Secretary of
Defense, Clark Clifford, to convene a senior group of advisors from

State, Defense, CIA, and the White House and to conduct a complete review
of our involvement, re-evaluating both the range of aims and the spectrum
of means to achieve them. The review was soon tagged the "A to Z Policy
Review" or the "Clifford Group Review." 19

2. The Clifford Group

The first meeting of the Clifford Group was convened in
the Secretary's office at the Pentagon on Wednesday, February 28. Present
were McNamara, General Taylor, Nitze, Fowler, Katzenbach, Walt Rostow,
Helms, Warnke, and Phil Habib from Bundy's office. 20/ In the meeting,
Clifford outlined the task as he had received it from the President and
a general discussion ensued from which assignments were made on the prepara-
tion of studies and papers. The focus of the entire effort was the
deployment requests from MACV. The general subjects assigned were recap-
itulated the following day by Bundy:

OUTLINE FOR SUBJECTS AND DIVISION OF LABOR ON
VIET NAM STAFF STUDY

Subjects to be Considered
' 1. What alternative courses of action are available to the US?
Assignment: Defense - General Taylor - State - (Secretary)
2, What alternative courses are open to the enemy?

Assignment: Defense and CIA ‘

150 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
