Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The morale of our air crews understandably rose when
briefed to strike Phuc Yen airfield and its MIG's -- A
target which has continually jeopardizec their well-being.
The unexplained revocation of that authority coupled with
the increasing numbers and aggressiveness of MIG~21 attacks
cannot help but impact adversely on air crew morale. Air
crews flying combat missions through the intense NVN defenses,
air to air and ground to air, have demonstrated repeatedly
their courage and determination to press home their attack
against vital targets. Every effort should be made to reduce
the hazard to them, particularly from a threat in which the
enemy is afforded a sanctuary and can attack at his own choosing. 35/

With the failure of the peace initiative in Paris, these
escalatory pressures could no longer be resisted. As it became evident
that peace talks were not in the offing, the President approved six new
targets on October 6 (including 5 in or near Haiphong). Secretary Rusk
in his October 12 news conference strongly questioned the seriousness
of North Vietnamese intent for peace and finally on October 20 the Paris
contacts were closed in failure. The Tuesday lunch on October 24 would
thus have to make important new bombing decisions. The day before,
Warnke outlined current JCS recommendations for Secretary McNamara, includ-
ing Phuc Yen. 36/ The White House meeting the following day duly
approved Phuc Yen along with a restrike of the Hanoi power transformer
and the temporary lifting of the Hanoi restrictions. 37/ On October 25,
the MiGs at Phuc Yen were attacked for the first time and Hanoi was
struck again after the long suspension.

The Tuesday luncheon at which the Phue Yen decision was
made was a regular decision-making forum for the air war and one that
came to public attention as a result of the Stennis hearings. Indica-
tive of the public interest in these gatherings is the following impres-
sionistic account by CBS newsman Dan Rather of how they were conducted:

First Line Report, 6:55 a.m.
WTOP Radio, October 17, 1967

Dan Rather: This is Target Tuesday. Today President
Johnson decides whether North Vietnam will cohtinue to be
bombed. If it is, how much and where. These decisions are
made at which Washington insiders call, for short, the Tues-
day lunch. This is the way it goes.

At about 1:00 in the afternoon Defense Secretary McNamara,
Secretary of State Rusk, and Presidential Assistant Walter
Rostow gather in the White House second floor sitting room.
They compare notes briefly over Scotch or Fresca. President

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
105
