10

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"The struggle for security and peace in Asia is far more than a mili- -
tary matter. In many of the Asian countries, including all the countries
which need military aid, economic assistance is also required.

x = :

4, The Military Aid Program: Statement by the Departments of State and
Defense, September 23, 1951, Department of State Bulletin, October 0,

1951, p. 570:

=) tas

"The participants were in complete agreement that the successful
defense of Indochina is of great importance to the defense of all South-
east Asia...."

st

5. The Defense of Indochina: Communique Regarding Discussions Between
Representatives of the United States, France, Viet-Nam, and Cambodia
June 18, 1952, Department of Stete Bulletin, June 30, 1952, p. 1010:
"The principle which governed this frank and detailed exchange of

views and information was the common recognition that the struggle in

which the forces of the French Union and the Associated States are en-
gaged against the forces of communist aggression in Indochina is an inte-

gral part of the world-wide resistance by the Free Nations to Communist
attempts at conquest and subversion...."

a,

6. Support by NATO of the French Union Defense Efforts in Indochina:
Resolution Adopted by the North Atlantic Council, December 17, 1952
Department of State Bulletin, January 5, 1953, p. L;

"The North Atlantic Council

"Recognizes that resistance to direct or indirect aggression in any
part of the world is an essential contribution to the common security of
the free world;

"HAVING BEEN INFORMED at its meeting in Paris on the 16th December
of the latest developments in the military and political situation in
Indo-China;

"Expresses its wholehearted admiration for the valiant and long con-
tinued struggle by the French forces and the armies of the Associated
Stdtes against Communist aggression; and

"Acknowledges that the resistance of the free nations in South Bast
Asia as in Korea is in fullest harmony with the aims‘and ideals of the
Atlantic Community;

*
