Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The Working Group's efforts were apportioned among seven tasks,
the initial input for each being accomplished by 4 particular member or
subcommittee, as follows: 25/

TOPIC RESPONSIBILITY
Assessment of the current situation Intelligence
in South Vietnam, including policy community
direction of interested powers.
U.S. Objectives and stakes in South William Bundy
Vietnam and Southeast Asia.
Broad options (3) available to the Bundy and ISA
United States.
Alternative forms of possible State/Policy Planning
negotiation. Council
Analyses of different options JCS to propose specific
vis-a-vis U.S. objectives and actions; Policy Planning
interests. Council to examine po-

litical impacts of the
most violent option
first.

Immediate actions in the period State/Far East Bureau
prior to Presidential decision
on options.

Most inputs were made in the form of either (1) draft papers
treating fully a topic intended for inclusion in the Working Group's
final submission or (2) memoranda commenting on an initial draft paper
end suggesting alterations. Because of the unique responsibilities and
advisory processes of the JCS, their member apparently chose to make
initiel inouts lergely through references to or excerpts from regular
JCS documents; he also contributed to the redrafting of the option
enalyses. 26/ The initial papers on each of the topics were circulated
among the Working Group members, reviewed in consultation with their
parent organizations and modified. Some positions passed through as
many és three drafts before being submitted to the Principals.

3. Working Group Assessments of the Utility of Pressures

The NSC Working Group approached its work with the general
assessment that increased pressures against North Vietnam would be both
useful and necessary. However, this assessment embraced a wide range
of consideretions stemming from the developing situation in South Viet-
nam and a variety of viewpoints concerning what Kinds of pressures
would be most effective.

6 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
