Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

made up his mind -- that he now felt the right action to be sharp ;
escalation such as CINCPAC, the JCS, and McNaughton had advocated during
the pause. But even now, despite the comparatively vigorous language of
the memorandum, one cannot be sure that McNamara expected or wanted the
President to approve his recommendations.

The memorandum was probably brought up at the White House
Tuesday luncheon on 28 March. Just sixteen days earlier, in response to
Marshal Ky's removal of General Nguyen Chanh Thi from Command of the
I Corps Area, Buddhist monks had initiated anti-Ky demonstrations in DaNang
and Hue. Soon, with other groups joining in, dissidents dominated the
northern and central part of the country. Many not only attacked the Ky
regime but denounced the American presence in Vietnam and called for negoti-
ation with the NLF. Controlling the Hue radio and having easy access to
foreign newsmen, these dissidents won wide publicity in the United States.
As a result, Americans previously counted as supporters of administration
policy began to ask why the United States should expend its resources on
people who apparently did not want or appreciate help. Such questioning
was heard from both Democrats and Republicans in Congress. Quite probably,
the political situation in Vietnam and its repercussions in America stood
uppermost in the President's mind. Equally probably, McNemara recognized
this fact. If so, it should not have surprised him to find the President
taking much the same position as that which they had both taken, and
recorded in NSAM 288 in March, 1964, when the Khanh government trembled --
that it was imprudent to mount new offensives "from an extremely weak base
which might at any moment collapse and leave the posture of political
confrontation worsened. rather than improved." 83/

In any event, the principal outcome of White House meetings
at the end of March was a string of urgent cables from Rusk to Lodge,
suggesting steps which might be urged on the Ky government and saying,
among other things,

--«-We are deeply distressed by the seeming unwilling-
ness or inability of the South Vietnamese to put aside their
lesser quarrels in the interest of meeting the threat from

the Viet Cong. Unless that succeeds, they will have no
country to quarrel about....We face the fact that we our
selves cannot succeed except in support of the South Viet-
namese. Unless they are able to mobilize reasonable solidarity,

the prospects are very grim." 8l/

: ra's proposals, the President approved only giving commanders
Acer te Teac 500 sorties into the northeast quadrant during April
and permission to strike roads, railroads, and bridges outside or just on
the fringe of the prohibited circles around Hanoi and Haiphong. He did
not consent to measures involving more visible escalation of the air war.

89 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
