Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

against North Vietnam. The results of this review were forwarded to the
President in a memorandum, dated July 30, 1965. Since it represents an
effective wrap-up, the memorandum is reproduced in full.

1, Retionale for bombing the North. The program of bombing Ril
began in an atmosphere of reprisal. We had had the August Tonkin Gulf
episode; we had absorbed the November 1 attack on Bien Hoa Airfield
and the Christmas Eve bombing of the Brinks Hotel in Saigon. The
attacks at U.S. installations at Pleiku on February 7 and Qui Nhon on
February 10 were the immediate causes of the first strikes against
North Vietnam. The strike following Pleiku was announced as a
‘response! -- a 'reprisal'; our strike following Qui Nhon was called
a@ response to more generalized VC terrorism. The major purposes of
the bombing program, however, were:

a. To promote a settlement. The program was designed (1)
to influence the DRV to negotiate (explicitly or otherwise), and (2)
to provide us with a bargaining counter within negotiations.

b.: To interdict infiltration. The program was calculated
to reduce the flow of men and supplies from the North to the South --
at the least, to put a ceiling on the size of war that the enemy
could wage in the South. /Author's Note: This is not entirely
accurate; interdiction did not become a program rationale within the
Administration until late March, and publicly not until late April
(see Sections VIII and XI.B.)/ Supplemental purposes of the program
were (c) to demonstrate to South Vietnam, North Vietnam and the world
the U.S. commitment to see this thing through, (d) to raise morale in
South Vietnam by punishing North Vietnam, the source of the suffering
in the South, and (e) to reduce criticism of the Administration from
advocates of a bombing program.

2. Achievement of major purposes. The potential tarerts,
targets struck and per cent of destruction are shown at Tab A. In

terms of the purposes of the program, its results have been as
follows:

a. To promote a settlement. Obviously, this objective has
not yet been attained. We recognized at the start of the program, as

we do now, that the influence of the bombing on 4 settlement would not
be great until the North Vietnamese had been disappointed in their
hopes for a quick military success in the South. There is no doubt
that the bombing program has become an important counter in the cur-
rent tacit and explicit bargaining process and will be an important
counter in any future bargaining,

be To interdict infiltration. It is pelieved that regu-
lar North Vietnamese units now in South Vietnam (estimated to be one

136 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
