Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

objectives cannot even be estimated. There is no reason
to believe that it could be done by an additional 200,000
American troops or double or triple that quantity....

The exact nature of the strategic guidance which should
be adopted cannot now be predicted. It should be the subject
of a detailed interagency study over the next several weeks.
During the progress of the study, discussions of the appro-
priate strategic guidance and its nature and implications
for the extent of our military commitment in South Vietnam
should be undertaken with both General Westmoreland and
Ambassador Bunker. 72/

Thus, the "A to Z reassessment" of U.S. strategy requested by the
President was relegated by the Working Group to a future date.

Tab E remained intact from the original 29 February draft memorandum.
Prepared by the State Department, it discussed negotiating options and
possible diplomatic actions in connection with a buildup of U.S. forces.
Concerning our negotiating posture, three broad options were listed:

1. Stand pat on the San Antonio formula and on our basic
position toward the terms of a negotiated settlement -- the

Geneva Accords plus free choice in the South, rejecting a

coalition or any special position for the NIF.

2. Take some new initiative, either privately or publicly,
that might involve a change in our position on the San Antonio
formula, and/or a change in our position on the elements of a
settlement. -

3. No change in our position for the present, but pitching
our course of action toward a strong move for negotiations when
and if we have countered Hanoi's offensive -- i.e., in a matter
of four months or so perhaps. 73/

The crucial question, the paper indicated, was really to examine
what we could conceivably do by way of a new initiative under Option 2.
After examining the situation, however, the conclusion was reached that:

..-any change in our position on the terms of a peaceful
settlement would be extremely unwise at the present time. We
may well wish to work on opening up channels to the NLF, but
this must be done in the utmost secrecy and in full consulta-
tion with the GVN. We do not know what the possibilities
may be in this direction, but any public stress on this avenue
would feed the fires of a VC propaganda line that has already
had significant disturbing effect in South Vietnam.

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
