Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

III. The Situation

A. Da Nang Local

Prior to the landing of the Marines, Da Nang had yet to be attacked
by the VC, but tne official estimates of enemy intentions and capabili-
ties in the I Corps area were none too encouraging. There were reported
to be 12 battalions numbering some 6,000 men within striking distance of
the base, and on the night of 7 March the town of Mieu Kong, three miles
south of the airfield, had been probed by a VC unit of unknown size. 18/
General Throckmorton's estimate of ARVN lack .of capability to prevent Viet
Cong depredations against the sizeable and expensive stocks of U.S. equip-
ment on the base was colored, no doubt, by recent Viet Cong attacks at
Pleiku and Qui Nhon and by the raid on Bien Hoa airfield on 1 November
1964. In all of these attacks, the GVN security forces had not been able
to prevent a determined Viet Cong attempt to penetrate the defenses around
important installations. Moreover, it was apparent that U.S. personnel
in South Vietnam were vulnerable. With the beginning of the Flaming Dart
air strikes against North Vietnam in early February 1965, commmist retalia-
tion against the bases which supported those strikes became a distinct
probability. In order to cope with possible communist reprisal air attacks
on Da Nang, elements of a Marine HAWK Missile Battalion were ordered to
that base on 7 February. 19/ However, commmist air attacks were less
probable and offered higher risk than a ground attack by Viet Cong forces
in country, and Da Nang, which was heavily supporting air activity over
North and South Vietnam, was a lucrative target. If, as General Westmore-
land reported in his February 1965 Monthly Evaluation, the air strikes in
North and South Vietnam were having a beneficial effect on morale in the
GVN, then it was highly likely that the Viet Cong would at least make an
effort to stop or slow dow the frequency of the raids. 20/

B. GVN Instability

Both the CIA and MACV were sober and somber in their estimates of
the political situation in South Vietnam in early 1965. 21/ The fall of
the Huong government in January and the confused events of 16-21 February
which culminated in General Khanh's departure from Vietnam made any
predictions difficult at best. The CIA thought Quat's government was
shaky, 22/ and the Chairman of thetJoint Chiefs of Staff in a message
to General Westmoreland conveyed his fears that despite U.S. actions
' against North Vietnam, the GVN might collapse. General Westmoreland's

reply to the Chairman stated in part:

“History may well record that the real significance of
1964 was net major VC advance and corresyonding GVN retro-
gression but rather that South Vietnam's social and political
institutions remained remarkably intact under the powerful
disintegrating blows to which subjected -- most of them not
of VC making... Nonetheless, we do have the very real
asset of a resilient people and this gives hope that there
is more time available than we might think; time in which,
if properly exploited, the needed national leadership could

evolve..." 23/ :

10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
