Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

173 oy
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

10,000 SAJEYE-BIU-26B clusters* per month; 1600 acoustic
sensors per month (assuming presently employed batteries with
2-week life), plus 68 appropriately equipped P-2V patrol
aircraft; a fleet of about 50 A-1's or 20 C-123's for Gravel
dispensing (1400 A-1 sorties or 600 C-123 sorties per month);
500 strike sorties per month (F-C equivalent); and sufficient
photo-reconnaissance sorties, depending on the aircraft, to
cover 2500 square miles each week, with an appropriate team of
photo interpreters. Even to make this system work, there
would be required experimentation and further development

for foliage penetration, moisture resistance, and proper dis-
persion of Gravel; development of a better acoustic sensor
than currently exists (especially in an attempt to eliminate
the need for button bomblets); aircraft modifications; possible
modifications in BLU-26B fuzing; and refinement of strike-
navigation tactics.

For the future, rapid development of new mines (such as
tripwire, smaller and more effectively camouflaged Gravel,
and various other kinds of mines), as well as still better
sensor/information processing systems will be essential. 45/

Thus, not only had this distinguished array of American
technologists endorsed the barrier idea McNamara had asked them to con-
sider, they had provided the Secretary with an attractive, well-thought-
out and highly detailed proposal as a real alternative to further
escalation of the ineffective air war against North Vietnam. But, true
to their scientific orientations, the study group members could not con-
clude their work without examining the kinds of counter-measures the North
Vietnamese might take to circumvent the barrier. Thus, they reasoned:

Assuming that surprise is not thrown away, countermeas-
ures will of course still be found, but they may take some
+ime to bring into operation. The most effective counter-
measures we can anticipate are mine sweeping; provision of
shelter against SADEYE strikes and Gravel dispersion;
spoofing of sensors to deceive the system or decoy aircraft
into ambushes, and in general a considerable step-up of North
Vietnamese anti-aircraft capability along the road net.
Counter-countermeasures must be an integral part of the

system development.

*¥ These quantities depend on an average number of strikes consistent
with the assumption of 7000 troops/month and 180 tons/day of supplies
by truck on the infiltration routes. This assumption was based on
likely upper limits at the time the barrier is installed. If the
assumption of initial infiltration is too high, or if we assume that
the barrier will be successful, the number of weapons and sorties
will be reduced accordingly.

- 159 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
