UE

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Iv

NEXT COURSES OF ACTION

By early September a general consensus had developed among high-
level Administration officials that some form of additional and con-
tinuous pressure should be exerted against North Vietnam. Though Laos
was relatively stabilized, the situation there was recognized as dependent
ultimately on the degree of success achieved in solving the problems of
Vietnam. Pacification efforts within South Vietnam were regarded as
insufficient by themselves to reverse the deteriorating trends in that
country. As a result, officials from both civilian and military agencies
were anxious to resume and to extend the program of military actions against
communist forces outside its borders.

STRATEGY MEETING IN SEPTEMBER

How to go about this was a problem of great concern to top-level
officials (the President, Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, General
Wheeler, Ambassador Taylor, CIA Director McCone) as they assembled in
Washington on 7 September. The main purpose of the meeting was to dis-
cuss with Ambassador Taylor future courses of U.S. and GVN action,
particularly as related to the implications of the recent political up-
heaval in Saigon.

The alternatives presented for discussion were based largely on
responses to the tentative analysis circulated by the State Department
in mid-August. Replies from CINCPAC and the Saigon and Vientiane embassies
had been circulated, and they provided the basis for a number of questions
which Ambassador Taylor's party was asked to be ready to discuss. 84/ JCS
reactions to the analysis and to the earlier replies were submitted to the
Secretary of Defense with the specific intent that they be considered at
the meeting and presumably were passed to other participating agencies. 85/
OSD/ISA views were prepared by Assistant Secretary McNaughton on 3 September
and were known at least to Assistant Secretary of State Bundy. 86/

Just prior to the meeting, the JCS urged that General Wheeler, their
Chairman, propose a course of action involving air strikes against targets
in North Vietnam appearing on the JCS-approved, 94-target list. 90/ This
kind of action had been recommended before -- most recently on 26 August,
in response to the Department of State analysis -- as a means of "destroying
the DRV will and capabilities, as necessary, to continue to support the
insurgencies in South Vietnam and Laos." What made this proposal particu-
iarly significant was that it called for deliberate attempts to provoke the
DRV into taking actions which could then be answered by a systematic U.S.
air campaign. According to the JCS scheme, the campaign "would be continuous
and in ascending severity," with its tempo and intensity varied as required
by enemy reactions. Targets would eventually include airfields, bridges,
railroads, military installations, industrial facilities and armed route
reconnaissance along the LOC's. The JCS argued that such actions were now
"essential to prevent a complete collapse of the U.S. position in the
Republic of Vietnam and Southeast Asig," because "continuation of present
or foreseeable programs limited to the RVN will not produce the desired

25 TOP. SECRET - Sensitive

