ae

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Vy. JUSTIFICATION OF THE WAR -- PUBLIC

A. Truman Administration

1. Secretary of State Statement on Extension of Military and Economic Aid
May 8, 1950, Department of State Bulletin, May 22, 1950, p. 821;

x «+ *

"The United States Government, convinced that neither national inde-
pendence nor democratic evolution exist in any area dominated by Soviet
imoerialism, considers the situation to be such as to warrant its accord-
ing economic aid and military ecuipment to the Associated States of
Indochina and to France in order to assist them in restoring stability and
permitting these states to pursue their peaceful and democratic development."

2. President's Radio Report to the American People on Korea and on U.S.
Policy in the Far East, April 11, 1951, Public Papers of the Presidents,
Pp. 223. ; .

"T went to talk to you plainly tonight about what we are doing in Korea
and about our policy in the Far Hast.

"Tn the simplest terms, what we are doing in Korea is this: We are try-
ing to prevent a third world war.

Lot ag a!

"The Communists in the Kremlin are engaged in a monstrous conspiracy to
stamp out freedom all over the world. If they were to succeed, the United
States would be numbered among their principal victims. It must be clear
to everyone that the United States cannot -- and will not -- sit idly by
and await foreign conquest. The only question is: What is the best time
to meet the threat and how is the best way to meet it?

"~The best time to meet the threat is in the beginning. It is easier to
put out 4 fire in the beginning when it is small than after it has become
a roaring blaze. And the best way to meet the threat of aggression is for
the peace-loving nations to act together. If they don't act together, they
are likely to be picked off, one by one.

"Tf they had followed the right policies in the 1930's -- if the free
countries had acted together to crush the aggression of the dictators, and
if they had acted in the beginning when the aggression was small -- there
probably would have been no World War II.

"Tf history has taught us anything, it is that aggression anywhere in
the world is a threat to the peace everywhere in the world. When that
ageression is supported by the cruel and selfish rulers of a powerful
nation who are bent on conquest, it becomes a clear and present danger to

the security and independence of every free nation.

* * *
A-2
