Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for a 40 per cent increase in his forces 'to regain the
initiative’ from the enemy.

-»--Many of the civilian officials are arguing that
there should be no increase beyond-the movement of troops
now under way.-.-.

The contention of these high ranking officials is that
an American increase will bring a matching increase by
North Vietnam, thereby raising the level of violence with-
out giving the allies the wpper hand.

Senior Pentagon civilians have put forward a written
counter-proposal to President Johnson, calling for 4
shift in American strategy to a concept of close-in
defense of populated areas with more limited offensive
thrusts then at present. Much of the military hierarchy
is reported to oppose this approach....

The President has not yet decided on the question of
substantial increases in American forces in Vietnam....

Nonetheless, the scope and depth of the internal debate
within the Government reflect the wrenching uncertainty
and doubt in this capitel about every facet of the war left
by the enemy's dramatic wave of attacks at Tet, the Asian
New Year holiday, six weeks ago. More than ever this has
left a sense of weariness and irritation over the war.

Officials themselves comment in private about wide-
spread and deep changes in attitudes, a sense that a water-
shed has been reached and that its meaning is just now
beginning to be understood....

But at every level of Government there is a sense that
the conflict, if expanded further, can no longer be called
's limited war.* Officials acknowledge that any further
American involvement carries serious implications for the
civilian life of the nation--not only the call-up of mili-
tary reserves and enactment of a tax increase but problems
with the budget, the economy and the balance of payments.

In Congress, uneasy and divided, as the Senate debate
on Thursday showed, there is a rising demand that Capitol Hill
be consulted. before any critical new step is taken. Even
supporters of Administration policy, such as Senator Richard
B. Russell, Democrat of Georgia, who is chaizman of the
Senate Armed Services Committee, are openly critical of
American combat strategy. Mr. Russell has suggested that the

66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a a ey ae.
