Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of essential POL has resulted, apart from temporary and
local showtages. It also seems doubtful that any such denial
need result if China and/or the USSR are willing to pay
greater costs in delivering it.

Maintaining the flow: of POL to consumers within North
Vietnam will be more difficult, costly, and hazardous,
depending primarily on the effectiveness of the U.S. armed
reconnaissance effort against the transportation system.
Temporary interruptions and shortages have probably been
and can no doubt continue to be inflicted, but it does not
seem likely that North Vietnam will have to curtail its
higher priority POL-powered activities as a result.

Since less than 5 percent of North Vietnamese POL
reguirements are utilized in supporting truck operations
in Laos, it seems unlikely that infiltration South will
have to be curtailed because of POL shortages; and since
North Vietnamese and VC forces in South Vietnam do not
require POL supplied from the North, their POL-powered
activities need not suffer, either. 26/

Coming as they did from a highly prestigious and respected group of
policy-supporting but independent-thinking scientists and scholars, and
coming at the end of a long and frustrating summer in the air war, these
views must have exercised a powerful influence on McNamara's thinking.

His prompt adoption of the "infiltration barrier" concept they recommended
as an alternative to the bombing (see below) gives evidence of the overall
weight these reports carried.

McNamara, for his part, made no effort to conceal his dis-
satisfaction. and disappointment at the failure of the POL attacks. He
pointed out to the Air Force and the Navy the glaring discrepancy between
the optimistic estimates of results their pre-strike POL studies had
postulated and the actual failure of the raids to significantly decrease
infiltration. 27/ The Secretary was already in the process of rethinking
_ the role of the entire air campaign in the U.S. effort in Southeast Asia.
He was painfully aware of its inability to pinch off the infiltration to
the South and had seen no evidence of its ability to break Hanoi's will,
demoralize its, population, or bring it to the negotiation table. The full
articulation cf his disillusionment would not come until the following
January, however, when he appeared before a joint session of the Senate
Armed Services and Appropriations Committees to argue against any further
extension of the bombing. To illustrate the ineffectualness of bombing
he cited our experience with the POL strikes:

Lyk TOP SECRET - Sensitive
