| 09

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

Laos, the demilitarized zone, and by sea appears to be increasing.
However, there is little evidence of major supplies from outside
sources, most arms apparently being captured or stolen from GVN
forces or from the French during the Indo-China war. 20/

On Laos, the situation summary showed no such pessimism. But, overall
the absence of bad news from Laos only added to the worry about South Viet-
nam. For the paper reported:

There probably have been some Viet Minh withdrawals from northern
Iaos but Viet Minh movement into Southern Laos bordering on South
Vietnam has increased. Thus it appears enemy may be accepting
stalemate for time being within Laos and giving priority to stepping
up offensive action against South Vietnam. 21/

Two final items are worth bearing in mind in trying to see the Viet-
namese problem as it might have appeared to the White House in the fall of
1961. First, this warning of the effect of U.S. policy in Vietnam, from
the August 15 NIE quoted earlier:

International Attitudes. In providing the GVN a maximum of
encouragement and extensive support in its struggle against the
Communists, the US will inevitably become identified with the GVN's
success or failure. The US will be under heavy pressure from other
members of the non-Communist world, many of whom view the Vietnam
struggle in differing terms. For example, the neighboring coun-
tries, such as Thailand, Cambodia, Burma, Indonesia, the Philip-
pines, and Nationalist China, have all to some extent viewed devel-
opments in Laos as a gauge of US willingness and ability to help
an anti-Communist Asian government stand against a Communist
‘national liberation' campaign. They will almost certainly look upon
the struggle for Vietnam as a critical test of such US willingness
and ability. All of them, including the neutrals, would probably
suffer demoralization and loss of confidence in their prospects
for maintaining their independence if the Communists were to gain
control of South Vietnam. This loss of confidence might even
extend to India. 22/

Second, a couple of newspaper quotes may serve as a reminder of the extent
to which the Kennedy Administration had been under a constant sense of
foreign policy crisis throughout its first year, with every evidence of
more to come. In late September, in a review piece on Congressional ap-
praisals of Kennedy's first year, Russell Baker comments that not even
Congress seems much interested in debate about Kemnedy's effectiveness

in pushing through legislation;

, What makes it particularly irrelevant this autumn is that
Congress itself has been far more concerned ever since January

(a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
