Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

her to pay almost the full cost by maintaining her repair’
erews in place. The sorties diverted from Zones 6A and 6B
could be concentrated on the infiltration routes in Zones 1
and 2 (the southern end of North Vietnam, including the

Mu Gia Pass), in Laos and in South Vietnam. /

a/ Any limitation on the bombing of North Vietnam will cause
serious psychological problems among the men who are risking
their lives to help achieve our political objectives; among
their commanders up to and including the JCS; and among those
of our people who cannot understand why we should withhold
punishment from the enemy. General Westmoreland, as do the
JCS, strongly believes in the military value of the bombing
program. Further, Westmoreland reports that the morale of
his Air Force personnel may already be showing signs of
erosion -- an erosion resulting from current operational
restrictions. 59/

The Secretary's footnote was judicious. The Chiefs did
indeed oppose any curtailment of the bombing as a means to get negoti-
ations started. They fired off a dissenting memo to the Secretary the
same day as his memo and requested that it be passed to the President.
With respect to the bombing program per se they stated:

The Joint Chiefs of Staff do not concur in your recom-
mendation that there should be no increase in level of
pombing effort and no modification in areas and targets subject
to air attack. They believe our air campaign against NVN to be
an integral and indispensable part of our over all war effort.
To be effective, the air campaign should be conducted with
only those minimum constraints necessary to avoid indiscrim-
inate killing of population. 60/

As to the Secretary's proposal for a bombing halt:

The Joint Chiefs of Staff do not coneur with your pro-
posal that, as a carrot to induce negotiations, we should
suspend or reduce our bombing campaign against NVN. Our
experiences with pauses in bombing and resumption have not
been happy ones. Additionally, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
believe that the likelihood of the war being settled by
negotiation is small, and that, far from inducing negoti-
ations, another bombing pause will be regarded by North
Vietnamese leaders, and our Allies, as renewed evidence
of lack of US determination to press the war to a successful

166 "TOP SECRET - Sensitive
