(53.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

cleanup of the insurgents within SVN, there is no limit to on pos-
sible comnitment (unless we attack the source in Hanoi, " 9

We have a good record of the DoD staff work, which preceded the
President's decision on this issue, but only a bit from State and
none from the White House. Rusk, an a cable from Japan on November 1,
contributed this note of caution : Cando also bears on the previous
discussion of demands on Diem for a quid pro quo for increased
American aid): sn Oy

Since General Taylor may give first full report prior
my return, believe special attention should be given to
critical question whether Diem is prepared take necessary
measures to give us something worth supporting. If Diem
unwilling trust military commanders to get job done and
take steps to consolidate non-communist elements into
serious national effort, difficult to see how handful
American troops can have decisive influence. While at-
taching greatest possible importance to security in SHA,
I would be reluctant to see U.S, make major additional
commitment American prestige to a losing horse.

Suggest Department carefully review all Southeast Asia
measures we expect from Diem if our assistance forces us to
assume de facto direction South Vietnamese affairs. 10/

But the view of the U.S, Mission in Saigon contained no such
doubts, nor did most Vietnamese, according to this cable Nolting sent
while Taylor was enroute home:

Our conversations over past ten days with Vietnamese
in various walks of life show virtually unanimous desire
for introduction U.S. forces into Viet-Nam. This based on
unsolicited remarks from cabinet ministers, National
Assembly Deputies, University professors, students, shop-
keepers, and oppositionists, Dr. Tran Dinh De, level-
headed Minister of Health, told Embassy officer Oct 29
that while GVN could continue resist communists for while
longer if US troops not introduced, it could not win
alone against conmies. National Assembly members, ac-
cording to Lai Tu, leader Personalist Community, unani-
mously in favor entry US forces, Diem told us while
General Taylor was here that he had consulted National
Assembly Committee on this question and had received
favorable response. Even an oppositionist like Ex-
Foreign Minister Tran Van Do has told us US forces are
needed and is apparently so strongly convinced of this

ng
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
