Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

851G.00./S-046

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Southeust Asian Affairs
(Moffat) to the Director of the Office of Fur Lustern Affairs ,
(Vincent)

[Wastixetox.] August 9, 1946. _

Recent developments indicate that the French are moving to regain
a large measure of their control of Indochina in violation of the
spirit of the March 6 convention. The evidence, as set forth below,
suggests that the French are attempting to gain their objective by
manoeuvres designed to confine and weaken Viet Nam. Jn the event
that Viet Nam decides to resist these encroachments, which is by no
means unlikely, widespread hostilities may result.

The chief opposition to the reestablishment of French rule in Tado-
china has all along come from the Annamese, who inhabit the three
east coastal provinces of Tonkin, Annum, and Cochinchina, which
once comprised the Kingdom of Annam. The populations of the
other two countries of Indochina—Cambodia and TLaos—are not in
a high state of political development or in any condition seriously to
resist French control. A modus r/rend/ between the French and the
Annamese was achieved in the preliminary convention of March 6,
1946, by which the Annamese “Republic of Viet Nam” was recognized
as a free state within the Indochinese Federation and the Viet Nam
Government declared its readiness to receive the French Army. ‘The
convention left for future settlement two crucial problems: the status
of Viet Nam in its external relations, and the geographical extent of
Viet Nam. On the former point, the provisional agreement stated
that “each contracting party will take all necessary measures .. .*

“ Qinission indicated in the original,

to cveate the favorable atmosphere necessary for an immediate open-
ing of amicable and free negotiations. These negotiations will bear
particularly upon diplomatic relations between the Viet Nam and
foreion states, the future status of Indochina, French economic and
cultural interests In Viet Nam.” On the latter point the agreement
stated that “with respect to the bringing tomether of le three (prov-
inces), the French Government pledges itself to ratify the decisions
taken by the populations consulted by referendum.” The erux of the
present siftition lies in the apparent intention of the French to settle
both matters to their own advantage and without reference to Viet
Nam. :

19
