Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Military force, in the form of increased comminist insur~
gency, is clearly the immediate threat to the stability of
Viet-Nem todsy. South Viet-Neam is unique in that it is the
only country in the world which is forced to defend itself
against a communist interns subversion action, while at the .
same time being subject.to the militarily supporteble threat of
a conventional external attack from commmnist North Viet-Nam.
The RVNAM force basis is inadequate to meet both these threats.

The problem is twofold, although at present the counter~
insurgency phase is the more dangerous and immediate. In this
counterinsurgency fight RVNAT is on the defensive. Approxi-
mately 75% of ARVN is committed to pacification missions, about
half of these being committed to static guard and security
roles....The guerrilla problem has /as a result of fragmented
lines of authority] become much more serious than the Civil
Guard can manage, thereby requiring a disproportionately large
RVNAF commitwent, which has further resulted in a serious
weakening of the RVNAF capability for defense against internal
or overt attack in force, 21/

This last point reflected General MeGarr's apparently very real con-
cern that ARVN was becoming incapable to meet internal (as well as
external) threats posed by the VC in conventional troop formations. As
the VC became stronger and formed larger regular units -- as distinct
from guerrilla bands -- the differences between conventional and uncon-
ventional warfare seemed to disappear. ‘The problem, as MAAG viewed it,
became one of guarding against a spectrum of dangers by means of a short
run emphasis on meeting the internal challenge in both its conventional
and unconventional (guerrilia) form. In this view ARVN should become
the conventional offensive and mobile defensive force, the CG should be
the static force in support of pacification efforts. The two should be
under & common chain of command, it was argued in the CIP, as should the
logistical organization for their support. Such a common chain of com-
mand did not exist in 1960-1961:

The military chain of command has usually been violated
at the expense of unity of effort and command. No adequate
operations control or overall plaming system presently
exists....The President has exercised arbitrary control of
operations, by-passing command channels of the JGS /Joint
Genera start] and often Corps and Division staff. Resources
have been fragmented to provincial control. The above prac-
tices appear to have been designed to divide responsibility
in order to guard against the possibility of a military coup
through placing too much power in the hands of a single sub-
ordinate. 22

Poor organization, then, was seen as the principal roadblock in the way

10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
