Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

that "solutions must be found for the resettlement villages which have
infringed upon land of the highland people, and for the highland villages
which are surrounded by military camps and consequently do not have
enough land to make a living." 82/

But the relocations which catalized the most widespread and
dangerous anti-GVN sentiment were those attempted among the South Vietnamese
farmers beginning in 1959. In February, 1959, a pilot program of political
bifureation was quietly launched in the areas southwest of Saigon which had
been controlled by the Viet Minh. 83/ Its objective was to resettle
peasants out of areas where GVN police or military forces could not operate
routinely, into new, policed communities of two distinct political colora-
tions. Into one type of these "rural agglomerations," called qui khu, were
grouped families with relatives among the Viet Minh or Viet Cong, or sus-
pected of harboring pro-Viet Cong sentiments. Into another type, called
gui ap, were grouped GVN-oriented families. Security was the primary
reason for selecting the sites of these communities, which meant that in
many instances the peasants were forced to move some distance from their
jJand. The French had attempted, on a small scale, such peasant relocations
in 1953 in Tonkin; Diem encountered in 1959, as had they, stiff resistance
from the farmers over separation from their livelihood and ancestral landhold.
But Diem's plan also aroused apprehensions during gui khu designates over
the Anti-Communist Campaign. With a rare sensitivity to rural protest, the
GVN suspended the program in March, 1959, after only a month.

In July, 1959, however, Diem announced that the GVN was
undertaking to improve rural standards of living through establishing
some 80 "prosperity and density centers" (khu tru mat). 84/ ‘These
"agrovilles" were to be located along a "strategic route system" -- key
roads, protected by the new towns. Some 80 agrovilles were to be built
by the end of 1963, each designed for 400 families (2,000 to 3,000 people),
and each with a surrounding cluster of smaller agrovilles, ap tru mat, for
120 families. The GVN master plan provided for each community defense,
schools, dispensary, market center, public garden -- even electricity. The
new communities seemed to offer the farmers many advantages, and the GVN
expected warm support. But the peasants objected to the agrovilles even
more sharply than they had the earlier experiment. The agrovilles were
supposed to be constructed by peasants themselves; Corvee labor was resorted
to, and thousands of Republican Youth were imported to help. For example,
at one site -- Vi Thanh near Can Tho -- 20,000 peasants were assembled from
four districts, many more than the number who could expect to profit
directly from the undertaking. 85/ Moreover, even most of those who were
selected to move into agrovilles they had helped build, did so unwillingly,
for it often meant abandoning a cherished ancestral home, tombs, and
developed gardens and fields for a strange and desolate place. The
settler was expected to tear down his old house to obtain materials for
the new, and received GVN aid to the extent of a grant of $5.50, and
an agricultural loan to assist him in paying for his allotted 1.5 acres
of land near the agroville. Peasant resistance, and then insurgent
attacks on the agrovilles, caused abandonment of the program in early
1961, with only 22 out of 80 communities completed. 86/

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
