Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

effect might he, more or less than $350 million, it was agreed that
it would certainly be substantial and that this should be a major
consideration before recommending large force increases or larger
programs in Southeast Asia. 41/

Meanwhile, in the Department of Defense there was increasing
emphasis upon exploration of the increased use of South Vietnamese
civilians for U.S. troop support. This was partially in follow-up
to the directive from the SecDef to the JCS on 23 May of 1967 which asked
them to review their combat service support and headquarters staffing to
determine whether all units were required in light of the sharply
improved logistics posture and support provided from other sources. As
part of the overall program of improving the U.S. "tooth to tail" ratio,
the JCS were asked to determine which of the resulting “hard core logis-
tical requirements" could be met by increased use of South Vietnamese
civilians for U.S, troop support. A preliminary review by Systems
Analysis had indicated a potential for saving approximately 20-25,000
troop spaces. he/ These, in turn, could be reallocated to increase
combat force requirements recommended by the JCS or alternatively used to
reduce the U.S. burden in Vietnam. The deadline given the JCS for sub-
mitting their study was 1 August but as the press for decisions on
increased forces became greater McNamara went back to the JCS and asked
for both studies before his planned trip to South Vietnam at the end of
July. 43/ In detailed conversations over force increases with both
COMUSMACV and CINCPAC McNamara asked:

Can we not make wider use of Vietnamese to reduce the
number of U.S. military personnel performing support func-
tions in SVN? This action would free U.S. men for combat
duties and train Vietnamese in skills they will need to help
build their nation. I. believe it would be wise to expand
the analysis I requested on May 23, 1967 (Combat Service i
Support Staffing in SVN) to include an analysis of each
essential combat service support function to determine the
extent it can be performed by SVN civilian personnel. The
-unit-by-unit, function-by-function review of support
should be performed first; then, the essential require-
ments should be evaluated to see which can be met by
appropriately trained and supervised SVN civilians. The
studies *orwarded to me should separately show the line
items and number of support personnel no longer required
and the number for whom Vietnamese can be substituted.

While organic U.S. military combat service support
capability is obviously required in an active combat
theater, the requirements in the permanent logistic enclaves,
such as Saigon or DaNang, should be less than at forward
locations, such an An Khe or Dong Ha. Further, some U.S,

191 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
