Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ca TOP SECRET
=i SECURITY INFORMATION

13. Militery action by the United States against Communist
Chine would inevitably involve the acceptance of increased
risks. Such risks, however, should not necessarily be ean
overriding deterrent to United States action. As NSC 48/5
points out, the risk of global war "should not preclude
ungertaking calculated risks against specific areas in the
over-811 interests of the United States."

14. If Communist Chine commits overt major acts of eg-
gression against French Indochina, Thailand, or Burma and if
in the face of such aggression the British and/or French _
refuse to offer either military or political support to pos-
sible United States action against Communist China itself,
the erfrect of United States unilateral action upon our mili-
tary alliances end positions in Burope as well as in Asia
‘should be appreised and the risk calculated. Further, in such
an eventuality, the validity of our alliances might well be
re-examined.

15. In the light of all of the foregoing and, to meet
the contingencies:

@. That Chinese Communist aggressicn in Southeast
Asia poses a threat unacceptable at that time to the
position of the United States, both in the Far East
and world-wide, and

b. That the United Kingdom and/or France decline
to support action against the nation of Communist China,

the Joint Chiefs of Staff, from the military point of view,
strongly recommend the inclusion in any National Security
Council volicy statement with respect to Southeast Asia stipu-
lation that the United States Government will consider teking
military action, unilaterally, if necessary, against the
nation of Communist China.

16. Acceptance of the policies proposed in NSC 124 would
serve to increase the commitments of the United States. The
Joint Chiefs of Staff consider thet such increase should. be
accompanied by a substantial unweard revision of our eccnomic
and militery assistance programs for Southeest Asia and for
Formosa and by some (possibly suostantieal) increase in our
forces in being. In this connection, current slippages in
the military production programs have already reduced plenned
United States end allied militery readiness. There should be
no increase in the risk resulting from such shortages in
militery production. fccordingly, the increases in our as-
sistence programs end our resdy forces, required by accept-
ance of the proposed policies; would call for a substantial

L920 TOP SECRET
