Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

be thoroughly Vietnamese and that the U.S. must not interfere. Lodge
agreed, adding that the U.S. wanted no satellites but would not thwart
a coup. When Lodge asked about the timing of the coup, Don replied that
the generals were not yet ready.

Later that evening Conein met Don by prearrangement at the latter's
initiative. ho/ When Conein called Don's attention to Lodge's scheduled
trip to Washington on October 31, indicating that it was important for
him to review the coup plans before his departure, Don replied that the
plans might not be availeble until four hours in advance, but urged that
the Ambassador not change his plans as this might be a tip-off. Don said
that nothing would happen in the next 48 hours, but the implication was
that the coup wouldme-empt Lodge's departure. When pressed for details
of the planning, Don indicated that within the committee, Minh had charge
of the military plans for the operation, Kim was doing the political
planning, and he, Don, was the liaison with the Americans. They hed
surrounded General Dinh with coup supporters and he would be neutralized.
Generals Tri and Khanh were both involved in the planning. General Khiem
was being circumspect because he was under palece suspicion. Minor details
of the plan and a list of units supporting the coup were elso discussed.

Simultaneous separate contacts had confirmed that several important
opposition civilians were in contact with the generals, including Phan
Huy Guat, Bui Diem, and Tran Trung Dung, and that they expected to play
a role in the post-coup government, which reportedly would be headed by
Vice President Tho. In a cable dispatched that same day summarizing the
situation, Lodge expressed some concern at the possibility of a premature
coup by junior officers, but generally expressed confidence in the generals
while regretting their reluctance for security reasons to provide details
of their plans. 50/ He concluded in these words;

In summary, it would appear that a coup attempt by the
Generals’ group is imminent; that whether this coup fails or
succeeds, the USG must be prepared to accept the fact that we
will be blamed, however unjustifiably; and finally, that no
positive action by the USG can prevent a coup attempt short
of informing Diem and Nhu with all the opprobrium that such
an action would entail. Note tco Don's statement we will
only have four hours notice. This rules out my checking with
you between time I learn of coup and time that it starts. It
means US will not be able significantly to influence course
of events. 51/

Lodge's view was clear. We were conmitted and it was too late for second
thoughts. Moreover, when the balloon went up he did not expect to have
time to consult Washington. He expected, and probably preferred, to
guide events himself.

In view of the deteriorating situation, instructions were given to
Admiral Felt, CINCPAC, to have a task force stand off the Vietnemese

h6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
