Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

After the mood at the Warrenton Conference, the push for reorgani-
zation should have come as no surprise to the higher ranking members of
the Mission. Discussions centering around the role of the Demty Am-
passeador (and earlier, the DCM) as a manager for the mushrooming Civilian
Mission had been going on for a long time, as Lodge and Porter well knew.
With Bundy in Saigon to ease the issue, Lodge answered the President on
February 15, 1966:

"J do indeed want to 'tighten and strengthen the organi-
zation for support of the rural construction program at this
end,’ as you tell me you plan to do at yours. And I applaud
your determination to treat 'rural construction' (for which
there should be a better name) * as an end in itself and on a
par with the military.

"As you say, Ambassador Porter is already putting a great
deal of effort into this work. I have never made a formal
announcement of this fact because it seemed to me that the
arrangement was working pretty well as it was and that public
announcement was unnecessary. Also, I felt the U.S. Government

* Lodge had for some time been troubled by the phrase "rural construction”
-- the literal translation of the Vietnamese Xay Dung Nong Thon -- which
he felt suggested bricks and cement, rather than the entire program of
"revolutionary uplift" which he advocated. Right after the Honolulu
meeting, he asked each member of the Mission Council for suggestions on
how better to translate the Vietnamese phrase. Out of the suggestions
that he received (including Westmoreland's recommendation that we ought
to leave the phrase alone, just translating the literal meaning of the
Vietnamese as accurately as possible), Lodge chose the phrase "Revolu-
tionary Development." At about the same time, the GVN dropped the word
"rural" from the name of the Ministry of Rural Construction (thus, Xay
Dung Nong Thon was replaced by Xay Dung). Lodge and Ky then announced
that henceforth the Vietnamese Ministry would be known in English as the
Ministry of Revolutionary Development, and the overall program called
Revolutionary Development (RD). To this day, the semantic gap remains
unbridged: the Vietnamese call it the Ministry of Construction (Bo Xay
Dung), except when they are talking in English to an American; the
Americans call it the MORD. The same applies to the program: moreover,
the confusion is often compounded by the fact that in most informal
discussions between Americans and Vietnamese, the term most often used
is still “pacification.” See, for example, the Working Group session
at Honolulu, February 7, 1966; "It is perhaps significant that this was
the only time in the course of the meeting, i.e., at the outset, that
the newly adopted U.S, term was heard. Throughout the remainder of the
Working Group discussion, the term pacification was used almost exclusively.
Tn this connection, the Saigon U.S. representatives present at the meeting
are inclined to doubt the actual appropriateness of the new term...)"

55 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
