Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

20. Special Message to the Congress on the Mutual Security Programs,
May 21, 1957, Public Papers of the Presidents--Eisenhower, 1957,
ps 373- ) :

cis) dry'8h ran

"First is defense assistance--our and other free nations' common
effort to counter the, Soviet-Chinese military power and their drive to
dominate the world. That power continues to grow--in armaments, in
nuclear capability, in its economic base. The Communist goal of con-
quering the world has never changed.

"For our nation alone to undertake to withstand and turn back Com-
munist imperialism would impose colossal defense spending on our people.
It would ultimately cost us our freedom.

"For other free nations to attempt individually to counter this
menace would be impossible.

"We in our own interest, and other free nations in their own
interest, have therefore joined in the building and maintenance of a
system of collective security in which the effort of each nation
strengthens all. Today that system has become the keystone of our
own and their security in a tense and uncertain world."

eS ©

"The second major element of our mutual security programs is eco-
nomic development assistance and technical cooperation.

"This part of the programs helps less developed countries make the
social and political progress needed to preserve their independence.
Unless these peoples can hope for reasonable economic advance, the dan-
ger will be acute that their governments will be subverted by Communism.

"To millions of people close to the Soviet and Chinese Comnunist
borders political freedom is still new. To many it must still prove its
worth. To survive it must show the way to another and equally essential
freedom--freedom from the poverty and hopelessness in which these peoples
have lived for centuries. With their new freedom their desire and their
determination to develop their economies are intense. They are fixed upon
raising their standards of living. Yet they lack sufficient resources.
Their need for help is desperate--both for technical know-how and cepital.
"i "lacking outside help these new nations cannot advance economically
as they must to maintain their independence. Their moderate leaders must
be able to obtain sufficient help from the free world to offer convincing
hope of progress. Otherwise their peoples will surely turn elsewhere.
Extremist elements would then seize power, whip up national hatreds and
incite civil dissension end strife. The danger would be grave that these
free governments would disappear. Instability and threats to peace would
result. In our closely-knit world, such events would deeply concern and
potentially endanger our own people.

B-32
