Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

slower than was estimated with the forces previously
requested. The intensity and frequency of combat opera-
tions may therefore be restricted, resulting ina

slower rate of progress in SVN, some loss of momentum
in operations, and possibly a longer war at increasing
costs in casualties and materiel...." af

Despite such protestations and recounting of dire outcomes, the
recommendations of JCSM 739-66 primarily concerned no more than direct
substitution of units below the 4"70,000-man ceiling (with no increase
in plaster expenditures) and these were approved by the Secretary of
Defense a week later. 2/

While the actual numbers of troops and amounts of equipment involved
in the reclamas were minor, the underlying nature of the dispute over
Program 4, of which the small adjustments were barely sumptomatic, had
been more basic from its inception and both the press and Capitol Hill
were picking up the tempo of debate between the Chiefs and their civilian
superiors. General Wheeler was busy denying in a press conference that
the civilian chiefs prevented General Westmoreland from receiving the
troops he felt necessary. Simultaneously, Secretary Rusk was spending
a long four hours before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, defending
the Administration's basic policies and those pursued by its Vietnam
commander. 3/

“Two days later a poll of nineteen predominantly hawkish Senators
revealed two basic areas of consensus; they believed we should give our
military leaders more support (presumably troops) and we should hit
North Vietnam harder (notably in Haiphong). More political. pressure
was generated on the troop issue by Senator Stennis’ declaration that
General Westmoreland's requests for troops should be met, "even if it
should require mobilization or partial mobilization." Stennis publicly
estimated that we were 100,000 men shy of the total needed to contain
the Viet Cong militarily. A similar figure often appeared in classified
studies at the time. )/

A public statement by Army Chief of Staff General Harold K. Johnson,
. probably intended to be reassuring, only heightened the sense of cost in
manpower and national energy which the war might require. He said that
withdrawal of U.S. units may be possible in 15-24 years because enemy
strength was being broken down into small units that could be contained
by smaller American units. oil! Few people, as the commentators were
quick to observe, were enamored with the thought of any American units

in Vietnam in 25 years, whatever the size! As if to underline the costs
of an increasingly expanding war, Operation CEDAR FALLS in the Iron Tri-
angle had produced a record number of U.S, deaths in a single week, 14h,
‘along with 1,04) wounded and 6 missing. The prospect of suffering 1,19)
casualties per week for the next indeterminate number of years was hardly
an appealing prospect, and a substantial number of the American people

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
