Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

objectives by increasing the amount of aid and advice we gave to the South
Vietnamese in order to enable them better to help themselves. But almost
from the beginning there were signs that this program would not be enough.
And as time passed it became more and more evident that something more

would be needed. Soon we began to be turned from full concentration upon
the NSAM-288 program by a major distraction--instability and inefficiency of
the GVN. This was a distraction that from the first we had feared but had
hoped against hope would not grow to major proportions.

A year before, in 1963, it had become more and more evident as time
wore on that the unpopularity and inefficiencies of the Diem-Ngu regime
destroyed the hope of permanent progress in the pacification program and the
ultimate chance of success of the whole counter-insurgency effort. This
time it was the increasing instability of the Khanh regime and the ineffici-
ency of his government--the regime that had supplanted the regime that had
supplanted Diem and Ngu. Now we feared the inability of the Khanh govern-
ment to attract and hold the loyalties of the politically active groups
within the cities, and we had no confidence in its competence to administer
the pacification programs, and thereby win the support of the politically
inert peasantry in the rural areas. .

But we wanted no more coups. Although Khanh's coup had surprised us
and even shaken our confidence somewhat, we quickly made him our boy, put
the best possible face on the matter, and made it a prime element of U.S.
policy to support Khanh and his colleagues, and discourage any further coups.
Bach coup that occurred, it seemed, greatly increased the possibility of yet
another coup.

Through the first period from March until July, we concentrated upon
making the NSAM-288 program work. In addition to the increases in U.S. aid
and advice, we sought to strengthen Khanh by patching things up with Big
Minh and mollifying the other Generals he had thrown out. We hoped he could
somehow subdue the politically active Buddhists, the Catholic political
activists, the Dai Viet, and the miscellaneous ambitious colonels and gen-
erals.

But execution of the 288 program began to fall behind the plans.- The
GVN administration of the program had troubles. There were troubles getting
piastres-which the U.S. government in effect provided-from the central
government to the provinces and districts where they were needed. Agreed
pay increases and force increases in the GVN armed forces were only tardily
and partially met. Civil servants needed to operate the program in the
provinces and districts were not available, were not trained, or, if avail-
able and trained, were often not paid, or were insufficiently or tardily
paid, or were not provided with necessary expenses. Funds for the provision
of necessary goods in the provinces and districts were not met. Payments to
’ peasants for relocation as a part of the pacification program were tardy or
inadequate or not made at all. There seemed to be a business as usual

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

oT
