Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

did the DRV and the Lao Dong Party play in the years of patient work
necessary to bring the NLF to flower in so short a time after 1960?
What role did they play in the insurgency overall?

The official U.S. view has been that the PRP is merely

the southern arm of the Lao Dong Party, and one instrument by which Hanoi
instigated and controlled the revolt against "My-Diem." 185 Douglas
Pike's analysis led him to concur, with reservations:

"The Viet Minh elements in South Vietnam during the struggle
against the French had of course included many non-Communist
elements....After 1954 many Viet Minh entered the ranks of the
new Diem government, and even a decade later many of the top
military and civilian governmental figures in Saigon were former
Viet Minh. Nevertheless the Viet Minh elements, made up chiefly
but not entirely of Communists, continued to offer resistance to
the Dien government....In terms of overt activity such as armed
incidents of the distribution of propaganda leaflets the period
was quiet and the Communists within the remnant Viet Minh organiza-
tion relatively inactive. In addition, much of the activity that
did take place apparently was the work of impatient cadres operating
in the South independently of Hanoi's orders....

“Such action on their part and the religious sects is under-
standable, and tile emergence of a clandestine militant opposition
group could be expected....such an effort would be in complete
harmony with Vietnamese social tradition and individual psychology.
But there is a vast difference between a collection of clandestine
opposition political groups and the organizational weapon that
emerged, a difference in kind and not just degree. The National
Liberation Front was not simply another indigenous covert group,
or even a coalition of such groups. It was an organizational
steamroller, nationally conceived and nationally organized,
endowed with ample cadres and funds, crashing out of the jungle
to flatten the GVN. It was not an ordinary secret society of the
kind that had dotted the Vietnamese political landscape for decades.
It projected a social construction progrem of such scope and ambition
that of necessity it must have been created in Hanoi and imported.
A revolutionary organization must build; it begins with persons
suffering genuine grievances, who are slowly organized and whose
militancy gradually increases until a critical mass is reached and
the revolution explodes. Exactly the reverse was the case with
the NLF. It sprang full-blown into existence and then was fleshed
out. The grievances were developed or manufactured almost as 4
necessary afterthought. The creation of the NLM was an accomplish-
ment of such skill, precision, and refinement that when one thinks
of who the master planner must have been, only one name comes to
mind: Vietnam's organizational genius, Ho Chi Minh." 186/

1. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
