Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Anorican Consulate Genoral,
Saigon, Indochina, Februnry 12, 1949.
MEMORANDUM ON INDOCHINA FOR NE. DELHI FOREIGN SERVICES CGLRFSRECCE

SSCTION V. a AND ADMISTISTRATIVE PROBLEMS

A problem which confronts sll small offices, no doubt, is the
-unusually heavy load of < snidetrative work in proportion to the
amount ef creative work.turnod ovt. Tho requirements of the Depart-
mont for administrative reports, and the quantity of administrative
detail involved in the daily operation of a smill office is roughly
the samc ss for a large office. The administrative instructions and
the forms. prescribed are naturally drafted with lorge offices in mind,
“and their use in a smo2l office is dixficult and results in a dis-
proportionate amount of time spent on adainistrative work.

It is urged that the Department investigate this matter with a
view to gt uing additional authority to the field to mike decisions
and also to transferring to the Benartment mach of the "control"
records and reporting that is now demanded of the ficld.

Alien Staff i :

Saigon has been expericnecing considerable trouble in finding and
keeping alien personnel, particularly French employeese Business
houses are in 2 position to offer better salaries and a shorter work
week, and the Consuinte has been unable to compcte. Recomnondations
have recently bocn sent to Washington which, it is heped, will sone-
wet emoliorate this situation. A single wage including basic wage
end temporary Incrcass has been suggosted, which will be sermi-annually

mq ake

nadsusted according to changes in the cost of living indox. . At the

same time c position classification system has been established which
allows in-grade promotions for merit and service.

To encourage the alien staff to continue its work with the Gcovern-
ment, end to make thon more valuable to the office, it is hoped %
some way can be aoe within budget.linitations to. Oe ae 2
and stenog pENDELS lessons for those meribors of the staff who appen
be gunld fied. eouoas hie arc aimest impossidle to find in Saigon,
and it is, Pastore, necessary for officers to consume much valuable
time in drafting correspondance for typists. Ths cost of such train-
ing is nominal, the time allowed curing working hours for tho study
would be negligiblo, and tho results undoustedly satisfying «

Supplics and Shipping.

Saigon formerly expericnced s i
ficinl supplics and personal cffee el

and breakage. It was found that elea a arents usually took little

5u rule they are small and

ind cifert spose on clearings doug not 35

to superviso earefully our shipments.

¥
pending much timc on each shipment in arranging

Ley for

shipmcnts since as

interest in consy

cio ey Eee
eh Pools

eae tAc oC
tLe Ne a he
rast f, Ma
cay

Consulate was stall
