Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. PROGRAM 5

A. PRELUDE TO ACTION ON PROGRAM 5

1. Hedged Public Optimism Meets the New Year

The last month of 1966 was like all such months -- a time for official
retrospection and tally. The mood was one .of cautious optimism, buoyed
by hopes that 1967 would prove to be the decisive year in Vietnam.

The indicators showed that great progress had been made -- quantita-
tively, anyway. The number of U.S. and FW maneuver battalions available
for operations in South Vietnam had increased from 45 to 102. ARVN had
added another 24 such units, bringing its total to 163, so altogether
there were 265 battalions ready to commence operations in the new year. 1/
In short, the US-FW resources available for operations roughly doubled
during the second year of the war, and they promised to be even higher
during the third. 2/

Large ground operations were mounting in number and duration, and
the trend promised to continue pointed sharply upward (see Figs..1-8).
This upswing in activity was attributed to the rapid infusion of U.S.
battalions; indications were that such a high level of activity was not
independent, but so strongly correlated with our presence that, if we
willed, it could be "sustained indefinitely." 3/

More importantly, all of these gains seemed to be having a relevant
impact on the enemy -- causing his battlefield fortunes to decline closer
to the point where he would be forced to stop fighting or negotiate, or
poth. Even accepting the historical overstatement of enemy losses -- the
bias is reasonably consistent -- and the trend in enemy losses to all
causes was rising sharply. Lf Kill ratios (enemy KIA vs. allied KTA)
were up to 4.2 from 3.3 during the preceding six month period. RVNAF
losses actually declined; but unfortunately US/FW KTA doubled -- a fact
that the press was later to pick up and exploit in its criticism of the
ARVN/GVN role in the war. (See Tables 4 and 5, Appendix B).

Observers believed that most of the enemy battalions, NVA and VC,
were in place six months ahead of the U.S., and that only recently had
the full consequences of our enlarged participation been reflected in
enemy strength and OB figures. From July 1966, vC/NVA strength had
appeared to d:cline slightly, although they had evidently been able to
maintain their oft-cited target of 100,000 men in the field.

Irregular forces had apparently declined to about 180,000 (confirmed
by a VC document captured on CEDAR FALLS) and their "solid" recruitment
population base had shrunk. Another VC document contained an estimate
that vc/NVA forces had lost about 1,000,000 people to GVN control during

1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
