Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

The French state that they now contemplate changing thsir
troop dispositions from a "pacification pattern" of widely
scattered small units in North Tonkin intended to gain the good
will of the natives and keep down local invidents, to an "opera-
tional pattern", This will require a political decision.

The present problem in Indochine under current plans is:

(A) To regroup companies end smaller units now in
Tonkin area into combat fighting battalions or regiments
with cross-country ability in order to maintain a flexible
line of resistance,

(B) To achieve the proper coordinated action of these
forces in local erea action,

(C) To at least maintain the pacification statue quo
throughout remainder of Indochina.

A withdrayal to the Hanoi-Haiphong Delta area will permit a
stronger coordinated defense in which combined French Army, Navy,
end Air Forces can begin dual support and be employed to their
utmost capabilities, when their action is properly coordinated,

_ There are excellent fields of fire for Infantry and Artillery.

Air will not be forced to operate in restricted mountainous areas
and targets will be better defined and more accessible. Numerous
waterways in the Delta area will greatly hamper Viet Minh movements
because of the necessity to move on foot. Viet Minh routes of
advance will be canalized and opportunity for rendezvous made more
difficult, French troops will have greater ground, water and air
transportation facilities which will afford greater opportunity
for quick concentration of larger French troops against the Vies
Minh forces. The withdrawal will also permit a regrouping of
troops for local offensive action or a-generel offensive. French
supply lines will be shortened and Viet Minh lines lengthened forc-
ing them to establish sub-arsenals and sub-depots south of the
frontier where they will be subject to French air attack and: ground
penetration, The withdrayal, however will permit the Viet Minh to
consolicate the area from which these units are withdrawn giving
them airstrips, better bases in Indochine and permit political
organization and their conscription of the population and may pro-
duce an unfavorable chein reaction among the population of Indo-
china, It is possible that relatively few weapons and possibly
aircraft will be given by the Chinese Comnunists as token gift

to the Viet Minh. Chinese Communists may be loath to spare many

-Of these weapons because of thelr commitments in Manchuria,

Changhéi-Amoy erea, Kowloon, Canton end Tibet.

SC 64/2 TOP SECRET

607
