[44.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

VI. SOME CABLES FROM SATGON

To a current reader, and very likely to the officials in Washington who
had access to the full Taylor Mission Report (including Taylor's personal
recommendations), there really seem to be three reports, not one.

1. Taylor's own cables read like, as of course they were, a soldier's
crisp, direct analysis of the military problem facing the Saigon govern-
ment. With regard to the Diem regime, the emphasis is on a need to build
up intelligence capabilities, clear up administrative drags on efficient
action, and take the offensive in seeking out and destroying VC units.

2, The main paper in the Report (the "Evaluations and Conclusions")
incorporates General Taylor's views on the military problems. But, it is
much broader, giving primary emphasis to the military problem, but also some
attention to what we now call the "other war," and even more to conveying an
essentially optimistic picture of the opportunities for a vigorous American
effort to provide the South Vietnamese government and army with the elan and
style needed to win. This paper was presumably drafted mainly by Rostow,
with contributions from other members of the party.

It is consistent with Rostow's emphasis before and since on the
Viet Cong problem as a pretty straight-forward case of external aggression.
There is no indication of the doubts expressed in the Alexis Johnson
"Concept of Intervention in Vietnam" paper that Diem might not be able to
defeat the Viet Cong even if infiltration were largely cut off. At one
point, for example, the paper tells its readers:

It must be remembered that the 1959 political decision in Hanoi
to launch the guerrilla and political campaign of 1960-61 arose
because of Diem's increasing success in stabilizing his rule and
moving his country forward in the several preceding years. 38/

On the very next page (perhaps reflecting the vagaries of committee
papers) the paper does not itself "remember" this description of conditions
when the war started. For it states:

The military frustration of the past two months has...made acute,
throughout his administration, dissatisfaction with Diem's method
of rule, with his lack of identification with his people, and
with his strategy which has been endemic for some years. 39/

But that seems only a momentary lapse from the general line of the
paper, which is fairly reflected in the recommendation that we tell Moscow
to;

use its influence with Ho Chi Minh to call his dogs off, mind
his business, and feed his people. 40/

109
. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
