Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The bombing is designed to interdict, as far as possible,
and to inhibit, as far as may be necessary, continued ae
sion against the Republic of Viet-lNam.

Three days “ater, Secretary MclNemara gave a special briefing to the
press corps at the Pentagon, complete with maps and photographs, driving
home the point of massive infiltration from the North:

Now the current [TNF and iy strikes against North
Vietnam have been designed to impede this infiltration of
men and materiel, and infiltration which makes the differ-
ence between a situation which is manageable and one which
is not manageable internally by the Government of South
Vietnan.

The air strikes have been carefully limited to military
targets, primarily to infiltration targets. To transit
points, to barracks, to supply depots, to ammunition depots,
to routes of communicetion, all feeding the infiltration
lines from North Vietnem into Laos and then into South
Vietnam,

More recently there has been edded to this terget system
railroads, highways, and bridges which are the foundation of
the infiltration routes...

The strikes have been designed to increase the dependence
on en already over-burdened road transport system by denying
the use of the-rail lines in the South. In summary, our ob-
jectives have been to force them off the rails onto the high-
ways and off the highways onto their feet...

Supplementing the bridge strikes, armed reconnaissance is
being conducted along truck convoy routes against maritime
traffic and rolling stock on the rail lines...

These carefully controlled rail strikes will continue as
necessary to impede the infiltration and to persuade the North
Vietnamese leadership that their aggression against the south
will not succeed... .-

C. Political Objectives are Reviewed
Now that interdiction was being publicly embraced as a major
objective of the bombing, at least one high-ranking Administration official
began to realize that insufficient attention had been paid to the U.S,
political posture in the event that the DRV became persuaded "that their
aggression will not succeed."

102 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
