Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

transition; it was one of a heightened awareness of instability in the
central government in Saigon (the Khanh coup and maneuvering for

advantage by the generals), of a deteriorating situation in the country-
side, and of the discovery that things had been worse to begin with than
the U.S. had suspected. Not only did events indicate a Viet Cong ascen-
dancy in the countryside; the U.S. was not even able to determine with
assurance just how things stood. ‘The informational returns were inadequate
from the existing advisory effort, ARVN had not become an effective fighting
force, and the extent of U.S. influence was questionable.

This deterioration of the counterinsurgent effort (including the
growing awareness that earlier reports had been unrealistically rosy) was
one factor which was to lead to an expansion of the U.S. military advisory
effort. A second, and complementary, factor was the increasing conviction
in official circles that the struggle in Vietnam was so important that we
could not afford to lose it. Althoush these two factors in juxtaposition
created a determination to take whatever steps were necessary to ensure
a free non~communist South Vietnam, this commitment operated in the shadow
of an equal determination to work through the GVN rather than around it
and to avoid radical policy departures during the Presidential elections.

A further buildup in U.S, advisors was not the major product of this
determined commitment. Rather, there was in 1964 a growing conviction
that only by ‘consciously expanding the war -- by “going North" in order
to punish and dissuade the DRV from support of the insurgency -- could
the deteriorating situation be arrested and reversed. Governmental
stability in South Vietnam and the reduetion, if not the elimination, of
pressures from the north came to be regarded as desiderata which would
turn upon actions outside RVN rather than within it. The decisions to
expand the U.S. advisory effort were overshadowed by plans to carry the
war to the DRV.*

NSAM 288

NSAM 273 had, as described above, limited cross-border operations to
an area 50 kilometers within Taos. NSAM 288, published in March 196h,
reaffirmed these measures but went considerably further in authori zing
contingency preparations to be employed in the event that border control
operations proved inadequate:

To prepare immediately to be in a position on 72 hours'
notice to initiate the full range of Laotian and Cambodian
"Border Control actions" (beyond those authorized...above)
and the "Retaliatory Actions" egainst North Vietnam, and to
be in a position on 30 days' notice to initiate the program of
“Graduated Overt Military Pressure" against North Vietnam. 91/

* The sensitive files of the Secretary of Defense for the period under

discussion consist in large part of detailed plans to bring increasing
military pressure against DRV under careful political control and under
"scenarios" which would ensure adequate domestic and foreign support
for these actions.

38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
