Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SECURITY INFORMATION
396..1-h/7-1553

b) Increase in total forces available to create sub- |
stantial strategic reserve permit French initiative. These
additional forces include 12 battalions from France with
50 helicopters,.3 LSTs and 2 Pocket (repeat Pocket) Liberty ,
ships, 30 C--7s , and 6 Beavers (repeat Eeavers).

Obviously most serious problem relates to 12 infantry
battalions. Politically raises grave problem sending con-
scripts to Indochina and this at very time when popular
sentiment against war crystalizing in France. Militarily
it would mean sharp reduction in French strength in Europe
and North ifrica. He estimated following units would have
to be deactivated as result cadre and supvort requirements
of 12 battalion force for Indochina: 8 or 9 artillery
groups, 6 or 7 engineer battalions, 4 armored regiments,

3 or 4 signal companies and 8 or 9 ordnance companies.

all this has serious financial implications. Bidault
stated that vrovisional French 1954 budget now includes
422 billion frances for Indochina and implementation
Navarre plan would result in additional 20 billion francs.
Lt sane time Tidault understood US requesting $400 million
to aid Indochina war and %40 million for direct assistance
to Associated States (Stassen corrected this last figure
to $25 million and pvointed out both $400 million and ($325
million amounts were only illustrative ). “hile Bidault
did not make any vrecise reauest of US he clearly indicated
because France's financial condition these amounts of aid
would not adequate permit above French expenditures.

Referring all aspects Indochina war in France Pidault
nointed to basic and delicate nolitical problem in Parlia-
ment where generally sneaking those who support Indo-
Chinese war (i.e., more Quote national Unquote element)
oppose SDC and vice versae This crisscross of political
sentiment comvlicated his over-all task immeasurably.

Secretary expressed understanding for French diffi-
culties and said outline Navarre nlan hac impressed us
favorably because of its offensive features. General
O'Daniel was now preparing his full report and unon com-
Dietion it would be given urgent and careful consideration
with view determining what financial aid could be given,
which of course would denend on Congress.

TOP SECRET = SECURITY INFOPMATION

38
