SS

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. Recent U.S. experiences in Korea were of two kinds: a tre-
mendous effort to counter an invasion by a large Communist conventional
army across a parallel of latitude with a large conventional ermy com-
posed primarily of U.S. and U.S.-treined "native" troops; and an anti-
guerrilla effort so miniscule as to be accorded to U.S. forces and less
than half a short paragraph in General Matthew B. Ridgway's 29l-page book
on the Korean war.

(

-..So it seemed a good time /in November 1951/ to take care
of a persistent annoyance -- the existence of large bands of
guerrillas in South Korea, particularly in the mountainous areas
northwest of Chinju, where they hed taken refuge after the Com-
munist retreat. Van Fleet assigned Lieutenant General Paik Sum
Yup, with two ROK divisions, to Operation RATKILLER, designed to
rid us of this potentially dangerous threat. By the end of
January 1952, nearly 20,000 freefooters -- bandits and organized
guerrillas -- had been killed or captured and the irritation was
ended for good, Ty

In view of the Korean experience, not yet two years old at the time of
O'Daniel's assumption of responsibility and training of the Vietnamese
National Army, it is-hardly surprising that the mission of defense,
however limited, of the 17th parallel was envisioned for these Viet-
namese forces to complement the more limited mission of achieving and
maintaining internal security. Nor perhaps is it surprising that this
mission came to dominate the organization and training of the VINA.

E. What was the state of the South Vietnamese Army?

While the U.S. was still in the process of taking the decision
to assume responsibility for orgenizing and training the Vietnamese arny,
NIE-63-7-54 reported on the condition of that army. Related documents
give no reason to suspect the accuracy of this estimate or to believe
the estimate overstates the magnitude of the tasks the U.S. was ebout to
undertake; —

23. The Vietnamese National Army has an estimated strength
of 170,000 regulars and 10,000 auxiliaries. Navel and air
strength is negligible. The regulars include 5 infantry regi-
ments and 152 combat battalions, of which 69 are infantry, 61
light infantry, 8 guerd, 5 airborne infantry, 8 artillery, and
one armored reconnaissance. The regroupment necessitated by
the Geneva Agreements has forced many units to leave their home
provinces for the first time, resulting in a considereble number
of desertions since 1 June (up to 25 percent of the total army
strength). Some auxiliaries and other semimilitary forces ere
being demobilized, with the exception of the armed forces of
the South Vietnamese sects and certain guard and militia elements.

Sensitive

TOP SECRET
