Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

106 ;
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.--that as time goes on and as the impact of sustained
bombing in NVN merges with the adverse effects of the other
courses Of action as they begin to unfold, the DRV would
become clearly aware of the extent of US determination and
thus might reconsider its position and seek a means to
achieve a cessation of the hostilities. 29/

INR dissented. Its Director, Thomas L. Hughes, wrote that
the escalation would evoke stronger reactions than indicated in the
SNIE, “because it would be widely assumed that we were initiating an
effort to destroy the DRV's modest industrial establishment":

The distinction between such operations and all-out
war would appear increasingly tenuous. As these attacks
expanded, Hanoi would be less and less likely to soften its
opposition to negotiations and at some point it would come
to feel that it had little left to lose by continuing the
fighting.... 30/

B. The Issue Focuses
1. POL and the Pause

Meanwhile, the flow of JCS papers urging POL strikes as
the next step continued. Secretary McNamara sent the Chairman, General
Wheeler, the 27 November CIA estimate which had suggested that the
strikes would not have great impact on the war (they would only “embar-
rass" operations in the South). General Wheeler commented that the loss
of POL storage would do much more:

It would, in fact, have a substantial impact not only
on their military operations but also would significantly
impede their efforts to support the anticipated build-up of
vc/PAVN forces in South Vietnam during the coming months. 31/

General Wheeler also forwarded a Joint Staff-DIA study
of the POL target system, with the comment that destruction of the system
would force NVN to curtail all but the most vital POL-powered activities
and resort to "more extensive use of porters, animal transport, and non-
powered water eraft." The net result would be to considerably reduce
WVN's capability to move large units cr quartities of equipment, an
important consideration in view of the fact that motorable segments of
the Ho Chi Minh trail were being extended. 32/

The Joint Staff-DIA study 33/ showed that NVN's bulk POL

storage capacity was greatly in excess of what NVN required to sustain
current consumption levels -- 179,000 metric tons available as compared

73 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
