Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Although the Soviets issued in March 1956 a demand for GVN observance

of the Accords, its diplomacy not only failed to bring about any action
on behalf of the DRV, but elicited, in April 1956, a sharp British note
condemning Hanoi for grave violations of the Accords. Hanoi received

the British note about the time that Khrushchev proclaimed that the Soviet
was committed to a policy of “peaceful coexistence." At the Ninth

Plenum of the Central Committee of the Lao Dong Party, held in Hanoi

that month, Ho Chi Minh lauded “de-Stelinization," but unequivocally
rejected "peaceful coexistence" as irrelevant to the DRV. In November
1997; after more than a year of upheavals and evident internal political
distress in North Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh and Le Duan journeyed to Moscow
for the Conference of Communist and Workers' Parties of Socialist
PDUBTEIES That conference issued a declaration admitting the possibility
of “non-peaceful transition to socialism" remarkably similar in thrust

to Ho's 1956 speech.

Further, Khrushchev's famous January 1961 speech

was simply a precis of the Declaration of the November 1960 Conference
of Communist and Workers' Parties of Socialist Countries. That 1960
Declaration, which formed the basis for Khrushchev's pronouncements on
wars of national liberation in turn explicitly reaffirmed the 1957
Declaration. The parallelism of the texts is remarkable:

HO CHI MINI:

SPEECH CLOSING NINTIL PLENUM OF THE
CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE LAO DONG PARTY
APRIL 24, 1956

“..sWe have grasped the great. significence
of the Twentieth Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union. This Congress hes:

Anlyzed the new eitustion prevailing in
the werld, and pointed out the new conditions
favorable to the preservation of peace and
tlie advance twoard socislism by the Revolution-
ary Parties of the working class and the
lsboring people;

Clearly shown the Soviet Union's yietori-
ous road, giving us still greater enthusiaen
and making us believe still more strongly in
the invincible forces of the Soviet Union,
the bastion of revolution and of World peace;

Pointed out the tasks of the Communist
Party in the ideological end orgenizational
fielde. The Congress particularly emphasized
the application of Marxist-Leninist principles
to collective leadership and opposed the cult
of the individual.

While recognizing that war mey be everted,
we must be vigilant to detect the warmongers’
schemes; for a6 long as imperialism exists,
the danger of var still existe.

While recognizing thet in certain countries
the road to socialism may be a peaceful one,
we should be aWere of thiz fact: In countrics
where the machinery of state, the armed
forces, and the police of the bourgeois
elass sre still strong, the proletarian class
till has to prepere for exmed struggle.

While recognizing the possibility of
reunifying Viet-Nam by peaceful means, we
showld always remember that our people's
principal evemies are the American imperiel-
diets and their egents who still oceupy helf
our country and ere preparing for war; there=-
fore, we should firmly hold eloft the banner
of peace and enbance our vigilance..."

DECLARATION OF THE CONFEHENCE OF COMMUNIST
AND WORKERS FARTIES OF SOCIALIST COUNTRIES
Moscow, 1957

"(he communist and workers parties are
faced with great historic tasks...In present
day conditions in s number of capitelist
countries, the working class has the possi-
bility...te unite the majority of the people,
When state power without civil war can ensure
the transfer of basie means of production to
the hands of the people...

In conditions in vhich the exploiting
classes resort to violence against the people,
it is necessary to bear in mind another possi-
bility--nonpeaceful transition te sccislien.
Leniniem teaches and history confirms thet
the ruling classes never relinquish power
volunterily. In these conditions the severity
and forms of class struggle will depend not
so much on the proletariat as on the resist-
ance of the reactionary circles to the will
of the overwhelming majority of the people,
on the use of force by these circles at one
or another stage of the struggle for socialism.”

26

DECLARATION OF THE CONFERENCE OF CUu@nihIsT
AND WORKERS PARTIES OF SOCIALIST CuunT-IEs
Moscon, 1960

".,.The Communist Partiva reaffina the
propositions of the 1957 Declaration concern-
ing the question of the forms of treuaition
of various countries from cepitelism to
socislisn.

The Declaration states that the working
class and its vanguard-the Marxiet-Leniniat
perty-seek to achieve socialist revolution
by peaceful means. Realization cf this
possibility would accord with the interests
of the working class end sli the people ant
with the national interests of the country...

eesiIn conditions when the exploiting
classes resort to the use of force against
the people, it is necessery to bear in mind
another possibility-that of nonpeaceful
transition to socialism. Levinism teucles
and historical experience confirms, thet the
ruling classes do not relinquisi power
voluntarily. In these conditions the degree
of bitterness and the forms of the class
struggle will depend not so much on the
proletariat as on the extent of the resistunec
of the reactionary circles to the will of the
overwhelming majority of the people, on the
use of force by these circles at one or
another stege of the struggle for socisiiam.

In each country the actual possibility
of cne or another means of transition to
socialian is determined by the specific
historical conditions..."

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
