Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"..-We must consider realistically what our over-all objectives
and stakes are, and just what degree of risk and loss we should
be prepared to make to hold South Vietnam, or alternatively, to
gain time end secure our further lines of defense in the world
end specifically in Asia.” hd /

Significant, in shedding light on the subtle changes that
occurred in this rationale during the ensuing three or four weeks, was
its treatment of the third fall-back objective. Observing that "most
of the world had written off" both South Vietnam end Laos in 195), an
early draft acknowledged that neither had acquired the international
standing of such former targets of Communist aggression as Greece, Iran
and South Korea, It went on to point out several historical character-
istics of South Vietnem and Laos that made them such unigue cases, in-
eluding: (1) "a bad colonial heritage" end inadequate preparation for
self-government; (2) a "colonialist war fought in half-beked fashion
end lost"; and (3) "a netionslist movement taken over by Communists
ruling in the other half of an ethnicelly and historically united
country...." It then edded;

"The basic point, of course, is that we heve never
thought we could defend a government or a people that hed
ceased to care strongly about defending themselves, or that
were unable to maintain the fundamentals of government.

And the overwhelming world impression is that these are
lacking elements in South Viet-Nem...."

Moreover, the commentary noted that there was widespread expectancy
that if South Vietnam were lost it would be due to its lack of these
elements. 5/

Subsequent to circulation of the initial draft of the "objectives
and national interest" Section, a number of critical or related comments
were directed toward Group Chairman Bundy. On 4 November, Michael.
Forrestal suggested thet "an important flevor" was lacking in the original
analysis -- hemely, "the role of China" and her need for "ideological
successes abroad.” In his view, given Chinese policy, "the effect of
our withdrawal from a situation in which the people we were trying to
help seemed unable to help themselves" would be more politically pervasive
in Asia than if China did not exist. He thought the U.S. object should
be to "contain" Chinese political and ideological influence "for the
longest possible period," thus providing time to create "at the very
least, Titoist regimes on the periphery of China....” 46/ On 6 November,
William Sullivan also urged placing U.S. volicy in Viet-Nam in the
“lerger perspective” of the political confrontation with Communist Chine.
In an attached, longer exposition of policy rationale for the Western
Pacific, he presented conceptions of the U.S. problem quite similar to
those advocated by Forrestal. The political future of the peoples of East
Asia was portrayed as depending largely on a struggle between Washington

“yh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
