Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Secondly, that government "should formally request
that the United States assume responsibility for training .. .
forces and providing the military equipment, financial assistance and
political advice necessary to insure internal stability." The Chiefs
saw no role in training for the French; the third precondition called
for complete French withdrawal from the country:

Arrangements should be made with the French granting
full independence to the Associated States and providing
for the phased, orderly withdrawal of French forces,
French officials and French advisors from Indochina in
order to provide motivation and a sound basis for the
establishment of national armed forces. The United
States from the beginning should insist on dealing
directly with the governments of the respective
Associated States, completely independent of French
participation or control.

Finally, both "local military requirements and the over-all US
saa should dictate the size and composition of indigenous forces."
25

be. Dulles' Views

Of the four preconditions, only the second presented
no problem. The State Department, notably Secretary Dulles, Walter F.
Robertson, Assistant Secretary of State for the Far East, and Kenneth
T. Young, head of an interdepartmental Vietnam Task Force, objected to
the other three stipulations. Dulles outlined his thinking in a
letter of August 18 to Defense Secretary Charles Wilson. Agreeing that
the Diem government "is far from strong or stable" Dulles pointed out
that reorganization and retraining of the army was “one of the most
efficient means of enabling the Vietnamese Government to become strong."
Calling this "the familiar hen-and-egg argument as to which comes
first," Dulles made his preference clear. He saw two courses of
action open to the United States:

one, to strengthen the government by means of a political

and economic nature and the other, to bolster that

government by strengthening the army which supports it.
Dulles wished to adopt both courses.

As for the question of French presence or absence,
Dulles said:

It would be militarily disastrous to demand the with-
drawal of French forces from Vietnam before the creation

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
