Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

any hope of success, the Combined Campaign Plan for 1967 required both

@ military "shield" to keep large enemy wnits from the populated areas
where pacification was proceeding, and a "shelter" under which pacified
areas could be respectably kept that way. The “shield” concept could be
implemented in a number of ways, statically or dynamically, (mobile vs.
position defense) geographically oriented or enemy force oriented, or by
different combinations of these at different times. General Westmoreland's
strategy based upon exploitation of our inherent superior mobility and
firepower was designed to simultaneously attrite the enemy and retain the
initiative by disrupting vc/NVA operations before they completely materi-
alized. This led to seeking engagement with enemy main force units well ~
out into the border regions, where they literally could be held at distance
before jumping off in operations. Related to this was the notion that the
important thing was to fight -- to engage the enemy and create casualties.
It mattered little that you accepted combat in regions with certain
advantages for the enemy -- the prime objective was to engage and to kill
him.

Fighting the mobile defense kind of war provides an adequate but
not perfect shield. You can liken it to a vast semi-permeable membrane
which has significant leakage by small amounts, over time. Backing up this
kind of @ "shield" is the "shelter" also manned by combat troops, geo-
graphically dispersed (actually occupying) in the areas where pacification
is going on. The combination of the two, shield and shelter, require
men and the balance is erucial, especially so if you have limited resources.
If your operating assumptions are those held by COMUSMACV in late 1966,
then what you have for the "shelter" is a function of the kind and sizes
of enemy forces you are fighting in the "shield" mission. If you are
fighting large units at many points simultaneously, you are forced to
strip "shelter" forces -~ or to use ARVN (or request more U.S. forces).
As Program 4 closes we find MACV facing just those same large multiple
threats, stripping the "shelter" forces, and relying upon an inadequate
ARVN for the majority of pacification security. With sufficient forces,
U.S. and ARVN, the task was prodigious -- and precarious. To attempt to
"shield" without adequate forces to "shelter" was bound to be precarious.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
ei
