Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP. SECRET - Sensitive

United States should be adapted to promote, where possible,
economic conditions that will contribute to political stability
in friendly countries of Asia, but the United States should
carefully avoid assuming responsibility for the economic wel-
fare and development of that continent...."

Sus BGR hes

"h. The United States should continue to use its influ-
ence in Asia toward resolving the colonial-nationalist conflict
in such a way as to satisfy the fundamental demands of the
nationalist movement while at the same time minimizing the strain
on the colonial powers who are our Western allies. Particular
attention should be given to the problem of French Indo-China and
action should be taken to bring home to the French the urgency of
removing the barriers to the obtaining by Bao Dai or other non-
Communist nationalist leaders of the support of a substantial
proportion of the Vietnamese....

"i, Active consideration should be given to means by
which all members of the British Commonwealth may be induced
to play a more active role in collaboration with the United
States in Asia. Similar collaboration should be obtained to
the extent possible from other non-Comnunist nations having
interests in Asia.

"j- Recognizing that the non-Communist governments of
South Asia already constitute a bulwark against Communist
expansion in Asia, the United States should exploit every oppor-
tunity to increase the present Western orientation of the area
and to assist, within our capabilities, its governments in their
efforts to meet the minimum aspirations of their people and to
maintain internal security." 81/

Thus, in the closing months of 1949, the course of U.S. policy was
set to block further communist expansion in Asia: by collective security
if the Asians were forthcoming, by collaboration with major European
allies and commonwealth nations, if possible, but bilaterally if neces-
sary. On that policy course lay the Korean War of 1950-1953, the forming
of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization of 1954, and the progressively
deepening U.S. involvement in Vietnam.

b. The U.S. Enters the War

On December 30, 1949, the French signed over ten separate
implementing agreements relating to the transfer of internal adminis-
tration in Vietnam to Bao Dai's State of Vietnam, in accordance with the
Elysee Agreement of March 8, 1949. By January, 1950, Mao's legions had
reached Vietnam's northern frontier, and North Vietnam was moving into
the Sino-Soviet orbit. A Department of State telegram reviewed U.S.
policy as of 20 January 1950:

A-58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
