Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Paris, September 12, 1946.
-MemorinDUM

To; The Ambassador
From: George M. Abbott

In accordance with your request, I called last night
on Ho Chi-minh and had a conversation lasting an house

Ho Chi-minh first discussed his contacts with
Americans dating back to his guerrilla warfare against
the Japanese when OSS and Army officers were parachuted
into his jungle headquarters and culminating in his talk
with youe He emphasized his admiration for the United
States and the respect and affection for President
Roosevelt which is found even in the remote villages of
his. country. He referred particularly to our policy
toward the Philippines and pointed out that it was only
‘natural that his people, seeing an independent Philippines
on one side and India about to gain its freedom on the .
other, Should expect France to understand that simila
measures for Indochina are inevitable, - ‘ :

He then took up the question of his supposed Com-—
munist connections which he, of course, denied. Ho
_Chi-minh pointed out that there are no Communist
ministers in his government and that the Viet-Nam con-
stitution opens with a guarantee of personal liberties
and the so-called rights of man and also guarantees
the right to personal property. He admits that thore
are Communists in Annam but claims that the Communist
Party as such dissolved itself several months agoe

The President then outlined his relations with
France in general and the developments during the
Fontainebleau Conference in particular. He pointed out
that all of the various provisions of the preliminary
agreemont of March 6, 1946, had been fulfilled except
the provisions regarding a referendum in Cochinchina.
The VietNam has its own government, its parliament,

. its army, and controls its finances. ' Regarding Cochin~

china, however, the French have been unwilling to set

any date for the referendum or to agree to the proposal

that a joint Viet-Nam-French commission should be named

to arranges for and supervise the referendum. At the

‘ same time the French authorities in Indochina have not

_ respected the truce in Cochinchina and have continued
military operations against resistance elements loyal
to the Vict~Name = wie

. Ho Chi-minh realizes that the present French

. Government is a provisional one and that until a French
 gonstitution was adopted, the outlines of the French

C-103 Union
