Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The front must carry out its work in a very flexible manner
in order to rally all forces that can be rallied, win over all
forces that can be won over, neutralize all forces that should
be neutralized, and draw the broad masses into the general
struggle against the US-Diem clique for the liberation of the
South and the peaceful reunification of the fatherland.

"The revolutionary movement in the South plays a very important
role in relation to the reunification of the country. Simultaneously
with the effort to build the North and advance toward socialism our
people must strive to maintain and develop the revolutionary forces
in the South and create favorable conditions for peaceful national
reunification...." 203/

Ho Chi Minh, in his speech at the Congress, attributed the "victory of the
Vietnamese revolution" in part to the "whole-hearted assistance of the
fraternal socialist countries, especially the Soviet Union and China."

He identified the DRV with the world "forces of peace” and stated that

"the Democratic Republic of Vietnam is a member of the big socialist family
headed by the great Soviet Union." 204/ Giap's speech at the Congress
cited the example of the August, 1945, general uprisings, noting that
victory came because "our party kept a firm hold on the national democratic
revolutionary line," and paid appropriate attention to preparing the people
for their tasks. Le Duan's address stressed that:

"The southern people's revolutionary struggle will be long,
drawn out, and arduous. It is not a simple process but a com-
plicated one, combining many varied forms of struggle -- from
elementary to advanced, legal and illegal -- and based on the
building, consolidation and development of the revolutionary
force of the masses. In this process, we must constantly intensify
our solidarity and the organization and education of the people of
the South...and must uphold the revolutionary fighting spirit of
all strata of patriotic compatriots.” 205/ ;

ir

Le Duan also called for a “worker-peasant-army coalition bloc," and a

"broad national united front against the US-Diem clique."

In a policy-cycle similar to that of 1957 -- strategy
announced around September, followed by international exposure and con-
firmation at Moscow in November -- the DRV obtained at the "Conference
of Representatives of Communist and Workers’ Parties" held in Moscow in
November, 1960, yvairly explicit endorsement of its line of action in South
Vietnam. As in 1957, the Moscow Declaration distinguished between war in
general and anti-colonial wars, noting that "national-liberation revolutions
have triumphed in vast areas of the world" and emphasized that:

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
