Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

consider adequate response on Diem's part for a resumption of the com-~-
mercial import program. The following day, after Lodge had related the
disappointing results of the conversation to Secretary Thuan over
luncheon, the latter observed thet the U.S. really wasn't asking much
and that perhaps the conversation with Diem had been a beginning. 2h/
In retrospect, the comment is ironic, for with the coup only five days
away, the October 27 conversation was in reality a pathetic ending not
a hopeful beginning.

At one level, attention now turned to Lodge's scheduled trip to
Washington October 31. The exact purpose of the trip remains a mystery.
On October 30, he sent a cable to Washington with some suggestions of
steps by the GVN that Washington might consider adequate for resuming
the commercial import program under various-conditions, steps which he
hoped to discuss when he arrived. 25/ However, earlier in October,
Lodge had sent a private note to McGeorge Bundy, asking that the Presi-
dent make him available for a trip te Vietnam to discuss with Lodge a
matter which Lodge did not feel free to enter into through any electronic.
communication channel. 26/ The following cryptic reference suggests
that whatever the mysterious subject Lodge had in mind, it was the pur-
pose for the planned trip to Washington at the end of October:

Regarding my wire, I appreciate your willingness to send
Bundy. Would not have brought this up if I did not have a
proposal which I think contains new ideas and which might just
change the situation here for the better. It cannot be properly
handled by telegram or letter and requires a chance for me to
have a dialogue with Rusk and/or Harriman and/or Bundy. I wired
Bundy because I cannot leave here immediately, but I could come
for one working day to Washington after Vietnamese National Day
on October 26 and dedication of Vietnamese Atomic Energy Plant
on October 28, returning here immediately thereafter, and would
be glad to do it." 2

In order to shorten Lodge's absence from Saigon and to add flexibility to
his departure timing, the President dispatched a militery aircraft to
Saigon and left it at his disposal. But as the October 31 date arrived,
it coincided with the momentary anticipation of a move by the generals.
Lodge, no doubt preferred to remain in control of U.S, actions during a
coup rather than see Harkins take over, as Washington's instructions for
his absence stipulated, and so, he postponed his own departure.

3. Renewed Coup Plotting

While Diem's reaction to the tough new American policy was hostile,
the senior South Vietnamese generals, predictably, interpreted the new

policy as a green light for a coup. Plotting was reactivated almost
immediately, if indeed it had ever been completely dormant.

hy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
