Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"There was also involved the problem of the phenomenon of aggres-
sion. We had found ourselves in the catastrophe of World War II
because aggressions in Asia, in Africa, and in Europe had demonstrated
that the aggressor would not stop until compelled to do so. It was
the determination of the United States to learn the lessons of that
experience by moving in the U.N. and otherwise to try to build an
enduring international*peace."

oe ~

"LEGALITY OF U.S. EFFORTS IN SOUTH VIET-NAM

"Very briefly, on the second question, Mr. Chairman, the matter
was raised with respect to the legal issues surrounding our efforts in
South Viet-Nam. We have made available to the committee an extensive
legal memorandum on these matters, and the law officers of the Govern-
ment are available to discuss this in whatever detail the committee may
wish.

'

"In this brief statement today I shall merely outline the essence
of our view.

"Military actions of the United States in support of South Viet-
Nam, including air attacks on military targets in North Viet-Nam, are
authorized under international law by the well-established right of
collective self-defense against armed attack.

"South Viet-Nem is the victim of armed attack from the North
through the infiltration of armed personnel, military equipment, and
regular combat units. This armed attack preceded our strikes at mili-
tary targets in North Viet-Nam.

"The fact that South Viet-Nam is not a member of the United Nations,
because of the Soviet Union's veto, does not affect the lewfulness of
collective self-defense of South Viet-Nam. The United Nations Charter
was not designed to, and does not, limit the right of self-defense to
United Nations menibers.

"Nor does South Viet-Nam's status under the Geneva accords of 1954,
. as’ one zone of a temporarily divided state, impair the lawfulness of the
defense against attack from the other zone.

"As in Germany and Korea, the demarcation line is established by
an international agreement, and international law requires that it be
respected by each zone. Moreover, South Viet-Nam has been recognized
as an independent entity by more than 60 governments around the world
and admitted to membership in a number of the specialized agencies of the
U.N.

"D-79 ;
