Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It is not certain that Russia and China will
replace North Vietnam's destroyed capital assets through
aid programs, thus absorbing part of the bombing cost
themselves. However, they could do so in a short period
of time at relatively small cost; if economic aid remained

at its wartime yearly rate of $340 million and half were
used to replace capital stock, North Vietnam's losses
could be replaced in a year. If the capital stock is
replaced, the economic cost to North Vietnam of the
bombing will be the cumulative loss of output from the
time the bombing began until the capital stock is fully
replaced. Even this probably overstates the cost, how-
ever. Even if the pre-bombing capital stock were only
replaced, it would be more modern and productive than it
otherwise would have been.

While the aggregate supply of goods in North
Vietnam has remained constant, standards of living may
have declined. The composition of North Vietnam's total
supply has shifted away from final consumer goods toward
intermediate products related to the war effort, i.e.,
construction and transportation.

Food supplies, vital to the health and effi-
ciency of North Vietnam, have been maintained with only
a slight decline. As shown in Table 4, the estimated
North Vietnamese daily intake of calories has fallen
from 1,910 in 1963 to 1,880 in 1967. Even considering
that imported wheat and potatoes are not traditional
table fare in North Vietnam, the North Vietnamese are
not badly off by past North Vietnamese standards or
the standards of other Asian countries.

The output of industrial and handicraft output
declined 35% in 1967 (Table 1). Economic aid has
probably not replaced all of this decline. With lower
war priority, the supply of non-food consumer goods
such as textiles and durables has probably declined more
than the food supply. r

Despite lower standards of living, the ability
of North Vietnamese government to sustain its population
at a level high enough to prevent mass dissatisfaction is
evident. 63/

The analysis of the manpower question in the Systems
.Analysis paper revealed that there was as yet no real squeeze for
the North Vietnamese because of population growth. In a word, the

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
129 See Lin ome
