=

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

In any case, if he was trusted by the Whus, he certainly was not by the
generals because they confided in him none of their detailed plans for
the operation, and Hhu's plan, in which he would have played the key
role, never came to fruition. It was pre-empted by the real coup the
generals had been plotting.

By the last week in October, timing had become critical. The Thao
group apparently had intended to act on October 2h, but were dissuaded
by Don and Khien who argued that they had too few forces to guerantee
success. 4/ It was at this juncture that Khiem brougnt the Thao group
into the plans and worked out joint arrangements with them for the
execution of the coup. Shaplen says thet the generals’ coup was
orginally planned for November 4. This conflicts, however, with what
Den had told Conein on October 24, namely that it would occur before
November 2. 5/ By Shaplen'’s account, Dinh revealed the planned date
of the coup to Nhu who instructed him to urge that it be advanced to
November 1, 6/ Whu still thought somehow he could carry off his plan
by abandoning the phony coup, by letting the real one substitute for
it in the hope that it would be thrown off balance by the advanced date,
and by relying on Dinh's loyal troops as supplemented by Cao's to tip
the scale in the family's favor once the chips were down. In allowing
the generals to make their move, the principal rebels would all be com-
promised and Whu could then act t6 crush all major dissidence. Whatever
the reason, whether by lihu's intrigue or by their own timetable, the
generals set the coup for November 1.

While they had left a worried U.S. officialdom with only sketchy
ideas of the planned operation, the generals had themselves devoted
great attention to all details of their move. When the hour came for
execution, the plan was implemented with hardly a hitch, and the fate
of the regime was sealed in the first hours of the coup.

On October 29, the first preparatory action for a coup was taken.
General Dinh ordered Colonel Tung to move his special forces out of the
capital for maneuvers, but whether he was acting as the agent of the
generals or the palace is still unclear. Simultaneously, the chief of
intelligence, who had been a member of the Thao plot and was now parti-
cipating in the generals' plen, passed phony intelligence of a VC
puild-up outside Saigon to Diem and Whu to get thein to divert loyal
units that could have been used to thwart a coup.

The day of the coup itself began improbably with an official
U.S, call on Diem. Admiral Felt, CINCPAC, had been visiting General
Harkins to review the situetion and prior to his departure at noon,
he and Lodge paid a courtesy call on the President. Diem's monologue
was little different from what he had said to MeNamara and Taylor the
month before. As they were leaving, however, he called Lodge aside and
they talked privately for twenty minutes. Diem, in a tragically unwitting
example of too little too late, indicated that he wanted to talk to Lodge

55 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
