Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

; .
102. TOP SECRET - Sensitive

would be dramatized....We believe that they would not change
their basic policy of avoiding overt involvement in combat
while giving extensive military equipment and economic
assistance to NVN. But their relations with the US would
almost certainly deteriorate, for it is the bombing of

North Vietnam which is, for Moscow, the most nearly intoler-

able aspect of [the war-/ 15/

In its estimate of the likely reactions to the wider
course of substantially expanding the U.S. effort in the South, together
with the bombing and aerial mining of the North, the Board similarly
offered little hope that the escalation would produce any marked improve-
ment in the situation. They characterized NVN's will to resist in the
North and to persevere in the South as virtually unshakeable in the short
run and extremely tough even in the long run:

Present Communist policy is to continue to prosecute
the war vigorously in the South. The Communists recognize
that the US reinforcements of 1965 Signify a determination
to avoid defeat. They expect more US troops and probably
anticipate that targets in the Hanoi-Haiphong area will come
under air attack. Nevertheless, they remain unwilling to
damp down the conflict or move toward negotiation. They
expect a long war, but they continue to believe that time
is their ally and that their own staying power is superior. 16/

Heavier air attacks by themselves would not budge them:

The DRV would not decide to quit; PAVN infiltration
southward would continue. Damage from the strikes would
make it considerably more difficult to support the war in
the South, but these difficulties would neither be immedi-
ate nor insurmountable. 17/

Aerial mining would create serious problems, but NVN would keep supplies
moving by resorting to shallow-draft coastal shipping and intensive
efforts to keep the rail lines open. As for the South, NVN would accept

. the challenge:

Rather than conclude in advance that the tide of battle
would turn permanently against them, the Communists would
choose tc boost their own commitment ard to test US capa-
bilities and will to persevere at a higher level of conflict
and casualties. Thus the DRV reaction would probably be a
larger program of PAVN infiltration. 18/

The Board's picture of Hanoi was one of almost unbelievably

strong commitment and dogged determination, by contrast with previous
estimates. Thus, if the U.S. ,committed enough forces in the South to

69 J TOP SECRET - Sensitive
