Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

are best assurance that the U,S. material we supply is used

to full advantage. Beyond this, we cannot give adequate justi-
fication for cur great involvement in Vietnam...if we are to
be denied access to the facts."

However, State indicated a willingness to limit subsector advisors to an
experimental program in a few districts, as suggested by Col. Thang, with
a review of the question to follow a few weeks later. State suggested

that General Minh's erroneous statement regarding U.S. training of Cao Dai
and.Hoa, Hao deserved prompt refutation. "It is suggested Harkins accompany
you to meetings where military matters may come up." 26/

In contrast to their reticence about extending U.S. advisors to
lower levels, Minh's government had volunteered the idea in December of a
group of high-level U.S. advisors to work with the top levels of the GVN,
The State Department replied enthusiastically:

"In elaboration of the brain trust concept suggested
by General Minh end accepted by President Johnson (DepTel 1000),
our view is that high-level advisors may be essential key
to ingredient most sorely Jacking in GVN: Efficiency and
urgency of action. Minh's invitation to establish brain trust
and readiness to accept U.S, advice and cooperate...should
be seized upon...We have in mind advisors working directly
with VN officials on day~to-day implementation of agreed
policy lines. They would of course be completely responsi-
ble to you for policy guidemce and would in no sense supplant
your policy role with top GVN officials nor would they in-
fringe direct and comprehensive military advisory role of
COMUSMACV...We recognize such advisors must operate behind
the scenes and thet their persistent prodding must be done
with great tact...."

The guidance continued that the department specifically had in
mind the assignment of three experienced full-time advisors (and senior
assistants) to work with top levels of GVN, One senior FSO would work
with Minh and Tho on broad program implementation, one ranking AID official
would be with GVN counterinsurgency and economic officials, one high-ranking
military would work with the Minister of Defense and JGS. Both advisors
and assistants would have office space in a GVN building close to the office
they would advise. Authority was given to discuss this with GVN. Lodge
was told to ask them whom they would like for these positions. 27/

Meanwhile, political tension increased. Then on January 28, General

Nguyen Khanh told his U.S, advisor and friend, Col. Jasper Wilson, that

a group of generals, including Minh and Don, were plotting with the French
to stage a pro-neutralist 'coup" by January 31. He asked whether the U.S.
would support him in staging a counter-coup which would assure a stepped-

up GVN effort against the Viet Cong. There is no record of an official

U.S. reply before Khanh resolved to act. 28/ The evening of January 29,
Khanh told Wilson he would take over the GVN at 4 a.m. the next morning.
Lodge informed State, which directed him to keep a hands-off attitude and

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
