Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

likelihood of a summer of demonstrations was great, with the strong
possibility of a non-commmist coup attempt. 3/ By mid-August a week
before Nhu launched general raids on Buddhist pagodas in Saigon and
elsewhere, the CIA had begun to note malaise in the bureaucracy and
the army:

Since the Buddhist dispute with the Diem government
erupted on 8 May, there have been a series of reports
indicating not only intensified plotting and grumbling
among Diem's traditional non-Communist critics, but
renewed restiveness and growing disaffection in official
civilian and military circles over Diem's handling of the
dispute. 1/

This estimate went on to detail numerous-rumors of coup plots in existence
since at least late June. But Nhu, in a bold move designed to frighten
coup plotters, and to throw them off guard, had called in the senior
generals on July 11, reprimanded them for not having taken action to
squelch revolt, and questioned their loyalty to the regime. Whu's move
seemed to have temporarily set back all plans for an overthrow. CIA

also reported rumors that Nhu himself was planning a "false coup" to

draw out and then crush the Buddhists. Sf

In August, Buddhist militancy reached new intensity; monks burned
themselves to death on the 5th, 15th, and 18th. The taut political
atmosphere in Saigon in mid-August should have suggested to U.5.
observers that a showdown was on the way. When the showdown came, how-
eyer, in the August 21 raids on the pagodas, the U.S, mission was
apparently caught almost completely off guard.

2. ‘The U.S. "No Alternatives to Diem" Policy

The explanation of how the U.S. mission became detached from the
realities of the political situation in Saigon in August 1963, is emong
the most ironic and tragic of our entire involvement in Vietnam. In
dealing with Diem over the years, the U.S. had tried two radically
different but ultimately equally unsuccessful approaches, Under
Ambassador Elbridge Durbrow from the late '50s until 1961, we had used
tough pressure tactics to bring Diem to implement programs and ideas we
felt necessary to win the war against the Viet Cong. But Diem soon
learned that the U.S, was committed to him as the only Vietnamese leader
capable of rallying his country to defeat the commmists. Armed with
this knowledge he could defer action or ignore the Ambassador with
relative impunity. He became adept at playing the role of offended
lover. Thus by 1961, Durbrow was cut off from the palace, with little
information about whet was going on and even less influence over events.
Under Frederick Nolting as U.S. Ambassador, the U.S. pursued a very
different tactic. Forewarned not to allow himself to be isolated,
Nolting set out through the patient cultivation of Diem's friendship and
trust to secure a role for himself as Diem's close and confidential
advisor. But there had been no basic change in the American belief that

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
