Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

around town (very possibly by the Viet Cong), and demonstrations spread
to other cities.

On the night of 2) August another coup rumor spread. It was later
suspected that Dai Viet generals had indeed been ready to move that night,
but thet Khiem, who had been wevering between Khanh and the Dai Viet,
told them to wait. That same night Khanh asked three top bonzes to come
to Cap St. Jacques for consultation. They refused, end Khanh for his
part rushed back to Saigon. He met with them and they demanded, first,
abolition of the 15 August charter, second establishment of government
councils to assure full freedom of religion and expression, and third,
free elections by 1 November 1965. Khanh made the mistake of telling
them he wanted to consult with the Americans. At 1/00 a.m. on 25
August, Ambassador Taylor and Deputy Ambassador Johnson met with Khanh
and they "unofficially" advised him to accept the Buddhist demands in
principle, but otherwise to be tough and not to knuckle under to any
minority. The conference lasted until about 3:00 a.m.

At 5:00 a.m, of 25 August, Khanh issued a commmique promising to
revise the new constitution, reduce press censorship, rectify local
abuses by arranging special courts, and permit continued demonstrations,
with the proviso that those responsible for actions of disorder be
punished,

But these concessions again were not enough to satisfy the students.
Later that morning a crowd of 25,000 gathered in front of Khenh's office.
Khanh appeared before them and denied that he wanted to be a dictator,
but refused to make further concessions. He did not, however, have the
corwd dispersed. Instead, he withdrew and then, without warning, issued
an announcement from his military headquarters that the 16 August charter
would be withdrawn and the he, Khanh, was quitting. Further, he announced
that the MRC would meet the next day, 26 August, to choose a new Chief of
State. 123/

The MRC met on 26 and 27 August. Khanh brought in the three
generals he had accused of participating in the pro-French neutralist
plot, as a ploy to forestall a power bid py Minh. But the Council
refused to seat them.and they were returned to their protective custody
at Dalat. While these maneuvers were going on street demonstrations
continued. Within the MRC Khiem failed in an attempt to name himself
Chief of State and Minh Prime Minister. Next Khanh was named Prime
Minister, but refused to accept either Khiem or Minh as President.
Finally, when he refused to be installed alone, the triumvirate of
Khanh, Minh and Kiem was chosen.

Anarchy in the streets of Saigon intensified. Khanh again nominally
Prime Minister, was by this time back in Dalat in a state of exhaustion.
The troika of Khanh, Minh and Khiem never met, and Nguyen Xuan Oanh was
made acting Prime Minister. Rumors of coups continued--one supposedly
by the Dai Viet, another by the so-called “colonels' Group." 12)/

On 29 August 1964 Vietnamese paratroopers with bayonets were used

Qh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
